 = = Awards and honors = = 
 Eastwood has been recognized with multiple awards and nominations for his work in film , television , and music . His widest reception has been in film work , for which he has received Academy Awards , Directors Guild of America Awards , Golden Globe Awards , and People 's Choice Awards , among others . Eastwood is one of only two people to have been twice nominated for Best Actor and Best Director for the same film ( Unforgiven and Million Dollar Baby ) the other being Warren Beatty ( Heaven Can Wait and Reds ) . Along with Beatty , Robert Redford , Richard Attenborough , Kevin Costner , and Mel Gibson , he is one of the few directors best known as an actor to win an Academy Award for directing . On February 27 , 2005 , he became one of only three living directors ( along with Miloš Forman and Francis Ford Coppola ) to have directed two Best Picture winners . Aged 74 , he was the oldest to date recipient of the Academy Award for Best Director . Eastwood has directed five actors in Academy Award – winning performances : Gene Hackman in Unforgiven , Tim Robbins and Sean Penn in Mystic River , and Morgan Freeman and Hilary Swank in Million Dollar Baby . 
 On August 22 , 1984 , Eastwood was honored at a ceremony at Grauman 's Chinese theater to record his hand and footprints in cement . Eastwood received the AFI Life Achievement Award in 1996 , and received an honorary degree from AFI in 2009 . On December 6 , 2006 , California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger and First Lady Maria Shriver inducted Eastwood into the California Hall of Fame located at The California Museum for History , Women , and the Arts . 
 In early 2007 , Eastwood was presented with the highest civilian distinction in France , Légion d 'honneur , at a ceremony in Paris . French President Jacques Chirac told Eastwood that he embodied " the best of Hollywood . " In October 2009 , he was honored by the Lumière Award ( in honor of the Lumière Brothers , inventors of the Cinematograph ) during the first edition of the Lumière Film Festival in Lyon , France . This award honors his entire career and his major contribution to the 7th Art . In February 2010 , Eastwood was recognized by President Barack Obama with an arts and humanities award . Obama described Eastwood 's films as " essays in individuality , hard truths and the essence of what it means to be American . " 
 Eastwood has also been awarded at least three honorary degrees from universities and colleges , including an honorary degree from the University of the Pacific in 2006 , an honorary Doctor of Humane Letters from the University of Southern California on May 27 , 2007 , and an honorary Doctor of Music degree from the Berklee College of Music at the Monterey Jazz Festival on September 22 , 2007 . 
 On July 22 , 2009 , Eastwood was bestowed by Emperor Akihito of Japan with the Order of the Rising Sun , 3rd class , Gold Rays with Neck Ribbon for his contributions to the enhancement of Japan – United States relations . 
 Eastwood won the Golden Pine lifetime achievement award at the 2013 International Samobor Film Music Festival , along with Ryuichi Sakamoto and Gerald Fried . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 Eastwood has contributed to over 50 films over his career as actor , director , producer , and composer . He has acted in several television series , including his starring role in Rawhide . He started directing in 1971 , and made his debut as a producer in 1982 , with Firefox , though he had been functioning as uncredited producer on all of his Malpaso Company films since Hang ' Em High in 1968 . Eastwood also has contributed music to his films , either through performing , writing , or composing . He has mainly starred in western , action , and drama films . According to the box office – revenue tracking website Box Office Mojo , films featuring Eastwood have grossed a total of more than $ 1 @.@ 68 billion domestically , with an average of $ 37 million per film . 
 = 1928 Fort Pierce hurricane = 
 The 1928 Fort Pierce hurricane devastated areas of Florida and the Southeastern United States in August 1928 . The first tropical cyclone and hurricane of the annual hurricane season , the storm developed from a tropical wave first identified on August 3 , 1928 , north of the Virgin Islands . Slowly intensifying as it moved west @-@ northwest , the system paralleled the Greater Antilles throughout much of its early existence . On August 5 , the tropical storm strengthened to the equivalent of a Category 1 hurricane , while positioned over The Bahamas . The hurricane continued to intensify , and after reaching Category 2 hurricane strength , attained its peak intensity on August 7 with winds of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 971 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 70 inHg ) . Shortly after , the hurricane made landfall as a slightly weaker storm just southeast of Fort Pierce , Florida at 0700 UTC on August 8 . Weakening as it moved across the Florida peninsula over the course of the next day , the storm briefly moved over the Gulf of Mexico before recurving northwards . Thus , it made a second landfall on the Florida Panhandle on August 10 as a tropical storm . Once inland , the system continued to weaken , degenerating to tropical depression strength before transitioning into an extratropical storm later that day . The extratropical remnants progressed outwards into the Atlantic Ocean before entirely dissipating by August 14 . 
 In its early developmental stages north of the Greater Antilles , the storm caused minor damage to shipping in The Bahamas and generated rough seas offshore Cuba . At its first landfall on Fort Pierce , the hurricane caused extensive property damage , particularly in coastal regions , where numerous homes were unroofed . Central Florida 's citrus crop was hampered by the strong winds and heavy rain . Several of Florida 's lakes , including Lake Okeechobee , rose past their banks , inundating coastal areas . Damage to infrastructure was less in inland regions than at the coast , though power outages caused loss of communication statewide . At the hurricane 's second landfall , wind damage was relatively minor , though torrential rainfall , aided by orthographic lift , caused extensive flooding as far north as the Mid @-@ Atlantic states . Overall , the hurricane caused $ 235 @,@ 000 in damages , primarily in Florida , and two deaths . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical disturbance was first identified north of the Leeward Islands near the Virgin Islands at 0000 UTC on August 3 . Due to a lack of conclusive weather reports from nearby areas at the time , the origins of the tropical storm were initially unknown , but listed the system as forming near Trinidad and Barbados in the HURDAT — the database listing all tropical cyclones in the Atlantic basin since 1851 . However , the Atlantic hurricane reanalysis project analyzed the storm to have formed north of the Leeward Islands based on reports from San Juan , Puerto Rico , and as such revised the storm 's HURDAT listing . Moving to the west @-@ northwest , the tropical storm maintained its intensity without any intensification early in its existence . Ships in the region reported tropical storm @-@ force winds and low barometric pressures . The ship S.S. <unk> sent a telegraphic report of the storm 's location and existence west of Acklins Island on August 5 , the first ship to explicitly do so . Beginning to accelerate as it paralleled the Cuban Atlantic coast the following day , the storm intensified to reach an intensity equivalent to a modern @-@ day Category 1 hurricane at 1200 UTC . 
 The hurricane continued to intensify , and attained Category 2 hurricane intensity by 0600 UTC on August 7 . At around the same time , the S.S. Lempira reported a minimum pressure of 971 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 70 inHg ) , while 30 miles ( 50 km ) southeast of Jupiter , Florida . At the time , maximum sustained winds were estimated at 105 mph ( 170 km / h ) ; this would be the hurricane 's peak intensity . The hurricane weakened slightly before making landfall on central Florida , just southeast of Fort Pierce , Florida , at 0700 UTC the following day . Winds at landfall were estimated at 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) , with a minimum central pressure of 977 mbar ( 28 @.@ 85 inHg ) recorded in Fort Pierce within the hurricane 's eye . At the time , the system 's maximum winds extended up to 10 mi ( 15 km ) from the center of circulation . The storm then slowly crossed the Florida peninsula , before entering the Gulf of Mexico the next day near Tampa , Florida , after having weakened down to tropical storm strength . Despite remaining over water , its close proximity to the continent prevented further strengthening . The tropical storm recurved to the north in the gulf , before making a second landfall near Apalachicola , Florida at 0400 UTC on August 10 with winds of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) . Moving inland , the system rapidly weakened as it continued to recurve to the northeast , further degenerating to tropical depression strength at 0000 UTC on August 11 while situated over Georgia . Based on weather station observations , the storm was analyzed to have transitioned into an extratropical cyclone later that day . The extratropical storm strengthened slightly over the Mid @-@ Atlantic states , before exiting into the Atlantic Ocean near the Virginia Capes . The storm system progressed eastward across the ocean before dissipating at 1800 UTC on August 14 . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 = = = The Bahamas and Cuba = = = 
 Passing through The Bahamas on August 6 – 7 , the tropical storm caused minor damage on the islands . Due to the rough seas , ships were taken to Nassau Harbor to ride out the storm . The storm passed without any disruption of shipping services . However , the flying boat Topsy Fish , containing two people , became lost over Bahamian waters on August 8 . The plane and crew were later found north of Andros Island by a Miami relief plane and a boat from Nassau three days later . Cuba , located south of the storm throughout its duration , reported minimal effects from the hurricane , other than a lowering of barometric pressures as reported by José Carlos Millás , then @-@ chief of the Cuban National Observatory . However , occasional thunderstorm activity fueled by the hurricane dropped rainfall over the island , and the storm generated heavy seas at the Cuban coast . 
 = = = Florida = = = 
 Upon notification that a newly formed tropical cyclone was approaching the Florida coast , the Weather Bureau posted storm warnings for coastal areas between Key West and West Palm Beach , Florida . Later on August 6 , warnings were lowered in Key West , but the warning area was extended north to Titusville , Florida . Vessels and small craft located offshore north of Miami , Florida were notified to advise caution for the oncoming tropical disturbance . As the storm approached the coast , more accurate forecasts allowed vessels to be cautioned as far north as Hatteras , North Carolina . Storm warnings between Jupiter and Daytona , Florida were upgraded to hurricane warnings on August 7 , in accordance with the storm 's upgrade to hurricane intensity . After moving inland , hurricane warnings were lowered , but emergency warnings for the storm 's potential effects were posted for the interior of the Florida peninsula north of 28 ° N the following day . Northwest storm warnings were issued in Tampa , while northeast storm warnings were issued from Tampa north to Apalachicola , Florida . All warnings were eventually lowered following the storm 's dissipation . 
 Approaching the Floridian coast as an intensifying hurricane , the storm initially turned away from the peninsula for a short period of time on August 7 , after nearly making landfall on West Palm Beach . Strong gusts of at least 30 mph ( 50 km / h ) and squally weather impacted the city , but did not cause any damage . However , telecommunications in the city were temporarily disrupted due to the storm . In Jupiter , stronger gusts reaching 60 mph ( 100 km / h ) were reported , but did not cause any damage as well . However , the hurricane 's recurvature offshore was short lived , and the system eventually made its landfall near Fort Pierce , Florida early on August 8 . Offshore , the USAHS Algonquin , a cruise ship belonging to the Clyde @-@ Mallory cruise line , was caught in the storm , but managed to reach its destination of New York , New York without any major problems . The <unk> freighter Lempira , which had also recorded the lowest barometric pressure associated with the hurricane , experienced considerable damage due to the strong seas . The ship lost all of its lifeboats , and as a result the United Fruit Company line was sent to accompany the damaged ship . Inland , damage was concentrated in an area extending from Jupiter to the border between Florida and Georgia . The hurricane 's landfall on the peninsula was attended by torrential rainfall , which damaged crops , particularly citrus . Rainfall peaked at 14 @.@ 5 in ( 370 mm ) in St. Cloud over a five @-@ day period from August 7 – 12 . There , the nearby East Lake Tohopekaliga began to overflow , threatening property and crops . Losses to the citrus crop were estimated by the Florida Citrus Exchange to be equivalent to 1 million boxes of citrus . However , damage to citrus in the Kissimmee area was comparatively less , and was limited to unripe fruit . Lake Okeechobee 's water level rose by 2 ft ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) as a result of floodwater rushing into the lake . Damage along the lake 's shores mostly occurred to the north . To the south , in Clewiston , minor damage was confined to trees and windows . Two deaths occurred in the vicinity of the Indian River ; these were the only deaths associated with the hurricane in the state . Numerous highways were also washed out by the rains , especially on Florida 's south @-@ central east coast . Portions of State Road 4 were covered in debris strewn by strong winds . Damage to the state 's road systems was estimated at $ 100 @,@ 000 by the former Florida State Highway Commission . Bridges were also badly damaged , with some needing replacement . 
 Alongside the heavy rainfall , strong winds were reported . Large live oak trees were uprooted , especially in Osceola , Brevard , Orange , and Marion counties in Florida . Initial estimates of property damage in several cities on Florida 's mid @-@ eastern coast reached $ 5 million , though this was later drastically scaled down . In Sebastian , winds were estimated at 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) . Due to the high winds , rail service on the Florida East Coast Railway was halted 3 mi ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) north of Jupiter after winds became unsuitable for continued travel . Portions of the railway were also flooded in water . The train station in Fort Pierce was later unroofed . Many of the state 's coastal beaches suffered from window damage and damage to vegetation caused by strong winds . An estimated 75 % of structures in Fort Pierce and 50 % of structures in Vera were estimated to have been damaged by the strong winds , particularly in the form of torn roofs . A report suggested that damage from those two cities reached at least $ 1 million . The strong winds also hampered telephone and telegraph networks across the state , with losses as a result in excess of $ 1 @,@ 000 . Power transmission lines belonging to the Florida Power & Light Company were downed , causing a widespread power outage along the coast from Titusville to West Palm Beach . Thus , services requiring electric power were postponed until power was later restored . In Stuart , failure of the electric pumps led to loss of telecommunications and the local water supply . In Melbourne , additional power lines were downed , and buildings experienced awning damage . Portions of Central Florida also saw considerable damage . In Winter Haven , winds were reported to have reached 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) , before power was cut . A hotel in the city collapsed , and numerous houses were unroofed . Property damage in Kissimmee and Haines City was severe , with many collapsed buildings . In Haines City , a large garage collapsed , destroying automobiles parked within . Nearby in Lakeland , there was less damage , though winds estimated at 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) tore signs and awnings . Effects of the storm in Tampa were comparatively less , though a lack of communications between the city and other locations led to speculation that Tampa had been severely hit . At nearby Clearwater , Florida , boats were run aground at the harbor , causing some damage . Similar conditions were felt in Ocala , though in some suburban areas trees were felled by the strong winds . Bus service in the area was delayed due to debris covering roadways . 
 = = = Elsewhere in the United States = = = 
 Upon the hurricane 's second landfall on the Florida Panhandle on August 10 , wind effects were much less significant , though the storm dropped widespread rainfall throughout its remaining path . Aided by orthographic lift from the Appalachian Mountains , the rainfall caused numerous reports of flood damage across the Southeast and Mid @-@ Atlantic states . For any given 50 @,@ 000 sq mi ( 130 @,@ 000 km2 ) area of land affected by the storm , the maximum average rainfall was 6 @.@ 4 in ( 160 mm ) . In southern and central Georgia , flood warnings were issued due to the potential for flood impacts late on August 10 . In Macon , Georgia , 8 @.@ 5 in ( 216 mm ) of rain was recorded in a 16 @-@ hour period . The Ocmulgee River , which runs through Macon , began to rise past flood stage as a result , causing the lower areas of the city to be inundated . Trees were also downed due to strong winds . Portions of the Central of Georgia Railway were washed out , forcing trains to be redirected . In Thomasville , Georgia , highways leading to Florida were rendered impassable due to blocking debris . In Valdosta , Georgia , a torn roof cut through several power lines , causing electrical disruptions in the city . Similar impacts were felt in Augusta , Georgia , where strong winds toppled trees , damaged cottages , and severed telecommunication lines . Five people there were injured . In addition , a tornado occurred nearby , damaging houses and flattening trees . 
 Further east in the Carolinas , five people were killed in the Piedmont region due to floods caused by the passing storm . Torrential rainfall in the area resulted in disruption of power , communications , and traffic . Precipitation in those two states peaked at 9 in ( 230 mm ) in western North Carolina . In South Carolina , the heavy rainfall forced the issuance of flood warnings on the rising Santee River and its tributaries . The Broad and Congaree Rivers in South Carolina later set high water level records due in part to the saturated soils caused by the storm . The storm reached Virginia by August 12 , resulting in additional flooding . A weather station in Richmond , Virginia recorded a minimum barometric pressure of 1000 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 53 inHg ) . There , the James and Rivanna Rivers exceeded their respective flood stages , washing out peripheral crops . Offshore the Mid @-@ Atlantic states , over 100 people were rescued after rough waves swept them away . Moderate gales associated with the storm were reported as far north as New York . 
 = Wind shear = 
 Wind shear , sometimes referred to as windshear or wind gradient , is a difference in wind speed and / or direction over a relatively short distance in the atmosphere . Atmospheric wind shear is normally described as either vertical or horizontal wind shear . Vertical wind shear is a change in wind speed or direction with change in altitude . Horizontal wind shear is a change in wind speed with change in lateral position for a given altitude . 
 Wind shear is a microscale meteorological phenomenon occurring over a very small distance , but it can be associated with mesoscale or synoptic scale weather features such as squall lines and cold fronts . It is commonly observed near microbursts and downbursts caused by thunderstorms , fronts , areas of locally higher low @-@ level winds referred to as low level jets , near mountains , radiation inversions that occur due to clear skies and calm winds , buildings , wind turbines , and sailboats . Wind shear has a significant effect during take @-@ off and landing of aircraft due to its effects on control of the aircraft , and it has been a sole or contributing cause of many aircraft accidents . 
 Wind shear is sometimes experienced by pedestrians at ground level when walking across a plaza towards a tower block and suddenly encountering a strong wind stream that is flowing around the base of the tower . This phenomenon is a concern for architects . 
 Sound movement through the atmosphere is affected by wind shear , which can bend the wave front , causing sounds to be heard where they normally would not , or vice versa . Strong vertical wind shear within the troposphere also inhibits tropical cyclone development , but helps to organize individual thunderstorms into longer life cycles which can then produce severe weather . The thermal wind concept explains how differences in wind speed at different heights are dependent on horizontal temperature differences , and explains the existence of the jet stream . 
 = = Definition = = 
 Wind shear refers to the variation of wind over either horizontal or vertical distances . Airplane pilots generally regard significant wind shear to be a horizontal change in airspeed of 30 knots ( 15 m / s ) for light aircraft , and near 45 knots ( 22 m / s ) for airliners at flight altitude . Vertical speed changes greater than 4 @.@ 9 knots ( 2 @.@ 5 m / s ) also qualify as significant wind shear for aircraft . Low level wind shear can affect aircraft airspeed during take off and landing in disastrous ways , and airliner pilots are trained to avoid all microburst wind shear ( headwind loss in excess of 30 knots ) . The rationale for this additional caution includes : ( 1 ) microburst intensity can double in a minute or less , ( 2 ) the winds can shift to excessive cross wind , ( 3 ) 40 @-@ 50 knots is the threshold for survivability at some stages of low @-@ altitude operations , and ( 4 ) several of the historical wind shear accidents involved 35 @-@ 45 knot microbursts . Wind shear is also a key factor in the creation of severe thunderstorms . The additional hazard of turbulence is often associated with wind shear . 
 = = Where and when it is strongly observed = = 
 Weather situations where shear is observed include : 
 Weather fronts . Significant shear is observed when the temperature difference across the front is 5 ° C ( 9 ° F ) or more , and the front moves at 30 knots or faster . Because fronts are three @-@ dimensional phenomena , frontal shear can be observed at any altitude between surface and tropopause , and therefore be seen both horizontally and vertically . Vertical wind shear above warm fronts is more of an aviation concern than near and behind cold fronts due to their greater duration . 
 Upper @-@ level jet streams . Associated with upper level jet streams is a phenomenon known as clear air turbulence ( CAT ) , caused by vertical and horizontal wind shear connected to the wind gradient at the edge of the jet streams . The CAT is strongest on the anticyclonic shear side of the jet , usually next to or just below the axis of the jet . 
 Low @-@ level jet streams . When a nocturnal low @-@ level jet forms overnight above the Earth 's surface ahead of a cold front , significant low level vertical wind shear can develop near the lower portion of the low level jet . This is also known as <unk> wind shear since it is not due to nearby thunderstorms . 
 Mountains . When winds blow over a mountain , vertical shear is observed on the lee side . If the flow is strong enough , turbulent eddies known as " rotors " associated with lee waves may form , which are dangerous to ascending and descending aircraft . 
 Inversions . When on a clear and calm night , a radiation inversion is formed near the ground , the friction does not affect wind above the top of the inversion layer . The change in wind can be 90 degrees in direction and 40 kt in speed . Even a nocturnal ( overnight ) low level jet can sometimes be observed . It tends to be strongest towards sunrise . Density differences cause additional problems to aviation . 
 <unk> . When an outflow boundary forms due to a shallow layer of rain @-@ cooled air spreading out near ground level from the parent thunderstorm , both speed and directional wind shear can result at the leading edge of the three dimensional boundary . The stronger the outflow boundary is , the stronger the resultant vertical wind shear will become . 
 = = Horizontal component = = 
 = = = Weather fronts = = = 
 Weather fronts are boundaries between two masses of air of different densities , or different temperature and moisture properties , which normally are convergence zones in the wind field and are the principal cause of significant weather . Within surface weather analyses , they are depicted using various colored lines and symbols . The air masses usually differ in temperature and may also differ in humidity . Wind shear in the horizontal occurs near these boundaries . Cold fronts feature narrow bands of thunderstorms and severe weather , and may be preceded by squall lines and dry lines . Cold fronts are sharper surface boundaries with more significant horizontal wind shear than warm fronts . When a front becomes stationary , it can degenerate into a line which separates regions of differing wind speed , known as a shear line , though the wind direction across the front normally remains constant . In the tropics , tropical waves move from east to west across the Atlantic and eastern Pacific basins . Directional and speed shear can occur across the axis of stronger tropical waves , as northerly winds precede the wave axis and southeast winds are seen behind the wave axis . Horizontal wind shear can also occur along local land breeze and sea breeze boundaries . 
 = = = Near coastlines = = = 
 The magnitude of winds offshore are nearly double the wind speed observed onshore . This is attributed to the differences in friction between land masses and offshore waters . Sometimes , there are even directional differences , particularly if local sea breezes change the wind on shore during daylight hours . 
 = = Vertical component = = 
 = = = Thermal wind = = = 
 Thermal wind is a meteorological term not referring to an actual wind , but a difference in the geostrophic wind between two pressure levels <formula> and <formula> , with <formula> ; in essence , wind shear . It is only present in an atmosphere with horizontal changes in temperature ( or in an ocean with horizontal gradients of density ) , i.e. <unk> . In a barotropic atmosphere , where temperature is uniform , the geostrophic wind is independent of height . The name stems from the fact that this wind flows around areas of low ( and high ) temperature in the same manner as the geostrophic wind flows around areas of low ( and high ) pressure . 
 The thermal wind equation is 
 <formula> , 
 where the <formula> are geopotential height fields with <formula> , <formula> is the Coriolis parameter , and <formula> is the upward @-@ pointing unit vector in the vertical direction . The thermal wind equation does not determine the wind in the tropics . Since <formula> is small or zero , such as near the equator , the equation reduces to stating that <formula> is small . 
 This equation basically describes the existence of the jet stream , a westerly current of air with maximum wind speeds close to the tropopause which is ( even though other factors are also important ) the result of the temperature contrast between equator and pole . 
 = = = Effects on tropical cyclones = = = 
 Tropical cyclones are basically heat engines that are fueled by the temperature gradient between the warm tropical ocean surface and the colder upper atmosphere . Tropical cyclone development requires relatively low values of vertical wind shear so that their warm core can remain above their surface circulation center , thereby promoting strengthening . Vertical wind shear tears up the " machinery " of the heat engine causing it to break down . Strongly sheared tropical cyclones weaken as the upper circulation is blown away from the low level center . 
 The vertical wind shear in a tropical cyclone 's environment is very important . When the wind shear is weak , the storms that are part of the cyclone grow vertically , and the latent heat from condensation is released into the air directly above the storm , aiding in development . When there is stronger wind shear , this means that the storms become more slanted and the latent heat release is dispersed over a much larger area 
 = = = Effects on thunderstorms and severe weather = = = 
 Severe thunderstorms , which can spawn tornadoes and hailstorms , require wind shear to organize the storm in such a way as to maintain the thunderstorm for a longer period of time . This occurs as the storm 's inflow becomes separated from its rain @-@ cooled outflow . An increasing nocturnal , or overnight , low level jet can increase the severe weather potential by increasing the vertical wind shear through the troposphere . Thunderstorms in an atmosphere with virtually no vertical wind shear weaken as soon as they send out an outflow boundary in all directions , which then quickly cuts off its inflow of relatively warm , moist air and kills the thunderstorm . 
 = = = Planetary boundary layer = = = 
 The atmospheric effect of surface friction with winds aloft force surface winds to slow and back counterclockwise near the surface of the Earth blowing inward across isobars ( lines of equal pressure ) , when compared to the winds in frictionless flow well above the Earth 's surface . This layer where friction slows and changes the wind is known as the planetary boundary layer , sometimes the Ekman layer , and it is thickest during the day and thinnest at night . Daytime heating thickens the boundary layer as winds at the surface become increasingly mixed with winds aloft due to insolation , or solar heating . Radiative cooling overnight further enhances wind decoupling between the winds at the surface and the winds above the boundary layer by calming the surface wind which increases wind shear . These wind changes force wind shear between the boundary layer and the wind aloft , and is most emphasized at night . 
 = = = = Effects on flight = = = = 
 = = = = = Gliding = = = = = 
 In gliding , wind gradients just above the surface affect the takeoff and landing phases of flight of a glider . Wind gradient can have a noticeable effect on ground launches , also known as winch launches or wire launches . If the wind gradient is significant or sudden , or both , and the pilot maintains the same pitch attitude , the indicated airspeed will increase , possibly exceeding the maximum ground launch tow speed . The pilot must adjust the airspeed to deal with the effect of the gradient . 
 When landing , wind shear is also a hazard , particularly when the winds are strong . As the glider descends through the wind gradient on final approach to landing , airspeed decreases while sink rate increases , and there is insufficient time to accelerate prior to ground contact . The pilot must anticipate the wind gradient and use a higher approach speed to compensate for it . 
 Wind shear is also a hazard for aircraft making steep turns near the ground . It is a particular problem for gliders which have a relatively long wingspan , which exposes them to a greater wind speed difference for a given bank angle . The different airspeed experienced by each wing tip can result in an aerodynamic stall on one wing , causing a loss of control accident . 
 = = = = = Parachuting = = = = = 
 Wind shear or wind gradients are a threat to parachutists , particularly to BASE jumping and wingsuit flying . <unk> have been pushed off of their course by sudden shifts in wind direction and speed , and have collided with bridges , <unk> , trees , other skydivers , the ground , and other obstacles . <unk> routinely make adjustments to the position of their open canopies to compensate for changes in direction while making landings to prevent accidents such as canopy collisions and canopy inversion . 
 = = = = = Soaring = = = = = 
 Soaring related to wind shear , also called dynamic soaring , is a technique used by soaring birds like albatrosses , who can maintain flight without wing flapping . If the wind shear is of sufficient magnitude , a bird can climb into the wind gradient , trading ground speed for height , while maintaining airspeed . By then turning downwind , and diving through the wind gradient , they can also gain energy . It has also been used by glider pilots on rare occasions . 
 Wind shear can also create wave . This occurs when an atmospheric inversion separates two layers with a marked difference in wind direction . If the wind encounters distortions in the inversion layer caused by thermals coming up from below , it will create significant shear waves that can be used for soaring . 
 = = = = = Impact on passenger aircraft = = = = = 
 Strong outflow from thunderstorms causes rapid changes in the three @-@ dimensional wind velocity just above ground level . Initially , this outflow causes a headwind that increases airspeed , which normally causes a pilot to reduce engine power if they are unaware of the wind shear . As the aircraft passes into the region of the downdraft , the localized headwind diminishes , reducing the aircraft 's airspeed and increasing its sink rate . Then , when the aircraft passes through the other side of the downdraft , the headwind becomes a tailwind , reducing lift generated by the wings , and leaving the aircraft in a low @-@ power , low @-@ speed descent . This can lead to an accident if the aircraft is too low to effect a recovery before ground contact . 
 As the result of the accidents in the 1970s and 1980s , most notably following the 1985 crash of Delta Air Lines Flight 191 , in 1988 the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration mandated that all commercial aircraft have on @-@ board wind shear detection systems by 1993 . Between 1964 and 1985 , wind shear directly caused or contributed to 26 major civil transport aircraft accidents in the U.S. that led to 620 deaths and 200 injuries . Since 1995 , the number of major civil aircraft accidents caused by wind shear has dropped to approximately one every ten years , due to the mandated on @-@ board detection as well as the addition of Doppler weather radar units on the ground ( NEXRAD ) . The installation of high @-@ resolution Terminal Doppler Weather Radar stations at many U.S. airports that are commonly affected by wind shear has further aided the ability of pilots and ground controllers to avoid wind shear conditions . 
 = = = = Sailing = = = = 
 Wind shear affects sailboats in motion by presenting a different wind speed and direction at different heights along the mast . The effect of low level wind shear can be factored into the selection of sail twist in the sail design , but this can be difficult to predict since wind shear may vary widely in different weather conditions . Sailors may also adjust the trim of the sail to account for low level wind shear , for example using a boom <unk> . 
 = = = = Sound propagation = = = = 
 Wind shear can have a pronounced effect upon sound propagation in the lower atmosphere , where waves can be " bent " by refraction phenomenon . The audibility of sounds from distant sources , such as thunder or gunshots , is very dependent on the amount of shear . The result of these differing sound levels is key in noise pollution considerations , for example from roadway noise and aircraft noise , and must be considered in the design of noise barriers . This phenomenon was first applied to the field of noise pollution study in the 1960s , contributing to the design of urban highways as well as noise barriers . 
 The speed of sound varies with temperature . Since temperature and sound velocity normally decrease with increasing altitude , sound is refracted upward , away from listeners on the ground , creating an acoustic shadow at some distance from the source . In the 1862 , during the American Civil War Battle of Iuka , an acoustic shadow , believed to have been enhanced by a northeast wind , kept two divisions of Union soldiers out of the battle , because they could not hear the sounds of battle only six miles downwind . 
 = = = = Effects on architecture = = = = 
 Wind engineering is a field of engineering devoted to the analysis of wind effects on the natural and built environment . It includes strong winds which may cause discomfort as well as extreme winds such as tornadoes , hurricanes and storms which may cause widespread destruction . Wind engineering draws upon meteorology , aerodynamics and a number of specialist engineering disciplines . The tools used include climate models , atmospheric boundary layer wind tunnels and numerical models . It involves , among other topics , how wind impacting buildings must be accounted for in engineering . 
 Wind turbines are affected by wind shear . Vertical wind @-@ speed profiles result in different wind speeds at the blades nearest to the ground level compared to those at the top of blade travel , and this in turn affects the turbine operation . This low level wind shear can create a large bending moment in the shaft of a two bladed turbine when the blades are vertical . The reduced wind shear over water means shorter and less expensive wind turbine towers can be used in shallow seas . 
 = Operation Southern Move = 
 Operation Southern Move ( Croatian : Operacija <unk> <unk> ) was the final Croatian Army ( Hrvatska vojska – HV ) and Croatian Defence Council ( Hrvatsko vijeće obrane – HVO ) offensive of the Bosnian War . It took place in western Bosnia and Herzegovina on 8 – 11 October 1995 . Its goal was to help the Army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina ( Armija Republike Bosne i Hercegovine – ARBiH ) whose positions around the town of Ključ , captured by them during Operation Sana , were endangered by a counteroffensive by the Army of Republika Srpska ( Vojska Republike Srpske – VRS ) . The objectives of Operation Southern Move included the capture of the town of Mrkonjić Grad and positions on the Manjača Mountain which would allow the HV and the HVO to directly threaten Banja Luka , the largest Bosnian Serb city . Finally , the offensive was also aimed at capturing the Bočac Hydroelectric Power Station , the last significant source of electricity under VRS control in western Bosnia and Herzegovina . The combined HV and HVO forces were under the overall command of HV Major General Ante Gotovina . 
 The offensive achieved its objectives , and significantly contributed , along with Operations Sana and Maestral 2 to forcing the Bosnian Serb leadership to serious peace negotiations . A country @-@ wide ceasefire came into effect on 12 October , one day after the offensive ended , and was soon followed by negotiations which produced the Dayton Agreement , ending the Bosnian War . 
 = = Background = = 
 As the Yugoslav People 's Army ( Jugoslovenska narodna armija – JNA ) withdrew from Croatia following the acceptance and start of implementation of the Vance plan , its 55 @,@ 000 officers and soldiers born in Bosnia and Herzegovina were transferred to a new Bosnian Serb army , which was later renamed the Army of Republika Srpska ( Vojska Republike Srpske – VRS ) . This re @-@ organisation followed the declaration of the Serbian Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina on 9 January 1992 , ahead of the referendum on the independence of Bosnia and Herzegovina that took place between 29 February and 1 March 1992 . This declaration would later be cited by the Bosnian Serbs as a pretext for the Bosnian War . Bosnian Serbs began fortifying the capital , Sarajevo , and other areas on 1 March 1992 . On the following day , the first fatalities of the war were recorded in Sarajevo and Doboj . In the final days of March , Bosnian Serb forces bombarded Bosanski Brod with artillery , resulting in a cross @-@ border operation by the Croatian Army ( Hrvatska vojska – HV ) 108th Brigade . On 4 April 1992 , JNA artillery began shelling Sarajevo . There were other examples of the JNA directly supported the VRS , such as during the capture of Zvornik in early April 1992 , when the JNA provided artillery support from Serbia , firing across the Drina River . At the same time , the JNA attempted to defuse the situation and arrange negotiations elsewhere in the country . 
 The JNA and the VRS in Bosnia and Herzegovina faced the Army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina ( Armija Republike Bosne i Hercegovine – ARBiH ) and the Croatian Defence Council ( Hrvatsko vijeće obrane – HVO ) , reporting to the Bosniak @-@ dominated central government and the Bosnian Croat leadership respectively , as well as the HV , which occasionally supported HVO operations . In late April 1992 , the VRS was able to deploy 200 @,@ 000 troops , hundreds of tanks , armoured personnel carriers ( APCs ) and artillery pieces . The HVO and the Croatian Defence Forces ( Hrvatske obrambene snage – HOS ) could field approximately 25 @,@ 000 soldiers and a handful of heavy weapons , while the ARBiH was largely unprepared with nearly 100 @,@ 000 troops , small arms for less than a half of their number and virtually no heavy weapons . Arming of the various forces was hampered by a United Nations ( UN ) arms embargo that had been introduced in September 1991 . By mid @-@ May 1992 , when those JNA units which had not been transferred to the VRS withdrew from Bosnia and Herzegovina to the newly declared Federal Republic of Yugoslavia , the VRS controlled approximately 60 percent of Bosnia and Herzegovina . The extent of VRS control was extended to about 70 percent of the country by the end of 1992 . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 By 1995 , the ARBiH and the HVO had developed into better @-@ organised forces employing comparably large numbers of artillery pieces and good defensive fortifications . The VRS was not capable of penetrating their defences even where its forces employed sound military tactics , for instance in the Battle of Orašje in May and June 1995 . After recapture of the bulk of the Republic of Serb Krajina ( the Croatian Serb @-@ controlled areas of Croatia ) in Operation Storm in August 1995 , the HV shifted its focus to western Bosnia and Herzegovina . The shift was motivated by a desire to create a security zone along the Croatian border , establish Croatia as a regional power and gain favours with the West by forcing an end to the Bosnian War . The government of Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomed the move as it contributed to their goal of gaining control over western Bosnia and the city of Banja Luka — the largest city in the Bosnian Serb @-@ held territory . 
 In the final days of August 1995 , NATO launched Operation Deliberate Force — an air campaign targeting the VRS . This campaign was launched in response to the second Markale massacre of 28 August , which came on the heels of the Srebrenica massacre . Airstrikes began on 30 August , initially targeting VRS air defences , and striking targets near Sarajevo . The campaign was briefly suspended on 1 September and its scope was expanded to target artillery and storage facilities around the city . The bombing resumed on 5 September , and its scope extended to VRS air defences near Banja Luka by 9 September as NATO had nearly exhausted its list of targets near Sarajevo . On 13 September , the Bosnian Serbs accepted NATO 's demand for the establishment of an exclusion zone around Sarajevo and the campaign ceased . 
 Following a relative lull in fighting in western Bosnia , the HV , HVO and ARBiH renewed their joint offensive against the VRS in the region . The HV and HVO component of the offensive , codenamed Operation Maestral 2 , was launched on 8 September with the aim of capturing the towns of Jajce , Šipovo and Drvar . The ARBiH 7th Corps advanced on the right flank of the HV and the HVO towards Donji Vakuf . As Operation Maestral 2 neared its objectives , the ARBiH 5th Corps launched Operation Sana in the Bihać area , aimed at pushing the VRS back to the Sana River to the east . The ARBiH achieved significant territorial gains , advancing 70 kilometres ( 43 miles ) to capture the town of Ključ , and approaching Sanski Most and Novi Grad by 18 – 19 September — before being halted by significant VRS reinforcements . A VRS counteroffensive , launched on the night of 23 / 24 September from Novi Grad , Sanski Most and Mrkonjić Grad gradually pushed the 5th Corps back towards Bosanska Krupa and Ključ , despite gradual arrival of reinforcements dispatched by the ARBiH 7th Corps . The VRS had approached within 1 @,@ 000 metres ( 3 @,@ 300 feet ) of Ključ by 6 October , and ARBiH control of the town was under threat . In response , the ARBiH requested HV and HVO assistance . 
 = = Order of battle = = 
 The HV and the HVO forces earmarked for the offensive comprised 11 @,@ 000 – 12 @,@ 000 troops , organised into two groups , under the overall command of HV Major General Ante Gotovina . The primary group consisted of the 4th Guards and the 7th Guards Brigades , the 1st Croatian Guards Brigade ( 1 @.@ hrvatski gardijski zdrug – 1st HGZ ) of the HV , while the second group was spearheaded by the 1st , 2nd and 3rd Guards Brigades of the HVO , and included the 126th Home Guard Regiment of the HV . 
 The VRS units facing the combined HV / HVO force were elements of Operational Group @-@ 2 and the 30th Division , under the command of Colonel Milenko Lazić . They were deployed around Mrkonjić Grad , and comprised the 7th Motorised , 3rd Serbian and 11th Mrkonjić Light Infantry brigades . The three brigades , numbering approximately 5 @,@ 500 troops , were tasked to cover the rear of the VRS force counterattacking the ARBiH force in Ključ . 
 = = Timeline = = 
 Operation Southern Move was to be carried out in two stages . The first stage involved the capture of Mrkonjić Grad and the surrounding <unk> Valley . In the second phase of the operation , the force would seize the last significant source of electricity in the VRS @-@ controlled part of western Bosnia and <unk> — the Bočac Hydroelectric Power Station . The whole operation was planned to take four days , immediately preceding a country @-@ wide ceasefire scheduled to take effect on the morning of 12 October 1995 . According to Brigadier Ante <unk> , then commander of the 126th Home Guard Regiment , the offensive was approved by the United States , and U.S. warplanes attacked VRS positions near Banja Luka in preparation of the offensive . 
 = = = Phase one : 8 – 9 October = = = 
 The offensive began on 8 October with an attack launched by the HV 126th Home Guard Regiment and the HVO 1st Guards Brigade from a starting line 15 to 20 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 3 to 12 @.@ 4 miles ) west of Mrkonjić Grad , against positions held by the 11th Mrkonjić Light Infantry Brigade . This effort was intended as a diversion aimed at misleading the VRS defences regarding the main axis of the offensive . It was hampered by poor weather which prevented the effective use of artillery fire . 
 The main HV force committed to the offensive , comprising the 4th Guards and the 7th Guards brigades and the 1st HGZ , began their advance on 9 October . Poor weather and heavy fog forced the HV to postpone the attack from 6 : 00 until 8 : 50 . The advance was supported by strong artillery fire support and two Mil Mi @-@ 24s of the Croatian Air Force . The HV 7th Guards Brigade struggled to advance against the VRS positions southeast of Mrkonjić Grad around the villages of <unk> , <unk> and <unk> , manned by the 7th Motorised Brigade . The 4th Guards Brigade and the 1st HGZ faced the defences southwest of the town , manned by the 3rd Serbian Brigade . By the end of the day , the HV had advanced by about 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 miles ) partially enveloping Mrkonjić Grad . The town itself was hit by about 200 artillery shells fired by the HV and HVO . 
 = = = Phase two : 10 – 11 October = = = 
 On 10 October , the 4th Guards Brigade broke through and outflanked the 7th Motorised Brigade positions , forcing the VRS to withdraw from Mrkonjić Grad . The move also placed the <unk> Valley and Čađavica junction under HV control , completing the objectives of the first stage of the operation . The HVO 2nd Guards Brigade was deployed on the right flank of the 7th Guards Brigade and the two units advanced north towards Bočac . At the same time , the 4th Guards Brigade advanced onto Manjača mountain . 
 The HV units were replaced by HVO elements on 11 October . The HVO 1st Guards and 2nd Guards brigades took over the northward advance from the HV 4th Guards and 7th Guards brigades , while the HVO 3rd Guards Brigade relieved the 1st HGZ and the 126th Home Guard Regiment . The VRS defence was disorganised , and they were gradually pushed north , while maintaining effective artillery fire support for their retreating troops . By the end of the day , the HVO had captured the Bočac Hydroelectric Power Station . The final objective was achieved when the force reached a line 25 kilometres ( 16 miles ) south of Banja Luka . The advance reportedly came within 14 kilometres ( 9 miles ) of Banja Luka , whose electrical power supply was interrupted , and where a curfew was imposed in response to the deteriorating situation . Operation Southern Move ended on the night of 11 / 12 October . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The offensive captured an area 40 kilometres ( 25 miles ) wide and 20 kilometres ( 12 miles ) deep . The defeat of the VRS also made it clear to the Bosnian Serb leadership that they had to commit to ending the war through negotiations or risk the capture of Banja Luka . In addition , the offensive proved decisive in halting the VRS counteroffensive against the ARBiH near Ključ and Bosanska Krupa , and allowing the ARBiH to mount a successful advance against the VRS 1st Krajina Corps defending Sanski Most . Finally , the outcome of the battle brought the VRS to a position where it was forced to choose between defending Prijedor , Banja Luka or the Doboj – Brčko route . This route had been vital for the resupply of both Banja Luka and Doboj since the VRS secured it in Operation Corridor 92 three years earlier . According to a Central Intelligence Agency analysis , the ground offensives of the HV , HVO and ARBiH in western Bosnia and Herzegovina , including Operation Southern Move , were a more significant contributor to bringing of the Bosnian Serbs to the negotiation table than the NATO airstrikes . A country @-@ wide ceasefire went into effect on 12 October , followed by negotiations which produced the Dayton Agreement on 21 November and ended the Bosnian War . 
 The offensive displaced 10 @,@ 000 Serb refugees from Mrkonjić Grad , adding to a growing humanitarian crisis as another 30 @,@ 000 Serbs fled Sanski Most before the ARBiH captured it in the final days of Operation Sana . Approximately 6 @,@ 000 non @-@ Serbs forced to flee their homes in Prijedor and Novi Grad by Bosnian Serb forces . Bosnian Serb sources claim that 480 Serbs died or went missing in the fighting in the area of Mrkonjić Grad . The figure includes 181 bodies recovered in a mass grave at the town 's Serbian Orthodox cemetery . According to the Republika Srpska police who investigated the scene and interviewed witnesses , most of the dead were VRS prisoners of war or civilians who were killed by soldiers of the HV 4th Guards Brigade in retribution for death of the brigade 's deputy commander , Colonel Andrija <unk> . Results of the investigation were forwarded to the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia ( ICTY ) , but the ICTY did not pursue the matter . As of December 2013 , an investigation by the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities against 27 high @-@ ranking HV and HVO officers and Croatian officials is ongoing . In 2013 , the trial of an officer and two soldiers of the 7th Guards Brigade charged with killing of four Serb civilians near Mrkonjić Grad ended in acquittals , pending an appeal by the prosecution . 
 = Prism ( Katy Perry album ) = 
 l 
 Prism is the fourth studio album by American singer Katy Perry . It was released by Capitol Records on October 18 , 2013 . While the album was initially planned to be " darker " than her previous material , Prism ultimately became a prominently dance @-@ inspired record . The singer worked with several past collaborators , while enlisting new producers and guest vocals . Much of Prism revolves around the themes of living in the present , relationships , and self @-@ empowerment . Many critics praised the album 's lyrical content for being more " mature " while others considered Prism to be more formulaic than her previous material . 
 The album debuted atop the US Billboard 200 with 286 @,@ 000 copies sold , becoming Perry 's best opening week to date . The album also peaked at number one in Australia , Canada , Ireland , New Zealand , and the United Kingdom . Prism became Perry 's fastest @-@ selling album , the second best @-@ selling album in Australia in 2013 , and the second best @-@ selling album released by a woman in the United States in 2013 . The International Federation of the Phonographic Industry ( IFPI ) reported that Prism was the sixth best @-@ selling album in the world in 2013 , the best @-@ selling album in the world in 2013 released by a woman , and labeled Perry " a global phenomenon . " It has globally sold 4 million copies as of August 2015 . The album 's success continued throughout 2014 , ranking within the top 10 of the annual charts for 2014 in the United States , Canada , Australia , and New Zealand , and earned Perry a Grammy Award nomination for Best Pop Vocal Album at the 57th Annual Grammy Awards . 
 The release of the album was preceded by the release of two singles . " Roar " was released on August 10 , 2013 as the album 's lead single . It became a commercial success and topped the Billboard Hot 100 . " Unconditionally " debuted on October 16 , 2013 as the record 's second single and was a moderate commercial success worldwide . In between the release of these two tracks were the releases of promotional singles " Dark Horse " on September 17 and " Walking on Air " on September 30 , 2013 . " Dark Horse " was released as the album 's third single three months later on December 17 , 2013 , and also reached number one on the Billboard Hot 100 . " Birthday " and " This Is How We Do " were the fourth and fifth singles , respectively . Prism was further promoted through The Prismatic World Tour . 
 = = Background = = 
 After ending her California Dreams Tour , Perry stated that she intended to " live a little " before recording any new material that was " worth listening to " . When ex @-@ husband Russell Brand left her on December 30 , 2011 , she felt devastated and contemplated suicide . Perry revealed to Vogue in June 2012 that she planned to record a " darker " album than her previous records . She stated : " It was inevitable , after what I went through . If I had a time machine and could go back in time , I would . But I can 't , so , you 'll discover another part of me . " To Interview , she mentioned that she aspired to include a more acoustic vibe to the record . 
 Perry also said that her music would be getting " real fucking dark " , though also stated that her fans would be able to relate to it . " I imagine that maybe my next record would be a little bit more of an artistic venture , " she said . " Not that I 'm going to self @-@ sabotage either and be like , ' I 'm going to make a crazy record that nobody really understands . ' " That fall , she later told Billboard about her plans for the album , saying she already envisioned several aspects of it . Perry told the magazine that she already had songs and ideas , and knew the type of record she would make next . She also said that although she had not started recording yet , she already knew how the artwork , coloring and tone of the album would turn out . Perry further detailed : " I have to let the music take shape first . I even know what type of tour I 'm doing next . I 'll be very pleased if the vision I have in my head becomes a reality . But I have to honor the music . " 
 = = Recording = = 
 The development of Prism started when Perry was embarking on the California Dreams Tour . She began with a process she deemed " slow cooking " , which consisted of recording random " fragments of ideas " into her mobile phone 's dictaphone application . A member of Direct Management Group , Ngoc Hoang , then transcribed the audio files , which he inserted into what Perry described as a " treasure chest " ; such object was consulted by Perry later on during the album 's recording sessions . While Perry started recording the album officially in November 2012 , accompanied by Greg Wells and Greg Kurstin , she noted she was still in a " dark place " , and that she had not " let the light in " . The sessions began again in March 2013 , following a trip to Madagascar which Perry credited as having " put [ her ] priorities in perspective " , thus leading her to " do more work on [ her ] self " . Perry also viewed a video made by Eckhart Tolle , which discusses loss . She commented : " When you lose something , all your foundations crumble — but that also leaves a big hole that 's open for something great to come through . " 
 After feeling prepared to record again , she reunited with her team from Teenage Dream — Dr. Luke , Bonnie McKee , and Cirkut — in Perry 's hometown of Santa Barbara , California , where they spent a month recording at Playback Recording Studio among others . After those sessions , she went to Stockholm , where she worked with Scandinavian record producer Max Martin , to do what Perry called " put [ ting ] the ice on the cake " . She also recruited other collaborators , such as Norwegian team Stargate , Bloodshy , Benny Blanco , Jonatha Brooke and Sia Furler . By April 2013 , recording for the album was halfway complete , and Perry revealed to ASCAP how was working with such collaborators . She affirmed that Wells allowed her to " vomit words " ; with Martin , she picked the melodies of the songs ; Luke mostly helmed the production and she worked with " topline and melody " . Perry described writing sessions with McKee as " emotional abuse " , adding that they argue over the " best lyric " , as if they were fighting in a boxing ring . McKee , who wrote four songs for Prism , spoke with MTV on the effort , describing it as " a little bit more grown up " and " interesting " . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The album opens with " Roar " , a midtempo synth @-@ driven power pop track . Musically , it contains elements of arena rock and glam rock , while lyrically it is an empowerment anthem . Comparisons were established between " Roar " and " Brave " by Sara Bareilles . " Legendary Lovers " , a bhangra @-@ based song , deals with the ideas of karma and infinity . " Birthday " was described by Perry as her own attempt at " writing something Mariah Carey would have put on her first record " . Musically , it is a " fluffy " pop song that is primarily styled in the genre of disco . " Walking on Air " , the album 's second promotional single , is an early 1990s @-@ inspired deep house @-@ Eurodance @-@ disco song , inspired heavily by CeCe Peniston and Crystal Waters . It was produced by Klas Åhlund and Max Martin . " Unconditionally " , Perry 's personal favorite song on the album and second official single , is a " soaring " power ballad with an " epic chorus " . Jason Lipshutz from Billboard noted that the song includes a " woodblock percussion " as well as " a dramatic bass line " and deemed it the album 's " most mature offering " . Furthermore , he called it " an ode to love that looks past all flaws " and stated that the song acts as a " compellingly grounded predicate " to the title track from Teenage Dream . Perry herself described the song as a song about unconditional love that could come in all forms , including those from relationships , from parent @-@ to @-@ child , and from sibling @-@ to @-@ sibling . 
 " Dark Horse " is a song with ample influences of trap , grime , hip hop , and " Southern rap @-@ techno mashup " genres . " This Is How We Do " , produced by Max Martin and Klas <unk> , was described as being the possible " song of summer " for 2014 . Shirley Halperin from The Hollywood Reporter described " This Is How We Do " as " a sunny 80s throwback " , while Edna Gundersen from USA Today described it as a " buoyant pop blast with hip @-@ hop underpinnings " and praised the song 's recurring refrain ( " It 's no big deal ! " ) . James Montgomery from MTV News called the song a " cocksure , club @-@ ready banger " . With " Double Rainbow " , produced by Greg <unk> and co @-@ writer Sia Furler , Perry was allowed to " dump pent @-@ up emotions " and " get things off her chest " . The song was described as a " massive ballad " . Lipshutz deemed it as a " breathy love track " with a " powerful chorus that explodes upon impact " with lyrics that include " One man 's trash is another man 's treasure / so if it 's up to me , I 'm gonna keep you forever " . He added that " Kurstin brings the pop sensibility he 's flashed with artists like Kelly Clarkson and P ! nk , while Sia 's presence connects this sleek , shimmering pop track to [ her David Guetta collaboration ] ' Titanium ' " . Elijah <unk> felt that " Some of Katy 's finest vocals of the album are on this song " . 
 Perry described " Love Me " as a song " about loving yourself the way you want to be loved " . Gundersen called it " irresistibly catchy and energetic " . The song was produced by Bloodshy . <unk> called it " an interesting mix – the lyrics are dark , but the music is very dance @-@ centric . At the very least , it 'll do well in clubs " . Montgomery stated that " Love Me " and " International Smile " both " seem destined for the dance floors " . The latter was inspired by Perry 's friend Mia Moretti , and was compared to the songs on Perry 's previous album . Lipshutz called it a " straightforward pop @-@ rock offering " and described its guitar hook as " kicky " , adding that the song also includes a " Melting Daft Punk @-@ esque vocoder breakdown " . Halperin stated that in the song , Perry sings the " hooky " line : " Please fasten your seat belts and make sure your champagne glasses are empty " . 
 Halperin described " This Moment " and " Ghost " as " mid @-@ tempo ballads that are closest in DNA to Perry 's previous smashes " . Perry stated that she was inspired to write " This Moment " after she heard the audio book of The Power of Now ; the song 's lyrics talk about " living in the present " ; with Perry " add [ ing ] a romantic spin " to it . Gary Trust described " Ghost " as a " mesmerizing ballad " , while Gundersen described it as " powerful , dark , and haunting " . Lipshutz felt that " Ghost " and " By the Grace of God " contain the album 's " most somber moments " . While talking about each Prism track , Perry mentioned that " By the Grace of God " was the first song she wrote and recorded for the album back in November 2012 while she was in her " dark " phase . Jody Rosen from Vulture described bonus track " Spiritual " as an inspirational song . Kevin Fallon of The Daily Beast described " It Takes Two " as a " sweeping ballad " which allowed Perry to " show off a full @-@ throated belt that so many of her more bubbly tracks mask " . In " Choose Your Battles " , Perry " pounds her chest and spews venom at the man she cannot understand " . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 On July 29 , 2013 , a golden truck driving in Los Angeles revealed the album 's title as Prism and that it would be released on October 22 , 2013 . On August 9 , the truck was hit by a drunk driver in Pennsylvania , but none of the involved in the accident were injured . On August 20 , Pepsi revealed a partnership with Perry , in which fans were given the opportunity to unlock song titles , lyrics , and snippets from Prism by tweeting the hashtag # <unk> . Additionally , Pepsi provided previews of the songs " Dark Horse " and " Walking on Air " , and fans could vote for which song they wanted to have an early release on iTunes . The former song was declared the winner and was released onto iTunes on September 17 , 2013 . 
 Three listening parties for Prism were hosted : on September 5 , 2013 , one was hosted in New York , open exclusively to an audience of 100 industry insiders and journalists , where twelve tracks were played . A second Prism listening party took place the next day in Atlanta , while a third took place September 12 in Los Angeles at the Hammer Museum . The release of two promotional singles via iTunes preceded the release of Prism : " Dark Horse " , which features vocals from Juicy J , was released on September 17 and debuted at number 17 on the US Billboard Hot 100 , and inside the top ten at number ten on the New Zealand Singles Chart . Perry first performed " Dark Horse " three days later at the iHeartRadio Music Festival . " Walking on Air " was released as the second promotional single on September 30 . 
 The album was released on October 18 , 2013 . Its album cover , unveiled in a Jumbotron during Good Morning America on September 6 , 2013 , was shot by American photographer Ryan McGinley . For the deluxe edition , 300 @,@ 000 copies with an iridescent digipak package were printed , and came with the album 's logo printed onto seed paper . 
 Perry began The Prismatic World Tour on May 7 , 2014 , at the Odyssey Arena in Belfast , Northern Ireland . The first leg of the tour also featured performances in Scotland and England that month . The second leg was announced on January 15 , 2014 , consisting of concerts in Canada , Mexico , and the United States . The leg ran from June to October 2014 . 
 = = Singles = = 
 " Roar " was serviced to mainstream radio stations on August 10 , 2013 as the album 's lead single , and its digital release followed two days later . It received mixed @-@ to @-@ positive commentary from music critics , who commended its " easy " and " poppy " beat , while some were ambivalent towards its clichéd lyrics . Commercially , it was a success , topping the Billboard Hot 100 and charts in Australia , Canada , New Zealand , and the United Kingdom . The song was nominated for the Song of the Year and the Best Pop Solo Performance awards at the 56th Grammy Awards . 
 " Unconditionally " was released as the album 's second single on October 16 , 2013 . It received generally favorable reviews from critics , who praised it for being " soaring " and " effortless " . A lyric video for the song was released two days after its debut , and its official music video was released on November 19 , 2013 . To promote the single , Perry has performed on various occasions , including a geisha @-@ themed performance of it on the American Music Awards of 2013 , which attracted negative press , controversy and accusations of racism . " Unconditionally " has peaked at number 14 on the Billboard Hot 100 and has charted moderately worldwide , reaching the top 30 in the single charts of Canada and Germany and the Top 10 in Italy . 
 " Dark Horse " was released on December 17 , 2013 as the album 's third official single . It had previously been released as the album 's first promotional single exactly three months prior to its single release . The following week , the song leaped to number four due to topping the Hot Digital Songs , selling 243 @,@ 000 copies . With " Dark Horse " topping the Hot Digital Songs chart , it became Perry 's 10th digital number @-@ one single . The song topped the Billboard Hot 100 chart on January 29 , 2014 , becoming Perry 's 9th number one single in the United States . 
 On April 3 , 2014 , " Birthday " was announced as the album 's fourth official single . It debuted at number 91 on the Billboard Hot 100 and impacted Top 40 / Mainstream radio in the U.S. on April 21 , 2014 . This single has peaked at number 17 on the Billboard Hot 100 and become her fifteenth top @-@ twenty hit in United States , although it was her third single not to reach the top 10 on the chart . 
 " This Is How We Do " served as the fifth official single from the album . A lyric video of the song was released on July 24 , 2014 , meanwhile the official music video was released a week later . The song was later sent to radio on August 12 , 2014 . The song debuted at number 88 on the Billboard Hot 100 on August 9 , 2014 and has since peaked at number 24 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Upon release , Prism received generally positive reviews from music critics . Jon Dolan from Rolling Stone gave the album three out of five stars , writing that " Perry and her longtime collaborators Dr. Luke and Max Martin often go for a darker , moodier intimacy à la high @-@ end Swedish divas Robyn and Lykke Li . Perry has always done a great job of letting us know she 's in on the joke of pop stardom . Sadly , she doesn 't always bring that same sense of humor and self @-@ awareness to the joke of pop @-@ star introspection . The album 's raft of ripe @-@ lotus ballads is larded with Alanis @-@ ian poesy she can 't pull off " . Nick Catucci from Entertainment Weekly gave the album a B + and stated that " Katy 's superpower , now more than ever , is minting songs so relatable that their insights quickly scale up to inspirational ..... Now she grasps that she 's making the mainstream , not just swimming in it " . 
 Helen Brown from The Daily Telegraph gave the album five out of five stars , stating Perry " sounds like a woman , and an artist , who 's finally found herself " and praised the " vulnerability " of the album . Stephen Thomas Erlewine from AllMusic , Alexis Petridis from The Guardian , and Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine all also gave the album three out of five stars . Erlewine dubbed Prism " a tighter , cleaner record than its predecessors " . Petridis called it " Katy Perry 's most spiritual album to date " . Mesfin Fekadu from ABC News deemed the tracks " likable " , but felt the album lacked " some of the fiery fierceness and excitement that dominated Teenage Dream " . James Reed from The Boston Globe felt Perry " always seemed like the pop star who knows precisely what she does best " and called the album " an unabashedly fun listen " . Chris Bosman from Consequence of Sound gave the album three and a half out of five stars , calling Perry " a champion of choruses " . Greg Kot from Chicago Tribune gave the album 2 out of 4 stars , commenting " Though not exactly spiritual , Prism does come off as a more serious — if no less formulaic — album than its predecessor " . Marah Eakin from The A.V. Club gave the album a C + , commenting " A lot of Prism is simply forgettable " , though praised the tracks " Roar " , " Birthday " , and " This Is How We Do " . Rob Harvilla from Spin gave the album a 5 / 10 rating , and felt some of the material was not " all that desirable " . 
 Elysa Gardner from USA Today gave the album a 3 / 4 rating and found the album to be " genuine and endearing " . Trent Wolbe from The Verge gave an overall 4 / 4 rating and praised Perry 's ability to " wrapping hyper @-@ specific emotions into a new format that everyone can relate to " . He particularly praised the tracks " International Smile " and " Birthday " , declaring the chorus of " Birthday " to be " fucking perfect " . Jody Rosen from Vulture was disappointed with every track on the album except for " Roar " . Randall Roberts of Los Angeles Times gave the album a 3 / 4 rating , calling it " a shimmering , dynamic , heavy @-@ duty modern pop album " . At the 57th Annual Grammy Awards , Prism was nominated for Best Pop Vocal Album , but lost against Sam Smith 's In the Lonely Hour . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Prism made its official debut in Ireland , where it charted atop the charts . In the United States , the album opened at the top spot on the US Billboard 200 , becoming her second consecutive number one album in the country . The album sold 286 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . Prism acquired the largest first week sum by a female artist for 2013 , surpassing Miley Cyrus ' Bangerz ( 270 @,@ 000 copies ) . However , this feat was surpassed by Beyoncé 's self @-@ titled fifth album , Beyoncé ( 617 @,@ 213 digital copies ) , released in December 2013 . At the time of its release Prism had the fourth highest first week sales of the year for a pop record , trailing behind Daft Punk 's May 2013 album Random Access Memories , which sold 339 @,@ 000 copies and Justin Timberlake 's The 20 / 20 Experience which debuted to 968 @,@ 000 copies and its follow @-@ up The 20 / 20 Experience – 2 of 2 which debuted to just 350 @,@ 000 copies . The first week sales also marks Perry 's highest weekly sales , with her previous album Teenage Dream selling 192 @,@ 000 copies in its first week in August 2010 . Prism has the highest first week sales for a female pop artist since Madonna 's twelfth studio album , MDNA . Prism sold 92 @,@ 000 copies during its second week of availability , falling to number two on the Billboard 200 . This represented the smallest sales dip for a number one album in the United States since the August 2013 release of The Civil Wars . Prism has spent 17 weeks so far in the top @-@ ten on the chart . The album has been certified double platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , and as of August 2015 , it has sold 1 @.@ 65 million copies in the United States . In June 2014 , Billboard announced its Mid Year Top 20 Best @-@ selling albums with Prism coming in at number 9 with sales of 453 @,@ 000 in 2014 alone . Pharrell Williams and Perry were the only two people in to have an album and a single in the Mid Year Top 10 charts . Due to the album 's success throughout 2014 , Perry topped eight of Billboard 's 2014 Year @-@ End charts : Top Female Artist , Hot 100 Artist , Radio Songs Artist , Streaming Songs , Streaming Songs Artist , Pop Songs , Pop Songs Artist , and Dance Club Songs Artist . Perry also topped the list of Canadian Hot 100 Artists . In February 2015 , following Perry 's performance at the Super Bowl XLIX halftime show , sales for the album increased by 85 % and the album rebounded back into the Top 50 . 
 In New Zealand , the album became Perry 's second consecutive number one album , and was certified gold by Recorded Music NZ , selling over 7 @,@ 500 copies in its first week sales . Prism was certified platinum in Australia during its second week of release . The album has sold a total of 179 @,@ 000 copies in Australia as of December 2013 . 
 In Europe , the album was a moderate success . In Switzerland , the album debuted at two , just behind James Blunt 's Moon Landing and was certified Gold shortly after . In Austria , the album debuted at number three and was certified Gold in its first week , achieving Platinum certification a month later . In France , Prism debuted in the Top 10 , spending a dozen weeks in the Top 40 , and has sold over 130 @,@ 000 copies according to SNEP . In The Netherlands , it debuted inside the top ten and spent seven weeks in the Top 40 , later rebounding back into the Top 40 with the success of " Dark Horse " . In Denmark , the album became her highest charting album since One of the Boys , debuting at number four . As of August 2015 , Prism has sold over 4 million copies worldwide . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Prism . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 The following people contributed to Prism : 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Goodbye , Toby = 
 " Goodbye , Toby " is the fourth season hour @-@ long finale of the American comedy television series The Office , and the show 's seventy @-@ first and seventy @-@ second episodes overall . Written by Paul Lieberstein and Jennifer Celotta , and directed by Paul Feig , the episode first aired in the United States on May 15 , 2008 on NBC . " Goodbye , Toby " guest starred Amy Ryan as Holly Flax , Melora Hardin as Jan Levinson , and Robert R. Shafer as Bob Vance . 
 The series — presented as if it were a real documentary — depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania , branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . In this episode , Toby Flenderson ( Lieberstein ) spends his last day at Dunder Mifflin before moving to Costa Rica . Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) develops feelings for the new Human Resources Representative Holly Flax ( Ryan ) , who makes her first appearance in this episode . Jim Halpert 's ( John Krasinski ) plan to propose to Pam Beesley ( Jenna Fischer ) gets ruined after Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) makes a proposal of his own . Elsewhere , Ryan Howard ( B. J. Novak ) is fired as Vice President of the company for misleading the shareholders and sent to prison . 
 " Goodbye , Toby " introduced the character of Holly Flax , played by Amy Ryan , whose presence would drastically affect the office in the series ' fifth and seventh seasons . The episode received largely positive reviews from critics , with many applauding the introduction of Amy Ryan 's character , as well as the ending between Jim and Pam . The episode received 4 @.@ 1 Nielsen rating and was watched by 8 @.@ 07 million viewers . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Dunder Mifflin 's Scranton branch is planning a going @-@ away party for Toby Flenderson ( Paul Lieberstein ) before he leaves for Costa Rica . Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) is extremely happy that Toby is leaving , but when Angela Martin ( Angela Kinsey ) balks at his unreasonable party demands , Phyllis Vance ( Phyllis Smith ) accepts the duty of planning the party . She does fantastically , ordering carnival rides and hiring a band . 
 Michael 's hatred of Toby has been transferred to the new human resources representative , Holly Flax ( Amy Ryan ) , and he and Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) plan to haze her . When she playfully affects disdain for Toby , Michael takes her seriously , and suddenly falls in love with her . Taking advice from Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) , Michael succeeds in warming Holly up with small talk and jokes , and even tempers Toby 's exit interview , which he had originally planned to be brutally insulting , because Holly attends . Dwight , however , continues the hazing , telling Holly that Kevin Malone ( Brian Baumgartner ) is mentally challenged , and putting a raccoon in her car . When Michael catches Dwight trying to release a raccoon into Holly 's car , he loudly proclaims his esteem for Holly . Holly gives special attention to Kevin throughout the episode due to her belief that he is mentally challenged , but Kevin believes her attention is a sexual interest in him . 
 Pam Beesly ( Jenna Fischer ) reveals that she is spending the summer studying graphic design at Pratt Institute in New York City . Meanwhile , Jim calls Ryan Howard ( B. J. Novak ) about a huge sale that he has recently made . <unk> as ever , Ryan instructs him to enter the sale on the company 's website before abruptly hanging up . Jim takes this as another sign that Ryan is trying to push him out of the company , and leaves Ryan a voice mail proclaiming that he will fight Ryan 's attempts to fire him . Shortly afterward , Creed Bratton ( Creed Bratton ) and Jim find a video on YouTube of Ryan being arrested for fraud in the full presence of his peers who are all recording his arrest on their cell phones and interrupt Toby 's exit interview to show Michael , Toby , Pam , and Holly . It is revealed that Ryan 's website was floundering , so he double @-@ counted office sales as website sales , fraudulently inflating the firm 's figures . Although Michael is deeply concerned for Ryan , Jim is pleased and leaves Ryan a second voice mail mockingly telling Ryan to disregard the last because he had his " hands tied . " 
 Michael discovers that Jan Levinson ( Melora Hardin ) has artificially inseminated herself from a sperm bank when Kevin runs into her at the grocery store . She explains that she did this while she was dating Michael , but still wants him to be involved in the pregnancy . He initially is indecisive , but eventually calls and agrees to attend <unk> class with her . 
 Jim contributes several hundred dollars to the party @-@ planning fund in order to buy fireworks , later revealing that he has decided to propose to Pam , going back to their " first date " . Pam notices the purchase and guesses his intentions ; however , at the party , Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) ruins the moment by proposing to Angela , who bitterly accepts . Pam is visibly disappointed that Jim didn 't propose to her . Michael has security escort Toby out of the office as a parting insult . Dwight is crushed that his ex @-@ girlfriend is marrying someone else . In the last scene of the episode , Phyllis returns to the office , pleased at the success of her party , where she and the camera crew walk in on Angela and Dwight having sex on one of the desks . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Goodbye , Toby " was written by Paul Lieberstein and Jennifer Celotta . Lieberstein is also the actor who plays Toby Flenderson . It took Lieberstein and Celotta four or five days to write this episode . Writer Anthony Farrell said that the idea for Dunder Mifflin Infinity to fail was inspired by the days that he was an administrative assistant for Countrywide Home Loans . Farrell recalled watching the company try new online initiatives and seeing them all be unsuccessful . The talking head interview wherein Michael compares Holly to a baker came after what the writers call " blitzes " , in which all the writers write a talking head on a specific topic , such as " Michael 's feelings to Holly " . Then they all read all of them out loud and see which one gets the biggest reaction . The YouTube video of Ryan being arrested was set on a private account . After " Goodbye , Toby " aired , the video was released to the public . When writing the story for the episode , the show originally planned on having Dwight put a badger in Holly 's car , but after finding out that it was difficult to get a badger , it was switched to a raccoon . The script also called for the raccoon to attack Meredith , but that was decided against for safety reasons . During one of the takes wherein Michael is singing his parody songs , Carell grabbed a guitar and played an Eddie Van Halen guitar solo , but that scene was cut because it did not match Michael 's character . After filming , the editors had about 72 minutes of material that they needed to cut down into 40 minutes . 
 " Goodbye , Toby " introduced Holly Flax , played by Amy Ryan , who would go on to become Michael 's main love interest . In fact , her return to the series in the seventh season was used by the writers as a way to write Steve Carell out of the series after his contract ended . Ryan gained prominence with her role as Beadie Russell on the HBO series The Wire . The writers of The Office , who were fans of the series , then approached Ryan about appearing in their show . Ryan , feeling that a comedy series would " keep [ her ] a couple steps ahead of people [ and ] surprise people " agreed . Holly 's character was developed by the writers awhile before the episode was scripted . However , once Ryan began acting on set , Lieberstein explained that " we started to see this really silly side that Amy brought to the character , and [ we ] found almost like a junior Michael in her . And we all saw it and knew what we had . " After the filming of " Goodbye , Toby " , the writers were hoping that Ryan would return for the fifth season ; the crew had not made a deal with her to film more episodes , but Lieberstein noted that " we knew that she would stay around , or we hoped . " The episode also guest starred Melora Hardin , and Robert R. Shafer . The members of Darryl 's band are the actual members of actor Craig Robinson 's band : Chris Rob played bass , Asa Watkins played drums , and David Sampson played guitar . 
 " Goodbye , Toby " was the seventh episode of the series directed by Paul Feig . Feig had previously directed " Office Olympics " , " Halloween " , " Performance Review " , " E @-@ mail Surveillance " , " Survivor Man " and " Dinner Party " . Feig was tasked with shooting many of the shots that would hide Angela Kinsey 's pregnant stomach . To do this , he " looked for places around the office that could conceal her belly " . Notably , the ending of the episode was shot in such a way that the audience could see that Dwight and Angela were having sex , but that Kinsey 's stomach would not be seen . 
 The Season Four DVD contains a number of deleted scenes from this episode . Notable cut scenes include Michael comparing Toby to the flu , Toby giving his going @-@ away speech and then being interrupted by Michael , Holly asking Pam if Kevin just ate before jumping in the bounce castle , Jim not sure whether Ryan is going to downsize him , Jim and Pam browsing for apartments online , the revelation that Kevin 's band Scrantonicity played 30 full Police songs , all out of tune and off @-@ beat , during Phyllis 's wedding , Kelly watching Ryan 's YouTube arrest video over and over again at Jim 's desk , Jim asking about the website , Troy ( Noel <unk> ) — Ryan 's drug dealer — showing up in Scranton . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Michael offers to make Holly a mixtape , which is a personalized compilation of songs recorded onto any audio format . Michael and Holly trade off comments , speaking as if they were Yoda , the diminutive Jedi master from the Star Wars universe . Michael sings a parody of " Goodbye Stranger " by Supertramp entitled " Goodbye , Toby " . He also mentions two other parodies that he wrote , the titles of two of his songs , " Beers in Heaven " and " Total Eclipse of the Fart " , parodies of " Tears in Heaven " by Eric Clapton and " Total Eclipse of the Heart " by Bonnie Tyler . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Goodbye , Toby " first aired on May 15 , 2008 on NBC . The episode received 4 @.@ 1 / 10 in the 18 – 49 demographic in the Nielsen ratings . This means that 4 @.@ 1 percent of all households with an 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ old living in it watched the episode , and ten percent had their televisions tuned to the channel at any point . The episode was watched by 8 @.@ 07 million viewers . 
 " Goodbye , Toby " was generally well @-@ received by critics . TV Squad 's Jay Black said that " The Office is at its best when its exposing the dramas that take [ sic ] place at every workplace " . Black went on to say that Angela 's rudeness to Phyllis " was a small thread throughout the show , but a hilarious one " . Kelly West of Cinemablend.com wrote that even though the episode did not play @-@ out " the way [ she ] expected " , she was " definitely not complaining " . Alan Sepinwall , a writer for The Star @-@ Ledger , was critical of the proposal scenario , saying that " I really , really , really hope the writers aren 't going to be foolish enough to try to create real strife in the PB & J ( Pam Beesly and Jim ) relationship over how long it 's going to take Jim to propose . " Furthermore , Sepinwall felt that " Goodbye , Toby " might have been , up until that point in the series , the show 's " best hour @-@ long ' Office ' ever " . 
 Nathan Rabin of The A.V. Club noted that " Goodbye , Toby " felt like " the season <unk> of all season finales " , largely because the series " <unk> [ ed ] three or four episodes worth of revelations and big plot twists and turns into one jam @-@ packed , over @-@ stuffed , <unk> mega @-@ super @-@ double @-@ extended episode . " Rabin was pleased with Ryan 's performance , noting that it proved she could play more than an " unfit , coke @-@ crazed , borderline feral Boston shit @-@ kickers " , a reference to her Academy Award nominated performance in Gone Baby Gone . Furthermore , he was also complimentary towards the Jim and Pam plot . However , he felt that the episode 's " overstuffed " qualities were a weakness , and he ultimately awarded it a " B + " . The episode was nominated for an Emmy at the Primetime Emmys in the " Best Direction for a Comedy Series " category in 2008 . 
 = Prince George 's County Sheriff 's Office = 
 The Prince George 's County Sheriff 's Office ( PGSO ) , officially the Office of the Sheriff , Prince George 's County ( <unk> ) , provides law enforcement services in Prince George 's County , Maryland in the United States . Its headquarters are located in Upper Marlboro , near the Depot Pond . The sheriff is the chief law enforcement officer of Prince George 's County and is elected every four years . There are no term limits for the sheriff . 
 Created in 1696 , the traditional duties of the sheriff are keeper of the public peace and the enforcement arm of the county court , analogous to the U.S. Marshals Service . The PGSO has a relatively long history compared to other police departments and sheriff 's offices in Maryland . The PGSO was involved with events that occurred during the burning of Washington and affected the writing of the " The Star @-@ Spangled Banner " . Prior to 1931 , the PGSO was the sole law enforcement organization of the county . 
 Today , the duties of the sheriff include service of court @-@ ordered warrants , writs , protective orders , and other injunctions . The Domestic Violence Unit has expanded its role in the county to include responding to calls for service that are domestic @-@ related . The creation of the School Resource Deputy division has placed a deputy sheriff at all of the local high schools , replacing the County Police . All other law enforcement services of the county are provided by multiple agencies but mostly left to the separate Prince George 's County Police Department ( PGPD ) , though some responsibilities are shared by both agencies . The PGSO , like most other county @-@ level law enforcement agencies in the United States , is a progressive agency with an array of services in tom a Specialized Services Team dealing with high @-@ risk arrest warrants and barricaded situations to community services aiding the county 's citizens in safety education . Although the agency is not nationally accredited , it has working for over fifteen years towards achieving accreditation , as of January 2015 . 
 = = Authority = = 
 The sheriff is the chief law enforcement official of Prince George 's County per Maryland common law . All deputy sheriffs are certified , sworn law enforcement officials with full power of arrest . All sworn members of the sheriff 's office are agents of the U.S. state of Maryland and thus have authority throughout the entire state , although direct jurisdiction is limited to the Seventh Judicial Circuit of Maryland , which includes Calvert County , Charles County , Prince George 's County , and St. Mary 's County . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 1690s – 1720s : Founding and British rule = = = 
 The Sheriff 's Office was founded April 22 , 1696 . The governor of Maryland , Sir Francis Nicholson , appointed Thomas Greenfield as the first sheriff . The St. Paul 's Church in Charlestown held the headquarters for the Sheriff 's Office until the 1720s when it was relocated to the town of Upper Marlboro . At the time of the 18th century , there was no set salary for the sheriff , but he was often paid in tobacco . 
 = = = 1810s : War of 1812 = = = 
 During the War of 1812 , which lasted from 1812 to 1815 , an incident occurred at the time of the Burning of Washington , D.C. , when the sheriff 's office became involved in an occurrence that led to the writing of the U.S. national anthem . As the British Army marched from Washington they passed through Prince George 's County . Because the residents had cooperated with the British , the commander ensured that minimal damage was inflicted upon the local residents and their property . After the Battle of Bladensburg , the British Army returned to the area of Upper Marlboro . However , this time some of the British soldiers looted local farms . A sheriff 's posse subsequently arrested the offending soldiers and placed them in the county jail . Upon learning about the arrest of his soldiers , the British commander ordered the arrest of the sheriff and the posse in turn . One of the posse members was Dr. William Beam . Beam was ultimately arrested and held for ransom on a British warship . Beam 's brother @-@ in @-@ law , Francis Scott Key , went to Baltimore Harbor in search of him . He witnessed the British fleet under attack which was the inspiration of " The Star @-@ Spangled Banner " . 
 During the war , an incident occurred involving the Prince George 's County jail , when local resident Dr. William Beanes , ( 1775 – 1824 ) captured several marauding British Army deserters from the passing army of General General Robert Ross ( 1766 – 1814 ) and Vice Admiral , Sir George Cockburn , ( 1772 – 1853 ) , and held them in the County Jail , after he had treated several wounded " Redcoat " soldiers in their march on to Washington and the disastrous Battle of Bladensburg on the Eastern Branch stream of the Anacostia River in August 1814 . Later he was arrested along with several others including Robert Bowie , former 11th Governor of Maryland ( 1803 – 06 , 1811 – 12 ) by retreating British cavalry on orders from Ross who had stayed in his home as headquarters . Later Francis Scott Key ( 1779 – 1843 ) , a Georgetown and Frederick lawyer with Col. John S. Skinner , U.S. Prisoner @-@ of @-@ War and Parole Agent went to Baltimore secured a small sailing ship , the Minden , and sailed down the Patapsco River and the Chesapeake Bay to find the British Royal Navy fleet after leaving the Patuxent River , beating up the Bay from their base on Tangier Island , Virginia heading for their attack on the hated " nest of pirates " - Baltimore . After being received and negotiating with General Ross , Admiral Cockburn and their superior , Admiral Sir Alexander Cochrane , ( 1758 – 1832 ) , and showing him some letters written by captured British wounded soldiers testifying to the fair treatment Beanes had given them and tended to them , they agreed to free him but that would be held up until they could celebrate after the Burning of Baltimore following their attack on Fort McHenry and landing troops to the east at North Point . Well , the famous story has been told , how the general was killed prior to the skirmishing at the Battle of North Point on September 12 , how the advancing British under successor , Colonel Arthur Brooke led the British regiments to face the 20 @,@ 000 drafted and volunteer citizens and militia under the command of Major General Samuel Smith , ( 1752 – 1839 ) , of the Maryland Militia on the eastern heights of " <unk> 's Hill " ( later known as " Hampstead Hill " in modern Patterson Park , between Highlandtown and Canton neighborhoods ) whose dug @-@ in fortifications and dragged cannon were so numerous that the " Redcoats " halted in their tracks and decided to await the shelling of the fort which guarded the entrances to the Harbor to pass into the inner port and the waterfront of Fells Point . Following the failure of the fort to fall to two days of " the rockets ' red glare and the bombs bursting in air " and their flanking troop @-@ loaded barge attack around the west end but driven back by alert artillery seamen at Forts Covington and Babcock in a driving night rainstorm , the British fleet turned about and set sail . Key and his companions Beanes and Skinner who were startled , amazed and emotionally overcome to see a huge 30 by 42 foot banner being raised in the light of the early morning with the distant booming of the morning 's gun salute , knew that the fort and the city had held . When they landed at " The Basin " ( modern " Inner Harbor " ) and Key finished up his draft of a new poem " The Defence of Fort McHenry " at the Indian Queen Hotel at West Baltimore and Hanover Streets , ( later to be set to music in a few days ) and sung lustily through the city , performed on the stage at the famed Holliday Street Theatre , and then soon throughout the state and soon the nation as " The Star Spangled Banner " . 
 = = = 1929 : Sheriff and police split = = = 
 In 1929 , due to an increase in population and crime , Prince George 's County created a separate police department . Prior to this time , laws allowed detectives to be used on loan from the Baltimore City Police Department . The newly created police department allowed the Sheriff 's Office to focus its manpower on enforcing orders of the court . 
 = = = 1994 – 2000 : Funding cuts and vacancies = = = 
 From December 12 , 1994 , to January 2000 , the PGSO did not hire any new deputies or civilian employees , leaving the agency with 92 vacant positions that needed to be filled . Over that period , 66 deputies left the agency , some retiring routinely , others leaving due to increased workloads caused by vacant positions . In some cases , deputies worked sixteen hours in one day , eight in courtrooms , and eight serving warrants . In December 1994 , the agency had 248 deputies , whereas on January 20 , 2000 , it only had 192 deputies , with 20 leaving from November 1998 to January 2000 . In July 1996 , the county government decreased the amount of funding the PGSO was receiving . Unlike the PGPD at the time , the PGSO was not nationally accredited and still is not , as of January 2015 . Computers were also in short supply , and the few that were in use were outdated and obsolete . 
 In 1996 , the Southern Management Company , a firm responsible for managing residential apartments complexes , filed a lawsuit against the sheriff and the county government , with the plaintiffs alleging that they lost revenue due to the sheriff 's office inability to evict tenants who were not paying their rent costs . 
 In January 2000 , it was revealed that the PGSO held seized money inside of a safe and did not report it to higher authorities . In response to the news , the county council responded that they did not object to the PGSO 's actions . 
 In February 2000 , the county government attempted to gain 57 million dollars from the state government at a courthouse in Charles County , to cover the costs of having sheriff 's deputies providing security at a district court since 1971 . The state countered that the county was responsible for any of the costs incurred . 
 In March 2000 , the county executive announced 1 @.@ 4 billion dollar budget for the county 's government in the 2001 fiscal year , which included funding increases for the sheriff 's office . 
 = = = 2000 – 2002 : <unk> politics = = = 
 On August 23 , 2002 , dozens of members from the Deputy Sheriff 's Association issued a vote of no confidence in the incumbent sheriff during a meeting at the county 's courthouse . The vote , they claimed , was issued due to allegations that the sheriff made against members of the agency , in which he said they were deliberately malingering in order to reflect badly on him . The sheriff rejected the allegations as unfounded and voiced his displeasure over the vote , calling them politically motivated due to their proximity to the primary elections , which was only weeks away at the time . 
 = = = 2002 : Deputies killed in the line of duty = = = 
 On the evening of Thursday , August 29 , 2002 , two PGSO sheriff 's deputies , Corporal James Victor " Jim " Arnaud , aged 53 , and Deputy Elizabeth " Liz " Licera Magruder , aged 30 , were killed in the line of duty while trying to serve an Emergency Petition Service ( EPS ) , a court @-@ ordered psychological evaluation , on James <unk> Logan , a 23 @-@ year @-@ old part @-@ time computer technician , drug dealer , and High Point High School graduate . 
 = = = = Background = = = = 
 At approximately 9 : 30 p.m. , on the night of August 29 , 2002 , Corporal Arnaud and Deputy Magruder arrived at the residence of James <unk> Logan , a 23 @-@ year @-@ old man who lived at his parents ' single @-@ story rambler house at <unk> <unk> Drive in Adelphi , Maryland , near the Buck Lodge Middle School . According to departmental protocol , they were to arrive at the house with a third deputy , however , none were available at the time . They were to serve a petition to have an emergency psychiatric evaluation performed on Logan . Earlier in the day , Logan 's wife , Valencia Flood , fearing for her safety and the safety of her children , filed the petition with the judicial system to have her husband receive treatment , saying that Logan was " paranoid " and that he " needs to be hospitalized immediately " as " his condition was worsening " . The petition entailed the deputies taking Logan to a hospital , where he would have his psychiatric health examined by medical personnel . A few days earlier , on August 26 , Logan had been examined by a psychiatrist , who diagnosed him with paranoid schizophrenia and recommended that he be admitted to a medical institution to receive treatment for his mental health . Logan adamantly believed that he was in sound mental health and refused to consent to any such treatment , and as such , he was not admitted to such an institution and was released . 
 After the deputies arrived at the man 's house , Logan 's father , James Logan , Sr. , a television repairman , led them inside the residence , where Logan was in the basement conducting a Bible study with Anthony Antwan Kromah , a 19 @-@ year @-@ old man from Hyattsville , Maryland . Earlier in the month , Logan was released from a St. Mary 's County detention center after posting a $ 25 @,@ 000 bond . He had been arrested by a Maryland state trooper who had found cocaine , marijuana , and a .38 caliber handgun in Logan 's automobile after stopping him as he was driving with Kromah and another man in St. Mary 's County , being charged with possession of an illegal controlled substance with the intent to distribute . Logan had also been using cocaine and smoking marijuana earlier in the day . 
 After the deputies went into the basement , he was asked by Arnaud to come with him . However , Logan adamantly refused , saying " I told you , I 'm not going with you anywhere " . Logan then ran up the staircase and went into his former bedroom , now used as a guest bedroom , and closed the door . Arnaud and Magruder followed him to the room and stood outside the door . Arnaud tried to convince Logan to come out of the room , as Logan 's parents and Magruder , who had joined the department in February 2001 , stood by , watching . After Logan 's parents left the scene and went to the house 's master bedroom , Logan became belligerent and uncooperative . Partially hidden behind a closet door , Logan retrieved a semi @-@ automatic 9mm @-@ chambered handgun and fired at Arnaud , where a bullet struck him in the throat and severed his carotid artery . Logan then shot Arnaud fatally in the chest . 
 Seeing Arnaud felled by gunfire , Magruder , who was wearing body armor , stepped back and drew her sidearm . However , before she could return fire , Logan then shot six bullets at her , one of which struck her in the head , mortally wounding her . Logan then went over to Arnaud and , while standing over his body , shot him four more times , injuring his liver and inducing severe internal bleeding . Arnaud would die from severe gunshot @-@ induced blood loss at the scene , but the mortally wounded Magruder was able to call for assistance over her radio at 9 : 34 p.m. Logan 's father , who was in the house 's master bedroom , had heard the gunshots , and thinking that the deputies had shot him , went over to see what had happened . Instead , he saw Logan leaving the house with a firearm in hand , and saw that the two deputies had been shot . Logan 's father then called 9 @-@ 1 @-@ 1 via telephone at 9 : 39 p.m. to report the shooting to authorities . Emergency medical technicians arrived and removed Arnaud and Magruder were removed from the house via stretchers , with Magruder being airlifted via medical helicopter to the Prince George 's Hospital Center , with CPR being applied on her while en route . However , she would be pronounced dead at the hospital before midnight . 
 = = = = Manhunt = = = = 
 After shooting Magruder and killing Arnaud , Logan then fled the scene with Kromah in a silver @-@ painted Dodge Charger with Maryland license plates , with Kromah driving the vehicle . After leaving the house , Kromah took the weapon from Logan and attempted to wipe off any residual evidence , such as fingerprints , from it . The two then disposed of the murder weapon by burying it at a nearby forested cemetery and abandoned the getaway vehicle . Kromah was captured and charged as an accomplice to the murder ; he pleaded guilty on April 24 , 2003 to being an accessory after the fact to a murder . In the meantime , Logan stayed briefly at the residence of Twyla James , a woman who lived in Largo , Maryland . James would later be arrested and charged as an accessory to murder as she transported Logan , whom she had known was a murder suspect and fugitive sought by legal authorities , to her residence and allowed him to stay there . Logan was apprehended two days after the murder , on August 31 , 2002 , at a shed near the Quebec Arms Apartments in Hyattsville , Maryland , on the 8200 block of 14th Avenue . He was spotted there by undercover policemen , who had received information that it had been an area that Logan was known to frequent in the past . Logan was found hiding in the shed by policemen , who then used a police canine and a taser to subdue and apprehend him . 
 After his capture , Logan was taken to the Prince George 's Hospital Center , where he received stitches and sutures , being treated for canine bites on his ankle and arms . After receiving medical treatment for his injuries , Logan was taken to a police station , where he was interrogated for approximately three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half hours by Vincent " Vince " Canales , a PGPD detective , where he admitted to the murders . When asked by the detective why he had murdered the deputies , rather than fleeing without killing them , Logan said " I wanted to annihilate them , I couldn 't leave them alive " . The interrogation was recorded via camera and stored onto a VHS cassette tape and DVD , the contents of which would later be used in his murder trial as evidence to assist in convicting him . In November 2002 , Logan 's attorney , Fred Warren Bennett , claimed that Logan could not be held criminally responsible for the murders , due to mental deficiencies and poor psychiatric health . In response , the judiciary mandated that Logan undergo a psychiatric evaluation . 
 = = = = Trial = = = = 
 At his trial in late October 2003 , Logan 's attorney , Fred Warren Bennett , argued that although Logan did kill the deputies , he was not criminally responsible for the killings due to mental illness , and thus , should be acquitted by reason of insanity . However , the state 's prosecution argued that any mental <unk> Logan had were brought about by his usage of illegal narcotics , such as cocaine and marijuana , and as such , he would be legally responsible for the murders . Ultimately , the jury did not agree with the arguments put forth by Logan 's defense attorney and Logan was convicted of second @-@ degree murder on November 10 , 2003 , after jurors deliberated for ten hours over the span of three days over his fate . A few weeks later , on December 12 , 2003 , Logan was sentenced by the trial 's judge , E. Allen Shepherd , to one hundred years of imprisonment , without the possibility of parole . Before he was sentenced , Logan apologized to the relatives and comrades of his victims , and asked Shepherd to show mercy in his sentencing him . Shepherd rebuked Logan 's pleas for mercy , citing the heinous nature of the crime , which he remarked as being the most callous one that he had ever encountered as a member of the judiciary , saying " I 've never experienced a case of a murder more cold @-@ blooded than those that occurred in this case " and " You decided you were going to annihilate those two people " . 
 = = = = Retrial = = = = 
 Despite his conviction , Logan 's attorneys tried to appeal to the courts , with the one @-@ hundred year prison sentence being unanimously upheld by a three @-@ judge judicial panel on June 15 , 2004 . However , in their decision , the panel granted him the possibility of paroled release after fifty years . However , more than a year later , on September 7 , 2005 , the conviction was overturned by the Maryland Court of Appeals and Logan was awarded a second trial . The judiciary determined that the investigators had acted with impropriety in the process of obtaining of Logan 's confession to the murders by violating Logan 's Miranda rights , and by deliberately misleading him in order to obtain a confession . The court also determined that the judiciary 's selection process of jurors for the trial had not been rigorous enough and had thus been conducted improperly . Logan 's retrial began in June 2007 , with the prosecution unable to use Logan 's confession to present its case for conviction , for the judiciary had ruled that it had been obtained with impropriety . In the retrial , the prosecution used the same argument it had used in the original trial back in 2003 , arguing that Logan 's insanity defense was illegitimate due to his usage of illegal controlled substances . The state 's prosecution argued that Logan himself was solely responsible for any deficiencies in his mental health , saying that they were brought about through his consumption of illegal narcotics , such as cocaine and marijuana , two illegal controlled substances which he had used on the day of the murders . Ultimately , the first attempt at a retrial ended in June 2007 with a mistrial after jurors couldn 't come to a verdict after ten hours of deliberations . On July 1 , 2007 , Logan 's attorney died after being involved in an automobile collision on Route 10 in Glen Burnie , further complicating matters . However , a few months later , he was subsequently convicted again after pleading guilty and sentenced to thirty years imprisonment on October 24 , 2007 , with credit for the five years he had already served , much to the disappointment of the victims ' surviving family members , who felt he deserved a lifelong imprisonment for his crime . 
 = = = = Legacy = = = = 
 The murders occurred eleven days before the Maryland Democratic Party 's primary election to determine its candidate for the Prince George 's County sheriff . As there were no candidates running for sheriff in any other parties , the winner of the primary election would automatically run unopposed in the general election itself . The incumbent sheriff lost reelection to the union president , who vowed to implement new measures to prevent a similar incident from occurring in the future . 
 Arnaud was posthumously promoted to sergeant , and Magruder was posthumously promoted to deputy first class . Arnaud is survived by his wife , Theresa , and several children . Magruder is survived by her husband <unk> and her three @-@ year @-@ old son <unk> . In September 2002 , Arnaud and Magruder were posthumously honored before the U.S. House of Representatives by U.S. Representative Steny H. Hoyer of Maryland 's 5th congressional district . 
 The killings helped to spur the passage of a new Maryland state law pertaining to the treatment of the mentally ill , which went into effect on October 1 , 2003 . The law 's creation and passage were spurred in part by testimony from Logan 's parents , James Logan , Sr. and Karen Logan . The law allows a judge to order a mandatory psychiatric evaluation of a person , if the person presented a threat to themselves or to others . 
 = = = 2008 : Deputy wounded in Laurel = = = 
 On February 16 , 2008 , at approximately 3 : 30 a.m. , a PGSO SWAT team member was shot and critically wounded while serving a warrant as part of a task force with Deputy U.S. Marshals . The suspect , Aaron M. Lowry , was wanted for the shooting of a Washington , D.C. police officer . The injured deputy was flown to Baltimore Shock Trauma Center where he had surgery and was upgraded to serious but stable condition , and survived . 
 = = = 2008 : Berwyn Heights mayor 's residence raid = = = 
 On July 29 , 2008 , the PGPD and PGSO raided the home of Cheye Calvo , the mayor of the Town of Berwyn Heights . The raid team did not coordinate their action with the local police department as required by mutual agreement , nor did they did not obtain a warrant or knock on the door to announce their presence . They raided the house with explosive devices and with firearms drawn . During the course of the raid , they shot and killed the Calvo family 's two pet Labrador retriever dogs . 
 No charges were filed against the family . A PGSO internal investigation stated that the PGSO 's actions were justified . In 2010 , Sheriff Michael A. Jackson , defended the actions taken during the raid , saying : " Quite frankly we 'd do it again tonight . " 
 = = = 2012 : Courthouse misconduct = = = 
 In June 2012 , Deputy Lamar McIntyre was charged with having coitus with a woman that was in custody at the county courthouse . In 2014 , He pleaded guilty and was sentenced to three years in custody , with all but one @-@ year suspended . He was mandated to be required to submit to eighteen months of supervised probation . 
 = = = 2012 – present : Accreditation = = = 
 Although it has been working for over fifteen years towards achieving accreditation , since 2000 , the PGSO , as of January 2015 , has still not been nationally accredited . 
 In late 2015 , the PGSO received Ford Taurus Police Interceptors for use in its vehicular fleet . 
 = = Organization = = 
 The sheriff is elected by the citizens of Prince George 's County . The rank structure of the remaining members of the Sheriff 's Office is , like many U.S. law enforcement agencies , modeled after the U.S. military . The ranks of student deputy through corporal are non @-@ <unk> sergeant through captain are competitive . The ranks of lieutenant colonel ( Assistant Sheriff ) and colonel ( Chief Assistant Sheriff ) are appointed by , and serve at the <unk> of the sheriff . 
 The PGSO is divided into three bureaus : 
 = = = Headquarters = = = 
 The Prince George 's County Sheriff 's Office 's headquarters was located at the county seat of Upper Marlboro until 2000 , when Sheriff Alonzo D. " Al " Black II , moved it to the nearby town of Largo where it remained until August 2008 . His successor , Sheriff Michael A. Jackson returned the office headquarters to Upper Marlboro , near the Depot Pond , where it remains today . He was succeeded by Sheriff Melvin C. High in 2010 , who was subsequently re @-@ elected in 2014 . 
 = = = Bureau of Court Services = = = 
 The PGSO 's Bureau of Court Services is based out of the court complex located within the municipality of Upper Marlboro and is responsible for the safety and security of the circuit court in Upper Marlboro , transportation of inmates , and to provide assistant security and law enforcement services to the District Court in Upper Marlboro and Hyattsville , as well as domestic violence liaison services . The Bureau of Court Services is subdivided into four sections : Circuit Court , District Court , Transportation , and Building Security . Specifically , the bureau is responsible for the safety and security of the 7th Judicial Circuit for the State of Maryland and the District Court for Prince George 's County located within the court complexes and adjacent property in Upper Marlboro and Hyattsville . Yearly , between the Circuit Court , District Court , Transportation , and Building Security Sections , the bureau transports an average of 31 @,@ 000 prisoners , effects 700 warrant and warrantless arrests , and interviews over 8 @,@ 000 victims of domestic violence . 
 = = = Bureau of Field Operations = = = 
 The PGSO 's Bureau of Field Operations was based out of the Largo Substation and is charged with : Civil / Landlord & Tenant , Domestic Violence Intervention Unit ( <unk> or DV Unit ) , Warrant / Fugitive Squad , and Child Support Enforcement . The Civil section is responsible for service of criminal and civil summonses , and other court @-@ ordered writs . The Landlord and Tenant ( L & T ) Section is responsible for notification of delinquent rent and / or mortgage payments / foreclosures , and court @-@ ordered evictions . The section receives approximately 10 @,@ 000 writs for non @-@ payment each month . 
 The Domestic Violence Intervention Unit 's primary responsibility is response to domestic @-@ related 9 @-@ 1 @-@ 1 calls , court @-@ ordered psychiatric commitments , and ex parte protective order service . The Prince George 's DV Unit was the first in the State of Maryland and the first to operate on a 24 @-@ hour basis , and is considered a nationally recognized model . The unit receives on average over 1 @,@ 200 orders per month , the highest in the state . 
 = = = Bureau of Administration = = = 
 The PGSO 's Bureau of Administration is based out of the main headquarters located in Upper Marlboro and contains the School Resource , Public Information Office ( PIO ) , Recruiting , Training , and Internal Affairs . The Public Information Office ( PIO ) also operates an Explorers Post , Prince George 's County Sheriff 's Office Explorer Post # 1696 for Prince George 's County youths between the ages of 15 ( or 14 , provisionally ) and 20 . The sheriff and his command staff operate out of the Sheriff 's Office complex located in Upper Marlboro . Most of the civilian support personnel also work out of this facility providing administrative duties such as <unk> monitoring , teletype ( <unk> ) , uniform and supply , criminal warrant research and organization , as well as other administrative duties as directed . 
 = = = Special Operations Division = = = 
 The PGSO 's Special Operations Division ( SOD ) is responsible for specialized and specific services . The division is commanded by an assistant bureau chief and has different teams specifically responsible for : SST ( SWAT ) <unk> , executive and witness protection , riot control , crisis negotiations , intelligence gathering , motorcycle escort , and ceremonial duties . 
 = = = = Specialized units = = = = 
 Specialized Services Team ( SST ) 
 VIP / Witness Protection Team ( <unk> ) 
 Civil Disturbance Unit ( CDU ) 
 K @-@ 9 
 Motorcycle Unit 
 D.A.R.E. 
 Hostage Negotiation 
 Homeland Security and Intelligence 
 = = = Union representation = = = 
 Sworn PGSO personnel below the rank of captain , along with all civilian employees , are represented by the Deputy Sheriffs ' Association / Fraternal Order of Police , Maryland Lodge 112 ( DSA ) . The DSA is a labor union that provides , among other things , collective bargaining and legal assistance for its members . The current president of the union is William R. Milam . 
 = = Sheriffs = = 
 = = Line of duty deaths = = 
 There have been two PGSO deputy sheriffs killed in the line of duty , both in August 2002 . 
 = = Rank structure = = 
 = = Fleet = = 
 The Prince George 's County Sheriff 's Office currently operates a fleet consisting primarily of sixth @-@ generation Ford Taurus Police Interceptors , ninth generation Chevrolet Impalas and Ford Crown Victoria Police Interceptors . It also operates the Ford Police Interceptor Utility . The PGSO 's transportation unit uses specialized Chevrolet and Dodge vans , whereas the motorcycle unit uses Harley @-@ Davidson Police Edition motorcycles . The PGSO also has a Freightliner FS @-@ 65 bus . 
 In the past , the PGSO used eight generation Chevrolet Impalas , first generation Ford Crown Victorias , fifth generation Pontiac Grand Prix sedans , Jeep Cherokees , as well as a few 1999 to 2001 Chevrolet <unk> . 
 The current paint scheme of the PGSO 's marked cruisers is a white base paint with brown and gold striping with the word " <unk> " emblazoned on the side doors . In the past , the PGSO 's horizontal vehicular stripe decals were green and gold , with a simple PGSO patch door decal being used before that , along with black " <unk> " lettering written in a sans @-@ serif typeface . The light bars used on the PGSO 's cars are a slim <unk> Generation II LED version , with red and blue lighting . The Domestic Violence Intervention Unit has all marked vehicles with Panasonic <unk> computers assigned to the cars . 
 = Max ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Max " is the eighteenth episode of the fourth season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network on March 23 , 1997 . It was directed by Kim Manners , and written by Frank Spotnitz and series creator Chris Carter . " Max " featured guest appearances by Joe Spano , Tom O 'Brien and Scott Bellis , and saw the final appearance of Brendan Beiser as special agent Pendrell . The episode helped to explore the overarching mythology , or fictional history of The X @-@ Files . " Max " earned a Nielsen household rating of 11 @.@ 6 , being watched by 18 @.@ 34 million people in its initial broadcast . The episode received mixed to positive reviews from critics . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . Following the airplane crash that killed alien abductee Max Fenig , Mulder is pursued by an assassin looking to recover an alien artifact . " Max " is a two @-@ part episode , with the plot continuing from the previous episode , " Tempus Fugit " . 
 Manners praised the large cast of extras used during production , concluding that they were the best he had worked with . " Max " featured scenes filmed at Vancouver International Airport and in a studio water tank , as well as using the custom @-@ built Boeing 737 set constructed for " Tempus Fugit " . Dialogue in the episode was inspired by the 1949 film The Third Man . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Max Fenig ( Scott Bellis ) , a Mutual UFO Network member , has been repeatedly abducted by aliens throughout his life . After meeting with FBI agent Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) , Fenig was abducted once again , and thought to have been lost entirely . Several years later , Fenig is found dead amongst the victims of an airplane crash . Investigating the disaster , Mulder and his partner Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) learn that the airplane crashed after being intercepted by a military jet — and possibly by an alien spacecraft . Mulder 's search for evidence of such a craft leads to him diving to the bottom of Great Sacandaga Lake to find it ; while Scully is ambushed by an assassin seeking to kill a military witness , leading to her colleague Pendrell ( Brendan Beiser ) being shot . 
 = = = Events = = = 
 Mulder is caught by a group of commandos after swimming to shore . In Washington , Scully tends to the critically wounded Pendrell while Man in Black Garrett escapes . Assistant Director Walter Skinner ( Mitch Pileggi ) arrives shortly afterwards and tells Scully that the orders to protect Frish have been countermanded and he is being arrested for providing false testimony . Scully releases Mulder from confinement and tells him the " official " explanation for the crash , that Frish and Gonzales caused the crash by mistakenly vectoring a military fighter craft with the plane , and that Frish has been lying to cover it up . Mulder is skeptical of this latest explanation and thinks the crashed UFO he found underwater is really what was involved in the crash . Scully tells Mulder that Sharon is not really Max 's sister , but rather an unemployed aeronautical engineer who met Max in a mental institution . She also tells him that Agent Pendrell died from his wounds . 
 Mulder and Scully visit Max 's trailer , and watch a tape of him where he talks about finding proof of alien existence . The military recovers the crashed UFO from the lake , including the alien body . The agents visit Millar , whose investigation has been unable to prove or disprove the military 's cover story . Mulder tells Millar what he believed really happened . Mulder believes that Max boarded the plane with proof of alien life and that a UFO stopped the plane , abducting him . A military aircraft intercepted the two however , with orders to attack the UFO . While Max was being returned , the military aircraft struck , causing both the UFO and plane to crash . 
 Mulder visits Max 's trailer again and looks through his mail , finding a luggage claim ticket . Scully visits Sharon , now in a mental institution , who tells Scully that she stole technology from her employer that Max believed was alien . The device was in three parts , one which she had , one that he brought on the plane and a third one . Mulder uses the claim ticket to obtain the third device at a New York airport and heads on a plane to return to Washington . Garrett , who is also aboard , sits next to him . Mulder soon realizes who Garrett is and holds him at gunpoint . Garrett does not care , telling Mulder that if he shoots him the plane will <unk> and he will be able to escape with a parachute he has with him . Mulder imprisons Garrett in the airplane bathroom but Garrett soon emerges with a zip gun and orders him to hand over the device . Suddenly the plane starts shaking and bright lights shine in through the windows . When the plane touches down and Mulder gets out both Garrett and the device are gone and Mulder is missing nine minutes , having no memory of what happened . The agents visit Sharon one last time in Max 's trailer and say goodbye . 
 = = Production = = 
 The writers decided to kill off agent Pendrell in this episode . Actor Brendan Beiser portrayed the character in eight other episodes , first appearing in the third season episode " Nisei " . Val Steffof , the assistant director of the filming crew , wanted a part , telling director Kim Manners " you know , I can act " ; this led to Steffof being cast as a bartender . The song " Unmarked Helicopters " by Soul Coughing can be heard playing in Max Fenig 's trailer ; the song also appeared on the 1996 compilation album Songs in the Key of X : Music from and Inspired by the X @-@ Files . 
 The very first scene was shot in a small tank across the street from North Shore Studios in Vancouver . Wide @-@ angle lenses were used to film the scene as the actors did not actually have much room for swimming . This made it look like the actors are actually covering some ground , while in reality they only swam 10 to 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 to 3 @.@ 7 m ) . On the set of the following scene in which Fox Mulder reaches the shore , it was raining and very cold . Manners commented that the acting crew was more tired than usual because of it — during filming , Duchovny struggled to run from the actors playing his pursuers , but had previously been able to run from two horses when filming the episode " Tunguska " . 
 It took several days to film the alien abduction scene . Internal shots of the airplane 's cockpit were filmed in a real flight simulator , separate from the airplane set used for the rest of the interior shots . The exterior scenes were filmed at Vancouver International Airport . Executive producer John Shiban was asked to write a speech for Garrett in the scene in which Mulder encounters him on the airplane . Inspired by a speech given by Orson Welles in The Third Man , Shiban wrote the monologue as an homage to the film . The scenes of the airplane 's final airborne moments included eighty extras who Manners felt were " eighty of the best extras I 've ever worked with in my life " . Several extras were as young as four years old , leading series creator Chris Carter to note that the scene would benefit from showing younger children , though these were represented by dolls as a safety precaution . 
 The beam of light seen shining from beneath the UFO in the episode was achieved by compositing several shots together , with elements including a crane carrying a spotlight — borrowed from the Canadian Coast Guard — and the spray from an aerosol combined to create the final shot . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Max " premiered on the Fox network on March 23 , 1997 , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC Two on January 21 , 1998 . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 11 @.@ 6 with an 18 share , meaning that roughly 11 @.@ 6 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 18 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . A total of 18 @.@ 34 million viewers watched this episode during its original airing . 
 The episode received mixed to positive reviews from critics . Todd VanDerWerff , writing for The A.V. Club , rated " Max " an A − . VanDerWerff was unconvinced that the episode , along with " Tempus Fugit " , merited being stretched over two parts ; however , he felt that the character of Fenig was " a simultaneous paean to the many , many lives lost in this fictional war and a very real story about someone who could very well live on the edges of our society , driven mad by visions that are only real to himself , visions the rest of us would immediately disregard as unbelievable and surreal " . Paula Vitaris , writing for Cinefantastique , rated " Max " one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of four . Vitaris praised the episode 's visual effects ; however , she felt that the two parts of the story would have better served as " a taut one @-@ hour episode " . Vitaris also felt that the episode 's final act , featuring Mulder on an airplane , saw Mulder uncharacteristically putting civilians at risk and was an example of " out and out bad writing " . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode four stars out of five , describing it as " <unk> , satisfying , witty and touching " . Shearman noted that the second half of two @-@ part episodes in the series tended to " drop the ball " , but felt that the story arc of " Tempus Fugit " and " Max " was " very solid " , calling them " the most satisfying " event " <unk> that The X @-@ Files has ever done " . 
 = Augustus Owsley Stanley = 
 Augustus Owsley Stanley I ( May 21 , 1867 – August 12 , 1958 ) was a politician from the US state of Kentucky . A Democrat , he served as the 38th Governor of Kentucky and also represented the state in both the U.S. House of Representatives and the U.S. Senate . From 1903 to 1915 , Stanley represented Kentucky 's 2nd congressional district in the House of Representatives , where he gained a reputation as a progressive reformer . Beginning in 1904 , he called for an antitrust investigation of the American Tobacco Company , claiming they were a monopoly that drove down prices for the tobacco farmers of his district . As a result of his investigation , the Supreme Court of the United States broke up the American Tobacco Company in 1911 . Stanley also chaired a committee that conducted an antitrust investigation of U.S. Steel , which brought him national acclaim . Many of his ideas were incorporated into the Clayton Antitrust Act . 
 During an unsuccessful senatorial bid in 1914 , Stanley assumed an anti @-@ prohibition stance . This issue would dominate his political career for more than a decade and put him at odds with J. C. W. Beckham , the leader of the pro @-@ temperance faction of the state 's Democratic Party . In 1915 , Stanley ran for governor , defeating his close friend Edwin P. Morrow by just over 400 votes . It was the closest gubernatorial race in the state 's history . Historian Lowell H. Harrison called Stanley 's administration the apex of the Progressive Era in Kentucky . Among the reforms adopted during his tenure were a state antitrust law , a campaign finance reform law , and a workman 's compensation law . In 1918 , Stanley was chosen as the Democratic nominee to succeed the recently deceased senator Ollie M. James . Stanley was elected , but did not resign as governor to take the seat until May 1919 and accomplished little in his single term . He lost his re @-@ election bid to Frederic M. Sackett in the 1924 Republican landslide and never again held elected office . He died in Washington , D. C. on August 12 , 1958 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Augustus Owsley Stanley was born in Shelbyville , Kentucky on May 21 , 1867 ; he was the eldest of seven children of William and Amanda ( Owsley ) Stanley . His father was a minister of the Disciples of Christ and served as a judge advocate on the staff of Joseph E. Johnston in the Confederate Army . His mother was the niece of former Kentucky governor William Owsley . He attended Gordon Academy in Nicholasville , Kentucky and the Kentucky Agricultural and Mechanical College ( later the University of Kentucky ) before graduating with an A.B. from Centre College in 1889 . At both Centre and Kentucky A & M , he competed at the State Oratorical Contest , becoming the only such competitor to represent two different institutions . 
 For a year after graduation , Stanley served as chair of belles @-@ lettres at Christian College in <unk> , Kentucky . The following year , he was principal of Marion Academy in <unk> , then spent two years in the same position at Mackville Academy in Mackville . While he held these positions , he studied law under Gilbert <unk> . He was admitted to the bar in 1894 , and opened his practice in Flemingsburg , Kentucky . 
 = = Political career = = 
 Stanley 's first venture into the political arena was in 1897 when he made an unsuccessful bid to become county attorney of Fleming County . He continued to practice law in Flemingsburg until March 1898 when he moved to Henderson because of financial hardships . He served as a Democratic presidential elector on the ticket of William Jennings Bryan in 1900 . 
 = = = House of Representatives = = = 
 In 1902 , Stanley was elected as a U.S. Representative from Kentucky 's 2nd congressional district . During his tenure in the House , he served on the Committee on Mines and Mining , the Committee on Territories , and the Committee on Agriculture . He advocated for progressive reforms such as more extensive study of mine accident prevention , railroad regulation , a pure food and drug act , and an eight @-@ hour work day . 
 By the time of Stanley 's election to the House , the American Tobacco Company had eliminated all its substantial competitors either by acquisition or by driving them out of business . The company worked with British tobacco manufacturers to set tobacco prices worldwide . Congressman Stanley came to the defense of the tobacco farmers of his district , making him virtually unbeatable as a congressional candidate . In the first of his five consecutive terms , he authored a bill that would remove an oppressive national tobacco tax , hoping this would help raise prices for unprocessed tobacco . The bill was defeated by extensive lobbying efforts by the American Tobacco Company . In 1904 , he convinced the Ways and Means Committee to hold public hearings on the American Tobacco Company 's monopolistic actions , but the hearings did not convince legislators to repeal the tax nor take action against the American Tobacco Company . 
 Besides his legislative efforts on behalf of farmers , Stanley also directly encouraged them to organize and keep their crops off the market until prices improved . He helped draft the charter for the Dark District Tobacco Planters Association . Some of the more radical members of this group , known as the " Night Riders " , used vigilante violence to compel membership in the Association during what became known as the Black Patch Tobacco Wars . 
 Finally in 1909 , Stanley attached his proposed repeal of the tobacco tax as a rider to the Payne @-@ Aldrich Tariff Act . The bill passed the House , but the Senate stripped Stanley 's provision . Kentucky Senator Ollie M. James reintroduced the repeal into the Senate version of the bill , and it survived when the bill was passed into law . The repeal resulted in higher tobacco prices , and although Stanley had not been alone in getting the repeal passed , he received much of the credit . In 1911 , Stanley 's fight against the American Tobacco Company bore fruit , as the Supreme Court ruled the company to be in violation of antitrust laws and broke it into separate companies . Both the tax repeal and the breakup of American Tobacco helped quell the violence perpetrated by the Night Riders . 
 Stanley gained national notoriety for his actions against U.S. Steel . In 1909 , he introduced a resolution calling for an investigation of the company , but it died in the House Rules Committee . A second resolution , introduced in June 1910 , passed the House , but was ignored by President William Howard Taft . Stanley introduced a stronger resolution later that month , but it was killed in committee . After Republicans lost control of the house in the 1910 congressional elections , Stanley reintroduced his resolution . House Speaker Champ Clark appointed him as chairman of a nine @-@ member committee to investigate U.S. Steel . 
 The committee 's investigation lasted from May 1911 to April 1912 . At its conclusion , the committee split along party lines . Stanley authored the majority report which condemned alleged price fixing by U.S. Steel and censured President Theodore Roosevelt for his role in U.S. Steel 's purchase of the Tennessee Coal and Iron Company . The minority report , authored by Republican Augustus P. Gardner , absolved Roosevelt and downplayed the price fixing charges . Stanley 's report also recommended a number of changes to strengthen the Sherman Anti @-@ Trust Act . Though his recommendations were not enacted into law during his time in the House , many of them were eventually included in the Clayton Antitrust Act . 
 = = = 1915 senatorial bid = = = 
 Despite having no serious challengers for his House seat , Stanley declined to seek re @-@ election in 1915 , choosing instead to run for a seat in the U.S. Senate . He was one of three Democrats seeking the seat , the others being Governor James B. McCreary and former governor J. C. W. Beckham . McCreary was never a serious challenger , and the primary campaign centered on Stanley and Beckham , the leaders of the two largest factions of the state 's Democratic party . The two men disliked each other . Stanley had once referred to Beckham as " a fungus growth on the grave of Goebel " – an allusion to Beckham 's former running mate , Governor William Goebel , whose assassination in 1900 had elevated Beckham to the governorship . During the campaign , Stanley criticized Beckham 's use of machine politics , calling his opponent " Little Lord Fauntleroy " . 
 Prohibition became the major issue of the campaign . Though both Stanley and Beckham were known to drink liquor , Beckham campaigned on a pro @-@ temperance platform . Stanley , an opponent of prohibition , criticized Beckham 's position as hypocritical , saying of pro @-@ temperance politicians in general and Beckham in particular " They keep full of booze and introduce bills to punish the man who sells it to them . " " [ Beckham ] would sell out the world to go to the Senate , " he added . The support of Louisville Courier @-@ Journal editor Henry Watterson and Representative Ben Johnson were not enough to carry Stanley to victory . Beckham secured the Democratic nomination by almost 7 @,@ 000 votes and went on to win the seat in the general election . 
 = = = Governor of Kentucky = = = 
 Several candidates announced their intention to seek the Democratic gubernatorial nomination in 1915 , but by late August , only two remained in the race . Stanley was the choice of the anti @-@ prohibition faction of the party , while state superintendent Harry V. McChesney represented the prohibition faction , backed by Beckham . Stanley won the nomination with 107 @,@ 585 votes to McChesney 's 69 @,@ 722 . The Republicans nominated Stanley 's close friend Edwin P. Morrow . The two traveled the state together , often speaking from the same stage . 
 Stanley was a powerful orator who used dramatic flourishes to emphasize his points . He would often loosen his tie before he ever started speaking , and by the end of his speech have thrown off his vest and coat . In one instance , the candidates debated a tax on dog owners of one dollar per dog . Stanley favored the tax , while Morrow contended that everyone should be allowed one dog tax @-@ free . Stanley ridiculed the idea as " Free Old Dog Ring , " and sometimes howled like a dog in speeches deriding the proposal . On another occasion Stanley , who had too much to drink , vomited in front of the audience as Morrow spoke . When Stanley took the podium , he remarked , " That just goes to show you what I have been saying all over Kentucky . Ed Morrow plain makes me sick to my stomach . " 
 Democrats had been divided in the primary , but united behind Stanley in the general election . Senators Beckham and Ollie M. James endorsed him , as did Governor James B. McCreary . Samuel Gompers praised Stanley for his opposition to trusts while in Congress ; endorsements from local chapters of the American Federation of Labor soon followed . Even Harry McChesney , Stanley 's primary opponent , urged Kentuckians to vote a straight Democratic ticket . 
 The election was too close to call on election night . Knowing that a challenged election would be decided by the heavily Democratic General Assembly , Morrow conceded a week later . Official results showed that Stanley won the election by 471 votes , the closest gubernatorial vote in the state 's history . 
 Historian Lowell H. Harrison called Stanley 's administration the apex of the Progressive Era in Kentucky . The most significant legislation passed during the 1916 legislative session were a state antitrust law and a ban on railroads offering free passes to public figures . A Corrupt Practices Act required candidates for office to file reports of their expenses , limited the amount of allowable expenses , and forbade public service corporations from contributing to any campaign . Other accomplishments included initiating the state 's first budget program , enacting its first workman 's compensation law , and instituting a convict labor law . The one progressive measure that did not pass , a bill granting women 's suffrage , failed in the House by a single vote . 
 Stanley called the General Assembly into special session in February 1917 . At issue was reformation of the state 's tax code , which Stanley felt unjustly burdened agricultural interests . The state was also incurring large deficits , ranging from $ 100 @,@ 000 to $ 700 @,@ 000 annually . Though Kentucky was in better shape financially than many of its peers , Stanley still sought to balance the budget . The session lasted sixty days , and the legislature passed of many of the bills he advocated . The most significant created a three @-@ member state tax commission , chaired by M. M. Logan . Additional taxes were passed on distilled spirits , oil production , race tracks , and corporate licenses . Assessments on the value of property , which had typically been evaluated at one @-@ third to one @-@ half of fair market price , rose dramatically . To balance this increase , legislators reduced the tax rates on certain types of property . With the dramatic increase in funds yielded by the special session , the General Assembly approved funding increases in nearly every part of state government , including higher education . The State Board of Health was given expanded powers , and county boards of health were established . 
 Stanley 's administration was affected by the United States ' entry into World War I. The legislature established and funded a state Council of Defense , but Stanley vetoed a bill that would have banned the teaching of German in public schools . 
 As in his run for Senate and in the gubernatorial primary , the liquor question was central to Stanley 's tenure as governor . Although anti @-@ prohibition forces declared prohibition dead following his election , a prohibition amendment was introduced during the first legislative session following it . The amendment failed by a vote of 20 – 14 in the state senate . In 1918 it was submitted to the state 's voters by an overwhelming 95 – 17 joint vote of the General Assembly . Although Stanley was against prohibition , he supported the 1918 amendment in order to settle the liquor issue and clear the legislature 's order paper for other measures . In 1919 , Kentucky was the first " wet " state to ratify the Eighteenth Amendment , enshrining prohibition into the national constitution . 
 = = = U.S. Senator = = = 
 On August 18 , 1918 , incumbent senator Ollie M. James died . Stanley appointed George B. Martin to finish James ' term , which was to expire on March 3 of the following year . James had already been nominated for re @-@ election in 1918 by the Democratic primary , and the task of selecting the party 's new nominee fell to the Democratic State Committee , which nominated Stanley . Stanley enjoyed the advantage of a united Democratic party ; J. C. W. Beckham supported Stanley for this seat so Stanley would not challenge him for his own seat when he faced re @-@ election . The Republicans chose a relative unknown , Dr. Ben L. Bruner . Stanley was attacked for his veto of the German language bill and for his long @-@ standing views against temperance . Though the national mood was against the Democrats , a letter of support from President Woodrow Wilson bolstered Stanley 's campaign , and he defeated Bruner by more than 5 @,@ 000 votes . He resigned as governor to assume the Senate seat in May 1919 . As a Democrat in a mostly Republican Senate , he wielded little influence . 
 When Stanley sought re @-@ election to his seat in 1924 , he faced an uphill battle . No Kentucky senator had been re @-@ elected to his seat in over forty years ( though senators had been popularly elected only since 1914 ) . His opposition to prohibition cost him the support of pro @-@ temperance voters and Democratic governor William J. Fields . He was also opposed by the Ku Klux Klan , then a powerful organization in the state , because of his opposition to bigotry and secret organizations . His Republican opponent Frederic M. Sackett secured the support of the Beckham wing of the Democratic Party . Despite having his own private stock of liquor , Sackett took a pro @-@ temperance position in the campaign and was endorsed by the Anti @-@ Saloon League . Louisville Courier @-@ Journal editor Robert Worth Bingham added his endorsement , calling Sackett " one of the best men I know " . In the general election , Stanley lost his seat by almost 25 @,@ 000 votes . Sackett 's victory meant Kentucky would have two Republican senators for the first time in its history . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 Following his defeat in the Senate , Stanley returned to his legal practice . In the 1927 gubernatorial election , he threw his support to his old enemy , J. C. W. Beckham , hoping to improve his chances of returning to the Senate in 1930 . Beckham lost to Republican Flem D. Sampson , greatly diminishing Stanley 's chances in the senatorial campaign . 
 In 1930 , President Herbert Hoover appointed Stanley to the International Joint Commission , a body charged with settling boundary disputes between the United States and Canada . Stanley became its chair in 1933 . He was very proud of his service on the Commission , and once noted that nowhere on earth have two great powers lived so long as neighbors with so few disputes . He served until 1954 when he resigned under pressure from his own party . 
 Stanley died in Washington , D.C. , on August 12 , 1958 and was buried in Frankfort Cemetery in Frankfort , Kentucky . He was survived by his wife , Sue ( <unk> ) Stanley , and two of his three sons , William Stanley and Augustus Owsley Stanley II . His grandson , Augustus Owsley Stanley III ( 1935 – 2011 ) , became a well @-@ known LSD chemist and backer of the Grateful Dead during the hippie movement . 
 = Grace , Replaced = 
 " Grace , Replaced " is the eighteenth episode of the first season of the American television series Will & Grace . It was written by Katie Palmer and directed by series producer James Burrows . The episode originally aired on the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) in the United States on April 8 , 1999 . Actors Molly Shannon , Leigh @-@ Allyn Baker , and Tom Gallop guest starred on " Grace , Replaced " . 
 In the episode , Grace 's ( Debra Messing ) job forces her to work overtime , which leads to Will ( Eric McCormack ) feeling neglected . As a result , he seeks solace in the company of a new neighbor , Val ( Shannon ) . Meanwhile , Jack ( Sean Hayes ) is annoyed that he has to perform community service for assaulting a meter maid . 
 Before the airing , NBC moved the program to Thursdays at 8 : 30 p.m. , after it was a success in the Tuesday lineup . " Grace , Replaced " was the first episode to debut on the Thursday slot . Since then , the episode has generally received positive reviews from television critics . According to the Nielsen ratings system , it was watched by 12 @.@ 9 million viewers , which resulted in the episode attracting its highest ratings of the season . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Will ( Eric McCormack ) feels neglected by his best friend , Grace ( Debra Messing ) , as she spends a lot of time with her work . When Will calls Grace to confirm for a lunch date , Grace cannot go as she is too busy creating interior designs . Later , while doing his laundry , Will meets his new upstairs neighbor , Val ( Molly Shannon ) . Immediately , the two take a liking to one another . The next day , Will visits Grace at work and introduces Val to her . After the two leave , Karen ( Megan Mullally ) — Grace 's friend and socialite assistant — tells Grace that she did not like the way Will and Val acted towards one another . Grace , however , refuses to accept what Karen implies . 
 Meanwhile , after slapping a meter maid , Jack ( Sean Hayes ) is ordered to work 40 hours of community service , picking up garbage , and while he does this is forced to wear an orange jumpsuit . While doing community service he visits Karen at Grace Adler Designs . While there , Jack goes through a trash bag and sees Soon @-@ Yi Allen 's phone bill . Jack shows Karen the bill which quickly results in the two prank calling Soon @-@ Yi . 
 At Will and Grace 's apartment , Will and Val play Pyramid against Will 's friends Ellen ( Leigh @-@ Allyn Baker ) and Rob ( Tom Gallop ) . Grace , who comes home , is shocked when her Pyramid record with Will — 2 minutes and 14 seconds — is the same as Will and Val 's . Before leaving , Grace is horrified that Will called her Val . While at her office , Grace learns that Will is sick . She goes home to attend to him and is surprised to see Val there . Grace tells her that since she is home that Val can go . Val , however , does not leave . This results in the two fighting . The fight , however , is broken by Will and tells them to work the situation out . Grace admits she felt jealous of Val as she believed Val had replaced her , due to her not being there for Will . Will , however , reassures Grace that no one can replace her as his best friend . As a result , Grace and Val make up . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Grace , Replaced " was written by Katie Palmer and directed by series producer James Burrows . This was Palmer 's first written episode , and was Burrows ' 18th directed episode . It originally aired on NBC in the United States on April 8 , 1999 . Before the airing of the episode , it was confirmed that actress Molly Shannon would guest star as Val , a new neighbor in Will and Grace 's apartment building . This episode would be Shannon 's first appearance on the show , with her later guest starring in the episodes " Girls , Interrupted " , " Last of the Really Odd Lovers " , " Fagel Attraction " , and " One Gay at a Time " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Grace , Replaced " brought in 12 @.@ 9 million American viewers upon its original broadcast in the United States , and making it the seventh highest @-@ rated show during the week of April 5 – 11 , 1999 . Originally , Will & Grace aired on Mondays , but due to insufficient viewership , NBC decided to move the program to Tuesdays at 9 : 30 p.m. , which was a success as viewers tuned in . The network then changed the time slot from Tuesdays to Thursdays at 8 : 30 p.m. , between Friends and Frasier , with this episode becoming a success as it attracted its highest audience ratings of the season . The previous episode , " Secrets and Lays " , was watched by 9 @.@ 6 million viewers . Many believed this decision was a good one , with a contributor of The Buffalo News commenting that the time slot change suggested that NBC felt that Will & Grace had a better chance of becoming a success than the current sitcom Jesse . In a report in The Star @-@ Ledger it said that the decision of Will & Grace airing on Thursdays was a good benefit on behalf of NBC as the program was " the only watchable comedy " . 
 The episode received generally positive reception . Alan Sepinwall and Matt Zoller Seitz of The Star @-@ Ledger were complimentary towards " Grace , Replaced " , writing that the episode " is a winner , packed with witty dialogue . " Monica Collins of the Boston Herald said that the episode " is one of the best of the series so far " . The Dallas Morning News writer Ed Bark noted that " Grace , Replaced " was " another energetic , generally amusing " episode . Bark , in regards to Jack and Karen , said that the two together " sometimes are almost more than the scenery can bear . " Aaron Barnhart for The Kansas City Star called the episode riotous , and said that the show " with [ its ] pop @-@ culture jokes delivered at blistering speed , outsized performances from ' supporting ' players Sean Hayes and Megan Mullally , and a camaraderie between platonic pals Eric McCormack and Debra <unk> that would make even Plato blush . " Ted Cox of the Daily Herald was less positive about the episode , reporting that this episode " looked like more of the same " , recounting the show 's past story lines , and past NBC programs . Chicago Tribune 's Steve Johnson opined that the episode " starts strong and then goes awry [ ... ] It 's funny for a while [ ... ] But then it takes it to a ludicrous level , selling out its own internal logic by conspiring to put [ Molly ] Shannon and Messing into a ... catfight . At its best this series works a groove of pop @-@ culture savvy ; this visit from The Three Stooges by way of Dynasty will have you rolling your eyes in dismay . " 
 Critics praised Shannon 's performance in the episode . Bark wrote , " ... the talented Ms. Shannon is winningly glossy and brassy [ in this episode ] . Someday soon she 'll have her own sitcom . Bet on it . " Tom Feran of The Plain Dealer reported that Shannon 's appearance on the show would make " a good introduction for viewers curious about Will & Grace . " The Boston Globe 's Matthew Gilbert enjoyed the actress in " Grace , Replaced " , writing that she is appealing as the Grace replacement . 
 = White Stag Leadership Development Program = 
 The White Stag Leadership Development Program , founded in 1958 , is a summer camp for youth 11 @-@ 18 led by two California @-@ based non @-@ profits that sponsor leadership development activities . The teen youth staff of the two programs develop and produce several week @-@ long leadership summer camps every year for several hundred youth from Central and Northern California and a few youth from other states and countries . The outdoors program relies on hands @-@ on learning methods to help develop leadership competencies in youth . 
 Originally founded on the Monterey Peninsula , California , in 1958 by Dr. Béla H. Bánáthy , there are currently two programs . One program in Concord , California is sponsored by the White Stag Association and a second program in Monterey , California is sponsored by the White Stag Leadership Development Academy . The entire program traces its history to the 1933 World Jamboree in <unk> , Hungary , which took as its emblem the white stag of Hungarian mythology . Four boys who did not know each other attended the Jamboree and met in the 1950s to lead the White Stag program . Founder Béla H. Bánáthy , a junior officer in the Hungarian Army during World War II , served on the National Council of the Hungarian Scout Association and became the voluntary national director for youth leadership development . At the end of the war , he narrowly escaped Soviet capture and likely execution . After considerable personal trials he arrived in June 1951 in Monterey , California to teach at the Army Language School . There he met two other Hungarians who had escaped the country before Soviet occupation , Joe Szentkiralyi and Paul Sujan , who had also attended the 1933 World Jamboree . They were initially assisted by a local American Scouter , Fran Peterson . 
 Bánáthy became the Monterey Bay Area Council Training Chairman and developed an experimental program to train Scouts in leadership skills . He collaborated with research psychologist Paul Hood , who was leader of Task NCO ( Non @-@ Commissioned Officer ) , a research project by the U.S. Army that sought to identify the essential leadership skills of non @-@ commissioned leaders . As part of his Master 's thesis , Bánáthy identified eleven specific leadership competencies that he taught in the program 's summer camp . The efforts of the four men , assisted by Maury Tripp , rapidly gained the attention of the National Council of the Boy Scouts of America . They conducted extensive research that validated Bánáthy 's leadership model and developed its own version for nationwide use . They introduced the leadership competencies during the 1970s into both the adult Wood Badge program and youth @-@ focused National Youth Leadership Training . These two programs had originally focused primarily on teaching Scoutcraft skills and the Patrol Method . The change to teaching leadership was a marked cultural shift for how both adults and youth were trained in the skills of Scouting . 
 The program is currently developed and delivered by two independent non @-@ profit groups in the Monterey Bay Area and in the San Francisco East Bay . In recent years , their youth staff plan and put on three week @-@ long summer camp programs at locations in Central and Northern California . The programs draw most of their participants from California , but attendees have come from Texas , Virginia , and international locations including France , Taiwan , Brazil , and China . The eleven leadership competencies remain a key part of both training program . The program , which observed its 50th anniversary in 2008 , has served over 21 @,@ 000 youth since its inception . 
 = = History = = 
 White Stag traces its direct roots to 1933 and <unk> , Hungary , and the Fourth World Scout Jamboree which three of its founders attended . 
 = = = Origins in Hungary = = = 
 At the 1933 World Scout Jamboree , a 14 @-@ year @-@ old Scout named Bela Bánáthy was kneeling by his campfire when three uniformed men rode up on horseback : Count Paul Teleki , the Chief Scout of Hungary and the Chief of Staff for the jamboree ; General Kisbarnaki Ferenc Farkas , a general staff officer of the Royal Hungarian Army ; and Baden @-@ Powell , the British hero of the Boer War and Chief Scout of the World . The men introduced themselves to the Scout and inspected his camp . They complimented him on a job well done and rode on . Meeting the Chief Scout of Hungary and Boer War hero Robert Baden @-@ Powell left a deep impression on Bánáthy . He decided he would become a military officer instead of a minister . 
 Bánáthy briefly met fellow Hungarian Boy Scout Joseph Szentkiralyi . Hungarian Sea Scouter Paul Ferenc Sujan 's camp was visited by Baden @-@ Powell , who asked to taste some of his soup . American Maury Tripp attended the Jamboree from Saratoga , California . These four Scouts would later play instrumental roles in forming the White Stag program on the Monterey Peninsula . At the conclusion of the Jamboree , Baden @-@ Powell gave a farewell speech in which he challenged the Scouts present to pursue the ideals represented by the White Stag . 
 This challenge and the myth of the White Stag it cites grew to become a source of inspiration to Bánáthy . During World War II , Bánáthy was a junior officer in the Royal Hungarian Army . After being seriously wounded during combat in Russia , through the connections he made at the World Jamboree , he was invited by General Farkas to join the faculty of the Hungarian Royal Academy . While there he served on the National Council of the Hungarian Scout Association and became the voluntary national director for youth leadership development . Barely escaping Soviet capture and likely execution at the end of World War II , Bánáthy arrived after considerable personal trials in June 1951 at Monterey , California to teach at the Army Language School , where he became reacquainted with Joe Szentkiralyi , who he had met at the Fourth World Jamboree . 
 Joseph Szentkiralyi had also barely survived World War II . He and his family had previously lived in the United States in 1939 , where Szentkiralyi worked in New York City . At the start of World War II , they were deported as enemy aliens back to Hungary . Because he spoke English , Szentkiralyi was assigned to watch over the crew members of the first American B @-@ 17 bomber to crash land in Hungary . When the crew told him sensitive information , he was ordered to reveal the information to his superiors . Citing the Geneva Convention , he refused . The authorities prepared to court @-@ martial him , and Szentkiralyi fled . During a time of frequent Allied aerial bombing raids , he hid where he figured no one would look for him : in the upper floors of apartment buildings . During one bombing raid a 500 pounds ( 230 kg ) bomb crashed through and landed on the floor above him . Fortunately it did not explode . Szentkiralyi and his family later narrowly survived the Siege of Budapest . 
 After the war ended , Szentkiralyi found work for the American Embassy in Budapest as a translator . However , this put him in a vulnerable position as the Communists hardened their grip on power . Because he had lived in the United States and spoke English , he knew he would fall under suspicion . People he knew began to disappear , including a friend who worked at the U.S. Embassy . Within a few days he found a note on his desk that read , " You are next . " With American assistance , he immediately fled Hungary for Switzerland . He and his family returned to New York City for a few months , and Szentkiralyi applied for a position as a Hungarian instructor at the Army Language School . The Army hired him in the summer of 1948 and he founded their Hungarian Department . 
 Starting in 1951 , almost 25 years afterward , four Scouts who had attended the 1933 Fourth World Jamboree were reunited on the Monterey Peninsula . Joseph Szentkiralyi ( which he later Anglicized as St. Clair ) renewed his acquaintance with Bánáthy when he hired him . In 1956 , they were joined by Hungarian Paul Ferenc Sujan . In Monterey , through their Scouting contacts , they met F. Maurice Tripp . 
 = = = Growth on the Monterey Peninsula = = = 
 Bánáthy had developed a passion for the idea of leadership development in boys when serving in the Hungarian Army . In Monterey , he became Chairman of the Leadership Training Committee of the Monterey Bay Area Council . He sought and received support for his concept of a leadership camp for boys with the Council Executive and Executive Board . 
 Bánáthy informally recruited one patrol of boys , including his own sons , and took them to summer camp in 1957 to test his idea . John Chiorini , a 17 @-@ year @-@ old Eagle Scout , was working on the waterfront . " Béla came through camp with a patrol of six or seven boys and commandeered me to teach a class on camp craft . He said he was trying out some new ideas with this patrol , " Chiorini reported " Béla listened intently as I presented and then he came up after and gave me some tips on teaching . He was a mentor to me from that point on . " 
 During the summer of 1958 , Bánáthy recruited two patrols of boys to take part . Chiorini was recruited to serve as senior patrol leader . There wasn 't much discussion of leadership competencies to start . Bánáthy seemed to have an internal sense of direction which not everyone understood . Chiorini said , " White Stag was all about creating an environment in which youth led youth . At the time , Scouting was not necessarily a boy @-@ led program . I remember it was very clear in Béla ’ s mind what a boy @-@ led Scouting program looked like . There was no question about who was in charge in White Stag . The boys were . " Fran Peterson , a local Scouter who served on the National Engineering Service for the Boy Scouts of America , along with St. Clair , Sujan , and Tripp , helped Bánáthy develop the White Stag program . Some of them remained active with it into the 1970s . 
 Borrowing on his experience at the 1933 World Jamboree , Bánáthy based the program symbol and its spirit and traditions on the white stag symbol found in the patch for the Fourth World Scout Jamboree , which was in turn based on Hungarian mythology . On June 8 , 1959 , at an adult staff meeting attended by Béla Bánáthy , Jack Stone , Bill White , Paul Holbrook , Ralph Herring , Fran Petersen , and Staff Advisor Bill <unk> , they " officially adopted White Stag as the name for junior leaders training events . " " Lord Baden @-@ Powell was my personal idol and I long felt a commitment to give back to Scouting what I had received , " Bánáthy said . 
 During August 1959 , the first full @-@ scale program was put on . Bánáthy served as Scoutmaster , Fran Petersen was Assistant Scoutmaster , along with eight other adult staff and 13 youth staff . The training troop consisted of 39 trainees from 24 troops . In the first two years of the program , emphasis was placed on training patrol leaders . Bánáthy said , " I saw in these principles an opportunity to develop the White Stag program for my three Boy Scout sons as well as show my gratitude to this country and Scouting . " 
 During the same year , Bánáthy continued his research on leadership and learned that the U.S. Army 's Human Resources Research Organization ( <unk> ) at the Presidio of Monterey was conducting research into the leadership characteristics of non @-@ commissioned officers . Bánáthy contacted research psychologist Paul Hood , Task Leader of Task NCO ( Non @-@ commissioned Officer ) , and began a fruitful collaboration . A <unk> publication titled , A Guide for the Infantry Squad Leader – What the Beginning Squad Leader Should Know About Human Relations articulated a core set of leadership competencies . Bánáthy found Hood 's research enumerated characteristics of leadership that strongly validated his vision and direction . With Hood 's active encouragement , he decided to incorporate these leadership skills into White Stag . 
 In 1960 , the adult staff announced that they would expand the program to offer an additional phase of leadership development for boys 14 – 17 years old , to train " junior trainers and impart leadership skills . " This phase was christened Troop Leadership Development . 
 = = = National Council takes notice = = = 
 With the interest and support of the Monterey Bay Area Council executive staff and board , the program was continually tested and improved . Two men with connections on the National Council , Fran Peterson ( a member of the National Council 's Engineering Service ) and F. Maurice Tripp ( a research scientist and member of the National Boy Scout Training Committee ) , brought the White Stag program to the National Council 's attention . In 1962 , Tripp formed and chaired an advisory board of educators , psychologists , management specialists , and members of the Scout professional staff . 
 During 1962 – 63 , Bánáthy focused his research and formalized it as his Master 's Thesis at San Jose State University . The Monterey Bay Area Council published an abbreviated version of it titled A Design for Leadership Development in Scouting . Responding to widespread interest , Dr. Tripp gave a talk in 1963 at the Fifty @-@ third Annual Meeting of the National Council of the Boy Scouts of America on Development of Leadership in Boy Leaders of Boys . In August 1963 , a patrol of Scouts from the San Mateo County Council and a few boys from the Circle Ten Council in Dallas attended White Stag summer camp at Camp Pico Blanco . The program was observed and evaluated by Ken Wells ( national director of Research ) and John Larson ( staff researcher ) . Wells had a long history with Wood Badge , beginning as a participant in the second United States Wood Badge course in 1948 . They were impressed by what they saw and experienced . 
 At the end of the August 1964 summer camp , Béla Bánáthy and Fran Peterson announced that White Stag would begin in 1965 to offer a third phase of leadership development for boys age 11 – 13 , called " Patrol Member Development . " This was a revolutionary step , for it made it possible for all boys 11 – 17 years old to learn leadership skills appropriate to their maturity , capabilities , and needs , and as they grew to re @-@ cycle through the program in another phase and acquire increased skills . 
 = = = World Scouting publishes paper = = = 
 In 1969 , the World Organization of the Scout Movement published a paper by Béla Bánáthy titled Leadership Development : World Scouting Reference Paper No. 1 . It described the results of the Boy Scouts of America 's research and testing and was presented at the World <unk> Conference in Helsinki . He advocated leadership development by design in Scouting based on the leadership competencies of White Stag . Bánáthy was appointed to the Interamerican Scout Committee and guided their national training teams at three Interamerican Train the Trainer events in Mexico , Costa Rica , and Venezuela . 
 = = = Adapted for use in U.S. Wood Badge = = = 
 In January 1967 , John Larson began work with Bánáthy and Bob Perin to write a new Wood Badge staff guide focusing on leadership . Two of the project members , Ken Wells and Bob Perin , had participated in the second United States Wood Badge course in 1948 . Despite their long experience in Wood Badge , they saw the benefit of adding leadership skills development to Wood Badge . William " Green Bar " Hillcourt , Scoutmaster of the first U.S. Wood Badge course in 1948 , felt very strongly that the traditional teaching of Scoutcraft skills should be retained . Hillcourt had recently formally retired , but his opinion still held considerable weight . Nonetheless , Chief Scout Joseph Brunton approved the changes . 
 The National Boy Scouts of America began to test the revised Wood Badge program utilizing the White Stag leadership competencies later that year . In May 1967 , staff from councils who were invited to attend the initial course met at Philmont to plan the program , and on June 17 , 1967 , the first experimental Wood Badge course was offered at Philmont . One month later , the Circle Ten Council in Dallas presented its first new Wood Badge course . In September 1967 , six councils were approved to pilot @-@ test the new Wood Badge program in 1968 : Monterey Bay Area Council , Piedmont Council , Middle Tennessee , Del @-@ Mar @-@ Va , and Hiawatha ( formerly <unk> ) and Circle Ten Council . Among these was an experimental Wood Badge course in Monterey in 1968 . Bánáthy was Course Director , Joe St. Clair served as Scoutmaster , and Fran Petersen was senior patrol leader . John Larson , National Director of Education , was also present . In a unique application not since reproduced , all attendees were asked to bring their entire troop to a single week of summer camp , allowing the Wood Badge staff who also attended to use the summer camp as an application for Wood Badge . 
 = = = Modified for use in junior leader training = = = 
 Pilot @-@ testing and experimentation continued for three more years , and an experimental junior leader training program was begun in 1969 . This later became Troop Leader Development , containing modified versions of the leadership competencies which were included in the final Troop Leadership Development Staff Guide , written by John W. Larson , which credited White Stag with its origins : 
 = = = Recent history = = = 
 The White Stag program continued to present the Monterey Bay Area Council 's official junior leader training program through the early 1970s , and again from 1994 to 2004 . In 1975 , Bill Roberts , the Phase III Director , invited the first Explorer girls age 14 – 18 to take part in the program and adult women to serve on adult staff , becoming the first coeducational leadership development program in the Boy Scouts of America . When Bánáthy learned of girls ' new role in the program , he said it was long overdue . Committed to training youth of all ages in a manner reflecting the real world , where both sexes must work together , the next year White Stag invited girls age 11 – 13 to participate as well . The program was evaluated by a staff member from the Western Region of the Boy Scouts of America in 1978 . He wrote : 
 White Stag Association incorporated 
 At the same time , the Monterey Bay Area Council decided to replace the White Stag program with the nationally mandated adaptation of White Stag , the Troop Leader Development program . The adult volunteer leaders of White Stag , informally known as the White Stag Steering Committee , incorporated itself as the non @-@ profit foundation White Stag Association in 1982 and continued to sponsor the program . Prevented from using Camp Pico Blanco , it rented Skylark Ranch Resident Camp in the Santa Cruz Mountains from the Girl Scouts of Santa Clara County for two years . Over the next few years , the Association moved the summer program to San Mateo County Council 's Camp Cutter in the Santa Cruz Mountains , and later , at different times , to Marin Council 's Camp Marin @-@ Sierra and Yosemite Council 's Camp <unk> in the California Sierra Nevada . They began attracting most of their youth from the San Francisco Bay Area . In 2014 , the Association secured use of Camp Robert L. Cole in the Tahoe National Forest near Cisco Grove , California . 
 White Stag Academy formed 
 When the Monterey Bay Area Council 's Junior Leader Training Chairman offered in 1994 to run the Council 's junior leader training program using the White Stag methods , the Council Executive agreed . White Stag adult alumni of the now San Francisco Bay Area @-@ based program who lived in the Monterey Peninsula area recruited a youth staff who planned and presented the White Stag program at Camp Pico Blanco in 1994 . This Monterey @-@ based program continued to present the council 's junior leader training program until 2005 , when a new Council Executive decided once again to adopt the current National Youth Leadership Training ( NYLT ) program . The adult leadership of the Monterey White Stag group incorporated in 2005 as the non @-@ profit charity White Stag Leadership Development Academy , Inc. to support the program . They have based their summer camp program at Camp Cutter and Camp Lindblad in the Santa Cruz Mountains , at Camp <unk> in Marin County , and at a custom @-@ built camp in Arroyo Seco on private land . 
 Girl Scout spin @-@ off 
 During 2004 , some leaders of the White Stag Academy organized a comparable program for the Girl Scouts of California 's Central Coast . The program teaches the eleven leadership skills used by White Stag . It was held at Cutter Scout Reservation for two years and is currently held at Boulder Creek Scout Reservation in the Santa Cruz Mountains . The Girl Scouts assumed leadership of the program after 2006 and renamed it Camp Artemis , after the Greek goddess who protects young girls , animals , and the natural environment . The Youth Staff are referred to as members of <unk> ( Artemis Leadership Training Adventure ) . They have continued to run Camp Artemis as a resident camp for girls 11 – 17 each summer . 
 Summer camp programs 
 Both the organization in Central California and the group in Northern California continue to develop and present summer camps for youth by youth , led by a corps of volunteer adults . The program will observe its 60th anniversary in 2018 . Participation in the Monterey @-@ based group has continued to increase each year , to 449 participants in 2013 , including 33 youth from Hong Kong , Taiwan , and mainland China , up from 70 in 2006 . The group sponsored by the White Stag Association has attracted between 40 and 83 campers from 2010 to 2014 . The two programs have operated continuously since the program 's founding entirely on a voluntary basis , with an estimated 21 @,@ 000 youth having attended its camps . In 2015 the two groups will produce four week @-@ long summer camps . 
 = = Core tenets = = 
 = = = Youth ready to learn = = = 
 In his master 's thesis , Bánáthy established his reasoning for focusing on developing leadership skills in youth rather than adults . He wrote that adults in leadership development experiences often have " deeply and rigidly established patterns which are difficult to change . " He felt leadership development needs to start early in life , when an opportunity exists to give individuals long @-@ term exposure to leadership behavior . Bánáthy formulated the White Stag program to address the needs of youth from 11 to 17 years of age . He did this when defining leadership as a <unk> skill was still in its infancy . 
 = = = = Youth need leadership development = = = = 
 A number of researchers have identified needs of youth for specific kinds of formative experiences . In one study , Ferber , Pittman , and Marshall described five developmental priorities for youth . These were learning ( developing positive basic and applied academic attitudes , skills , and behaviors ) , thriving ( developing physically healthy attitudes , skills , and behaviors ) , connecting ( developing positive social attitudes , skills , and behaviors ) , working ( developing positive vocational attitudes , skills , and behaviors ) , and leading ( developing positive civic attitudes , skills , and behaviors ) . 
 Educators report that successful programs utilize " positive and sustained relations with a caring adult , mentoring in life skills and opportunities to use newly learned skills . " Other studies have identified areas that help youth acquire the attitudes , skills , and knowledge required to be effective in society . These areas are strong relationships with adults ; training in mediation , conflict resolution , team dynamics , and project management ; new roles and responsibilities based on experiences and resources that provide opportunity for growth , teamwork and peer networking ; and opportunities to practice communication , negotiation , and refusal skills . 
 = = = = Youth @-@ led program = = = = 
 The White Stag Leadership Development Program 's methods address all of the areas the studies identified . Mentored and coached by adults , the youth staff develop , plan and implement the week @-@ long summer camp programs . They develop skills in research , writing , planning , and evaluation . Using the outdoors , they practice learning activities , games , and outdoor skills required to live in a camping environment . They learn to get along with and other counsel youth from different backgrounds . They study eleven specific skills of leadership and practice presenting them to one another before summer camp , when they present these learning sessions to the participants . The youth , led and mentored by adults , work together with other youth they have never met , forming new relationships and learning to connect and cooperate . They learn basic group membership skills required in work life , like communication and planning , and plan and implement their leadership skills in their home community . They learn and practice problem @-@ solving and counseling skills , how groups form and grow , and planning skills . They learn and rehearse various kinds of communications skills , how to represent their group — both with and without the group 's input — and how to work effectively with others . 
 = = = Leadership competencies = = = 
 In his research for his master 's thesis , Bánáthy identified 80 characteristics of leadership . He condensed these into eleven specific leadership competencies which he then proposed be taught in a systematic process using six developmental levels tailored to the various needs of youth as they mature . The White Stag leadership competencies are organized into three groups . The competencies are taught based on the members ' and the overall group 's readiness and maturity . 
 = = = = Four @-@ stage learning approach = = = = 
 The group writes down both general goals and very specific , measurable objectives each year that describe leadership in behavioral terms . When engaging learners in leadership development learning activities , the youth staff implement a four @-@ phase approach called Manager of Learning . 
 The first step requires the participant to practice the skill without preparation . The simulation is made as real and practical as possible within the limitations of the training environment . Both the participant and the instructor gain through this Guided Discovery an assessment of the learner 's current knowledge , skills , attitudes relevant to the learning task . 
 The second step is a Teach / Learn session where the instructor begins to present information based on what the participants don 't already know . This is usually prefixed with a written statement describing in behavioral terms the objectives that the participant will complete during the session . The instructor may utilize more advanced members to help less skilled members . The instructor often tries to elicit information from the participants ' experience by asking questions . 
 Once the Teach / Learn is complete , the third step allows participants an opportunity in an Application to practice their newly acquired skills . This may or may not be an experience like the Guided Discovery . 
 The final step is an Evaluation discussion , during which the participants not only self @-@ assess whether they achieved the stated learning objectives , but to give feedback to the instructor about their success in presenting the information . 
 = = = = Developing group members = = = = 
 The first three competencies are essential to forming the group 's ability to organize itself and become ready for action . 
 Getting and Giving Information teaches participants about different types of communication and how communication helps establish the group . They learn how to get , store , and retrieve information . Individuals practice communicating to both help get the job done and keep the group together . 
 Understanding Group Needs and Characteristics helps individuals build group morale and unity . They learn about values , norms , needs , and characteristics . 
 Knowing and Understanding Group Resources helps learners to use resources to improve group togetherness , to learn about different kinds of resources , and how as a leader can use the diversity of group members ' skills and abilities to help the group succeed . They learn about how resources affect getting the job done and keeping the group together . 
 = = = = Growing group capability = = = = 
 The second group of leadership competencies help the group to develop and implement a plan . 
 Controlling the Group helps individuals to learn how their behavior affects others . Individuals learn the difference between external control of the group and personal control of their own behavior . They learn that controlling the group is something that everyone in the group contributes to . They learn about different techniques to influence group success . They gain skills in balancing the group 's versus the individual 's needs . 
 Counseling helps individuals to define key counseling ideas , learn simple counseling methods , and identify when simple counseling is appropriate . 
 Setting the Example helps participants identify what it means to set a good example , why setting an example is important , and describe ways a leader can set a good example . 
 Planning provides learners a chance to learn about problem @-@ solving and its importance to a leader . They learn problem @-@ solving and planning methods and how planning contributes to accomplishing the task and to group success . 
 Evaluation enables the learner to use evaluation improve group focus and get the job done . They learn to balance getting the job done and helping the group , and learn to continually assess their level of success . 
 = = = = Accomplish the task = = = = 
 The last group of leadership competencies helps individuals to grow the organization . 
 Sharing Leadership helps participants learn that leadership is something that is shared by all group members depending on the situation and group member 's abilities . They learn about what kinds of things affect the leader and the group , and what style of leadership is appropriate . They learn to select a style of leadership based on the job and the group situation . 
 Representing the Group is a way for participants to learn about how groups communicate and how to represent one group to another . They learn how to accurately represent their group to another . 
 Manager of Learning is a four @-@ step technique for instructing others . Participants learn how to develop effective learning <unk> for effectively communicating information ; emphasize the learner in the learning process . 
 = = The program = = 
 = = = Values = = = 
 The program has defined a set of values that govern how the program is implemented . 
 One of the most important is outdoor learning . Program leaders believe that the outdoors environment provides a context for learning that is physically demanding and entirely different from that experienced every day at home and in school . The outdoors stimulates new ways of thinking and approaching both <unk> and group @-@ related problems . As participants learn they can exceed what they perceive to be their physical limits , they find their mental capacity also grows . White Stag uses the physical environment to tire the individual and open their minds to new ways of thinking . The program does nothing indoors that can be done outdoors , and encourages physical fitness through outdoor activities . Using the outdoors avoids the negative association of a standard classroom environment . 
 In addition , the program utilizes outdoor camping skills to provide opportunities to practice leadership skills . One of the very first challenges a leader @-@ in @-@ training faces is to plan how to set up of their camp and cook their meals . They learn how to analyze the task , how to plan the task and organize the group , how to use all of the groups ' resources , how to implement their plan , and how to evaluate and correct . 
 The program teaches participants to cultivate an evaluation attitude , or a predisposition to continually seek improvement . Growth as a leader is dependent on his ability to assess his current skill level and to accept the necessity for change . The leader can only attain his goals if he continuously works to analyze his movement towards achieving his goals and objectives . 
 White Stag uses the patrol method to effectively include all members . Baden @-@ Powell wrote " [ t ] he Patrol System is the one essential feature in which Scout training differs from that of all other organizations , and where the System is properly applied , it is absolutely bound to bring success . It cannot help itself ! The formation of the boys into Patrols or from six to eight and training them as separate units each under its own responsible leader is the key to a good Troop . " 
 One of the most important values is a focus on hands @-@ on learning . The program emphasizes use of experiential learning activities in the context of outdoor education . These help participants retain what they learn about leadership generally and the eleven leadership competencies specifically . For example , participant teams can be challenged to build foot bridges , complete a hike , build a Tyrolean Traverse , cook a meal , or other practical challenges . 
 Always seeking to engage individuals both physically and mentally , the program uses the hurdle method . The hurdle method teaches individuals how to nimbly respond situation for which they have not specifically prepared themselves . The manager of learning prepared and present unexpected tasks or challenges to the leader and the group which they must organize themselves to find a solution or to complete a task . The hurdle method is closely linked to hands @-@ on learning . 
 The program believes leadership can be taught using a direct approach , not by osmosis or example alone . In early leadership development programs , learning about leadership was not specifically defined with qualified objectives . Learning about leadership was a by @-@ product of other learning activities . The White Stag Method challenges these indirect methods and focuses the participant 's experience using a direct approach . The White Stag program defines leadership behaviors in specific terms as eleven leadership competencies . 
 Youth spend too much time learning what their teachers think is important , irrelevant from what the youth may already know . The manager of learning value allows the youth to learn and practice his skills in situations simulating real life . The Manager of Learning methodology first exposes the learner to a situation to help both the learner and the leader assess his current state of knowledge . This causes the learner to internalize a need to improve his knowledge or skills . This is followed by a period of teaching or exposure during which the participant improves from their base @-@ line knowledge . The participant then gets a chance to apply what he has learned , and lastly , evaluates his performance improvement . 
 The program believes that learning never stops and embraces this as the infinity principle . According to Bánáthy , leadership behavior cannot be developed " during a few weeks , not even during several months , " but must be ongoing . 
 It takes months for individuals to gain proficiency in leadership skills . " The White Stag continues to leap on — upward and forward — in a never @-@ ending journey that leads the joyous followers to the promised land . For us who wear the badge of the White Stag , the White Stag journey symbolizes the idea of becoming the best we can . " The program borrowed words from Baden @-@ Powell 's Jamboree farewell , " Forward , Upward , Onward , " to define leadership : 
 Leadership is the process of influencing people by providing purpose , direction , and motivation to continually move the organization and individual forward , upward , and onward . 
 Individuals are taught to believe that difficult situations are opportunities for growth that must be overcome . Thus , leadership development cannot take place during a single training course . It is a continuous sequence of sequential , structured learning and experience @-@ building opportunities . The program subscribes to the belief that when an individual embraces the infinite challenge to change , he is engaged in the never @-@ ending process of becoming a leader . " The infinity principle of growth in leadership is what the White Stag symbolizes in this leadership development process . " 
 Avoiding stereotypes and labeling based on personal dress , the program uses polo shirts , t @-@ shirts , and other articles of clothing like <unk> as uniforms . Participants uniforms display the White Stag logo , which is a visible reminder of the program 's founding vision articulated by Baden @-@ Powell at the conclusion of the 1933 World Jamboree . The uniform reminds the individual wearing it of their commitment to the program 's values . It instills self @-@ esteem in the person and pride in the program . It eliminates class and socio @-@ economic distinctions . Wearing a uniform improves member 's behavior and lessens the impact on a person 's personal wardrobe . 
 = = = Phases and levels = = = 
 Based on Béla Bánáthy 's original work , the program is still organized into three phases , each consisting of a candidate , youth staff , and an adult staff level . This structure allows youth to develop their leadership skills over several years through gradually more intense and more advanced levels of instruction . Each level is tailored to the needs of youth at specific ages and maturity levels . 
 The youth staff develop each summer camp 's program during the preceding nine months in a series of leadership development training and planning events . They are ultimately responsible for the entire leadership program 's content . 
 = = = Aims = = = 
 The program has four primary aims that are closely aligned with the aims of the Boy Scouts of America with the addition of leadership development . The program focuses on character development , which it defines as encouraging people to do what is right , no matter what , and to serve themselves and others . Its second aim is personal fitness , and in its programs it encourages individuals to accept physical and mental challenges , to surpass their own expectations , expand their knowledge , skills and abilities , and strive for continuous personal improvement . Their third aim is citizenship training , in which it helps individuals to develop a positive attitude , influence those around them , join in and shape their community . The paramount aim however is leadership development , in which it inspires individuals to engage life as an ongoing adventure , to challenge themselves , and to lead others to pursue excellence . 
 = = = Symbolism and mythology = = = 
 Differentiating White Stag from any other leadership program for youth is its spirit and traditions , including campfires , ceremonies , skits , yells , cheers , and emblems , all of which give it a distinctive character . These are used to communicate an ethic of always striving for self @-@ improvement and personal achievement , and values that include characteristics of servant leadership , compassion , enthusiasm , kindness , and selflessness . 
 The symbolism of the White Stag is described in a story telling the White Stag legend . The legend borrows from the Fourth World Jamboree held in Hungary , which in turn was inspired by Hungarian mythology of the white stag . The White Stag Legend is used to inspire in the participants a desire for reflection , continuous self @-@ improvement , and pursuit of higher aims and goals . Other traditions include <unk> , waist ropes , staves , berets , and patrol names . The legend tells a version of a legend honoring Hunor and Magyar , who led their people in pursuit a mythical White Stag , following it over impassable trails to a new home . Through this story and other ceremonies , the program challenges individuals to continually strive " onward and upward " and " overcome challenges , continuously evaluate , focus on learning , and always strive to improve " . 
 = = Camp locations = = 
 The White Stag program is currently offered by two related non @-@ profit groups in Northern and Central California . In northern California , the non @-@ profit White Stag Association sponsors three Venturing crews , a Learning for Life group , and a Boy Scout troop that plan and produce the summer camp program in Northern California , in the past at Camp John <unk> , Camp Wolfeboro , and since 2014 at Camp Robert L. Cole . 
 In central California , the non @-@ profit White Stag Leadership Development Academy sponsors a Learning for Life group , a Venturing crew , and a Boy Scout troop in the Silicon Valley Monterey Bay Council and the Alameda Council . These youth plan and put on a program each summer in Central California . In 2009 they offered for the first time two camps , one at Camp <unk> in Marin County in Northern California , and the second at Camp Lindblad in the Santa Cruz Mountains . They have continued to offer two weeks of summer camp and in 2012 based the program at a site in the Santa Lucia Range near Arroyo Seco . Youth staff participants are registered as members of the Boy Scouts or Venturing programs in the Silicon Valley Monterey Bay Council and the Alameda Council . 
 Both programs adhere to the Youth Protection Standards of the Boy Scouts of America , including background checks of all adult leaders . The Monterey @-@ based program has drawn participants from overseas , including France , China , Martinique , and Taiwan . 
 = = Financial support = = 
 The White Stag program is implemented by two 501 ( c ) 3 non @-@ profits . The White Stag Leadership Development Academy is located on the Monterey Peninsula and the White Stag Association is located in the San Francisco East Bay . Both are financially self @-@ supporting . The programs are administered and managed by part @-@ time adult volunteers . All participants , including youth and adult staff , pay fees to participate . Fees for participants attending the week @-@ long summer camp are US $ 275 – $ 325 in 2012 . Candidate attendees to White Stag Sierra pay up to $ 320 , while the Association in Monterey charges $ 335 . As of 2014 , adult and youth staff volunteers paid about US $ 400 in fees over the course of a year of staff development . 
 = = Awards and recognition = = 
 Since 1960 , the program has recognized one or two youth and adults each year by presenting them with a Silver Stag award . The device , a miniature solid sterling silver stag on a chain or medallion , recognizes the individual 's outstanding " contributions and qualities of leadership , spirit and service to the program . " One youth staff member from each phase is selected as the outstanding youth staff member . Each graduating participant received a neckerchief unique to each phase that is to be worn only at White Stag functions . Participants may also be recognized with other awards that vary from year to year . 
 = = Other programs that used the White Stag name = = 
 In 1967 , Rex Hatch returned to the Crossroads of America Council after attending a pilot test of the <unk> program at Philmont . He founded in 1972 a junior leader training program , previously known as Silver Bars , which was initially based on the White Stag program 's principles . It was later modified to follow the National Youth Leadership Training Course syllabus . The Hoosier Trails Council in Bloomington , Indiana produced a " National Youth Leadership Training " program based on the national syllabus that was nicknamed " White Stag NYLT " until 2011 . On the east coast , the Narragansett Council in Rhode Island nicknamed their national NYLT program as " White Stag NYLT " until 2011 . 
 These programs are produced by the local councils . They present the standardized , nationally mandated National Youth Leadership Training program . The non @-@ profit White Stag Academy in Monterey , California sponsors Venture Crew 122 , which develops and produces a summer camp program independent of the Boy Scout of America 's nationally mandated junior leaders training program . 
 = Sugar & Spice ( Picket Fences ) = 
 " Sugar & Spice " is an episode of the CBS comedy @-@ drama series Picket Fences . Written by series creator David E. Kelley and directed by Alan Myerson , the episode originally aired on April 29 , 1993 . The episode caused controversy because it depicted 16 @-@ year @-@ old lead character Kimberly Brock engaged in same @-@ sex kissing with her best friend and frankly discussing her sexuality . 
 " Sugar & Spice " was an early entry on a list of American television episodes in which a lesbian or possibly lesbian character kisses a straight @-@ identifying character . These lesbian kiss episodes often occurred during times of the year when networks were most concerned about generating ratings , and have come to be viewed by some critics as gimmicks to help secure those ratings . The controversy generated by " Sugar & Spice " and other lesbian kiss episodes led to a chilling effect on the non @-@ sensationalized presentation of same @-@ sex intimacy on network television through most of the rest of the 1990s . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Kimberly Brock ( Holly Marie Combs ) and her best friend Lisa Fenn ( <unk> Lee ) exchange several experimental kisses during a sleepover at Kimberly 's house , the first kiss being a chaste peck with the later kisses becoming more intimate . Kimberly 's younger brother Matthew ( Justin <unk> ) eavesdrops on the girls the next day when they discuss the incident and their feelings . He goes to his mother , town doctor Jill Brock ( Kathy Baker ) and tells her that Kimberly is a " <unk> " . A patient overhears and word of the kissing spreads through the town . Kimberly 's father , Sheriff Jimmy Brock ( Tom Skerritt ) and stepmother Jill react poorly to the idea that their daughter might be a lesbian , debating " nature vs. nurture " and " elective lesbianism " and even renting " hunk films " starring Mel Gibson and Kevin Costner . Kimberly turns to her birth mother , Lydia ( Cristine Rose ) , who had had a lesbian relationship in college . Lydia advises her that her relationship with another woman was during the women 's movement and that while she enjoyed her time with the woman she realized that she was confusing feelings of intimacy with sexuality . Lisa and Kimberly talk further . Lisa acknowledges that she is in love with Kimberly but Kimberly lets her know that she is unable to return those feelings . 
 In a secondary plot , male Sheriff 's deputy Kenny <unk> ( Costas Mandylor ) is given a promotion over female deputy Maxine Stuart ( Lauren Holly ) after she is asked in her interview about such things as whether she was planning to get married and get pregnant in the near future . She sues for sex discrimination and Kenny 's promotion is reversed . She tells Kenny that she would be proud to serve under him but tells Sheriff Brock that his blatant bigotry has made her less proud to serve under him . 
 = = Production = = 
 Before " Sugar & Spice " aired , CBS , fearing sponsor <unk> and viewer backlash , demanded revisions to the kissing scene . According to Kelley in a Los Angeles Times interview , the network initially suggested fading to black before the second more intimate kiss , then suggested cutting away before the kiss to a shot of one of Kimberly 's brothers eavesdropping . Eventually , the network and Kelley settled on reshooting the kissing scene in darkness . In the episode as aired , a line of dialog is inserted over a shot of the exterior of the Brock house to explain why the room is suddenly dark . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Network affiliate KSL @-@ TV in Salt Lake City , which had earlier refused to air an episode dealing with polygamy , also refused to air this episode . In a move described by Stephen Tropiano of PopMatters as " a prime example of network hypocrisy " , CBS released the original footage along with the reshot scene to Entertainment Tonight , which generated enormous publicity for the episode . Television critic John Martin described this episode as indicative of the way that Picket Fences deftly blended ethical and social issues with family concerns . 
 = = = The " lesbian kiss episode " = = = 
 Picket Fences was one of the first American television series to feature an intimate kiss between two women . Two years earlier , L. A. Law had aired an episode ( also written by Kelley ) that included a kiss between bisexual @-@ identified character C. J. Lamb ( Amanda Donohoe ) and straight @-@ identifying Abby Perkins ( Michele Greene ) . The kiss led to complaints to the network and five sponsors pulled their ads from the episode . In reviewing incidents of lesbian kisses on network television programs , the New York Times noted that they tended to happen during " sweeps " periods , when the networks use Nielsen ratings to determine advertising rates . Noting lesbian kisses during sweeps periods on such shows as L. A. Law , Roseanne , Party of Five and Ally McBeal in addition to the Picket Fences episode and noting that they were occurring about once per year , the Times concludes that kisses between women are : 
 " <unk> visual ; cheap , provided the actors are willing ; controversial , year in and year out ; and elegantly reversible ( sweeps lesbians typically vanish or go straight when the week 's over ) , kisses between women are perfect sweeps stunts . They offer something for everyone , from advocacy groups looking for role models to indignation @-@ seeking conservatives , from goggle @-@ eyed male viewers to progressive female ones , from tyrants who demand psychological complexity to plot buffs . " 
 The Guardian concurred in this assessment , calling the lesbian kiss episode " a clear sign of desperation and a show running out of ideas ... <unk> The Friend is the new Jumping The Shark . " 
 Michele Greene confirmed in an interview with AfterEllen.com that her kiss with Amanda Donohoe 's C. J. was a ratings ploy and that there was never any intention on the part of producers to seriously explore the possibility of a relationship between two women . 
 During a period in network television history when producers were pushing the broadcast boundaries on sexually explicit content with such shows as NYPD Blue , the controversy over this and other television episodes that made inroads into presenting same @-@ sex sexuality or affection led producers not to present any sexualization of their gay and lesbian characters . As noted by author Ron Becker , 
 " So viewers got to see Carol and Susan wed on Friends , but they didn 't get to see them kiss . And fans of NYPD Blue could hear male hustlers talk about their johns , but the only sex they got to see involved the precinct 's straight cops — naked butts and all . Clearly , chastity was the price gay characters paid for admission to prime @-@ time television in the 1990s . " 
 = Eskimo ( film ) = 
 Eskimo ( also known as Mala the Magnificent and Eskimo Wife @-@ Traders ) is a 1933 American Pre @-@ Code drama film directed by W. S. Van Dyke and released by Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer ( MGM ) . It is based on the books Der Eskimo and Die <unk> ins <unk> Land by Danish explorer and author Peter Freuchen . The film stars Ray Mala as Mala , Lulu Wong Wing as Mala 's first wife Aba , Lotus Long as Mala 's second wife Iva , Peter Freuchen as the Ship Captain , W. S. Van Dyke as Inspector White , and Joseph Sauers as Sergeant Hunt . 
 Eskimo was the first feature film to be shot in a Native American language ( Inupiat ) , and the first feature film shot in Alaska . The film also incidentally documented many of the hunting and cultural practices of Native Alaskans . The production for the film was based at Teller , Alaska , where housing , storage facilities , a film laboratory , and other structures were built to house the cast , crew , and equipment . 
 It was nicknamed " Camp Hollywood " . The crew included 42 cameramen and technicians , six airplane pilots , and Emil Ottinger — a chef from the Roosevelt Hotel . Numerous locations were used for filming , including Cape Lisburne in March 1933 , Point Hope and Cape Serdtse @-@ Kamen in April to July , and Herald Island in the Chukchi Sea in July . The film crew encountered difficulties recording native speech due to the " kh " sound of the native language . Altogether , pre @-@ production , principal photography , and post @-@ production took 17 months . 
 The motion picture was well received by critics upon release on 14 November 1933 , and received the first ever Academy Award for Best Film Editing , although it didn 't fare well at the box office . Scholar Peter Geller has more recently criticized the film as depicting the Eskimo as childlike , simple , and mythic " noble savages " rather than as human beings . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Mala is a member of an unspecified Eskimo tribe living in Alaska . He has a wife , Aba , and an infant son . He and the villagers are shown welcoming a newcomer to their village , hunting walrus , and celebrating the hunt . Mala learns of white traders at nearby <unk> Inlet from another Eskimo . Mala learns about rifles and desperately wants one , and Aba longs for needles and other white men 's goods . Mala gratefully offers Aba 's sexual favors to the man for telling him about the trading ship 's presence . Mala and Aba travel to the trading ship with their children , where the white ship captain takes all of Mala 's tanned animal skins in exchange for a single rifle . The captain demands that Aba spend the night with him . He gets her drunk and gives her worthless gifts , and has sexual intercourse with her . Mala is upset , but is told by the English @-@ speaking Eskimo <unk> that " the white man is always right " . 
 Mala and the Eskimos go bowhead whale hunting in wooden boats and with harpoons provided by the white men , and an actual whale hunt and carcass slaughtering is depicted on film . After the successful hunt , two drunken white men kidnap Aba ( and prevent Mala from rescuing her ) and force her to get drunk . The ship captain rapes Aba , who escapes at dawn . The Captain 's Mate , hunting seals with a rifle , mistakes Aba ( passed out on the ice ) for an animal and kills her . Mala kills the ship captain with a harpoon ( mistakenly believing the captain shot his wife ) . He flees back to his village with his children . 
 Lonely and needing someone to care for his children and help with the sewing and other chores , Mala takes the young girl Iva as his new wife . But Mala still longs for Aba , and their relationship is a cold one . The Eskimos go hunting caribou by stampeding the animals into a lake and then hunting them with bow and arrow and spears from boats . Mala is haunted by Aba 's death , and after pouring out his grief through dance and prayer he changes his name to Kripik . Kripik 's attitude toward Iva softens dramatically , and they make love . The hunter whom Mala welcomed to the village the previous year returns to his village , and gives Kripik his wife in gratitude . The woman is more than happy to live with Mala , and Mala makes love to her as well . 
 Some years pass . The Royal Canadian Mounted Police establish a post at <unk> , bringing law to the area for the first time . Several white men accuse the Eskimos of being savage and without morals , and charge Mala with the murder of the ship captain . Sergeant Hunt and Constable Balk try to find Mala and arrest him , but get lost in a blizzard and nearly freeze to death . Kripik finds them , and saves their lives . Kripik is angry with the men until Hunt explains that they do not want Kripik 's wives . When Hunt asks if Kripik knows Mala , Kripik says " Mala is no more " . The Mounties believe Mala is dead , but their misunderstanding is corrected by <unk> , who arrives in the village and innocently exposes Kripik . 
 The Mounties convince Kripik to come to the post to answer questions , and Kripik agrees . Several months pass . Hunt and Balk give Kripik the freedom of the post , and Hunt learns about the horrors the white traders visited on the Eskimo . When the Eskimo village moves on to new hunting rounds , Kripik 's family stays behind to wait for him . They begin to starve , and Kripik learns of their plight . However , the rigid and rule @-@ bound Inspector White has arrived at the RCMP outpost , and he demands that Kripik not only no longer be allowed to hunt during the day but also be chained down in his bed at night . Hunt tries to dissuade White , but White insists — and Hunt is forced to break his word that Kripik will not be chained . 
 During the night , Kripik pulls his hand free of the single <unk> used to chain him down , but <unk> his hand while doing so . Kripik flees the post with his team of sled dogs , heading for his family 's old village . Hunt and Balk pursue him . The rifle Kripik steals proves useless when the bullets are not the right gauge . Kripik is forced to kill his sled dogs one by one for food . In a driving blizzard , Kripik falls short of reaching his family , and is attacked and injured by a wolf ( which he manages to kill ) . Kripik is found by his eldest son <unk> ( now a teenager ) , rescued , and fed by his family . 
 The Mounties arrive the next morning , in hot pursuit . Kripik prevents his eldest son from killing the Mounties , and says he will leave and never come back . Kripik departs on foot , but Iva professes her love and goes with him . The Mounties pursue them on foot across the ice , which is breaking up . Sergeant Hunt takes aim at Kripik with his rifle , but cannot shoot him because Kripik has saved their lives and exhibited more honor and decency than white men have . Kripik and Iva escape on an ice floe , Hunt calling out goodbye and good luck to them . Hunt tells Balk that the ice will take Kripik and Iva across the inlet , and that the adults will be able to return to <unk> and the other children next spring . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Following is a list of the cast members : 
 Ray Mala as Mala 
 Lulu Wong Wing as Aba 
 Lotus Long as Iva 
 Iris Yamaoka as the Second Wife 
 Peter Freuchen as Ship Captain 
 Edward Hearn as Captain 's Mate 
 W. S. Van Dyke as Inspector White 
 Joseph Sauers as Sergeant Hunt 
 Edgar Dearing as Constable Balk 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Script and casting = = = 
 The script for Eskimo was based on books by Danish explorer and author Peter Freuchen . W.S. Van Dyke was assigned by MGM to direct , but it was not a film which Van Dyke was interested in doing . He wrote to his uncle , John Charles Van Dyke , on May 24 , 1932 , " Am going to film Peter Freuchen 's book Eskimo . Don 't fancy the job a damn bit , but it brings in the bread and butter . " 
 Van Dyke intended the picture to depict the corrupting influence white culture had on the Eskimos , much as he had done in White Shadows in the South Seas . The script originally ended with Mala and Iva escaping onto the ice , only to drown . But producer Hunt Stromberg felt this ending was too downbeat , and changed it in April 1932 to the ending now seen on film . 
 Both Stromberg and Van Dyke wanted the Native Alaskans in the film to speak in their native tongue . However , MGM production chief Irving Thalberg worried that intertitles were too distracting and would seem old @-@ fashioned , and Stromberg agreed . By this time , however , it was September 1932 . To <unk> the shot scenes in English would be prohibitively expensive , and Stromberg changed his mind so that intertitles ( not subtitles ) were used in the final film to translate the Inupiat language into English . 
 Stromberg demanded complete authenticity in casting , language , and the depiction of Eskimo life . Casting was critical . Van Dyke cast Inupiat natives ( most of them from Barrow , Alaska ) for all the minor roles , but Stromberg was so insistent on finding the perfect male lead that casting the title role of Mala / Kripik proved difficult . MGM wanted Ray Wise , the actor and cameraman ( who later changed his name to Ray Mala ) , as the star of the picture , and he would become Alaska 's first movie star . Wise was a half @-@ Inupiat , half @-@ Russian Jew who previously starred in the 1932 documentary film Igloo . Van Dyke wanted an all @-@ native cast , not a half @-@ native lead , and rejected Wise . A young native Alaskan was hired for the role , but he walked off the set in July 1932 when the stress of filming proved too great . Already on location in Alaska and isolated from the studio , Van Dyke turned to Ray Wise . Not only could Wise perform his own stunts , but Stromberg praised him as an immensely realistic actor . Wise came to Hollywood in 1925 , and in addition to his work on Igloo was working as an assistant cameraman . He was hired as a guide for Eskimo 's production to Alaska , and was able to offer his services to the film when the original actor quit . Although the film 's credits state that professional actors were used only for the Canadian police roles , in fact the major female roles were played by professional actresses Lotus Long and Lulu Wong Ying . Numerous minor roles are also clearly filled by trained actors in make @-@ up and costume . 
 According to Peter Freuchen , MGM considered filming in Greenland , where Freuchen 's novels were set . But the difficult weather and bright summer light ( which made filming difficult ) dissuaded them , and the production settled on Alaska instead . Freuchen accompanied the production not only as an actor , but as an interpreter as well . 
 = = = Principal photography and filming locations = = = 
 The start of production is not clear . A commercial transport ship , the Victoria , took the cast and crew from Seattle , Washington , to Nome , Alaska . There , the schooner Nanuk was rented by the studio to take the production team farther north . Originally known as the Pandora , the schooner would next be used in the 1935 production of Mutiny on the Bounty , and rerigged for the 1937 film Maid of Salem . The Nanuk acted as a mobile base of operations , and as a set for the shipboard scenes . MGM bought the schooner outright during the production . On @-@ screen credits for the film claim filming began in April 1932 , but The Hollywood Reporter said it began in July and the New York Times said June . 
 The production had its land @-@ based home at Teller , Alaska . Housing , storage facilities , a film laboratory , and other structures were built to house the cast , crew , and equipment , and the cast nicknamed the site " Camp Hollywood " . The crew included 42 cameramen and technicians , six airplane pilots , and Emil Ottinger — a chef from the Roosevelt Hotel . The production took 50 stone ( 700 lb ) ( 0 @.@ 32 metric tonnes ) of food with them to Alaska , as well as medical supplies , a mobile film processing laboratory , and sound recording equipment . Many native people ate bacon , corn flakes , and oranges for the first time , and became enamored of the food . Film was flown out of Teller back to Los Angeles every seven or eight weeks . 
 There are varying accounts about how much danger the production encountered during the 1932 – 33 winter season . The Hollywood Reporter said in October 1932 that the Nanuk was caught in the ice off Alaska and sled dog teams had to be used to rescue the film crew . However , crew on the film noted that the Nanuk wintered in Grantley Harbor at Teller . A press release by MGM in November 1932 claimed that the Nanuk reported via radio that it was frozen in the sea ice and drifting with 35 people aboard , unable to continue shooting until the spring . A report by the New York Times in February 1933 also claimed the Nanuk was locked in sea ice between Teller and Barrow . Peter Freuchen also relates that the Nanuk was blown off course by heavy winds several times . 
 Filming locations varied widely . Scenes of Eskimo villages on the ice , and some of the polar bear footage ( not used ) , were shot on sea ice 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) off Cape Lisburne , Alaska , in March 1933 . For this set , separate camera houses were built some distance away from the igloo sets , and accessed via tunnel below the snow . At one point , a sudden warm spell melted the igloos the production set up to house cast and cameras . Some interior and other shots were filmed on sets at the MGM studios in Culver City , California . 
 At one point , most of the Native Alaskans in the film went on strike . They were paid $ 5 per day for being extras , participating in hunts or tribal ceremonies , or for acting in minor roles . Although this was a large sum for Alaska at the time , many decided to strike for $ 10 or $ 15 a day . Van Dyke immediately hired strikebreakers from among the other native people as replacements , and the strike ended . 
 Although cinematographer Clyde <unk> is credited with the cinematography , additional footage was shot by George Gordon <unk> , Josiah Roberts , and Leonard Smith . Screenwriter John Lee Mahin claims he shot a few of the scenes with Eskimo women when coverage was found to be lacking . Numerous days of shooting were lost in the summer when strong sunlight made it impossible to film . To reduce glare from the snow , most of the sets were sprayed with pink paint from the air . 
 Because Native Alaskan languages are somewhat staccato in nature and makes heavy of the " kh " sound , sound recordists initially had trouble recording native speech . The " kh " sound overwhelmed the microphones ( a problem known as " chopping " ) , which would then not pick up the following sounds . Significant adjustments were made in order to correct the problem . 
 = = = Hunting and wolf attack scenes = = = 
 The scenes of walrus , bowhead whale , and caribou hunting are all real . Because the hunting season for caribou , polar bear , walrus , and whale occur at the same time , the production was forced to spend more than a year in the Arctic ( covering two hunting seasons ) in order to get the necessary footage . 
 The walrus and polar bear hunts were filmed in July 1932 at Herald Island in the Chukchi Sea . Walrus carcasses were used as dog food and to attract polar bears . Additional polar bear hunting was filmed in March 1933 off Cape Lisburne . The bowhead whale hunt was filmed from late April to July 1933 in two locations : Off Point Hope , Alaska , and off Cape Serdtse @-@ Kamen on the Chukchi Peninsula . The whale hunting shoot took nearly three months because the whales kept fleeing every time they spotted boats . As depicted in the film , the Inupiat also hunted polar bears by roping and drowning them , but little of this footage made it into the picture . 
 According to Peter Freuchen , the scene in which the wolf attacks Mala is real . Freuchen says that Mala , armed with a rock and a pistol beneath his fur jacket , spent three afternoons trying to lure a wolf into attacking him . A rifleman and a cinematographer using a camera with a telephoto lens followed at a distance . The wolf attack was filmed from far away , with the rifleman ready to shoot the wolf in case Mala was unable to kill it . As shown in film , Mala was able to kill the wolf without using his pistol or relying on the rifleman , and was not injured in the attack . 
 = = = Post @-@ production = = = 
 Principal production appears to have ended about March 25 , 1933 . Van Dyke was back aboard a commercial ship , headed for California , while Frank Messenger ( aboard the Nanuk ) continued to shoot second unit footage for the next month or two . 
 In the summer of 1933 , MGM staff realized that additional footage was needed to complete the film . This involved casting an actress for the role . The production staff visited San Francisco , California , to identify an actress for a minor female part . Ray Mala offered the role of Iva to Sadie Brower , a 17 @-@ year @-@ old half @-@ Inupiat girl . But after her father refused to let her appear in movies , a Japanese American ( who could not speak any Eskimo ) was cast in the role instead . According to Brower , this woman 's Eskimo was so bad that it was unintelligible . <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and four other Inupiat actors were brought to California to act in the reshoots and new scenes . 
 William <unk> is credited with the musical score . However , some of Modest Mussorgsky 's " Night on Bald Mountain " may be heard on the soundtrack when the Eskimos go off to hunt whales . Altogether , pre @-@ production , principal photography , and post @-@ production took 17 months . 
 The total cost of the picture was reported variously as $ 935 @,@ 000 or $ 1 @.@ 5 million . Even the lower figure was an exceptionally large amount for the time . To recoup its costs , MGM kept the film in circulation for many years . The running time of the film in previews was 160 minutes . Major cuts were made afterward , however . The final running time for the film was either 117 or 120 minutes . 
 = = Premieres and critical reception = = 
 = = = Premieres = = = 
 Eskimo premiered at the Astor Theatre in New York City on November 14 , 1933 . MGM did not promote the film as a tale of colonial corruption or revenge , but rather played up its sexual motifs . The studio placed large neon signs on Broadway Avenue declaring " Eskimo Wife Traders ! Weird Tale of the Arctic ! " Lobby cards in theaters contained lurid descriptions : " The strangest moral code on the face of the earth — men who share their wives but kill if one is stolen ! " MGM more appropriately advertised Eskimo as " the biggest picture ever made " . 
 The film did not do well at the domestic box office , however . As Angela <unk> put it , " The film 's adventurous scenes were certainly impressive , but few Americans would be stirred by Inupiat survival in the far north . " To boost receipts , MGM changed the film 's title to Eskimo Wife @-@ Traders . But the change did not help , and MGM lost $ 236 @,@ 000 on the film domestically . The film was released in the UK and Australia as Mala the Magnificent . The UK premiere was on October 20 , 1934 , and the Australian premiere on October 31 , 1934 . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Conrad A. <unk> won the very first Oscar for Best Film Editing for his work on Eskimo . Mordaunt Hall , writing for the New York Times in 1933 , generally praised the picture . The script managed to sustain interest in the various scenes , he was surprised to find moments of " genuinely effective comedy " , and he found the acting by native people " really extraordinary " . He singled out Ray Mala , Lulu Wong Wing , and Lotus Long for being particularly effective in conveying emotion . He also found the use of native language and realistic sounds ( recorded in Alaska ) one of the film 's best elements . However , Hall felt the picture was a bit long , and various hunting scenes ( although often thrilling ) were too reminiscent of many such scenes in previous motion pictures . Other reviews were also generally positive , but nearly all critics compared the film to other motion pictures ( such as Igloo and <unk> of the North ) which had also captured exquisite scenery and scenes of Inupiat people . To many critics of the day , the footage of tribal customs and hunting actually made Eskimo a documentary film rather than a drama . 
 Scholar Peter Geller has more recently criticized the film as depicting the Eskimo as childlike , simple , and mythic " noble savages " rather than as human beings . Film historian Thomas P. Doherty concludes that the picture favors scenery and typecasting over real characters . 
 Eskimo was not the first dramatic film to use an all @-@ native cast for the native roles ; that was the 1914 silent film In the Land of the Head Hunters . It was , however , the first motion picture to be filmed in the language of a Native American people , and the first feature film shot in Alaska . Ray Mala became nationally famous for his work in Eskimo , and subsequently had a long career as a lead and supporting actor in Hollywood . 
 = = Box Office = = 
 The film grossed a total ( domestic and foreign ) of $ 1 @,@ 312 @,@ 000 : $ 636 @,@ 000 in the US and Canada and $ 676 @,@ 000 elsewhere resulting in a loss of $ 236 @,@ 000 . 
 = Interstate 287 = 
 Interstate 287 ( I @-@ 287 ) is an auxiliary Interstate Highway in the US states of New Jersey and New York . It is a partial beltway around New York City , serving the northern half of New Jersey and the counties of Rockland and Westchester in New York . I @-@ 287 , which is signed north – south in New Jersey and east – west in New York , follows a roughly horseshoe @-@ shaped route from the New Jersey Turnpike ( I @-@ 95 ) in Edison Township , New Jersey , clockwise to the New England Thruway ( I @-@ 95 ) in Rye , New York , for 98 @.@ 72 miles ( 158 @.@ 87 km ) . Through New Jersey , I @-@ 287 runs west from its southern terminus in Edison through suburban areas . In Bridgewater Township , the freeway takes a more northeasterly course , paralleled by U.S. Route 202 ( US 202 ) . The northernmost part of I @-@ 287 in New Jersey passes through mountainous surroundings . After crossing into New York at Suffern , I @-@ 287 turns east on the New York State Thruway ( I @-@ 87 ) and runs though Rockland County . After crossing the Hudson River on the Tappan Zee Bridge , I @-@ 287 splits from I @-@ 87 near Tarrytown and continues east through Westchester County on the Cross @-@ Westchester Expressway until it reaches the New England Thruway . 
 A bypass around New York City had been planned since the 1950s and would become a part of the Interstate Highway System and receive the I @-@ 287 designation . The Cross @-@ Westchester Expressway , which was originally designated as Interstate 187 , opened in 1960 as Interstate 487 before later becoming part of I @-@ 287 . The New York State Thruway portion of I @-@ 287 , which included a crossing of the Hudson River , opened in 1955 . In New Jersey , the proposed I @-@ 287 had originally been designated as FAI Corridor 104 and incorporated what was planned as the Middlesex Freeway . The New Jersey section of I @-@ 287 between the New Jersey Turnpike in Edison and US 202 in Montville opened in stages between the 1960s and 1973 ; the remainder opened in 1994 . The aging Tappan Zee Bridge is due to be replaced with a new span — construction started in 2013 , with opening scheduled for 2017 . In addition , a proposed tunnel across the Long Island Sound between Rye and Oyster Bay on Long Island would link the eastern terminus of I @-@ 287 to New York State Route 25 ( NY 25 ) and NY 135 in Syosset . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = New Jersey = = = 
 = = = = Middlesex County = = = = 
 I @-@ 287 begins at an interchange with the New Jersey Turnpike ( I @-@ 95 ) in Edison in Middlesex County , New Jersey , where the freeway continues east as Route 440 towards Perth Amboy and Staten Island . Within Middlesex County , I @-@ 287 is called the Lt. Col. ( Ret ) Richard F. Lauer , US Army Highway . From this point , it heads west as an eight @-@ lane freeway through suburban areas , soon reaching an interchange with US 1 that also has access to County Route 531 ( CR 531 ) in the southbound direction . Past this point , the road turns more to the northwest as it comes to the junction with Route 27 ( Lincoln Highway ) . Following Route 27 , I @-@ 287 narrows to six lanes and passes over Amtrak 's Northeast Corridor as it continues to a southbound exit and northbound entrance with CR 501 . 
 As the freeway continues into South Plainfield , it passes near several business parks and comes to a partial interchange with Durham Avenue which only has a northbound exit and southbound entrance At this point , the road starts to turn more west before it comes to a full junction with CR 529 . Here , the road enters Piscataway Township and reaches an interchange with CR 665 ( Washington Avenue ) . Continuing near more business parks , I @-@ 287 comes to the exit for South <unk> Road . Following this interchange , the road heads west more before it turns to the southwest and comes to the Possumtown Road interchange . After Possumtown Road , the freeway comes to the CR 622 ( River Road ) exit . 
 = = = = Somerset County = = = = 
 After crossing over the Raritan River , I @-@ 287 enters Franklin Township , Somerset County and becomes the Captain ( Ret ) Joseph <unk> , US Navy Highway . Soon after the river , there is an interchange with CR 527 . After CR 527 , the freeway makes a turn to the northwest and passes a mix of residential areas and business parks . The road has an interchange with CR 623 ( Weston Canal Road ) before crossing the Raritan River again and continuing into Bridgewater Township . Within Bridgewater Township , I @-@ 287 curves north @-@ northwest and passes over both New Jersey Transit 's Raritan Valley Line and CR 533 near TD Bank Ballpark , which is home to the Somerset Patriots baseball team . Past this area , the road encounters Route 28 at an interchange . Past Route 28 , the freeway turns northwest and intersects US 22 at a partial interchange with a northbound exit and entrance and southbound entrance . From this point , I @-@ 287 makes a turn to the west and runs to the north of US 22 as it has a wide median . The freeway turns northwest as it passes near the Bridgewater Commons shopping mall and reaches a partial interchange with US 202 / US 206 . Through the remainder of New Jersey , US 202 will parallel the course of I @-@ 287 . At this point , I @-@ 287 gains a local @-@ express lane configuration , with 3 local and 2 express lanes southbound and 3 express and 3 local lanes northbound . Both the southbound local and express lanes have access to southbound US 202 / US 206 at this interchange , whereas northbound US 202 / US 206 only has access to the local lanes of northbound I @-@ 287 . 
 From here , the road continues north past suburban residential areas , with the northbound direction narrowing to 2 local lanes , before entering Bedminster Township . Here , I @-@ 287 intersects I @-@ 78 at the Vincent R. Kramer Interchange , where the local @-@ express lane configuration ends . Access from eastbound I @-@ 78 to southbound I @-@ 287 is only to the local lanes . Meanwhile , the express lanes of northbound I @-@ 287 provides access to westbound I @-@ 78 while the local lanes provide access to eastbound I @-@ 78 . Following I @-@ 78 , I @-@ 287 heads north with four northbound lanes and three southbound lanes into more wooded surroundings , reaching another interchange with US 202 / US 206 . At this point , the freeway median widens again as it turns northeast before continuing more to the east and entering Far Hills . Within Far Hills , the road passes under CR 512 before the northbound direction narrows to three lanes and the wide median ends . Entering Bernards Township , I @-@ 287 runs east @-@ northeast to an interchange with CR 525 . After the CR 525 interchange , the road gains a wide median that narrows again before the road runs under New Jersey Transit 's Gladstone Branch , heading more to the northeast . Before leaving Bernards Township , there is an exit for North Maple Avenue . 
 = = = = Morris County = = = = 
 A short distance after this interchange , I @-@ 287 enters Harding Township , Morris County at the crossing of the Passaic River , where it becomes the Marine Hector <unk> Jr . Cong . Medal of Honor Highway . It continues northeast , with US 202 running a short distance to the west . The freeway makes a turn more to the east as it comes to a truck @-@ only rest area in the northbound direction . The road crosses into Morris Township , where it reaches an exit @-@ only interchange with Harter Road ; there are no entrances present . Shortly after Harter Road , there is a junction with CR 663 ( James Street ) that only has entrances to I @-@ 287 . After this , I @-@ 287 turns north and enters Morristown , where the northbound direction gains a fourth lane as the median narrows . The freeway enters more developed areas as it comes to the Route 124 interchange . From this point , the road becomes eight lanes total , with four in each direction , as it passes west of Morristown Memorial Hospital . After crossing under New Jersey Transit 's Morristown Line , it reaches the exit for CR 510 . From CR 510 , I @-@ 287 makes a turn to the northeast , crossing back into Morris Township before continuing into Hanover Township . Here , the route comes to the western terminus of the Route 24 freeway . Following Route 24 , the freeway intersects Route 10 . I @-@ 287 passes near several business parks as it enters Parsippany @-@ Troy Hills . In this area , there is an interchange with CR 511 east of Lake Parsippany that also has access to <unk> Road in the southbound direction . After this , I @-@ 287 widens to ten lanes with five northbound lanes , two express southbound lanes , and three local southbound lanes as it comes to the I @-@ 80 junction . 
 Following this interchange , the freeway becomes six lanes , with three in each direction as it continues into more wooded areas and reaching an exit with access to US 46 and US 202 / CR 511 . In this area , the highway runs to the west of the Jersey City Reservoir and immediately to the east of US 202 / CR 511 . I @-@ 287 comes to the Intervale Road exit , which carries US 202 and CR 511 . The freeway enters Boonton , where it turns northeast , with New Jersey Transit 's Montclair @-@ Boonton Line located a short distance to the northwest . In Boonton , there is another interchange with US 202 / CR 511 . From here , I @-@ 287 curves more to the east , with US 202 running immediately to the north of the road . Along this stretch , there is an exit for US 202 and Vreeland Avenue . Upon entering Montville , the freeway draws away from US 202 as it passes near wooded residential areas before coming to another interchange with US 202 . I @-@ 287 continues northeast from this point , crossing under New Jersey Transit 's Montclair @-@ Boonton Line before running north @-@ northeast through more woodland as the terrain starts to get more mountainous . The freeway runs through Kinnelon , where the northbound direction has four lanes , and Pequannock Township before entering Riverdale . In Riverdale , there is an interchange with Route 23 . A short distance later , I @-@ 287 reaches the CR 694 interchange which provides access to CR 511 Alternate . 
 = = = = Passaic and Bergen counties = = = = 
 Immediately after this , I @-@ 287 crosses the Pequannock River into Bloomingdale , Passaic County , where the highway becomes US Air Force Gunner Clarence " Red " Mosley Highway . The road continues northeast and turns north as it briefly passes through Pompton Lakes before crossing into Wanaque . Here , the road makes a turn northeast again as it comes to the CR 511 Alternate interchange . After this , I @-@ 287 passes through rock cuts in the Ramapo Mountains before making a sharp turn east as it crosses high above the Wanaque River valley on a bridge . The freeway continues into Oakland , Bergen County , where the name becomes Army Staff Sergeant Walter Bray Highway . 
 Here , there are a couple of businesses near the road before the interchange with Skyline Drive . Following this , the road crosses the Ramapo River before passing near neighborhoods and reaching a junction with US 202 . After US 202 , I @-@ 287 turns southeast and closely parallels the New York , Susquehanna and Western Railway line to the southwest before entering Franklin Lakes and coming to an interchange with the northern terminus of Route 208 . Past this interchange , I @-@ 287 narrows to four lanes and turns northeast as the railroad line draws away . The freeway passes wooded residential neighborhoods prior to turning north and entering Mahwah Township , where it continues near more wooded suburban areas as well as the <unk> Mountain Reservation to the west of the road . After passing to the east of the Ramapo College of New Jersey campus , I @-@ 287 passes over US 202 . The freeway crosses the Ramapo River again before reaching an interchange with Route 17 . At this point , Route 17 forms a concurrency with I @-@ 287 and the road widens to six lanes as it passes between the Ramapo Valley County Reservation to the west and business parks to the east . 
 = = = New York = = = 
 = = = = New York State Thruway = = = = 
 Upon entering New York in the Village of Suffern in the Town of Ramapo in Rockland County , New York , New Jersey 's Route 17 ends and NY 17 follows I @-@ 287 as the road comes to an interchange with the New York State Thruway ( I @-@ 87 ) . At this point , I @-@ 287 joins I @-@ 87 on the eight @-@ lane New York State Thruway , passing over Metro @-@ North Railroad 's Port Jervis Line as it heads east out of the mountains into suburban residential and commercial surroundings as it narrows to six lanes . After passing through the Village of Montebello , the freeway reaches an interchange with Airmont Road where it becomes the border between Montebello to the north and the Village of Airmont to the south . Continuing to the east , the New York State Thruway becomes the border between Monsey and Airmont before separating Monsey from the Village of Chestnut Ridge to the south as it turns slightly to the east @-@ southeast . After briefly running along the south edge of the Village of Spring Valley , where there is a westbound toll plaza for trucks , the highway fully enters Chestnut Ridge . In this area , it comes to the New York extension of the Garden State Parkway . Following this junction , I @-@ 87 / I @-@ 287 continues east into the Town of <unk> , coming to an exit for NY 59 . After this , the road passes to the north of Nanuet , crossing under New Jersey Transit / Metro @-@ North Railroad 's Pascack Valley Line . The freeway crosses under NY 304 before the cloverleaf interchange with the Palisades Interstate Parkway . As the Thruway continues into West Nyack , it comes to the exit for NY 303 that provides access to the Palisades Center shopping mall to the south of the road . 
 Past NY 303 , I @-@ 87 / I @-@ 287 turns to the east @-@ southeast and passes near wooded areas as well as suburban neighborhoods of Central Nyack . It comes to another interchange with NY 59 that also provides access to US 9W . At this point , the New York State Thruway widens to eight lanes and turns to the south @-@ southeast into the Village of Nyack in the Town of Orangetown , crossing over US 9W prior to passing near residential areas in the Village of South Nyack as it runs to the east of US 9W , descending The Palisades . The last interchange in Rockland County is with US 9W and has no southbound exit . From here , the New York State Thruway crosses the Hudson River on the Tappan Zee Bridge east into the Village of Tarrytown in the Town of Greenburgh in Westchester County . After passing over the river , the road crosses over Metro @-@ North Railroad 's Hudson Line before coming to an eastbound toll plaza . After this , the freeway comes to the exit for US 9 that also serves the western terminus of NY 119 . I @-@ 87 / I @-@ 287 continue east past woodland and business parks , leaving Tarrytown before coming to an interchange where the two routes split , with I @-@ 87 continuing south on the New York State Thruway and I @-@ 287 heading east on the Cross @-@ Westchester Expressway . This interchange also has access to and from the northbound Saw Mill River Parkway and NY 119 . 
 = = = = Cross @-@ Westchester Expressway = = = = 
 The Cross @-@ Westchester Expressway , which is maintained by the New York State Thruway Authority , is six lanes wide and carries I @-@ 287 east to a westbound exit for NY 119 that is intertwined with the ramps between the New York State Thruway and NY 119 / Saw Mill River Parkway . After passing over the Saw Mill River Parkway and the Saw Mill River , the road enters the Village of Elmsford and runs through developed areas as it has a partial diamond interchange with NY 9A that does not have an eastbound exit . The Cross @-@ Westchester Expressway turns southeast from this point and intersects the Sprain Brook Parkway . I @-@ 287 widens to eight lanes at this junction and continues to the exit for NY 100A . After the NY 100A interchange , the freeway leaves Elmsford and turns to the east near residential areas , narrowing to six lanes before coming to an exit for NY 100 and NY 119 that also has access to the Bronx River Parkway . 
 Following this exit , the road becomes eight lanes again and crosses over the Bronx River Parkway , the Bronx River , and Metro @-@ North Railroad 's Harlem Line . Here , the road crosses into White Plains and reaches an interchange with NY 22 . Past NY 22 , I @-@ 287 makes a sharp curve to the south as it narrows to six lanes and runs near inhabited neighborhoods . The road has a westbound exit and eastbound entrance with the Central Westchester Parkway , a road that provides access to the Taconic State Parkway by way of NY 22 . The freeway runs past commercial areas to the east of downtown White Plains as it encounters Westchester Avenue , which connects to NY 119 , NY 127 , and Anderson Hill Road as well as The Westchester shopping mall in the downtown area . Within this interchange , the Cross @-@ Westchester Expressway turns east along the border between Harrison to the north and White Plains to the south . Westchester Avenue becomes a frontage road for I @-@ 287 as the road passes corporate parks to the north and populated neighborhoods to the south . 
 The road begins to turn southeast as it comes to a directional interchange with the southern terminus of I @-@ 684 . The I @-@ 287 freeway heads south along the White Plains / Harrison border before turning east and fully entering Harrison , where there is a cloverleaf interchange with the Hutchinson River Parkway . At this interchange , the Westchester Avenue frontage road serves as a collector / distributor road . The Cross @-@ Westchester Expressway turns southeast again past wooded areas of development , with NY 120 coming onto the Westchester Avenue frontage road . I @-@ 287 reaches an interchange where the frontage road ends as Westchester Avenue heads east as NY 120A and NY 120 continues to the south . Here , the freeway enters the Village of Rye Brook in the Town of Rye as it continues southeast . The Cross @-@ Westchester Expressway comes into the Village of Port Chester , where the road runs near more dense suburban development as it intersects US 1 . At this point , the road has ramp access to and from the southbound direction of the New England Thruway ( I @-@ 95 ) . From here , the mainline I @-@ 287 narrows to four lanes and enters the City of Rye , where it passes over the Northeast Corridor before merging into northbound I @-@ 95 about a half @-@ mile ( 800 meters ) west of the Connecticut state line . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = New Jersey = = = 
 In the 1950s , a limited @-@ access highway was proposed to bypass New York City . This planned beltway would be incorporated into the new Interstate Highway System . The proposed beltway in New Jersey was designated as FAI Corridor 104 and later received the I @-@ 287 designation in 1958 . The southern segment of I @-@ 287 was planned in the 1950s as the Middlesex Freeway , which was to run from the Outerbridge Crossing to Staten Island and follow the Route 440 corridor to Edison , where it would connect to the New Jersey Turnpike before continuing west to I @-@ 78 . From here , the freeway would parallel US 202 north to the New York border . The anticipated cost of building I @-@ 287 in New Jersey was $ 235 million . The southernmost part of I @-@ 287 in Middlesex County was to be cosigned with I @-@ 95 ; this never happened due to the cancellation of the Somerset Freeway . By the mid @-@ 1960s , I @-@ 287 had been completed between the New Jersey Turnpike and Bedminster Township and from US 46 in Parsippany to US 202 in Montville . More of I @-@ 287 in New Jersey had been finished by 1969 , with the sections from US 46 south to Route 10 in Hanover Township and from Bedminster Township north to Maple Avenue in Bernards Township opened . The segment of the highway between Maple Avenue and Route 10 opened in 1973 , making I @-@ 287 a continuous road between the New Jersey Turnpike in Edison and US 202 in Montville . 
 I @-@ 287 's missing section between US 202 in Montville and the New York State Thruway in Suffern , NY was controversial dating back to 1965 and continuing until its opening in 1993 . Property owners along the proposed route fought its completion as part of the freeway revolts of the 1960s and 1970s . Originally , I @-@ 287 was proposed to take a more eastern route through the Lincoln Park and Wayne areas ; this routing gained opposition as it passed through populated areas . A more western alignment was planned through mountainous areas in 1973 , but this was rejected as the cost of building the road through the mountains was too high . In 1977 , the current alignment of I @-@ 287 was proposed between Montville and Suffern ; this was approved by the federal government in 1982 as it was less costly than the western alignment and went through less developed areas than the eastern alignment . 
 Permits allowing construction to begin on this segment were issued in 1988 by the Army Corps of Engineers . Officials in Rockland County , New York filed a lawsuit on November 19 , 1993 , hours before the highway 's official ribbon @-@ cutting , seeking to block its opening . They claimed the incomplete interchange with the New York State Thruway was inadequate to handle the additional traffic . That interchange was not complete until 1994 , but the highway opened as planned on November 19 in a ceremony held on the Wanaque River bridge , where New Jersey Governor Jim Florio cut the ribbon . This moment marked the completion of a bypass around New York City that had been planned for decades . The portion of I @-@ 287 between the US 202 interchange in Oakland and the Route 208 interchange in Franklin Lakes overtook the westernmost portion of Route 208 , truncating that route to its current location . 
 The completion of I @-@ 287 in New Jersey had significant effects on traffic and development patterns in the area . Several towns along the highway , such as Wanaque and Montville , saw increases in development . In addition , as the road was a bypass , it saw a significant increase in truck traffic wishing to bypass congested roads closer to New York City . The road also increased truck traffic on other north – south corridors , such as Route 31 , from truckers wanting to bypass the New Jersey Turnpike by using these surface roads to get between the I @-@ 287 bypass of New York City and I @-@ 95 south to Pennsylvania . On July 16 , 1999 , Governor Christine Todd Whitman banned oversize trucks from using roads that are not part of the National Highway System , such as Route 31 . Trucks were therefore forced to use I @-@ 287 and the New Jersey Turnpike to travel across the state . In the 1990s , high @-@ occupancy vehicle lanes were built along I @-@ 287 between Bedminster and Parsippany . These HOV lanes , along with the ones that had been built on I @-@ 80 , were opened to all traffic in 1998 due to lack of HOV usage , and the state did not have to repay the federal government the $ 240 million to build the lanes . In 2011 , a small section of the northbound side of the highway in Boonton collapsed into the Rockaway River due to Hurricane Irene . Near the end of that year , five people and a dog were killed when a small <unk> TBM 700 airplane en route to Georgia crashed on the highway near exit 33 in Morris Township . 
 = = = New York State Thruway = = = 
 The New York State Thruway portion of I @-@ 287 was planned around 1950 as part of a tolled limited @-@ access highway that was to connect the major cities of New York . A bridge across the Hudson River was planned between Nyack and Tarrytown at a site that was close enough to New York City but far enough from the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey 's jurisdiction area , as they opposed the crossing . The portion of the thruway currently followed by I @-@ 287 , including the Tappan Zee Bridge over the Hudson River , opened on December 15 , 1955 . In the 1960s , I @-@ 287 was designated along the New York State Thruway between Suffern and Tarrytown , while I @-@ 87 ran farther to the east on present @-@ day I @-@ 684 . On January 1 , 1970 , the I @-@ 87 designation was shifted onto this portion of the New York State Thruway to run concurrent with I @-@ 287 . 
 The E @-@ ZPass electronic toll collection system was first introduced on this segment of the Thruway at the Spring Valley and Tappan Zee Bridge toll plazas in 1993 . The same year , an interchange in Suffern opened providing access to the newly opened New Jersey portion of I @-@ 287 . In 1997 , tolls for cars were eliminated at the Spring Valley toll plaza , with tolls remaining for trucks and other commercial vehicles . The I @-@ 87 / I @-@ 287 interchange split near Tarrytown began a $ 187 million reconstruction in 2001 in order to add additional lanes and rebuild overpasses and underpasses . Reconstruction in this area was completed in May 2004 . 
 = = = Cross @-@ Westchester Expressway = = = 
 Plans for a limited @-@ access road to cross Westchester County east to west date back to the 1920s and became more needed after post @-@ World War II traffic increases . When the Tappan Zee Bridge was proposed around 1950 , the Cross @-@ Westchester Expressway was becoming a more realistic idea . Construction of the freeway began in 1956 , and was given the NY 119 designation . The design of the highway met Interstate highway standards after opening , and was supposed to have the I @-@ 187 designation . However , by the time the highway opened , it was officially designated as I @-@ 487 instead . At a cost of $ 50 million , the Cross Westchester Expressway was opened December 1960 . Later in the 1960s , this segment of road was redesignated I @-@ 287 to make it a part of the beltway around New York City . 
 I @-@ 287 was to continue past I @-@ 95 in Port Chester and was to cross Long Island Sound via the unbuilt Oyster Bay – Rye Bridge . On Long Island , the route would run along the Seaford – Oyster Bay Expressway ( NY 135 ) . Then , I @-@ 287 was again to be extended into Jones Beach by merging with the Wantagh State Parkway in Merrick . The plans for the bridge , and the I @-@ 287 extension onto Long Island , were dropped in 1973 by Governor Nelson Rockefeller as a result of community opposition and environmental concerns . 
 Ownership of the Cross @-@ Westchester Expressway was transferred from the New York State Department of Transportation to the New York State Thruway Authority in 1990 to help relieve the state 's budget issues . On July 27 , 1994 , a propane truck crashed into an overpass on the Cross @-@ Westchester Expressway in White Plains and exploded , killing the driver . The fire from the explosion spread into adjacent neighborhoods and injured 23 people . In the mid @-@ 1990s , a reversible high @-@ occupancy vehicle lane was proposed for the Cross @-@ Westchester Expressway in order to alleviate congestion at a planned cost of $ 365 million . In addition , a Metro @-@ North Railroad line and a guided busway were considered to serve the I @-@ 287 corridor in Westchester County as alternatives to the HOV lane . The proposed HOV lane was cancelled in 1997 by Governor George Pataki out of the fear it would have negative effects on the area in trying to solve traffic . Since 1999 , the Cross @-@ Westchester Expressway has been under construction in order to reduce congestion and improve safety for the motorists who use the highway . The final phase of the project , a reconstruction in the area of exit 8 in White Plains , was completed in December 2012 , nine months ahead of schedule . 
 = = Future = = 
 = = = Tappan Zee replacement = = = 
 Due to the congestion along I @-@ 87 / I @-@ 287 and the aging and decay of the over fifty @-@ year @-@ old Tappan Zee Bridge , talks have begun regarding the possibility of replacing the bridge . A variety of transportation improvements are currently being considered , including a Metro @-@ North Railroad commuter rail system or a bus rapid transit system that would link the western shore of the Hudson River with Westchester County and New York City . In addition , several alternatives are being considered for traffic management on the bridge , including high @-@ occupancy toll lanes , park and ride lots , ramp meters , and congestion tolling at peak times . Several designs for the new bridge , which is to be north of the existing structure , included suspension , cantilever , and cable @-@ stayed spans . Construction on the new bridge began in 2013 , with opening targeted for 2017 . 
 = = = Improvements in New Jersey = = = 
 NJDOT started the I @-@ 287 ( Middlesex Freeway ) Rehabilitation Project in August 2007 to resurface the pavement between exit 5 in South Plainfield and I @-@ 95 / New Jersey Turnpike in Edison Township , which is used by about 150 @,@ 000 vehicles daily . Some of the bridges and overpasses had deteriorated to such a state that they needed to be replaced . On September 16 , 2009 , NJDOT announced the start of another rehabilitation and repaving project from exit 5 in Piscataway to the area of exit 10 in Franklin Township . This project , which is being funded by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 , is to cost $ 29 million and is expected to be finished later in 2011 . 
 = = = Proposed crossing to Long Island = = = 
 In 2008 , a private firm , <unk> Associates , proposed to construct a more than 16 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 26 km ) tunnel across Long Island Sound between Rye and Oyster Bay . This proposed tunnel would be the longest highway tunnel in the world , with its length exceeding that of the <unk> in Norway by a mile . It would start at the junction with the Cross Westchester Expressway and the New England Thruway in Rye and end at NY 135 and NY 25 in Syosset . Estimated to cost approximately $ 10 billion , it would feature three tubes : the outer tubes would have three lanes of vehicular traffic each and the inner tube would be used for maintenance . The proposed tunnel , which is to be operated by a private firm , is still awaiting approval to begin construction . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 = Miracle Man ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Miracle Man " is the eighteenth episode of the first season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network on March 18 , 1994 . It was written by Howard Gordon and series creator Chris Carter , directed by Michael Lange , and featured guest appearances by R. D. Call and Scott Bairstow . The episode is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . " Miracle Man " earned a Nielsen household rating of 7 @.@ 5 , being watched by 7 @.@ 1 million households in its initial broadcast ; and received mixed reviews from critics . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . When Mulder and Scully receive a video tape of a faith healer whose latest patient died mysteriously , the agents come to believe the healer 's ministry may be covering up several murders . 
 " Miracle Man " was the first episode of The X @-@ Files written by Howard Gordon without the aid of his long @-@ term collaborator Alex Gansa . Chris Carter helped Gordon flesh out the details of the episode . Exterior shots for the episode were filmed on location in Steveston , British Columbia — a location which had previously been used in the earlier first season episode " Gender Bender " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 1983 , a young boy , Samuel Hartley , appears at the scene of a car accident and pushes his way past an emergency crew . He opens a body bag and commands the severely burnt cadaver inside to " rise up and heal . " Samuel 's father , Calvin , convinces a fireman to let him continue . The body inside the bag comes alive , grabbing Samuel 's hand . 
 Ten years later , Dana Scully shows Fox Mulder a videotape of a religious service led by the now @-@ grown Samuel , who has become an evangelical faith healer for a ministry run by Calvin . The video shows a supposed healing which later left the follower dead . The agents travel to Clarksville , Tennessee , where they attend a service featuring an enthusiastic sermon by Leonard Vance , the man whom Samuel raised from the dead a decade earlier . The agents learn from Calvin that Samuel has gone missing . 
 Samuel eventually turns up drunk at a local bar , his faith shaken by the death . He is taken into custody . The agents doubt his ability , but he is able to convince Mulder that he knows the latter has lost a sister — Samantha — at a young age . Mulder has been seeing visions of Samantha , and continues to see them . At Samuel 's bail hearing , the courtroom fills with a swarm of locusts , which Samuel claims is a sign of God 's wrath against him . 
 Once he is released , Samuel returns to his ministry and attempts to heal a woman in a wheelchair . However , she suffers a seizure and dies , which leads to Samuel 's second arrest . An autopsy reveals the woman died of cyanide poisoning , whilst Mulder and Scully find evidence that the swarm of locusts , which were actually common grasshoppers , was guided by someone to the courtroom through the building 's ventilation system . Mulder believes Samuel to be innocent . However , the local sheriff , Maurice Daniels , allows two of his men to beat Samuel to death in his cell . 
 At his home , Vance is confronted by a ghostly vision of Samuel , who accuses him of betraying the church and perpetrating the murders . Vance confesses and blames his bitterness at having been resurrected with such a scarred and deformed visage . Mulder and Scully , who have been able to trace a large purchase of grasshoppers to Vance , arrive to find the man dying of cyanide poisoning from his own glass of water . He confesses to the agents before falling dead . 
 As the agents prepare to finish work on the case , they receive a phone call to say that Samuel 's body has gone missing from the morgue , and witnesses have seen him walking around , badly bruised . Meanwhile , Sheriff Daniels is arrested by one of his deputies for questioning by the district attorney over Samuel 's death . As Mulder and Scully leave Tennessee , Samuel 's ministry closes down , and Mulder sees one last vision of his missing sister before he gets into his car . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Miracle Man " was the first episode of The X @-@ Files written by Howard Gordon without the aid of his long @-@ term collaborator Alex Gansa . The pair had worked on several other series before The X @-@ Files , and had also contributed the episodes " Conduit " , " Ghost in the Machine " , " Fallen Angel " and " Lazarus " to the series so far . Series creator Chris Carter recalls being asked to collaborate on the episode , saying " Howard came to my house , and said , ' Help me out , ' so we went to my living room and put up this bulletin board and in a matter of hours we came up with this story " . Originally the script had called for more overt religious imagery , though censors at Fox objected to depictions of faith healer Samuel being beaten to death whilst in a cruciform pose , leading to scenes being cut . 
 Exterior shots of the town were filmed on location in Steveston , British Columbia — a location which had previously been used in the earlier first season episode " Gender Bender " . Scenes set in the home of Reverend Hartley were shot in a mansion in the Langley area , with the crew taking advantage of an old filled @-@ in swimming pool in the building to set up the necessary equipment . All of the scenes set in the faith healer 's tent were filmed in one day , and involved over three hundred extras . Producer R. W. Goodwin felt that the greatest difficulty in creating the episode was the challenge in finding enough actors in the Vancouver area who could portray a convincing Southern United States accent , leading to the hiring of a dialect coach to prevent the cast from sounding " like they were coming from fifteen different parts of the South " . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Miracle Man " premiered on the Fox network on March 18 , 1994 , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC Two on January 26 , 1995 . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 7 @.@ 5 with a 13 share , meaning that roughly 7 @.@ 5 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 13 percent of households watching TV , were tuned in to the episode . A total of 7 @.@ 1 million households watched this episode during its original airing . 
 In a retrospective of the first season in Entertainment Weekly , the episode was rated a B- . Scott Bairstow 's guest role was praised , though it was noted that " an ultimately contrived plot and a stereotypical Bible @-@ thumping Southern milieu make for a case more suited to Jessica Fletcher than Mulder and Scully " . Zack Handlen , writing for The A.V. Club , described it as " a largely predictable story that hits all the middle @-@ of @-@ the @-@ road marks " , finding the religious imagery to have been used to little effect . Matt Haigh , writing for Den of Geek , felt that the identity of the killer was one of the few endings amongst first season episodes that he had found genuinely surprising , though he attributed this to the episode 's focus on Mulder 's personal history . The use of Mulder 's visions of his sister Samantha as a motivation for his actions in this episode has been seen as " opening up " the overarching search for the truth about her through the series . The plot for " Miracle Man " was also adapted as a novel for young adults in 2000 by Terry Bisson . 
 = Operation Shed Light = 
 Operation Shed Light was a crash development project in aerial warfare , initiated in 1966 by the United States Air Force to increase the ability to accurately strike at night or in adverse weather . During the 1960s the United States military worked hard to interdict the movement of men and materiel along the Ho Chi Minh trail . The North Vietnamese were experts in the use of weather and darkness to conceal their movement , and understanding the superiority of American air power put their skills immediately to good use . US forces seeking to impede the steady flow of supplies attempted to locate largely static targets during the day with poor results . 
 The United States Air Force , focused toward nuclear weapons and delivery of such munitions against static strategic targets had spent little effort in expanding its tactical capabilities since the end of the World War II . Operation Shed Light sought to rectify this by bringing together improved tactics and technology . The programs were subsequently centered on improved communication and navigation aids for all @-@ weather and night flying , sensor equipment for seeing through clouds , foliage , and darkness , improved equipment and methods for target marking and battlefield illumination , and aircraft and tactics to utilize these developments . In the end , few of the programs would yield applicable results and most of the aircraft developed under its umbrella would largely fall into obscurity . The most applicable developments were those that could be mainstreamed such as the work done on navigation and communication and sensor equipment . 
 = = Origins = = 
 The United States Air Force had largely redirected its efforts to the matter of strategic deterrence in the period between the Korean War and deployment to southeast Asia . As a result , it had few serious capabilities for the plethora of conventional missions that became readily apparent with the expanding US commitment to southeast Asia . Dedicated attack aircraft were virtually nonexistent , with the exception of the Korean War era A @-@ 1 Skyraider . The US Navy was still using the type at the time , and the US Air Force had itself been long interested in the type , with this further reinforced as a result of its advisory role in South Vietnam . The US supported Vietnam Air Force was in fact using it as their primary aircraft by 1965 . These aircraft had directly replaced aging F8F Bearcats in 1962 and the decision was made in 1964 to transition to the type from the then standard T @-@ 28 Trojans . 
 As a result of the orientation toward nuclear war , tactical air strikes were flown almost exclusively by the US Air Force between 1964 and 1966 using a variety of fighter bombers intended initially for the delivery of small strategic and tactical nuclear weapons . These types included the F @-@ 100 Super Sabre , F @-@ 4 Phantom II , and even the F @-@ 104 Starfighter . The F @-@ 100 had two fighter bomber variants in service at the time , the F @-@ 100C and F @-@ 100D , both of which were capable of carrying a nuclear store , and only the latter of which was primarily for use as a strike aircraft and not a fighter . The F @-@ 100C had largely been passed to the United States Air National Guard and by 1965 less than two hundred of the aircraft were capable of using cluster bombs or even the largely standard AIM @-@ 9 Sidewinder air @-@ to @-@ air missile . The F @-@ <unk> , a fighter bomber version of another fighter , though capable of utilizing conventional air @-@ to @-@ ground stores , was intended as a nuclear weapon delivery platform . Only the F @-@ 4C and F @-@ 4D were available as a true multirole aircraft , and the F @-@ 4C had still been used firstly as a fighter when deployed to the theater . The only other major non @-@ fighter type in use early on in the conflict was the B @-@ 57 Canberra . Strikes in Laos were even conducted for a time using the F @-@ 102 Delta Dagger , modified with infrared sensors , and using its internal rocket armament . These strikes proved largely fruitless and were quickly discontinued . 
 Realizing the need for more dedicated attack aircraft the Air Force combed its inventory and looked to invest in new types . It found itself with an odd selection of obsolete , new , and experimental aircraft , and grasped for immediate solutions . To try and coordinate this effort , a task force was established by Lt. General James Ferguson , then Deputy Chief of Staff for Research and Development . Dubbed Operation Shed Light , it began on 7 February 1966 as a means of coordinating a wide variety of technological and other projects and programs that were being pursued in order to improve the United States Air Force ’ s night fighting capabilities . Outlined in the Task Force ’ s charter as of April were the following : 
 Identify current equipment , techniques , and procedures being used by the USAF in Southeast Asia . 
 Identify planned modifications and new equipment being developed for Southeast Asia . 
 Survey exploratory , advanced development , and operational support projects having a potential application to the problem , indicating current programs or schedules . 
 Identify voids in our capabilities or efforts . 
 Recommend courses of action to improve and / or provide new attack capability in 1966 , 1967 , and the longer term . 
 In all , the Shed Light Task Force identified nine new weapon systems and seventy @-@ seven research and development “ tasks ” in the first five months of operation . Over the next 5 – 10 years it hoped to have a fully functional " self @-@ contained night attack aircraft , " a single type that would meet the operational need and would be functionally useful in other similar situations . 
 = = Initial programs = = 
 Shed Light ’ s initial programs were broken down into a number of categories , the most important being communication and navigation systems , sensors , and illumination and target marking equipment . Also detailed were proposed aircraft modifications and tactics . 
 = = = Communication and navigation = = = 
 Issues of communication and navigation were identified under Shed Light . That air strikes could not be called in effectively and / or guided to the target reduced the effectiveness of air power overall . A variety of communication system improvements and navigational aids , including improvements to the Long @-@ Range Navigation ( LORAN ) system ( specifically LORAN @-@ D ) were incorporated into the Shed Light mission . 
 = = = Sensors = = = 
 The sensors to be developed under Shed Light were broken into three categories , Low Light Level TV ( LLLTV ) , Forward Looking Infrared ( FLIR ) , and Forward Looking Radar ( FLR ) . 
 Two LLLTV systems were in development initially . Both were podded , designed to be added to aircraft already in USAF inventory . The first , produced by <unk> @-@ Victor under Project 1533 , was LLLTV only , but had provision for a laser range finder . It was intended for the A @-@ 1E Skyraider . The second , produced by Westinghouse under Project <unk> , contained both the LLLTV and a laser ranger finder . It was intended for either the A @-@ 1E or B @-@ 57 Canberra series . The second unit would eventually be fitted to the B @-@ <unk> . The two programs were named projects Tropic Moon I and Tropic Moon II respectively . The Tropic Moon I system was essentially obsolete before it was deployed , and tests quickly confirmed this . Only 4 A @-@ <unk> were so equipped . The results from the Tropic Moon II B @-@ <unk> were almost as discouraging , with 456 trucks detected on 182 sorties , for only 39 confirmed kills . Both systems were removed from the theatre by the end of 1968 . 
 A prototype FLIR unit had been tested under Project Red Sea in a DC @-@ 3 at Eglin AFB , and later in an AC @-@ 47 in South Vietnam in September 1965 . Using technology developed from those tests , Project Lonesome Tiger was initiated , testing a FLIR unit on two B @-@ 26 Invader aircraft . Climate was found to have serious effects on the units , especially humidity , and this fit was not to be put into widespread use . Improvised mounting of “ starlight scope [ s ] ” in the bomb bay of the B @-@ 26 is also mentioned in oral history reports , and this fit was found to be largely impractical . 
 = = = Illumination equipment and target marking = = = 
 Battlefield illumination was of key importance within the original Shed Light programs . The dominant aerial flare at the time was the Mk 24 Mod 0 , developed by the US Navy . Reliability of the units , however , were in question , as was availability . Perhaps of greater concern was existing test data in 1966 that suggested pilot disorientation and flare placement were serious issues . Project Night Owl , conducted in 1954 , testing flares dropped from F @-@ 86 Sabre aircraft , led to twenty @-@ five percent of pilots reporting experiencing some level of vertigo . Ironically , initial studies showed that in correcting this problem , issues of insufficient illumination were experienced . 
 A new flare , designated MLU @-@ 32 / B99 , also referred to as <unk> , was put into development . The new flare burned at 5 million candle power for over five minutes and produced a signal that could be heard by pilots indicating when it was about to burn out . Additionally , the Navy ’ s Mk 33 Mod 0 flare warhead for the 5 ” Mk 16 “ Zuni ” rocket motor was tested under Shed Light . Projected delays in the procurement of the MLU @-@ 32 / B99 led to a proposal to test the Swedish Lepus flare as an interim measure . The Lepus flare was tested , but found to be inferior to the MLU @-@ 32 / B99 . 
 The issues surrounding flares led to exploration of other methods of battlefield illumination . The Battlefield Illumination Airborne System or <unk> , employed two banks of Xenon ARC lamps ( 28 total ) fitted to a modified C @-@ <unk> aircraft . A cooling system was installed on the left side of the aircraft to help dissipate the heat generated . The system was deployed to Vietnam , but it was found that the lamps provided a perfect target for enemy gunners and the system was discontinued . Initially it had been proposed that a similar system be installed on the more capable C @-@ 130 , but the experience during the operational trials brought the whole program to a halt . 
 More unorthodox methods were also explored . <unk> International developed a so @-@ called “ Quartz Chamber ” which burned pure oxygen and aircraft fuel , converting the chemical energy into light . The system was planned to be evaluated within a year , and installed in a similar arrangement to the more conventional <unk> . A plan , codenamed Moonshine , was also put forward . Moonshine was to be a joint effort with NASA to determine the feasibility of a geosynchronous satellite that could in project light directly down on any desired location . 
 Ground target marking , which was a key tactic for day time strikes , was investigated . Project 2531 was to investigate target marking munitions , and looked into warheads for the Mk 40 2 @.@ 75 ” rocket motor , using a variety of <unk> materials . These were to be loaded with compounds developed under the US Navy ’ s Target Illumination and Recovery Aid ( <unk> ) program . Initially they used modified <unk> high @-@ explosive warheads , but found the amount of compound that could be contained provided poor results . The Shed Light Task Force noted that a lighter case for these compounds was in development . A combination of red phosphorus and a flare was investigated in an attempt to provide a system that could be used at night or during the day . 
 = = = Aircraft and tactics = = = 
 The key aircraft intended to be developed under Shed Light was to be a “ Self Contained Night Attack ” aircraft or SCNA . The SCNA would have “ the necessary night sensors and weapon delivery capability to find and strike targets at night one the first pass without the use of visible artificial illumination . ” 
 However , to provide an interim capability , the idea of using a “ Hunter @-@ Killer ” concept using aircraft capable of spotting targets at night and more or less unmodified conventional strike aircraft was proposed . This method had many identified disadvantages , including the need for specialized aircraft and capability differences between the hunter and the killer that might affect their combined operation . The need for specialized aircraft was further exposed by the fact that only three aircraft at all suitable for the hunter role were available to the US military in southeast Asia as of 1966 . These included the Army ’ s OV @-@ 1B Mohawk , and the USAF ’ s RF @-@ 4C Phantom II and RB @-@ <unk> Canberra aircraft . There were only two RB @-@ <unk> aircraft in country at the time , under a special reconnaissance project codenamed Patricia Lynn , and the aircraft were essentially experimental . They also featured <unk> VI FLIR units , which was an older technology than those being developed under Shed Light . The RF @-@ 4C had the benefit of being of a similar capability to strike aircraft at the time , and a modified hunter version , given a designation RF @-@ 4C ( H ) was to be developed , replacing the camera equipment with LLLTV , FLIR , and Side @-@ Looking Radar ( <unk> ) units . 
 A three @-@ phase program had been outlined as early as 1966 for development of the SCNA . The first would be a slower bomber or cargo aircraft , followed , by a jet aircraft of some type . The F @-@ 111 was originally slated to become the key SCNA aircraft . It was ultimately hoped it would incorporate the final versions of all three types of sensors ( LLLTV , FLIR , and FLR ) developed under the program . In the initial study , an “ RF @-@ 111 ” was also supposed to be available in the 3 – 7 year time frame for use in the hunter @-@ killer pairing . This time frame led the initial study report to propose using the OV @-@ 10 Bronco aircraft in the interim measure , but decided against it because of the inability of the OV @-@ 10 to carry all the desired sensor equipment . As it turned out that while the RF @-@ 111A did enter testing in December 1967 , it was not easily convertible to and from the existing F @-@ 111A configuration . The Air Force looked for alternatives , but the revised RF @-@ <unk> program was terminated because of a funding shortage in September 1969 and the RF @-@ 111A program was cut for good by March 1970 . 
 With the decision not to use the OV @-@ 10 and the desire for an immediate capability , the USAF decided to investigate using the S @-@ 2 Tracker aircraft . The proposed aircraft would incorporate the three main sensors under development in a revised aircraft that provided operators for all major systems . The S @-@ 2 ’ s built @-@ in search light was to be slaved to the LLLTV , crew protection would be provided , and the armament system would be primarily 10 SUU @-@ 24 / A munitions dispensers in a revised bomb bay . Six wing hard points would be available for additional conventional munitions including bombs , rockets , cluster munitions and dispensers , and gun pods . Interestingly enough , the program package documentation suggests that the “ XM @-@ 9 ” would be the primary under @-@ wing store . The <unk> designation is the US Army designation for the SUU @-@ 7 / A low @-@ drag dispenser pod modified for use on the UH @-@ 1B / C Iroquois helicopter . The two planned pre @-@ production aircraft were to be designated <unk> @-@ 2D , while the production aircraft would have been AS @-@ 2D . Difficulties in funding , getting the aircraft from the US Navy , and delays in completing the modifications led the USAF to scrap the S @-@ 2 based SCNA in January 1968 . 
 The F @-@ 111 would initially have a mixed record in Southeast Asia , when a detachment of six aircraft from the 474th Tactical Fighter Wing were deployed to Takhli RTAFB in Thailand , in early 1968 , as part of Operation Combat Lancer . The remaining aircraft were returned to the United States in November after logging 55 missions , but at the cost of three F @-@ 111A 's lost in combat . Eventually the aircraft redeemed itself when two squadrons ( 48 F @-@ 111As ) from the 474th deployed to Takhli in September 1972 , in order to participate in the aerial offensive against North Vietnam under Operation Linebacker II . During this deployment the F @-@ 111s operated day and night , in all weather conditions and without electronic countermeasures escort , and relied on less aerial refueling support than other tactical aircraft . Eventually over 4000 missions were logged by the two F @-@ 111 @-@ equipped units at the cost of six aircraft lost in combat and two lost to operational causes . However , by this point in time , the aircraft was no longer earmarked for conversion into the SCNA role . 
 = = Black Spot = = 
 Perhaps the most radical of Shed Light 's projects were two C @-@ 123K Provider aircraft modified in September 1965 under Project Black Spot . Black Spot had been in development prior to the establishment of the Shed Light Task Force , but were subsequently incorporated in under the wide reaching charter . With the scrapping of the AS @-@ 2D aircraft program in 1968 , the Black Spot aircraft became the prime contenders for Shed Light ’ s first phase . 
 The Black Spot aircraft were to fit under the " self @-@ contained night attack capability " description and E @-@ Systems of Greenville , Texas was contracted to complete the modifications . These aircraft featured the following sensors : 
 Autonetics ( A division of North American Aviation ) R @-@ 132 forward looking radar ( FLR ) to locate targets for closer inspection via Low Light Level TV ( LLLTV ) and Forward Looking Infrared ( FLIR ) , and featured a Moving Target Indicator ( MTI ) and automatic tracking capability . 
 An Avco FLIR . 
 Westinghouse LLLTV , with automatic tracking . 
 A Westinghouse laser rangefinder . 
 The LLLTV system was described as having the highest resolution , and was to be the primary means of target location and engagement . The aircraft itself looked radically different visibly from its transport brethren , as the new equipment required lengthening the nose by over 50 inches . 
 Also included was an armament system that could carry BLU @-@ 3 / B ( using the ADU @-@ 253 / B adapter ) or BLU @-@ 26 / B ( using the ADU @-@ 272 / B adapter ) bomblets , or CBU @-@ 68 / Bs cluster bombs . Both the ADU @-@ <unk> / B and ADU @-@ <unk> / B are listed as being used in combat , with no mention of combat drops of CBU @-@ 68 / Bs . In addition to the offensive armament , two hand operated flare launchers were initially provided , until LAU @-@ 74 / A automatic launchers could be supplied . Besides the automated nature of the LAU @-@ 74 / A , the unit only required one loadmaster to operate it . 
 The two aircraft , serial numbers 54 @-@ 691 and 54 @-@ 698 , were first designated NC @-@ 123K in 1968 and then redesignated AC @-@ 123K in 1969 . These NC / AC @-@ 123Ks were first deployed operationally at Osan in South Korea between August and October 1968 , and flying in support of operations against North Korean infiltrators approaching by boat . The operations in Korea met with a certain level of success and as a result the NC / AC @-@ 123Ks were transferred to South Vietnam in November 1968 . 
 Once in South Vietnam the aircraft were engaged in missions against the transport of materiel along Ho Chi Minh Trail and in the Mekong Delta Region . The aircraft operated there until January 1969 , when they were redeployed to Ubon <unk> , Thailand . Two missions a night were flown from Ubon with two A @-@ 1 escorts from Nakhon Phanom <unk> ( often referred to simply as NKP ) flying cover and providing additional firepower . Initial escort had been provided by F @-@ 4s , but the difference in speed and capabilities had made protecting the lower and slower flying NC / AC @-@ 123Ks difficult . The area of responsibility for the first six months was approximately 100 nm east southeast from NKP . After that , the area of coverage was a river in southern Laos . 
 The two aircraft were returned to the United States , to Hurlburt Field , Florida in May 1969 , where a second round of training occurred . Four crews attended a ground school in Greenville , Texas and returned to Hurlburt where they flew the aircraft for the first time . In October 1969 two crews flew the aircraft to a second deployment at Ubon . The other two crews arrived in early November . After attending jungle survival training at Clark AB in the Philippines missions over Laos commenced . 
 The final phases of the program are slightly unclear . Some sources have missions terminating in early July , 1970 and the aircraft flying to the " Bone Yard " at Davis @-@ Monthan AFB where they were returned to C @-@ 123K standard , then returned to South Vietnam still wearing their camouflage and black undersides for transport duty . The description of the designation in the official documentation supports this , by saying that the NC @-@ 123K is " Similar to C @-@ 123K but partially <unk> from AC @-@ 123K ( modified to an attack configuration ) to permit general cargo handling and troop movement . " 
 However , the official history states that combat operations ceased 11 May 1969 , with no mention of the second deployment . The second deployment is mentioned in associated documentation , but only as to when the aircraft were scheduled to arrive in Thailand , not when they departed . Also , the official aircraft records show both aircraft as transferred to Napier Field , Alabama , where they were still listed as an NC @-@ 123K as of December 1972 . The purpose of this transfer is unclear . That the official history notes an " munitions accident " on 19 March 1969 in the chronology , but without any details as to the fate of aircraft or which aircraft was affected , adds additional confusion . 
 It is also suggested that the Black Spot aircraft were never intended to be used in combat . However , as of 1966 20 production aircraft were planned , for a total cost of $ 64 @.@ 7 million . There was even a recommendation that the C @-@ 130 Hercules be added to the program and used instead . These projected aircraft were referred to as a Black Spot II . After the Operation Trial and Evaluation , it was found that the aircraft were not suitably protected and survivable for protracted use in combat zones . No C @-@ 130 aircraft are known to have been converted to a Black Spot II standard . 
 = = Tropic Moon III = = 
 Shed Light ’ s Second phase eventually turned out to be based on the B @-@ 57 . B @-@ 57 aircraft had already been deployed to southeast Asia and had been the subject of initial sensor evaluations under Tropic Moon II . Tropic Moon III was envisioned as an SCNA that made up for the gross shortcomings of Tropic Moon I and II . 
 Tropic Moon III involved a completely new set of systems , up to date , and infinitely more capable than those previously installed . An entire new aircraft sub @-@ variant , the B @-@ 57G , was developed for the purpose with a redefined nose to house the new sensor package . Development of the aircraft experienced major delays during which it was equipped with a laser target designated to be used with the then new first @-@ generation Pave Way laser @-@ guided bombs . 
 In the end the Tropic Moon III proved to be a capable system , both with conventional ordnance and laser guided weapons , day and night . However , the advent of the side @-@ firing gunship threatened the system . The B @-@ 57G conducted its first combat missions in October 1970 during Operation Commando Hunt V. The kill rates per sortie between the AC @-@ 130A / E and the B @-@ 57G made it clear which system was dominant in the role of " truck hunter , " in reference to the primary targets of the campaign . During the course of the operation the B @-@ 57G 's claimed over 2 @,@ 000 trucks destroyed , mostly as a result of using precision guided weaponry . In the same period AC @-@ 130s were credited with destroying six times this number of trucks . While B @-@ 57G operations continued , this led to an attempt to modify the system to incorporate gunship elements . One B @-@ 57G was modified to house a special bomb bay installation of one Emerson TAT @-@ 161 turret with a single M61 20mm cannon as a gunship under Project Pave Gat . This system proved to still be inferior to the capabilities of the AC @-@ 130 . 
 In addition to their laser guided ordnance , Tropic Moon III B @-@ <unk> also used a variety of conventional ordnance , including M36 incendiaries , cluster dispensers , and iron bombs . These other systems were used in light of a shortage of precision guided munitions available . 
 The B @-@ 57G was removed from the theatre in May 1972 coinciding with the withdrawal of the bulk of US Air Elements . Plans remained for the continuation of the B @-@ 57G program and there were proposals for multiple wings of aircraft to operate in concert with AC @-@ 130s and similar aircraft . Post @-@ conflict spending cuts ended this . 
 = = Other associated programs = = 
 Other programs were also associated with Shed Light , either coming under its wide @-@ reaching charter , or otherwise being observed . Similar mission requirements meant other services were working on developing their own equipment , and the Shed Light Task Force was under orders from the start to survey all other development ( see the original 1966 charter ) . 
 The US Army had been managing a piece of equipment referred to as S @-@ 202 , which combined four IR cameras , a display , and operator chains , an artificial illumination component ( described as “ covert – UV , ” using Ultraviolet light to provide illumination ) , and a freeze display function . Under Project Night Life , the S @-@ 202 it was to be tested on a S @-@ 61 helicopter by early 1967 . The project itself was being funded by the Advanced Research Projects Agency ( ARPA ) . 
 The Army was also working on Project Dancing Dolls , which was attempting to develop a “ foliage penetration radar . ” Triple canopy jungle in Laos meant that being able to see at night might not be enough to acquire a target . The system was being tested on OV @-@ 1 aircraft then in use by the Army , but the USAF envisioned the radar as a component on the planned SCNA F @-@ 111s . This program and continued investigations into hunter @-@ killer combinations led to the OV @-@ 1B ( using <unk> ) and OV @-@ 1C ( using FLIR ) aircraft being deployed themselves as hunters , teaming up with gunship aircraft during Operation Commando Hunt . 
 = = Summary = = 
 No report on the effectiveness of Operation Shed Light as a whole exists . It is known that there was some discontent among some of its major participants . General John D. Ryan , Commander in Chief of the Pacific Air Forces , complained following the poor showings from the Tropic Moon II program that he was “ tired of buying everything they send us . ” He then requested that his staff draft a message that would allow him to send “ this thing [ the Tropic Moon II B @-@ <unk> ] to <unk> [ Continental United States ] . ” Even in regards to the development of the Tropic Moon III aircraft , the Aeronautical Systems Division was forced to admit that the myriad of delays in that program had been caused by " reduced quality control " springing from the " crash " nature of the program . 
 Shed Light was a crash development project , and was largely unguided . It was tasked with research and development of almost any piece of equipment that might help with the mission outlined in its charter . As a result , few of the programs came to fruition and fewer still left a definitive mark on the conflict . The developments under Shed Light were quickly eclipsed by new aircraft produced under Project Gunship ( notably under Gunship II and Gunship III ) . They were fitted with many of the sensors developed under Shed Light , but took on a life all their own . Shed Light ’ s most visible programs , Black Spot and Tropic Moon , have largely fallen into obscurity . 
 = Bucentaur = 
