 In addition to his real estate and construction ventures , Swisher was an organizer and secretary of the Royalty Oil Company , which owned mining rights to approximately 16 @,@ 000 acres ( 65 km2 ) of prospective oil lands throughout the southern and southwestern United States . He built and operated the Swisher Theater in Morgantown . Swisher was also a director of the Valley Wood Working Company , the owner of the Monongahela Valley Posting and Distributing Plant , and the secretary of the Federal Savings and Trust Company prior to 1903 . By 1913 , he was the president of the West Virginia Tri @-@ Products Company , which invested in coal and oil production , glass manufacturing , and the production of timber and fruit . Swisher maintained fruit growing interests on South Branch Mountain ( known as Jersey Mountain ) in Hampshire County , and served as the president of the South Branch Merchandising Company . 
 = = Writing career = = 
 During his travels , Swisher contributed articles and poetry to newspapers throughout the Northwest . While attending West Virginia University , he published a small book containing approximately 600 lines of poetry , which he dedicated to his classmates . In 1897 , Swisher co @-@ authored History of Hampshire County , West Virginia : From Its Earliest Settlement to the Present with West Virginia historian Hu Maxwell . The book was the first comprehensive history of Hampshire County ever compiled . He composed a collection of poetry and short stories titled Briar Blossoms , which was published by his Acme Publishing Company in 1899 . Swisher was the editor of The Ghourki , a literary journal of poetry , short stories , and aphorisms . He began each issue with an introductory commentary entitled " Harangues to the Ghourki " in which he referred to himself as the " Chief of the Tribe " . In 1908 , Swisher published Book of Harangues , a selection of passages from The Ghourki . 
 = = Politics = = 
 Swisher was an active member of the West Virginia Democratic Party . In 1900 , he was selected as a candidate for State Superintendent of Free Schools . In the 1902 general election , he ran as the Democratic candidate for the Eleventh District of the West Virginia State Senate . Despite his loss , Swisher received the largest number of Democratic votes ever amassed in Monongalia County up until that time . Swisher was a delegate at the 1936 Democratic National Convention in Philadelphia , and was selected as an alternate delegate to the Democratic National Conventions of 1912 and 1924 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In August 1897 , Swisher married Mary Dering of Morgantown , daughter of Edward A. Dering and his wife , Cordelia Walker Dering of Morgantown . Both the Dering and Walker families , from which Swisher 's wife descended , had arrived in the Colony of Virginia during its earlier periods of settlement . 
 Swisher was a member of the Morgantown Union Lodge No. 4 of the Free and Accepted Masons , Morgantown Lodge No. 411 of the Benevolent and Protective Order of Elks , the Morgantown Chamber of Commerce , the Kiwanis Club , the Country Club , and the Old Colony Club . Swisher served on the Old Colony Club 's National Advisory Council . 
 On August 27 , 1945 , Swisher died of a cerebral hemorrhage due to hypertension at his residence at 80 Donley Street in Morgantown . Swisher was interred on August 30 , 1945 at Oak Grove Cemetery in Morgantown 's Chancery Hill Historic District . 
 = = Selected works = = 
 History of Hampshire County , West Virginia : From Its Earliest Settlement to the Present . 1897 . Co @-@ authored with Hu Maxwell . 
 Briar Blossoms : Being a Collection of a Few Verses and Some Prose . 1899 . 
 Book of Harangues . 1908 . 
 = Camber Castle = 
 Camber Castle , also known formerly as Winchelsea Castle , is a 16th @-@ century Device Fort , built near Rye by King Henry VIII to protect the Sussex coast of England against French attack . The first fortification on the site was a small , round artillery tower , constructed by Henry between 1512 and 1514 , overlooking the Camber anchorage and the entrance to Rye Harbour . In 1539 , increasing tensions with France encouraged Henry to rethink his coastal defence plans , and Camber Castle was rebuilt and extended over the next year under the direction of the Moravian engineer , Stefan von Haschenperg . The results were considered unsatisfactory and further work was carried out from 1542 to 1543 , at great expense , to rectify the problems . The result was a large , concentric artillery fort , with a central keep , surrounded by four circular bastions and a circular entrance bastion , built from stone and brick . 
 The finished castle was initially equipped with 28 brass and iron artillery guns and a garrison of 28 men , commanded by a captain . It may have seen service in 1545 when a French fleet attacked the coast , but its operational value was short lived . The Camber and the surrounding harbours began to silt up , becoming unusable by shipping , and the coastline receded away from the fort , eventually placing it well in @-@ land . Furthermore , the fort had been superseded by newer European military designs even before it had been completed , and peace with France later in the century removed much of the requirement for the fort . The castle still remained operational up until 1637 , when it was closed by King Charles I. With the outbreak of civil war in 1642 , much of the fortification was dismantled by Parliamentary forces to prevent it being used by the Royalists . 
 The ruins became a popular spot for picnics in the 18th and 19th centuries , and was painted by J. M. W. Turner . Plans to redevelop the castle as a Martello tower or as a clubhouse for a local golf course came to nothing , although the property was used in the Second World War , probably as an early warning site . Archaeological interest in the fort increased after the war and in 1967 it was taken into the guardianship of the state , the property being bought from the private owners in 1977 . It is now operated by English Heritage , who reopened it to visitors after an extensive programme of conservation between 1968 and 1994 . The fort is an unusual example of an unmodified Device Fort and is protected under UK law as a Grade I listed building . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 16th – 17th centuries = = = 
 = = = = Initial tower , 1512 – 14 = = = = 
 Camber Castle was built approximately 1 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 93 mi ) between the ports of Rye and Winchelsea on the south coast of England , overlooking a body of water called the Camber , at the mouth of the Brede , Rother and Tillingham rivers . The two towns were part of the Cinque Ports , a strategic chain of maritime towns responsible for providing ships to the king 's navy , although Winchelsea 's harbour had silted up by the 16th century , limiting its utility , and similar problems were beginning to impact the port of Rye . The mouth of the Camber had also begun to silt up in the late medieval period , although in this case the process had created an important new anchorage for ships . 
 The first fortification at Camber may have been built shortly after 1486 by Sir Richard Guldeford , the Master of the Ordnance , who was given the manor of Higham by King Henry VII in exchange for Richard constructing a tower to protect the anchorage . There is no surviving evidence , however , to show if a tower was in fact built as Guldeford had promised , and Henry VII did not invest much in his coastal defences during the rest of his reign . Many castles across England were left in poor repair , often considered to be outdated and too expensive to maintain . 
 Henry VIII became king in 1509 and began to follow a more aggressive policy towards neighbouring France than his father . Tensions increased and in 1512 Henry ordered the construction of an artillery tower and a new bridge at Camber . The work was carried out by Edward Guldeford , Richard 's son , and cost £ 1 @,@ 309 over the next two years . The resulting circular stone tower was 64 feet ( 20 m ) across and around 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) high , occupying the shingle spit of <unk> Point and controlling the Camber and the port of Rye . It would have provided relatively limited facilities and living accommodation , and was probably not permanently garrisoned . 
 Despite being an artillery tower with a flat roof to carry heavy guns , the tower was not initially supplied with any artillery and was therefore unable to protect Rye against the hostile naval expeditions which attacked the coast in the 1520s . After many letters to from Guldeford to the Lord Chancellor , Cardinal Thomas Wolsey , some guns finally arrived around 1536 in the form of wrought iron serpentines . <unk> concerns began to be raised in the mid @-@ 1530s about whether the Camber might silt up further and ultimately become unusable as an anchorage . 
 = = = = Concentric design , 1539 – 40 = = = = 
 In 1539 the threat of invasion from France and Spain grew and Henry issued orders for his coastal defences to be improved , creating a sequence of fortifications called the Device Forts across England . These were intended to carry artillery pieces able to engage enemy naval vessels should they approach the coast , and to deter any enemy landings . As part of this programme of work , Camber Castle was considerably expanded at a cost of £ 5 @,@ 660 . 
 The first phase of this work took place from 1539 until autumn 1540 . The Moravian engineer Stefan von Haschenperg was responsible for the design of the fort , being paid the substantial salary of £ 75 a year for his work on this and other similar projects , including Calshot , Hurst , Sandgate and Sandown . Philip Chute , John Fletcher and William Oxenbridge , all prominent local men , served as the commissioners for the project , Oxenbridge becoming the pay master . Finding sufficient numbers of workmen was difficult and some had to be pressed into service unwillingly . More artillery pieces were sent to the castle ahead of the work being completed , and were probably installed in temporary battery positions around the castle site . 
 Initially the old tower was converted into a stronger keep which was able to support artillery guns on its roof , a gatehouse was built alongside it , four stirrup towers – so @-@ called because of their shape – a curtain wall was constructed around the outside of the castle , and bastions erected around the wall . Towards the end of this phase of work the castle was altered in a frantic burst of work , possibly driven on by pressure from the King himself . The height of the curtain wall was increased , the gatehouse extended into an entrance bastion , a new network of underground passages installed , and <unk> added around the outside of the bastions . By the end of 1540 the castle was garrisoned with 17 men and equipped with artillery , with Chute appointed as its captain . 
 The result was a concentric fortress , which von Haschenperg had hoped would combine the best of Italian military architecture , able to carry heavy guns but with a low profile to protect against any incoming artillery fire . Various flaws rapidly became apparent . The castle 's design had focused on defence , with the result that the guns could not easily be brought to bear on enemy vessels , which had been the original intent of building the fortification by the Camber ; some of the angles of fire from the defences were blocked by the entrance and the high water table may have caused serious damp problems on the ground floor . Furthermore , the design was different from the other Device Forts constructed across the region and would have stood out as unusual and not in keeping with the King 's general intent for the chain of forts . 
 = = = = <unk> concentric design , 1542 – 43 = = = = 
 As a result of the problems with the original design , in summer 1542 work recommenced on the castle , well after the initial invasion scare was over , lasting until August 1543 . The decision to rectify the problems with the castle may have been taken by King Henry himself . Oxenbridge appears to have stayed on as the pay master and acted as the master of the works , with von Haschenperg remaining in his role as engineer almost until the end of the project , despite the difficulties with his earlier work . The cost of the second phase of work was much higher than the first , around £ 10 @,@ 000 . 
 The design was rather different to von Haschenperg 's first castle . The keep and the stirrup towers were raised in height , the level of the floors elevated , the curtain wall was strengthened , the old bastions entirely removed and four new , larger bastions added in their place , while the older <unk> around the castle were demolished . The keep 's flat roof was altered to a pitched design , and the guns that it had supported moved into the outlying bastions . Although the size of the castle had slightly decreased , the new design had much more domestic space available for the garrison . 
 In practice , even the revised design ignored the acute @-@ angled bastions which had been introduced in Europe , the round towers creating numerous patches of dead ground around the castle into which its guns could not fire ; the high walls presented a greater target , the internal design was complicated and it remained difficult to move around inside the fort . Indeed , the historian Peter Harrington describes the final design as even " more archaic than its predecessor " . Chute 's role was extended to become the Keeper and Captain of Camber , and the Keeper of the Waters of Camber and Puddle in January 1544 , for which he was paid two shillings a day . Haschenperg left England in disgrace in 1544 , facing complaints that he was " a man who will pretend more knowledge than he hath indeed " . 
 The bulk of the stone for the two phases of the project was acquired by demolishing monastic buildings in Winchelsea , and by purchasing it from the nearby Fairlight and Hastings quarries . Higher quality stone was bought from <unk> in Hampshire , and from various suppliers in Normandy . Timber was acquired from <unk> , Appledore and Knell , the latter two lumber @-@ felling operations being run directly by the Camber project team . Chalk was brought from Dover to manufacture lime , and at least 16 @,@ 000 bricks initially purchased to make the necessary kilns , with possibly over 500 @,@ 000 further bricks being manufactured locally as the work progressed . Steel , iron and tiles were bought locally in Sussex , along with a 10 metric tons ( 9 @.@ 8 long tons ; 11 short tons ) crane for the project 's quay . 
 = = = = Operational use = = = = 
 The castle was already obsolete by the time it had been completed , as European military design had moved beyond curved bastions , embracing the angular designs seen in the later star forts . Nonetheless , it remained operational as an artillery fort for the rest of the century , with an initial garrison in 1540 of 24 men under the command of Chute , rising to 28 men and the captain after 1542 . Although it had been fitted with gunloops for handguns from the very start , the castle initially relied heavily on archers for its own protection against attack from the land . It had stocks of 140 longbows and 560 sheaves of arrows in 1568 , for example , probably for use by the local militia in the event of a war . <unk> were also stored there in considerable numbers , again probably for use by the militia . 
 Initially the fort was equipped with between 26 and 28 artillery pieces , including brass demi @-@ cannons , culverins , demi @-@ culverins and a falcon , and wrought @-@ iron guns , such as portpieces , bases and slings . After 1568 , the castle typically held around nine or ten guns for most of the 16th century , including cannons , demi @-@ cannons , culverins and demi @-@ culverins . Brass guns could fire more quickly , up to eight times an hour , and were safer to use than their iron equivalents . It is uncertain how far the castle 's guns could have reached ; analysis carried out in the 16th and 17th century on the ranges of artillery suggested that a culverin , for example , could hit at a target up to between 1 @,@ 600 metres ( 5 @,@ 200 ft ) and 2 @,@ 743 metres ( 8 @,@ 999 ft ) away . 
 In July 1545 , the French carried out a raid at nearby Seaford , and the castle may have seen action against the French fleet . Soon , however , silt began to block the entrance to the Camber , threatening its use as an anchorage . Complaints were made to Parliament about the situation in 1548 , and the authorities in Rye expressed fears in 1573 that the Camber was damaged beyond repair . By the end of the century , the reclamation of the surrounding marshes and the dumping of ballast by passing ships had accelerated the natural processes and the anchorage was ruined . The surrounding region was also less strategically important than it had once been : towns like Winchelsea and Rye were in decline , peace had been made with France in 1558 and military attention shifted towards the Spanish threat to the south @-@ west of England . 
 The castle was garrisoned from 1553 onwards by between 26 to 27 men , including 17 gunners ; they were led by a captain , Thomas Wilford having taken over this role by 1570 . As the century went on , the castle became difficult to maintain . By 1568 the gun platforms were reported to be in " utter <unk> and decay " , with repairs projected to be likely to cost around £ 60 , although it is unclear whether the repairs were carried out . Tensions between Spain and England rose , and in 1584 Queen Elizabeth I spent £ 171 on repairs to the castle amid fresh fears of an invasion . War broke out the next year , and in 1588 , the year of the Spanish Armada , a Jesuit priest called Father <unk> , and Roger Walton , a spy in the pay of the Spanish , made plans to hand over the castle to an invading force of French and Spanish soldiers , although the conspiracy never came to fruition . 
 In 1593 there was a fresh crisis with Spain and the brass guns needed for the English navy were in short supply . Brass artillery pieces were therefore rounded up from the forts along the south coast , including Camber . The number of guns at the castle remained around the same , but the larger , brass culverins and demi @-@ cannon were removed , being replaced with smaller iron demi @-@ culverins , sakers and a minion . In 1594 another royal survey suggested that £ 95 of repair work was needed on the fortifications . 
 = = = 17th – 19th centuries = = = 
 = = = = Closure and English Civil War = = = = 
 Camber Castle went through several changes at the start of the 17th century . In 1610 , Peter Temple was appointed as captain of the castle , and between 1610 and 1614 the garrison was reduced to 14 soldiers , including only 4 gunners , either as an effort to reduce costs or as a result of the changing types of artillery kept at the castle . The north and south bastions were filled in to form solid gun platforms around approximately 1613 and 1615 , and an earth rampart called the Rampire was built up against the south corner of the castle . These solid bastions would have sacrificed living space , less in demand with a smaller garrison , but been much cheaper to maintain . <unk> fell out of use in warfare as archery in England declined , and were replaced by arquebuses and muskets , 46 of which were kept at the castle in 1614 . 
 Sir John Temple took over as captain in 1615 , being replaced by Robert Bacon by 1618 . The fortification was now both antiquated and too far from the receding sea to be useful . In 1623 it was suggested that the castle should be closed , and King Charles I was briefed on the dilapidated condition of the fortification , which was now reportedly around 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) from the sea . The local towns campaigned to keep the castle operational but in 1636 Charles issued an instruction to demolish it ; the garrison , by now led by Captain Thomas Porter , left the next year , followed by the artillery . 
 When civil war broke out in 1642 between the supporters of Charles and those of Parliament , Camber Castle had not been entirely closed and was being used as a royal munitions store . The citizens of Rye sided with Parliament , which agreed that the weapons and stores in the castle should be removed and taken to the town for safe @-@ keeping . Concerned that it might be seized by Royalist forces , Parliament went on to dismantle the castle over the next year , stripping the lead from the roof , blocking up the gunports and demolishing the living accommodation . As a result , Camber Castle was not used by the Royalists during the Second English Civil War in 1648 , despite several other of the Device Forts along the south coast being occupied . 
 = = = = Ruins = = = = 
 After the Restoration of Charles II to the throne in 1660 , a royal survey of the castle found the fortification to be in ruins . An increasing number of visitors came to see the castle in the 18th and 19th centuries , with the north @-@ east corner becoming a popular site for picnics . Writing in 1785 , the antiquarian Francis Grose attributed the decline of the fortification to the changes in the local harbours and the superiority of the British Navy in protecting the coasts , observing that the castle 's architecture " clearly shew the low state of military architecture " during the 16th century in England . 
 In response to the threat posed by France during the Napoleonic Wars , Lieutenant Colonel John Brown surveyed the castle in 1804 to examine whether the central keep could be turned into a Martello tower , a type of circular gun tower popular during this period . The scheme was not taken forward , although the defences of the surrounding coast line were much improved by the government . The painter J. M. W. Turner visited between 1805 and 1807 during the middle of this work , later depicting the castle in landscape paintings and sketches of the area . 
 = = = 20th – 21st centuries = = = 
 At the start of the 20th century Camber Castle and the surrounding farmland remained in private ownership and open to visitors . In the 1931 there was a proposal to turn the keep into a golf clubhouse but the project was not taken forward and the facility was built at the nearby Castle Farm instead . A research team from the Victoria County History project visited the castle in 1935 , resulting in the first – albeit cursory – historical analysis and survey of the fortification being published two years later . 
 By the 1940s , the castle structures were mostly covered with rubble and debris , interwoven with pathways created by the movement of visitors over the years . During the Second World War , the castle was used by the British Army , possibly as an early warning site fitted with anti @-@ aircraft searchlights . In an area just to the north of the castle , the Starfish and Naval decoy sites were created to distract incoming German bombers from the town of Rye itself . Trenches were dug in the north bastion , and military training may have been conducted around the outskirts of the castle . 
 In the post @-@ war years , archaeological interest in the castle grew . From 1951 onwards the Ministry of Works carried out a long @-@ running research project into the Device Forts , the section on Camber being written by the historian Martin Biddle and finally published in 1982 . Biddle carried out an exploratory archaeological survey of the site in 1962 and the following year the ruins were closed to allow more extensive archaeological excavation by the Ministry . These were initially carried out by Biddle and Alan Cook , with support from local school children and from young offenders from the Borstal institution in Dover . 
 The state took Camber Castle into guardianship in 1967 , and the next year the government began a slow process of restoring the castle with the intention of eventually reopening it to the public , their efforts largely focusing on protecting the internal brick walls and wall @-@ cores . Further excavations followed in the 1970s and early 1980s . 
 In 1977 , the Department of National Heritage bought the castle from its owners . The government agency English Heritage took control of the castle in 1984 and a scheme to reopen the property to visitors was put forward in 1993 . This included a final assessment of the archaeological work of the previous decades , and the castle finally opened to the public again in 1994 . As of 2015 , the castle is open to visitors through guided tours organised by the Rye Harbour Nature Reserve . The site is protected under UK law as a Grade I listed building . 
 = = Architecture and landscape = = 
 = = = Landscape = = = 
 Camber Castle now lies on the Brede Level , a wide , reclaimed area of land between the modern towns of Rye and Winchelsea , about 1 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 93 mi ) from the sea . The surrounding pasture land is flat and only just above at sea @-@ level , marked with numerous ridges formed by the retreating coastline over the centuries . On the eastern side of the fortification is Castle Water , a large , 20th @-@ century gravel pit that is now flooded to form a wetland nature reserve . 
 A 1 @.@ 8 @-@ metre ( 5 ft 11 in ) defensive earthwork runs around the south and east sides of the castle ; this was probably originally topped by a stone wall and designed to protect the castle from the sea , which would have then been much closer . The remains of a raised causeway , which once linked the isolated castle to the mainland , leads away for a short distance to the south @-@ west from the earthwork before petering out . Marks from the holes that were dug to provide the materials for the infilling of the bastions in the early 17th century also survive around the outside of the castle . 
 = = = Architecture = = = 
 The three @-@ storey castle itself has changed little since its completion in 1544 , an incorporates elements from all of the three phases of building work in 1512 – 14 , 1539 – 40 and 1543 – 44 . It is now roofless but still standing up to 18 metres ( 59 @.@ 1 ft ) tall , and covers 0 @.@ 73 acres ( 0 @.@ 30 ha ) , almost as big as the largest of the Device Forts at Deal in Kent . The first tower on the site was built from fine @-@ grained yellow sandstone , with the later expansion making use of both yellow and grey sandstone , with imported Caen stone being used for the finer detailing . Ironstone , siltstone and brown sandstone rubble and boulders was used for the core of the castle walls , some of it taken from the local cliffs . 
 The castle would have been entered through the entrance bastion . The core of this building was constructed in the second phase of work on the castle and was initially a square one @-@ storey construct , 15 by 10 @.@ 5 metres ( 49 @.@ 2 by 34 @.@ 4 ft ) across , before being extended forward by an additional 9 metres ( 29 @.@ 5 ft ) to form a circular bastion ; an additional floor was then added on top in the third phase . The internal walls have mostly been destroyed , but the ground floor chambers would have been used for administration , and possibly as living rooms for the deputy captain . The first floor would have formed a high @-@ status set of chambers for the use of the captain , and included large windows , fireplaces and a private garderobe , but most of this storey has been destroyed . A special German tile @-@ stove was probably fitted into the chambers for the use of Philip Chute , the first captain of the castle , and was illustrated with pictures of <unk> soldiers and Protestant German leaders ; only fragments of the stove have survived . 
 In the centre of the fortification was the keep , built up from the round tower of 1512 – 14 , and 6 @.@ 7 metres ( 22 ft ) of the original building 's walls were incorporated into the new design . The original tower had ten gunports embedded at ground level in its 3 @.@ 05 @-@ metre @-@ thick ( 10 @.@ 0 ft ) walls , but these were blocked up in the second phase of building . The keep would originally had a parapet running around its roof , which was initially flat but converted to a ridged design in the third phase of work . The ground floor was laid in brick and had a brick and stone @-@ lined well to supply it with water . The keep had two fireplaces , but these were small and not intended for cooking – indeed , the final version of the keep was probably never used as a living space . The first floor windows were added in the final phase of work ; they were not intended for use as gunports , but they had bars and shutters , so could have been easily secured in the event of an attack . 
 An underground vaulted ring passageway , only 1 @.@ 9 metres ( 6 ft 3 in ) high ran around the outside of the keep , with similar covered radial passageways leading off to each of the bastions ; the passageways are now ruined . A cobbled courtyard surrounded the keep , separating it from the external defences , and containing a well in the north @-@ west corner . Underground passageways led from the entrance bastion to outside the castle walls , either to allow the garrison to escape in an emergency or to assault a besieging force . 
 The outer part of the castle was defended by an octagonal wall , which linked the four stirrup turrets and bastions that formed the main defences for the castle . This wall had initially been built in the second phase of work on the castle , but was then supplemented in the final phase with an additional 2 @.@ 4 @-@ metre @-@ thick ( 7 @.@ 9 ft ) exterior facing , and was originally finished with a gun embrasure along each section , and parapets . A two @-@ storey gallery , which provided relatively spacious barrack accommodation for the garrison , ran all the way around the inside of the wall , although only the ground floor of the gallery now survives . The gallery would have been lit by windows facing into the courtyard . The Rampire earthwork built in the early 17th century lies across the south and south @-@ east parts of the defences , where the gunports were blocked up with stone when the earth was piled up along the inside of the castle . 
 The four stirrup towers are two storeys tall , 6 by 6 @.@ 2 metres ( 19 @.@ 7 by 20 @.@ 3 ft ) across internally , with 0 @.@ 8 @-@ metre @-@ thick ( 2 @.@ 6 ft ) walls , flat at the front and curved at the back . They would originally have been topped by firing platforms , with gunloops around the inside of the fortification enabling their occupants to fire into the courtyard if necessary . The bastions built around the outside of the towers in the third phase of work are 19 metres ( 62 @.@ 3 ft ) wide internally and each extend 12 metres ( 39 @.@ 4 ft ) from their respective stirrup tower , with 3 @.@ 6 @-@ metre @-@ thick ( 12 ft ) walls . Most of the bastions had a single internal gun room with a robust gun deck on top , but the West Bastion was used as a kitchen and the interior was fitted with two circular ovens and a range for cooking . The bastions would have been connected by a wall @-@ walk and parapets , but these have since been lost . The south stirrup tower and bastion remains partially buried as a result of the construction of the Rampire . 
 = Nancy Reagan = 
 Nancy Davis Reagan ( born Anne Frances Robbins ; July 6 , 1921 – March 6 , 2016 ) was an American actress and the wife of the 40th President of the United States , Ronald Reagan . She was the First Lady of the United States from 1981 to 1989 . 
 She was born in New York City . After her parents separated , she lived in Maryland with an aunt and uncle for some years . She moved to Chicago when her mother remarried in 1929 , and later took the name Davis from her stepfather . As Nancy Davis , she was a Hollywood actress in the 1940s and 1950s , starring in films such as The Next Voice You Hear ... , Night into Morning , and Donovan 's Brain . In 1952 , she married Ronald Reagan , who was then president of the Screen Actors Guild . They had two children together . Reagan was the First Lady of California when her husband was Governor from 1967 to 1975 , and she began to work with the Foster Grandparents Program . 
 Reagan became First Lady of the United States in January 1981 , following her husband 's victory in the 1980 presidential election . She was criticized early in his first term , largely due to her decision to replace the White House china , despite it being paid for by private donations . She aimed to restore a Kennedy @-@ esque glamour to the White House following years of lax formality , and her interest in high @-@ end fashion garnered much attention as well as criticism . She championed recreational drug prevention causes by founding the " Just Say No " drug awareness campaign , which was considered her major initiative as First Lady . More discussion of her role ensued when it was revealed in 1988 that she had consulted an astrologer to assist in planning the president 's schedule after the attempted assassination of her husband in 1981 . She had a strong influence on her husband , and played a role in a few of his personnel and diplomatic decisions . 
 The Reagans retired to their home in Bel Air , Los Angeles , California in 1989 . Reagan devoted most of her time to caring for her husband , who was diagnosed with Alzheimer 's disease in 1994 , until his death at the age of 93 in 2004 . Reagan remained active within the Reagan Library and in politics , particularly in support of embryonic stem cell research , until her death in March 2016 . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Anne Frances Robbins was born on July 6 , 1921 , at Sloane Hospital for Women , at the time located in Midtown Manhattan in New York City . She was the only child of Kenneth Seymour Robbins ( 1894 – 1972 ) , a car salesman who had been born into a once @-@ prosperous family , and his actress wife , radio actress Edith Prescott Luckett ( 1888 – 1987 ) . Her godmother was silent @-@ film @-@ star Alla Nazimova . From birth , she was commonly called Nancy . 
 She lived her first two years in Flushing , Queens , in New York City , in a two @-@ story house on Roosevelt Avenue between 149th and 150th Streets . Her parents separated soon after her birth and were divorced in 1928 . After their separation , her mother traveled the country to pursue acting jobs and Reagan was raised in Bethesda , Maryland , for six years by her aunt , Virginia Luckett , and uncle , Audley <unk> . Nancy later described longing for her mother during those years : " My favorite times were when Mother had a job in New York , and Aunt <unk> would take me by train to stay with her . " 
 In 1929 , her mother married Loyal Edward Davis ( 1896 – 1982 ) , a prominent conservative neurosurgeon who moved the family to Chicago . Nancy and her stepfather got along very well ; she later wrote that he was " a man of great integrity who exemplified old @-@ fashioned values . " He formally adopted her in 1935 , and she would always refer to him as her father . At the time of the adoption , her name was legally changed to Nancy Davis . She attended the Girls ' Latin School of Chicago ( describing herself as an average student ) , graduated in 1939 , and later attended Smith College in Massachusetts , where she majored in English and drama , and graduated in 1943 . 
 = = Acting career = = 
 In 1940 , a young Davis had appeared as a National Foundation for Infantile Paralysis volunteer in a memorable short subject shown in movie theaters to raise donations for the crusade against polio . The Crippler featured a sinister figure spreading over playgrounds and farms , laughing over its victims , until finally dispelled by the volunteer . It was very effective in raising contributions . 
 Following her graduation from college , Davis held jobs in Chicago as a sales clerk in Marshall Field 's department store and as a nurse 's aide . With the help of her mother 's colleagues in theatre , including <unk> Pitts , Walter Huston , and Spencer Tracy , she pursued a career as a professional actress . She first gained a part in Pitts ' 1945 road tour of <unk> Inn , moving to New York City . She landed the role of Si @-@ <unk> , a lady @-@ in @-@ waiting , in the 1946 Broadway musical about the Orient , Lute Song , starring Mary Martin and a pre @-@ stardom Yul Brynner . The show 's producer told her , " You look like you could be Chinese . " 
 After passing a screen test , she moved to California and signed a seven @-@ year contract with Metro Goldwyn Mayer Studios ( MGM ) in 1949 ; she later remarked , " Joining Metro was like walking into a dream world . " Her combination of attractive appearance – centered on her large eyes – and somewhat distant and understated manner made her hard at first for MGM to cast and publicize . Davis appeared in eleven feature films , usually typecast as a " loyal housewife " , " responsible young mother " , or " the steady woman " . Jane Powell , Debbie Reynolds , Leslie Caron , and Janet Leigh were among the actresses with whom she competed for roles at MGM . 
 Davis ' film career began with small supporting roles in two films released in 1949 , The Doctor and the Girl with Glenn Ford and East Side , West Side starring Barbara Stanwyck . She played a child psychiatrist in the film noir Shadow on the Wall ( 1950 ) with Ann Sothern and Zachary Scott ; her performance was called " beautiful and convincing " by New York Times critic A. H. Weiler . She co @-@ starred in 1950 's The Next Voice You Hear ... , playing a pregnant housewife who hears the voice of God from her radio . Influential reviewer Bosley Crowther of The New York Times wrote that " Nancy Davis [ is ] delightful as [ a ] gentle , plain , and understanding wife . " In 1951 , Davis appeared in Night Into Morning , her favorite screen role , a study of bereavement starring Ray Milland . Crowther said that Davis " does nicely as the fiancée who is widowed herself and knows the loneliness of grief , " while another noted critic , The Washington Post 's Richard L. Coe , said Davis " is splendid as the understanding widow . " MGM released Davis from her contract in 1952 ; she sought a broader range of parts , but also married Reagan , keeping her professional name as Davis , and had her first child that year . She soon starred in the science fiction film Donovan 's Brain ( 1953 ) ; Crowther said that Davis , playing the role of a possessed scientist 's " sadly baffled wife , " " walked through it all in stark confusion " in an " utterly silly " film . In her next @-@ to @-@ last movie , Hellcats of the Navy ( 1957 ) , she played nurse Lieutenant Helen Blair , and appeared in a film for the only time with her husband , playing what one critic called " a housewife who came along for the ride . " Another reviewer , however , stated that Davis plays her part satisfactorily , and " does well with what she has to work with . " 
 Author Garry Wills believes that Davis was underrated as an actress overall because her constrained part in Hellcats was her most widely seen performance . In addition , Davis downplayed her Hollywood goals : promotional material from MGM in 1949 said that her " greatest ambition " was to have a " successful happy marriage " ; decades later , in 1975 , she would say , " I was never really a career woman but [ became one ] only because I hadn 't found the man I wanted to marry . I couldn 't sit around and do nothing , so I became an actress . " Ronald Reagan biographer Lou Cannon nevertheless characterized her as a " reliable " and " solid " performer who held her own in performances with better @-@ known actors . After her final film , Crash Landing ( 1958 ) , Davis appeared for a brief time as a guest star in television dramas , such as the Zane Grey Theatre episode " The Long Shadow " ( 1961 ) , where she played opposite Ronald Reagan , as well as Wagon Train and The Tall Man , until she retired as an actress in 1962 . 
 During her career , Davis served on the board of directors of the Screen Actors Guild for nearly ten years . Decades later , Albert Brooks attempted to coax her out of acting retirement by offering her the title role opposite himself in his 1996 film Mother . She declined in order to care for her husband , and Debbie Reynolds played the part . 
 = = Marriage and family = = 
 During her Hollywood career , Davis dated many actors , including Clark Gable , Robert Stack , and Peter Lawford ; she later called Gable the nicest of the stars she had met . On November 15 , 1949 , she met Ronald Reagan , who was then president of the Screen Actors Guild . She had noticed that her name had appeared on the Hollywood blacklist , and sought Ronald Reagan 's help to maintain her employment as a guild actress in Hollywood , and for assistance in having her name removed from the list . Ronald Reagan informed her that she had been confused with another actress of the same name . The two began dating and their relationship was the subject of many gossip columns ; one Hollywood press account described their nightclub @-@ free times together as " the romance of a couple who have no vices " . Ronald Reagan was skeptical about marriage , however , following his painful 1948 divorce from Jane Wyman , and he still saw other women . 
 After three years of dating , he eventually proposed to Nancy in the couple 's favorite booth at the Beverly Hills restaurant Chasen 's . They married on March 4 , 1952 , in a simple ceremony designed to avoid the press , at the Little Brown Church in the San Fernando Valley of Los Angeles . The only people in attendance were fellow actor William Holden ( the best man ) and his wife , actress Brenda Marshall ( the matron of honor ) . The couple 's first child , Patricia Ann Reagan ( better known by her professional name , Patti Davis ) , was born on October 21 , 1952 . Their son , Ronald Prescott Reagan alias Ron Reagan , was born six years later on May 20 , 1958 . Reagan also became stepmother to Maureen Reagan ( 1941 – 2001 ) and Michael Reagan ( born 1945 ) , the daughter and adopted son of her husband 's first marriage to Jane Wyman . 
 Observers described Nancy and Ronald 's relationship as intimate . As President and First Lady , the Reagans were reported to display their affection frequently , with one press secretary noting , " They never took each other for granted . They never stopped courting . " Ronald often called Nancy " Mommy " ; she called him " Ronnie " . While the President was recuperating in the hospital after the 1981 assassination attempt , Nancy Reagan wrote in her diary , " Nothing can happen to my Ronnie . My life would be over . " In a letter to Nancy , Ronald wrote , " whatever I treasure and enjoy ... all would be without meaning if I didn 't have you . " In 1998 , while her husband was afflicted with Alzheimer 's disease , Reagan told Vanity Fair , " Our relationship is very special . We were very much in love and still are . When I say my life began with Ronnie , well , it 's true . It did . I can 't imagine life without him . " Nancy was known for the focused and attentive look , termed " the Gaze " , that she fastened upon her husband during his speeches and appearances . 
 President Reagan 's death in June 2004 ended what Charlton Heston called " the greatest love affair in the history of the American Presidency . " 
 Nancy 's relationship with her children was not always as close as that with her husband . She frequently quarreled with her biological children and her stepchildren . Her relationship with Patti was the most contentious ; Patti flouted American conservatism , rebelled against her parents by joining the nuclear freeze movement , and authored many anti @-@ Reagan books . The nearly 20 years of family feuding left Patti very much estranged from both her mother and father . Soon after her father was diagnosed with Alzheimer 's disease , Patti and her mother reconciled and began to speak on a daily basis . Nancy 's disagreements with Michael were also public matters ; in 1984 , she was quoted as saying that the two were in an " estrangement right now " . Michael responded that Nancy was trying to cover up for the fact she had not met his daughter , Ashley , who had been born nearly a year earlier . They too eventually made peace . Nancy was thought to be closest to her stepdaughter Maureen during the White House years , but each of the Reagan children experienced periods of estrangement from their parents . 
 = = First Lady of California , 1967 – 1975 = = 
 Nancy Reagan was First Lady of California during her husband 's two terms as governor . She disliked living in the state capitol of Sacramento , which lacked the excitement , social life , and mild climate to which she was accustomed in Los Angeles . She first attracted controversy early in 1967 , when , after four months ' residence in the California Governor 's Mansion in Sacramento , she moved her family into a wealthy suburb , because fire officials had labeled the mansion as a " <unk> . " Though the Reagans leased the new house at their expense , the move was viewed as snobbish . Reagan defended her actions as being for the good of her family , a judgment with which her husband readily agreed . Friends of the family later helped support the cost of the leased house , while Reagan supervised construction of a new ranch @-@ style governor 's residence in nearby Carmichael . The new residence was finished just as Ronald Reagan left office in 1975 , but his successor , Jerry Brown , refused to live there . It was sold in 1982 , and California governors lived in improvised arrangements , until Brown moved into the Governor 's Mansion in 2015 . 
 In 1967 , Reagan was appointed by her husband to the California Arts Commission , and a year later was named Los Angeles Times ' Woman of the Year ; in its profile , the Times labeled her " A Model First Lady " . Her glamour , style , and youthfulness , made her a frequent subject for press photographers . As first lady , Reagan visited veterans , the elderly , and the handicapped , and worked with a number of charities . She became involved with the Foster Grandparents Program , helping to popularize it in the United States and Australia . She later expanded her work with the organization after arriving in Washington , and wrote about her experiences in her 1982 book To Love a Child . The Reagans held dinners for former POWs and Vietnam War veterans while governor and first lady . 
 = = Role in 1976 and 1980 presidential campaigns = = 
 Governor Reagan 's term ended in 1975 , and he did not run for a third ; instead , he met with advisors to discuss a possible bid for the presidency in 1976 , challenging incumbent President Gerald Ford . Ronald still needed to convince a reluctant Nancy before running , however . She feared for her husband 's health and his career as a whole , though she felt that he was the right man for the job and eventually approved . Nancy took on a more traditional role in the campaign , holding coffees , luncheons , and talks , with senior citizens . With that , she oversaw personnel , monitored her husband 's schedule , and occasionally provided press conferences . The 1976 campaign included the so @-@ called " battle of the queens " , contrasting Nancy with First Lady Betty Ford . They both spoke out over the course of the campaign on similar issues , but with different approaches . Nancy was particularly upset by the warmonger image that the Ford campaign had drawn of her husband . 
 Though he lost the 1976 Republican nomination , Ronald Reagan ran again for the presidency in 1980 , and succeeded in winning the nomination and election . During this second campaign , Nancy played a very prominent role , and her management of staff became more apparent . She arranged a meeting among feuding campaign managers John Sears and Michael Deaver , and her husband , which resulted in Deaver leaving the campaign and Sears being given full control . After the Reagan camp lost the Iowa caucus and fell behind in New Hampshire polls , Nancy organized a second meeting and decided it was time to fire Sears and his associates ; she gave Sears a copy of the press release announcing his dismissal . Her influence on her husband became particularly notable ; her presence at rallies , luncheons , and receptions increased his confidence . 
 = = First Lady of the United States , 1981 – 1989 = = 
 = = = White House glamour = = = 
 = = = = Renovation = = = = 
 Reagan became the First Lady of the United States when Ronald Reagan was inaugurated as president in January 1981 . Early in her husband 's presidency , Reagan stated her desire to create a more suitable " first home " in the White House , as the building had fallen into a state of disrepair following years of neglect . White House aide Michael Deaver described the second and third floor family residence as having " cracked plaster walls , chipped paint [ and ] beaten up floors " ; rather than use government funds to renovate and redecorate , she sought private donations . In 1981 , Reagan directed a major renovation of several White House rooms , including all of the second and third floors and rooms adjacent to the Oval Office , including the press briefing room . The renovation included repainting walls , refinishing floors , repairing fireplaces , and replacing antique pipes , windows , and wires . The closet in the master bedroom was converted into a beauty parlor and dressing room , and the West bedroom was made into a small gymnasium . 
 The First Lady secured the assistance of renowned interior designer Ted Graber , popular with affluent West Coast social figures , to redecorate the family living quarters . A Chinese @-@ pattern , handpainted wallpaper was added to the master bedroom . Family furniture was placed in the president 's private study . The First Lady and her designer retrieved a number of White House antiques , which had been in storage , and placed them throughout the mansion . In addition , many of Reagan 's own collectibles were put out for display , including around twenty @-@ five Limoges boxes , as well as some porcelain eggs and a collection of plates . 
 The extensive redecoration was paid for by private donations . Many significant and long @-@ lasting changes occurred as a result of the renovation and refurbishment , of which Reagan said , " This house belongs to all Americans , and I want it to be something of which they can be proud . " The renovations received some criticisms for being funded by tax @-@ deductible donations , meaning some of it eventually did indirectly come from the tax @-@ paying public . 
 = = = = Fashion = = = = 
 Another of Reagan 's trademarks was her interest in fashion . While her husband was still president @-@ elect , press reports speculated about Reagan 's social life and interest in fashion . In many press accounts , Reagan 's sense of style was favorably compared to that of a previous First Lady , Jacqueline Kennedy . Friends and those close to her remarked that , while fashionable like Kennedy , she would be different from other first ladies ; close friend Harriet Deutsch was quoted as saying , " Nancy has her own imprint . " 
 Reagan 's wardrobe consisted of dresses , gowns , and suits made by luxury designers , including James Galanos , Bill Blass , and Oscar de la Renta . Her white , hand @-@ beaded , one shoulder Galanos 1981 inaugural gown was estimated to cost $ 10 @,@ 000 , while the overall price of her inaugural wardrobe was said to cost $ 25 @,@ 000 . She favored the color red , calling it " a picker @-@ upper " , and wore it accordingly . Her wardrobe included red so often that the fire @-@ engine shade became known as " Reagan red " . She employed two private hairdressers , who would style her hair on a regular basis in the White House . 
 Fashion designers were pleased with the emphasis Reagan placed on clothing . Adolfo said the first lady embodied an " elegant , affluent , well @-@ bred , chic American look " , while Bill Blass commented , " I don 't think there 's been anyone in the White House since Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis who has her flair . " William Fine , president of cosmetic company Frances Denney , noted that she " stays in style , but she doesn 't become trendy . " 
 Though her elegant fashions and wardrobe were hailed as a " glamorous paragon of chic " , they were also controversial subjects . In 1982 , she revealed that she had accepted thousands of dollars in clothing , jewelry , and other gifts , but defended her actions by stating that she had borrowed the clothes , and that they would either be returned or donated to museums , and that she was promoting the American fashion industry . Facing criticism , she soon said she would no longer accept such loans . While often buying her clothes , she continued to borrow and sometimes keep designer clothes throughout her time as first lady , which came to light in 1988 . None of this had been included on financial disclosure forms ; the non @-@ reporting of loans under $ 10 @,@ 000 in liability was in violation of a voluntary agreement the White House had made in 1982 , while not reporting more valuable loans or clothes not returned was a possible violation of the Ethics in Government Act . Reagan expressed through her press secretary " regrets that she failed to heed counsel 's advice " on disclosing them . 
 Despite the controversy , many designers who allowed her to borrow clothing , noted that the arrangement was good for their businesses , as well as for the American fashion industry overall . In 1989 , Reagan was honored at the annual gala awards dinner of the Council of Fashion Designers of America , during which she received the council 's lifetime achievement award . Barbara Walters said of her , " She has served every day for eight long years the word ' style . ' " 
 = = = = Elegance and formality = = = = 
 Approximately a year into her husband 's first term , Reagan explored the idea of ordering new state china service for the White House . A full china service had not been purchased since the Truman administration in the 1940s , as only a partial service was ordered in the Johnson administration . She was quoted as saying , " The White House really badly , badly needs china . " Working with Lenox , the primary porcelain manufacturer in America , the first lady chose a design scheme of a red with etched gold band , bordering the scarlet and cream colored ivory plates with a raised presidential seal etched in gold in the center . The full service comprised 4 @,@ 370 pieces , with 19 pieces per individual set . The service totaled $ 209 @,@ 508 . Although it was paid for by private donations , some from the private <unk> Knapp Foundation , the purchase generated quite a controversy , for it was ordered at a time when the nation was undergoing an economic recession . Furthermore , news of the china purchase emerged at the same time that her husband 's administration had proposed school lunch regulations that would allow ketchup to be counted as a vegetable . 
 The new china , White House renovations , expensive clothing , and her attendance at the wedding of Charles and Diana , Prince and Princess of Wales , gave her an aura of being " out of touch " with the American people during the recession . This built upon the reputation she had coming to Washington , wherein many people concluded that Reagan was a vain and shallow woman , and her taste for splendor inspired the derogatory nickname " Queen Nancy " . While Jacqueline Kennedy had also faced some press criticism for her spending habits , Reagan 's treatment was much more consistent and negative . In an attempt to deflect the criticism , she self @-@ deprecatingly donned a <unk> costume at the 1982 Gridiron Dinner and sang " Second @-@ Hand Clothes " , mimicking the song " Second @-@ Hand Rose " . The skit helped to restore her reputation . 
 Reagan reflected on the criticisms in her 1989 autobiography , My Turn . Reagan describes lunching with former Democratic National Committee chairman Robert Strauss , wherein Strauss said to her , " When you first came to town , Nancy , I didn 't like you at all . But after I got to know you , I changed my mind and said , ' She 's some broad ! ' " Reagan responded , " Bob , based on the press reports I read then , I wouldn 't have liked me either ! " 
 After the presidencies of Gerald Ford ( who favored the Michigan fight song over " Hail to the Chief " ) , and Jimmy Carter ( who dramatically reduced the formality of presidential functions ) , Reagan brought a Kennedy @-@ esque glamour back into the White House . She hosted 56 state dinners over eight years . She remarked that hosting the dinners is " the easiest thing in the world . You don 't have to do anything . Just have a good time and do a little business . And that 's the way Washington works . " The White House residence staff found Reagan demanding to work for during the preparation for the state dinners , with the First Lady overseeing every aspect of meal presentations , and sometimes requesting one dessert after another be prepared , before finally settling on one she approved of . 
 In general , the First Lady 's desire for everything to appear just right in the White House led the residence staff to consider her not easy to work for , with tirades following what she perceived as mistakes . One staffer later recalled , " I remember hearing her call for her personal maid one day and it scared the <unk> out of me – just her tone . I never wanted to be on the wrong side of her . " She did show loyalty and respect to a number of the staff . In particular , she came to the public defense of a maid who was indicted on charges of helping to smuggle ammunition to Paraguay , providing an affidavit to the maid 's good character ( even though it was politically inopportune to do so at the time of the Iran – Contra affair ) ; charges were subsequently dropped , and the maid returned to work at the White House . 
 In 1987 , Mikhail Gorbachev became the first Soviet leader to visit Washington , D.C. since Nikita Khrushchev had in 1959 at the height of the Cold War , and Reagan was in charge of planning and hosting the important and highly anticipated state dinner , with the goal to impress both the Soviet leader and especially his wife Raisa Gorbachev . After the meal , Reagan recruited pianist Van Cliburn to play a rendition of " Moscow Nights " for the Soviet delegation , to which Mikhail and Raisa broke out into song . Secretary of State George Shultz later commented on the evening , saying " We felt the ice of the Cold War crumbling . " Reagan concluded , " It was a perfect ending for one of the great evenings of my husband 's presidency . " 
 = = = Just Say No = = = 
 The First Lady launched the " Just Say No " drug awareness campaign in 1982 , which was her primary project and major initiative as first lady . Reagan first became aware of the need to educate young people about drugs during a 1980 campaign stop in <unk> Village , New York . She remarked in 1981 that " Understanding what drugs can do to your children , understanding peer pressure and understanding why they turn to drugs is … the first step in solving the problem . " Her campaign focused on drug education and informing the youth of the danger of drug abuse . 
 In 1982 , Reagan was asked by a schoolgirl what to do when offered drugs ; Reagan responded : " Just say no . " The phrase proliferated in the popular culture of the 1980s , and was eventually adopted as the name of club organizations and school anti @-@ drug programs . Reagan became actively involved by traveling more than 250 @,@ 000 miles ( 400 @,@ 000 km ) throughout the United States and several nations , visiting drug abuse prevention programs and drug rehabilitation centers . She also appeared on television talk shows , recorded public service announcements , and wrote guest articles . She appeared in single episodes of the television drama Dynasty and the sitcom Diff 'rent Strokes , to underscore support for the " Just Say No " campaign , and in a rock music video , " Stop the Madness " ( 1985 ) . 
 In 1985 , Reagan expanded the campaign to an international level by inviting the First Ladies of various nations to the White House for a conference on drug abuse . On October 27 , 1986 , President Reagan signed a drug enforcement bill into law , which granted $ 1 @.@ 7 billion in funding to fight the perceived crisis and ensured a mandatory minimum penalty for drug offenses . Although the bill was criticized , Reagan considered it a personal victory . In 1988 , she became the first First Lady invited to address the United Nations General Assembly , where she spoke on international drug interdiction and trafficking laws . 
 Critics of Reagan 's efforts questioned their purpose , labelled Reagan 's approach to promoting drug awareness as simplistic , and argued that the program did not address many social issues , including unemployment , poverty , and family dissolution . A number of " Just Say No " clubs and organizations remain in operation around the country . 
 = = = Her husband 's protector = = = 
 Reagan assumed the role of unofficial " protector " for her husband after the attempted assassination on his life in 1981 . On March 30 of that year , President Reagan and three others were shot as they left the Washington Hilton Hotel . Nancy was alerted and arrived at George Washington University Hospital , where the President was hospitalized . She recalled having seen " emergency rooms before , but I had never seen one like this – with my husband in it . " She was escorted into a waiting room , and when granted access to see her husband , he quipped to her , " Honey , I forgot to duck " , borrowing the defeated boxer Jack Dempsey 's jest to his wife . 
 An early example of the First Lady 's protective nature occurred when Senator Strom Thurmond entered the President 's hospital room that day in March , passing the Secret Service detail by claiming he was the President 's " close friend " , presumably to acquire media attention . Nancy was outraged and demanded he leave . While the President recuperated in the hospital , the First Lady slept with one of his shirts to be comforted by the scent . When Ronald Reagan was released from the hospital on April 12 , she escorted him back to the White House . 
 Press accounts framed Reagan as her husband 's " chief protector " , an extension of their general initial framing of her as a helpmate and a Cold War domestic ideal . As it happened , the day after her husband was shot , Reagan fell off a chair while trying to take down a picture to bring to him in the hospital ; she suffered several broken ribs , but was determined to not reveal it publicly . 
 = = = Influence in the White House = = = 
 Nancy Reagan stated in her memoirs , " I felt panicky every time [ Ronald Reagan ] left the White House " following the assassination attempt , and made it her concern to know her husband 's schedule : the events he would be attending , and with whom . Eventually , this protectiveness led to her consulting an astrologer , Joan Quigley , who offered insight on which days were " good " , " neutral " , or should be avoided , which influenced her husband 's White House schedule . Days were color @-@ coded according to the astrologer 's advice to discern precisely which days and times would be optimal for the president 's safety and success . 
 The White House Chief of Staff , Donald Regan , grew frustrated with this regimen , which created friction between him and the First Lady . This escalated with the revelation of the Iran @-@ Contra affair , an administration scandal , in which the First Lady felt Regan was damaging the president . She thought he should resign , and expressed this to her husband , although he did not share her view . Regan wanted President Reagan to address the Iran @-@ Contra matter in early 1987 by means of a press conference , though Reagan refused to allow her husband to <unk> himself due to a recent prostate surgery and astrological warnings . Regan became so angry with Reagan that he hung up on her during a 1987 telephone conversation . According to the recollections of ABC News correspondent Sam Donaldson , when the President heard of this treatment , he demanded – and eventually received – Regan 's resignation . Vice President George H. W. Bush is also reported to have suggested to Reagan to have Regan fired . In his 1988 memoirs , Regan wrote about Reagan 's consultations with the astrologer , the first public mention of them , which resulted in embarrassment for the First Lady . Reagan later wrote , " Astrology was simply one of the ways I coped with the fear I felt after my husband almost died ... Was astrology one of the reasons [ further attempts did not occur ] ? I don 't really believe it was , but I don 't really believe it wasn 't . " 
 Nancy wielded a powerful influence over President Reagan . Again stemming from the assassination attempt , she strictly controlled access to the president and even occasionally attempted to influence her husband 's decision making . 
 Beginning in 1985 , she strongly encouraged her husband to hold " summit " conferences with Soviet General Secretary Mikhail Gorbachev , and suggested they form a personal relationship beforehand . Both Ronald Reagan and Gorbachev had developed a productive relationship through their summit negotiations . The relationship between Nancy Reagan and Raisa Gorbachova was anything but the friendly , diplomatic one between their husbands ; Reagan found Gorbachova hard to converse with and their relationship was described as " frosty " . The two women usually had tea and discussed differences between the USSR and the United States . Visiting the United States for the first time in 1987 , Gorbachova irked Reagan with lectures on subjects ranging from architecture to socialism , reportedly prompting the American president 's wife to quip , " Who does that dame think she is ? " 
 Press framing of Reagan changed from that of just helpmate and protector to someone with hidden power . As the image of her as a political interloper grew , she sought to explicitly deny that she was the power behind the throne . At the end of her time as First Lady , however , she said that her husband had not been well @-@ served by his staff . She acknowledged her role in reaction in influencing him on personnel decisions , saying " In no way do I apologize for it . " She wrote in her memoirs , " I don 't think I was as bad , or as extreme in my power or my weakness , as I was depicted , " but went on , " However the first lady fits in , she has a unique and important role to play in looking after her husband . And it 's only natural that she 'll let him know what she thinks . I always did that for Ronnie , and I always will . " 
 = = = Breast cancer = = = 
 In October 1987 , a mammogram detected a lesion in Reagan 's left breast and she was subsequently diagnosed with breast cancer . She chose to undergo a mastectomy rather than a lumpectomy , and the breast was removed on October 17 , 1987 . Ten days after the operation , her 99 @-@ year @-@ old mother , Edith Luckett Davis , died in Phoenix , Arizona , leading Reagan to dub the period " a terrible month " . 
 After the surgery , more women across the country had <unk> , an example of the influence the First Lady possessed . 
 = = Subsequent life = = 
 Though Reagan was a controversial First Lady , 56 percent of Americans had a favorable opinion of her when her husband left office on January 20 , 1989 , with 18 percent having an unfavorable opinion , and the balance not giving an opinion . Compared to fellow First Ladies when their husbands left office , Reagan 's approval was higher than those of Rosalynn Carter and Hillary Clinton . However , she was less popular than Barbara Bush , and her disapproval rating was double that of Carter 's . 
 Upon leaving the White House , the couple returned to California , where they purchased a home in the wealthy East Gate Old Bel Air neighborhood of Bel Air , Los Angeles , dividing their time between Bel Air and the Reagan Ranch in Santa Barbara , California . Ronald and Nancy regularly attended Bel Air Presbyterian Church as well . After leaving Washington , Reagan made numerous public appearances , many on behalf of her husband . She continued to reside at the Bel Air home , where she lived with her husband until he died on June 5 , 2004 . 
 = = = Early post @-@ White House activities = = = 
 In late 1989 , the former First Lady established the Nancy Reagan Foundation , which aimed to continue to educate people about the dangers of substance abuse . The Foundation teamed with the BEST Foundation For A Drug @-@ Free Tomorrow in 1994 , and developed the Nancy Reagan Afterschool Program . She continued to travel around the United States , speaking out against drug and alcohol abuse . 
 Her memoirs , My Turn : The Memoirs of Nancy Reagan ( 1989 ) , are an account of her life in the White House , commenting openly about her influence within the Reagan administration , and discussing the myths and controversies that surrounded the couple . In 1991 , the author Kitty Kelley wrote an unauthorized and largely <unk> biography about Reagan , repeating accounts of a poor relationship with her children , and introducing rumors of alleged sexual relations with singer Frank Sinatra . A wide range of sources commented that Kelley 's largely unsupported claims are most likely false . 
 In 1989 , the Internal Revenue Service began investigating the Reagans over allegations they owed additional tax on the gifts and loans of high @-@ fashion clothes and jewelry to the First Lady during their time in the White House ( recipients benefiting from the display of such items recognize taxable income even if they are returned ) . In 1992 , the IRS determined the Reagans had failed to include some $ 3 million worth of fashion items between 1983 and 1988 on their tax returns ; they were billed for a large amount of back taxes and interest , which was subsequently paid . 
 After President Reagan revealed that he had been diagnosed with Alzheimer 's disease in 1994 , she made herself his primary caregiver , and became actively involved with the National Alzheimer 's Association and its affiliate , the Ronald and Nancy Reagan Research Institute in Chicago , Illinois . 
 Nancy Reagan was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom , the nation 's highest civilian honor , by President George W. Bush on July 9 , 2002 . President Reagan received his own Presidential Medal of Freedom in January 1993 . Reagan and her husband were jointly awarded the Congressional Gold Medal on May 16 , 2002 , at the United States Capitol building , and were only the third President and First Lady to receive it ; she accepted the medal on behalf of both of them . 
 = = = Ronald Reagan 's funeral = = = 
 Ronald Reagan died in their Bel Air home on June 5 , 2004 . During the seven @-@ day state funeral , Nancy , accompanied by her children and military escort , led the nation in mourning by keeping a strong composure , traveling from her home to the Reagan Library for a memorial service , then to Washington , D.C. , where her husband 's body lay in state for 34 hours prior to a national funeral service in the Washington National Cathedral . She returned to the library in California for a sunset memorial service and interment , where , overcome with emotion , she lost her composure , crying in public for the first time during the week . After accepting the folded flag , she kissed the casket and mouthed " I love you " before leaving . CNN journalist Wolf Blitzer said of Reagan during the week , " She 's a very , very strong woman , even though she looks frail . " 
 She had directed the detailed planning of the funeral , including ordering all the major events and asking former President George H. W. Bush , as well as former British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher , former Soviet Union Leader Mikhail Gorbachev , and former Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney to speak during the National Cathedral Service . She paid very close attention to the details , something she had always done in her husband 's life . Betsy Bloomingdale , one of Reagan 's closest friends , stated , " She looks a little frail . But she is very strong inside . She is . She has the strength . She is doing her last thing for Ronnie . And she is going to get it right . " The funeral marked her first major public appearance since delivering a speech to the 1996 Republican National Convention on her husband 's behalf . 
 The funeral had a great impact on her public image . Following substantial criticism during her tenure as first lady , she was seen somewhat as a national heroine , praised by many for supporting and caring for her husband while he suffered from Alzheimer 's disease . U.S. News & World Report opined , " after a decade in the shadows , a different , softer Nancy Reagan emerged . " 
 = = = Widowhood = = = 
 Reagan remained active in politics , particularly relating to stem cell research . Beginning in 2004 , she favored what many consider to be the Democratic Party 's position , and urged President George W. Bush to support federally funded embryonic stem cell research , in the hope that this science could lead to a cure for Alzheimer 's disease . Although she failed to change the president 's position , she did support his campaign for a second term . 
 In 2005 , Reagan was honored at a gala dinner at the Ronald Reagan Building in Washington , D.C. , where guests included Dick Cheney , Harry Reid , and Condoleezza Rice . It was her first major public appearance since her husband 's funeral . Asked what her plans were , Reagan shook her head and responded , " I don 't know . I 'll know when I 'll know . But the Reagan library is Ronnie , so that 's where I spend my time . " 
 In 2007 , she attended the national funeral service for Gerald Ford in the Washington National Cathedral . Reagan hosted two 2008 Republican Presidential Candidates Debates at the Reagan Presidential Library , the first in May 2007 and the second in January 2008 . While she did not participate in the discussions , she sat in the front row and listened as the men vying to become the nation 's 44th president claimed to be a rightful successor to her husband . Though some speculation arose as to whether Reagan might support New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg in a presidential bid , nothing came of it . She formally endorsed Senator John McCain , then the presumptive Republican party nominee , for president on March 25 . 
 She attended the funeral of Lady Bird Johnson in Austin , Texas , on July 14 , 2007 , and three days later accepted the highest Polish distinction , the Order of the White Eagle , on behalf of Ronald Reagan at the Reagan Library . The Reagan Library opened the temporary exhibit " Nancy Reagan : A First Lady 's Style " , which displayed over eighty designer dresses belonging to her . 
 Reagan 's health and well @-@ being became a prominent concern in 2008 . In February , she suffered a fall at her Bel Air home and was taken to St. John 's Health Center in Santa Monica , California . Doctors reported that she did not break her hip as feared , and she was released from the hospital two days later . News commentators noted that Reagan 's step had slowed significantly , as the following month she walked in very slow strides with John McCain . NBC 's Brian Williams , who attended a dinner with Reagan in mid @-@ 2008 , recalled , " Mrs. Reagan 's vision isn 't what it always was so she was taking very halting steps as a lot of folks her age do ... It is so important for folks in her age bracket and in her bracket of life to remain upright and captain of their own ship . She very much is captain of her own ship . " As for her mental ability , Williams remarked , " She 's as sharp as ever and enjoys a robust life with her friends in California , but falling is always a danger of course . She 's a very stoic , hardy person full of joy and excitement for life ... She is not without opinions on politics and political types these days ... She is , as most of her friends described her , a pistol . " 
 In October 2008 , Reagan was admitted to Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center after falling at home . Doctors determined that the 87 @-@ year @-@ old had fractured her pelvis and sacrum , and could recuperate at home with a regimen of physical therapy . As a result of her mishap , medical articles were published containing information on how to prevent falls . In January 2009 , Reagan was said to be " improving every day and starting to get out more and more . " 
 In March 2009 , she praised President Barack Obama for reversing the ban on federally funded embryonic stem cell research . She traveled to Washington , D.C. in June 2009 to unveil a statue of her late husband in the Capitol rotunda . She was also on hand as President Obama signed the Ronald Reagan Centennial Commission Act , and lunched privately with Michelle Obama . Reagan revealed in an interview with Vanity Fair that Michelle Obama had telephoned her for advice on living and entertaining in the White House . Following the death of Senator Ted Kennedy in August 2009 , she said she was " terribly saddened … Given our political differences , people are sometimes surprised how close Ronnie and I have been to the Kennedy family . ... I will miss him . " She attended the funeral of Betty Ford in Rancho Mirage , California , on July 12 , 2011 . 
 Reagan hosted a 2012 Republican presidential debate at the Reagan Presidential Library on September 7 , 2011 . She suffered a fall in March 2012 . Two months later , she endured several broken ribs , which prevented her from attending a speech given by Paul Ryan in the Reagan Presidential Library in May 2012 ; her spokesperson said , " Mrs. Reagan has been recovering slowly and has been adding a few appointments back on to her schedule , but was advised by her doctor today not to try and attend large events too far from home just yet . " She endorsed Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney on May 31 , 2012 , explaining that her husband would have liked Romney 's business background and what she called " strong principles " . Following the death of former British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher in April 2013 , she said that , " The world has lost a true champion of freedom and democracy . ... Ronnie and I knew her as a dear and trusted friend , and I will miss her . " 
 Reagan was the second @-@ longest @-@ lived First Lady of the United States , after Bess Truman who died at the age of 97 . Coincidentally , Ronald Reagan was the second @-@ longest @-@ lived President , trailing only Gerald Ford . 
 = = Death and funeral = = 
 On March 6 , 2016 , Reagan died at the age of 94 , of congestive heart failure . On March 7 , 2016 , President Barack Obama issued a presidential proclamation , ordering the Flag of the United States of America to be flown at half @-@ staff until sunset on the day of Reagan 's interment . 
 Her funeral was held on March 11 , 2016 , at the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library in Simi Valley , California . Representatives from ten First Families were in attendance , including former President George W. Bush and four current or former first ladies : Michelle Obama , Laura Bush , Hillary Clinton , and Rosalynn Carter . The other such representatives were presidential children Steven Ford , Tricia Nixon Cox , Luci Baines Johnson , and Caroline Kennedy , and presidential grandchild Anne Eisenhower <unk> . 
 Other prominent individuals in attendance included Governor of California Jerry Brown and former Governors Arnold Schwarzenegger and Pete Wilson ; former House Speakers Nancy Pelosi and Newt Gingrich ; and former members of the Reagan administration , including George Shultz and Edwin Meese . A sizable contingency from the Hollywood entertainment industry attended as well , including Mr. T , Maria Shriver , Wayne Newton , Johnny Mathis , Angelica Huston , John Stamos , Tom Selleck , Bo Derek , and Melissa Rivers . In all there were some 1 @,@ 000 guests . 
 <unk> included former Prime Minister of Canada Brian Mulroney , former Secretary of State James Baker , Diane Sawyer , Tom Brokaw , and her children Patti Davis and Ron Reagan . After the funeral , Nancy Reagan was buried next to her husband . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 As Nancy Davis , she also made a number of television appearances from 1953 to 1962 , as a guest star in dramatic shows or installments of anthology series . These included The Ford Television Theatre ( her first appearance with Ronald Reagan came during a 1953 episode titled " First Born " ) , Schlitz Playhouse of Stars , Wagon Train , The Tall Man , and General Electric Theater ( hosted by Ronald Reagan ) . 
 = Gordon Parks High School = 
 Gordon Parks High School is a public alternative learning center in Saint Paul , Minnesota . The school , founded in 1991 , was originally the Saint Paul Area Learning Center . It was then called Unidale Alternative Learning Center for several years , after the local strip mall it operated in ; this was often shortened to ALC Unidale . In 2007 , a permanent building was built for the school and it was again renamed . The school serves high @-@ school @-@ age students categorized as " at risk " or far behind in grade level . It is the largest of seven alternative day school programs in the Saint Paul Public Schools district . 
 = = Campus = = 
 The Saint Paul Area Learning Center opened on February 1 , 1991 . Its initial student body consisted of 500 full and part @-@ time students . The school first opened in a leased 8 @,@ 000 square feet ( 740 m2 ) building in the Unidale Mall . The small space was repeatedly expanded ; the largest expansion was in 1997 , when the building grew by 6 @,@ 000 square feet ( 560 m2 ) . Eventually , the building reached 18 @,@ 000 square feet ( 1 @,@ 700 m2 ) . The school , with tiny classrooms and no windows , cost the school district $ 300 @,@ 000 in rent a year . The rented space became too small , and the school district decided to build a new building in part because of pressure from developers of the mall . 
 Upon the school 's relocation suggestions were solicited for a new name , and social studies teacher Ted Johnson submitted the winning entry . The school was named after photographer , film director and local icon Gordon Parks . Parks grew up in Saint Paul , attending local high schools such as Mechanic Arts High School and Saint Paul Central . Like many of the students the school targets , Parks struggled with events outside of school and eventually dropped out . 
 = = = New building = = = 
 In 2003 , Saint Paul Public Schools purchased a parcel of land about a mile and half west of the Unidale Mall on University Avenue from 3M . Construction of the new facility was planned to start in 2005 , costing $ 7 million . When construction bids were higher than expected , the price tag went up to $ 8 million and the project was postponed to allow for planning to reduce costs . Construction started in late November 2006 after price concerns had been resolved . The building opened in early December 2007 , with a total cost of $ 7 @.@ 5 million . It was dedicated one day before the two @-@ year anniversary of Gordon Parks 's death . He died on March 7 , 2006 ; the building was dedicated on March 6 , 2008 . 
 When the new building was proposed , the initial plan called for a 44 @,@ 000 square feet ( 4 @,@ 100 m2 ) facility . The finished product featured a new gym and cafeteria in a 34 @,@ 000 square feet ( 3 @,@ 200 m2 ) building . Ownership of the new facility is saving the Saint Paul Public Schools district $ 300 @,@ 000 annually in rent . The building also has new science labs , computer labs , and bigger art and industrial technology areas . 
 The building was designed by Wold Architects and built by Jorgenson Construction , Inc . The sloping glass walls in the front entrance were designed to emulate the many car dealerships along University Avenue . The school was built to be environmentally friendly , and the school district intends to apply for a Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design Certification . 
 = = Students = = 
 The school serves students aged 16 @-@ 21 . Students who enroll must qualify under one or more " at @-@ risk " categories . These include homelessness , pregnancy , children and chemical dependency , as well as being at least one year behind for graduation or any other characteristic that would place a student at a disadvantage . In the 2006 @-@ 07 school year roughly 279 students attended Gordon Parks High School . Sixty @-@ two percent of students qualify for free or reduced lunch , which is the school district 's measure of poverty . Eight percent of students qualify for special education . 
 = = Academics = = 
 Students must finish school before turning 21 years old . In 2007 , the school 's 12 @-@ week trimesters were changed into smaller six @-@ week mini @-@ terms , and then in 2011 , even smaller three @-@ week terms in order to improve attendance . Students who miss more than three days in a three @-@ week mini @-@ term do not earn full high school credit . As a result of this change , attendance increased by 100 % , though daily attendance is still about 50 % . It takes 60 hours of class work to earn one credit . 
 The school has a closed campus . When students were free to come and go as they pleased , many would not return after leaving for lunch . Now students must arrive by 8 a.m. and remain until noon , or arrive by 1 p.m. and stay until 5 p.m. Exceptions are granted for students in job programs , or who must take care of their family . To meet student needs the school has social workers , counselors , special education teachers , educational assistants , and on @-@ the @-@ job training . 
 The school has developed a specific program focus that includes film , photography , writing , and art , using Gordon Parks 's life as an inspiration and guide . In partnership with the Minnesota Historical Society , students are documenting stages of transition along University Avenue through the stories of elders , business owners , and residents affected by the METRO Green Line light @-@ rail transit project . The students learn more about the neighborhood 's history , document stories of the LRT project that might not otherwise be told , and share images that might not otherwise be seen . 
 This multiyear project is titled " Transitions : University Avenue " and is produced entirely by students , who began by documenting the controversial stage of pre @-@ construction along the avenue . As the construction moved forward , the students created documentaries on area residents and businesses and the impact the LRT has on them . The goals are to preserve important history , increase awareness of this community in transition , and highlight the work of Gordon Parks High School students . 
 <unk> partners with the Human Rights Program at the University of Minnesota in a pilot creative writing curriculum called the Scribes Fellowship . Students develop writing skills and confidence by focusing on personal reflections on human rights that affect their community . Community / school gardens , sustainable agriculture and food justice are the first topics explored . 
 = Pennsylvania Route 39 = 
 Pennsylvania Route 39 ( PA 39 ) is a 17 @.@ 83 miles ( 28 @.@ 69 km ) state highway located in Dauphin County , Pennsylvania , United States . PA 39 begins at North Front Street near Harrisburg and ends at U.S. Route 322 and U.S. Route 422 near Hummelstown and Hershey . The route passes through the northern and eastern suburbs of Harrisburg and passes by Hersheypark , Giant Center , as well as the primary production factory for The Hershey Company . Between Harrisburg and Manada Hill , it is known as Linglestown Road , from Manada Hill to Hershey as Hershey Road and from Hershey to near Hummelstown and Hershey as Hersheypark Drive . Prior to the establishment of PA 39 in 1937 , PA 39 , had previously been designated as a route in northeastern Pennsylvania during the 1920s . That designation was deleted when it was renumbered US 11 . As a result , PA 39 is one of a few routes which has a set of child routes which are no where near the primary route . 
 The Linglestown – Manada Hill portion of PA 39 was originally part of Legislative Route 140 , one of hundreds of unsigned legislative routes created by the Sproul Road Bill in 1911 . LR 140 was later rerouted to bypass Linglestown to the south , and the Paxtonia – Lower Paxton Township portion of its former routing became LR 140A . This legislative route was initially signed solely as PA 894 . PA 39 was assigned in the 1930s to the portion of LR 140A east of Linglestown — overlapping PA 894 — and also to LR 22006 between the Susquehanna River and Manadahill . The PA 894 designation was later removed . 
 PA 39 was extended southward to the vicinity of Hummelstown in two stages . The first extension during the 1940s shifted PA 39 's eastern terminus to the junction of Hershey Road and Allentown Boulevard ( U.S. Route 22 ) south of Manadahill . Its terminus was moved to its present location in the early 1960s . Only local realignments and improvements have occurred since . 
 = = Route description = = 
 PA 39 begins at an intersection with North Front Street on the east bank of the Susquehanna River in the Dauphin County township of Susquehanna north of Harrisburg . It heads northeast as Linglestown Road through a densely populated neighborhood and widens from two to four lanes as it approaches an interchange with U.S. Route 22 and U.S. Route 322 at the northern tip of Wildwood Lake . East of the exit , the highway reverts to two lanes and passes through the predominantly residential northern suburbs of Harrisburg . It intersects North Progress Avenue prior to passing into Lower Paxton Township . 
 West of the village of Linglestown , Linglestown Road intersects Colonial Road , and then continues east to Linglestown , where it intersects North Mountain Road at a roundabout . Outside of the village , the amount of development along the highway declines as the route passes through areas of forests and open fields . Continuing east , the road becomes more developed as it approaches an interchange with Interstate 81 at exit 77 . Just east of the interchange , PA 39 intersects Jonestown Road and changes names from Linglestown Road to Hershey Road . 
 Unlike Linglestown Road , which followed a mostly east – west alignment , Hershey Road has a north – south orientation . It heads south from Jonestown Road to intersect US 22 , here an at @-@ grade roadway named Allentown Boulevard , near Skyline View . Hershey Road continues onward , snaking southeastward through a rural region of Dauphin County to the vicinity of Hershey . During this stretch , it passes through South Hanover Township and serves the communities of <unk> and Union Deposit . The route crosses into Derry Township after crossing over Swatara Creek , then intersects Hersheypark Drive near the creek 's southern bank . Hershey Road continues south from here as Park Boulevard , a service road for Hersheypark , Hersheypark Stadium , Hersheypark Arena , The Star Pavilion , Giant Center and Hershey 's Chocolate World ; however , the route veers westward onto Hersheypark Drive and bypasses Giant Center to the north . This portion of the road is four lanes wide , the first significant portion of PA 39 to be that many lanes wide since the area surrounding I @-@ 81 . 
 PA 39 heads south bypassing the village of Hershey to the north and west . It passes under a Norfolk Southern Railway line , then enters a highly developed area east of the borough of Hummelstown . Here , the road intersects Walton Avenue , a local street connecting Hersheypark Drive to the village . This is the final junction along PA 39 as the route ends 0 @.@ 3 miles ( 480 m ) later at a modified cloverleaf interchange with US 322 and U.S. Route 422 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Legislative Routes = = = 
 Legislative Route 140 , an unsigned legislative route extending from Harrisburg in the west to Pottsville in the east , was created on May 31 , 1911 , through the Sproul Road Bill , which established the initial set of legislative routes throughout Pennsylvania . LR 140 entered Linglestown on North Mountain Road , then turned to follow modern PA 39 from Linglestown to Manadahill , where it veered onto Jonestown Road . LR 140 was realigned by 1926 to follow a direct route between Paxtonia and Manadahill via Jonestown Road . The portion of former LR 140 from Paxtonia to the Lower Paxton – West Hanover township line was then redesignated as LR 140A . All of LR 140A was designated as the signed PA 894 by 1930 . 
 In the Omnibus Road Bill Act of 1931 , LR 22006 was established , spanning the portion of current PA 39 from the Susquehanna River north of Harrisburg to <unk> at the West Hanover – South Hanover township line , three miles north of Union Deposit . The remainder of current PA 39 north of Swatara Creek was a state @-@ aid route designated A @-@ 306 , which ran from South Hanover Township to Union Deposit . Those sections of roads were paved in 1926 , in preparation for gaining state aid . 
 = = = Designation and extensions = = = 
 PA 39 was assigned on May 1 , 1937 , by the Pennsylvania Department of Highways to the portion of LR 22006 between the Susquehanna River ( at North Front Street ) and Manadahill and to the section of LR 140A east of Linglestown , overlapping PA 894 along the latter . PA 894 was also extended northward along <unk> Road to a junction with PA 443 near <unk> . The overlap between PA 39 and PA 894 was eliminated in the 1940s when the entirety of the PA 894 designation was removed . 
 The first change to PA 39 's routing came in the 1940s . During this time , U.S. Route 22 was rerouted through Dauphin and Lebanon County to follow Allentown Boulevard instead of Jonestown Road . As a result , PA 39 was extended a short distance southward along LR 22006 on what is now Jonestown Road , Harper Drive , and Hershey Road to meet the new alignment of US 22 south of Manadahill . This section of PA 39 was rerouted in 1969 when a new road was constructed between Jonestown Road and Manada View Drive which directly connected Linglestown Road to Hershey Road . The alignment on Jonestown Road and what became Harper Drive was deleted . 
 PA 39 was extended further southward on LR 22006 and A @-@ 306 , as well as parts of Legislative Routes <unk> and <unk> , in 1961 , to a new terminus at U.S. Route 322 and U.S. Route 422 near Hummelstown . At the time , it was routed on Hanover Street in the vicinity of Union Deposit . The portion of Hanover Street south of Canal Street had previously been part of PA 340 from the 1930s to the early @-@ to @-@ mid @-@ 1950s . 
 A new highway around the eastern fringe of Union Deposit was constructed in the late 1960s and opened to traffic as a realignment of PA 39 by 1970 . Park Boulevard in Hershey was rerouted in 1973 to intersect the new bypass and provide a direct connection between Hersheypark and PA 39 . 
 = = = Rehabilitation projects = = = 
 In the early 1970s , the portion of PA 39 in Susquehanna Township from North Sixth Street to <unk> Drive was converted from a two @-@ lane roadway to a four @-@ lane divided highway as part of the construction of the US 22 and US 322 bypass . The divided highway was extended west to North Front Street in the early 1990s . To the southeast , the segment of PA 39 south of West Chocolate Avenue near Hummelstown was rebuilt as a divided highway ca . 1990 . All of Hersheypark Drive east to <unk> Road was converted into a divided highway by 1995 . The piece of PA 39 near I @-@ 81 was reconstructed into a four @-@ line divided roadway ca . 1990 . 
 In 2009 , PA 39 was widened to five lanes ( two lanes in each direction with a center turning lane ) when a new shopping center near the intersection of PA 39 and Progress Avenue was built . At the same time , West Hanover Township made improvements to the area surrounding PA 39 's interchange with Interstate 81 . Prior to the improvements , there was only one traffic light in the vicinity , located at Jonestown Road . Several traffic lights and two additional lanes with a center concrete barrier was added to handle the increased truck traffic caused by the construction of warehouses nearby in 2003 and 2004 . 
 PA 39 was also improved in Linglestown square , when two roundabouts were installed between 2009 and 2011 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Dauphin County . 
 = 32X = 
 The 32X is an add @-@ on for the Mega Drive / Genesis video game console . Codenamed " Project Mars " , the 32X was designed to expand the power of the Genesis and serve as a transitional console into the 32 @-@ bit era until the release of the Sega Saturn . Independent of the Genesis , the 32X uses its own ROM cartridges and has its own library of games . The add @-@ on was distributed under the name Super 32X ( <unk> , Sūpā <unk> Ekkusu ) in Japan , Genesis 32X in North America , Mega Drive 32X in the PAL region , and Mega 32X in Brazil . 
 Unveiled by Sega at June 1994 's Consumer Electronics Show , the 32X was presented as a low @-@ cost option for consumers looking to play 32 @-@ bit games . Developed in response to the Atari Jaguar and concerns that the Saturn would not make it to market by the end of 1994 , the product was first conceived as an entirely new console . At the suggestion of Sega of America executive Joe Miller and his team , the console was converted into an add @-@ on to the existing Genesis and made more powerful . The final design contained two 32 @-@ bit central processing units and a 3D graphics processor . To bring the new add @-@ on to market by its scheduled release date of November 1994 , development of the new system and its games were rushed . The console failed to attract third @-@ party video game developers and consumers because of the announcement of the Sega Saturn 's simultaneous release in Japan . Sega 's efforts to rush the 32X to market cut into available time for game development , resulting in a weak library of forty titles that could not fully use the add @-@ on 's hardware , including Genesis ports . By the end of 1994 , the 32X had sold 665 @,@ 000 units . After price reductions in 1995 , it was discontinued in 1996 as Sega turned its focus to the Saturn . 
 Reception after the add @-@ on 's unveiling and launch was positive , highlighting the low price of the system and power expansion to the Genesis . Later reviews , both contemporary and retrospective , for the 32X have been mostly negative because of its shallow game library , poor market timing and the resulting market fragmentation for the Genesis . 
 = = History = = 
 The Sega Genesis , initially released in Japan as the Mega Drive in 1988 , was Sega 's entry into the 16 @-@ bit era of video game consoles . The console was then released as the Genesis in 1989 for the North American market , with releases in other regions following a year later . 
 Although the earlier release of the Sega CD add @-@ on had been commercially disappointing , Sega began to develop a stop @-@ gap solution that would bridge the gap between the Genesis and the Sega Saturn , serving as a less expensive entry into the 32 @-@ bit era . The decision to create a new system was made by Nakayama and broadly supported by Sega of America employees . According to former Sega of America producer Scot Bayless , Nakayama was worried that the Saturn would not be available until after 1994 , and about the recent release of the 64 @-@ bit Atari Jaguar . As a result , the direction given was to have this second release to market by the end of the year . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 At the Winter Consumer Electronics Show in January 1994 , Sega of America research and development head Joe Miller took a phone call from Nakayama , in which Nakayama stressed the importance of coming up with a quick response to the Jaguar . Included on this call were Bayless , Sega hardware team head Hideki Sato , and Sega of America vice president of technology Marty Franz . One potential idea for this came from a concept from Sega Enterprises in Japan , later known as " Project Jupiter " , an entirely new independent console . Project Jupiter was initially slated to be a new version of the Genesis , with an upgraded color palette and a lower cost than the upcoming Saturn , as well as with some limited 3D capabilities thanks to integration of ideas from the development of the Sega Virtua Processor chip . Miller suggested an alternative strategy , citing concerns with releasing a new console with no previous design specifications within six to nine months . According to former Sega of America producer Michael Latham , Miller said , " Oh , that 's just a horrible idea . If all you 're going to do is enhance the system , you should make it an add @-@ on . If it 's a new system with legitimate new software , great . But if the only thing it does is double the colors .... " Miller , however , insists that the decision was made collectively to talk about alternative solutions . One idea was to leverage the existing Genesis as a way to keep from alienating Sega customers , who would otherwise be required to discard their Genesis systems entirely to play 32 @-@ bit games , and to control the cost of the new system . This would come in the form of an add @-@ on . From these discussions , Project Jupiter was discontinued and the new add @-@ on , codenamed " Project Mars " , was advanced . 
 At the suggestion from Miller and his team , Sega designed the 32X as a peripheral for the existing Genesis , expanding its power with two 32 @-@ bit SuperH @-@ 2 processors . The SH @-@ 2 had been developed in 1993 as a joint venture between Sega and Japanese electronics company Hitachi . The original design for the 32X add @-@ on , according to Bayless , was created on a cocktail napkin , but Miller insists that this was not the case . At the end of the Consumer Electronics show , with the basic design of the 32X in place , Sega Enterprises invited Sega of America to assist in development of the new add @-@ on . 
 Although the new unit was a stronger console than originally proposed , it was not compatible with Saturn games . This was justified by Sega 's statement that both platforms would run at the same time , and that the 32X would be aimed at players who could not afford the more expensive Saturn . Bayless praised the potential of this system at this point , calling it " a coder 's dream for the day " with its twin processors and 3D capabilities . Sega of America headed up the development of the 32X , with some assistance from Sato 's team at Sega Enterprises in Japan . Shortages of processors due to the same 32 @-@ bit chips being used in both the 32X and the Saturn hindered the development of the 32X , as did the language barrier between the teams in Japan and the United States . 
 Before the 32X could be launched , the release date of the Saturn was announced for November 1994 in Japan , coinciding with the 32X 's target launch date in North America . Sega of America now was faced with trying to market the 32X with the Saturn 's Japan release occurring simultaneously . Their answer was to call the 32X a " transitional device " between the Genesis and the Saturn , to which Bayless describes of the strategy , " [ f ] <unk> , it just made us look greedy and dumb to consumers . " 
 = = = Pre @-@ launch promotion , release , and marketing = = = 
 The unveiling of the 32X to the public came at the Summer Consumer Electronics Show in June 1994 in Chicago . Promoted as the " poor man 's entry into ' next generation ' games " , 32X was marketed for its US $ 159 price point as a less @-@ expensive alternative to the Saturn . However , Sega would not answer whether or not a Genesis console equipped with a Sega CD and a 32X would be able to run Saturn software . Founder of The 3DO Company , Trip Hawkins , was willing to point out that it would not , stating , " Everyone knows that 32X is a Band @-@ Aid . It 's not a ' next generation system . ' It 's fairly expensive . It 's not particularly high @-@ performance . It 's hard to program for , and it 's not compatible with the Saturn . " In response to these comments , Sega executive Richard <unk> @-@ Lindner pointed out that the 32X would play Genesis titles , and had the same system architecture as the Saturn . 
 In August of that year , GamePro highlighted the advantages of the upcoming add @-@ on in its 32 @-@ bit processors and significantly lower price , noting that " [ n ] o doubt gotta @-@ get @-@ it @-@ now gamers will spend the big bucks to grab Saturn or PlayStation systems and games from Japan . For the rest of us , however , 32X may well be the system of choice in ' 94 . " In promotion for the new system , Sega promised 12 games available at launch and 50 games due for release in 1995 from third @-@ party developers . 
 The 32X was released on November 21 , 1994 in North America , in time for the holiday season that year . As announced , it retailed for $ 159 @.@ 99 , and had a reasonably successful launch in the marketplace . Demand among retailers was high , and Sega could not keep up orders for the system . Over 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 orders had been placed for 32X units , but Sega had only managed to ship 600 @,@ 000 units by January 1995 . Launching at about the same price as a Genesis console , the price of the 32X was less than half of what the Saturn 's price would be at launch . Despite Sega 's initial promises , only four titles were available at its North American launch ; Doom , Star Wars Arcade , Virtua Racing Deluxe , and Cosmic Carnage . Games were available at a retail price of $ 69 @.@ 95 . Advertising for the system included images of the 32X being connected to a Genesis console to create an " arcade system " . Japan received the 32X on December 3 , 1994 , at a cost of JP ¥ 16 @,@ 800 . The system 's PAL release came in January 1995 , at a price of GB £ 169 @.@ 99 , and also experienced initial high demand . 
 = = = Decline = = = 
 Despite the lower price console 's positioning as an inexpensive entry into 32 @-@ bit gaming , Sega had a difficult time convincing third @-@ party developers to create games for the new system . Top developers were already aware of the coming arrival of the Sega Saturn , Nintendo 64 , and PlayStation , and did not believe the 32X would be capable of competing with any of those systems . The quick development time of the 32X also made game development difficult , according to Franz . Not wanting to create games for an add @-@ on that was " a technological dead @-@ end " , many developers decided not to make games for the system . Issues also plagued titles developed in @-@ house due to the time crunch to release the 32X . According to Bayless , " games in the queue were effectively jammed into a box as fast as possible , which meant massive cutting of corners in every conceivable way . Even from the outset , designs of those games were deliberately conservative because of the time crunch . By the time they shipped they were even more conservative ; they did nothing to show off what the hardware was capable of . " 
 Journalists were similarly concerned about Sega 's tactic of selling two similar consoles at different prices and attempting to support both , likening Sega 's approach to that of General Motors and segmenting the market for its consoles . In order to convince journalists that the 32X was a worthwhile console , Sega hosted a party for journalists in a nightclub , featuring live music and 32X games on exhibition . The event turned out to be a bust , however , as journalists attempted to leave the party due to its loud music and unimpressive games on display . 
 Though the system had a successful launch , demand soon disappeared . Over the first three months of 1995 , several of the 32X 's third party publishers , including Capcom and Konami , cancelled their 32X projects so that they could focus on producing games for the Saturn and PlayStation . The 32X failed to catch on with the public , and is considered a commercial failure . By 1995 , the Genesis had still not proven successful in Japan , where it was known as Mega Drive , and the Saturn was beating the PlayStation , so Sega CEO Hayao Nakayama decided to force Sega of America to focus on the Saturn and cut support for Genesis products , executing a surprise early launch of the Saturn in the early summer of 1995 . Sega was supporting five different consoles before this — Saturn , Genesis , Game Gear , Pico , and the Master System — as well as the Sega CD and Sega 32X add @-@ ons . Sales estimates for the 32X stood at 665 @,@ 000 units at the end of 1994 . Despite assurances from Sega that many games would be developed for the system , in early 1996 , Sega finally conceded that they had promised too much out of the add @-@ on and decided to discontinue the 32X in order to focus on the Saturn . In September 1995 , the retail price for the 32X dropped to $ 99 , and later the remaining inventory was cleared out of stores at $ 19 @.@ 95 . 
 = = = Sega Neptune = = = 
 The Sega Neptune was a two @-@ in @-@ one Genesis and 32X console which Sega planned to release in fall 1995 , with the retail price planned to be something less than US $ 200 . The Neptune was delayed into 1996 , then canceled altogether with the discontinuation of 32X production . Electronic Gaming Monthly used the Sega Neptune as an April Fools ' Day prank in its April 2001 issue . The issue included a small article in which the writers announced that Sega had found a warehouse full of old Sega Neptunes , and were selling them on a website for only $ 50 . 
 = = Technical aspects and specifications = = 
 The 32X can be used only in conjunction with a Genesis system . It is inserted into the system like a standard game cartridge . The add @-@ on requires its own separate power supply , a connection cable linking it to the Genesis , and an additional conversion cable for the original model of the Genesis . As well as playing its own library of cartridges , the 32X is backwards @-@ compatible with Genesis games , and can also be used in conjunction with the Sega CD to play games that use both add @-@ ons . The 32X also came with a spacer so it would fit properly with the second model of the Genesis ; an optional spacer was offered for use with the Sega Genesis CDX system , but ultimately never shipped due to risks of electric shock when the 32X and CDX were connected . Installation of the 32X also requires the insertion of two included electromagnetic shield plates into the Genesis ' cartridge slot . 
 Seated on top of a Genesis , the 32X measures 115 mm × 210 mm × 100 mm ( 4 @.@ 5 in × 8 @.@ 3 in × 3 @.@ 9 in ) . The 32X contains two Hitachi SH2 32 @-@ bit RISC processors with a clock speed of 23 MHz , which Sega claimed would allow the system to work 40 times faster than a stand @-@ alone Genesis . Its graphics processing unit is capable of producing 32 @,@ 768 colors and rendering 50 @,@ 000 polygons per second , which provides a noticeable improvement over the polygon rendering of the Genesis . The 32X also includes 256 <unk> of random @-@ access memory ( RAM ) , along with 256 <unk> of Video RAM . Sound is supplied through a pulse @-@ width modulation sound source . Input / output is supplied to a television set via a provided A / V cable that supplies composite video and stereo audio , or through an RF modulator . Stereo audio can also be played through headphones via a headphone jack on the attached Genesis . 
 = = Game library = = 
 The 32X 's game library consists of forty titles , including six that required both the Sega 32X and Sega CD . Among the titles for the 32X were ports of arcade games Space Harrier and Star Wars Arcade , a sidescroller with a hummingbird as a main character in Kolibri , and a 32X @-@ exclusive game in the Sonic the Hedgehog series titled Knuckles ' Chaotix . Several of the games released for the 32X are enhanced ports of Genesis games , including After Burner , NFL Quarterback Club , and World Series Baseball ' 95 . In a retrospective review of the console , Star Wars Arcade was considered the best game for the 32X by IGN for its cooperative play , soundtrack , and faithful reproduction of the experiences of Star Wars . In a separate review , IGN 's Buchanan praised the 32X title Shadow Squadron as superior to Star Wars Arcade . Retro Gamer writer Damien McFerran , however , praised Virtua Fighter as " the jewel in the 32X 's crown " , and GamesRadar named Knuckles ' Chaotix as the best game for the system . 
 Although the console used 32 @-@ bit processing and was capable of better graphics and sound than the Genesis alone , most games for the 32X did not take advantage of its hardware . Doom for the 32X received near perfect reviews from gaming magazines upon launch , but was later noted for being an inferior version of the game compared to releases for the PC and the Atari Jaguar , with the 32X version criticized for missing levels , poor graphic and audio quality , <unk> movement , and running within a window on the screen . Though the system had enhanced audio capabilities , 32X games did not use this , which Franz believes was due to developers being unwilling to invest in designing games to work with the new audio enhancements . One source of these issues was the rush to release games on time for the 32X 's launch ; former Sega of America executive producer Michael Latham explained , in reference to 32X launch title Cosmic Carnage , " We were rushed . We had to get games out for the 32X and it was going to be such a close cycle . When Cosmic Carnage showed up , we didn 't even want to ship it . It took a lot of convincing , you know , to ship that title . " Likewise with Doom , id Software 's John Carmack rushed to have the port ready for release at the 32X 's launch and had to trim out a third of the game 's levels in order to meet the deadline for the port to be published on time . Because of time limitations , game designs were intentionally conservative and did not show what the 32X hardware was able to do . In an interview at the end of 1995 , Sega vice president of marketing Mike <unk> , while insisting that Sega was not abandoning the 32X , acknowledged that first party software support for the system had been lackluster : " I won 't lie to you , we screwed up with 32X . We <unk> and <unk> . " 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Initial reception to the 32X and its games upon the launch of the add @-@ on was very positive . Four reviewers from Electronic Gaming Monthly scored the add @-@ on 8 , 7 , 8 , and 8 out of 10 in their 1995 Buyer 's Guide , highlighting the add @-@ on 's enhancements to the Genesis but questioning how long the system would be supported . GamePro commented that the 32X 's multiple input and power cords make it " as complicated as setting up your VCR " and noted some performance glitches with the prototype such as freezes and overheating , but expressed confidence that the production models would perform well and gave the add @-@ on their overall approval . Reviews of its launch titles , such as Doom , were likewise positive . By 1996 , feedback to the add @-@ on had soured . In its 1996 Buyer 's Guide , Electronic Gaming Monthly 's four reviewers scored the add @-@ on 3 , 3 , 3 , and 2 out of 10 , criticizing the game library and Sega 's abandonment of the system in favor of the Saturn . 
 Retrospectively , the 32X is widely criticized as having been under @-@ supported and a poor idea in the wake of the release of the Sega Saturn . 1UP.com 's Jeremy Parish stated that the 32X " tainted just about everything it touched . " GamesRadar also panned the system , placing it as their ninth @-@ worst console with reviewer Mikel Reparaz criticizing that " it was a stopgap system that would be thrown under the bus when the Sega Saturn came out six months later , and everyone seemed to know it except for die @-@ hard Sega fans and the company itself . " Retro Gamer 's Damien McFerran offered some praise for the power increase of the 32X to offer ports of Space Harrier , After Burner , and Virtua Fighter that were accurate to the original arcade versions , as well as the add @-@ on 's price point , stating , " If you didn 't have deep enough pockets to afford a Saturn , then the 32X was a viable option ; it 's just a shame that it sold so poorly because the potential was there for true greatness . " Levi Buchanan , writing for IGN , saw some sense in the move for Sega to create the 32X but criticized its implementation . According to Buchanan , " I actually thought the 32X was a better idea than the SEGA CD ... The 32X , while underpowered , at least advanced the ball . Maybe it only gained a few inches in no small part due to a weak library , but at least the idea was the right one . " 
 In particular , the console 's status as an add @-@ on and poor timing after the announcement of the Saturn has been identified by reviewers as being responsible factors for fracturing the audience for Sega 's video game consoles in terms of both developers and consumers . Allgame notes that " [ e ] very add @-@ on whittled away at the number of potential buyers and discouraged third @-@ party companies from making the games necessary to boost sales . " GamePro criticized the concept of the add @-@ on , noting the expenses involved in purchasing the system . According to reviewer Blake Snow , " Just how many 16 @-@ bit attachments did one need ? All in all , if you were one of the unlucky souls who completely bought into Sega 's add @-@ on frenzy , you would have spent a whopping $ 650 for something that weighed about as much as a small dog . " Writing for GamesRadar , Reparaz noted that " developers — not wanting to waste time on a technological dead @-@ end — abandoned the 32X in droves . Gamers quickly followed suit , turning what was once a promising idea into an embarrassing footnote in console history , as well as an object lesson in why console makers shouldn 't split their user base with pricey add @-@ ons . " Reparaz went on to criticize Sega 's decision to release the 32X , noting that " ( u ) <unk> , the 32X was the product of boneheaded short @-@ sightedness : its existence put Sega into competition with itself once the Saturn rolled out . " Writing for IGN , Buchanan also notes that " Notice that we haven 't seen many add @-@ ons like the 32X since 1994 ? I think the 32X killed the idea of an add @-@ on like this — a power booster — permanently . And that 's a good thing . Because add @-@ ons , if not implemented properly , just splinter an audience . " 
 Former executives at Sega have mixed opinions of the 32X . Bayless believes firmly that the 32X serves as a warning to the video game industry not to risk splintering the market for consoles by creating add @-@ ons , and was critical of the Kinect and PlayStation Move for doing so . Franz places the 32X 's commercial failure on its inability to function without an attached Genesis and lack of a CD drive , despite its compatibility with the Sega CD , stating , " The 32X was destined to die because it didn 't have a CD drive and was an add @-@ on . An add @-@ on device is never as well thought out as a built @-@ from @-@ scratch device . " Miller , on the other hand , remembers the 32X positively , stating , " I think the 32X actually was an interesting , viable platform . The timing was wrong , and certainly our ability to stick with it , given what we did with Saturn , was severely limited . There were a whole bunch of reasons why we couldn ’ t ultimately do what we had to do with that platform , without third party support and with the timing of Saturn , but I still think the project was a success for a bunch of other reasons . In hindsight , it was not a great idea for a whole bunch of other reasons . " 
 = Jama Masjid , Delhi = 
 The Masjid @-@ i <unk> @-@ <unk> ( Persian / Urdu : <unk> <unk> <unk> , Devanagari : <unk> ् <unk> <unk> <unk> , the ' World @-@ reflecting Mosque ' ) , commonly known as the Jama Masjid ( Hindi : <unk> <unk> ् <unk> , Urdu : جامع مسجد ) of Delhi , is one of the largest mosques in India . 
 It was built by Mughal emperor Shah Jahan between 1644 and 1656 at a cost of 1 million rupees , and was inaugurated by an imam from Bukhara , present @-@ day Uzbekistan . The mosque was completed in 1656 AD with three great gates , four towers and two 40 m high minarets constructed of strips of red sandstone and white marble . The courtyard can accommodate more than 25 @,@ 000 persons . There are three domes on the terrace which are surrounded by the two minarets . On the floor , a total of 899 black borders are marked for worshippers . The architectural plan of Badshahi Masjid , built by Shah Jahan 's son Aurangzeb at Lahore , Pakistan , is similar to the Jama Masjid . 
 The mosque has been the site of two attacks , one in 2006 and another in 2010 . During the first , two explosions occurred in the mosque , injuring thirteen people . In the second , two Taiwanese students were injured as two gunmen opened fire upon them . 
 = = History = = 
 Mughal emperor Shah Jahan built the Jama Masjid between 1644 and 1656 . It was constructed by more than 5000 workers . It was originally called Masjid @-@ i @-@ Jahan @-@ Numa , meaning ' mosque commanding view of the world ' . The construction was done under the supervision of <unk> Khan , wazir ( or prime minister ) during Shah Jahan 's rule . The cost of the construction at the time was one million Rupees . Shah Jahan also built the Taj Mahal , at Agra and the Red Fort in New Delhi , which stands opposite the Jama Masjid . The Jama Masjid was completed in 1656 AD ( 1066 AH ) . The mosque was inaugurated by an Imam Bukhari , a mullah from Bukhara , <unk> , on 23 July 1656 , on the invitation from Shah Jahan . About 25 @,@ 000 people can pray in the courtyard at a time and it is sometimes regarded as India 's largest mosque . The mosque is commonly called " Jama " which means Friday . 
 After the British victory in Revolt of 1857 , they confiscated the mosque and stationed their soldiers <unk> also wanted to destroy the mosque to punish the people of the city . But due to opposition faced , the demolition was not done . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The mosque has three great gates , four towers and two 40 m high minarets constructed of strips of red sandstone and white marble . The northern gate has 39 steps and the southern side has 33 steps . The eastern gate was the rural entrance and it has 35 steps . Out of all these gateways , the eastern one , which was used by the emperors , remains closed during weekdays . The mosque is built on a red sandstone porch , which is about 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) from ground level and spreads over 1200 square metre . The dome is flanked by two lofty minarets which are 130 feet ( 40 m ) high and consists of 130 steps , longitudinally striped by marble and red sandstone . The minarets consists of five storeys , each with a protruding balcony . The adjoining edifices are filled with calligraphy . The first three storeys of the minarets is made of red sandstone , the fourth of marble and the fifth of sandstone . 
 The courtyard can accommodate 25 @,@ 000 worshippers and occupies 408 square feet . The mosque is about 261 feet ( 80 m ) long and 90 feet ( 27 m ) wide . The prayer hall measures 61 metre in length and 27 @.@ 5 metre in breadth . It is made up of high cusped arches and marble domes . The cabinet located in the north gate has a collection of relics of Muhammad – the Quran written on deerskin , a red beard @-@ hair of the prophet , his sandals and his footprints implanted in a marble block . 
 The floor plan of the mosque is similar to that of the Jama Masjid of Agra . It is covered with white and black ornamented marble to look like a Muslim prayer mat . Beside it , a thin black border measuring 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) long and 1 @.@ 5 feet ( 0 @.@ 46 m ) wide is marked for the worshippers . There are 899 total such boxes . The architecture and plan of Badshahi Masjid which was built by Shah Jahan 's son Aurangzeb in Lahore is closely related to that of the mosque . Before the Revolt of 1857 , there was a madrasa near the southern end of the mosque , which was during the revolt destroyed . 
 = = Recent times = = 
 In 2006 , it was reported that the mosque was in urgent need of repair and the then Saudi Arabian king Abdullah , offered to pay for it . The imam said that he had received the offer directly from the Saudi authorities but requested them to approach the Indian government . 
 In November 2014 , the Shahi Imam Syed Bukhari appointed his son Shaban Bukhari as his successor . However , the Delhi High Court said that this matter had no " legal sanctity " giving no " special equities " to the imam . He created controversy by inviting Pakistan Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif to the ceremony and not his Indian counterpart Narendra Modi . He said that " Muslims have not forgiven him for the Gujarat riots " . 
 = = = 2006 Jama Masjid explosions = = = 
 On 14 April 2006 , there were two explosions which came soon after Friday prayers and occurred in swift succession . However it was unclear , about how the blasts occurred . Among the casualties , one was in serious condition , whereas other eight people sustained minor injuries . The then imam , Bukhari commented " here is anger among our people but I am appealing to them to maintain calm " . 
 = = = 2010 Jama Masjid attack = = = 
 On 15 September 2010 , two Taiwanese tourists were injured after gunmen on a motorcycle opened fire on a bus parked near gate number three of the mosque . After the attack , the police detained 30 people to question and the area was turned into a fortress because policemen were heavily deployed . 
 In November 2011 , the Delhi Police arrested six members of the Indian Mujahideen who were believed to be behind the Jama Masjid blast along with the Pune German bakery blast . Sources said that the " ' main man ' Imran " allegedly planted the bomb in a car outside the mosque . In September 2013 it was reported that , Yasin Bhatkal , a leader of the group , along with Assadullah Akhtar , were arrested last month and admitted that they carried the attack with on @-@ the @-@ run Pakistani national <unk> . Yasin said that he was ordered by Karachi @-@ based IM head Riyaz Bhatkal to do the task as the Imam allowed " semi @-@ naked " foreigners inside it . 
 = St Ceinwen 's Church , Cerrigceinwen = 
 St Ceinwen 's Church , Cerrigceinwen , is a former parish church in the countryside of central Anglesey , north Wales . The present building dates from 1860 , although the site has been used for worship since at least the 7th century . The doorway reuses some old carved gravestones , one from the 9th to 11th centuries , and another from the 12th century . The church grounds contain a well , once thought to have healing properties . The church and the well are both named after St Ceinwen , an early Celtic female saint . 
 The church is closed and no longer used for worship by the Church in Wales and , as of July 2012 , was for sale . It is a Grade II listed building , a national designation given to " buildings of special interest , which warrant every effort being made to preserve them " , in particular because it is a " simple rural church " from the 19th century that reuses older carved stonework . 
 = = History and location = = 
 St Ceinwen 's Church is in a rural location in the middle of Anglesey , north Wales . It is set in a hollow at the side of the road near the village of Cerrigceinwen , about 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) to the south @-@ west of Llangefni , the county town of Anglesey . The date of establishment of the first church on this site is uncertain . According to a 2006 guide to the churches of Anglesey , worship began here in the 7th century . The 19th @-@ century writer Samuel Lewis , however , stated that it was supposed that a church was founded at the site in 450 . Some repair work was carried out to a medieval church on this site in 1839 ( although the date of its original construction is unknown ) and the current structure was erected in 1860 . The architects were Henry Kennedy ( architect of the Diocese of Bangor ) and Frederick Rogers . 
 The dedication is to St Ceinwen , known elsewhere in Wales and in Cornwall as Cain or Keyne ( in Welsh , Cain means " fair " or " beautiful " , and Ceinwen means " Blessed Cain " ) . She was the daughter of King Brychan Brycheiniog ; her siblings St Dwynwen and St <unk> are commemorated elsewhere on Anglesey , at St Dwynwen 's Church , <unk> and St <unk> 's Church , <unk> respectively . A spring in the south of the churchyard is known as " St Ceinwen 's Well " ; according to the 19th @-@ century clergyman and antiquarian Harry Longueville Jones , it was " once much resorted to as a spring that could cure many diseases . " 
 The church is no longer used for worship by the Church in Wales and , as of July 2012 , it was being offered for sale at £ 65 @,@ 000 . Some of the surrounding land is included in the sale , but the graveyards to the front and rear of the church are not . 
 = = Architecture and fittings = = 
 The church , which is built in the Decorated style , has a nave at the west end and a chancel at the east end . It is built from rubble masonry dressed with freestone ; the roof is made of slate and edged with stone . There is a porch at the west end of the south wall of the nave and a vestry at the west end of the north wall of the chancel , abutting the nave . The nave measures approximately 39 feet 8 inches by 20 feet 8 inches ( <unk> by 6 @.@ 30 m ) and the chancel is shorter and narrower at approximately 18 feet by 14 feet 1 inch ( 5 @.@ 50 by 4 @.@ 30 m ) . The total floor space of the church is approximately 1 @,@ 076 square feet ( 100 m2 ) . There is a large bellcote at the west end of the nave , containing one bell . 
 The arched doorway in the porch reuses two old carved gravestones . One from the 12th century is cut at its head with a circle containing a rough cross of petals and has a decorated key design on the shaft . It is used as the lintel of the doorway . Part of another gravestone , dating from the 9th to the 11th centuries and with a cross in a circle , is set to the right of the door . Inside , three steps lead up from the nave to the chancel through a decorated chancel arch . A further two steps lead up from the chancel to the sanctuary . The internal woodwork of the roof is exposed . The window in the east wall of the chancel is a pointed arch and has three lights ( sections of window separated by mullions ) topped with trefoils ( a pattern of three overlapping circles ) . The nave windows are also pointed arches and variously have one , two or three lights topped with trefoils . The windows contain coloured leaded glass rather than stained glass pictures . 
 The circular stone font dates from the 12th century but is set on a modern base . It has five panels , four of which are decorated with interlacing carvings of crosses and knots while the fifth is blank . The other fittings of the church date from the 19th century and include an octagonal pulpit with decorated panels . The west wall of the nave has a stone memorial to a Reverend William Griffith who died in 1752 , the south wall has a war memorial to the dead of the First World War , and the north wall has an inscribed stone commemorating a Morris Lloyd ( or Llwyd ) , a Royalist who was killed by Cromwell 's troops in 1647 . 
 A survey of church plate within the Bangor diocese in 1906 recorded a chalice and a paten dating from 1823 . It recorded that a pewter flagon , known from church records to have been owned by the church from 1739 to 1834 , was lost . 
 The churchyard contains a Commonwealth War Grave of a Royal Army Medical Corps sergeant of World War II . 
 = = Assessment = = 
 The church has national recognition and statutory protection from unauthorised alteration as it has been designated as a Grade II listed building , which is the lowest of the three grades of listing , designating " buildings of special interest , which warrant every effort being made to preserve them " . It was given this status on 30 January 1968 and has been listed as " a simple rural church of the 19th century " . Cadw , the Welsh Government body responsible for the built heritage of Wales and the inclusion of Welsh buildings on the statutory lists , also comments that the church is " particularly notable for retention of early carved stonework in the later fabric . " 
 Two writers in the 19th century described the old church . The antiquarian Angharad Llwyd described it ( before the 1839 building work ) as " a neat small edifice , and appropriately fitted @-@ up " . Writing in 1846 , after some rebuilding , Longueville Jones said that the east window was " one of the purest models , as to proportion and workmanship " , in Anglesey , and noted the " richly sculptured compartments " of the font . 
 = Great Sejm = 
 The Great Sejm , also known as the Four @-@ Year Sejm ( Polish : respectively , Sejm Wielki or Sejm <unk> ; Lithuanian : Didysis seimas or <unk> <unk> seimas ) was a Sejm ( parliament ) of the Polish @-@ Lithuanian Commonwealth that was held in Warsaw between 1788 and 1792 . Its principal aim became to restore sovereignty to , and reform , the Commonwealth politically and economically . 
 The Sejm 's great achievement was the adoption of the Constitution of May 3 , 1791 , often described as Europe 's first modern written national constitution , and the world 's second , after the United States Constitution . The Polish Constitution was designed to redress long @-@ standing political defects of the federative Polish @-@ Lithuanian Commonwealth and its system of Golden Liberties . The Constitution introduced political equality between townspeople and nobility and placed the peasants under the protection of the government , thus mitigating the worst abuses of serfdom . The Constitution abolished pernicious parliamentary institutions such as the liberum veto , which at one time had placed a sejm at the mercy of any deputy who might choose , or be bribed by an interest or foreign power , to undo all the legislation that had been passed by that sejm . The May 3rd Constitution sought to supplant the existing anarchy fostered by some of the country 's reactionary magnates , with a more egalitarian and democratic constitutional monarchy . 
 The reforms instituted by the Great Sejm and the Constitution of May 3 , 1791 , were undone by the Targowica Confederation and the intervention of the Russian Empire at the invitation of the Targowica Confederates . 
 = = Origins = = 
 The reforms of the Great Sejm responded to the increasingly perilous situation of the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth , only a century earlier a major European power and indeed the largest state on the continent . By the 18th century the Commonwealth 's state machinery became increasingly dysfunctional ; the government was near collapse , giving rise to the term " Polish anarchy " , and the country was managed by provincial assemblies and magnates . Many historians hold that a major cause of the Commonwealth 's downfall was the peculiar parliamentary institution of the liberum veto ( " free veto " ) , which since 1652 had in principle permitted any Sejm deputy to nullify all the legislation that had been adopted by that Sejm . By the early 18th century , the magnates of Poland and Lithuania controlled the state – or rather , they managed to ensure that no reforms would be carried out that might weaken their privileged status ( the " Golden Freedoms " ) . The matters were not helped by the inefficient monarchs elected to the Commonwealth throne around the start of the 18th century , nor by neighboring countries , which were content with the deteriorated state of the Commonwealth 's affairs and abhorred the thought of a resurgent and democratic power on their borders . 
 The Enlightenment European cultural movement had gained great influence in certain Commonwealth circles during the reign of its last king , Stanisław August Poniatowski ( 1764 – 95 ) , which roughly coincided with the Enlightenment in Poland . In 1772 , the First Partition of Poland , the earliest of the three successive 18th @-@ century partitions of Commonwealth territory that eventually removed Poland from the map of Europe , shocked the inhabitants of the Commonwealth , and made it clear to progressive minds that the Commonwealth must either reform or perish . In the last three decades preceding the Great Sejm , there was a rising interest among progressive thinkers in constitutional reform . Even before the First Partition , a Polish noble , Michał Wielhorski , an envoy of the Bar Confederation , had been sent to ask the French philosophes Gabriel Bonnot de Mably and Jean @-@ Jacques Rousseau to offer suggestions on a new constitution for a new Poland . Mably had submitted his recommendations ( The Government and Laws of Poland ) in 1770 – 1771 ; Rousseau had finished his Considerations on the Government of Poland in 1772 , when the First Partition was already underway . Notable works advocating the need to reform and presenting specific solutions were published in the Commonwealth itself by Polish @-@ Lithuanian thinkers such as : 
 Stanisław Konarski , founder of the Collegium Nobilium ( On the Effective Conduct of Debates in Ordinary Sejms , 1761 – 1763 ) ; 
 Józef Wybicki , composer of the Polish National Anthem ( Political Thoughts on Civil Liberties , 1775 , Patriotic Letters , 1778 – 1778 ) ; 
 Hugo Kołłątaj , head of the Kołłątaj 's Forge party ( Anonymous Letters to Stanisław Małachowski , 1788 – 1789 , The Political Law of the Polish Nation , 1790 ) ; and 
 Stanisław Staszic ( Remarks on the Life of Jan Zamoyski , 1787 ) . 
 Also seen as crucial to giving the upcoming reforms their moral and political support were Ignacy Krasicki 's satires of the Great Sejm era . 
 = = Proceedings = = 
 = = = 1789 – 90 = = = 
 A major opportunity for reform seemed to present itself during the sejm of 1788 – 92 , which opened on October 6 , 1788 with 181 deputies , and from 1790 – in the words of the May 3 Constitution 's preamble – met " in dual number " , when 171 newly elected Sejm deputies joined the earlier @-@ established Sejm . On its second day the Sejm transformed itself into a confederated sejm to make it immune to the threat of the liberum veto . Russian <unk> Catherine the Great had issued the approval for the sejm confederation a while ago , at a point she was considering that the successful conclusion of this Sejm may be necessary if Russia would need Polish aid in the fight against the Ottoman Empire . Stanisław Małachowski , a statesman respected both by most factions , was elected as the Marshal of the Sejm . 
 Many supporters of the reforms were gathered in the Patriotic Party . This group received support from all strata of Polish @-@ Lithuanian society , from societal and political elites , including some aristocratic magnates , through Piarist and Enlightened Catholics , to the radical left . The Party 's conservative , or right , wing , led by progressive magnates such as Ignacy Potocki , his brother Stanisław Kostka Potocki and Prince Adam Kazimierz Czartoryski , sought alliance with Prussia and advocated opposing King Poniatowski . The Patriotic Party 's centrists , including Stanisław Małachowski , wished accommodation with the King . The liberal left wing ( the Polish Jacobins ) , led by Hugo Kołłątaj ( hence also known as " Kołłątaj 's Forge " ) , looked for support to the people of Warsaw . While King Poniatowski also supported some reforms , he was initially not allied with this faction , represented by Potocki , who preferred a republican form of a government . 
 Events in the world appeared to play into the reformers ' hands . Poland 's neighbors were too occupied with wars to intervene forcibly in Poland , with Russia and Austria engaged in hostilities with the Ottoman Empire ( the Russo @-@ Turkish War and the Austro @-@ Turkish War ) ; the Russians also found themselves fighting Sweden ( the Russo @-@ Swedish War ) . At first , King Poniatowski and some reformers hoped to gain Russian support for the reforms ; they attempted to draw Poland into the Austro @-@ Russian alliance , seeing a war with the Ottomans as an opportunity to strengthen the Commonwealth . Due to internal Russian politics , this plan was not implemented . Spurned by Russia , Poland turned to another potential ally , the Triple Alliance , represented on the Polish diplomatic scene primarily by the Kingdom of Prussia . This line of reasoning gained support from Polish politicians such as Ignacy Potocki and Adam Kazimierz Czartoryski . With the new Polish @-@ Prussian alliance seeming to provide security against Russian intervention , King Poniatowski drew closer to leaders of the reform @-@ minded Patriotic Party . This alliance was also helped as the 1790 elections were more supportive of the royal faction then Potocki 's ; and the conservative faction gained enough new seats to threaten the reformers if they were to stay divided . With the mediation of Scipione Piattoli , Potocki and Poniatowski begun to reach a consensus on a more constitutional monarchy approach , and started to draft a constitutional document . 
 Overall , the first two years of the Sejm passed with few major reforms , and it was the second half of the Sejm duration that brought major changes . 
 = = = 1791 – 92 = = = 
 The elections of autumn 1790 resulted in a new group of deputies joining those already elected . A second Marshal of the Sejm was elected ( Kazimierz Nestor Sapieha ) . As Małachowski was seen as associated with the reformers , Sapieha was initially seen as a conservative , although he would later switch sides and join the reformers . The doubled number of deputies exceeded the capacity of the parliament chambers , and not all of the deputies could secure a seat ; public interest also grew and the entire building and the observation galleries were often overcrowded . 
 While the Sejm comprised representatives only of the nobility and clergy , the reformers were supported by the burghers ( townspeople ) , who in the fall of 1789 organized a Black Procession , demonstrating their desire to be part of the political process . Taking a cue from similar events in France , and with the fear that if burghers ' demands were not met , their peaceful protests could turn violent , the Sejm on April 18 , 1791 adopted a law addressing the status of the cities and the rights of the burghers ( the Free Royal Cities Act ) . Together with the legislation on the voting rights ( the Act on Sejmiks of March 24 , 1791 ) , it became incorporated into the final constitution . 
 The new Constitution had been drafted by the king , with contributions from others , including Ignacy Potocki and Hugo Kołłątaj . The king is credited with authoring the general provisions , and Kołłątaj , with giving the work its final shape . Poniatowski aimed for a constitutional monarchy similar to the one in England , with strong central government based upon a strong monarch . Potocki wanted to make the parliament ( Sejm ) the most powerful of the state 's institutions , and Kołłątaj , for a " gentle " social revolution , enfranchising other classes in addition to the till @-@ then dominant nobility , but doing so without a violent overthrow of the old order . 
 Reforms were opposed by conservative elements , including the Hetmans ' Party . The reform 's advocates , threatened with violence from their opponents , managed to move debate on the new constitution forward by two days from the original May 5 , while many opposed deputies were still away on Easter recess . The ensuing debate and adoption of the Constitution of 3 May took place in a quasi @-@ coup d 'état : recall notices were not sent to known opponents of reform , while many pro @-@ reform deputies arrived early and in secret , and the royal guard were positioned about the Royal Castle , where the Sejm was gathered , to prevent Russian supporters from disrupting the proceedings . On May 3 the Sejm met with only 182 members present , about a half of its " dual " number ( or a third , if one was to count all individuals eligible to take part in the proceedings , including the Senate and the king ) . The bill was read out and adopted overwhelmingly , to the enthusiasm of the crowds gathered outside . 
 The work of the Great Sejm did not end with the passing of the Constitution . The Sejm continued to debate and pass legislation building on and clarifying that document . Among the most notable acts passed after the 3 May was the <unk> <unk> <unk> ( Declaration of the Assembled Estates ) of May 5 , 1791 , confirming the Government Act adopted two days earlier , and the <unk> <unk> Obojga Narodów ( Reciprocal Guarantee of Two Nations , i.e. , of the Crown of Poland and the Grand Duchy of Lithuania ) of October 22 , 1791 , affirming the unity and indivisibility of Poland and the Grand Duchy within a single state , and their equal representation in state @-@ governing bodies . The Mutual Declaration strengthened the Polish @-@ Lithuanian union , while keeping many federal aspects of the state intact . 
 The Sejm was disbanded on May 29 , 1792 . On that day , soon after learning that the Russian army had invaded Poland , the Sejm gave the commander @-@ in @-@ chief position to the king , and voted to end the session . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Soon afterwards , the Friends of the Constitution , regarded as the first Polish political party , and including many participants of the Great Sejm , was formed to defend the reforms already enacted and to promote further ones . The response to the new Constitution was less enthusiastic in the provinces , where the Hetmans ' Party exerted stronger influence . The Great Sejm 's reforms were brought down by the Targowica Confederation and the intervention of the Russian Empire . On 23 November 1793 the Grodno Sejm annulled all the enactments of the Great Sejm , including the Constitution of May 3 , 1791 . 
 = Certificate of division = 
 A certificate of division was a source of appellate jurisdiction from the circuit courts to the Supreme Court of the United States from 1802 to 1911 . Created by the Judiciary Act of 1802 , the certification procedure was available only where the circuit court sat with a full panel of two : both the resident district judge and the circuit @-@ riding Supreme Court justice . As Chief Justice John Marshall wrote , he did not have " the privilege of dividing the court when alone . " 
 The certificate of division procedure had unique features . Unlike writ of error and certiorari jurisdiction , the certificate of division procedure did not require a federal question . In criminal cases , the certificate of division was the only source of appellate jurisdiction from the circuit courts ( save original habeas ) until 1889 . In civil cases , although ordinary writs of error were authorized , the certificate of division remained important because it permitted appeals without regard to the amount in controversy and interlocutory appeals . Inasmuch as the certificate of division permitted the Supreme Court some measure of control over its docket , it is a precursor to modern certiorari jurisdiction . 
 With regards to criminal cases , the Supreme Court held ( in 1896 ) that Judiciary Act of 1891 operated as an implied repeal of the authorization to hear cases on certificates of division . But , the Court retained its authority hear civil cases via certificates of division until the abolition of the circuit courts by the Judicial Code of 1911 . A different , and rarely used , certified question procedure was adopted in 1925 and is currently codified at 28 U.S.C. § 1254 ( 2 ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Circuit courts = = = 
 Under the Judiciary Act of 1789 , the circuit courts were composed of a stationary district court judge and any two Supreme Court justices riding circuit . Following a brief intermezzo with the soon @-@ repealed Midnight Judges Act of 1801 ( which abolished circuit riding ) , under the Judiciary Act of 1802 , the circuit courts were composed of a stationary district judge and one Supreme Court justice assigned to the circuit . 
 Section 4 of the Judiciary Act of 1789 had provided that two judges or justices would constitute a quorum . The practice of sending a single circuit rider was explicitly authorized by the Judiciary Act of 1793 , but was already common before 1793 . Under the Judicial Act of 1802 , a single judge ( either the district judge or the circuit rider ) could preside alone . 
 = = = Early tie @-@ breaking methods = = = 
 In United States v. Daniel ( 1821 ) , Chief Justice John Marshall recounted the history of tie @-@ breaking methods on the circuit courts . If one judge or justice disagreed with the other two , the majority prevailed . If only one Supreme Court justice could attend , and a division arose between the district judge and the Supreme Court justice , the practice — as required by the Judiciary Act of 1793 — was to hold the case over until the next term . If a one @-@ to @-@ one division persisted with a different circuit riding justice , the opinion of the previous circuit rider broke the tie . After 1802 , in cases where both judges sat , though , one @-@ to @-@ one divisions were less likely to be resolved by continuing the case until the next term because the circuit @-@ riding justice would be the same ( barring a change in membership on the Court ) . 
 Prior to 1802 , there was no way to call upon the Supreme Court to resolve one @-@ to @-@ one ties on the circuit courts . Alexander Dallas , the Supreme Court reporter ( and also the reporter of an eclectic assortment of cases from state and federal courts in Pennsylvania ) , noted in United States v. Worrall ( C.C.D. Pa . 1798 ) : 
 The Court being divided in opinion , it became a doubt , whether sentence could be pronounced upon the defendant ; and a wish was expressed by the Judges and the Attorney of the District , that the case might be put into such a form , as would admit of obtaining the ultimate decision of the Supreme Court , upon the important principle of the discussion : But the counsel for the prisoner [ Dallas himself ] did not think themselves authorized to enter into a compromise of that nature . 
 Worrall involved a criminal prosecution of Robert Worrall for bribing Tench Coxe , the Commissioner of Revenue within the Department of the Treasury . After Worrall 's conviction by jury , Dallas had moved for a judgment of acquittal on the ground that the Judiciary Act of 1789 did not empower the circuit court to try common law crimes ( in 1798 , there was no federal statute criminalizing the bribery of the relevant federal official ) . Despite the divided opinion in the circuit court , Worrall was sentenced to three months imprisonment and fined $ 200 . The " short consultation " referred to in the official report , prior to the pronouncement of the reduced sentence , may have been with other members of the Supreme Court , which was then resident in Philadelphia . 
 = = Statutory basis = = 
 The Judiciary Act of 1802 permitted circuit courts to certify questions of law to the Supreme Court if the judges were divided on that question . Specifically , § 6 provided : 
 Whenever any question should occur before a circuit court , upon which the opinions of the judges shall be opposed , the point upon which the disagreement shall happen , shall , during the same term , upon the request of either party , or their counsel , be stated under the direction of the judges , and certified under the seal of the court , to the supreme court , at their next session to be held thereafter ; and shall , by said court , be finally decided . And the decision of the supreme court , and their order in the premises , shall be remitted to the circuit court , and be there entered of record , and shall have effect according to the nature of the said judgment and order : Provided , that nothing herein contained shall prevent the cause from proceeding , if , in the opinion of the court , farther proceedings can be had without prejudice to the merits : and provided also , that imprisonment shall not be allowed , nor punishment in any case be inflicted , where the judges of the said court are divided in opinion upon the question touching said imprisonment or punishment . 
 An 1872 statute modified the certificate of division procedure to require waiting for a final decision in the circuit court case first . In the interim , the opinion of the presiding judge was to prevail . An 1874 statute repealed the 1872 modification as to criminal cases , but left it in place as to civil cases . 
 While the statute provided only for the certification of " the point upon which the disagreement shall happen , " the justices sometimes took the liberty of enlarging the question . For example , in United States v. Hudson ( 1812 ) , the question certified was " whether the Circuit Court of the United States had a common law jurisdiction in cases of libel ? " but the question answered was " whether the Circuit Courts of the United States can exercise a common law jurisdiction in criminal cases ? " And , in United States v. Bevans ( 1818 ) , the Court noted that " [ i ] t may be deemed within the scope of the question certified to this court " to inquire whether the murder was cognizable under § 3 of the Crimes Act of 1790 , even though the defendant had only been indicted under § 8 . 
 = = History of use = = 
 Certificates of division began to fall into disuse as it became increasingly common for the circuit courts to sit with a single judge . The Judiciary Act of 1869 ( the " Circuit Judges Act " ) reduced the circuit @-@ riding duties of the Supreme Court justices and therefore reduced the possibility for certificates of division . As Chief Justice Marshall wrote , he did not have " the privilege of dividing the court when alone . " 
 = = = In criminal cases = = = 
 In United States v. More ( 1805 ) , the Court held that the ordinary means of appeal , the writ of error , could not be utilized in criminal cases from the circuit courts . This contributed to the importance of the certificate of division in criminal cases . The Marshall Court ( 1801 – 1835 ) heard thirty @-@ one criminal cases arising from certificates of division ; the Taney Court ( 1836 – 1864 ) , fifteen ; the Chase Court ( 1864 – 1873 ) , seventeen ; the Waite Court ( 1874 – 1888 ) , thirty @-@ eight ; and the Fuller Court ( 1888 – 1910 ) , fourteen . 
 The Judiciary Act of 1802 plainly contemplated that certificates of division would issue in criminal cases . Section 6 provided that " imprisonment shall not be allowed , nor punishment in any case be inflicted , where judges of the said court are divided in opinion upon the question touching the said imprisonment or punishment . " Justice Story — in his opinions for the Court — cautioned against the too frequent use of certificates of division in criminal cases . In United States v. Gooding ( 1827 ) , for the Court , Justice Story wrote : 
 We take this opportunity of expressing our anxiety , least , by too great indulgence to the wishes of counsel , questions of this sort should be frequently brought before this Court , and thus , in effect , an appeal in criminal cases become an ordinary proceeding to the manifest obstruction of public justice , and against the plain <unk> of the acts of Congress . 
 Not every question or every criminal case was eligible for a certificate of division . In United States v. Daniel ( 1821 ) , the Court held that a motion for a new trial — as authorized by the § 17 of the Judiciary Act of 1789 — could not be the subject of a certificate of division ; rather , the division would operate a rejection of the motion . Similarly , in United States v. Bailey ( 1835 ) , the Court held that the question of whether the evidence was legally sufficient to support the offense charged could not be certified . In United States v. Briggs ( Briggs I ) ( 1847 ) , the Court further limited its jurisdiction to hear criminal certificates of division by holding that the question of whether a demurrer to an indictment should be sustained was to general to be certified . 
 In United States v. Hamilton ( 1883 ) , the Court reaffirmed its earlier holdings that certificates could not issue from motions to quash an indictment . And , in United States v. <unk> ( 1868 ) and United States v. Avery ( 1871 ) , the Court held that a motion to quash an indictment could not be so certified , even if the motion called into question the jurisdiction of the circuit court . 
 = = = In habeas cases = = = 
 In Ex parte Tom Tong ( 1883 ) , the Court held that — under 1872 amendments to the certification procedure , which went into effect during the Chase Court era — because habeas corpus was a civil proceeding , questions arising in habeas cases could not be certified to the Supreme Court until a final judgment had been entered . In Ex parte Milligan ( 1866 ) , after the repeal of those amendments , the Court held that habeas petitions in the circuit courts could be a source of certified questions to the Supreme Court . 
 = = = In civil cases = = = 
 Dartmouth College v. Woodward ( 1819 ) is a famous use of the certificate of division procedure in a civil case . In order to insure that the certificate of division procedure would be available in Dartmouth College , " Story was closely involved from the outset with the litigation . " Early on , Dartmouth 's lawyer , Daniel Webster , sought " to elicit the cooperation of Story in carrying the case to the Marshall Court through a pro forma certificate of division . " The Contract Clause question for which Dartmouth College is famous could have been appealed to the Supreme Court even if the case had been brought in the courts of New Hampshire ( and it was ) ; but , the " vested rights " argument , which Story and Webster regarded as potentially stronger , was not a matter of federal law and thus could not be appealed by writ of error . In fact , after the New Hampshire Supreme Court ruled against the College , in addition to filing an appeal , a new case was filed in the federal circuit court . As Webster wrote in a letter to another lawyer for the College : 
 I have no doubt [ that Justice Story ] will [ be ] incline [ d ] to send up the new cause in the most convenient manner , without giving any opinion , and probably without an argument . If the district judge will agree to divide without argument , pro forma , I think Judge Story will incline so to dispose of the cause . 
 Although Story did as Webster predicted , the certificate of division was never heard by the Supreme Court because the direct appeal was decided first . 
 = = Certificates not decided = = 
 In addition to the Dartmouth College case ( supra ) , there are other reports of certificates of division that were issued but never decided by the Supreme Court . After the indictment of Jefferson Davis , the President of the Confederacy , for treason , William Wirt Henry reports that a certificate of division was issued on Davis 's motion to dismiss the indictment on the grounds that he owed no allegiance to the United States after the secession of his state . Reportedly , Chief Justice Salmon P. Chase sided with Davis , while District Judge John Curtiss Underwood sided with the government . No response from the Supreme Court to that certificate is reported , but Davis 's bail was eventually absolved , and he was released . 
 = = Abolition = = 
 = = = Criminal cases = = = 
 In 1889 , Congress created a right of ordinary appeal in capital cases . The 1889 act was " [ t ] he first act of Congress which authorized a criminal case to be brought from the Circuit Court of the United States to this court , except upon a certificate of division of opinion . " In 1891 , with the Judiciary Act of 1891 ( the " Evarts Act " ) , Congress extended this right to other serious crimes . The 1891 act did not explicitly repeal the authorization to issue certificates of division , but § 14 provided that prior , inconsistent laws were repealed . 
 After the passage of the 1891 act , the Supreme Court initially continued to decide questions presented in criminal cases by certificate of division on the merits . Three such decisions , United States v. Eaton ( 1892 ) , United States v. Rodgers ( 1893 ) , and United States v. Thomas ( 1894 ) , made no mention of the 1891 act . But , in United States v. Rider ( 1896 ) and United States v. Hewecker ( 1896 ) , the Court held that the 1891 act was an implied repeal of the authorization of certificates of division in criminal cases . Rider held : 
 We are of opinion that the scheme of the act of March 3 , 1891 , precludes the contention that certificates of division of opinion may still be had under sections 651 and 697 of the Revised Statutes . 
 Review by appeal , by writ of error or otherwise , must be as prescribed by the act , and review by certificate is limited by the act to the certificate by the Circuit Courts , made after final judgment , of questions raised as to their own jurisdiction and to the certificate by the Circuit Courts of Appeals of questions of law in relation to which our advice is sought as therein provided , and these certificates are governed by the same general rules as were formerly applied to certificates of division . 
 It is true that repeals by implication are not favored , but we cannot escape the conclusion that , tested by its scope , its obvious purpose , and its terms , the act of March 3 , 1891 , covers the whole subject @-@ matter under consideration , and furnishes the exclusive rule in respect of appellate jurisdiction on appeal , writ of error or certificate . 
 Hewecker , the last criminal certificate of division case , declined to reconsider the question on the grounds that Rider could have been decided on the narrower ground that a certificate of division could not issue on a matter committed to the district judge 's discretion . 
 = = = Civil cases = = = 
 Following Rider and Hewecker , certificates of division continued to be issued in civil cases . <unk> v. United States ( 1902 ) was the last civil certificate of division case . The possibility of civil certificates of division was not completely abolished until the Judicial Code of 1911 abolished the circuit courts . 
 = = Other forms of certification = = 
 The modern form of Supreme Court certified question jurisdiction was enacted in 1925 and amended in 1949 . 28 U.S.C. § 1254 provides : 
 Cases in the courts of appeals may be reviewed by the Supreme Court by the following methods : 
 ( 1 ) By writ of certiorari granted upon the petition of any party to any civil or criminal case , before or after rendition of judgment or decree ; 
 ( 2 ) By certification at any time by a court of appeals of any question of law in any civil or criminal case as to which instructions are desired , and upon such certification the Supreme Court may give binding instructions or require the entire record to be sent up for decision of the entire matter in controversy . 
 Section 1254 ( 1 ) represents the far more common route : certiorari , the source of nearly all the Supreme Court 's current docket . Section 1254 ( 2 ) represents a less common route : certification . Pursuant to § 1254 ( 2 ) , the Supreme Court heard 72 certified question cases between 1927 and 1936 ; 20 between 1937 and 1946 ; and only four between 1947 and 2010 . In modern jurisprudence , § 1254 ( 2 ) certification has become very rare . For example , when the en banc Fifth Circuit attempted to certify a question in 2009 ( also a rare occurrence ) , the Supreme Court summarily declined to consider the case . Certified questions are also governed by Supreme Court Rule 19 . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 Several scholars have argued that certificates of division were pro forma , and that the judge and justice would merely agree to disagree , often without writing opposing opinions . For example , with the circuit court decision leading up to United States v. Marchant ( 1827 ) , the reporter records that " [ t ] he district judge concurred in this opinion ; but as it was a matter of not infrequent occurrence , and important to the practice of the court , the judges afterwards divided in opinion for the purpose of obtaining a solemn decision of the superior court . " Similarly , the United States v. Ortega ( 1826 ) circuit court opinion notes that the " point was taken to the supreme court upon a <unk> certificate of a division of opinion in this court . " 
 White writes that " the certificate of division procedure constituted the principal opportunity by which they could control their docket . " It was common for Marshall Court justices , while riding circuit or on vacation , to exchange letters about cases in the circuit courts which might be appropriate for certificates of division . 
 = New York State Route 96 = 
 New York State Route 96 ( NY 96 ) is a 126 @.@ 01 @-@ mile ( 202 @.@ 79 km ) northwest – southeast state highway in the Finger Lakes region of New York in the United States . The southern terminus of the route is at an interchange with NY 17 in the Southern Tier village of Owego , Tioga County . Its northern terminus is at a junction with East Main Street in the city of Rochester , Monroe County . Between the two endpoints , NY 96 passes through the city of Ithaca and the villages of Waterloo , Victor , and Pittsford . NY 96 is signed north – south for its entire length , although most of the route in Ontario County travels in an east – west direction . 
 All of NY 96 , except from Candor to Ithaca and from northwest of Victor to Pittsford , was originally designated as part of New York State Route 15 in 1924 . NY 15 was originally routed on modern NY 96B between Candor and Ithaca , and modern NY 64 and NY 251 between Victor and Pittsford . It was realigned onto the modern alignment of NY 96 between Victor and Pittsford in 1930 . NY 15 was renumbered to New York State Route 2 c . 1939 to eliminate duplication with U.S. Route 15 ( US 15 ) . NY 2 was subsequently redesignated as NY 96 in the early 1940s as the alignments of NY 2 and NY 96 , a route in Rensselaer County , were swapped . NY 96 was realigned again in the early 1950s , this time between Candor and Ithaca , to serve the village of Spencer west of Candor . Near Rochester , NY 96 followed what is now Interstate 490 ( I @-@ 490 ) for a short time during the 1950s and early 1960s . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Most of NY 96 's 126 miles ( 203 km ) are maintained by the New York State Department of Transportation ( NYSDOT ) ; however , three sections of the route in Tompkins County and Monroe County are maintained by local highway departments . In the Tompkins County city of Ithaca , NY 96 is city @-@ maintained from the southern city line to the start of the Fulton / Meadow Street one @-@ way couplet , at which point maintenance of the highway reverts to NYSDOT . The route is also maintained by Ithaca from Park Road to the western city limits . The last locally owned section is in the Monroe County city of Rochester , where the entirety of NY 96 within the city is city @-@ maintained . 
 = = = Tioga County = = = 
 Though unsigned at this point , NY 96 begins at the eastbound onramp to NY 17 at exit 64 on Southside Drive across the Susquehanna River from the Tioga County village of Owego . The route remains unsigned until the intersection of Court Street and Southside Drive , the western terminus of NY 434 . NY 434 continues east along Southside Drive while NY 96 , now fully signed , turns north onto Court Street and crosses the Susquehanna River . On the opposite side of the river , NY 96 intersects Front Street . The configuration of NY 96 between Front Street and East Main Street is unorthodox in that NY 96 splits at Front Street to follow a one @-@ way couplet around the Tioga County Courthouse to Main Street , where both streets terminate . NY 96 turns onto Main Street for half a block to North Avenue , where it resumes its northward path . The route shares the parallel one @-@ way streets with NY <unk> , which enters Owego from the west via Main Street and leaves via Front Street to the east . 
 Now on North Avenue , NY 96 passes through the heart of Owego before leaving the village and following Owego Creek into a long stretch of rural country . Just over 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) north of Owego village in the town of Owego , NY 96 meets the southern terminus of NY 38 . At this point , NY 38 becomes the creekside highway while NY 96 passes over Owego Creek and follows <unk> Creek northwest into the town of Candor . Once in Candor , the route and the creek turn northward toward the village of Candor , where NY 96 meets NY 96B , an alternate route of NY 96 between Candor and the city of Ithaca . Past NY 96B , NY 96 turns to the west and crosses over <unk> Creek as it exits the village . West of Candor , NY 96 follows an east – west alignment through a creek valley to the village of Spencer , where the route converges with NY 34 and heads north into another valley leading to Tompkins County . 
 = = = Tompkins County = = = 
 The two routes remain concurrent as they snake to the northwest through Tompkins County . Southwest of the city of Ithaca in the town of Ithaca , NY 34 and NY 96 meet NY 13 . The three routes continue northeast through the town , intersecting NY 327 and NY 13A before crossing over the inlet of Cayuga Lake and entering the city of Ithaca on Meadow Street . Here , NY 96B reconnects to its parent at the junction of Clinton and Meadow Streets . North of this point , Meadow Street splits into a one @-@ way couplet , with Fulton Street carrying southbound traffic and Meadow Street handling northbound traffic . NY 79 , also routed on a one @-@ way couplet here , crosses NY 96 at Green and Seneca Streets , with NY 79 eastbound using one block of Fulton Street to travel from State Street to Green Street . 
 One block north of NY 79 , NY 96 splits from NY 13 and NY 34 and heads to the west at Buffalo Street . NY 89 begins here , and NY 96 overlaps with NY 89 toward the West End of Ithaca . After crossing southbound NY 13 and NY 34 , NY 89 and NY 96 run parallel to and a few feet to the north of NY 79 . NY 89 turns north onto Taughannock Boulevard at the next intersection while NY 96 continues west across the lake outlet as Cliff Street , paralleling NY 79 . They do not intersect in this area — known locally as The Octopus — though they once did . At one time , NY 96 , NY 79 , NY 89 , NY 13A and Elm Street met at an intersection that gave the area its name . Today , only NY 13A and NY 79 intersect there while the stub of former NY 89 is now a park access road that intersects with NY 96 , which continues north out of the Cayuga Lake valley as Trumansburg Road . 
 Unlike NY 89 , which runs along the base of the valley and parallels the west shore of Cayuga Lake , NY 96 heads away from the lake , increasing the distance between itself and the water body as it proceeds northwestward to the highlands overlooking the lake . The route heads across open fields and past isolated pockets of homes toward Trumansburg , where NY 96 crosses over Taughannock Creek and serves Taughannock Falls State Park southeast of the village . In Trumansburg itself , the highway becomes Main Street and meets the northern terminus of NY 227 in the center of the community . NY 96 continues on , exiting Trumansburg just 250 yards ( 229 m ) before crossing the Seneca County line . 
 = = = Seneca County = = = 
 NY 96 proceeds northwest through a lightly populated section of Seneca County and the town of Covert to the village of Interlaken , home to the southern terminus of NY 96A , a more westerly alternate route of NY 96 between Interlaken and Geneva . Outside of the village , NY 96 continues on a northwesterly path for another 4 @.@ 5 miles ( 7 @.@ 2 km ) to the Ovid – Romulus town line , where it turns due west for 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) to access the village of Ovid . The route mostly bypasses the village , with NY 96A and NY 414 serving as its Main Street instead . The three routes meet at a junction on the northern fringe of the community , at which point NY 96A leaves NY 414 and turns west to follow the town line toward Seneca Lake while NY 96 joins NY 414 and heads north into the town of Romulus . 
 Midway between the village of Ovid and the hamlet of Romulus , the two routes split , allowing NY 414 to continue due north to Seneca Falls . NY 96 , meanwhile , turns to the northwest , following the eastern edge of the Seneca Army Depot for most of the distance to Romulus hamlet . Just south of the community 's center , NY 96 separates from the depot grounds and continues north through the hamlet and into the town of Varick . The route uneventfully crosses the town , passing by open fields on a predominantly northward alignment on its way to the Fayette town line and a junction with NY 336 , an east – west connector between NY 96A and NY 414 . NY 96 continues across rural terrain to the outskirts of the village of Waterloo , where the number of homes rises as the route enters the village on Fayette Street . 
 In the southern half of the village , the highway follows a zig @-@ zag routing as it leaves Fayette Street at River Road before returning to the north at Washington Street one block to the east . While on Washington Street , the route passes over the Cayuga – Seneca Canal and enters the village 's center , changing names to Virginia Street in the process . Not far to the north , NY 96 heads into Waterloo 's central business district , built up around the junction of Virginia and Main ( US 20 and NY 5 ) Streets . Past Routes 5 and 20 , NY 96 continues north as a residential street to the village line , where the route turns to the west with a slight trend to the north . At this point , the scenery surrounding NY 96 shifts from house @-@ lined streets to rural countryside once again , an appearance that follows the road to the northwest through the town of Waterloo and across the county line . 
 = = = Ontario County = = = 
 Although NY 96 travels mostly in an east – west direction throughout Ontario County , it is still signed as a north – south highway . Less than 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) into the county , NY 96 connects to NY 14 by way of a cloverleaf interchange , an oddity considering the rural location of the interchange . West of NY 14 , NY 96 begins to parallel the paths of both the New York State Thruway ( I @-@ 90 ) and the Canandaigua Lake outlet to the north . The highway follows both entities across the town of Phelps to the village of the same name , where NY 96 meets the southern terminus of NY 88 . Just west of the village , NY 96 intersects the northern terminus of NY 488 , formerly part of NY 88 . West of the intersection , a northward reverse S @-@ curve draws NY 96 closer to the Thruway and the outlet as the route heads toward the village of Clifton Springs , which NY 96 bypasses to the north . 
 4 miles ( 6 km ) to the west in the village of Manchester , NY 96 crosses over the outlet ( which roughly follows NY 21 south to Canandaigua Lake from this point out ) and indirectly connects to the Thruway by way of a junction with NY 21 located north of the village center and just south of where NY 21 meets the Thruway at exit 43 . West of NY 21 , NY 96 curves gently to the south , crossing the Ontario Central Railroad before resuming its westward alignment near the grade crossing . At this point , NY 96 enters the town of Farmington and begins to parallel the Thruway once more . The route passes by Finger Lakes Gaming and Race Track , located between County Route 8 ( CR 8 ) and NY 332 , prior to intersecting NY 332 itself 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) west of the race track . 
 From this point northwestward to Rochester , NY 96 passes through substantially more developed areas . The first of these is the nearby village of Victor , which NY 96 enters by way of an overpass carrying it over the Ontario Central Railroad . In the village itself , the route meets the northern terminus of NY 444 , which travels north – south between Victor and Bloomfield . West of the village in the town of Victor , NY 96 runs along the base of a valley separating it from the Thruway , where it intersects the eastern terminus of NY 251 . The route continues on a northwesterly track for another mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) before curving to the north and widening from two to four lanes as it passes under the Thruway near exit 45 . I @-@ 490 , which begins at Thruway exit 45 , is accessible from NY 96 by way of exit 29 , the eastern @-@ most exit on I @-@ 490 . 
 The section of NY 96 between exit 29 and NY 250 in Perinton serves as a major commercial strip , anchored by the presence of Eastview Mall , one of the largest malls in the Rochester area and the largest east of the city . Also present along this stretch of NY 96 are a series of plazas , beginning with one just north of I @-@ 490 featuring a Walmart and a Kohl 's . Continuing northward , NY 96 runs along the eastern edge of Eastview Mall and passes two more plazas , one of which is developed around a Kmart . The highway gradually turns northwest toward the county line as it passes the mall , and crosses into Monroe County at an intersection leading to Eastview Commons , a plaza separated from the mall by high @-@ voltage power lines and a large ditch . 
 = = = Monroe County = = = 
 Roughly a quarter of a mile ( 0 @.@ 4 km ) from the county line , the commercial surroundings end as NY 96 intersects the southern terminus of NY 250 in the town of Perinton . 0 @.@ 75 miles ( 1 @.@ 21 km ) to the northwest , NY 96 meets I @-@ 490 once again , this time at exit 28 . West of the exit , NY 96 parallels I @-@ 490 for roughly 1 @.@ 25 miles ( 2 @.@ 01 km ) , serving several office parks and Powder Mills Park before reconnecting to the freeway at exit 27 , located on the southern edge of Bushnell 's Basin , a small hamlet located directly on NY 96 . North of the exit , NY 96 breaks from I @-@ 490 and parallels the Erie Canal through slightly less developed areas between Bushnell 's Basin and Mitchell Road in the town of Pittsford , where it narrows to two lanes and becomes East Jefferson Road . 
 West of Mitchell Road , NY 96 takes a more southerly alignment than the canal as it enters the densely populated village of Pittsford and meets the northern and eastern termini of NY 64 and NY 252 , respectively , at the intersection of Jefferson Road and South Main Street . NY 64 heads to the south along South Main Street and NY 252 continues along Jefferson Road to the west while NY 96 turns north , proceeding into the heart of the village along South Main Street . In the village center , NY 96 intersects Monroe Avenue and State Street , which carry NY 31 east – west through Pittsford . The route continues on , becoming North Main Street as it crosses the Erie Canal and passes under the CSX Transportation @-@ owned West Shore Subdivision . Just north of the railroad overpass is a junction with the southern terminus of NY 153 , the most direct route between Pittsford and nearby East Rochester . 
 Past NY 153 , NY 96 exits the village of Pittsford and becomes East Avenue , a name the route retains to its terminus in downtown Rochester . It proceeds northward through the heavily residential town , passing by Nazareth College and meeting the western terminus of NY 31F ( Fairport Road ) at a junction adjacent to the campus of St. John Fisher College . East Avenue , and likewise NY 96 , takes on the northwesterly , four @-@ lane alignment set by Fairport Road and begins to parallel the routing of I @-@ 490 once more as both enter the town of Brighton . Not far to the northwest of the town line , NY 96 meets Elmwood and Linden Avenues , the latter carrying NY 441 . About 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) to the northwest , NY 96 intersects Penfield Road , the pre @-@ expressway alignment of NY 441 . One block from this point is Clover Street , which carries NY 65 south of East Avenue . 
 At the Brighton town – Rochester city line , NY 96 passes through the center of the Can of Worms , a complex interchange that links I @-@ 490 to I @-@ 590 . Here , I @-@ 590 passes under NY 96 while I @-@ 490 flies over NY 96 . On the other side of the interchange in Rochester , East Avenue becomes a commercial strip once again , but to a lesser extent than in Victor . At North Winton Road , NY 96 is signed for the last time by way of a " North 96 " reassurance assembly directing traffic to stay on East Avenue . Despite this fact , the route officially continues northwestward toward downtown Rochester . 
 West of Winton , NY 96 passes through the East Avenue Historic District , a primarily residential area with historic upper @-@ class houses , including the George Eastman House . This stretch of the route was narrowed in mid @-@ 2010 from four lanes to two , to improve the residential feel and reduce automobile speeds . At Alexander Street , the environment turns more commercial as the route enters the downtown area . After crossing the Inner Loop , the route passes the Little Theatre before terminating at a Y @-@ junction with East Main Street . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1908 , the New York State Legislature created Route 36 , an unsigned legislative route that extended from Owego to Seneca Falls via Candor , Ithaca , and Ovid . South of Romulus , Route 36 utilized what is now NY 96 and NY 96B . When the first set of posted routes in New York were assigned in 1924 , the Owego – Interlaken and Ovid – Romulus portions of legislative Route 36 became part of NY 15 , which began in Owego and proceeded northwest from Romulus to Rochester by way of Waterloo , Phelps , Victor , Mendon , and Pittsford . From Mendon to Rochester , NY 15 followed the path of legislative Route 14 , another highway dating back to 1908 that continued south from Mendon on what is now NY 64 and used Monroe Avenue between Pittsford and Rochester . Another section of NY 15 — from the village of Phelps east to NY 14 — utilized what had been designated as part of legislative Route 6 @-@ a from 1911 to 1921 . 
 By 1926 , NY 31 was assigned across western and central New York , utilizing Monroe Avenue from downtown Rochester to Pittsford . Although NY 96 's modern routing via East Avenue was state @-@ maintained and formerly part of legislative Route 20 from current NY 31F westward , NY 15 initially remained on Monroe Avenue , creating an overlap between NY 15 and NY 31 . It was realigned at some point between 1927 and 1932 to follow East Avenue to Rochester instead . In southern Seneca County , NY 15 initially passed through Lodi on its way from Interlaken to Ovid . It was realigned in the late 1920s to bypass Lodi to the northeast on the former alignment of legislative Route 36 . 
 In the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , NY 15 basically remained intact . The only change made at this time was the straightening out of the Victor – Pittsford segment , which now bypassed Mendon in favor of a more direct alignment between the two villages via Bushnell 's Basin . The former alignment of NY 15 became part of NY 251 east of Mendon and part of NY 64 north of the hamlet . US 15 was extended into New York c . 1939 ; it replaced NY 2 , which had extended from the Pennsylvania state line to Rochester . NY 15 was renumbered to NY 2 to eliminate numerical duplication with the U.S. Highway . 
 The NY 96 designation was originally assigned to present @-@ day NY 2 from NY 7 in Troy to Route 2 at the Massachusetts state line . In the early 1940s , the alignments of NY 2 and NY 96 were swapped , placing NY 96 on the Owego – Rochester routing . The only major change to NY 96 since that time came in the early 1950s , when the route was realigned between Candor and Ithaca to follow a new routing via Spencer . The Candor – Spencer portion of the alignment had been part of NY 53 during the 1920s and part of NY 223 since 1930 . NY 223 was truncated to its current eastern terminus at NY 224 near Van Etten as part of NY 96 's realignment . Between Spencer and Ithaca , NY 96 overlapped with NY 34 , which had occupied that segment of highway since the 1930 renumbering . 
 In the 1950s , NY 96 was temporarily moved onto the Eastern Expressway as sections of the freeway opened to traffic . The first section extended from Bushnell 's Basin to NY 31F and opened to traffic in the mid @-@ 1950s , at which time NY 96 was routed onto the new highway and NY 252 and NY 64 were extended eastward and northward , respectively , to cover NY 96 's old surface alignment . NY 31F , meanwhile , was truncated to begin at the expressway . A northwest extension to what is now the Can of Worms was completed c . 1957 as a realignment of NY 96 , resulting in the re @-@ extension of NY 31F to its original terminus and an extension of NY 64 along East Avenue to the eastern edge of Rochester . NY 64 , NY 96 , and NY 252 were restored to their pre @-@ 1950s alignments c . 1961 when the freeway was designated as I @-@ 490 . 
 = = Suffixed routes = = 
 NY 96A ( 26 @.@ 94 miles or 43 @.@ 36 kilometres ) is an alternate route of NY 96 in Seneca County . The route splits from NY 96 in Interlaken and terminates at US 20 and NY 5 east of Geneva in Waterloo . It was assigned in the early 1940s . 
 NY 96B ( 19 @.@ 56 miles or 31 @.@ 48 kilometres ) is an alternate route of NY 96 between Candor , Tioga County , and Ithaca , Tompkins County . The route was assigned in the early 1950s . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Kill the Irishman = 
 Kill the Irishman ( alternatively known as Bulletproof Gangster ) is a 2011 American biographical crime film directed by Jonathan Hensleigh , and starring Ray Stevenson , Vincent D 'Onofrio , Christopher Walken , and Val Kilmer . Written by Hensleigh ( along with Jeremy Walters ) , it is based on the life of Irish @-@ American gangster Danny Greene , and was adapted from the book To Kill the Irishman : The War That Crippled the Mafia by Rick Porrello . 
 Before entering production , Kill the Irishman had a troubled development stage that lasted over a decade . Production commenced in 2009 , with filming taking place in and around Detroit . The film chronicles the rise and fall of Danny Greene . He worked as a longshoreman in the Cleveland docks , until being chosen to serve as interim president in 1961 . In 1964 , he was convicted of embezzling $ 11 @,@ 500 of the union 's funds . After his conviction , Greene rose through the criminal underworld in Cleveland , and waged war on the Mafia for control of the city . After many failed attempts , Greene was assassinated on October 6 , 1977 by contract killer Ray Ferritto . His death ultimately led to the demise of the Cleveland Mafia . 
 Released in the United States on March 11 , 2011 , Kill the Irishman premiered at the Landmark Sunshine Cinema in New York City . Most of the cast , including Stevenson and D ’ Onofrio , were in attendance . Shondor Birns ' niece was also present . The film was met with mixed @-@ positive reviews upon release , but some criticized the purported similarities to Martin Scorsese 's Goodfellas . Kill the Irishman grossed $ 1 @,@ 188 @,@ 194 at the domestic box office , against a production budget of $ 12 million . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 1960 , Danny Greene and his childhood friends Billy McComber and Art Sneperger are longshoremen at the Cleveland docks . Meanwhile , the members are exploited by corrupt union boss , Jerry Merke and the leadership of the ILA union urges Greene to run against him . Meanwhile , Sneperger can 't pay a gambling debt to Cleveland Mafia Capo John Nardi . In return for Sneperger 's debt being forgiven , Greene supplies Nardi 's crew with goods stolen from the docks . Merke finds out , demands a cut of Greene 's profits , and then sends an enforcer to kill him . Instead , Greene beats up the enforcer , then beats up Merke , throws the union leader out of his office , and is later elected union president . He improves the working conditions at the docks while continuing his dealings with Nardi . 
 Greene 's corruption is exposed by the Plain Dealer newspaper and Cleveland Police Detective Joe Manditski , who grew up with Greene in Collinwood , arrests him . Bankrupt and facing prison , Greene plea bargains to lesser charges in return for becoming an FBI informant and being banned for life from organized labor . Greene is released and moves his unhappy wife and daughters back to Collinwood . Nardi gets him work as an enforcer for Hungarian Jewish loan shark Shondor Birns , and later helps pitch a deal to Mafia Capo Jack Licavoli : Greene will force the city 's garbage haulers to join the union Licavoli controls . Greene , McComber , Sneperger , and ex @-@ Hells Angel Keith Ritson terrorize many into joining , but Greene 's friend Mike Frato refuses . Licavoli orders Greene to kill Frato , but Greene balks because Frato has ten children . Nardi tells him privately , though , that , " You wanted to play in the big leagues . Sometimes you have to do things you don 't wanna do . " 
 As Greene prepare 's to kill Frato with a car bomb , he learns from the FBI that Sneperger has returned to gambling , and has become an informant for <unk> . That night , Greene assigns Sneperger to set the bomb under Frato ’ s car and presses the detonator as he does it . An enraged Frato later shoots at Greene in a park . Greene returns fire , kills Frato , and is arrested for murder , but released after Frato 's driver tells Manditski that Greene acted in self @-@ defense . Having had enough , Greene 's long suffering wife leaves him and takes the children . 
 Greene sees his elderly Irish neighbor , Grace O ’ Keefe , being evicted . He intervenes , pays her rent , and she gratefully gives him her father 's gold Celtic cross to wear for protection . Greene begins to use his money and connections to help other Irish @-@ Americans in need , and earns the nickname " The Robin Hood of Collinwood " . 
 Greene wants to open his own restaurant , and asks Shondor Birns to help him . Birns arranges a $ 70 @,@ 000 loan from the <unk> , but Birns ' courier buys cocaine with the money and gets arrested . Birns and Greene argue over which of them should pay back the money ; when Greene refuses to pay , Birns hires a hitman to kill him . Greene narrowly escapes , and later kills Birns with a car bomb . 
 After Mafia boss John <unk> dies , both Nardi and Licavoli are considered for succession . Licavoli is chosen due to his closer ties to the Five Families and decides to charge Greene 30 % " street tax " for doing business in Cleveland . Greene refuses to pay , crudely mocks Licavoli 's Italian heritage , and vows , " The Irishman 's in business for himself now . " 
 An outraged Licavoli has Greene 's house blown up , but he survives . He then attempts to demote Nardi and take away his crew , only to have the latter join forces with Greene . Vowing to take over Cleveland together , Greene and Nardi start by organizing the murders of Licavoli ’ s associates , many of whom are blown up . Thirty @-@ six car bombings occur during the summer of 1976 , drawing national attention and humiliating Licavoli . After failing multiple times to kill Greene , Licavoli is forced to humbly ask Genovese boss Anthony Salerno to help him kill Nardi and Greene . 
 Having learned of this from the FBI , Greene claims that he wants to leave Cleveland and buy a ranch in Texas , but needs to raise $ 2 million . Wishing to size up their enemies , Greene and Nardi travel to New York and invite Salerno to invest in the ranch . After they leave , Salerno orders his associates to hire professional hitman Ray Ferritto to kill them both . Nardi is killed in a car explosion , McComber dies in a bombing at the Cleveland docks , and Ritson is shot near his house . Detective Manditski lets Greene know that a master killer is after him . He offers Greene protection , but is told , " My enemies will be taken care of . " 
 After a dentist 's appointment on October 6 , 1977 , Greene notices Ferritto driving by slowly , and accepts that he is about to die , giving his gold cross to an admiring boy . Ferritto detonates a bomb on the car next to Greene 's , killing Greene instantly . An epilogue , by Manditski , reveals that the investigation of Danny Greene 's murder led to the collapse of the Mafia , not only in Cleveland , but all over the United States . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = = Principal = = = 
 Ray Stevenson as Danny Greene , an Irish @-@ American gangster . 
 Vincent D 'Onofrio as John Nardi , an Italian @-@ American labor racketeer and Greene 's ally . 
 Val Kilmer as Joe Manditski , a Cleveland cop who investigates Greene . The character is partly based on former Cleveland Police Chief Edward Kovačić . 
 Christopher Walken as Alex " Shondor " Birns , a Jewish @-@ American loan shark . 
 = = = Supporting = = = 
 = = Development = = 
 Kill the Irishman had been in development since 1997 . Producer Tommy Reid heard that Rick Porrello , an Ohio policeman , was about to publish a book about Greene called To Kill the Irishman . Reid flew to Ohio and met with Porrello , who told Reid his grandfather was a high @-@ ranking Mafia figure in Cleveland during the prohibition era . The meeting went well , and on March 17 , 1998 , they signed a deal for the film rights to the book . Getting Kill the Irishman produced was difficult . Reid frequently left deals <unk> , and discovered that the script he ’ d commissioned was attached to a cover with another screenwriter and producer ’ s name listed . According to Reid , this was a common occurrence in Hollywood , and he claims to have spent over $ 1 million to ensure the film was made . 
 = = Pre @-@ production = = 
 = = = Inspiration = = = 
 Reid was a fan of mafia movies ( including The Godfather and Goodfellas ) and aspired to become a film maker . Being of Irish and Italian ancestry , he wanted to make a film that would relate to both nationalities . Reid first heard about mobster Danny Greene from his roommates in Ohio , and believed that New York , Chicago and Boston were the " three <unk> of mafia crime " . According to Reid , there wasn 't much documentation on Greene 's life , but after hearing that Porrello was about to publish a book on Greene and the Mafia in Cleveland , he was determined to make a movie about him . 
 = = = Background research = = = 
 Prior to making Kill the Irishman , Reid did research on Greene 's life and organized crime in Cleveland . He spoke with Sister Barbara Eppich , a nun , who helped raise Greene during his childhood . Sister Eppich told Reid of how Greene was abandoned during childhood and was raised by his grandfather . Because his grandfather worked nights , Greene was left to walk the streets . He would go to school dirty on a regular basis , so Sister Eppich would have to wash him . She also stated that Greene would sleep all the time , but was a " phenomenal athlete " . 
 Reid spoke to number of law enforcement agencies , including the FBI . The FBI wanted to make sure that Reid wasn 't glorifying the Mafia . Reid stated he had no intentions of glorifying crime , and that " the whole message at the end of the movie is that crime doesn ’ t pay " . On a similar subject , Hensleigh also said the " film [ doesn 't suggest Greene ] was a hero " . However , he did note the film provides a balanced perspective . 
 While researching his role , Stevenson looked at TV footage of Greene , and read <unk> 's book ; To Kill The Irishman . According to Stevenson , there was " quite a bit " of research material available . D 'Onofrio , on the other hand , had the opposite experience . Information on Nardi was scarce , so Hensleigh allowed him to improvise on his character . 
 = = = Screenplay = = = 
 Although the screenplay was adapted from his book , Porrello had " minimum involvement " in its writing ( most of which was done by Hensleigh ) . Hensleigh regularly contacted Porrello and they agreed not to use the real names of anyone who was still alive , " out of respect and sensitivity " towards them . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Due to the troubled development of Kill the Irishman , Reid decided to make a documentary about Greene 's life ; known as Danny Greene : the Rise and Fall of the Irishman . Due to the research he had done for the movie , Reid became specialized in the Northern Ohio crime scene and Greene ’ s life . Reid felt that by doing the documentary , at least he could go to his " grave ' saying I tried ' " . In 2009 , with 17 hours of the documentary shot , Reid was told his film had been green @-@ lit . He joined forces with production company Code Entertainment and engaged with a " reliable " director ; Jonathan Hensleigh . They then signed actors Val Kilmer and Christopher Walken to the project . This was followed by the signing of actors Vincent D ’ Onofrio ( Full Metal Jacket ) , Paul Sorvino ( Goodfellas ) , and Irish actor Ray Stevenson , respectively . Stevenson was filming The Book of Eli when he got a telephone call from Hensleigh , so they arranged to meet in Los Angeles . According to Stevenson , he was drawn to the script and immediately made a deal . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 On May 19 , 2009 , the film entered principal photography . It was shot within seven weeks , mostly in and around Detroit . This was partly because the city gave tax credits which Cleveland would not match . According to the 2009 report by the Michigan Film Office , Kill the Irishman received roughly $ 3 million in subsidies . Michigan 's film rebate pays up to 42 percent of filmmakers ' expenses for costs incurred while filming in the state . Ohio offers only 25 to 35 percent in subsidies , meaning that if the producers spent the same amount filming in Cleveland , they would have received $ 500 @,@ 000 to $ 1 @.@ 25 million less in subsidies . On the other hand , Stevenson said that they wanted to film in Cleveland , but the city had " <unk> itself up " and changed , whereas Detroit was - in his opinion - still " on its knees " . 
 Two incidents occurred during filming . On the first , seven bullet holes were shot into one of the trucks used during production . On the second , the cast and crew were driving from the set , and a pedestrian was shot in the neck outside a supermarket . The ambulance took 35 – 45 minutes to arrive , and waited a further 35 – 45 minutes for the police to arrive . The paramedics refused to take the victim to the hospital without a police escort . According to Stevenson , there was a possibility that rival <unk> would shoot at the paramedics for trying to resuscitate the victim . 
 = = Post @-@ production = = 
 = = = Effects = = = 
 Due to the limited budget , some of the effects seen in the film couldn 't be replicated . Stevenson said everyone " had to be on point " , and that any mistakes couldn 't be rectified by re @-@ filming . For example , the producers couldn 't afford to shoot the film 's final scene ( in which Greene is killed via a car explosion ) twice . Before filming , the production crew and actors had to check everything on the set . Time was also lacking , with Stevenson saying everyone " had to be extremely focused " . 
 = = = Editing = = = 
 Porrello had second thoughts about one scene being included in the film . This particular scene included the murder of two police officers . Porrello felt uncomfortable approaching Hensleigh , but did so anyway . Porrello said to him : " if you are going to kill a cop " , it is " going to change the tone of the story " . The scene was nevertheless included in the final cut . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Kill the Irishman received mixed @-@ to @-@ positive reviews from film critics . Giving the film a positive review , Mike LaSalle , of the San Francisco Chronicle , said ; " What makes this film special and memorable is the character of Danny Greene , who is not the usual neighborhood hoodlum you see in movies , the kind who gets in deep and gradually loses his soul " . Marshall Fine , of the Huffington Post , gave the film a mixed review . He criticized it for jumping through different events in a " jerky fashion " , but summed up the review by calling it a " movie with a lot of meat on the bone , even if some of it is tough or stringy . It 's not fancy , but it 's always tasty " . 
 Rotten Tomatoes reported that 63 % of critics gave the movie a positive review , with an average rating of 5 @.@ 6 out of 10 . Whereas on Metacritic , the film has a score of 50 out of 100 , indicating " mixed or average reviews " . But despite the mixed @-@ positive reception , a number of critics have called the movie a ripoff of Goodfellas . Robert Abele , of the LA Times , said " the film plays like an explosion 's aftermath ; shards of mob movies that add up to the usual Goodfellas knockoff " . Scott Tobias , of the A.V. Club , had similar views ; saying " the biggest problem " with the film " isn ’ t that it rips off Goodfellas " , but that plenty of " good films " have " ripped it off well " . In regards to the controversy surrounding Kill the Irishman and its purported similarities to Goodfellas , critic Dave Van <unk> said : 
 " There are certain movies that serve as a standard bearer for a genre – a high water mark that filmmakers always try to hit , but seem to always come up short . To me , I think Martin Scorsese ’ s Goodfellas is that type of film for the gangster genre . In the 21 years since the film was released , so many filmmakers have tried so hard to copy Goodfellas ' success , and so few have gotten even close to capturing the magic that Scorsese did in one of his very best films . The 21 years have been littered with a bunch of pale imitations . To that list , you can add Jonathan Hensleigh ’ s Kill the Irishman , which wants so desperately to be Goodfellas , and comes up so very , very short . " 
 Hensleigh 's directing was criticized . Scott Tobias said the directing " doesn ’ t do much beyond filling in the template " . He noted that Hensleigh was telling the " true @-@ life tale " of the mob 's decline in Cleveland , but also said that " every character and setpiece felt like it fell off a truck " . LA Weekly 's Nick Pinkerton held similar views , saying that although " Hensleigh perks up when filming violence , the atmosphere throughout is past @-@ prime , <unk> any strut " . Lisa Schwarzbaum , of Entertainment Weekly , also concurred , calling the film 's structure " pretty square " . 
 Despite criticizing the film 's structure , Schwarzbaum called the cast " tasty " , and singled out D 'Onofrio , Kilmer , and Walken for praise . Clint O 'Connor , of The Plain Dealer , held similar views , saying the " film 's greatest strength is its cast " . On the contrary , David Rooney held the opposite opinion ; saying the " low @-@ wattage cast " is what turned the " potentially strong " film into a " routine crime thriller " . 
 = = = Box office performance = = = 
 On its opening day , Kill the Irishman earned $ 42 @,@ 925 from five theaters ( with an average gross of $ 8 @,@ 585 per theater ) . On its second day , the box office receipts increased by 46 percent ; earning $ 62 @,@ 446 from five theaters ( with an average gross of $ 12 @,@ 489 per theater ) . Then on the third day , the film 's box office performance dropped by 36 percent ; earning $ 40 @,@ 059 from five theaters ( with an average gross of $ 8 @,@ 012 per theater ) . The gradual decline in box office receipts continued until the eighth day , where the film 's gross sharply increased by 373 percent ; earning $ 36 @,@ 119 from 21 theaters ( with an average gross of $ 1 @,@ 720 per theater ) . The film continued to have periodic fluctuations at the box office . By the end of its box office run , Kill the Irishman grossed a total of $ 1 @,@ 188 @,@ 194 at the domestic box office , against a production budget of $ 12 million . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 After a limited theatrical release , Kill the Irishman was released on DVD by Anchor Bay Entertainment on June 14 , 2011 . As of October 22 , 2015 , the movie has grossed $ 2 @,@ 498 @,@ 115 in domestic DVD sales . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The soundtrack for the film includes 26 songs . 
 = = Historical accuracy = = 
 Kill the Irishman contains four historical inaccuracies . This has been noted by critics , one of whom said the film 's main problem is that it seemed " all too willing to sacrifice historical accuracy in the name of an easy @-@ to @-@ digest narrative " . Shondor Birns was murdered on March 29 , 1975 , whereas in the film this occurs on March 8 . The movie also misspells the name of a nearby parish known as ' St. Malachi 's ' ; in the movie it is spelled ' St. <unk> 's ' . 
 = = = The death of Alex " Shondor " Birns = = = 
 In the movie , Greene kills Shondor Birns by detonating a bomb on his car . In reality , even though Birns was killed by a car bomb , there was no evidence to link Greene to his murder . Even though it is commonly speculated that Greene killed Birns , his murder remains officially unsolved . 
 = = = The death of Art Sneperger = = = 
 In the movie , Greene discovers his friend Art Sneperger is about to become an informant , so he decides to kill him in a car bombing . Greene has Sneperger place a bomb on Mike Frato 's car , and as he is doing it , Greene detonates the bomb early , killing Sneperger in the process . In reality , Greene was questioned by the police , but was never proved to have killed Sneperger . 
 = Paynter ( horse ) = 
 Paynter ( foaled March 4 , 2009 ) is an American @-@ bred Thoroughbred racehorse notable for a promising three @-@ year @-@ old racing season that included a second @-@ place finish in the Belmont Stakes and a victory in the Haskell Invitational , cut short by a near @-@ fatal case of colitis requiring abdominal surgery , complicated by laminitis . Most experts believed that even if he survived , his racing days were over . His struggle for life , regularly updated via social media by his owners , gained him a large fan base and earned him the National Thoroughbred Racing Association Moment of the Year and Secretariat Vox Populi Award for 2012 . His surgery was successful , and innovative treatment for laminitis prevented harm to his feet , so he was sent to the Fair Hill Training Center for recovery and rehabilitation . In his four @-@ year @-@ old year , he returned to the track in June 2013 , almost eleven months after his 2012 Haskell victory , winning the first race of his comeback by 4 1 ⁄ 2 lengths , then running in three more graded stakes races , placing second in two of them , demonstrating his ability to compete against top horses . In November , 2013 , he ran in the Breeders ' Cup Classic and following the race was retired to WinStar Farm to stand at stud beginning with the 2014 breeding season . 
 = = Background = = 
 Paynter is a bay horse with a white star on his forehead , a faint irregular snip on his nose , and a white left front pastern bred by Diamond A Racing Corporation of Kentucky . His sire is 1998 Breeders ' Cup Classic winner Awesome Again , and his dam is Tizso , who raced twice and is a full sister to the two @-@ time Breeders ' Cup Classic winner Tiznow . 
 Originally named MC 's Dream , Paynter sold for $ 325 @,@ 000 at the Keeneland yearling sale . He was purchased by Ahmed Zayat 's Zayat Stables , LLC and was started under saddle by horse trainer J.B. McKathan in Florida . After completing basic training , Zayat 's adult son , Justin , selected Paynter , along with stablemate Bodemeister , to move on to the racing stable of trainer Bob Baffert . Paynter did not race as a two @-@ year @-@ old . 
 = = Three @-@ year @-@ old season = = 
 Paynter won his maiden race on February 18 , 2012 at Santa Anita Park . In an unusual move , he was taken directly from his maiden race to the Grade I Santa Anita Derby , where he had a troubled start and ran in sixth place before finishing fourth , 3 3 ⁄ 4 lengths behind the winner . Viewed as not quite ready for the Triple Crown races , Paynter next ran in the Derby Trial , where , on a muddy track , he lost narrowly in the final furlong . In his first three races , he was ridden by Martin Garcia . His second win was in a 1 1 ⁄ 16 mile allowance race on the undercard of the 2012 Preakness Stakes , when he was ridden by Mike Smith , who also rode Bodemeister in the Preakness later that day . Following Bodemeister 's second @-@ place finish in both the Kentucky Derby and the Preakness , Paynter was entered into the Belmont with Smith as jockey . 
 In the Belmont , Paynter led for most of the race until the final furlong when Smith came off the rail , allowing winner Union Rags to slip through and win by a neck . Paynter had already fended off two challengers during the race , and Smith had switched his whip from his right hand to his left in an attempt to fend off a late challenge from Atigun ; Smith considered his decision to be an error that cost him the race . 
 Paynter 's biggest win and first graded stakes win came in his next race , the 1 1 ⁄ 8 mile , $ 1 million Haskell Invitational at Monmouth Park Racetrack in July 2012 . Baffert 's assistant trainer , Jim Barnes , represented the stable at the race , as Baffert had cut back his schedule following a heart attack earlier in the year . Paynter went off as the even @-@ money favorite . Ridden for the first time by jockey Rafael Bejarano , he followed the leader through the backstretch , then took the lead at the far turn , beating five other horses to win by 3 3 ⁄ 4 lengths . His winning time was 1 : 48 @.@ 87 , earning him a Beyer Speed Figure of 108 . The victory was also Baffert 's third win in a row at the Haskell and sixth Haskell win in his career . Paynter 's winnings of $ 600 @,@ 000 put him close to a lifetime earnings figure of $ 1 million , at $ 952 @,@ 224 , considered impressive for a three @-@ year @-@ old horse who did not race as a two @-@ year @-@ old . 
 Paynter 's next race was scheduled to be the Travers Stakes on August 25 . With all three Triple Crown race winners for 2012 already retired from racing ( all due to injury ) , Paynter was considered a contender to become the 3 @-@ year @-@ old Horse of the Year if he continued to win races . 
 = = Illness and surgery = = 
 On July 29 , 2012 , two days after his Haskell win , Paynter developed a fever , pneumonia , and diarrhea . He was hospitalized at the nearby Mid @-@ Atlantic Equine Medical Center in New Jersey and then shipped on August 10 , 2012 to Belmont Park where he trained for several days . He was then shipped to Saratoga Race Course , home to the Travers Stakes , to recover further . However , he had no public workouts and missed the Travers . He was scheduled to be flown back to Baffert 's home stable in California on August 27 , but Paynter again developed a fever and diarrhea . He was sent to the Upstate Equine Medical Center in Schuylerville , NY where he was diagnosed with colitis , an inflammation of the colon . Paynter 's condition quickly deteriorated and was deemed life @-@ threatening . Ahmed and Justin Zayat began to tweet regular updates on his condition to the public . His care was supervised by Dr. Laura Javsicas , an Equine Internal Medicine specialist . Her devotion to Paynter was admired by both Zayat and Baffert , who later said that Javsicas should receive a special Eclipse Award . In turn , Paynter , normally characterized as an " aggressive " horse , was very cooperative toward his caregivers and accepted treatment without causing problems . 
 Paynter developed an infection at a catheter site and blood clots in his veins due to problems with his protein levels . He lost weight , and suffering from fever , colitis and diarrhea was given plasma and " aggressive " antibiotic treatment . 
 The medical staff were also worried , because a systemic illness with intestinal inflammation , such as colitis , is a common precursor to laminitis , a painful inflammation of the internal structures of the hoof . The staff had been using cryotherapy on his lower legs as a precaution . Although his blood test results and protein levels began to stabilize , he nevertheless developed laminitis in three of his feet on September 4 , ten days after he arrived at the center . The veterinarians treating Paynter put casts on his lower legs to support his feet . Most experts believed that even if he survived his racing days were over , and the Zayat family feared that euthanasia would be necessary . 
 After about three days , he seemed to be feeling better ; his blood work became normal and his diarrhea cleared up , but he still had low @-@ grade fevers . Against the odds , his hoof X @-@ rays came back showing no separation of the laminae , and no rotation or sinking of the coffin bone in any of his feet . Although the cryotherapy had not prevented laminitis , it might have kept it from becoming worse . On September 21 , the casts were removed from his legs . The laminitis treatment was successful and his feet were returning to normal , raising hopes that he could race again some day . 
 Paynter developed an increasing fan base as people followed the Zayat family 's social media updates , drawing comparisons to the struggle of Barbaro a few years earlier . Both Ahmed and Justin Zayat sent out regular tweets and the hashtag # <unk> was used to help organize updates to the public . Paynter received handmade posters from children and hundreds of get well cards . 
 Because fevers and colitis were still a problem , Javsicas performed ultrasound and found a problem area in his colon , thus surgery was required . Paynter was very thin by this time , weighing less than 900 pounds , and surgery was considered high risk . On October 2 , he was shipped to the University of Pennsylvania School of Veterinary Medicine 's New Bolton Center ( where Barbaro had also been treated ) and saw Dr. Louise Southwood , a veterinary surgeon who specialized in equine intestinal medicine and colitis cases . The following morning , Paynter went into surgery and Southwood removed a 15 @-@ inch ( 380 mm ) growth " full of puss [ sic ] and bacteria " from his intestines . Southwood explained , " we finally got to the bottom of why he was spiking the fever . " Paynter came out of the surgery well and Zayat tweeted , " Just think about the resilience of this guy . " Baffert commented , " I can 't believe this horse is still alive . " Nine days later , a press release came out stating that Paynter was " cleared of any lingering symptoms of both [ colitis and laminitis ] , " and expected to fully recover . 
 = = Rehabilitation and awards = = 
 Following surgery , Paynter quickly started to regain his weight , putting on 35 pounds in the two weeks between his surgery and being sent to Fair Hill Training Center 's Equine Therapy program on October 15 for rehabilitation . Nonetheless , he arrived at Fair Hill weighing only 912 pounds . At Fair Hill , he started out with hand @-@ walking and grazing , later being allowed short periods of exercise in a round pen . He had access to treatment in a horse @-@ sized hyperbaric oxygen therapy chamber , an underwater treadmill called an <unk> , equine massage therapy , electromagnetic therapy , and use of a cold saltwater spa . By November 15 , he was close to 1 @,@ 000 pounds and was allowed free daily turnout in a paddock . His normal temperament returned as he began to buck and kick during turnout . He also developed a taste for red peppermint candies , strongly preferring them over green spearmint ones . 
 On December 26 , Paynter was selected as the winner of the 2012 Secretariat Vox Populi Award . Penny Chenery , owner of Secretariat , for whom the award was named , said " Paynter 's popularity stems from his ability to battle and exceed expectations , making him the perfect choice as the recipient of this year 's Vox Populi Award ... After seeing firsthand the devastating effects of this disease , I am even more convinced that the industry must continue to diligently fight laminitis . The progress we have made to date clearly benefited Paynter — a beautiful colt with a tremendous spirit . " In January 2013 , Paynter 's survival and recovery was voted the " Moment of the Year " by the National Thoroughbred Racing Association ( NTRA ) in a field of 12 nominees , and the horse 's connections were given that honor at the annual Eclipse Awards . 
 = = 2013 : Comeback = = 
 On December 29 , 2012 , Paynter was shipped from Fair Hill back to California , where he resumed race training with Baffert . When he left Fair Hill he weighed 1022 pounds and was described as " full of himself . " Both Southwood and Javsicas believed that he could recover completely . While numerous horses recovering from colitis and abdominal surgery have been able to return to their previous levels of competition , Paynter 's successful recovery from laminitis was the biggest factor in his ability to resume racing . He began jogging on the track on January 5 , and had his first official workout on February 26 . On June 14 he was entered into a 7 @-@ furlong allowance race at <unk> Hollywood Park . Ahmed Zayat said , " He has shown so much courage , so much tenacity . I just want to let the horse do the talking . " 
 Paynter carried 124 pounds , the co @-@ <unk> of the eight horses in the race . Bejarano returned as jockey . It was the horse 's first start on a synthetic surface . He started from starting post position two at odds of 2 – 5 . Paynter led from the start , clocked the first quarter mile in : 22 @.@ 68 and the half mile in : 45 @.@ 67 . At six furlongs , he was 2 1 ⁄ 2 lengths in front , running that distance in 1 : 06 @.@ 56 , and continued to increase his lead over the other horses . He won by 4 1 ⁄ 2 lengths , finishing in 1 : 21 @.@ 86 , and earning a Beyer Speed Figure of 114 , the best of his career . Justin Zayat said , “ I thought I was winning the Kentucky Derby , ” and Baffert stated , " He is just an incredible , phenomenal horse , I can 't believe he is back . He 's just a great horse ... He went from being 99 – 1 to survive to 1 – 9 to win ... I got emotional watching . It ’ s an amazing story . " Paynter handled the race well and came out in good shape . 
 Plans were made for Paynter to run additional races before the Breeders ' Cup Classic in the fall . His next race was the San Diego Handicap at Del Mar on July 27 , 2013 . Shortly after his arrival at Del Mar racetrack in early July , Paynter was profiled on TV , showing that his usual temperament was back to normal , as the camera showed him attempting to nip Baffert . Running for the first time on a different synthetic surface , Polytrack , in the grade 2 race , Paynter was the 3 – 5 favorite , and at 122 pounds carried the most weight . After running close to the pace and taking the lead in the homestretch , he lost by a half @-@ length to a late @-@ running horse , Kettle Corn , at the finish . Jockey Bejarano believed the <unk> surface was a factor in his loss . " He never seemed comfortable out there , I felt like I had plenty of horse , but he just wasn 't liking what he was doing ... he didn 't have enough at the end . " Nonetheless , purse money for his placing put him over one million dollars in lifetime winnings . 
 Paynter next went east to run in the Grade I Woodward Stakes at Saratoga on August 31 . Five of the horses in the initial seven @-@ horse field , including Paynter , were previous Grade I stakes winners . Paynter drew post position 5 and was the second favorite at 3 @-@ 1 odds on the morning line . However , following the scratch of a speed horse , the <unk> revised his figures to make front @-@ running Paynter the 2 @-@ 1 favorite . On race day , over a sloppy track , another horse , Mucho Macho Man , scratched and only five horses went to the post . Paynter had a bad start , hitting the left side of the starting gate . Although he ran second for part of the race , he finished last in the field . Justin Zayat said after the race , " [ Paynter ] never got a hold of the track . We ’ ll be back another day . " Baffert concurred , stating that the horse was " fine " , but had been troubled by the poor break and by mud hitting his face . 
 Paynter 's next race was the Grade I Awesome Again Stakes at Santa Anita on September 28 . He started from the seven post with his former rider , Martin Garcia up . After running in the middle of the pack and going five horses wide coming into the stretch , he finished second to Mucho Macho Man . His placing was viewed by sportswriters as proof that he could run against top competitors . Baffert said Paynter was still " a bit rusty , " but the trainer was happy with Paynter 's race . He was entered in the Breeders ' Cup Classic , on November 2 . Before the race , he had a very strong workout and Baffert said that Paynter was " a monster " and " back to top form " , and Ahmed Zayat stated , " Paynter is a horse like no other ... The fact that he 's even competing in the Breeders ' Cup is miraculous . " Though he finished 7th out of 11 horses , with Mucho Macho Man winning again , Paynter finished ahead of a fellow Awesome Again son , the stakes @-@ winning favorite Game On Dude . 
 After the Breeders ' Cup , Paynter was retired and shipped to WinStar Farm to begin his stud career . His initial stud fee was set at $ 25 @,@ 000 for the 2014 breeding season . Anticipating his arrival , WinStar commissioned a unique , colorful 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) long graffiti @-@ style mural , created by Louisville street artist <unk> Stewart . The artwork featured the slogan " Paynter : Awesome Heart , " and was surrounded by quotations about the horse and assorted references to his racing career . The decision to use graffiti art as a promotional tool was to reflect Paynter 's toughness and " street fighter " image . Artist Stewart also expressed hope that the artwork would help put graffiti art in a positive light and encourage young people to " get involved with the arts . " 
 = = Racing statistics = = 
 = = Pedigree = = 
 Paynter was sired by the Canadian @-@ bred Awesome Again , winner of the 1998 Breeders ' Cup Classic . At stud , Awesome Again has sired many stakes winners including Ghostzapper , who was 2004 Breeders ' Cup winner and 2004 Horse of the Year , and two @-@ time Santa Anita Handicap winner Game On Dude , another Bob Baffert @-@ trained horse . Paynter is closely related to 2013 Preakness Stakes winner Oxbow ; the two horses share the same sire and are out of full sisters . Both horses have pedigrees outcrossed for four generations , with very little inbreeding , <unk> to Northern Dancer . 
 Paynter 's dam is Tizso , a full sister to Tiznow , who was 2000 Horse of the Year and won the Breeders ' Cup Classic twice . Tizso 's dam , Cee 's Song , is credited with raising the respect breeders have for her female breeding line , Thoroughbred family 26 , as one of the top distaff lines in America . Five full siblings out of Cee 's Song were either race winners or the dams of race winners : Paynter 's dam Tizso and Oxbow 's dam Tizamazing both foaled stakes winners , and Tiznow , <unk> and <unk> all won stakes races . Another Cee 's Song son , the gelding <unk> , was second in the 1999 Breeders ' Cup Classic . 
 = February 2010 Australian cyberattacks = 
 The February 2010 Australian cyberattacks were a series of denial @-@ of @-@ service attacks conducted by the Anonymous online community against the Australian government in response to proposed web censorship regulations . Operation <unk> was the name given to the cyber attacks by the perpetrators . They resulted in lapses of access to government websites on 10 and 11 February 2010 . This was accompanied by emails , faxes , and phone calls harassing government offices . The actual size of the attack and number of perpetrators involved is unknown but it was estimated that the number of systems involved ranged from the hundreds to the thousands . The amount of traffic caused disruption on multiple government websites . 
 Australian Telecommunications Minister Stephen Conroy proposed the regulations that would mainly filter sites with pornographic content . Various groups advocating uncensored access to the Internet , along with companies like Google and Yahoo ! , object to the proposed filter . A spokesperson for Conroy said that the actions were not a legitimate form of protest and called it irresponsible . The attacks also drew criticism from other filter protest groups . The initial stage was followed by small in @-@ person protests on 20 February that were called " Project <unk> " . 
 = = Background = = 
 The attack began as a protest responding to a plan by Australian Telecommunications Minister Stephen Conroy that would require internet service providers to block Australian users from accessing illegal and what the government deemed as " unwanted " content . Websites to be blocked feature pornography showing rape , bestiality , child sex abuse , small @-@ breasted women ( who may appear under the legal age ) , and female ejaculation . Drawn depictions of such acts are included in the proposal . The proposed filter also includes gambling sites along with others showing drug use . A leaked version of the proposed blacklist ( also referred to as the " refused classification " or " RC " list ) also showed sites that did not include adult content . The name " Operation <unk> " was in reference to the material that would be censored . 
 Google has questioned the proposal , saying the prohibitions would be too broad . It is strongly opposed by free speech groups . A poll conducted by McNair Ingenuity Research for the Hungry Beast television program found that 80 % of their 1 @,@ 000 respondents were in favour of the concept of the plan . The survey also found that 91 % were concerned about the government 's intent to keep the list of filtered websites a secret . 
 The Department of Defence 's Cyber Security Operations Centre discovered the attack was coming on 5 February . A statement released by Anonymous to the press two days before the attack said , " No government should have the right to refuse its citizens access to information solely because they perceive it to be ' unwanted ' . " It went on to read , " The Australian Government will learn that one does not mess with our porn . No one messes with our access to perfectly legal ( or illegal ) content for any reason " . Anonymous had previously garnered media attention with protests against Church of Scientology ( Project Chanology ) and the Iranian government . In September 2009 , Prime Minister Kevin Rudd 's website was hacked in a similar protest to proposed web censorship reforms . 
 = = Attacks = = 
 Flyers distributed to recruit participants said the attack was to begin at 8 pm AEST on 10 February . On that day , government websites were targeted by denial @-@ of @-@ service attacks . The Communications Department said the hackers had not infiltrated government security , but had instead swamped government computer servers . Sites were left unavailable for sporadic periods throughout the attack . At one point , the Australian Parliament 's website was offline for about two days due to the high volume of requests . Rudd 's government site was also inaccessible for some time . As a primary target , the Communications Department also received a large amount of traffic . Government offices were also flooded with e @-@ mail spam , junk faxes , and prank phone calls . The Prime Minister 's homepage was vandalized with pornographic images . The flyer released before the attack called for the faxes to focus on cartoon pornography , female ejaculation , and small @-@ breasted pornography . 
 Reports of the actual size of the attack have varied . One cyber security expert described the attacks as " the equivalent of parking a truck across the driveway of a shopping centre " . A firm marketing security technology said that the peak of the attack was a relatively low 16 @.@ 84 megabits per second . One writer described the 7 @.@ 5 million requests per second that initially brought down the Parliament website as " massive " . The site usually only receives a few hundred per second . It appears that botnets made up of compromised computers were not used . Estimates of the number of attacking systems involved have ranged from hundreds to thousands . 
 = = Response = = 
 A spokeswoman for Conroy said such attacks were not a legitimate political protest . According to her , they were " totally irresponsible and potentially deny services to the Australian public " . The Systems Administrators Guild of Australia said that it " condemned DDoS attacks as the wrong way to express disagreement with the proposed law " . Anti @-@ censorship groups criticised the attacks , saying they hurt their cause . A purported spokesperson for the attackers recommended that the wider Australian public protest the filter by signing the petition of Electronic Frontiers Australia . 
 Anonymous coordinated a second phase with small protests outside the Parliament House in Canberra and in major cities throughout Australia on 20 February . Additional demonstrations were held at some of the country 's embassies overseas . The organizers called the follow @-@ up protests " Project <unk> " to differentiate them from the criticised cyber attacks . 
 Several supporters of the attack later said on a messageboard that taking down websites was not enough to convince the government to back down on the web filtering policy and called for violence . Others disagreed with such actions and proposed launching an additional attack on a popular government site . A spokesman for Electronic Frontiers Australia said he believed there was no real intention or capacity to follow through with any of the violent threats . 
 The attack also resulted in criticism of Australia 's terrorism laws from the The University of New South Wales Law Journal . One writer wrote that the provisions leave " no place for legitimate acts of online protest , or at least sets the penalty far too high for relatively minor cyber @-@ vandalism " . 
 An Australian teenager was charged with four counts of inciting other hackers to impair electronic communications and two of unauthorised access to restricted data for his role in the attack . He was ordered to pay a bond instead of being convicted after pleading guilty and showing good behaviour . 
 In July 2010 , Conroy delayed implementing the plan pending a 12 @-@ month review into how refused classification content was rated . The proposal is not expected to go forward due to the opposition from The Coalition and the Greens . Internet service providers Telstra and Optus have both agreed to voluntarily block some content . 
 = History of Crystal Palace F.C. = 
 Crystal Palace Football Club is an English professional football club who were founded in 1905 at the famous Crystal Palace Exhibition building and during their early years they played at the FA Cup Final venue which was situated inside the Palace grounds . This article documents the history of the club from its formation all the way through to the present day . 
 = = Background and formation = = 
 As early as 1861 , workers from the famous glass exhibition building formed the initial Crystal Palace team as an amateur club . They were one of the 12 founder members of the Football Association and competed in the first FA Cup reaching the semi @-@ finals where they were eliminated by the Royal Engineers in a replay after the first game ended goalless . The team also played in the FA Cup in the next four seasons , disappearing from historical records after a 3 – 0 defeat to eventual winners Wanderers in the second round of the 1875 – 76 FA Cup . However , this was not the end of the association between Crystal Palace and the FA Cup . In 1895 , the FA adopted a new permanent home for the Cup Final which was to be played at the sports stadium situated inside the grounds of The Crystal Palace . With the owners of the attraction reliant on tourist activity for their income , they sought fresh attractions for the venue , attracting the London County Cricket Club of W. G. Grace before turning their attention to football . 
 The idea of a new club playing at the Crystal Palace stadium was proposed in 1904 by the Crystal Palace Company . The proposal was rejected by the Football Association , who disliked the idea of the owners of the Cup Final venue also possessing a football club . However a separate company was formed the following year to establish the club under the chairmanship of Sydney Bourne , chosen due to his propensity in buying tickets to the Cup Final . 
 = = Southern League ( 1905 – 20 ) = = 
 Crystal Palace Football Club was formed on 10 September 1905 playing in the Aston Villa colours of claret and blue . The choice of colours was a result of the important role in the club 's formation played by Edmund Goodman , an Aston Villa employee who was recommended to the fledgling club by the Villa chairman , William McGregor . Goodman organised the business side of the club and managed the team from 1907 to 1925 . A former amateur player with Villa , Goodman had lost his right leg after an injury led to amputation . Goodman hired John Robson from Middlesbrough to be the team 's manager . Robson had transformed his previous club from an amateur side to an established Football League First Division side . 
 Along with another newly formed London club Chelsea , Palace applied to join the Second Division of the Football League . Chelsea were accepted , but Crystal Palace were not . Unfortunately Palace were too late to be considered for the First Division of the Southern League and were forced to settle for a place in the Second Division . To increase the number of club fixtures , they also joined the mid @-@ week United Counties League . Robson established a team of sixteen professionals , mainly drawn from Middlesbrough . The club 's inaugural campaign in Division Two of the Southern League , which consisted mainly of other clubs ' reserve sides alongside Southall , Southern United , St. Leonards United and Grays United was a successful one . Their opening match was against Southampton Reserves , and approximately 3 @,@ 000 people paid 6d to stand or a shilling to sit . Palace led 3 – 0 after 30 minutes , before fading and losing 3 – 4 . However , that was the club 's only defeat in the League all season , and Crystal Palace won the championship and were promoted to the Southern League First Division . The season included a run of seventeen straight victories , and a 9 – 1 win over Grays United at Crystal Palace . The crowd attendances for the season were regularly between 2 @,@ 000 and 3 @,@ 000 although 4 @,@ 000 attended the 4 – 0 defeat of Watford Reserves in March . 
 Following their championship win , Palace started their second season as a club in the Southern League First Division , placing 19th at the end of the season but enjoying better form in the FA Cup . Beating Rotherham County in a qualifying tie , Palace were then drawn away to Newcastle United in the First Round proper . Newcastle had played in the previous two FA Cup Finals , were league champions in 1905 and were on their way to another championship . In what still stands as one of the club 's greatest ever wins , Crystal Palace scored through Horace Astley against the run of play and then held off Newcastle to come away with a shock 1 – 0 win . The second and third rounds saw Palace dispose of Fulham and Brentford respectively , the latter after a replay , and the quarter @-@ finals saw Palace drawn at home to First Division club Everton , currently flying high in second place . In front of a record crowd of 35 @,@ 000 , Palace took the lead , but their opponents equalised taking the tie to a replay , where Everton proved too strong , running out 4 – 0 winners . 
 John Robson left Palace to manage neighbours Croydon Common F.C for the 1907 – 08 season , and Edmund Goodman took over as manager and club secretary . The club had a good season , finishing fourth . Bill Davies became the first player from the club to win an international honour when he was called up for Wales . The club could not sustain their league form the following season , finishing the league in a disappointing sixteenth place . In the FA Cup they fell to their heaviest defeat , a second round replay to Burnley which finished 0 – 9 , a record defeat for Palace and a record victory for Burnley . Palace managed to finish fourth again in the following season , losing just one game in the first twelve , and repeated their fourth @-@ place finish again the following season , with league attendances as high as 12 @,@ 000 . The club won the London Challenge Cup in 1913 , overcoming West Ham United 1 – 0 . After seventh and fifth @-@ place finishes , Palace enjoyed good form in the 1913 – 14 season , the club putting together some long unbeaten runs and finishing the season runners @-@ up to Swindon Town on goal average . They also retained the London Challenge Cup , defeating Tottenham Hotspur 2 – 1 at Highbury , and provided their first England representative in Horace <unk> , who played in the team that beat Wales in Cardiff on 16 March . 
 Following the outbreak of the First World War on 4 August 1914 , Palace had three players called up as Reservists before the season started . Former Palace players Ginger Williams and Joe Bulcock were amongst those killed in the conflict . In March 1915 , The Admiralty , who had taken over the Palace and its grounds at the start of the war , ordered the club to leave . Palace chose to move to Herne Hill Stadium , but the 1918 – 19 season found Palace at a new ground . Croydon Common failed to return to business after the war , and it was to their ground , The Nest opposite Selhurst Station , that Crystal Palace now moved . Palace finished the season without a win in the last nine games , ending in seventh place , building on that position to finish third the following year . 
 = = Lower divisions ( 1920 – 58 ) = = 
 Crystal Palace became a league club in 1920 when the Football League accepted the entire Southern League en bloc as associate members in a newly formed Third Division . In their first season as a league club , Palace lost their opening game at Merthyr Town 1 – 2 with A.G. Milligan scoring Palace 's first @-@ ever Football League goal . Milligan 's Palace career was short @-@ lived however , and he made just one more appearance for the club . Palace 's first @-@ ever home Football League match was a disappointing 0 – 0 draw against Plymouth Argyle but Palace then went on a run of six consecutive wins . Goalkeeper Jack Alderson , who had been signed in 1919 , kept a clean sheet in six consecutive games . Palace lost just six more games all season , were unbeaten in the final sixteen games of the season which included an eight @-@ game winning streak and went on to win the championship by five points from Southampton . The feat earned them promotion to the Second Division . The club conceded just thirty @-@ four goals over the season , a record that stood until 1978 – 79 , and they joined Preston North End , Small Heath , Liverpool and Bury as the only clubs to have won a championship in their first season as a league club . Palace also won their third London Challenge Cup , beating Clapton Orient at White Hart Lane 1 – 0 through a goal from forward John Conner . 
 The following season , 1921 – 22 , saw the formation of a Northern section of the Third Division and the Third Division became Division Three South . This arrangement would continue until 1958 when the Third and Fourth Division were formed , but for the moment , Palace were above all of that , and in 1921 they opened their second season in the Football League as a Second Division club , finishing in fourteenth place . The highest attendance of the season was 20 @,@ 000 for the Fulham game . Palace remained in the lower reaches of the table in the following season , 1922 – 23 , finishing fifteenth . The club also made a significant purchase that season with regards to a new permanent home . 
 Back in 1919 , the Palace minute book contained an entry instructing the Secretary to investigate the possibility of obtaining a lease on the ' ground at Selhurst ' . Calling it a ' ground ' was a little misleading since at the time it was a piece of wasteland valuable only to the London , Brighton and South Coast Railway Company . At one time it had been a <unk> , and two chimney stacks still remained . On 3 January 1922 the club purchased the ground at a cost of £ 2 @,@ 750 , and renowned football ground architect Archibald Leitch was commissioned to design Selhurst Park . Leitch had designed stands at Craven Cottage , Stamford Bridge , White Hart Lane and Leeds Road , but the design for Palace was unusual in that it had no roof gable . The other three sides of the ground remained open banking with just the lower parts being terraced . Construction work was delayed by industrial disputes , and when the ground was opened by the Lord Mayor of London on the first day of the 1924 – 25 season , 30 August , the stand was not finished . It did however boast many luxuries , including " offices , tea rooms , training quarters , plunge , slipper shower and needle baths " . The opening fixture was against The Wednesday , and in front of a crowd of 25 @,@ 000 , Palace lost 0 – 1 , with the first goal at Selhurst Park being scored by Billy Marsden . That defeat set the tone for the season , and the club finished in twenty @-@ first place – relegated along with Coventry City . A win in the last game at home to Oldham Athletic would have secured survival , but Palace went down 0 – 1 and it would be almost 40 years before Palace would again grace the second level of English football . One small consolation was the decision by the FA to stage the England versus Wales international at Selhurst Park on 1 March 1925 . It remains the only full international staged at the ground , and Wales won the game 3 – 1 . 
 After one season in the Third Division South and eighteen in total , Edmund Goodman stepped down as manager and returned to administrative duties , and a succession of managers attempted to plot Palace 's climb back up the table . However , Palace 's stay in the division was to last as long as the Third Division South itself . With only the champions gaining promotion , it was a difficult division to be promoted from , although Palace came close on more than one occasion . In the fourteen Division Three South seasons pre @-@ Second World War , Palace finished in the top seven ten times , and never lower than fourteenth . Palace finished runners @-@ up no less than three times , and when the 1939 – 40 season ended , Palace were sitting fourth . Unfortunately the season was only four matches old , cancelled with the onset of the Second World War . 
 The war years of 1939 – 45 saw football enter a period of disarray with the creation of Wartime Leagues . Palace joined the South " A " Division in 1939 , but also joined the South League " D " in 1940 , winning the latter competition , and then promptly winning an improvised South Regional League the following season on goal average . Palace then joined the London League for 1941 – 42 , the sides in London refusing to accept the ad @-@ hoc competitions the Football League were organising . This division lasted one season before the London clubs were back in the Football League fold , Palace joining the Football League South for the next four seasons . Crystal Palace fielded 186 different players during the seven wartime seasons . 
 Kit changes had been introduced in the late 1930s . The 1937 season saw Palace field a shirt of claret and blue stripes , before adopting white shirts and black shorts for the following eleven seasons . The club reverted to claret and blue in 1948 , but any attempt at changing the kit to change their luck backfired as the club had their worst season to date , finishing bottom and celebrating twenty @-@ five years in League Football by applying for re @-@ election for the first time . Palace kept their place , changed the kit back to white shirts and black shorts , and finished seventh the following season . They followed this up with another bottom place and re @-@ election in 1951 , with the unwanted record of scoring the lowest number of goals in a Division Three South season . Palace would remain in the bottom half of the table until the League was restructured in 1958 , requiring re @-@ election a third and final time in 1956 , with only Swindon keeping them from bottom spot that season . 
 = = Arthur Wait years ( 1958 – 74 ) = = 
 1958 was a period of change , with Arthur Wait taking control of the club as chairman and Division Four football being enjoyed by the club . Palace had failed to qualify for Division Three , falling outside the top eleven finish required by three places . The 1958 – 59 season saw the club finish seventh , with the team going slightly worse the following season with an eighth @-@ place finish . The club then enjoyed a successful 1960 – 61 season , finishing second behind league newcomers Peterborough United , who thus matched Palace 's 1921 achievement of winning a championship in their inaugural league season . Palace themselves set the Fourth Division records for highest average attendance of 19 @,@ 092 , and the highest attendance at an individual match ; 37 @,@ 774 for the Good Friday game at Selhurst Park between Palace and Millwall . Surrey born Johnny Byrne scored thirty @-@ one of Palace 's 110 goals , and his strike partner Roy <unk> netted twenty @-@ five as Palace moved up to Division Three . 
 Palace finished fifteenth in the 1961 – 62 season . In November , Byrne was called up to the England team , despite playing outside the top two divisions at the time , one of only five people ever to achieve this . He played the whole of the 1 – 1 draw against Northern Ireland , part of the 1962 British Home Championship , at Wembley Stadium . After international recognition , Ron Greenwood paid a British record transfer fee of £ 65 @,@ 000 and ex @-@ Palace striker Ron Brett in exchange to take " Budgie " to West Ham United in March 1962 . This was a record fee between two British clubs at the time . Byrne left having scored ninety @-@ six goals for Palace , then a post @-@ war record . 
 On Wednesday 18 April 1962 , Real Madrid made their first ever appearance in London to celebrate the opening of Palace 's new floodlights , with Byrne returning to the Palace line @-@ up as a guest player . Real Madrid ran out 4 – 3 winners . The 1962 – 63 season saw Palace finish 11th , before the following season saw the team finish second behind Coventry City on goal average and gain promotion to the Second Division . The Dave Clark Five 's chart @-@ hit " Glad All Over " became a crowd favourite at Selhurst , with fans banging on advertising hoardings in time with the drum beat in the chorus of the song . The club began to play the song regularly , and it remains the club 's anthem today . 
 For the following four seasons Palace achieved respectable top half finishes , and poached the Bury manager Bert Head after persistence from chairman Arthur Wait in early 1966 . Head had been with Bury less than a season . The new manager promoted from the youth team and transferred in players new and old , and delighted fans by re @-@ signing Johnny Byrne . His work paid dividends in the 1968 – 69 season when Palace , not fancied as promotion candidates at the beginning of the season , finished second behind Brian Clough 's Derby County . The club had achieved a place in the top flight for the first time in their history , clinching promotion with a 16 @-@ game unbeaten run to end the season . 
 Palace 's life in the top division of English football in the 1969 – 70 season began with a home game against Manchester United . Scoring the first Division One goal for the club was Mel Blyth after six minutes , and a second goal from new signing Gerry Queen saw Palace hold Manchester United to a 2 – 2 draw with goalkeeper John Jackson denying George Best and Brian Kidd . The next match was another home game versus Sunderland which Palace won 2 – 0 . After a season long struggle against relegation , Palace were eventually able to secure safety , finishing in twentieth place above demoted Sheffield Wednesday and Sunderland . Palace managed to gain three new records for the First Division at the end of this season : the fewest goals scored ; the fewest wins recorded by a non @-@ relegated team ; and the tally of twenty @-@ seven points was the smallest number with which a team has avoided relegation from the top flight . Palace avoided the drop for two more seasons , and followed the trend of many other top flight clubs by introducing a new " Player of the Year " award which has been presented at the end of every season since the 1971 – 72 campaign . The first recipient was John McCormick . 
 Despite some good performances in the 1972 – 73 season , notably a 5 – 0 home win against Manchester United in December , Palace succumbed to the drop in their fourth season in the top division . Arthur Wait , having overseen the rise of the club from Fourth to First , was replaced as Chairman by Raymond Bloye in November 1972 and the club appointed Malcolm Allison in March the following year , replacing Bert Head . Although the club saw a record average attendance over the season , neither the crowd nor the managerial change were able to keep the club at the top level . Allison 's first game in charge did see some changes , however . He gave young Scottish defender Jim Cannon his debut in the home game against Chelsea . Palace had never won a London derby in the top flight to this point , but Cannon , who had risen through the youth ranks at Palace , marked Blues striker Peter Osgood out of the game and then scored the second goal in a 2 – 0 win to begin a long career in <unk> . 
 = = The coming of The Eagles ( 1974 – 80 ) = = 
 Despite relegation , the 1973 – 74 season started with much optimism among supporters . Malcolm Allison had a strong recent record as a coach , having won trophies with Manchester City as an assistant to Joe Mercer . Allison , or ' Big Mal ' as he was nicknamed in the press , had a flamboyant personality which was something of a change for the club . Palace had previously enjoyed something of a conservative image . " The Glaziers " became " The Eagles " and the club changed its colours from the original claret and sky blue to a red and dark blue scheme inspired by Barcelona . The Eagle was also introduced as the club mascot at this time , an idea borrowed from Benfica , and the club badge was redesigned . The new season saw the introduction of a three @-@ up , three @-@ down promotion and relegation system , and Palace struggled to find their feet in the Second Division , failing to win any of their first 15 league games . In bottom place for most of the season , the club , aided by the signing from Southend United of pacey winger Peter Taylor climbed to seventeenth place with a 3 – 1 win at Fulham on Good Friday . The club then turned in three consecutive losses which saw them needing to win the last game of the season at Cardiff City to remain in the second tier of English football . They could only draw 1 – 1 , and were demoted for a second successive season . 
 The 1974 – 75 season was the club 's first season in Division Three since 1963 – 64 , and although the team had a good season , and attendances were the highest in the division , they missed out on promotion , finishing in fifth place . Allison acquired Terry Venables and Ian Evans from QPR in exchange for Don Rogers , a trade that was to be significant to Palace 's , and indeed England 's , football future . It was also around this time that Allison persuaded the club to put more resources into developing a strong youth team , a decision that would lead to both success at youth level , and the emergence of a number of promising players . The following season Palace again failed to gain promotion , distracted in part by their best effort in the FA Cup to date . Palace enjoyed a run to the semi @-@ finals , beating Leeds United and Chelsea along the way , before losing 2 – 0 to Southampton at Stamford Bridge on 2 April . Allison was sacked at the end of the season , in part because of his off the field antics , famously getting himself photographed in the team bath with porn star Fiona Richmond . 
 Allison was replaced as manager by Terry Venables , who had been his assistant the previous season , and he guided Palace to promotion at the first attempt . The Palace youngsters also won the FA Youth Cup with a side including Kenny Sansom , Vince Hilaire and Billy Gilbert . The following season , 1977 – 78 saw the youth team became the first team to win the FA Youth Cup in successive seasons since Chelsea in 1960 and 1961 . These talented young players had become regulars in the team by the 1978 – 79 season which saw Palace vying not only for promotion but also the Second Division Championship . The final game of the season was a Friday night match at home to Burnley . In front of the club 's record home crowd of 51 @,@ 801 , there was all to play for : a Palace win , and the club would be champions ; a draw , and Palace would be promoted , but hand the championship to fierce rivals Brighton ; a loss and Palace would stay down , with Sunderland clinching the final promotion place . At half @-@ time the deadlock had not been broken despite Palace 's dominance , but a second @-@ half cross from Vince Hilaire allowed Ian Walsh to head the opener , before a great run by David <unk> was completed by a finish from outside the penalty area to give the Eagles a 2 – 0 win . Palace were crowned champions , and had reached the top flight again . 
 As an increasing number of players from the FA Youth Cup winning team had established themselves in the first team , the press gave Palace the title of the " Team of the Eighties " . The Eagles began the 1979 – 80 season well and stayed unbeaten longer than any other club in the top flight . They also occupied first place in the top flight for the first and to date only time in the club 's history when they demolished an excellent Ipswich Town side managed by Bobby Robson by four goals to one at Selhurst Park . Sadly however the young starlets could not keep this form up , and a slide down the table resulted in the Eagles finishing thirteenth , which at that point was the club 's highest ever finish . 
 = = Top tier football ( 1980 – 98 ) = = 
 The slide continued into the 1980 – 81 season , with nine defeats in the first ten games , and Venables quit Selhurst Park for QPR . The club were suffering financial problems as well , and were virtually relegated by the start of February when another , even bigger change occurred . Ron Noades , formerly chairman of Wimbledon , took financial control of the club , purchasing it from Raymond Bloye 's consortium . After a couple of seasons flirting with the drop and numerous managerial changes , Noades appointed 29 @-@ year @-@ old former Manchester United and England midfielder Steve Coppell as manager for the 1984 – 85 season . Coppell 's playing career had been cut short by a knee injury , and , assisted by former Palace player Ian Evans , he worked on rebuilding the club , eventually signing the then unknown Ian Wright from non @-@ league Greenwich Borough and Mark Bright from Leicester City , and the pair formed the " <unk> & <unk> " strike partnership . Coppell stabilised the club in his first season , and after two seasons of narrowly missing out on the play @-@ offs , followed up by narrowly missing out on automatic promotion by a single point . The club instead entered the 1989 Football League Championship play @-@ offs , beating Swindon in the semi @-@ finals to set up a two legged final against Blackburn Rovers . The first leg at Ewood Park saw the Lancashire club defeat the Eagles 3 – 1 , but a 30 @,@ 000 full house at Selhurst Park saw the Eagles triumph 3 – 0 in extra time in the second leg to end their eight @-@ year exile from the top flight . Ian Wright , who scored 24 league goals , and 33 in all competitions in the promotion campaign , was voted player of the year by the club 's supporters . 
 Crystal Palace began their first top flight campaign in nearly a decade by re @-@ signing Andy Gray from QPR for £ 500 @,@ 000 . In November , Palace hit the headlines when they signed Bristol Rovers goalkeeper Nigel Martyn for £ 1million – a record for a goalkeeper in Britain . Mixed form meant that the Eagles ended the season fifteenth after spending most of the first half in the top ten . However it was in the FA Cup that Palace really shone . After a succession of ties against lower division teams ( Portsmouth , Huddersfield Town , Rochdale and Cambridge United ) , Palace reached the semi @-@ finals , drawing the same Liverpool side that had beaten them 9 – 0 earlier in the season . The tie was played at Villa Park , and saw Liverpool score first and hold a seemingly comfortable 1 – 0 lead at half @-@ time . However , Palace emerged from the half @-@ time interval with a sense of purpose , and within a minute of the restart were level with Bright equalising . After going 2 – 1 up , they found themselves 3 – 2 down late in the match and were seemingly beaten . Then a late equaliser by Andy Gray took the game into extra @-@ time , with the winner scored by Alan Pardew . The team secured a thrilling 4 – 3 victory and for the first time in their history , Palace were in the FA Cup Final . 
 Their first @-@ ever appearance at Wembley Stadium saw the Eagles facing Alex Ferguson 's Manchester United . Gary O 'Reilly opened the scoring and Ian Wright then equalised immediately after coming onto the pitch as a substitute to take the tie to extra time , before scoring again early in the extra period . Mark Hughes scored a third for United to leave the game drawn 3 – 3 and requiring a replay . In the replay the Eagles wore a new one @-@ off yellow and black striped shirt because the club did not have time to find their away strip . The replay saw United left @-@ back Lee Martin cap a 40 @-@ yard run by slotting past Martyn to win the Cup for the Red Devils . 
 The club built on the success of the previous season and for a while challenged for the league title . However Palace fell just short of champions Arsenal and runners @-@ up Liverpool , finishing a club @-@ best third in the league . Palace were denied a place in Europe because although the ban on English clubs in European competitions following the Heysel disaster of 1985 had now been lifted , there would only be one place for English clubs in the 1991 – 92 edition of the UEFA Cup , and this went to Liverpool rather than Palace . Success was achieved that season however when Palace made their third trip to Wembley in twelve months , beating Everton 4 – 1 in the final of the Full Members Cup . 
 The following season was to become one marked by controversy in another way . Critical Eye – Great Britain United , a Channel 4 documentary of 12 September featured interviews with a number of club personnel . Amongst them was chairman Ron Noades , who commented " when you 're getting into mid @-@ winter in England , you need a few hard white men to carry the artistic black players through " . Noades claimed he was reported out of context , an allegation rejected by the programmes makers , and his comments stunned Palace 's many black players . Ian Wright left the club soon after , transferring to Arsenal for £ <unk> Palace finished tenth in the First Division , losing rising England star John Salako to a cruciate ligament injury . A breakaway by the top 22 clubs saw Palace become founder members of the new FA Premier League for the 1992 – 93 season . However , they would be without the services of another key player – Mark Bright – who was sold to Sheffield Wednesday and the Eagles struggled to score goals without him . They were demoted on goal difference , after Oldham Athletic 's 4 – 3 victory over Southampton . Palace 's 49 points from 42 games that season became the joint @-@ highest total of any club ever to have been relegated from the top flight of English football , and remains a Premier League record . Palace 's drop prompted the resignation of manager Steve Coppell after nine years at the helm , and he was succeeded by his assistant Alan Smith . 
 Smith immediately guided Palace back to the Premier League as runaway champions of the second tier , Chris Armstrong top @-@ scoring with 23 league goals . During this period the badge was changed with the bird being replaced by one which Ron Noades felt more closely resembled an eagle . 1995 again saw the club making news for off the field reasons . On 25 January 1995 Palace played Manchester United at Selhurst Park . Following a bad tackle on Richard Shaw , United 's maverick french forward Eric Cantona was sent off . As Cantona walked towards the tunnel he was taunted by Palace fan Matthew Simmons . This angered Cantona , who launched a flying kick at him with both feet . Manchester United suspended Cantona for the remainder of the season , while the French Football Federation dropped Cantona from the France national football team , and stripped Cantona of the captaincy of Les Bleus . Cantona was sentenced to two weeks in jail ; this was reduced to 120 hours community service on appeal . Simmons was immediately banned from Selhurst Park , and in 1996 was found guilty of two charges of using threatening words and behaviour towards Cantona . More was to follow at Selhurst in March , when Chris Armstrong was suspended by the FA for failing a drugs test . In 1995 Palace reached the semi @-@ finals of both domestic cups , but a shortage of Premier League goals counted against them alongside the introduction of a fourth relegation place . The Premiership was being cut from 22 to 20 clubs at the end of the 1994 – 95 season , and Palace found themselves demoted on the last day of the season once again . 
 Smith left by " mutual agreement " within days of failing to secure a place in the Premier League , and Steve Coppell returned as technical director , with Ray Lewington and Peter Nicholas handling first team affairs . This set @-@ up was augmented after only seven months with Dave Bassett joining as manager , overseeing a run of form which took them to the play @-@ offs , losing the final against Leicester City at Wembley after a long range Steve Claridge goal in the final minute of extra time . Bassett moved to Nottingham Forest in March 1997 , but Steve Coppell returned as manager to secure a play @-@ off spot . Palace beat Sheffield United at Wembley , with David Hopkin scoring a long @-@ range goal in the 90th minute . When asked what promotion meant to him , Coppell famously replied " ten months of misery " . 
 The 1997 – 98 season saw a new board member and new arrivals on the pitch . Mark Goldberg was the new board member who had aspirations to take over the club and spent the season negotiating with Ron Noades . Goldberg 's initial plans involved the club becoming part owned by Juventus , and it was from this source that the club gained two Italian players : Attilio Lombardo and Michele <unk> . Goldberg agreed a deal to gain control of the club in February 1998 , with Palace bottom of the Premiership , and moved Coppell to Director of Football . The club appointed Lombardo as player @-@ manager , with former Swedish striker Tomas Brolin as assistant . The two failed to achieve a turn @-@ around and Palace fell through the trap door back to the second tier , having won just two home games and finishing bottom of the table with 33 points . Lombardo and Brolin were replaced as the management team by out @-@ going Chairman Noades and Ray Lewington for the last three games of the season . Despite finish bottom , the beginning of the next season saw Palace get their first experience of European football in the UEFA Intertoto Cup . Goldberg 's takeover of the club finally went through in early June , although Noades maintained ownership of the ground , leasing it back to the club , and granting them an option to buy . 
 = = Two administrations ( 1998 – 2010 ) = = 
 Palace 's European venture was brief , entering the Intertoto Cup in the Third Round with a tie against <unk> , of Turkey . Palace lost by two goals to nil at both Selhurst Park and the Samsun 19 <unk> <unk> . Terry Venables had returned to the club for a second spell after being appointed head coach , but the dream of success for the 1998 – 99 season quickly soured as Goldberg was unable to sustain his financial backing of the club and they were placed into administration . Venables left and Steve Coppell returned to manage the club once again , while , with the approval of the administrators Peter Morley was installed as chairman . Coppell guided Palace to two mid @-@ table finishes , and in July 2000 Singapore financier Jerry Lim purchased an almost bankrupt Crystal Palace , immediately selling the club to mobile phone tycoon and lifelong fan Simon Jordan . Jordan replaced Coppell with Alan Smith after taking control , but despite reaching the League Cup semi @-@ finals , Smith was sacked in April 2001 with demotion to the third tier looking imminent . Long serving coach Steve Kember was put in temporary charge of the first team alongside Terry Bullivant , and demotion was staved off on the last day of the season with an 87th @-@ minute Dougie Freedman goal away to Stockport County . 
 Palace turned to former Manchester United captain Steve Bruce as their manager for the 2001 – 02 season . A good start gave the club hope for a promotion challenge , but Bruce attempted to walk out on the club after just four months at the helm to take charge of Birmingham City . After a short spell on ' gardening leave ' , Bruce was eventually allowed to join Birmingham , succeeded by Trevor Francis , who had , ironically , been his predecessor at the Midlands club Under Francis , Palace finished mid @-@ table for two successive seasons , and Francis left to be replaced by long @-@ serving coach Steve Kember . Kember guided Palace to victories in their opening three games of the 2003 – 04 Division One campaign , which put Palace at the top of the table , but he was sacked in November after a terrible loss of form saw them slip towards the bottom three . Caretaker player @-@ manager Kit Symons , was put in charge of first @-@ team duties for a month and oversaw an improvement in form before the appointment of Iain Dowie as manager was made . Dowie , a former Palace player , transformed the club from relegation candidates at Christmas into play @-@ off contenders in April , where they overcame West Ham United in the Play @-@ off Final at the Millennium Stadium in Cardiff on Saturday 29 May 2004 . A goal from captain Neil <unk> was enough for them to win the match 1 – 0 , and with it a return to the Premiership . Palace once again could not maintain their seat at the top table , however , and again dropped down a division in spite of the 21 Premiership goals struck by Andrew Johnson , the second highest goalscorer in the division . Palace now held the distinction of being the only team to have been relegated from the Premier League four times . 
 The following season saw Palace make the play offs for the third time in four seasons but they failed to progress to the final , losing to Watford . Palace also lost another manager , as Dowie left the club stating that he wanted to be closer to his family in Bolton . Jordan had accepted Dowie 's reasons and waived a £ 1million compensation fee in the manager 's contract . However , when Dowie was appointed as manager of Charlton Athletic Jordan pursued him through the courts , eventually settling the affair in April 2008 . Former fans favourite Peter Taylor succeeded Dowie as manager for the 2006 – 07 season . Taylor was unsuccessful in getting Palace promoted , and was replaced by Neil Warnock two months into the 2007 – 08 season . Warnock guided the team to the 2008 Football League Championship play @-@ offs where they lost in the semi @-@ finals to Bristol City . Palace followed this with a fifteenth @-@ place finish the next season . 
 The 2009 – 10 season started poorly , with the club failing to pay bonuses to former players , as well as £ <unk> owed to Bristol City for the transfer of Australian international Nick Carle twelve months before . The Football League placed a transfer embargo on the Eagles in early August , which was lifted near the end of that month . However , it was only another three weeks before a second embargo was put into effect , this time due to an unpaid portion of a transfer fee owed to Ipswich Town for Alan Lee . The financial problems came to a head at the end of January when the club was placed into administration by creditor <unk> Finance , and Brendan Guilfoyle took over the running of the club . Victor Moses departed for Wigan Athletic days later , and Neil Warnock left one month later to take over at Queens Park Rangers . Paul Hart was brought in on a temporary basis to keep the Eagles up , with Dougie Freedman and John Pemberton both returning to the club they played for as assistant and coach respectively . Before administration , the Eagles appeared to be building towards a run for the play @-@ offs , but the ten @-@ point deduction for going into administration turned the season into a battle against relegation . Survival was only achieved on the final day , with a memorable 2 – 2 draw at Sheffield Wednesday , who went down to League One instead of Palace . Following the end of the season , Freedman took over as caretaker manager and the club emerged from administration owned by a consortium of wealthy fans , CPFC 2010 . 
 = = New era ( 2010 onwards ) = = 
 The CPFC 2010 consortium , consisting of businessmen Steve Parish , Martin Long , Stephen Browett and Jeremy Hosking , appointed former Scotland boss George Burley as the club 's new manager for the 2010 – 11 season , with Freedman remaining at the club as his assistant . The club was short on players , with several members of the squad from the previous season having departed . One of Burley 's first signings to bridge this gap was former Netherlands midfielder Edgar Davids . Palace started poorly in the League , however , and by November sat bottom , with Davids departing after less than impressive performances for the club . The club 's away form in the first half of the season was poor and a heavy South London derby defeat to Millwall on New Year 's Day saw Burley sacked , with Palace second @-@ from @-@ bottom in the Championship table . Dougie Freedman was appointed manager , Lennie Lawrence was brought in as his assistant to provide some much @-@ needed experience , and the duo successfully guided Palace to safety with a game to spare . 
 In the midst of the managerial change from Burley to Freedman , the club announced plans to relocate the club back to the site of the Crystal Palace National Sports Centre , built on the club 's original home , redeveloping it into a 25 @,@ 000 @-@ seater , purpose @-@ built football stadium . The following season started well , with a League Cup run that saw Palace beat Crawley Town , Wigan Athletic and Middlesbrough , and by late October the club were third in the league . A League Cup victory over Southampton set up a quarter final tie away at Manchester United . League form began to slip though and Palace went six games without scoring immediately prior to the match at Old Trafford . Entering the tie as the underdogs , a 35 @-@ yard free @-@ kick from Darren Ambrose and an extra time header from Glenn Murray saw Palace win at Old Trafford for the first time in 22 years . The club then announced potential plans to update the image of the club through a new badge . On the pitch , league form remained patchy , and the semi @-@ final of the League Cup ended in a penalty shoot @-@ out defeat to Cardiff . Palace finished the season in seventeenth place , an improvement on the previous season . 
 The 2012 – 13 season saw Freedman take charge for a third season – the club 's eighth consecutive in the Championship – before departing to manage Bolton on 23 October . Lennie Lawrence and Curtis Fleming acted in caretaker roles , with Lawrence managing for the away games against Barnsley and Leicester City which saw Palace take four points . Although Ian Holloway was appointed manager on 3 November , Fleming took charge for that day 's home win against Blackburn . Holloway 's first game in charge was the 5 – 0 home win against Ipswich Town which saw the club climb to the top of the table . A poor end of the season saw them scrape into the play @-@ offs by finishing 5th . They played Brighton in the semi @-@ finals , achieving a scintillating 2 – 0 win away from home after a 0 – 0 draw at Selhurst in the first leg . Both goals were scored by Wilfried Zaha , appearing in his penultimate game for Palace . Palace met Watford at Wembley in the Final . It was Palace who won 1 – 0 courtesy of a Kevin Phillips penalty given for a foul on Zaha , holding on in the face of Watford pressure with the help of a goal line clearance from Joel Ward in the final minute , resulting in promotion back to the Premier League after an eight @-@ year absence . 
 At the end of the 2013 – 14 season , Palace had secured eleventh place in the Premier League . Although they had previously enjoyed four @-@ year spells in the top flight under Bert Head ( 1969 – 1973 ) and Steve Coppell ( 1989 – 1993 ) and a two @-@ year spell ( 1979 – 1981 ) , this was the first time since the top division had been rebranded as the Premier League that Palace had survived beyond one season . Ian Holloway had quit as manager in October , with the club having only taken three points from the first eight games of the season . He was replaced by former Stoke City manager Tony Pulis , who led the team to a remarkable run of results and subsequent safety achieved with three weeks of the season still remaining . Pulis then resigned just two days before the start of the 2014 – 15 season . Neil Warnock returned to the club for a second spell as manager on 27 August , after Palace had lost their first two league games under caretaker manager Keith Millen . However , Warnock was sacked by the club at Christmas after a poor run of results . In January 2015 , former Palace player Alan Pardew was confirmed as the new manager , signing a three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ year contract with the club after a compensation package of £ 3 @.@ 5 million was agreed with Newcastle United . Under Pardew the club won eight games out of twelve in the new year , eventually securing mid @-@ table safety and a third season in a row in the Premier League . The following season saw the club reach their first FA Cup Final for twenty @-@ six years . Manchester United would again be the opposition , who Palace lost to back in the 1990 final . Unfortunately , Palace would suffer disappointment again when they lost 2 @-@ 1 after extra time . 
 = M @-@ 83 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 83 is a state trunkline highway in the Lower Peninsula of the US state of Michigan primarily serving as a link between Interstate 75 / US Highway 23 ( I @-@ 75 / US 23 ) in Birch Run and the Bavarian @-@ themed town of Frankenmuth . M @-@ 83 is primarily a north – south trunkline that passes by such landmarks as Bronner 's Christmas Wonderland , Zehnder 's and the Bavarian Inn before leaving town . The landscape in the remainder of the area is composed of farm fields between Frankenmuth and the northern terminus at M @-@ 15 near Richville . 
 Previously , the M @-@ 83 designation was used for a highway in the Upper Peninsula between 1919 and 1926 . Immediately after that , the moniker was used to supplant the M @-@ 31 designation in The Thumb area . A disconnected segment of highway was given the M @-@ 83 name in 1929 in the Frankenmuth area . The gap between the two roads was eliminated within a year . By the end of the 1930s , the highway was truncated to its current northern terminus in the Richville area , removing the The Thumb area segments . The last changes rerouted the southern end to connect with I @-@ 75 after that freeway was opened in 1962 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 83 starts at exit 136 along I @-@ 75 / US 23 just north of the outlet mall in Birch Run ; this interchange is also the northern terminus of M @-@ 54 . The two highways run concurrently east from the freeway along Birch Run Road , crossing Dixie Highway . The landscape away from the freeway is predominantly fields through the area . Traveling eastward along this roadway , a motorist is on either northbound M @-@ 83 or southbound M @-@ 54 , making these two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) a wrong @-@ way concurrency . At the intersection with Gera Road , the two trunklines diverge when M @-@ 54 turns southward . From here , M @-@ 83 turns due north for about four miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) into Frankenmuth . 
 The trunkline curves to the northwest around Bronner 's Christmas Wonderland , which bills itself as the " World 's Largest Christmas Store " ; the store has 7 acres ( 2 @.@ 8 ha ) under one roof devoted to Christmas merchandise . Further north , M @-@ 83 follows Main Street over the Cass River into downtown Frankenmuth . North of the river are Zehnder 's and the Bavarian Inn , restaurants known for their " world famous " chicken dinners . The city is known as " Michigan 's Little Bavaria " ; the area was settled by German Lutherans in the 19th century . Today , buildings and even road signs are erected in the Bavarian theme . 
 North of downtown , the highway passes through a residential area and out of the city . The landscape returns to farm fields as M @-@ 83 follows Gera Road due north again . The highway passes through the community of Gera and crosses a line of the Huron and Eastern Railway . North of the railroad , the trunkline intersects M @-@ 46 ( Holland Road ) . After this intersection , M @-@ 83 continues about a mile and a half ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) and ends at a four @-@ way intersection with M @-@ 15 ( Vassar Road ) near Richville while Gera Road continues as a county road . 
 M @-@ 83 is maintained by the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) like other state highways in Michigan . As a part of these maintenance responsibilities , the department tracks the volume of traffic that uses the roadways under its jurisdiction . These volumes are expressed using a metric called annual average daily traffic , which is a statistical calculation of the average daily number of vehicles on a segment of roadway . MDOT 's surveys in 2011 showed that the highest traffic level along M @-@ 83 was 17 @,@ 240 vehicles daily between the I @-@ 75 / US 23 interchange and Dixie Highway in Birch Run ; the lowest count was 2 @,@ 316 vehicles per day at the northern terminus . No section of M @-@ 83 has been listed on the National Highway System , a network of roads important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Previous designation = = = 
 The first designation of M @-@ 83 was in place by July 1 , 1919 , for a routing along the Mohawk – Gay Road between the communities of the same name in Keweenaw County in the Upper Peninsula . This designation lasted until late 1926 when it was replaced by a northerly extension of M @-@ 26 . The second designation of M @-@ 83 replaced M @-@ 31 across The Thumb between Bay Port and Harbor Beach , along what is today M @-@ 142 . 
 = = = Current designation = = = 
 The current designation was assigned in 1929 as a second , disconnected section of highway . This new routing ran from US 10 / US 23 in Clio by way of Frankenmuth to Reese . The gap between the two sections was filled in a year later when M @-@ 84 in Tuscola County was redesignated as part of M @-@ 83 . After this change , M @-@ 83 continued north from Reese through Gilford and Akron to Unionville . There it ran concurrently along M @-@ 29 to Bay Port , connecting the two segments . 
 The eastern segment first designated in 1926 was separated from the rest of the highway in 1939 . The northern end was scaled back to M @-@ 15 / M @-@ 24 in Saginaw County . The concurrency along M @-@ 81 was removed , the section northeast to Gilford was transferred to local control , and the section northeast of Guilford to Unionville was added to M @-@ 138 . The Bay Port — Harbor Beach section was redesignated M @-@ 142 . The last changes came around 1962 when the I @-@ 75 / US 10 / US 23 freeway was completed between Pontiac and Flint . M @-@ 83 was rerouted on its south end to turn west along Birch Run Road to the freeway , concurrent with the new M @-@ 54 , which replaced M @-@ 83 south of Birch Run Road . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is in Saginaw County . 
 = Stokesay Castle = 
 Stokesay Castle is a fortified manor house in Stokesay , Shropshire , England . It was built in the late 13th century by Laurence of Ludlow , then the leading wool merchant in England , who intended it to form a secure private house and generate income as a commercial estate . Laurence 's descendants continued to own the castle until the 16th century , when it passed through various private owners . By the time of the outbreak of the English Civil War in 1641 , Stokesay was owned by William Craven , the first Earl of Craven and a supporter of King Charles I. After the Royalist war effort collapsed in 1645 , Parliamentary forces besieged the castle in June and quickly forced its garrison to surrender . Parliament ordered the property to be slighted , but only minor damage was done to the walls , allowing Stokesay to continue to be used as a house by the Baldwyn family until the end of the 17th century . 
 In the 18th century the <unk> rented the castle out for a range of agricultural and manufacturing purposes . It fell into disrepair , and the antiquarian John Britton noted during his visit in 1813 that it had been " abandoned to neglect , and rapidly advancing to ruin " . Restoration work was carried out in the 1830s and 1850s by William Craven , the second Earl of Craven . In 1869 the Craven estate , now heavily in debt , was sold to the wealthy industrialist John Derby Allcroft who paid for another round of extensive restoration during the 1870s . Both of these owners attempted to limit any alterations to the existing buildings during their conservation work , which was unusual for this period . The castle became a popular location for tourists and artists , and was formally opened to paying visitors in 1908 . 
 Allcroft 's descendants fell into financial difficulties during the early 20th century , however , and it became increasingly difficult for them to cover the costs of maintaining Stokesay . In 1986 Jewell Magnus @-@ Allcroft finally agreed to place Stokesay Castle into the guardianship of English Heritage , and the castle was left to the organisation on her death in 1992 . English Heritage carried out extensive restoration of the castle in the late 1980s . In the 21st century , Stokesay Castle continues to be operated as a tourist attraction , receiving 39 @,@ 218 visitors in 2010 . 
 Architecturally , Stokesay Castle is " one of the best @-@ preserved medieval fortified manor houses in England " , according to historian Henry Summerson . The castle comprises a walled , moated enclosure , with an entrance way through a 17th @-@ century timber and plaster gatehouse . Inside , the courtyard faces a stone hall and solar block , protected by two stone towers . The hall features a 13th @-@ century wooden @-@ beamed ceiling , and 17th @-@ century carved figures ornament the gatehouse and the solar . The castle was never intended to be a serious military fortification , but its style was intended to echo the much larger castles being built by Edward I in North Wales . Originally designed as a prestigious , secure , comfortable home , the castle has changed very little since the 13th century , and is a rare , surviving example of a near complete set of medieval buildings . English Heritage has minimised the amount of interpretative material displayed at the property and kept the castle largely unfurnished . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 13th - 15th centuries = = = 
 Stokesay Castle was built in the 1280s and 1290s in the village of Stokesay by Laurence of Ludlow , a very wealthy wool merchant . Stokesay took its name from the Anglo @-@ Saxon word <unk> , meaning cattle farm , and the surname of the de Says family , who had held the land from the beginning of the 12th century onwards . In 1241 , Hugh de Say sold Stokesay to John de Verdon ; John then left for the Eighth Crusade in 1270 , mortgaging the land on a life @-@ time lease to Philip de Whichcote . John died in 1274 , leaving his rights to the property to his son , Theobald . 
 Laurence bought Stokesay from Theobald and Philip in 1281 , possibly for around £ 266 , which he could easily have afforded , as he had made a fortune from the wool trade . Laurence exported wool from the Welsh Marches , travelling across Europe to negotiate sales , and maintaining offices in Shrewsbury and London . He had become the most important wool merchant in England , helping to set government trade policies and lending money to the major nobility . Stokesay Castle would form a secure personal home for Laurence , well @-@ positioned close to his other business operations in the region . It was also intended to be used as a commercial estate , as it was worth around £ 26 a year , with 120 acres ( 49 ha ) of agricultural land , 6 acres ( 2 @.@ 4 ha ) of meadows , an expanse of woodland , along with watermills and a dovecot . 
 Work began on the castle at some point after 1285 , and Laurence moved into his new property in the early 1290s . The castle was , as Nigel Pounds describes it , " both pretentious and comfortable " , initially comprising living accommodation and a tower to the north . In 1291 Laurence received permission from the King to fortify his castle - a document called a licence to crenellate - and he may have used this authority to construct the southern tower , which had a particularly martial appearance and was added onto the castle shortly afterwards . 
 In November 1294 Laurence was drowned at sea off the south of England , and his son , William , may have finished some of the final work on Stokesay . His descendants , who took the Ludlow surname , continued to control Stokesay Castle until the end of the 15th century , when it passed into the Vernon family by marriage . 
 = = = 16th - 17th centuries = = = 
 Stokesay Castle was passed by Thomas Vernon to his grandson Henry Vernon in 1563 . The family had hopes of becoming members of the peerage and , possibly as a consequence , the property began to be regularly called a " castle " for the first time during this period . Henry divided his time between London and Stokesay , probably staying in the north tower . Henry stood surety for an associate 's debts and when they defaulted , he was pursued for this money , resulting in a period of imprisonment in Fleet Prison ; by 1598 he sold the castle for £ 6 @,@ 000 to pay off his own substantial debts . The new owner , Sir George Mainwaring , sold the property on again in 1620 , via a consortium of investors , to the wealthy widow and former Mayoress of London , Dame Elizabeth Craven for £ 13 @,@ 500 . The estates around Stokesay were now valuable , bringing in over £ 300 a year in income . 
 Elizabeth 's son , William , spent little time at Stokesay and by the 1640s had leased it out to Charles Baldwyn , and his son Samuel . He rebuilt the gatehouse during 1640 and 1641 , however , at a cost of around £ 533 . In 1643 the English Civil War broke out between the supporters of King Charles I and Parliament . A Royalist supporter , William spent the war years at Elizabeth Stuart 's court at the Hague , and gave large sums of money to the King 's war effort . William installed a garrison in the castle , where the <unk> were also strong Royalists , and , as the conflict progressed , the county of Shropshire became increasingly Royalist in sympathies . Despite this , by late 1644 bands of vigilante clubmen had risen up in Shropshire , complaining about the activities of Royalist forces in the region , and demanding , among other things , the removal of the garrison from Stokesay Castle . 
 By early 1645 the war had turned decisively against the King , and in February , Parliamentary forces seized the city of Shrewsbury . This exposed the rest of the region to attack , and in June a force of 800 Parliamentary soldiers pushed south towards Ludlow , attacking Stokesay en route . The Royalist garrison , led by Captain <unk> , was heavily outnumbered and it would have been impossible for them to effectively defend the new gatehouse , which was essentially ornamental . Nonetheless , both sides complied with the protocols of warfare at the time , resulting in a bloodless victory for the Parliamentary force : the besiegers demanded that the garrison surrender , the garrison refused , the attackers demanded a surrender for a second time , and this time the garrison were able to give up the castle with dignity . 
 Shortly afterwards on 9 June , a Royalist force led by Sir Michael Woodhouse attempted to recapture the castle , now garrisoned by Parliament . The counter @-@ attack was unsuccessful , ending in the rout of the Royalist forces in a skirmish at the nearby village of <unk> . 
 Unlike many castles in England which were deliberately seriously damaged , or slighted , to put them beyond military use , Stokesay escaped substantial harm after the war . Parliament sequestrated the property from William and ordered the slighting of the castle in 1647 , but only pulled down the castle 's curtain wall , leaving the rest of the complex intact . Samuel returned in 1649 to continue to rent the castle during the years of the Commonwealth , and put in wood panelling and new windows into parts of the property . With the restoration of Charles II to the throne in 1660 , William 's lands were returned to him , and the <unk> continued to lease Stokesay Castle from him . 
 = = = 18th - 19th centuries = = = 
 During the 18th century , Stokesay Castle continued to be leased by the Baldwyn family , although they sublet the property to a range of tenants ; after this point it ceased to be used as a domestic dwelling . Two wood and plaster buildings , built against the side of the hall , were demolished around 1800 , and by the early 19th century the castle was being used for storing grain and manufacturing , including barrel @-@ making , coining and a smithy . 
 The castle began to deteriorate , and the antiquarian John Britton noted during his visit in 1813 that it had been " abandoned to neglect , and rapidly advancing to ruin : the glass is destroyed , the ceilings and floors are falling , and the rains streams through the opening roof on the damp and <unk> walls " . The smithy in the basement of the south tower resulted in a fire in 1830 , which caused considerable damage to the castle , gutting the south tower . Extensive decay in the bases of the cruck tresses in the castle 's roof posed a particular threat to the hall , as the decaying roof began to push the walls apart . 
 Restoration work was carried out in the 1830s by William Craven , the Earl of Craven . This was a deliberate attempt at conserving the existing building , rather than rebuilding it , and was a very unusual approach at this time . By 1845 , stone buttresses and pillars had been added to support parts of the hall and its roof . Research by Thomas Turner was published in 1851 , outlining the history of the castle . Frances Stackhouse Acton , a local landowner , took a particular interest in the castle , and in 1853 convinced William to carry out further repair work on the castle , under her supervision , at a cost of £ 103 . 
 In 1869 the Craven estate , 5 @,@ 200 acres ( 2 @,@ 100 ha ) in size but by now heavily mortgaged , were purchased by John Derby Allcroft for £ 215 @,@ 000 . Allcroft was the head of <unk> , a major glove manufacturer , through which he had become extremely wealthy . The estate included Stokesay Castle , where from around 1875 onwards Allcroft undertook extensive restoration work over several years . Stokesay was in serious need of repairs : the visiting writer Henry James noted in 1877 that the property was in " a state of extreme decay " . 
 Allcroft attempted what the archaeologist Gill Chitty has described as a " simple and unaffected " programme of work , which generally attempted to avoid excessive intervention . He may have been influenced by the contemporary writings of the local vicar , the Reverend James La Touche , who took a somewhat romanticised approach to the analysis of the castle 's history and architecture . The castle had become a popular sight for tourists and artists by the 1870s and the gatehouse was fitted out to form a house for a caretaker to oversee the property . Following the work , the castle was in good condition once again by the late 1880s . 
 = = = 20th - 21st centuries = = = 
 Further repairs to Stokesay Castle were required in 1902 , carried out by Allcroft 's heir , Hebert , with help from the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings . The Allcroft family faced increasing financial difficulty in the 20th century and the castle was formally opened for visitors in 1908 , with much of the revenue reinvested in the property , but funds for repairs remained in short supply . By the 1930s the Allcroft estate was in serious financial difficulties , and the payment of two sets of death duties in 1946 and 1950 added to the family 's problems . 
 Despite receiving considerable numbers of visitors - over 16 @,@ 000 in 1955 - it was becoming increasingly impractical to maintain the castle , and calls were made for the State to take over the property . For several decades the owners , Philip and Jewell Magnus @-@ Allcroft , declined these proposals and continued to run the castle privately . In 1986 Jewell finally agreed to place Stokesay Castle into the guardianship of English Heritage , and the castle was left to the organisation on her death in 1992 . 
 The castle was passed to English Heritage largely unfurnished , with minimal interpretative material in place , and it needed fresh restoration . There were various options for taking forward the work , including restoring the castle to resemble a particular period in its history ; using interactive approaches such as " living history " to communicate the context to visitors ; or using the site to demonstrate restoration techniques appropriate to different periods . These were rejected in favour of a policy of minimising any physical intervention during the restoration and preserving the building in the condition it was passed to English Heritage , including its unfurnished interior . The archaeologist Gill Chitty has described this as encouraging visitors to undergo a " personal discovery of a sense of historical relationship and event " around the castle . Against this background , an extensive programme of restoration work was carried out between August 1986 and December 1989 . 
 In the 21st century , Stokesay Castle continues to be operated by English Heritage as a tourist attraction , receiving 39 @,@ 218 visitors in 2010 . British Airways , in conjunction with English Heritage , named their last Boeing 757 aircraft Stokesay Castle in 2010 for its final month of flying . The castle is protected under UK law as a Grade I listed building and as a scheduled monument . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 = = = Structure = = = 
 Stokesay Castle was built on a patch of slightly rising ground in the basin of the River <unk> . It took the form of a solar block and hall attached to a northern and southern tower ; this combination of hall and tower was not uncommon in England in the 13th century , particularly in northern England . A crenellated curtain wall , destroyed in the 17th century , enclosed a courtyard , with a gatehouse - probably originally constructed from stone , rebuilt in timber and plaster around 1640 - controlling the entrance . The wall would have reached 34 feet ( 10 m ) high measured from the base of the moat . The courtyard , around 150 feet ( 46 m ) by 125 feet ( 38 m ) , contained additional buildings during the castle 's history , probably including a kitchen , bakehouse and storerooms , which were pulled down around 1800 . 
 The castle was surrounded by a moat , between 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) and 25 feet ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) across , although it is uncertain whether this was originally a dry moat , as it is in the 21st century , or water @-@ filled from the pond and nearby stream . The spoil from digging out the moat was used to raise the height of the courtyard . Beyond the moat were a lake and ponds that were probably intended to be viewed from the south tower . The parish church of St John the Baptist , of Noman origins but largely rebuilt in the middle of the 17th century , lies just alongside the castle . 
 Stokesay Castle forms what archaeologist Gill Chitty describes as " a comparatively complete ensemble " of medieval buildings , and their survival , almost unchanged , is extremely unusual . Historian Henry Summerson considers it " one of the best @-@ preserved medieval fortified manor houses in England " . 
 = = = Buildings = = = 
 The gatehouse is a two @-@ storied , 17th century building with exposed timber and plasterwork , constructed in a distinctively local Shropshire style . It features elaborate wooden carvings on the exterior and interior doorways , including angels , the biblical characters of Adam , Eve and the serpent from the Garden of Eden , as well as dragons and other nude figures . It was designed as essentially an ornamental building , with little defensive value . 
 The south tower forms an unequal pentagon in shape , and has three storeys with thick walls . The walls were built to contain the stairs and garderobes , the unevenly positioned empty spaces weakening the structure , and this meant that two large buttresses had to be added to the tower during its construction to support the walls . The current floors are Victorian in origin , having been built after the fire of 1830 , but the tower remains unglazed , as in the 13th century , with shutters at the windows providing protection in winter . The basement was originally only accessible from the first floor , and would have provided a secure area for storage , in addition to also containing a well . The first floor , which formed the original entrance to the tower , contains a 17th @-@ century fireplace , reusing the original 13th @-@ century chimney . The second floor has been subdivided in the past , but has been restored to form a single chamber , as it would have been when first built . 
 The roof of the south tower provides views of the surrounding landscape ; in the 13th @-@ century protective wooden mantlets would have been fitted into the gaps of the merlons along the battlements , and during the English Civil War it was equipped with additional wooden defences to protect the garrison . 
 The hall and solar block are adjacent to the south tower , and were designed to be symmetrical when seen from the courtyard , although the addition of the additional stone buttresses in the 19th century has altered this appearance . The hall is 54 @.@ 5 feet ( 16 @.@ 6 m ) long and 31 feet ( 9 @.@ 4 m ) wide , with has three large , wooden 13th @-@ century arches supporting the roof , unusually , given its size , using lateral wooden collars , but no vertical king @-@ posts . The roof 's cruck joists now rest on 19th @-@ century stone supports , but would have originally reached down to the ground . The roof is considered by the historian Henry Summerson to be a " rare survival for the period " . In the medieval period a wooden screen would have cut off the north end , providing a more secluded dining area . 
 The solar block has two storeys and a cellar , and would have probably acted as the living space for Laurence of Ludlow when he first moved into the castle . The solar room itself is on the first floor , and is reached by external steps . The wood panelling and carved wooden fireplace are of 17th @-@ century origin , probably from around 1640 . This woodwork would have originally been brightly painted , and included spy @-@ holes so that the hall could be observed from the solar . 
 The three @-@ storey north tower is reached by a 13th @-@ century staircase in the hall , which leads onto the first floor . The first floor was divided into two separate rooms shortly after the construction of the tower , and contain various decorative tiles , probably from Laurence 's house in Ludlow . The walls of the second floor are mostly half @-@ timbered , <unk> out above the stone walls beneath them ; the tower has its original 13th @-@ century fireplace , although the wooden roof is 19th @-@ century , modeled on the 13th @-@ century original , and the windows are 17th @-@ century insertions . The details and the carpenters ' personal marks on the woodwork show that the hall , solar and north tower were all constructed under the direction of the same carpenter in the late 1280s and early 1290s . 
 = = = Interpretation = = = 
 Stokesay Castle was never intended to be a serious military fortification . As long ago as 1787 , the antiquarian Francis Grose observed that it was " a castellated mansion rather than a castle of strength " , and more recently the historian Nigel Pounds has described the castle as forming " a lightly fortified home " , providing security but not intended to resist a military attack . The historian Henry Summerson describes its military features as " superficial " , and Oliver Creighton characterises Stokesay as being more of a " picturesque residence " than a fortification . 
 Among its weaknesses were the positioning of its gatehouse , on the wrong side of the castle , facing away from the road , and the huge windows in the hall , reaching down to the ground and making access relatively easy to any intruder . Indeed , this vulnerability may have been intentional - its builder Laurence was a newly moneyed member of the upper class , and he may not have wanted to erect a fortification that would have threatened the established Marcher Lords in the region . 
 Nonetheless , Stokesay Castle was intended to have a dramatic , military appearance , echoing the castles then being built by Edward I in North Wales . Visitors would have approached the castle across a causeway , with an excellent view of the south tower , potentially framed by and reflected in the water @-@ filled moat . The south tower was probably intended to resemble the gatehouses of contemporary castles such as Caernarfon and Denbigh , and would probably have originally shared the former 's " banded " stonework . Cordingley describes the south tower as " adding prestige rather than security " . Visitors would then have passed by the impressive outside of the main hall block , before entering the castle itself , which Robert Liddiard notes might have been an " anticlimax from the point of view of the medieval visitor " . 
 = = = Carved 17th @-@ century woodwork = = = 
 = Buzz ( mascot ) = 
 Buzz is one of the two official mascots of the Georgia Institute of Technology . Buzz is usually represented as a stylized yellowjacket with yellow @-@ and @-@ black fur , white wings , a yellow head , and antennae . He is almost never drawn with six legs , but rather with arms , legs , hands ( in white gloves ) and feet ( in black Converse high tops ) , like a human . Invented in 1972 and reinvented in 1979 , Buzz reflects the tradition of referring to Georgia Tech students as " Yellow Jackets . " Buzz is also one of Georgia Tech 's emblems and trademarks , one that they defended in a 1998 legal conflict with the Salt Lake Buzz . 
 = = Tradition = = 
 Like many mascots , Buzz communicates via hand gestures and sign language , rather than speech . At some school events , there are a few people who dress up as Buzz . The identities of these individuals must be kept secret until their graduation . They must be in excellent physical condition , about 5 ft 4 in tall ( 1 @.@ 63 m ) , and must be able to do a front " suicide " flip called a Buzz Flip , Buzz 's trademark move . Those interested in donning the Buzz suit must take part in a two @-@ day tryout , judged by the former Buzz . Buzz is officially part of Georgia Tech 's cheerleading team , so the Buzz tryout happens at the same time as the other cheerleading tryouts . 
 Buzz is beloved by Georgia Tech students and fans for his spirit and antics . He is a prankster and likes to crowd @-@ surf . Buzz is seen at football games , basketball games , Georgia Tech Six Flags Night , and other events . Buzz has parachuted onto the field for pre @-@ game festivities , does push @-@ ups every time Tech scores , and conducts the band for the Budweiser song , a common jingle for the beer . Buzz is involved with charity events , team photos , sports conventions , and official Georgia Tech events such as the annual President ’ s Dinner . Buzz can also be hired for social gatherings , such as weddings and birthday parties . 
 = = History = = 
 The term Yellow Jacket or Yellowjacket has been used to refer to students and the various sports teams as early as the 1890s . Fans of Georgia Tech would often wear yellow jackets to sporting events in support of the early Georgia Tech teams . The early football teams , lacking gold fabric for jerseys , wore yellow jerseys . John Heisman told the Atlanta Constitution that he wanted his teams to be referred to as the Yellow Jackets in October 1905 . In November 1906 , the Atlanta Journal portrayed a University of Georgia football player being attacked by a yellowjacket with the words " Somebody 's about to get stung " as the caption . This was the first time that the Georgia Tech sports teams were referred to as the Georgia Tech Yellow Jackets in print . 
 = = = Invention and reinvention = = = 
 The original Georgia Tech Yellow Jacket mascot was Judi McNair who , according to the Winter 2004 edition of the Georgia Tech Alumni Association Tech Topics magazine , donned a homemade yellowjacket costume in 1972 and performed at home football games . She rode on the Ramblin ' Wreck and appears in the 1972 Georgia Tech Blueprint yearbook . McNair 's mascot was considered a great idea , as it was a big hit with the fans . 
 In 1979 , McNair 's idea for a Yellow Jacket was reintroduced by another Georgia Tech student , Richie Bland . Bland , who was apparently unaware of McNair 's prior initiative , paid $ 1 @,@ 400 to have a local theme park costume designer make a yellow jacket costume that he first wore at a pep rally prior to the Tennessee football game . Rather than obtain permission from Georgia Tech as Judi had done in 1972 , this student , a few weeks later simply sneaked onto the field in costume during a football game and ran across the field . The fans naturally believed that this costumed character was acting as an official member of the cheerleading squad and responded accordingly . By 1980 this new incarnation of the yellow jacket mascot was given the name Buzz Bee and was adopted as an official mascot by Georgia Tech . This new Buzz character would be the model for a new Georgia Tech emblem , designed in 1985 by Mike Lester . 
 = = = Salt Lake Buzz lawsuit = = = 
 In 1998 , Georgia Tech filed a trademark infringement lawsuit against the Salt Lake Buzz , a Pacific Coast League minor league baseball team . The Institute had negotiated a deal with the team , but the team backed out of the agreement before it was finalized and filed suit in Utah for the right to use the mark . Tech filed a countersuit and won in 2001 . As a result , the team was forced to change its name ( to the " Salt Lake Stingers " ; several years later , it would adopt its current name of the " Salt Lake Bees " ) and pay Georgia Tech $ 600 @,@ 000 , although Georgia Tech spent $ 700 @,@ 000 to $ 800 @,@ 000 during the dispute . 
 = = = Contests and stunts = = = 
 Buzz participates in several mascot contests . In 1997 , Buzz won an Access Atlanta poll due to creative ballot stuffing by Tech students . In 2005 and 2006 , Buzz was named to the Capital One All @-@ American Mascot Teams and participated in the Capital One Mascot Challenge . In 2000 and 2001 , Buzz won the NCA ( National Cheerleaders <unk> . ) mascot of the year and in 2004 and 2006 , Buzz received second place in the NCA Mascot Competition in Daytona , Florida . On June 14 , 2008 , Buzz rappelled down the 40 story Viewpoint lofts building in Midtown , Atlanta as part of a university fundraiser . 
 = Axial Seamount = 
 Axial Seamount ( also <unk> Seamount or Axial Volcano ) is a seamount and submarine volcano located on the Juan de Fuca Ridge , approximately 480 km ( 298 mi ) west of Cannon Beach , Oregon . Standing 1 @,@ 100 m ( 3 @,@ 609 ft ) high , Axial Seamount is the youngest volcano and current eruptive center of the Cobb @-@ Eickelberg Seamount chain . Located at the center of both a geological hotspot and a mid @-@ ocean ridge , the seamount is geologically complex , and its origins are still poorly understood . Axial Seamount is set on a long , low @-@ lying plateau , with two large rift zones trending 50 km ( 31 mi ) to the northeast and southwest of its center . The volcano features an unusual rectangular caldera , and its flanks are pockmarked by fissures , vents , sheet flows , and pit craters up to 100 m ( 328 ft ) deep ; its geology is further complicated by its intersection with several smaller seamounts surrounding it . 
 Axial Seamount was first detected in the 1970s by satellite altimetry , and mapped and explored by Pisces IV , DSV Alvin , and others through the 1980s . A large package of sensors was dropped on the seamount through 1992 , and the New Millennium Observatory was established on its flanks in 1996 . Axial Seamount received significant scientific attention following the seismic detection of a submarine eruption at the volcano in January 1998 , the first time a submarine eruption had been detected and followed in situ . Subsequent cruises and analysis showed that the volcano had generated lava flows up to 13 m ( 43 ft ) thick , and the total eruptive volume was found to be 18 @,@ 000 – 76 @,@ 000 km3 ( 4 @,@ 300 – 18 @,@ 200 cu mi ) . Axial Seamount erupted again in April 2011 , producing a mile @-@ wide lava flow and fulfilling a 16 @-@ year cycle that had been predicted in 2006 . 
 = = Geology = = 
 = = = Tectonic setting = = = 
 Axial Seamount is the youngest volcano and current eruptive center of the Cobb @-@ Eickelberg Seamount chain , a chain of seamounts that terminates south of Alaska . Axial lies where the chain intersects with the Juan de Fuca Ridge , approximately 480 km ( 298 mi ) west of Oregon . It is a product of the Cobb hotspot , but now sits on an ocean spreading center between the Juan de Fuca Plate and the North American Plate , offset by the Blanco Fracture Zone to the south and a ridge @-@ built triple junction to the north . 
 This position is not yet entirely understood . It is believed that the chain , formed over millions of years by the now @-@ inactive Cobb hotspot , is older than the mid @-@ ocean ridge it bisects . Between 200 @,@ 000 and 700 @,@ 000 years ago , the hotspot was encroached by the tectonic spreading center , displacing it by as much as 20 km ( 12 mi ) and building up the 500 km ( 311 mi ) long Juan de Fuca Ridge . At least 7 spreading centers have been recognized , and plate measurements near Axial show that the ridge is separating at a rate of 6 cm ( 2 in ) per year , producing a complex system of oceanic basins and ridges . However some scientists have questioned this theory , pointing out that the high density of the chain 's overlapping seamounts is incompatible with such an origin , as a hotspot would form a well organized , widely spaced chain . Although the exact nature of Axial Seamount remains unknown , its complex origins makes it one of the most geologically interesting features in the North Pacific . 
 = = = Structure = = = 
 Axial Seamount is the most active volcanic site in the North Pacific . Study of magnetic delineations along the seamount have modeled the ridge 's history up to 30 million years ago , and shown that growth has progressed mostly in the north , with some southward progression dating back 3 @.@ 5 million years . The base of Axial Seamount is a long , low @-@ lying plateau , and the eastern part of the seamount is defined by a series of linear scarps . Axial Seamount has two major volcanic rifts extending approximately 50 km ( 31 mi ) north and south of its main summit , as well as several much smaller , ill @-@ defined ones aligned in a roughly similar pattern . Basins around the volcano increase its irregularity , making it unusually complex ( most seamounts of roughly the same size are circular or flattened in shape . ) 
 Axial Seamount 's summit is marked by an unusual rectangular caldera , 3 km × 8 km ( 2 mi × 5 mi ) in area , ~ 3 ° in slope , and breached on the southeast side . The area is offset by the two rift zones and defined on three sides by boundary faults up to 150 m ( 492 ft ) deep . The caldera is roughly 50 m ( 164 ft ) deeper at the north side then it is in the south . Flows within the caldera consist mostly of sheet flows pocketed by lava ponds and pit craters . Less common are pillow lavas ; their arrangement along the caldera walls suggests that they were an important component in the volcano 's early growth . There are several dome @-@ like structures within the caldera with heights of 100 – 300 m ( 328 – 984 ft ) . There are several small craters within the region , the largest of which , nicknamed the D.D. Cone , is 2 km ( 1 mi ) in diameter and 100 m ( 328 ft ) in relief . However , most of the features do not range over 30 to 40 m ( 98 to 131 ft ) deep and 1 km ( 1 mi ) across . 
 The northern rift zone of Axial Seamount is a 5 km ( 3 mi ) long ridge running 10 to 20 degrees northeast of the main caldera . The rift is pocketed by multiple fissures , 100 – 200 m ( 328 – 656 ft ) in length , as far as 7 km ( 4 mi ) from Axial Volcano 's center , and reaching up to 400 m ( 1 @,@ 312 ft ) long and 20 m ( 66 ft ) deep . The area contains high amounts of volcanic glass ; a major eruption is still visible in the form of an elongated glassy lava flow extending off the caldera wall , east of the main rift line . Dives in 1983 found extensive low @-@ temperature venting at the northern half of the fissure . The shorter , newer southern rift zone consists of a topographically plunging rift , surrounding by subtle , discontinuous faults . Camera tows along the southern flank reveal that the area is built of delineated sheet flows , small lava ponds , and lava channels . 
 The youngest of the flows on Axial Seamount are aligned along the two rift zones , followed by flows inside the summit caldera ; the oldest appear to originate from directly around the caldera , where most of the basalt is completely covered in accumulated sediment . This suggests a bilateral growth pattern , a trend also found in <unk> volcanics and other well @-@ known seamounts , for instance Jasper Seamount . 
 Axial Seamount 's growth has intersected the growth of many of the smaller seamounts around it . The largest of these is Brown Bear Seamount , to which it is connected by a narrow ridge running roughly perpendicular to its western caldera wall . However , little evidence of interactions between the two seamounts has been found . On the other hand , Axial Seamount 's southern rift zone bisects Vance Seamount by as much as 30 km ( 19 mi ) , creating a zone of intense <unk> at the northern edge of the smaller volcano . Interactions with Cobb Seamount to the north are more complex , forming an unusual " bent spreading center . " In addition there are four smaller structures directly east , north , and south of Axial . 
 = = History = = 
