 The Browns advanced to the AAFC championship in 1946 , but a week before the game , Rymkus and teammates Jim Daniell and Mac Speedie were arrested and held for several hours after a confrontation with Cleveland police . The men were drinking as they waited to pick up Speedie 's wife , who was coming on a plane from Utah . Daniell , who was driving the car the three men were in , honked at a police car that was blocking him , leading to an argument and the arrests . Rymkus and Speedie were charged with creating a disturbance and Daniell was charged with public intoxication . Daniell , the Browns ' captain , was kicked off the team after the incident , but Rymkus and Speedie remained . The Browns went on to win the championship the following week , and Rymkus was named to a combined all @-@ AAFC and NFL team . 
 Cleveland won the AAFC championship in each of the following three years before the league dissolved and the Browns were absorbed by the NFL . Rymkus was named to all @-@ AAFC teams in 1947 , 1948 and 1949 . In 1948 , when the Browns won all of their games , Brown took away Rymkus 's defensive duties and made him exclusively an offensive tackle . That summer , he served as an umpire in the All @-@ American Girls Professional Baseball League . 
 The Browns won the NFL championship in 1950 , the team 's first year in the league . Cleveland advanced to the championship the following year , but lost 24 – 17 to the Los Angeles Rams . Slowed by injuries to his elbow and knees , the 32 @-@ year @-@ old Rymkus retired after the 1951 season , never having missed a game or a practice during his six years with the team . Brown called him " the best pass protector I 've ever seen " ; former teammates said his play was a model Cleveland coaches used to teach pass blocking to newcomers . 
 = = Coaching career = = 
 Following his retirement in early 1952 , Rymkus accepted a position as line coach at Indiana University , where his former Notre Dame teammate Bernie Crimmins had been appointed head coach . A year later , he headed north to work as an assistant under former Rams head coach Bob Snyder with the Calgary Stampeders of the Canadian Football League . In 1954 , he returned to the NFL as a line coach for the Green Bay Packers . In four seasons there , he worked with future Hall of Famers Forrest Gregg and Jim Ringo . 
 On January 9 , 1958 , Rymkus accepted an assistant coaching position with the Rams . Rymkus had been mentioned as a possible candidate to replace Lisle <unk> as the head coach of the Packers , but was passed over for the job in favor of fellow assistant Ray McLean . He worked under Sid Gillman with the Rams for two seasons , and was seen as a potential head coach . The new American Football League 's ( AFL ) Los Angeles Chargers considered him for the top spot in 1959 ; Leahy , Rymkus ' former Notre Dame coach , served as the team 's general manager . The Chargers selected Gillman instead , and Rymkus in January 1960 took the head coaching position of the AFL 's Houston Oilers . Oilers owner Bud Adams signed him to a three @-@ year contract paying $ 15 @,@ 500 per year ( $ 123 @,@ 983 in 2016 dollars ) . 
 Rymkus hired a stable of assistant coaches including Wally Lemm , Walt <unk> , Fred Wallner and former Browns teammate Speedie . The team was led by quarterback George Blanda , running back Billy Cannon and wide receiver Charlie Hennigan . As the regular season progressed , Houston built up a 10 – 4 record , setting up a meeting with the Chargers in the AFL championship game . The Oilers had lost to the Chargers in a November 13 game dubbed the " Sawdust Game " because sawdust was spread over the muddy and wet field in Los Angeles , but they entered the championship a six @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half point favorite . Before the game , Rymkus was named the AFL 's coach of the year . The Oilers went on to beat Gillman 's Chargers 24 – 16 in the championship game on January 1 , 1961 . To commemorate the victory , Rymkus ordered thousands of drinking glasses emblazoned with a picture of his face and gave them to friends . 
 The celebratory mood continued into the next preseason , when Adams sent the team for two weeks of training camp in Hawaii . Rymkus was upset by the distractions caused by the decision . " We found it hard to think football around the palm trees " , he said . " A preseason camp has to be hard , and you have to work hard . You can 't do it in a place like Hawaii . " The team got off to a 1 – 3 – 1 start in 1961 , and Adams fired him on October 14 . Adams said the decision was " based on the conclusion the material on hand has not been used to its fullest potential " . Wally Lemm was given the head coaching job , but the shake @-@ up prompted Speedie to resign . Under Lemm , the Oilers regrouped to win their second consecutive title . 
 Rymkus left football after his firing and accepted a regional public relations position with the Los Angeles @-@ based Global Marine Exploration Company . After more than three years out of the sport , he returned to coaching and the Oilers when former Redskins teammate Hugh Taylor hired him as the team 's offensive line coach . Rymkus stayed with the team for the 1965 season , resigning in January 1966 . Despite his short tenure with the Oilers , Rymkus 's was popular in Houston ; over 250 people attended a dinner in his honor following his resignation . 
 Three weeks later , Rymkus and Baugh , who had worked with him on the Oilers ' staff , were named assistant coaches for the Detroit Lions . When Harry Gilmer was fired as Lions ' head coach after the 1966 NFL season , however , Rymkus was once again out of work . He got a job as an assistant for the Akron Vulcans of the Continental Football League and was appointed the team 's head coach and general manager in 1967 . Rymkus stayed in the position until the team folded later that year due to financial difficulties ; the team 's owner , Frank Hurn , ran out of money and stopped paying the Vulcans ' bills . 
 Rymkus next took a steep pay cut to serve as head coach of Many High School in Many , Louisiana . The job , in rural west @-@ central Louisiana , paid him only $ 9 @,@ 200 a year ( $ 62 @,@ 604 in 2016 ) to coach football , teach three history classes and run the school 's summer recreation program . Rymkus was drawn by the tough conditions the players endured ; many of his athletes missed practice to work on family farms . The team failed to win a game in 1968 , but Rymkus stayed connected to professional football as a scout with the Kansas City Chiefs on weekends . 
 In 1969 , Rymkus left Many – he said he " couldn 't afford it " – and began working as general manager of the Executive Health Club in Houston . Later that year , he raised money to organize a West Texas Rufneks team in the Continental Football League . After the Rufneks lost an exhibition game 31 – 0 to the visiting Omaha Mustangs , the board of directors of Professional Sports Inc. voted unanimously to remove him as head coach . Ted Dawson , who had been head coach and general manager of the Rufneks when the team was part of the Texas Football League in 1968 , retook the position and completed the season in a tie with the Western Conference champion San Antonio Toros . 
 In early 1970 , Rymkus applied for a job as the Browns ' offensive line coach but did not get the position . Later that year , he returned to the NFL as an offensive line coach for the Baltimore Colts under Don McCafferty . After just three regular @-@ season games , however , he was replaced by George Young and transferred to the team 's scouting department . Rymkus received a championship ring that year when the Colts defeated the Dallas Cowboys in Super Bowl V. 
 During his coaching career , Rymkus was renowned for his strictness . While with the Oilers , he repeatedly threatened to whip his players . He could also be melodramatic . He once repeated a speech Leahy gave at Notre Dame before a practice in a blizzard . He told his players during a hot August in Houston to be " like the Great Northern Buffalo , whose coat is shaggy and whose muscles are strong . The Great Northern Buffalo sticks his head into the wind and braves the cold , not like the puny Southern Buffalo , who turns his back to the storm . " 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 Rymkus worked in the late 1970s for the Houston Astros in the group sales department . He went on to take a number of jobs outside of football , including selling cars in Houston , where he spent his remaining years . In 1988 , he was among 15 finalists for induction into the Pro Football Hall of Fame but did not make the cut . He died of a stroke in a Houston hospice in 1998 . He and his wife Betty had two children , twin boys named Pat and Mike . 
 = American Cocker Spaniel = 
 The American Cocker Spaniel is a breed of sporting dog . It is a spaniel type dog that is closely related to the English Cocker Spaniel ; the two breeds diverged during the 20th century due to differing breed standards in America and the UK . In the United States , the breed is usually called the Cocker Spaniel , while elsewhere in the world , it is called the American Cocker Spaniel in order to differentiate between it and its English cousin . The word cocker is commonly held to stem from their use to hunt woodcock in England , while spaniel is thought to be derived from the type 's origins in Spain . 
 The first spaniel in America came across with the Mayflower in 1620 , but it was not until 1878 that the first Cocker Spaniel was registered with the American Kennel Club ( AKC ) . A national breed club was set up three years later and the dog considered to be the father of the modern breed , Ch . Obo II , was born around this time . By the 1920s the English and American varieties of Cocker had become noticeably different and in 1946 the AKC recognised the English type as a separate breed . It was not until 1970 that The Kennel Club in the UK recognised the American Cocker Spaniel as being separate from the English type . The American Cocker was the most popular breed in the United States during the 1940s and 1950s and again during the 1980s , reigning for a total of 18 years . They have also won the best in show title at the Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show on four occasions , and have been linked to the President of the United States on several occasions , with owners including Richard Nixon and Harry S. Truman . In 2013 , the cocker spaniel ranked 29th the American Kennel Club registration statistics of historical comparisons and notable trends . 
 The breed is the smallest of the sporting dogs recognised by the AKC , and its distinctly shaped head makes it immediately recognisable . In addition , there are some marked differences between it and its English relative . It is a happy breed with average working intelligence , although by being bred to a show standard it is no longer an ideal working dog . Members of the breed suffer from a wide variety of health ailments including problems with their hearts , eyes and ears . 
 = = History = = 
 The word <unk> is thought to date from the late 12th century when it was used to name a type of dog imported into England from Spain , with the span part of the word referring to the country of origin . Records from the mid @-@ 14th century show that selective breeding was already in place , with the breed being separated into two distinct types , called water spaniels and land spaniels . By 1801 , the smaller variety of land spaniel was called the Cocker or Cocking Spaniel , so named for its use in flushing woodcock . 
 According to historical records , the first spaniel was brought to North America aboard the Mayflower which sailed from Plymouth , England and landed in New England in 1620 . The first Cocker Spaniel recorded in America was a liver and white dog named Captain , who was registered with the American Kennel Club in 1878 . In 1881 , the American Cocker Spaniel Club was formed ; it would later become the American Spaniel Club ( ASC ) and is now known as the oldest breed club for dogs in the United States . The task of the club was initially to create a standard to separate the Cocker Spaniel in America from other types of land spaniels , a task which would take over 20 years , only being completed in 1905 . 
 The dog considered to be the father of the American Cocker Spaniel was sired by the dog considered to be the father of the English Cocker Spaniel . Ch . Obo was bred to Ch . Chloe II , who was shipped to America while she was pregnant . Once in the United States , she whelped a dog who became Ch . Obo II . He differed greatly from the modern breed , being only 10 inches ( 25 cm ) tall and with a long body , but was considered to be an excellent dog of that era and became a popular sire . 
 Towards the end of the 19th century , the breed had become popular in America and Canada due to their dual use as a family pet and a working dog . In the early 20th century the breeders on either side of the Atlantic had created different breed standards for the Cocker Spaniel and the breed gradually diverged from one another , with the two becoming noticeably different by the 1920s . The American Cockers by now had a smaller muzzle , their coats were softer and the dogs overall were lighter and smaller . The differences were so apparent that in 1935 , breeders founded the English Cocker Spaniel Club and restricted breeding between the two types of spaniel . The two types of Cocker Spaniel in America were shown together as one breed , with the English type as a variety of the main breed , until 1946 when the American Kennel Club recognised the English Cocker Spaniel as a separate breed . 
 = = = Return to the UK = = = 
 Initially in the United Kingdom there were a few American Cockers that had accompanied service personnel to American bases in the 1950s and 1960s . In addition , several came over with embassy staff and business people returning home . 
 The first UK Kennel Club registered American Cocker Spaniel was <unk> <unk> , born 17 January 1956 and bred by Herbert L. Steinberg . Two judges confirmed that the dog was an American Cocker and not an English Cocker before the Kennel Club permitted the dog to be shown . In the 1960s they were shown as a rare breed , which meant that they did not have a show class of their own and could only be shown in variety classes . This included <unk> <unk> , who was the first American Cocker Spaniel to be shown at Crufts in 1960 in a class entitled " Any variety not classified at this show " . In 1968 , the KC agreed to have the breed shown in the category " Any variety gundog other than Cocker " and stated that the American Cocker was not a variety of " Spaniel ( Cocker ) " . There were around 100 registrations between 1966 and 1968 . 
 In 1970 the breed was given a separate register in the Kennel Club Breed Supplement , as it was previously included in " Any other variety " . Registration numbers increased to 309 by 1970 following this full recognition . 
 = = = Notable American Cockers and popularity = = = 
 American Cocker Spaniels have won best in show at the Westminster Dog Show on four occasions , with the first win in 1921 by Ch . <unk> Seductive . Ch . My Own Brucie won the title twice in 1940 and 1941 , and became known as the most photographed dog in the world . 
 Brucie 's win in 1940 coincided with the American Cocker Spaniel becoming the most popular breed of dog in the United States , and they would remain the most popular until 1952 . The most recent victory was in 1954 with the victory going to Ch . <unk> 's Rise and Shine . The popularity of the American Cocker increased once again in the 1980s with it becoming the most popular breed again from 1984 until 1990 . In more recent years the popularity of the breed has decreased , with it ranked 15th most popular by the American Kennel Club in 2005 . 
 American Cocker Spaniels have had several links to the United States Presidency . In 1952 , an American Cocker Spaniel became a household name when United States Senator Richard Nixon made his Checkers speech on 23 September . A parti @-@ colored American Cocker Spaniel named Dot was one of several dogs owned by Rutherford B. Hayes ; and a buff colored dog named Feller caused a scandal for Harry S. Truman when the dog was received as an unwanted gift with the President subsequently giving it away to a White House physician . More recently , a Cocker named Zeke lived with Bill Clinton while he was Arkansas Governor . 
 = = Appearance = = 
 The American Cocker Spaniel is the smallest dog recognised by the American Kennel Club as a sporting dog , being on average between 13 @.@ 5 and 15 @.@ 5 inches ( 34 and 39 cm ) high at the withers . It is a dog of normal proportions , with medium long silky fur on the body and ears , hanging down on the legs and belly ( known as feathering ) . The head has an upturned nose and the ears hang down . The breed standard states that size over 15 @.@ 5 inches ( 39 cm ) inches for males and 14 @.@ 5 inches ( 37 cm ) for females is a disqualification at conformation shows . American Cocker Spaniels weigh around 24 to 30 pounds ( 11 to 14 kg ) on average , with females of the breed usually weighing slightly less than the males . 
 The head of an American Cocker Spaniel makes the breed immediately recognizable , with the rounded dome of the skull , well @-@ pronounced stop , and a square shaped lip . The drop ears are long , low set , with long silky fur , and the eyes are dark , large , and rounded . The nose can be black or brown depending on the colour of the breed . 
 The coat of the breed come in a variety of shades with the colours being separated into three main groups : black / black and tan , any solid colour other than black ( ASCOB ) , and parti @-@ colour . The black variety is either all black , or with tan points on the dog 's head , the feet and the tail in a pattern called black and tan . The group known as ASCOB includes all other solid colours from light cream through to dark red , although some lighter colouring is allowed on the feathering according to standards . Parti @-@ coloured dogs are white with patches of another colour such as black or brown , and includes any roan coloured dogs . In addition , American Cockers coats can come in a pattern known as merle , which is not recognised by the American Kennel Club . 
 American Cockers have rounder eyes , a domed skull , shorter muzzle and more clearly pronounced eyebrows than the English Cockers , whose head is more setter @-@ like . In colours , the roan colours are rarer in the American variety than in the English but the shade of buff which is common in the American is not seen in the English breed at all , although there are English Cocker Spaniels which are considered to be a shade of red . The English breed is also slightly larger , being between 14 @.@ 5 – 15 @.@ 5 inches ( 37 – 39 cm ) in height . 
 American Cocker Spaniel 
 = = Temperament = = 
 Known as the " Merry Cocker " , the American Cocker Spaniel breed standard defines the ideal dog of the breed as being " equable in temperament with no suggestion of timidity . " The breed ranks 20th in Stanley Coren 's The Intelligence of Dogs , a rating that indicates good " Working or Obedience Intelligence " , or trainability . IQ tests run on a variety of breeds in the 1950s and 1960s showed that the American Cocker performed the best when tested on its ability to show restraint and delayed response to a trigger , a trait which was put down to the breed 's bred @-@ in ability when hunting to freeze upon finding a bird before flushing it out on command . However , they proved to be the worst breed tested when it came to manipulating objects with their paws , for instance uncovering a dish of food or pulling on a string . 
 With a good level of socialisation at an early age , an American Cocker can get along with people , children , other dogs and other pets . This breed seems to have a perpetually wagging tail and prefers to be around people ; it is not best suited to the backyard alone . Cockers can be easily stressed by loud noises and by rough treatment or handling . 
 Members of the breed were originally used as hunting dogs , but increased in popularity as a show dog . It was bred more and more in conformation with the breed standard , resulting in certain attributes , such as a long coat , which no longer make it an ideal working dog . 
 = = Health = = 
 American Cocker Spaniels in UK and USA / Canada surveys had a median lifespan of about 10 to 11 years , which is on the low end of the typical range for purebred dogs , and one to two years less than other breeds of their size . The larger English Cocker Spaniel typically lives about a year longer than the American Cocker Spaniel . In a 2004 UK Kennel Club survey , the most common causes of death were cancer ( 23 % ) , old age ( 20 % ) , cardiac ( 8 % ) , and immune @-@ mediated ( 8 % ) . In a 2003 USA / Canada Health Survey with a smaller sample size , the leading causes of death were cancer , hepatic disease , and immune @-@ mediated . 
 American Cockers previously high popularity resulted in the breed frequently being bred by backyard breeders or in puppy mills . This indiscriminate breeding has increased the proliferation of breed related health issues in certain bloodlines . 
 American Cocker Spaniels are susceptible to a variety of illnesses , particularly infections affecting their ears and , in some cases , their eyes . Although the number or percent of afflicted dogs is not known , progressive retinal atrophy ( PRA ) , glaucoma , and cataracts have been identified in some members of the breed . The American Spaniel Club recommends annual eye exams by a veterinary ophthalmologist for all dogs that are to be used for breeding . Autoimmune problems in Cockers have also been identified in an unknown number or percent of the breed , including autoimmune hemolytic anemia ( <unk> ) . Ear inflammations are common in drop @-@ eared breeds of dog , including the American Cocker , and luxating <unk> and hip dysplasia have been identified in some members of the breed . 
 Heart conditions such as dilated cardiomyopathy , where the heart becomes weakened and enlarged , and sick sinus syndrome , which is a type of abnormal heart beating which causes low blood pressure , have been identified in the breed . <unk> deficiency is a condition caused by a recessive gene in the breed which prevents the metabolism of glucose into energy , causing the dog to have extremely low energy and be unable to exercise . The gene which causes this appears in around 10 percent of the population , but DNA testing can prevent two carrier dogs from breeding and thus creating puppies with this condition . 
 American Cockers are also prone to canine epilepsy and the related condition known as Rage Syndrome . The latter is a form of epilepsy which can cause a normally placid dog to engage in sudden and unprovoked violent attacks . Initial research shows that both conditions appear to be inheritable . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 The film Lady and the Tramp features Lady who is an American Cocker Spaniel . 
 = Tropical Storm Morakot ( 2003 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Morakot , known in the Philippines as Tropical Storm Juaning , brought significant rainfall to Taiwan before alleviating drought conditions in mainland China in August 2003 . The tenth named storm in the western Pacific that year , Morakot spawned from an area of disturbed weather in the Philippine Sea on July 31 . Tracking northwest , favorable conditions allowed for the intensification of the system to tropical storm strength on August 2 . Morakot reached peak intensity later that day with winds of 85 km / h ( 50 mph ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 992 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 29 inHg ) . This intensity was held for several hours until less conducive atmospheric conditions slightly weakened the system ; this was followed by Morakot making landfall on southern Taiwan on August 3 . Subsequently , the storm weakened and moved into the Taiwan Strait before making its final landfall near Quanzhou , China the next day . The storm quickly weakened over the Chinese mainland , and dissipated entirely several hours after landfall . 
 In Taiwan , where Morakot first made landfall , heavy rainfall resulted in flooding . Commercial flights , schools , and rail service in some areas was cancelled in advance of the storm . Precipitation there peaked at 653 mm ( 25 @.@ 71 in ) over a period of nearly two days in Taitung County . Crop damage also resulted from the rainfall , and was estimated at over NT $ 70 million ( US $ 2 million ) . In China , record rainfall was reported . The worst impacted city was Quanzhou , where losses due to Morakot reached CN ¥ 240 million ( US $ 29 million ) and one death was reported . Power outages were also widespread across southeastern China . Due to preexisting drought conditions , 703 cloud seeding operations took place in order to artificially generate added rainfall ; such operations resulted in moderate precipitation over the targeted area . Overall , Morakot caused roughly $ 31 million in damage and three deaths . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 In late July 2003 , an area of disturbed weather began to persist northwest of Chuuk in the Philippine Sea , and was first noted by the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) early on July 30 . As atmospheric conditions remained favorable throughout the day 's duration , the system organized , and was upgraded to tropical depression status by the Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration ( PAGASA ) at 0600 UTC on July 31 , followed by the JTWC at 0600 UTC and Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) six hours later . The PAGASA consequently named the system Juaning for local purposes . Tracking north @-@ northwestward under the influence of a passing trough , the system intensified further into a tropical storm by 0600 UTC on August 2 , thus receiving the name Morakot . At the time , the storm was well organized with a steady outflow pattern . 
 Intensification continued , and at 1800 UTC on August 2 the JMA determined Morakot to have peaked in intensity with winds of 85 km / h ( 50 mph ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 992 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 29 inHg ) ; however , the JTWC still considered Morakot to have been a strengthening tropical cyclone at the time . The appearance of a ragged eye prompted the agency to upgrade the storm to typhoon status at 0600 UTC on August 3 , though other agencies still maintained Morakot 's tropical storm classification . Over the rest of the day the cyclone moved rather erratically before making its first landfall on Tainan , Taiwan late on August 3 . Morakot had slightly weakened prior to landfall and as such estimates from the JMA of the storm 's intensity at the time of landfall were slightly lowered to 75 km / h ( 45 mph ) . Despite the slowing of the storm 's forward motion as it moved across the island , passage over Taiwan was brief and Morakot entered the Taiwan Strait by early on August 4 . The cyclone 's northwesterly track brought the storm to a second landfall , this time near Quanzhou , China , at approximately 1000 UTC that day . Weakening was quick over China , and by two hours after landfall the JMA declared Morakot to have weakened below tropical depression intensity . The JTWC continued to monitor the system until it was determined to have dissipated by 0000 UTC on August 5 . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Due to the storm 's projected path into Taiwan , the Central Weather Bureau issued a sea and land warning on August 2 . Commercial flights between Taiwan and Green and Orchid Islands were cancelled , as well as rail service along Taiwan 's eastern coast . Morakot 's passage over southern Taiwan resulted in significant rainfall across the island . Precipitation from the tropical cyclone peaked at 653 mm ( 25 @.@ 71 in ) over nearly two days in Taitung County . The rains uprooted trees in southeastern Taitung City and triggered some landslides . Flash flooding was reported in Pingtung County . Additional landslides blocked highways there , and elementary and junior high schools in the county were forced to close . Power outages also occurred and impacted hundreds of residences . Crop damage ensued from the precipitation , and amounted to over NT $ 70 million ( US $ 2 million ) . 
 Heavy rainfall and flooding also occurred in China . A station in Jinjiang , Fujian recorded 544 mm ( 21 @.@ 42 in ) of rain in an 18 @-@ hour period ; this was the most torrential rainfall event for the city since records began . Heavy rains also fell in <unk> Town , where 334 mm ( 13 @.@ 15 in ) of rain was documented in eight hours . Quanzhou City was heavily impacted by the rainfall , and total losses there reached CN ¥ 240 million ( US $ 29 million ) . One death resulted in the city . Further south in <unk> , widespread power outages were caused by torrential rainfall . Winds blew two people off of a high falsework , killing both . The rainfall from Morakot in China somewhat relieved persistent drought conditions in the region . Following the passage of the tropical storm , however , 703 cloud seeding missions were carried out in Fujian Province in order to produce enhanced artificial rainfall . This included the deployment of 1 @,@ 027 rockets and 14 @,@ 700 cannonballs containing silver iodide . As a result of these , rainfall totals ranging from 40 – 60 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 – 2 @.@ 4 in ) over a 138 @,@ 500 km2 ( 53 @,@ 500 sq mi ) area were attributed to <unk> enhanced precipitation . Though not directly related to Morakot , the storm 's cyclonic circulation helped in part to produce thick smog and low visibility conditions in parts of Hong Kong . 
 = = Naming = = 
 In 2002 , the name Hanuman was replaced prior to being used , due to objection by the India Meteorological Department for reason of religion . 
 = Order of the Bath = 
 The Most Honourable Order of the Bath ( formerly the Most Honourable Military Order of the Bath ) is a British order of chivalry founded by George I on 18 May 1725 . The name derives from the elaborate medieval ceremony for appointing a knight , which involved bathing ( as a symbol of purification ) as one of its elements . The knights so created were known as " Knights of the Bath " . George I " erected the Knights of the Bath into a regular Military Order " . He did not ( as is commonly believed ) revive the Order of the Bath , since it had never previously existed as an Order , in the sense of a body of knights who were governed by a set of statutes and whose numbers were replenished when vacancies occurred . 
 The Order consists of the Sovereign ( currently Queen Elizabeth II ) , the Great Master ( currently The Prince of Wales ) , and three Classes of members : 
 Knight Grand Cross ( GCB ) or Dame Grand Cross ( GCB ) 
 Knight Commander ( KCB ) or Dame Commander ( DCB ) 
 Companion ( CB ) 
 Members belong to either the Civil or the Military Division . Prior to 1815 , the order had only a single class , Knight Companion ( KB ) , which no longer exists . Recipients of the Order are now usually senior military officers or senior civil servants . Commonwealth citizens not subjects of the Queen and foreigners may be made Honorary Members . 
 The Order of the Bath is the fourth @-@ most senior of the British Orders of Chivalry , after The Most Noble Order of the Garter , The Most Ancient and Most Noble Order of the Thistle , and The Most Illustrious Order of St Patrick ( dormant ) . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Knights of the Bath = = = 
 In the Middle Ages , knighthood was often conferred with elaborate ceremonies . These usually involved the knight @-@ to @-@ be taking a bath ( possibly symbolic of spiritual purification ) during which he was instructed in the duties of knighthood by more senior knights . He was then put to bed to dry . Clothed in a special robe , he was led with music to the chapel where he spent the night in a vigil . At dawn he made confession and attended Mass , then retired to his bed to sleep until it was fully daylight . He was then brought before the King , who after instructing two senior knights to buckle the spurs to the knight @-@ elect 's heels , fastened a belt around his waist , then struck him on the neck ( with either a hand or a sword ) , thus making him a knight . It was this accolade which was the essential act in creating a knight , and a simpler ceremony developed , conferring knighthood merely by striking or touching the knight @-@ to @-@ be on the shoulder with a sword , or " dubbing " him , as is still done today . In the early medieval period the difference seems to have been that the full ceremonies were used for men from more prominent families . 
 From the coronation of Henry IV in 1399 the full ceremonies were restricted to major royal occasions such as coronations , investitures of the Prince of Wales or Royal dukes , and royal weddings , and the knights so created became known as Knights of the Bath . Knights Bachelor continued to be created with the simpler form of ceremony . The last occasion on which Knights of the Bath were created was the coronation of Charles II in 1661 . 
 From at least 1625 , and possibly from the reign of James I , Knights of the Bath were using the motto Tria iuncta in uno ( Latin for " Three joined in one " ) , and wearing as a badge three crowns within a plain gold oval . These were both subsequently adopted by the Order of the Bath ; a similar design of badge is still worn by members of the Civil Division . Their symbolism however is not entirely clear . The ' three joined in one ' may be a reference to the kingdoms of England , Scotland and either France or Ireland , which were held ( or claimed in the case of France ) by English and , later , British monarchs . This would correspond to the three crowns in the badge . Another explanation of the motto is that it refers to the Holy Trinity . Nicolas quotes a source ( although he is sceptical of it ) who claims that prior to James I the motto was Tria <unk> iuncta in uno ( three powers / gods joined in one ) , but from the reign of James I the word <unk> was dropped and the motto understood to mean Tria [ <unk> ] iuncta in uno ( three kingdoms joined in one ) . 
 = = = Foundation of the order = = = 
 The prime mover in the establishment of the Order of the Bath was John Anstis , Garter King of Arms , England 's highest heraldic officer . Sir Anthony Wagner , a recent holder of the office of Garter , wrote of Anstis 's motivations : 
 It was Martin Leake 's opinion that the trouble and opposition Anstis met with in establishing himself as Garter so embittered him against the heralds that when at last in 1718 he succeeded , he made it his prime object to aggrandise himself and his office at their expense . It is clear at least that he set out to make himself indispensable to the Earl Marshal , which was not hard , their political principles being congruous and their friendship already established , but also to Sir Robert Walpole and the Whig ministry , which can by no means have been easy , considering his known attachment to the Pretender and the circumstances under which he came into office ... The main object of Anstis 's next move , the revival or institution of the Order of the Bath was probably that which it in fact secured , of ingratiating him with the all @-@ powerful Prime Minister Sir Robert Walpole . 
 The use of honours in the early eighteenth century differed considerably from the modern honours system in which hundreds , if not thousands , of people each year receive honours on the basis of deserving accomplishments . The only honours available at that time were hereditary ( not life ) peerages and baronetcies , knighthoods and the Order of the Garter ( or the Order of the Thistle for Scots ) , none of which were awarded in large numbers ( the Garter and the Thistle are limited to 24 and 16 living members respectively . ) The political environment was also significantly different from today : 
 The Sovereign still exercised a power to be reckoned with in the eighteenth century . The Court remained the centre of the political world . The King was limited in that he had to choose Ministers who could command a majority in Parliament , but the choice remained his . The leader of an administration still had to command the King 's personal confidence and approval . A strong following in Parliament depended on being able to supply places , pensions , and other marks of Royal favour to the government 's supporters . 
 The attraction of the new Order for Walpole was that it would provide a source of such favours to strengthen his political position . George I having agreed to Walpole 's proposal , Anstis was commissioned to draft statutes for the Order of the Bath . As noted above , he adopted the motto and badge used by the Knights of the Bath , as well as the colour of the riband and mantle , and the ceremony for creating a knight . The rest of the statutes were mostly based on those of the Order of the Garter , of which he was an officer ( as Garter King of Arms ) . The Order was founded by letters patent under the Great Seal dated 18 May 1725 , and the statutes issued the following week . 
 The Order initially consisted of the Sovereign , a Prince of the blood Royal as Principal Knight , a Great Master and thirty @-@ five Knights Companion . Seven officers ( see below ) were attached to the Order . These provided yet another opportunity for political patronage , as they were to be sinecures at the disposal of the Great Master , supported by fees from the knights . Despite the fact that the Bath was represented as a military Order , only a few military officers were among the initial appointments ( see List of Knights Companion of the Order of the Bath ) . They may be broken down into categories as follows ( note that some are classified in more than one category ) : 
 Members of the House of Commons : 14 
 The Royal Household or sinecures : 11 
 Diplomats : 4 
 The Walpole family , including the Prime Minister : 3 
 Naval and Army Officers : 3 
 Irish Peers : 2 
 Country gentlemen with Court Appointments : 2 
 The majority of the new Knights Companions were knighted by the King and invested with their <unk> and badges on 27 May 1725 . Although the statutes set out the full medieval ceremony which was to be used for creating knights , this was not performed , and indeed was possibly never intended to be , as the original statutes contained a provision allowing the Great Master to dispense Knights Companion from these requirements . The original knights were dispensed from all the medieval ceremonies with the exception of the Installation , which was performed in the Order 's Chapel , the Henry VII Chapel in Westminster Abbey , on 17 June . This precedent was followed until 1812 , after which the Installation was also dispensed with , until its revival in the twentieth century . The ceremonies however remained part of the Statutes until 1847 . 
 Although the initial appointments to the Order were largely political , from the 1770s appointments to the Order were increasingly made for naval , military or diplomatic achievements . This is partly due to the conflicts Britain was engaged in over this period . The Peninsular War resulted in so many deserving candidates for the Bath that a statute was issued allowing the appointment of Extra Knights in time of war , who were to be additional to the numerical limits imposed by the statutes , and whose number was not subject to any restrictions . Another statute , this one issued some 80 years earlier , had also added a military note to the Order . Each knight was required , under certain circumstances , to supply and support four men @-@ at @-@ arms for a period not exceeding 42 days in any year , to serve in any part of Great Britain . This company was to be captained by the Great Master , who had to supply four trumpeters , and was also to appoint eight officers for this body , however the statute was never invoked . 
 = = = Restructuring in 1815 = = = 
 In 1815 , with the end of the Napoleonic Wars , the Prince Regent ( later George IV ) expanded the Order of the Bath " to the end that those Officers who have had the opportunities of <unk> themselves by eminent services during the late war may share in the honours of the said Order , and that their names may be delivered down to remote posterity , accompanied by the marks of distinction which they have so nobly earned . " 
 The Order was now to consist of three classes : Knights Grand Cross , Knights Commander , and Companions . The existing Knights Companion ( of which there were 60 ) became Knight Grand Cross ; this class was limited to 72 members , of which twelve could be appointed for civil or diplomatic services . The military members had to be of the rank of at least Major @-@ General or Rear Admiral . The Knights Commander were limited to 180 , exclusive of foreign nationals holding British commissions , up to ten of whom could be appointed as honorary Knights Commander . They had to be of the rank of Lieutenant @-@ Colonel or Post @-@ Captain . The number of Companions was not specified , but they had to have received a medal or been mentioned in despatches since the start of the war in 1803 . A list of about 500 names was subsequently published . Two further officers were appointed , an " Officer of arms attendant on the Knights Commanders and Companions " , and a " Secretary appertaining to the Knights Commanders and Companions " The large increase in numbers caused some complaints that such an expansion would reduce the prestige of the Order . 
 = = = The Victorian era = = = 
 In 1847 , Queen Victoria issued new statutes eliminating all references to an exclusively military Order . As well as removing the word ' Military ' from the full name of the Order , this opened up the grades of Knight Commander and Companion to civil appointments , and the Military and Civil Divisions of the Order were established . New numerical limits were imposed , and the opportunity also taken to regularise the 1815 expansion of the Order . The 1847 statutes also abolished all the medieval ritual , however they did introduce a formal Investiture ceremony , conducted by the Sovereign wearing the Mantle and insignia of the Order , attended by the Officers and as many GCBs as possible , in their Mantles . 
 In 1859 a further edition of the Statutes was issued ; the changes related mainly to the costs associated with the Order . Prior to this date it had been the policy that the insignia ( which were provided by the Crown ) were to be returned on the death of the holder ; the exception had been foreigners who had been awarded honorary membership . In addition foreigners had usually been provided with stars made of silver and diamonds , whereas ordinary members had only embroidered stars . The decision was made to award silver stars to all members , and only require the return of the Collar . The Crown had also been paying the fees due to the officers of the Order for members who had been appointed for the services in the recent war . The fees were abolished and replaced with a salary of approximately the same average value . The offices of Genealogist and Messenger were abolished , and those of Registrar and Secretary combined . 
 = = = The 20th century = = = 
 In 1910 , after his accession to the throne , George V ordered the revival of the Installation ceremony , perhaps prompted by the first Installation ceremony of the more junior Order of St Michael and St George , held a few years earlier , and the building of a new chapel for the Order of the Thistle in 1911 . The Installation ceremony took place on 22 July 1913 in the Henry VII Chapel , and Installations have been held at regular intervals since . 
 Prior to the 1913 Installation it was necessary to adapt the chapel to accommodate the larger number of members . An appeal was made to the members of the Order , and following the Installation a surplus remained . A Committee was formed from the Officers to administer the ' Bath Chapel Fund ' , and over time this committee has come to consider other matters than purely financial ones . 
 Another revision of the statutes of the Order was undertaken in 1925 , to consolidate the 41 additional statutes which had been issued since the 1859 revision . 
 Women were admitted to the Order in 1971 . In the 1971 New Year Honours , Jean Nunn became the first woman admitted to the order . In 1975 , Princess Alice , Duchess of Gloucester , an aunt of Elizabeth II , became the first ( and to date only ) woman to reach the highest rank , Dame Grand Cross . Princess Alice ( née Douglas @-@ Montagu @-@ Scott ) was a direct descendant of the Order 's first Great Master , and her husband , who had died the previous year , had also held that office . 
 = = Composition = = 
 = = = Sovereign = = = 
 The British Sovereign is the Sovereign of the Order of the Bath . As with all honours except those in the Sovereign 's personal gift , the Sovereign makes all appointments to the Order on the advice of the Government . 
 = = = Great Master = = = 
 The next @-@ most senior member of the Order is the Great Master , of which there have been nine : 
 1725 – 1749 : John Montagu , 2nd Duke of Montagu 
 1749 – 1767 : ( Vacant ) 
 1767 – 1827 : Prince Frederick , Duke of York and Albany 
 1827 – 1830 : Prince William , Duke of Clarence and St Andrews ( later King William IV ) 
 1830 – 1837 : ( Vacant ) 
 1837 – 1843 : Prince Augustus Frederick , Duke of Sussex 
 1843 – 1861 : Albert , Prince Consort 
 1861 – 1897 : ( Vacant ) 
 1897 – 1901 : Albert Edward , Prince of Wales ( later King Edward VII ) 
 1901 – 1942 : Prince Arthur , Duke of Connaught and Strathearn 
 1942 – 1974 : Prince Henry , Duke of Gloucester 
 1974 – present : Charles , Prince of Wales . 
 Originally a Prince of the Blood Royal , as the Principal Knight Companion , ranked next after the sovereign . This position was joined to that of the Great Master in the statutes of 1847 . The Great Master and Principal Knight is now either a descendant of George I or " some other exalted personage " ; the holder of the office has custody of the seal of the order and is responsible for enforcing the statutes . 
 Members 
 The statutes also provide for the following : 
 120 Knights or Dames Grand Cross ( GCB ) ( of whom the Great Master is the First and Principal ) 
 355 Knights Commander ( KCB ) or Dames Commander ( DCB ) 
 1 @,@ 925 Companions ( CB ) 
 Regular membership is limited to citizens of the United Kingdom and of other Commonwealth countries of which the Queen is Sovereign . Appointees are usually officers of the armed forces or senior civil servants , such as permanent secretaries . 
 Members appointed to the Civil Division must " by their personal services to [ the ] crown or by the performance of public duties have merited ... royal favour . " Appointments to the Military Division are restricted by the minimum rank of the individual . GCBs hold the rank of Admiral in the Royal Navy , General in the British Army or Royal Marines , or Air Chief Marshal in the Royal Air Force . <unk> must at least hold the rank of vice admiral , lieutenant general in the Army or Marines , or Air Marshal . CBs tend be of the rank of Rear Admiral , Major General in the Army or Royal Marines , or Air Vice Marshal , and in addition must have been Mentioned in Despatches for distinction in a command position in a combat situation , although the latter is no longer a requirement . Non @-@ line officers ( e.g. engineers , medics ) may be appointed only for meritorious service in wartime . 
 Commonwealth citizens not subjects of the Queen and foreigners may be made Honorary Members . Queen Elizabeth II has established the custom of awarding an honorary GCB to visiting heads of state , for example Gustav Heinemann , and Josip Broz Tito ( in 1972 ) , Ronald Reagan ( in 1989 ) , Lech Wałęsa ( in 1991 ) , Dr. <unk> <unk> , President of Malta , in 1992 , Fernando Henrique Cardoso , George H. W. Bush ( in 1993 ) , Nicolas Sarkozy in March 2008 , In 2012 , former Indonesian President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono . Turkish President Abdullah Gül , Slovenian President Dr Danilo Türk Mexican President Felipe Calderón , and South African President Jacob Zuma . Foreign generals are also often given honorary appointments to the Order , for example : Marshal Ferdinand Foch and Marshal Joseph Joffre during World War I ; Marshal Georgy Zhukov , King Abdul @-@ Aziz of Saudi Arabia , General Dwight D. Eisenhower and General Douglas MacArthur during World War II ; and General Norman Schwarzkopf and General Colin Powell after the Gulf War . A more controversial member of the Order was Robert Mugabe , whose honour was stripped by the Queen , on the advice of the Foreign Secretary , David Miliband , on 25 June 2008 " as a mark of revulsion at the abuse of human rights and abject disregard for the democratic process in Zimbabwe over which President Mugabe has presided . " 
 Honorary members do not count towards the numerical limits in each class . In addition the statutes allow the Sovereign to exceed the limits in time of war or other exceptional circumstances . 
 = = = Officers = = = 
 The Order of the Bath now has six officers : 
 a Dean : John Hall , Dean of Westminster ( ex officio ) 
 a King of Arms : Michael Boyce , Baron Boyce 
 a Registrar and Secretary : Iain Henderson 
 a Deputy Secretary : Alexander Matheson of Matheson , yr . 
 a Genealogist : Thomas Woodcock 
 the Gentleman Usher of the Scarlet Rod : Charles Vyvyan 
 The office of Dean is held by the Dean of Westminster . The King of Arms , responsible for heraldry , is known as Bath King of Arms ; he is not , however , a member of the College of Arms , like many heralds . The Order 's Usher is known as the Gentleman Usher of the Scarlet Rod ; he does not , unlike his Order of the Garter equivalent ( the Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod ) perform any duties in the House of Lords . 
 There were originally seven officers , each of whom was to receive fees from the Knights Companion both on appointment and annually thereafter . The office of Messenger was abolished in 1859 . The office of Genealogist was abolished at the same time , but revived in 1913 . The offices of Registrar and Secretary were formally merged in 1859 , although the two positions had been held concurrently for the previous century . An Officer of Arms and a Secretary for the Knights Commander and Companions were established in 1815 , but abolished in 1847 . The office of Deputy Secretary was created in 1925 . 
 Under the Hanoverian kings certain of the officers also held heraldic office . The office of Blanc <unk> Herald of Arms was attached to that of the Genealogist , Brunswick Herald of Arms to the Gentleman Usher , and Bath King of Arms was also made Gloucester King of Arms with heraldic jurisdiction over Wales . This was the result of a move by Anstis to give the holders of these sinecures greater security ; the offices of the Order of the Bath were held at the pleasure of the Great Master , while appointments to the heraldic offices were made by the King under the Great Seal and were for life . 
 = = Habit and insignia = = 
 Members of the Order wear elaborate costumes on important occasions ( such as its quadrennial installation ceremonies and coronations ) , which vary by rank : 
 The mantle , worn only by Knights and Dames Grand Cross , is made of crimson satin lined with white taffeta . On the left side is a representation of the star ( see below ) . The mantle is bound with two large tassels . 
 The hat , worn only by Knights and Dames Grand Cross and Knights and Dames Commander , is made of black velvet ; it includes an upright plume of feathers . 
 The collar , worn only by Knights and Dames Grand Cross , is made of gold and weighs 30 troy ounces ( 933 g ) . It consists of depictions of nine imperial crowns and eight sets of flowers ( roses for England , thistles for Scotland and shamrocks for Ireland ) , connected by seventeen silver knots . 
 On lesser occasions , simpler insignia are used : The star is used only by Knights and Dames Grand Cross and Knights and Dames Commander . Its style varies by rank and division ; it is worn pinned to the left breast : 
 The star for military Knights and Dames Grand Cross consists of a Maltese Cross on top of an eight @-@ pointed silver star ; the star for military Knights and Dames Commander is an eight @-@ pointed silver cross pattée . Each bears in the centre three crowns surrounded by a red ring bearing the motto of the Order in gold letters . The circle is flanked by two laurel branches and is above a scroll bearing the words Ich dien ( older German for " I serve " ) in gold letters . 
 The star for civil Knights and Dames Grand Cross consists of an eight @-@ pointed silver star , without the Maltese cross ; the star for civil Knights and Dames Commander is an eight @-@ pointed silver cross pattée . The design of each is the same as the design of the military stars , except that the laurel branches and the words Ich dien are excluded . 
 The badge varies in design , size and manner of wearing by rank and division . The Knight and Dame Grand Cross ' badge is larger than the Knight and Dame Commander 's badge , which is in turn larger than the Companion 's badge ; however , these are all suspended on a crimson ribbon . Knights and Dames Grand Cross wear the badge on a riband or sash , passing from the right shoulder to the left hip . Knights Commander and male Companions wear the badge from a ribbon worn around the neck . Dames Commander and female Companions wear the badge from a bow on the left side : 
 The military badge is a gold Maltese Cross of eight points , enamelled in white . Each point of the cross is decorated by a small gold ball ; each angle has a small figure of a lion . The centre of the cross bears three crowns on the obverse side , and a rose , a thistle and a shamrock , emanating from a sceptre on the reverse side . Both emblems are surrounded by a red circular ring bearing the motto of the Order , which are in turn flanked by two laurel branches , above a scroll bearing the words Ich dien in gold letters . 
 The civil badge is a plain gold oval , bearing three crowns on the obverse side , and a rose , a thistle and a shamrock , emanating from a sceptre on the reverse side ; both emblems are surrounded by a ring bearing the motto of the Order . 
 On certain " collar days " designated by the Sovereign , members attending formal events may wear the Order 's collar over their military uniform or <unk> . When collars are worn ( either on collar days or on formal occasions such as coronations ) , the badge is suspended from the collar . 
 The collars and badges of Knights and Dames Grand Cross are returned to the Central Chancery of the Orders of Knighthood upon the decease of their owners . All other insignia may be retained by their owners . 
 = = Chapel = = 
 The Chapel of the Order is the Henry VII Lady Chapel in Westminster Abbey . Every four years , an installation ceremony , presided over by the Great Master , and a religious service are held in the Chapel ; the Sovereign attends every alternate ceremony . The last such service was in May 2014 and was attended by the Sovereign . The Sovereign and each knight who has been installed is allotted a stall in the choir of the chapel . 
 As there are a limited number of stalls in the Chapel , only the most senior Knights and Dames Grand Cross are installed . A stall made vacant by the death of a military Knight Grand Cross is offered to the next most senior uninstalled military GCB , and similarly for vacancies among civil GCBs . Waits between admission to the Order and installation may be very long ; for instance , Marshal of the Air Force Lord Craig of Radley was created a Knight Grand Cross in 1984 , but was not installed until 2006 . 
 Above each stall , the occupant 's heraldic devices are displayed . Perched on the pinnacle of a knight 's stall is his helm , decorated with a mantling and topped by his crest . Under English heraldic law , women other than monarchs do not bear helms or crests ; instead , the coronet appropriate to the dame 's rank ( if she is a peer or member of the Royal family ) is used . 
 Above the crest or coronet , the knight 's or dame 's heraldic banner is hung , emblazoned with his or her coat of arms . At a considerably smaller scale , to the back of the stall is affixed a piece of brass ( a " stall plate " ) displaying its occupant 's name , arms and date of admission into the Order . 
 Upon the death of a Knight , the banner , helm , mantling and crest ( or coronet or crown ) are taken down . The stall plates , however , are not removed ; rather , they remain permanently affixed somewhere about the stall , so that the stalls of the chapel are festooned with a colourful record of the Order 's Knights ( and now Dames ) throughout history . 
 When the grade of Knight Commander was established in 1815 the regulations specified that they too should have a banner and stall plate affixed in the chapel . This was never implemented ( despite some of the <unk> paying the appropriate fees ) primarily due to lack of space , although the 1847 statutes allow all three classes to request the erection of a plate in the chapel bearing the member 's name , date of nomination , and ( for the two higher classes ) optionally the coat of arms . 
 = = Precedence and privileges = = 
 Members of the Order of the Bath are assigned positions in the order of precedence . Wives of male members also feature on the order of precedence , as do sons , daughters and daughters @-@ in @-@ law of Knights Grand Cross and Knights Commander ; relatives of female members , however , are not assigned any special precedence . Generally , individuals can derive precedence from their fathers or husbands , but not from their mothers or wives . ( See order of precedence in England and Wales for the exact positions . ) 
 Knights Grand Cross and Knights Commander prefix " Sir " , and Dames Grand Cross and Dames Commander prefix " Dame " , to their forenames . Wives of Knights may prefix " Lady " to their surnames , but no equivalent privilege exists for husbands of Dames . Such forms are not used by peers and princes , except when the names of the former are written out in their fullest forms . Furthermore , honorary foreign members and clergymen do not receive the accolade of knighthood , and so are not entitled to the prefix " Sir " , unless the former subsequently become Commonwealth citizens . 
 Knights and Dames Grand Cross use the post @-@ nominal " GCB " ; Knights Commander use " KCB " ; Dames Commander use " DCB " ; Companions use " CB " . 
 Knights and Dames Grand Cross are also entitled to receive heraldic supporters . Furthermore , they may encircle their arms with a depiction of the circlet ( a red circle bearing the motto ) with the badge pendant thereto and the collar ; the former is shown either outside or on top of the latter . 
 Knights and Dames Commander and Companions may display the circlet , but not the collar , around their arms . The badge is depicted suspended from the collar or circlet . Members of the Military division may encompass the circlet with " two laurel branches <unk> from an <unk> azure inscribed Ich dien " , as appears on the badge . Members of the Order of the Bath and their children are able to be married in Westminster Abbey in London . 
 = = Revocation = = 
 It is possible for membership in the Order to be revoked . Under the 1725 statutes the grounds for this were heresy , high treason , or fleeing from battle out of cowardice . Knights Companion could in such cases be degraded at the next Chapter meeting . It was then the duty of the Gentleman Usher to " pluck down the <unk> [ i.e. <unk> ] of such knight and spurn it out of the chapel " with " all the usual marks of infamy " . 
 Only two people were ever degraded – Lord Cochrane in 1813 and General Sir Eyre Coote in 1816 , both for political reasons , rather than any of the grounds given in the statute . Lord Cochrane was subsequently reinstated , but Coote died a few years after his degradation . 
 Under Queen Victoria 's 1847 statutes a member " convicted of treason , cowardice , felony , or any infamous crime derogatory to his honour as a knight or gentleman , or accused and does not submit to trial in a reasonable time , shall be degraded from the Order by a special ordinance signed by the sovereign " . The Sovereign was to be the sole judge , and also had the power to restore such members . 
 The situation today is that membership may be cancelled or annulled , and the entry in the register erased , by an ordinance signed by the Sovereign and sealed with the seal of the Order , on the recommendation of the appropriate Minister . Such cancellations may be subsequently reversed . 
 William Pottinger , a senior civil servant , lost both his status of CB and Commander of the Royal Victorian Order ( CVO ) in 1975 when he was gaoled for corruptly receiving gifts from the architect John Poulson . 
 Romanian president Nicolae Ceauşescu was stripped of his honorary GCB status by Queen Elizabeth II on 24 December 1989 , the day before his execution . Robert Mugabe , the President of Zimbabwe , was stripped of his honorary GCB status by the Queen , on the advice of the Foreign Secretary , David Miliband , on 25 June 2008 " as a mark of revulsion at the abuse of human rights and abject disregard for the democratic process in Zimbabwe over which President Mugabe has presided . " 
 Vicky Pryce , former wife of Chris Huhne , was stripped of her CB by Queen Elizabeth II on 30 July 2013 , following her conviction for perverting the course of justice . 
 = = Current Knights and Dames Grand Cross = = 
 Sovereign : Queen Elizabeth II 
 Grand Master : Charles , Prince of Wales 
 Knights and Dames Grand Cross 
 Honorary Knights and Dames Grand Cross 
 = Henry Ward Beecher = 
 Henry Ward Beecher ( June 24 , 1813 – March 8 , 1887 ) was an American Congregationalist clergyman , social reformer , and speaker , known for his support of the abolition of slavery , his emphasis on God 's love , and his 1875 adultery trial . 
 = = Background = = 
 Henry Ward Beecher was the son of Lyman Beecher , a Calvinist minister who became one of the best @-@ known evangelists of his age . Several of his brothers and sisters became well @-@ known educators and activists , most notably Harriet Beecher Stowe , who achieved worldwide fame with her abolitionist novel Uncle Tom 's Cabin . Henry Ward Beecher graduated from Amherst College in 1834 and Lane Theological Seminary in 1837 before serving as a minister in Indianapolis and Lawrenceburg , Indiana . 
 In 1847 , Beecher became the first pastor of the Plymouth Church in Brooklyn , New York . He soon acquired fame on the lecture circuit for his novel oratorical style , in which he employed humor , dialect , and slang . Over the course of his ministry , Beecher developed a theology emphasizing God 's love above all else . He also grew interested in social reform , particularly the abolitionist movement . In the years leading up to the Civil War , he raised money to purchase slaves from captivity and to send rifles — nicknamed " Beecher 's Bibles " — to abolitionists fighting in Kansas and Nebraska . He toured Europe during the Civil War speaking in support of the Union . 
 After the war , Beecher supported social reform causes such as women 's suffrage and temperance . He also championed Charles Darwin 's theory of evolution , stating that it was not incompatible with Christian beliefs . Widely rumored to be a womanizer , in 1872 the Woodhull & Claflin 's Weekly published a story about his affair with Elizabeth Tilton , the wife of his former associate Theodore Tilton . In 1874 , Tilton filed adultery charges against him for the affair . The subsequent trial , which resulted in a hung jury , was one of the most widely reported American trials of the century . Beecher 's long career in the public spotlight led biographer Debby Applegate to call him " The Most Famous Man in America " . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Born in Litchfield , Connecticut , Henry was the eighth of thirteen children born to Lyman Beecher , a Presbyterian preacher from Boston . His siblings included author Harriet Beecher Stowe , educators Catharine Beecher and Thomas K. Beecher , and activists Charles Beecher and Isabella Beecher Hooker ; Lyman would later become known as " the father of more brains than any man in America " . Beecher 's mother , Roxana Foote , died when Henry was three ; Lyman Beecher soon remarried to Harriet Porter , whom Henry later remembered as " severe " and subject to bouts of depression . Beecher also taught school for a time in <unk> , MA . The schoolhouse was later moved and became a residence which is still occupied . 
 The Beecher household was , one of the children later recalled , " the strangest and most interesting combination of fun and seriousness " . The family was poor , and Lyman Beecher assigned his children " a heavy schedule of prayer meetings , lectures , and religious services " while banning the theater , dancing , most fiction , and the celebration of birthdays or Christmas . The family 's pastimes included story @-@ telling and listening to Lyman play the fiddle . 
 Henry had a childhood stammer and was considered slow @-@ witted and one of the less promising of the brilliant Beecher children . His less @-@ than @-@ stellar performance earned him punishments such as being forced to sit for hours in the girls ' corner wearing a dunce cap . At age fourteen , he began his oratorical training at Mount Pleasant Classical Institution , a boarding school in Amherst , Massachusetts , where he met a fellow student , Constantine <unk> , a Smyrna Greek . Both students later attended Amherst College together , where they signed a " contract " pledging lifelong friendship and brotherly love . <unk> died of cholera after returning to Greece in 1842 , and Beecher later named his third son after him . 
 During his years in Amherst , Beecher had his first taste of public speaking and , setting aside his early dream of going to sea , resolved to join the ministry . He met his future wife , Eunice Bullard , the daughter of a well @-@ known physician , and on January 2 , 1832 , became engaged to her . During his Amherst years , he also developed an interest in the new pseudoscience of phrenology — an attempt to link personality traits with features of the human skull — and befriended Orson Squire Fowler , who later became the theory 's best @-@ known American exponent . 
 Beecher graduated from Amherst College in 1834 and then attended Lane Theological Seminary outside Cincinnati , Ohio . Lane was headed by Beecher 's father , who had by this time become " America 's most famous preacher " . Lane 's student body was riven in these years by the slavery question : whether to support a form of gradual emancipation , as Lyman Beecher did , or to stand by principle and demand immediate emancipation . Henry stayed largely clear of the controversy , sympathetic to the radical students but unwilling to defy his father . He graduated in 1837 . 
 = = Early ministry = = 
 On August 3 , 1837 , Beecher married Eunice Bullard , and the two proceeded to the small , impoverished town of Lawrenceburg , Indiana , where Beecher had been offered a post as a minister of the First Presbyterian Church . He received his first national publicity when he became involved in the break between " New School " and " Old School " Presbyterianism , which were split over questions of original sin and the slavery issue ; Henry 's father Lyman was a leading proponent of the New School . Lyman 's Old School enemies blocked Henry 's official confirmation as minister in Lawrenceburg after Henry refused to swear an oath of allegiance to their views , and the resulting controversy split the western Presbyterian Church into rival synods . 
 Though Henry Beecher 's Lawrenceburg church declared its independence from the Synod to retain him as its pastor , the poverty that followed the Panic of 1837 caused him to look for a new position . Banker Samuel Merrill invited Beecher to visit Indianapolis in 1839 , and he was offered the ministry of the Second Presbyterian Church there on May 13 , 1839 . Unusually for a speaker of his era , Beecher would use humor and informal language including dialect and slang as he preached . His preaching was a major success , building Second Presbyterian into the largest church in the city , and he also led a successful revival meeting in nearby Terre Haute . However , mounting debt led to Beecher again seeking a new position in 1847 , and he accepted the invitation of businessman Henry Bowen to head a new Plymouth Congregational Church in Brooklyn , New York . Beecher 's national fame continued to grow , and he took to the lecture circuit , becoming one of the most popular speakers in the country and charging correspondingly high fees . 
 In the course of his preaching , Henry Ward Beecher came to reject his father Lyman 's theology , which " combined the old belief that ' human fate was preordained by God 's plan ' with a faith in the capacity of rational men and women to purge society of its sinful ways " . Henry instead preached a " Gospel of Love " that emphasized God 's absolute love rather than human sinfulness , and doubted the existence of Hell . He also rejected his father 's prohibitions against various leisure activities as distractions from a holy life , stating instead that " Man was made for enjoyment " . 
 = = Social and political activism = = 
 = = = Abolitionism = = = 
 Henry Ward Beecher became involved in many social issues of his day , most notably abolition . Though Beecher hated slavery as early as his seminary days , his views were generally more moderate than those of abolitionists like William Lloyd Garrison , who advocated the breakup of the Union if it would also mean the end of slavery . A personal turning point for Beecher came in October 1848 when he learned of two escaped young female slaves who had been recaptured ; their father had been offered the chance to ransom them from captivity , and appealed to Beecher to help raise funds . Beecher raised over two thousand dollars to secure the girls ' freedom . On June 1 , 1856 , he held another mock slave auction to purchase the freedom of a young woman named Sarah . 
 In his widely reprinted piece " Shall We Compromise " , Beecher assailed the Compromise of 1850 , a compromise between anti @-@ slavery and pro @-@ slavery forces brokered by Whig Senator Henry Clay . The compromise banned slavery from California and slave @-@ trading from Washington , D.C. at the cost of a stronger Fugitive Slave Act ; Beecher objected to the last provision in particular , arguing that it was a Christian 's duty to feed and shelter escaped slaves . Slavery and liberty were fundamentally incompatible , Beecher argued , making compromise impossible : " One or the other must die " . In 1856 , Beecher campaigned for abolitionist John C. Frémont , the first presidential candidate of the Republican Party ; despite Beecher 's aid , Frémont lost to Democrat James Buchanan . During the pre @-@ Civil @-@ War conflict in the Kansas Territory , known as " Bloody Kansas " , Beecher raised funds to send Sharps rifles to abolitionist forces , stating that the weapons would do more good than " a hundred Bibles " . The press subsequently nicknamed the weapons " Beecher 's Bibles " . Beecher became widely hated in the American South for his abolitionist actions and received numerous death threats . 
 In 1863 , during the Civil War , President Abraham Lincoln sent Beecher on a speaking tour of Europe to build support for the Union cause . Beecher 's speeches helped turn European popular sentiment against the rebel Confederate States of America and prevent its recognition by foreign powers . At the close of the war in April 1865 , Beecher was invited to speak at Fort Sumter , South Carolina , where the first shots of the war had been fired ; Lincoln had again personally selected him , stating , " We had better send Beecher down to deliver the address on the occasion of raising the flag because if it had not been for Beecher there would have been no flag to raise . " 
 = = = Other views = = = 
 Beecher advocated for the temperance movement throughout his career and was a strict teetotaler . Following the Civil War , he also became a leader in the women 's suffrage movement . In 1867 , he campaigned unsuccessfully to become a delegate to the New York Constitutional Convention of 1867 @-@ 1868 on a suffrage platform , and in 1869 , was elected unanimously as the first president of the American Woman Suffrage Association . 
 In the Reconstruction Era , Beecher sided with President Andrew Johnson 's plan for swift restoration of Southern states to the Union . He believed that captains of industry should be the leaders of society and supported Social Darwinist ideas . During the Great Railroad Strike of 1877 , he preached strongly against the strikers whose wages had been cut , stating , " Man cannot live by bread alone but the man who cannot live on bread and water is not fit to live , " and " If you are being reduced , go down boldly into poverty " . His remarks were so unpopular that cries of " Hang Beecher ! " became common at labor rallies , and plainclothes detectives protected his church . 
 Influenced by British author Herbert Spencer , Beecher embraced Charles Darwin 's theory of evolution in the 1880s , identifying as a " cordial Christian evolutionist " . He argued that the theory was in keeping with what Applegate called " the inevitability of progress " , seeing a steady march toward perfection as a part of God 's plan . In 1885 , he wrote Evolution and Religion to expound these views . His sermons and writings helped to gain acceptance for the theory in America . 
 Beecher was a prominent advocate for allowing Chinese immigration to continue to the US , helping to delay passage of the Chinese Exclusion Act until 1882 . He argued that as other American peoples , such as the Irish , had seen a gradual increase in their social standing , a new people was required to do " what we call the menial work " , and that the Chinese , " by reason of their training , by the habits of a thousand years , are adapted to do that work . " 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Marriage = = = 
 Beecher married Eunice Bullard in 1837 after a five @-@ year engagement . Their marriage was not a happy one ; as Applegate writes , " within a year of their wedding they embarked on the classic marital cycle of neglect and nagging " , marked by Henry 's prolonged absences from home . The couple also suffered the deaths of four of their eight children . 
 Beecher enjoyed the company of women , and rumors of extramarital affairs circulated as early as his Indiana days , when he was believed to have had an affair with a young member of his congregation . In 1858 , the Brooklyn Eagle wrote a story accusing him of an affair with another young church member who had later become a prostitute . The wife of Beecher 's patron and editor , Henry Bowen , confessed on her deathbed to her husband of an affair with Beecher ; Bowen concealed the incident during his lifetime . 
 Several members of Beecher 's circle reported that Beecher had had an affair with Edna Dean Proctor , an author with whom he was collaborating on a book of his sermons . The couple 's first encounter was the subject of dispute : Beecher reportedly told friends that it had been consensual , while Proctor reportedly told Henry Bowen that Beecher had raped her . Regardless of the initial circumstances , Beecher and Proctor allegedly then carried on their affair for more than a year . According to historian Barry Werth , " it was standard gossip that ' Beecher preaches to seven or eight of his mistresses every Sunday evening . ' " 
 = = = " The Beecher @-@ Tilton Scandal Case " ( 1875 ) = = = 
 In a highly publicized scandal , Beecher was tried on charges that he had committed adultery with a friend 's wife , Elizabeth Tilton . In 1870 , Elizabeth had confessed to her husband , Theodore Tilton , that she had had a relationship with Beecher . The charges became public when Theodore told Elizabeth Cady Stanton of his wife 's confession . Stanton repeated the story to fellow women 's rights leaders Victoria Woodhull and Isabella Beecher Hooker . 
 Henry Ward Beecher had publicly denounced Woodhull 's advocacy of free love . Outraged at what she saw as his hypocrisy , she published a story titled " The Beecher @-@ Tilton Scandal Case " in her paper Woodhull and Claflin 's Weekly on November 2 , 1872 ; the article made detailed allegations that America 's most renowned clergyman was secretly practicing the free @-@ love doctrines that he denounced from the pulpit . The story created a national sensation . At Beecher 's urging , Woodhull was arrested in New York City and imprisoned for sending obscene material through the mail . The scandal split the Beecher siblings ; Harriet and others supported Henry , while Isabella publicly supported Woodhull . 
 The subsequent trials and hearings , in the words of Walter A. McDougall , " drove Reconstruction off the front pages for two and a half years " and became " the most sensational ' he said , she said ' in American history " . The first trial was Woodhull 's , who was released on a technicality . The Plymouth Church held a board of inquiry and exonerated Beecher , but excommunicated Theodore Tilton in 1873 . Tilton then sued Beecher on civil charges of adultery . The trial began in January 1875 , and ended in July when the jurors deliberated for six days but were unable to reach a verdict . Beecher then called for the Congregational church to hold a final hearing to exonerate him , which it did . 
 Stanton was outraged by Beecher 's repeated <unk> , calling the scandal a " holocaust of womanhood " . French author George Sand planned a novel about the affair , but died the following year before it could be written . 
 = = Later life and legacy = = 
 = = = Later life = = = 
 In 1871 , Yale University established " The Lyman Beecher Lectureship " , of which Henry taught the first three annual courses . After the heavy expenses of the trial , Beecher embarked on a lecture tour of the West that returned him to solvency . In 1884 , he angered many of his Republican allies when he endorsed Democratic candidate Grover Cleveland for the presidency , arguing that Cleveland should be forgiven for having fathered an illegitimate child . He made another lecture tour of England in 1886 . 
 On March 6 , 1887 , Beecher suffered a stroke and died in his sleep on March 8 . Still a widely popular figure , he was mourned in newspapers and sermons across the country . Henry Ward Beecher is interred at Green @-@ Wood Cemetery in Brooklyn , New York . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 In assessing Beecher 's legacy , Applegate states that 
 At his best , Beecher represented what remains the most lovable and popular strain of American culture : incurable optimism ; can @-@ do enthusiasm ; and open @-@ minded , open @-@ hearted pragmatism ... His reputation has been eclipsed by his own success . Mainstream Christianity is so deeply infused with the rhetoric of Christ 's love that most Americans can imagine nothing else , and have no appreciation or memory of the revolution wrought by Beecher and his peers . 
 A Henry Ward Beecher Monument created by the sculptor John Quincy Adams Ward was unveiled on June 24 , 1891 in Borough Hall Park , Brooklyn and was later relocated to Cadman Plaza , Brooklyn in 1959 . 
 A limerick written about Beecher by poet Oliver Herford became well known in the USA : 
 Said a great congregational preacher 
 To a hen , " You 're a beautiful creature . " 
 And the hen , just for that , Laid an egg in his hat , 
 And thus did the Hen reward Beecher . 
 Oliver Wendell Holmes , Sr. offered his own limerick on Beecher : 
 The Reverend Henry Ward Beecher 
 Called the hen a most elegant creature . 
 The hen , pleased with that , Laid an egg in his hat , 
 And thus did the hen reward Beecher . 
 Christopher J Barry , Canadian published songwriter , offered this perhaps more accurate limerick : 
 The Reverend Henry Ward Beecher 
 Said of hens : " some are elegant creatures " . 
 Of the hens pleased with that , Some laid eggs in his lap . 
 What will judgement day hatch for the preacher ? 
 - Christopher Joseph Barry 
 = = Writings = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Henry Ward Beecher was a prolific author as well as speaker . His public writing began in Indiana , where he edited an agricultural journal , The Farmer and Gardener . He was one of the founders and for nearly twenty years an editorial contributor of the New York Independent , a Congregationalist newspaper , and from 1861 till 1863 was its editor . His contributions to this were signed with an asterisk , and many of them were afterward collected and published in 1855 as " Star Papers ; or , Experiences of Art and Nature " . 
 In 1865 , Robert E. Bonner of the New York Ledger offered Beecher twenty @-@ four thousand dollars to follow his sister 's example and compose a novel ; the subsequent novel , Norwood , or Village Life in New England , was published in 1868 . Beecher stated his intent for Norwood was to present a heroine who is " large of soul , a child of nature , and , although a Christian , yet in childlike sympathy with the truths of God in the natural world , instead of books . " McDougall describes the resulting novel as " a New England romance of flowers and <unk> sighs ... ' new theology ' that amounted to warmed @-@ over Emerson " . The novel was moderately well received by critics of the day . 
 = = = List of published works = = = 
 Seven Lectures to Young Men ( 1844 ) ( a pamphlet ) 
 Star Papers ( 1855 ) 
 <unk> from Plymouth Pulpit ( 1859 ) 
 The Independent ( 1861 – 63 ) ( periodical , as editor ) 
 Eyes and Ears ( 1862 ) ( collection of letters from the New York Ledger newspaper ) 
 " Freedom and War " ( 1863 ) Boston , Ticknor and Fields ( 1863 ) Library of Congress catalogue number 70 @-@ <unk> 
 " Lectures to Young Men , On Various Important Subjects " New edition with additional lectures . Boston : Ticknor and Fields 1868 
 Christian Union ( 1870 – 78 ) ( periodical , as editor ) 
 Summer in the Soul ( 1858 ) 
 Prayers from the Plymouth Pulpit ( 1867 ) 
 Norwood , or Village Life in New England ( 1868 ) ( novel ) 
 Life of Jesus Christ ( 1871 ) 
 Yale Lectures on Preaching ( 1872 ) 
 Evolution and Religion ( 1885 ) - ( Reissued by Cambridge University Press 2009 ; ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 108 @-@ 00045 @-@ 1 ) 
 <unk> <unk> Plymouth Pulpit ( 1887 ) 
 = Alejandro ( song ) = 
 " Alejandro " is a song by American recording artist Lady Gaga . It was released as the third single from her third extended play ( EP ) and second major release , The Fame Monster ( 2009 ) . Co @-@ written and produced by herself and RedOne , the song inspired by her " Fear of Men Monster " , the lyrics portray Gaga bidding farewell to her lovers . Musically , it is a mid @-@ tempo synthpop song . 
 Contemporary critics predominantly gave " Alejandro " positive reviews and noted that it takes influence from the pop acts ABBA , Ace of Base and Madonna . The song charted in the United Kingdom and Hungary due to digital sales following the album 's release . Upon release , " Alejandro " charted again in the United Kingdom as well as in Australia , Canada , New Zealand , Sweden , and the United States while topping the Finnish , Polish , Russian , Bulgarian , and Romanian charts . " Alejandro " became Gaga 's seventh successive single to reach the top @-@ ten of the US Billboard Hot 100 . 
 The accompanying music video was directed by fashion photographer Steven Klein and inspired by Gaga 's love for her gay friends and admiration of gay love . Within the video , Gaga dances with a group of soldiers in a cabaret , interspersed with scenes of Gaga as a nun swallowing a rosary and near @-@ naked men holding machine guns . The music video was controversial and received mixed reviews . Critics complimented its idea and dark nature while the Catholic League criticized Gaga for alleged blasphemy , despite Klein dismissing the idea and claiming that the scene in question ( the swallowing of Rosary beads ) was Gaga 's " desire to take in the Holy " . Gaga performed the song on the ninth season of American Idol and has performed it on all dates of The Monster Ball Tour . The song was also included on her 2012 – 13 tour The Born This Way Ball , as well as on her 2014 tour , ArtRave : The Artpop Ball . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Alejandro " is written by Lady Gaga and RedOne , while the latter produced the song . It was recorded at FC Walvisch Studios in Amsterdam . Originally , " Dance in the Dark " was planned to be released as the third single from The Fame Monster , as a preference of Gaga 's record label . The singer 's own choice , " Alejandro " , initially saw poor reception in terms of radio play , thereby was not seen as a viable choice for a single . A quarrel then arose between Gaga and her label where " Alejandro " was ultimately chosen to be released . Through her account on Twitter , the singer remarked on the decision , " Alejandro is on the radio . Fuck it sounds so good , we did it little monsters . " The single was officially sent to radio on April 20 , 2010 in the United States . In an interview with Fuse TV , Gaga said that the inspiration behind " Alejandro " was her " Fear of Men Monster " . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Billboard described " Alejandro " as a synthpop song with a " stomping Euro @-@ pop beat " . The song is influenced by ABBA and Ace of Base . The Ace of Base influences are prominent in the beats of the song , the vocals , and the melody . The words are slurred in her mouth while consisting of an uplifting melody . 
 The song opens with the main melody from the Hungarian piece " <unk> " by Italian composer Vittorio Monti played on violin , as a distressed Gaga ( speaking in a Spanish accent ) states : " I know that we are young , and I know that you may love me / But I just can 't be with you like this anymore , Alejandro . " The track then changes to a stomping Europop beat . Gaga bids her ex @-@ lovers farewell with a bitter @-@ hearted pre @-@ chorus where she sings : " You know that I love you , boy / Hot like Mexico , rejoice ! / At this point I 've got to choose / Nothing to lose . " By the end of the song , the three protagonists – Alejandro , Fernando , and Roberto – are bid farewell by Gaga . 
 According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Sony / ATV Music Publishing , the song is set in the time signature of common time , with a moderate tempo of 99 beats per minute . It is composed in the key of B minor with Gaga 's vocal range spanning from F ♯ 3 to G5 . The song has a basic sequence of Bm – D – F ♯ m as its chord progression . The lyrics talk about Gaga defending herself against a group of Latin men and has a number of ABBA allusions , including a reference to their 1976 song " Fernando " , which Gaga cited as one of her influences . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Chris Ryan from MTV described the song as a " lush paean to a love that 's ' hot like Mexico ' . " Evan Sawdey from PopMatters said that Gaga 's vocals sounded like those of Shakira in the song 's chorus . Ben Patashnik from NME called the song light @-@ hearted . Michael Hubbard of MusicOMH complimented the song as " brilliantly catchy , deceptively simple and wonderfully melancholy , " while Sarah Hajibagheri from The Times dismissed it for being a " painful Latino warble [ and ] a would @-@ be Eurovision reject . " The Boston Globe 's James Reed also gave a negative review of the song , writing that it is " a tepid dance track in which she trills the song 's title over and over again as if she had nothing better to say . " The song won Best Pop Dance Track at the Annual International Dance Music Awards , the major event held during the Winter Music Conference 2011 . 
 Comparisons with Swedish pop music groups ABBA and Ace of Base 's work were constant in reviews . Paul Lester from BBC felt that " [ Alejandro ] moves at an Ace of Base pace . " Lindsey Fortier from Billboard compared it to Ace of Base 's " Don 't Turn Around " and ABBA 's " Fernando " , adding that : " By the song 's end , Alejandro , Fernando and Roberto aren 't the only ones sent packing — the listener is dancing out right behind them " . Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine also made an Ace of Base connection calling the song a homage to them . Stephen Thomas Erlewine from Allmusic denoted the song as an " updated ABBA revision " . Mikael Wood of Los Angeles Times called it bubbly and also went to compare with ABBA 's style . Jon Dolan from Rolling Stone called it a " loving ABBA spoof " . Scott Plagenhoef of Pitchfork Media noted that although " Alejandro " is an ABBA morph , " it comes off very modern , in part because U.S. pop and hip @-@ hop is currently drawing heavily from Europop , hi @-@ NRG , and dance music . " Brian R. <unk> from The Wall Street Journal compared the song with Madonna 's 1987 single " Who 's That Girl " . Robert Copsey of Digital Spy gave the song five out of five stars and compared it to Madonna 's song " La Isla Bonita " and Ace Of Base songs , but felt that Gaga added " her own twist to hers " . He also praised the song 's melodies describing them as " deceptively catchy " and the lyrics as " wistful " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the United States , " Alejandro " debuted at number 72 on the Billboard Hot 100 for the issue dated April 17 , 2010 . It reached number five on the chart , becoming Gaga 's seventh consecutive top ten hit in the United States . Gaga became the second female artist to have her first seven singles reach top @-@ ten in the United States , since R & B singer Monica did so in 1995 – 99 . The song also debuted on the Mainstream Top 40 chart at number 35 , and the Hot Digital Songs chart at number 71 , after selling 24 @,@ 000 paid digital downloads according to Nielsen Soundscan . " Alejandro " peaked at number four on the Mainstream Top 40 chart , becoming the first single by her not to reach the number one position there . It also debuted on the Hot Dance Club Songs chart at 40 and reached the top on the issue dated July 7 , 2010 . The song has sold 2 @,@ 570 @,@ 000 paid digital downloads in the United States as of April 2016 , making Gaga the only artist in digital history to amass seven consecutive 2 million sellers as a lead act . In Canada , " Alejandro " debuted at number 78 on the Canadian Hot 100 issue dated April 4 , 2010 , and moved to number 50 the next week . The song reached a peak of number four , on the issue dated May 8 , 2010 . 
 On April 5 , 2010 , " Alejandro " debuted at number 49 in Australia on the official ARIA Singles Chart , and moved to number 28 the next week . It ultimately peaked at number two , thus becoming Gaga 's seventh top five hit in the country . " Alejandro " was certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for shipment of 70 @,@ 000 copies of the single . The song debuted at number 35 on the New Zealand Top 40 on April 19 , 2010 . It has peaked at number 11 . 
 With the release of The Fame Monster , " Alejandro " charted on the UK Singles Chart at number 75 , on November 29 , 2009 , due to digital sales . On the May 16 , 2010 , chart , the song re @-@ entered at number 95 and ultimately peaked at number seven . According to the Official Charts Company , " Alejandro " has sold a total of 436 @,@ 000 copies as of February 2014 , and was certified gold by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) . They also revealed it as the 37th best @-@ selling vinyl single in the UK for the 2010s decade . On the Mahasz issue dated December 6 , 2009 , the song debuted at number five on the Hungarian Singles Chart . Across Europe , the song reached the top five in Austria , the Ultratop charts of Belgium ( Flanders and Wallonia ) , Czech Republic , Denmark , France , Germany , Hungary , Ireland , Italy , Netherlands , Norway , Slovakia , Sweden and Switzerland , while topping the charts in Finland , Poland , Bulgaria , Romania and Russia . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Development and release = = = 
 In January 2010 , it was reported that Gaga was holding casting calls for the music video of " Alejandro " and was eager for David Walliams to appear in the video alongside his wife Lara Stone . On March 23 , 2010 , Women 's Wear Daily reported that photographer Steven Klein would direct the music video , which Gaga confirmed herself . While touring Australia with The Monster Ball Tour , Gaga was interviewed by Australian radio station , Melbourne 's Nova 100 , where she talked about the music video . She said , 
 I 'm so excited about the ' Alejandro ' video , [ ... ] Actually , we 're shooting it very soon and I don 't want to say who the director is yet because it 's going to give a lot away . [ ... ] Are you absolutely mad ? I would never , ever tell you [ about the concept of the video ] ! I would be more likely to lie through my teeth to you [ regarding ] what the video 's about so that you could all be surprised . But I will tell you it 's not the sequel to the ' Telephone ' video . 
 After confirming that Klein was directing her video , Gaga explained that she " doesn 't know what [ the video is ] going to look like until it 's finished " , and commented that " [ Steven Klein is ] a very good friend of mine and I love him so much , [ ... ] I have so much respect for him . And we 've been excited to collaborate and have a fashion photographer tell us a story , the story of my music through his lens and this idea of fashion and lifestyle . " Gaga explained that Klein understood her " I am what I wear " lifestyle , making him a suitable director for the video . She added , " It 's all about where I 'm from and love of theater and love of music and love of the lie in art , and Steven really knows and understands that , [ .... ] So we 're making a beautiful video , and I 'm so excited . " In May 2010 , Gaga told The Times about the concept of the video : " [ It 's about the ] purity of my friendships with my gay friends , and how I 've been unable to find that with a straight man in my life . It 's a celebration and an admiration of gay love — it confesses my envy of the courage and bravery they require to be together . In the video I 'm pining for the love of my gay friends — but they just don 't want me to be with them . " 
 A snippet of the video was shown on Larry King Live on June 1 , 2010 . The clip was from the portion of the video in black @-@ and @-@ white , where Gaga and her dancers perform variations on a sharp military march throughout . Kara Warner of MTV said that it seemed reminiscent of Madonna 's " Vogue " video and Christina Aguilera 's " Not Myself Tonight " , but stated that in " Alejandro " , Gaga 's style was more cutting , masculine and militant in contrast to Madonna 's . Because of the video 's military theme , comparisons were also made to Janet Jackson 's " Rhythm Nation " . On the program , Gaga said to King that the video has a " homoerotic military theme " [ ... ] " It is a celebration of my love and appreciation for the gay community , my admiration of their bravery , their love for one another and their courage in their relationships . " The video premiered on Gaga 's official website and her YouTube / Vevo account on June 8 , 2010 , at noon EDT ( June 8 , 2010 , 16 : 00 UTC ) . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 A portion of the video is dedicated to the Broadway musical Cabaret . The video begins with soldiers in black leather uniforms in a cabaret with a close @-@ up of a soldier passed out in female fishnet stockings and heels as another lone soldier stares into the distance . The scene then cuts to male dancers performing elaborate choreography while marching forward with a Star of David . As the intro of the song begins , Gaga is shown leading a funeral procession , carrying the Sacred Heart on a pillow . When the lyrics begin , she sits on a throne wearing an elaborate headpiece and binocular @-@ like <unk> , with a smoking pipe in her hand , watching her dancers perform a rigorous routine in the snow . Gaga is then seen as the character Sally Bowles from Cabaret , dancing and simulating sex acts with three men on a stage with twin beds surrounded by spotlights , all wearing nothing but underwear , intercut with shots of Gaga lying on a larger bed dressed in a red latex nun outfit . She subsequently appears dressed in a white hooded robe , reminiscent of Joan of Arc , with her dancers , interspersed with a shot of her as the nun , consuming a set of rosary beads . After this , Gaga and her dancers are shown in a sequence in black @-@ and @-@ white in their military uniforms performing a tribute dedicated to the late choreographer Bob Fosse , who won an Academy Award for his direction of the film version of Cabaret . Gaga is seen in a blonde bob and a similar outfit to one of Liza Minnelli 's performance costumes . The video moves to a scene of her wearing a bra equipped with AR @-@ 15 rifle barrels and her dancers performing another dance routine . She is then shown in the empty club , scenes of war breaking out flash by , and the lone soldier appears again . Going back to the Joan of Arc scene , she struggles with her dancers and <unk> . The video ends with her dressed as the nun , the film burning away from her face outwards . Klein explained that the video was , " about a woman 's desire to resurrect a dead love and who can not face the brutality of her present situation . The pain of living without your true love . " 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 James Montgomery from MTV commented that " Gaga has created a world that , while oppressive , also looks great . " In a separate piece Montgomery added that " ... she may have finally reached the point in her career where not even she can top herself . " Rolling Stone 's Daniel Kreps called the video a " cinematic epic . " Brad Wete of Entertainment Weekly , liked the video ; however , he had no idea what was going on : " I can ’ t wait to hear Lady Gaga explain her latest video , “ Alejandro . ” Mostly because after watching it ( twice ! ) , I have absolutely no clue what ’ s going on beyond the obvious . " Anthony Benigno from Daily News felt that " the shock songstress ' new music video [ ... ] is chock full of bed @-@ ridden S & M imagery that makes it look like the softcore answer to The Matrix . Randall Roberts from Los Angeles Times said " the clip reinforces the notion that no one understands the convergence of image and music right now better than Gaga . " Jed Gottlieb from the Boston Herald said that " The plot [ of the video ] is hard to decipher , but it ’ s clearly not a story that ends happily ever after . " Jen Dose from National Post commented " Gaga ’ s new vid for ' Alejandro ' certainly brings the crazy we ’ ve all come to expect from her . It ’ s like an 8 + minute homage to Madonna — with some gay Nazis thrown in for good measure " . Amy Odell of New York said the video 's outfits were not as " intense " as those of " Bad Romance " or " Telephone . " Nate Jones of Time Magazine disliked the song , but felt the video " looks fantastic ... the self @-@ conscious <unk> of Gaga and director Steven Klein works here . " Jennifer Cady from E ! liked the video , but did not think it was as good as Gaga 's previous work . Julie Moult from Daily Mail said " [ After the video ] , no @-@ one could accuse Lady Gaga of being the shy and retiring type . " 
 The video was also heavily compared to works by 1980s pop artists like Madonna and Janet Jackson . Critic Monica Herrera viewed the video as a hybrid of Madonna 's " Like a Prayer " and Janet Jackson 's " Rhythm Nation " . MTV 's Kyle Anderson found references to Madonna 's 1996 film Evita and the music videos for her songs " Like a Prayer " , " Human Nature " and " Vogue . " Rolling Stone compared the black @-@ and @-@ white cinematography of the video to that of " Vogue , " and noticed some " not so subtle " hints toward " Like a Prayer . " The magazine believed that the " Alejandro " was so similar to Madonna 's work because director Steven Klein had closely worked with Madonna prior to shooting " Alejandro . " Devon Thomas from CBS News said the " Madonna @-@ isms run high in the clip . " He noted Gaga 's short , cropped hair and black blazer " set against the stark , post @-@ industrialist mood of the [ " Alejandro " ] clip " was similar to " Express Yourself " and the machine @-@ gun bra in the video was similar to the cone bra Madonna sported in " Vogue . " He also compared the video to Madonna 's early Blond Ambition World Tour era by saying that " [ this video ] is a visual love letter to [ Madonna ] " . New York said the video " reeked " of Madonna . James Montgomery of MTV News defended Gaga against the Madonna comparisons , saying , " Just to say , ' Oh , ' cause it 's in black and white and she has a bowl haircut at one point , it 's Madonna , ' that 's sort of selling their vision short . " 
 = = = Religious iconography = = = 
 " Alejandro " created a media uproar after the release of the video because of its use of religious imagery . One of the most discussed scenes in the video was when Gaga , dressed in a latex nun outfit , swallowed rosary beads . The Catholic League criticized the video for its use of religious imagery , accusing Gaga of " playing a Madonna copy @-@ cat " . <unk> Herrara said of the mayhem : " [ Alejandro ] courts religious controversy in much the same way that Madonna 's ' Like a " Prayer ' video once did , intermingling Catholic imagery like rosary beads and nun 's robes with sexual cues . " In an interview with MTV , Klein explained that the religious symbolism was not meant to denote anything negative , but to represent Gaga 's battle between the darker and lighter forces . Thus at the end of the film , she is portrayed again in her nun 's habit . Klein added that the significance behind her mouth and eyes disappearing was " because she is withdrawing her senses from the world of evil and going inward towards prayer and contemplation . " He added that the scene where Gaga devours the rosary beads was her act of <unk> , the desire to consume the body of God , the rosary being symbolic of the Holy . 
 Many critics agreed that the religious imagery was a calculated move by Gaga to create controversy . Simon <unk> @-@ Levinson from Entertainment Weekly felt that the move was calculated , saying , " Gaga wants to offend people . She 's a provocateur . Gaga would probably be disappointed if no one was offended by her latest video . She 's doing that stuff for a reason . " He did not think that the risks were very original or as exciting as the ones in " Telephone . " " The risks that she was taking [ ... ] were easier targets [ ... ] It 's a little bit been there , done that , " he said . New York Times 's Jon Caramanica thought the controversy was Gaga 's attempt to take the " Queen of Pop " throne . He said , " " I 'm sure she 'd say she loves Madonna ... but I also think she 's saying , ' This [ Queen of Pop title ] is mine . ' And also , like , ' I 'm murdering you with my own style . I 've learned this . I know how to do this ... And look how flawlessly I do it . ' " He did feel , however , that the religious imagery was obvious and lazy : " Even the worst provocation is going to succeed . She got what she wanted . " Singer Katy Perry took to her Twitter account and wrote , " Using blasphemy as entertainment is as cheap as a comedian telling fart jokes . " The Huffington Post ascertained that while Gaga had not been mentioned directly by name that it was definitely a slam by Perry towards Lady Gaga . In an interview on NRJ Radio 's Le 6 / 9 , Perry said that the tweet was not solely about Gaga , stating that it was based on her personal views of religion at that time . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Gaga performed " Alejandro " on her 2009 – 11 The Monster Ball Tour . It was the fourth song of the set list on the North American leg of the tour . However , on the European and British legs of the tour the song was performed towards the end of the show . The live performance saw her wearing a silver bodysuit and then being carried by her crotch by one of her male dancers and lowered onto another male dancer , engaging in a threesome with them . During the performance at San Diego , California , Gaga incorporated the city 's name in the song , later commenting " I am so lucky that San Diego rhymes with ' Fernando ' and ' Alejandro ' . " Ted Shaw of Windsor Star commented that " Songs like ' Alejandro ' , ' Teeth ' and ' Monster ' shoved the sex act in your face . " T 'Cha Dunlevy from The Gazette said that " the song followed in fast order , with not quite enough to set [ it ] apart . It was one choreographed dance number after the next . " Jeremy Adams from Rolling Stone commented that the performance was " [ one ] of several moments [ ... ] that gave parents in the audience consternation . " Jim Harrington from San Jose Mercury News compared Gaga 's performance of the song with that of an erotic dancer . 
 On April 20 , 2010 , Gaga performed the song at the MAC AIDS Fund Pan @-@ Asia Viva Glam launch in Tokyo where she wore a <unk> lace dress . She entered the stage in a procession inspired by a Japanese wedding , and as the lights dimmed , she sat at her piano on the rotating stage and belted out " Speechless " , which was followed by the performance of " Alejandro " , where she was picked up by one of her dancers , who appeared to be covered in talcum powder . Gaga taped a medley of " Bad Romance " and " Alejandro " for the ninth season of American Idol on April 28 , 2010 . Her performance aired on the show 's May 5 , 2010 episode . The performance started with Gaga playing the piano for a slowed @-@ down snippet of " Bad Romance " . She was dressed in a revealing @-@ but @-@ veiled black outfit , wielding a cape and was surrounded by shirtless dancers . Halfway through the performance , she shed her cape and began writhing on the floor . Over in one corner of the stage , a statue of the Virgin Mary had flames pouring out of the top of it , as Gaga sang the chorus . Fog filled the stage , as Gaga and her dancers performed an energetic dance routine . <unk> Fisher from ABC News called it a " thinly @-@ veiled performance dripping with sex and violins " and " Gaga doing her best Madonna impression . " On July 9 , 2010 , the song was performed on The Today Show , where she sang it on a stage , outside the studio . In May 2011 , Gaga performed the song during Radio 1 's Big Weekend in Carlisle , Cumbria . The song was also included on her 2012 Born This Way Ball Tour . The performance included her lounging on a couch made of meat and wearing her gun bra with half naked men dancing around her . 
 = = Track listing and formats = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Lady Gaga – vocals , songwriter , co @-@ producer , vocal arrangement , background vocals 
 RedOne – songwriter , producer , vocal editing , vocal arrangement , background vocals , audio engineering , instrumentation , programming , recording at FC Walvisch , Amsterdam and Sonic Vista Studios , Ibiza , Spain on July 24th 2009 
 <unk> Bakker – audio engineering 
 Johnny Severin – vocal editing 
 Robert Orton – audio mixing at Sarm Studios , London , England 
 Gene Grimaldi – audio mastering at Oasis Mastering , Burbank , California 
 Credits adapted from The Fame Monster album liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = HMS Royal Oak ( 1892 ) = 
 HMS Royal Oak was one of seven Royal Sovereign @-@ class pre @-@ dreadnought battleships built for the Royal Navy during the 1890s . Upon her completion in 1894 , she was initially placed in reserve until mobilised in 1896 for service with the Flying Squadron . After returning briefly to reserve , the ship was assigned the following year to the Mediterranean Fleet . Royal Oak remained there until 1902 when she returned home ; after a refit , the ship was assigned to the Home Fleet , where she served as the flagship of the fleet 's second @-@ in @-@ command in 1904 – 05 . Royal Oak was then reduced to reserve until she was taken out of service in 1911 . The ship was sold for scrap in early 1914 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The design of the Royal Sovereign @-@ class ships was derived from that of the Admiral @-@ class ironclad battleships , greatly enlarged to improve seakeeping and to provide space for a secondary armament as in the preceding Trafalgar @-@ class ironclad battleships . The ships displaced 14 @,@ 150 long tons ( 14 @,@ 380 t ) at normal load and 15 @,@ 580 long tons ( 15 @,@ 830 t ) at deep load . They had a length between perpendiculars of 380 feet ( 115 @.@ 8 m ) and an overall length of 410 feet 6 inches ( 125 @.@ 1 m ) , a beam of 75 feet ( 22 @.@ 9 m ) , and a draught of 27 feet 6 inches ( 8 @.@ 4 m ) . Their crew consisted of 670 officers and ratings in 1903 . 
 The Royal Sovereigns were powered by a pair of three @-@ cylinder , vertical triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each driving one shaft . Their engines were designed to produce a total of 11 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 8 @,@ 200 kW ) and a maximum speed of 17 @.@ 5 knots ( 32 @.@ 4 km / h ; 20 @.@ 1 mph ) using steam provided by eight cylindrical boilers with forced draught . The ships carried a maximum of 1 @,@ 420 long tons ( 1 @,@ 443 t ) of coal , which gave them a range of 4 @,@ 720 nautical miles ( 8 @,@ 740 km ; 5 @,@ 430 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 Their main armament consisted of four breech @-@ loading ( BL ) 13 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 343 mm ) guns mounted in two twin @-@ gun barbettes , one each fore and aft of the superstructure . Each gun was provided with 80 rounds . Their secondary armament consisted of ten quick @-@ firing ( QF ) 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) guns . 200 rounds per gun were carried by the ships . Sixteen QF 6 @-@ pounder ( 2 @.@ 2 in ( 57 mm ) ) and a dozen QF 3 @-@ pounder ( 1 @.@ 9 in ( 47 mm ) ) Hotchkiss guns were fitted for defence against torpedo boats . The two 3 @-@ pounders in the upper fighting top were removed in 1899 – 1902 and all of the remaining light guns from the lower fighting tops and main deck followed in 1905 – 09 . The Royal Sovereign @-@ class ships mounted seven 18 @-@ inch ( 450 mm ) torpedo tubes , although Royal Oak had four of hers removed in 1902 . 
 The Royal Sovereigns ' armour scheme was similar to that of the Trafalgars , as the waterline belt of compound armour only protected the area between the barbettes . The 14 – 18 @-@ inch ( 356 – 457 mm ) belt was 238 feet ( 72 @.@ 5 m ) long and had a total height of 8 feet 8 inches ( 2 @.@ 6 m ) of which 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) was below water . Transverse bulkheads 14 – 16 inches ( 356 – 406 mm ) thick closed off the ends of the belt . Above the belt was a strake of 4 @-@ inch ( 102 mm ) nickel @-@ steel armour closed off by 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) transverse bulkheads . 
 The barbettes were protected by compound armour , ranging in thickness from 11 to 17 inches ( 279 to 432 mm ) , and the casemates for the 6 @-@ inch guns were protected by armour equally thick . The thicknesses of the deck armour ranged from 2 @.@ 5 to 3 inches ( 64 to 76 mm ) . The walls of the forward conning tower were 12 – 14 inches ( 305 – 356 mm ) thick and the aft conning tower was protected by 3 @-@ inch plates . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 The Royal Sovereign class was ordered as part of the Naval Defence Act 1889 that was a supplement to the normal naval estimates . Royal Oak , named after the tree in which King Charles II hid after the Battle of Worcester , was the sixth ship of her name to serve in the Royal Navy . The ship was laid down by Cammell Laird at their shipyard in Birkenhead on 29 May 1890 and floated out of the drydock on 5 November 1892 . She arrived at Portsmouth Dockyard on 29 October 1893 for fitting out , completed her sea trials in June 1894 , and cost £ 977 @,@ 996 . Upon completion , Royal Oak was placed in reserve at Portsmouth . Almost two years later , she mobilised there on 14 January 1896 for service in the Particular Service Squadron , which was formed in response to rising tensions in Europe following the Jameson Raid and Germany 's Kaiser Wilhelm II 's telegram of support to the Boer government . When the squadron disbanded on 25 November , the ship returned to reserve at Portsmouth . 
 Royal Oak was recommissioned on 9 March 1897 for service with the Mediterranean Fleet , where she was to relieve the battleship Collingwood . She departed Portsmouth on 24 March 1897 , and arrived at Malta on 5 April . Royal Oak was relieved by the battleship Bulwark and departed the Mediterranean in May 1902 . She arrived at Plymouth on 16 May , and at Portsmouth the following day , and paid off there on 6 June 1902 . She soon moved to Chatham Dockyard for a refit , during which casemates were provided for her six @-@ inch upper deck guns . On 16 February 1903 , Royal Oak recommissioned at Portsmouth for service in the Home Fleet using part of the battleship Nile 's crew as a nucleus . In the summer of 1903 , she participated in combined exercises in the Atlantic involving the Home Fleet , Mediterranean , and Channel Fleets , as well as the Cruiser Squadron . 
 In April 1904 , while operating with the Home Fleet off the Scilly Isles , Royal Oak and her sister ship Revenge had their bottoms lightly damaged when they struck a sunken wreck . On 9 May 1904 , Royal Oak became flagship of the Home Fleet 's second @-@ in @-@ command , relieving her sister Empress of India , and took part in annual maneuvers in July and August . On 7 March 1905 , Royal Oak paid off at Portsmouth into the Chatham Reserve , and her crew transferred to the battleship Caesar . The following day the ship recommissioned with a skeleton crew for service with the Sheerness @-@ Chatham Division of the newly formed Fleet in Commission in Reserve at Home . While she was under refit at Chatham , an explosion in her small @-@ arms magazine on 11 May killed one workman and injured three others . In July , Royal Oak participated in Reserve Fleet manoeuvres . Her crew was then transferred to the battleship Ocean , and Royal Oak recommissioned with a new nucleus crew to serve as an emergency reserve ship at Chatham . 
 As a unit of the First Division of the Blue Fleet , Royal Oak took part in annual maneuvers off the coast of Portugal and in the eastern Atlantic from 12 June to 2 July 1906 . On 1 January 1907 , she recommissioned in reserve at Devonport with a nucleus crew . In April 1909 , Royal Oak and the other reserve ships with nucleus crews at Devonport were formed into the 4th Division of the Home Fleet . She relieved her sister Ramillies as the parent ship of the division in June 1911 , and was in turn relieved of this duty by her sister Empress of India in November . The ship was taken out of service in December 1911 and towed to the Motherbank by the battleship Bellerophon in August 1912 . She was sold to Thomas W. Ward on 14 January 1914 for £ 36 @,@ 450 and subsequently broken up at Briton Ferry . 
 = French battleship Démocratie = 
 Démocratie was a pre @-@ dreadnought battleship of the Liberté class built by the French Navy . She had three sister ships : Liberté , Justice , and Vérité . Démocratie was laid down in May 1903 , launched in April 1904 , and completed in January 1908 , over a year after the revolutionary British battleship HMS Dreadnought made ships like Démocratie obsolete . She was armed with a main battery of four 305 mm ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) guns , compared to the ten guns of the same caliber mounted on Dreadnought . 
 Despite her out @-@ dated design , Démocratie served with the French Mediterranean Fleet throughout her career , including during World War I. She participated in the Battle of Antivari in late August 1914 , and spent the majority of the war based on the coast of Greece , in Corfu and Mudros , to keep the Austro @-@ Hungarian and Ottoman navies bottled up in port , though she saw no further action . After the end of the war , she went into the Black Sea to assist in the enforcement of the terms of the Armistice with Germany . Démocratie was stricken in 1921 and subsequently broken up for scrap . 
 = = Design = = 
 Démocratie was laid down at the Arsenal de Brest shipyard on 1 May 1903 , launched on 30 April 1904 , and completed in January 1908 , over a year after the revolutionary British battleship HMS Dreadnought , which rendered the pre @-@ dreadnoughts like Démocratie outdated before they were completed . The ship was 133 @.@ 81 meters ( 439 ft 0 in ) long between perpendiculars and had a beam of 24 @.@ 26 m ( 79 ft 7 in ) and a full @-@ load draft of 8 @.@ 41 m ( 27 ft 7 in ) . She displaced up to 14 @,@ 489 metric tons ( 14 @,@ 260 long tons ; 15 @,@ 971 short tons ) at full load . Démocratie had a crew of between 739 and 769 officers and enlisted men . The ship 's propulsion system consisted of three vertical triple expansion engines with twenty @-@ two Belleville boilers . They were rated at 18 @,@ 500 indicated horsepower ( 13 @,@ 800 kW ) and provided a top speed of 19 knots ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) . Coal storage amounted to 1 @,@ 800 t ( 1 @,@ 800 long tons ; 2 @,@ 000 short tons ) . 
 Démocratie 's main battery consisted of four Canon de 305 mm Modèle 1893 / 96 guns mounted in two twin gun turrets , one forward and one aft . The secondary battery consisted of ten Canon de 194 mm Modèle 1902 guns ; six were mounted in single turrets , and four in casemates in the hull . She also carried thirteen 9 @-@ pounder guns and ten 3 @-@ pounders , and had two 450 mm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes submerged in the hull . The ship 's main belt was 280 mm ( 11 @.@ 0 in ) thick and the main battery was protected by up to 350 mm ( 13 @.@ 8 in ) of armor . The conning tower had 305 mm ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) thick sides . 
 = = Service history = = 
 In August 1910 , the 1st Squadron of the Mediterranean fleet conducted a gunnery practice using the old ironclad <unk> as a target ; Démocratie scored 22 @.@ 7 percent hits , the second best performance in the squadron and surpassed only by her sister Justice . During a fleet exercise on 28 May 1914 , Démocratie collided with the battleship Suffren when the latter vessel lost power . Suffren was only lightly damaged , with her port anchor and hawsepipe carried away . 
 At the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , Démocratie was assigned to the 1st Division of the 2nd Squadron in the Mediterranean , along with Justice . The French fleet was initially used to cover the movement of French troops — the XIX Corps — from Algeria to metropolitan France . As a result , the fleet was far out of position to catch the German battlecruiser SMS Goeben . For the majority of the war , the French used their main fleet to keep the Austro @-@ Hungarian fleet bottled up in the Adriatic Sea . In 1914 she participated in the Battle of Antivari , where the battle line caught the Austro @-@ Hungarian cruiser SMS Zenta by surprise and sank her . The French battleships then bombarded Austrian fortifications at Cattaro in an attempt to draw out the Austro @-@ Hungarian fleet , which refused to take the bait . 
 The French operations in the area were hampered by a lack of a suitable base close to the mouth of the Adriatic ; the British had given the French free access to Malta , but that was hundreds of miles away . The Austrians also possessed several submarines , one of which torpedoed the dreadnought Jean Bart in December 1914 . This threat from underwater weapons greatly limited French naval activities in the Adriatic . As the war progressed , the French eventually settled on Corfu as their primary naval base in the area . Later in the war , Démocratie was sent to Mudros along with her sister ships to reinforce the blockade of the Dardanelles . 
 Shortly after the end of the war , Démocratie , Justice , and a destroyer joined an Allied fleet ( including the British dreadnoughts HMS Superb and Temeraire and the Italian battleship Roma ) that was sent to the Black Sea port of Sevastopol . They oversaw the enforcement of the terms of the Armistice with Germany ; the Germans had previously seized Russian naval units and stationed occupation forces there under the terms of the Treaty of Brest @-@ Litovsk . The French contingent provided crews for a pair of Russian destroyers and two German U @-@ boats , and the other Allied ships similarly activated Russian and German vessels to secure the area . Démocratie ultimately was stricken from the naval register in 1921 and sold to ship @-@ breakers . 
 = Ganoga Lake = 
 Ganoga Lake is a natural lake in Colley Township in southeastern Sullivan County in Pennsylvania , United States . Known as Robinson 's Lake and Long Pond for most of the 19th century , the lake was purchased by the Ricketts family in the early 1850s and became part of R. Bruce Ricketts ' extensive holdings in the area after the American Civil War . The lake is one of the highest in Pennsylvania , which led Ricketts to name it Highland Lake by 1874 and rename it Ganoga Lake in 1881 ; Pennsylvania senator Charles R. Buckalew suggested the name Ganoga from the Seneca language word for " water on the mountain " . 
 The Ricketts built a stone house on the lake shore by 1852 or 1855 ; this served as a hunting lodge and tavern . In 1873 a large wooden addition was built north of the stone house , which became a hotel known as the North Mountain House . The hotel had one of the first summer schools in the United States in 1876 and 1877 . A branch railroad line to the lake served the hotel and also hauled ice cut from the lake for refrigeration . The hotel closed in 1903 , though the house remained the Ricketts family summer home . After the death of R. Bruce Ricketts in 1918 , his heirs sold much of his 80 @,@ 000 acres ( 32 @,@ 000 ha ) to the state for Pennsylvania State Game Lands and Ricketts Glen State Park . The state tried to purchase the lake in 1957 , but was outbid by a group of investors who turned the land around it into a private housing development ; as such it is " off limits " to the public . 
 Ganoga Lake is on the Allegheny Plateau , just north of the Allegheny Front , in sedimentary rocks from the Pocono Formation . The Wisconsin Glaciation some 20 @,@ 000 years ago changed the drainage patterns of the lake ; this diverted its waters to Kitchen Creek and carved the 24 named waterfalls in Ricketts Glen State Park in the process . Ganoga Lake has a continental climate , with average monthly high temperatures ranging from 33 ° F ( 1 ° C ) in January to 82 ° F ( 28 ° C ) in July . Ganoga Lake 's drainage basin is heavily forested and it is in an Important Bird Area . The lake and its surroundings have a variety of flora and fauna , although the ecosystem has been damaged by acid rain . 
 = = Description = = 
 Ganoga Lake is a natural spring @-@ fed lake just west of Pennsylvania Route 487 in southern Colley Township in southeastern Sullivan County , Pennsylvania . It is near the meeting point of Sullivan , Columbia and Luzerne counties , and is less than 0 @.@ 4 miles ( 0 @.@ 6 km ) northwest of Ricketts Glen State Park . Ganoga Lake is on the Allegheny Plateau at an elevation of 2 @,@ 260 feet ( 690 m ) . William Reynolds Ricketts , who owned the lake in the first half of the 20th century , claimed it was the highest lake in the United States east of the Rocky Mountains ; Petrillo repeats this in his history of the region , Ghost Towns of North Mountain . While the United States Geological Survey Geographic Names Information System identifies Ganoga Lake as the second highest in Pennsylvania ( after Siebert Lake in Somerset County , at 2 @,@ 287 feet ( 697 m ) ) , the Pennsylvania Audubon Society says Ganoga Lake is " the highest elevation natural lake in Pennsylvania " . 
 Ganoga Lake has a long , narrow oval shape , oriented north @-@ northwest to south @-@ southeast . In 1936 William Reynolds Ricketts wrote that the lake has an average width of 700 to 800 feet ( 210 to 240 m ) and is " about one mile long , lacking 600 to 700 ft . " or about 0 @.@ 88 miles ( 1 @.@ 42 km ) in length . However , according to a 1917 Pennsylvania Water Resources Inventory Report , in its largest dimensions it is 3 @,@ 720 feet ( 1 @,@ 130 m ) long ( 0 @.@ 705 miles or 1 @.@ 135 kilometres ) by 1 @,@ 025 feet ( 312 m ) wide . It has an average depth of 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) and a maximum depth of 13 feet ( 4 @.@ 0 m ) . The drainage basin for the lake is an area of 1 @.@ 5 square miles ( 3 @.@ 9 km2 ) , and its capacity is 373 acre feet ( 460 @,@ 000 m3 ) ( 121 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 US gallons or 459 @,@ 900 @,@ 000 litres or 101 @,@ 200 @,@ 000 imperial gallons ) . 
 A branch of Kitchen Creek flows from the southern end of the lake ; 0 @.@ 4 miles ( 0 @.@ 64 km ) downstream it enters Lake Jean in Ricketts Glen State Park . From there the water flows through Ganoga Glen and its 10 named waterfalls , then joins the main stem of the creek at Waters Meet ; below this it flows over five more named waterfalls . Kitchen Creek is a tributary of Huntington Creek , which flows into Fishing Creek , which is a tributary of the Susquehanna River . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = First inhabitants = = = 
 Ganoga Lake is in the Susquehanna River drainage basin , the earliest recorded inhabitants of which were the Iroquoian @-@ speaking Susquehannocks . Their numbers were greatly reduced by disease and warfare with the Five Nations of the Iroquois , and by 1675 they had died out , moved away , or been assimilated into other tribes . After this , the lands of the Susquehanna valley were under the nominal control of the Iroquois , who encouraged displaced tribes from the east to settle there , including the Shawnee and Lenape ( or Delaware ) . 
 On November 5 , 1768 , the British acquired land , known in Pennsylvania as the New Purchase , from the Iroquois in the Treaty of Fort Stanwix ; this included what is now Ganoga Lake . After the American Revolutionary War ( 1775 – 1783 ) , Native Americans almost entirely left Pennsylvania . The lake was originally in Northumberland County , then became part of Lycoming County when it was formed in 1795 . Sullivan County was formed from Lycoming County in 1847 , and two years later Colley Township was formed from Cherry Township . The lake drains into Kitchen Creek , where a Native American pot , decorated in the style of " the peoples of the Susquehanna region " , was found under a rock ledge around 1890 . 
 A hunter named Robinson , whose cabin was at the lake 's northern end about 1800 , was the first recorded inhabitant . He gave the lake its earliest known name : Robinson 's Lake . However , for most of the 19th century the lake was known as Long Pond , because of its elongated shape . From 1822 to 1827 the Susquehanna and Tioga Turnpike , which followed the lake 's western shore , was built between the Pennsylvania communities of Berwick in the south and Towanda in the north . Beginning in 1827 the northbound daily stagecoach left Berwick in the morning and stopped for lunch at the Long Pond Tavern on the lake about noon . The stage operated until 1851 ; the road was the Susquehanna and Tioga Turnpike until 1908 , when the modern Pennsylvania Route 487 was built . Route 487 follows the course of the turnpike as it approaches the lake from the south , then passes to the east of the lake instead . 
 While on a hunting trip north of the lake in 1850 , brothers Elijah and Clemuel Ricketts were frustrated at having to spend the night on a hotel 's parlor floor . In 1851 or 1853 they bought 5 @,@ 000 acres ( 2 @,@ 000 ha ) , including the lake , as their own hunting preserve , and built a stone house on the lake shore by 1852 or 1855 . The stone house served as their lodge and as a tavern ; it was known as " Ricketts Folly " for its isolated location in the wilderness . Clemuel died in 1858 and Elijah bought his share of the land and house . 
 = = = R. B. Ricketts = = = 
 Elijah 's son Robert Bruce Ricketts , for whom Ricketts Glen State Park is named , joined the Union Army as a private at the outbreak of the American Civil War in 1861 , and rose through the ranks to become a colonel . After the war , R. B. Ricketts returned to Pennsylvania and purchased the stone house , lake , and some of the land around it from his father on September 25 , 1869 for $ 3 @,@ 969 @.@ 81 ( approximately $ 71 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) ; eventually he controlled or owned more than 80 @,@ 000 acres ( 32 @,@ 000 ha ) , including the lake and the park 's glens and waterfalls . 
 From 1872 to 1875 Ricketts and his partners operated a sawmill near the lake , 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) southeast of his house . In 1872 Ricketts used lumber from the mill to build a three @-@ story wooden addition next to the stone house ; this opened as the North Mountain House hotel in 1873 , and was run by Ricketts ' brother Frank from then until 1898 . The hotel hosted many of the Ricketts friends and relations as well as guests from Wilkes @-@ Barre , Philadelphia , New York City , and other places . Many of the guests arrived after school let out in June and stayed all summer until school resumed in September . In 1876 and 1877 , Ricketts ran the first summer school in the United States at his house and hotel ; one of the teachers was Joseph Rothrock , later known as the " Father of Forestry " in Pennsylvania . 
 Ricketts and the others living in the area were not aware of the waterfalls in what is now the state park until about 1865 , when they were discovered by two of the Ricketts ' guests who went fishing and wandered down Kitchen Creek . In 1879 Ricketts started the North Mountain Fishing Club , for anglers on the lake and creek . Guests of the hotel paid one dollar to fish as a club member . By 1874 Ricketts had renamed Long Pond as Highland Lake , and by 1875 had named the highest waterfall on Kitchen Creek as Ganoga Falls . In 1881 , Ricketts renamed Highland Lake as Ganoga Lake . Pennsylvania senator Charles R. Buckalew suggested the name Ganoga , an Iroquoian word which he said meant " water on the mountain " in the Seneca language . Donehoo 's A History of the Indian Villages and Place Names in Pennsylvania identifies it as a Cayuga language word meaning " place of floating oil " and the name of a Cayuga village in New York . Ganoga Lake is the source of the branch of Kitchen Creek that flows through Ganoga Glen , which has the tallest waterfall . 
 Ricketts was a lumberman who made his fortune clearcutting nearly all his land , but no logging was allowed within 0 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) of the lake , and the glens and their waterfalls in the state park were " saved from the lumberman 's axe through the foresight of the Ricketts family " . One hemlock tree cut near the lake to clear land for a building in 1893 was 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) in diameter and 532 years old . 
 Ricketts and his business partners built the lumber town of Ricketts about 4 miles ( 6 km ) northeast of the lake starting in 1890 ; it had up to 800 inhabitants and several saw mills and operated until 1913 , when the timber was exhausted . A 3 @.@ 85 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 20 km ) branch line of the Lehigh Valley Railroad ran from Ricketts to the north end of the lake , opening in 1893 . There was daily passenger service to Wilkes @-@ Barre and Towanda on this line , which also served freight trains hauling ice from the lake for use in refrigeration from 1895 on . The ice cutting business on the lake employed 175 men , and had a 80 @-@ by @-@ 400 @-@ foot ( 24 by 122 m ) ice house at the north end of the lake , near the small train station made of logs . The Ganoga Lake Ice Company was incorporated in 1897 , and operated until about 1915 . Ricketts ' son William Reynolds Ricketts was one of five partners in the ice company . Ice skating was also a popular pastime on the lake . In 1913 the lake had a boathouse and was used by rowboats . 
 The North Mountain House was threatened by a forest fire in 1900 ; the subsequent loss of much of the surrounding old @-@ growth forest led to decreased numbers of hotel guests . In 1903 another large fire on North Mountain threatened the sawmill in the village of Ricketts . The wooden addition to the stone house was torn down in either 1897 or 1903 , and the land became a garden . The hotel closed in November 1903 , and the fishing club and passenger train service ended with the closure . 
 The stone house remained the Ricketts family 's summer home . After the hotel closed , several small cabins were built around the lake for rental to sportsmen . Ricketts proposed moving the highway from his front yard in 1904 ; the Pennsylvania General Assembly approved this in 1908 , after he paid for the construction of the new highway . The house was renovated and added to in 1913 , and Ricketts died there during the 1918 flu pandemic . His wife died shortly thereafter , and they are buried in the small Ricketts family cemetery near the north end of the lake . 
 = = = Modern era = = = 
 R. B. Ricketts and his wife had three children ; their son William Reynolds Ricketts lived in the house after his parents ' deaths . Between 1920 and 1924 the Pennsylvania Game Commission bought 48 @,@ 000 acres ( 19 @,@ 000 ha ) from the Ricketts heirs , via the Central Pennsylvania Lumber Company . This became most of Pennsylvania State Game Lands Number 13 , west of the lake in Sullivan County . These sales left the Ricketts heirs with over 12 @,@ 000 acres ( 4 @,@ 900 ha ) surrounding Ganoga Lake and the glens with their waterfalls . The stone house was listed on the Historic American Buildings Survey in 1936 , which gave its name as " Ganoga " . The area was approved as a national park site in the 1930s , and the National Park Service operated a Civilian Conservation Corps camp at " Ricketts Glynn " ( sic ) . Budget problems and World War II brought an end to national plans for development . 
 In 1942 the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania bought 1 @,@ 261 acres ( 510 ha ) , including the glens and their waterfalls , from the heirs for $ 82 @,@ 000 . Ricketts Glen State Park opened in 1944 . The state bought a total of 16 @,@ 000 acres ( 6 @,@ 500 ha ) more from the heirs in 1945 and 1950 for $ 68 @,@ 000 ; the park today has about 10 @,@ 000 acres ( 4 @,@ 000 ha ) from the Ricketts family and about 3 @,@ 000 acres ( 1 @,@ 200 ha ) acquired from others . After World War II , William Reynolds Ricketts also sold the old @-@ growth timber around Ganoga Lake to help pay property taxes . 
 William Reynolds Ricketts died in 1956 and the lake and surrounding land were sold in October 1957 for $ 109 @,@ 000 . The Department of Forests and Waters ( predecessor of the Pennsylvania Department of Conservation and Natural Resources ) bid on the 3 @,@ 140 acres ( 1 @,@ 270 ha ) including the lake , but were outbid by a group of private investors . They initially planned to sell up to 788 building lots around the lake , but when sales were slower than expected , they instead " formed the Lake Ganoga Association in September 1959 to regulate and preserve the recreation and residential facilities at Lake Ganoga " . Thus , private development of houses on the lake only began in the 20th century . 
 The association built 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) of roads around the lake ; the Air Force paved some of these to provide better access from the Benton Air Force Station in the park to a radio transmitter southwest of the lake . The Ganoga Lake Association also cleared some land at the lake 's southern end , and its members built more than 50 houses on the lake shore . The stone house serves as the association 's headquarters and clubhouse , and is used for association meetings , weddings , and picnics ; in 1983 the house was listed on the National Register of Historic Places as the Clemuel Ricketts Mansion . Today the lake is used by kayakers and wind surfers . As a private development , " To all outsiders that have no property around the lake , the lake and grounds are off limits . " 
 = = Geology and climate = = 
 The rocks underlying Ganoga Lake are from the Mississippian Pocono Formation , which is a " light @-@ gray to buff or light @-@ olive @-@ gray , medium @-@ grained , <unk> sandstone " , with some siltstone and conglomerates . The Pocono Formation formed more than 340 million years ago , when the land was part of the coastline of a shallow sea that covered a great portion of what is now North America . The high mountains to the east of the sea gradually eroded , causing a build @-@ up of sediment made up primarily of clay , sand and gravel . Tremendous pressure on the sediment caused the formation of the rocks that are found at the lake and in the drainage basin for Kitchen Creek : sandstone , shale , siltstone , and conglomerates . In 1894 R. Bruce Ricketts planned to mine yellow ocher near the lake . 
 Ganoga Lake is on the Allegheny Plateau , just north of the Allegheny Front , which is the boundary between the dissected plateau to the north and the Ridge @-@ and @-@ Valley Appalachians to the south . Kitchen Creek , which drains the lake , drops approximately 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 300 m ) in 2 @.@ 25 miles ( 3 @.@ 62 km ) as it flows down the steep escarpment of the Allegheny Front . About 300 to 250 million years ago , the Allegheny Plateau , Allegheny Front , and Appalachian Mountains all formed in the Alleghenian orogeny . This happened long after the sedimentary rocks at the lake were deposited , when the part of Gondwana that became Africa collided with what became North America , forming Pangaea . In the years since , up to 5 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 500 m ) of rock has been eroded away by streams and weather . At least three major glaciations in the past million years have been the final factor in shaping the land around the lake today . 
 Prior to the last ice age , Ganoga Lake drained into Big Run , a tributary of Fishing Creek . This changed when the glaciers retreated to the northeast about 20 @,@ 000 years ago , and formed glacial lakes . The retreating glaciers also left deposits of debris 20 to 30 feet ( 6 to 9 m ) thick , which formed a dam blocking water from draining into Big Run . Instead , water from Ganoga Lake and the area that later became Lake Jean was diverted into the Ganoga Glen branch of Kitchen Creek . These diversions added about 7 square miles ( 18 km ² ) to the Kitchen Creek drainage basin , increasing it by just over 50 percent to 20 @.@ 1 square miles ( 52 km2 ) . The result was increased water flow in Kitchen Creek , which has been cutting the falls in the glens since . Glacial striations are found on the eastern side of the lake . The lake is in a shallow valley , 13 feet ( 4 @.@ 0 m ) deep , which is impounded by glacial till up to 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) thick at the southeast end , where Kitchen Creek exits . 
 The Allegheny Plateau has a continental climate , with occasional severe low temperatures in winter and average daily temperature ranges ( the difference between the daily high and low ) of 20 ° F ( 11 ° C ) in winter and 26 ° F ( 14 ° C ) in summer . Ganoga Lake is part of the Huntington Creek watershed , where the mean annual precipitation is 40 to 48 inches ( 1 @,@ 016 to 1 @,@ 219 mm ) . Weather records are not available for Ganoga Lake , but they are known for the adjoining Ricketts Glen State Park . The highest recorded temperature at the park was 103 ° F ( 39 ° C ) in 1988 , and the record low was − 17 ° F ( − 27 ° C ) in 1984 . On average , January is the coldest month , July is the hottest month , and June is the wettest month . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Ganoga Lake is the largest tributary of Lake Jean , via a 0 @.@ 4 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 6 km ) branch of Kitchen Creek . While Lake Jean lies entirely within Ricketts Glen State Park , much of its 1 @,@ 998 @-@ acre ( 809 ha ) drainage basin extends beyond the park , and Ganoga Lake 's 960 @-@ acre ( 390 ha ) watershed accounts for nearly half of the total area . Lake Jean covers 253 acres ( 102 ha ) ; the remaining 1 @,@ 745 acres ( 706 ha ) of the Lake Jean watershed are 81 @.@ 0 % hardwood forest , 12 @.@ 6 % pastures , 4 @.@ 7 % other lakes ( including Ganoga Lake 's 78 @.@ 8 acres ( 31 @.@ 9 ha ) ) , and 1 @.@ 7 % wetlands . The park has more than 80 species of vines , shrubs , and trees ; black gum , black spruce , eastern hemlock , eastern white pine , eastern larch , red maple , and yellow birch are found in area forests . 
 In the 19th century Ganoga Lake was home to trout , bullhead catfish , pike , pickerel , and black bass . The lake had very few plants in it , but its shore was lined with mountain laurel and , in the east , mountain ash . After the Ganoga Lake Association 's 1957 purchase , they drained the lake to kill its fish , then stocked it with " 30 @,@ 000 <unk> brook trout " . In 2007 Lake Jean , which is connected to Lake Ganoga via Kitchen Creek , was still home to many of the fish found there in the 19th century : brook trout , brown trout , brown bullhead , yellow bullhead , chain pickerel , and largemouth bass . 
 Although there are no pollution point sources in the drainage basin , acid rain is a major concern . Acidification has altered the ecology of the lakes and region ; in Lake Jean low pH has decreased the number and quality of insects and plankton at the base of the food chain . Fish which are acid tolerant are predominant , including fathead minnow , muskellunge , pumpkinseed , walleye , and yellow perch . There are relatively few predators like chain pickerel and largemouth bass , and adult fish " appear to have good growth rates but poor reproductive success " . 
 Despite the increased acidity , all of the Kitchen Creek drainage basin , which includes Ganoga Lake , is classified by the state of Pennsylvania as a " High Quality @-@ Cold Water Fishery " . Under the Clean Water Act a Total Maximum Daily Load ( TMDL ) has been established for acidic pollution in the Lake Jean watershed . Ganoga Lake 's TMDL for acidity is 4 @.@ 1 pounds ( 1 @.@ 9 kg ) per day . Long term exposure to acid rain also damages soil , depleting calcium levels , which may in turn affect insect populations and reproduction in birds . Lake Jean is also " impaired for mercury due to atmospheric deposition " , although TMDLs have not yet been established for this . 
 Ganoga Lake and Ricketts Glen State Park are part of the much larger 114 @,@ 978 @-@ acre ( 46 @,@ 530 ha ) Pennsylvania Important Bird Area ( IBA ) # 48 , which the Audubon Society describes as " the largest extant forest in northeastern Pennsylvania and one of the largest in the Commonwealth " . Over 75 species of bird are known to breed in the state park adjoining the lake . Lake Jean is home to bald eagle and Canada goose ; aquatic birds found in the IBA include American bittern , American black duck , great blue heron , green @-@ winged teal , hooded merganser , mallard duck , osprey , Virginia rail , and wood duck . Historically , common pheasant were found in the woods around the lake . 
 Ganoga Lake is on the Allegheny Plateau just north of the Allegheny Front ; this region is known locally as North Mountain . Many bird species are found in the forests on North Mountain , including the state 's only population of blackpoll warbler ; other birds seen there include evening grosbeak , northern goshawk , red crossbill , and Swainson 's thrush . Historically North Mountain was home to olive @-@ sided flycatcher , and " was one of the few places one could enjoy the songs of all of Pennsylvania 's native thrushes " ; today it is home to the state 's largest yellow @-@ bellied flycatcher population . 
 Ganoga Lake and its surroundings have a variety of insects and animals . Butterflies in the region are studied by lepidopterists , and the hemlock woolly adelgid threatens many of the hemlock trees . Animals found on North Mountain and in the park include squirrel , black bear , fisher , hoary bat , otter , porcupine , raccoon , and white @-@ tailed deer . In 1912 , white @-@ tailed deer around the lake became locally extinct due to loss of habitat from lumbering and overhunting . Pennsylvania imported nearly 1 @,@ 200 white @-@ tailed deer from Michigan between 1906 and 1925 to re @-@ establish the species , and made it the official state animal in 1959 . By 2001 , deer populations had increased to the point where it was feared that " Pennsylvania is losing its vegetative diversity from deer over @-@ browsing " . 
 = Undertale = 
 Undertale is a role @-@ playing video game created by indie developer Toby Fox . In the game , players control a human child who has fallen into the Underground , a large , secluded region underneath the surface of the Earth , separated by a magic barrier . The player meets various monsters during a quest to return to the surface , mainly through the combat system ; the player navigates through mini @-@ bullet hell attacks by the opponent cyclically , and can opt to spare monsters instead of attacking and killing them . These choices affect the game , with the dialogue , characters , and story changing based on outcomes . 
 Fox developed the entirety of the game independently , including writing and composing the score , with only additional art created by other artists . The game was inspired by the Mother and Mario & Luigi role @-@ playing series , the bullet hell shooter series Touhou Project , and the British comedy show Mr. Bean . Undertale was initially meant to be two hours in length and released in mid @-@ 2014 , but development took over three years , effectively extending the campaign and delaying the release . 
 The game was released on Steam for Microsoft Windows and OS X on September 15 , 2015 . Upon release , the game was acclaimed for its writing , thematic material , intuitive combat system , musical score , and originality ; with praise directed towards its story , dialogue , and characters . The game sold over a million copies , and was nominated for multiple accolades and awards , including Game of the Year from several gaming publications , winning others from conventions including South by Southwest . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Undertale is a role @-@ playing game that uses a top @-@ down perspective . In the game , players control a child and complete objectives in order to progress through the story . Players explore an underground world of towns and caves , and are required to solve numerous puzzles on their journey . The underground world is the home of monsters , many of whom challenge the player in combat ; players decide to kill , flee , or befriend them . 
 When players encounter enemies in either scripted events or random encounters , they enter a battle mode . During battles , players control a small red heart which represents their soul , and must avoid attacks unleashed by the opposing monster in a similar fashion to a bullet hell shooter . As the game progresses , new elements are introduced , such as colored obstacles which require players to remain stationary or move through them , and boss battles which change the way players control the heart . Players may choose to attack the enemy , which involves timed button presses , earning EXP and gold for defeating them . Alternatively , they can use the ACT option to perform non @-@ violent actions , which vary depending on the enemy . If players uses the right actions to respond to the enemy , they can choose to spare them and end the fight without killing them . In order for some boss encounters to be completed peacefully , the player is required to survive until the character they are facing has finished their dialogue . The game features various story branches and endings depending on whether players choose to kill or spare their enemies ; and as such , it is possible to clear the game without killing a single enemy . 
 Monsters will converse with players during the battles , and the game will tell the players what the monster 's feelings and actions are . Enemy attacks alter based on how players interact with them : should players choose non @-@ violent options , enemy attacks are easy , whereas they become difficult if players choose violent options . The game relies on a number of metafictional elements in both its gameplay and story . When players participate in a boss battle on a second playthrough , the dialogue will be altered depending on actions in previous playthroughs . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Undertale takes place in the Underground , a realm where monsters , once equal to humans , were banished to after war broke out between them . The Underground is sealed from the surface world by an imperfect magic barrier , the only point of entry being at Mount <unk> . A human child falls into the Underground and encounters Flowey , a sentient flower who teaches them the game 's mechanics and encourages them to raise their " LV " , or " LOVE " , by gaining " EXP " through killing monsters . When Flowey attempts to murder the human to take their soul for himself , the human is rescued by Toriel , a motherly goat @-@ like monster , who teaches the human to solve puzzles and survive conflict in the Underground without killing . She intends to adopt the human , wanting to protect them from Asgore <unk> , the king of the Underground . 
 The human eventually leaves Toriel to search for Asgore 's castle , which contains the barrier leading to the surface world . Along the way , the human encounters several monsters , including : the skeletons Sans and Papyrus , two brothers who act as sentries for the Underground ; <unk> , the head of the royal guard ; Alphys , the kingdom 's royal scientist ; and <unk> , a robotic television host Alphys created . Some of them are fought , with the human having to choose whether to kill them or to show mercy ; should the human spare them , they become friends . During their travels , the human learns the cause of the war between humans and monsters . Asriel , the son of Asgore and Toriel , befriended a human child who fell into the Underground and was adopted by Asgore and Toriel . One day , the child was fatally poisoned by some flowers . When Asriel returned their body to the humans , they attacked and killed him , resulting in Asgore declaring war . Asgore now seeks to break the barrier , which requires him to collect seven human souls , of which he has six . 
 The game 's ending depends on how the player resolved encounters with monsters . If the player killed some but not all monsters , the human arrives at Asgore 's castle and learns that they also need a monster 's soul to cross the barrier , forcing them to fight Asgore . Sans stops the human before their confrontation , revealing that the human 's " LOVE " is an acronym for " Level Of <unk> " and " EXP " for " <unk> Points . " Sans judges the human based on the combined resolution of the encounters . The human fights Asgore , but Flowey interrupts them , killing Asgore and stealing the human souls , becoming a monstrous abomination named ' Photoshop Flowey ' . With the aid of the rebelling souls , the human defeats Flowey , falls unconscious , and awakens on the human side of the barrier ; they receive a phone call from Sans , explaining the state of the Underground after the human 's departure . In order for the player to proceed and obtain the pacifist ending , they must complete a neutral ending first , regardless as to whether they spared monsters or not - Thus , Photoshop Flowey is the only final boss that appears in multiple paths . 
 If the player instead kills no monsters , as well as having completed a previous Neutral playthrough of the game , Flowey is revealed to be a reincarnation of Asriel , created as part of Alphys 's experiments . Toriel intervenes before the human fights Asgore , and is joined by the other monsters the human has befriended . Flowey ambushes the group , using the souls of all the monsters to take an older Asriel 's form to fight the human . The human connects with their new friends during the fight , eventually triumphing . Asriel reverts to his child form , destroys the barrier , and expresses his remorse to the others before leaving . The human falls unconscious , and is awoken to see their friends surrounding them , with the knowledge of the human 's name – Frisk . The monsters reintegrate with the humans on the surface , while Frisk has the option of accepting Toriel as their adoptive mother . 
 Another ending ensues if the player kills all monsters , in which Frisk becomes influenced by the malevolent spirit of the fallen human child whose body Asriel attempted to return . When Frisk reaches Asgore 's castle , Sans attempts to stop them , but Frisk kills him along with Asgore and Flowey . The fallen human child assumes control and , with or without the player 's consent , destroys the universe . In order to enable further replays of the game , Frisk must first give their soul to the fallen human child in exchange for restoring the universe . In doing so , every future playthrough becomes marred by the fallen child 's presence . 
 = = Development = = 
 Undertale was developed by Toby Fox across 2 @.@ 7 years . Development was financed through a crowdfunding campaign on the website Kickstarter . The campaign was launched on June 25 , 2013 with a goal of US $ 5 @,@ 000 ; it ended on July 25 , 2013 , with US $ 51 @,@ 124 raised by 2 @,@ 398 people ( 1022 @.@ 48 % of the original goal ) . Undertale 's creation ensued after Fox created a battle system using the game creation system <unk> : Studio . He wanted to develop a role @-@ playing game that was different from the traditional design , which he often found " boring to play " . He set out to develop a game with " interesting characters " , and that " utilizes the medium as a storytelling device ... instead of having the story and gameplay abstractions be completely separate " . 
 Fox worked on the entire game independently , besides some of the art ; he decided to work independently to avoid relying on others . Fox had little experience with game development ; he and his three brothers often used RPG Maker 2000 to make role @-@ playing games , though few were ever completed . Fox also worked on a number of EarthBound ROM hacks while in high school . <unk> Chang worked as the main artistic assistant for the game , providing most of the sprites and concept art . Fox has said that the game 's art style would likely remain the same if he had access to a larger team of artists . He found that " there 's a psychological thread that says audiences become more attached to characters drawn simply rather than in detail " , particularly benefiting from the use of visual gags within the art . 
 = = = Game design = = = 
 The defensive segment within the battle system was inspired by the Mario & Luigi series , as well as bullet hell shooters such as the Touhou Project series . When working on the battle system , Fox set out to create a mechanic that he would personally enjoy . He wanted Undertale to have a battle system as equally engaging as Super Mario RPG ( 1996 ) and Mario & Luigi : Superstar Saga ( 2003 ) . Fox did not want grinding to be necessary at any point in the game , instead leaving it optional to players . He also did not wish to introduce fetch quests , as they involve backtracking , which he dislikes . In terms of the game 's difficulty , Fox ensured that it was easy and enjoyable . He asked some friends who are inexperienced with bullet hell shooters to test the game , and found that they were able to complete it . He felt that the game 's difficulty is optimal , particularly considering the complications involved in adding another difficulty setting . 
 The game 's dialogue system was inspired by Shin Megami Tensei ( 1992 ) , particularly the gameplay mechanic whereby players can talk to monsters to avoid conflict . Fox intended to expand upon this mechanic , as failing to negotiate resulted in a requirement to fight . " I want to create a system that satisfied my urge for talking to monsters , " he said . When he began developing this mechanic , the concept of completing the game without killing any enemies " just evolved naturally " . However , he never considered removing the option to fight throughout development . When questioned on the difficulty of playing the game without killing , Fox responded that it is " the crux of one of the major themes of this game " , asking players to think about it themselves . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 For the game 's writing , Fox was partly influenced by the silliness of internet culture , as well as comedy shows like Mr. Bean ( 1990 – 1995 ) . He was also inspired by the unsettling atmosphere of EarthBound ( 1994 ) . Fox 's desire to " subvert concepts that go unquestioned in many games " further influenced Undertale 's development . Fox found that the writing became easier after establishing a character 's voice and mood . He also felt that creating the world was a natural process , as it expressed the stories of those within it . Fox felt the importance to make the game 's monsters " feel like an individual " . He cited the Final Fantasy series ( 1987 – present ) as the opposite ; " all monsters in RPGs like Final Fantasy are the same ... there 's no meaning to that " . 
 The character of Toriel , who is one of the first to appear in the game , was created as a parody of tutorial characters . Fox strongly disliked the use of the companion character Fi in The Legend of Zelda : Skyward Sword ( 2011 ) , in which the answers to puzzles were often revealed early . Fox also felt that role @-@ playing video games generally lack mother characters ; in the Pokémon series ( 1996 – present ) , as well as Mother ( 1989 ) and EarthBound , Fox felt that the mothers are used as " symbols rather than characters " . In response , Fox intended for Toriel 's character to be " a mom that hopefully acts like a mom " , and " genuinely cares " about players ' actions . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The game 's soundtrack was entirely composed by Fox . A self @-@ taught musician , he composed most of the tracks with little iteration ; the game 's main theme , " Undertale " , was the only song to undergo multiple iterations in development . The soundtrack was inspired by music from Super NES role @-@ playing games , such as EarthBound , as well as the webcomic <unk> , for which Fox also provided some of the music . Fox also stated that he tries to be inspired by all music he listens to , particularly those in video games . According to Fox , over 90 % of the songs were composed specifically for the game . " <unk> " , the song used during the boss battle with Sans , had previously been used within the <unk> webcomic and in one of Fox 's EarthBound ROM hacks . For each section of the game , Fox composed the music prior to programming , as it helped " decide how the scene should go " . He initially tried using a music tracker to compose the soundtrack , but found it difficult to use . He ultimately decided to play segments of the music separately , and connect them on a track . 
 Undertale 's soundtrack has been well received by critics as part of the success of the game , in particular for its use of various leitmotifs for the various characters used throughout various tracks . In particular , " Hopes and Dreams " , the boss theme when fighting Asriel in the run @-@ through where the player avoids killing any monster , brings back most of the main character themes , and is " a perfect way to cap off your journey " , according to USgamer 's Nadia Oxford . Oxford notes this track in particular demonstrates Fox 's ability to " turning old songs into completely new experiences " , used throughout the game 's soundtrack . Tyler Hicks of GameSpot compared the music to " bit @-@ based melodies " . 
 = = Release = = 
 The game was released on September 15 , 2015 , for Microsoft Windows and OS X. Fox has expressed interest in releasing Undertale on other platforms , but is unable to port it to Nintendo platforms without reprogramming the game due to the engine 's lack of support for the platforms . A patch was released in January 2016 , fixing bugs and altering the appearance of blue attacks to help colorblind players see them better . 
 Other Undertale media and merchandise have been released , including toy figurines and plush toys based on characters from the game . The game 's official soundtrack was released in 2015 simultaneously with the game 's release . Additionally , two official Undertale cover albums have been released : the 2015 metal album Determination by <unk> and Ace Waters , and the 2016 jazz album Live at <unk> 's by Carlos <unk> . 
 On July 17 , 2016 , Toby Fox announced on Twitter that he has officially released the game on Linux . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Undertale received critical acclaim , and was quickly considered a cult video game by numerous publications . Review aggregator Metacritic calculated an average score of 92 out of 100 , indicating " universal acclaim " , based on 42 reviews . Metacritic ranks the game the third @-@ highest rated Windows game released in 2015 , and among the top 25 of all time . Praise was particularly directed at the game 's writing , unique characters , and combat system . GameSpot 's Tyler Hicks declared it " one of the most progressive and innovative RPGs to come in a long time " , and IGN 's <unk> Plagge called it " a masterfully crafted experience " . By the end of 2015 , in a preliminary report by Steam Spy , Undertale was one of the best @-@ selling games on Steam , with 530 @,@ 343 copies sold . By early February 2016 , the game surpassed one million . 
 Daniel Tack of Game Informer called the game 's combat system " incredibly nuanced " , commenting on the uniqueness of each enemy encounter . Giant Bomb 's Austin Walker praised the complexity of the combat , commenting that it is " unconventional , clever , and occasionally really difficult " . Ben " Yahtzee " Croshaw of The Escapist commended the game 's ability to blend " turn @-@ based and live combat elements in a way that actually fucking works " . IGN 's Plagge praised the ability to avoid combat , opting for friendly conversations instead . Jesse Singal of The Boston Globe found the game 's ability to make the player empathize with the monsters during combat if they opted for non @-@ violent actions was " indicative of the broader , fundamental sweetness at the core " of Undertale . 
 Reviewers praised the game 's writing and narrative , with IGN 's Plagge calling it " excellent " . The Escapist 's Croshaw considered Undertale the best @-@ written game of 2015 , writing that is " on the one hand hilarious ... and is also , by the end , rather heartfelt " . Destructoid 's Ben Davis praised the game 's characters and use of comedy , and compared its tone , characters and storytelling to Cave Story ( 2004 ) . PC Gamer 's Richard Cobbett provided similar comments , writing that " even its weaker moments ... just about work " . Breitbart 's Ned Price commended the " soul and charm " that the game conveys through its writing , but noted that the dialogue often " borders on cringey random humor " . 
 The game 's visuals received mixed reactions . Giant Bomb 's Walker called it " simple , but communicative " . IGN 's Plagge wrote that the game " isn 't always pretty " and " often ugly " , but felt that the music and animations compensate . Breitbart 's Price named the art " bland and not on the same level of detail as the excellent character design " , and The Escapist 's Croshaw remarked that " it wobbles between basic and functional to just plain bad " . Other reviewers liked the graphics : Daniel Tack of Game Informer felt that the visuals appropriately match the characters and settings , while Richard Cobbett of PC Gamer commended the ability of the visuals to convey emotion . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Undertale has received multiple awards and nominations from several gaming publications . It won Game of the Year from The <unk> and Zero Punctuation , as well as Game of the Month from Rock , Paper , Shotgun . The game won the Best Game Ever poll from GameFAQs , and was awarded Best PC Game from Destructoid and IGN . At the Independent Games Festival Awards , it won the Audience Award , while the SXSW Gaming Awards named it the Most Fulfilling <unk> Game , and awarded it the Matthew Crump Cultural Innovation Award . 
 = Bayt Jibrin = 
 For the history of the site see in chronological order Maresha , Beit Guvrin , Eleutheropolis , Bethgibelin , Bayt Jibrin , Kibbutz Beit Guvrin and Beit Guvrin National Park 
 Bayt Jibrin ( Arabic : بيت <unk> , also transliterated Beit Jibrin ; Hebrew : בית <unk> ) , was a Palestinian Arab village located 21 kilometers ( 13 mi ) northwest of the city of Hebron . The village had a total land area of 56 @,@ 185 dunams or 56 @.@ 1 km2 ( 13 @,@ 900 acres ) , of which 0 @.@ 28 km2 ( 69 acres ) were built @-@ up while the rest remained farmland . 
 During the 8th century BCE , the village was part of the Kingdom of Judah . During the days of Jewish king Herod the town was the administrative center for the district of Idumea . After the turmoil of the First Jewish @-@ Roman War and the Bar Kokhba revolt the town became a thriving Roman colony and a major administrative center under the name of Eleutheropolis . In the early 7th century CE , Bayt Jibrin was conquered by Muslim forces led by ' Amr ibn al- ' As . Under the Crusaders in the 12th century , it had a population of 1 @,@ 500 , compared to 100 @-@ 150 in the average village of the time . It fell to the Mamluks and then the Ottoman Turks . In the 19th century , the al- ' Azza family took control of Bayt Jibrin and unsuccessfully attempted to rebel against the Ottomans , ending in the exile and execution of local leaders . 
 Under the British Mandate of Palestine , Bayt Jibrin again served as a district center for surrounding villages . It was captured by Israeli forces during the 1948 War , causing its inhabitants to flee eastward . Today , many of the refugees of Bayt Jibrin and their descendants live in the Bayt Jibrin and <unk> camps in the southern West Bank . The kibbutz of Beit Guvrin was established on Bayt Jibrin 's lands in 1949 . The underground caves of Bayt Jibrin have been listed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site . 
 = = Name = = 
 The town was renamed over the centuries . Its Aramaic name Beth <unk> , preserved by the geographer Ptolemy in the Greek variation of <unk> ( <unk> ) , translates as the " house of the [ strong ] man " or " house of the mighty one " . The antecedent might be seen in the name of an Edomite king : <unk> @-@ <unk> or <unk> @-@ Gabr , found on an inscription of <unk> III . The Romans gave it a Greek name , Eleutheropolis ( <unk> ) , meaning " City of the Free " . In the <unk> Tables in 393 CE , Bayt Jibrin was called <unk> . In the Talmud , compiled between the 3rd and 4th centuries , it was known as Beit <unk> ( or Guvrin ) . To the Crusaders , it was known as Bethgibelin or <unk> . Another name in medieval times may have been Beit Jibril , meaning " house of Gabriel " . In Arabic , Bayt Jibrin or <unk> ( بيت <unk> ) means " house of the powerful " , reflecting its original Aramaic <unk> and the town was probably called Bayt Jibrin or Beit Jibril throughout its rule by various Muslim dynasties . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Ancient period = = = 
 The excavations have revealed no remains older than the Iron Age , a time when the Judahite town of Maresha rose on the tell known in Arabic as Tell Sandahanna and in Hebrew as Tel Maresha . This corresponds to several Hebrew Bible mentions of Maresha . However , local folklore tells that the former Arab village of Bayt Jibrin was first inhabited by Canaanites . After the destruction of the Kingdom of Judah in 586 BCE , the city of Maresha became part of the Edomite kingdom . In the late Persian period a Sidonian community settled in Maresha , and the city is mentioned in the Zenon Papyri ( 259 BCE ) . During the Maccabean Revolt , Maresha was a base for attacks against Judea and suffered retaliation from the Maccabees . In 112 BCE , Maresha was conquered and destroyed by the Hasmonean king , John Hyrcanus I , after which the region of Idumea ( the Greek name of Edom ) remained under Hasmonean control and <unk> were forced to convert to Judaism . In 40 BCE , the Parthians devastated completely the " strong city " , after which it was never rebuilt . After this date , nearby Beit Guvrin succeeded Maresha as the chief center of the area . 
 = = = Antiquity = = = 
 In the Jewish War ( 68 CE ) , Vespasian slaughtered or enslaved the inhabitants of <unk> . According to Josephus : " When he had seized upon two villages , which were in the very midst of Idumea , <unk> , and <unk> , he slew above ten thousand of the people , and carried into captivity above a thousand , and drove away the rest of the multitude , and placed no small part of his own forces in them , who overran and laid waste the whole mountainous country . " However , it continued to be a Jewish @-@ inhabited city until the Bar Kokhba revolt ( 132 @-@ 135 CE ) . 
 Septimius Severus , Roman Emperor from 193 to 211 , granted the city municipal status , renaming it Eleutheropolis meaning " City of the Free " and exempting its citizens from taxes . Coins minted by him , bearing the date 1 January 200 , commemorate its founding . Eleutheropolis , which covered an area of 65 hectares ( 160 acres ) ( larger at the time than Aelia <unk> - the Roman city built over the ruins of Jewish Jerusalem ) , flourished under the Romans , who built public buildings , military installations , aqueducts and a large amphitheater . Towards the end of the 2nd century CE , Rabbi Judah the Prince ameliorated the condition of its Jewish citizens by releasing the city from the obligations of tithing home @-@ grown produce , and from observing the Seventh Year laws with respect to the same produce , as believing this area of the country was not originally settled by Jews returning from the Babylonian captivity . The vita of Epiphanius of Salamis , born into a Christian family near Eleutheropolis , describes the general surroundings in Late Antique Judaea . The second chapter of the vita describes the details of the important market of Eleutheropolis . Seven routes met at Eleutheropolis , and Eusebius , in his Onomasticon , uses the Roman milestones indicating the city as a central point from which the distances of other towns were measured . The Madaba Map ( dated 542 @-@ 570 CE ) shows Eleutheropolis as a walled city with three towers , a curving street with a colonnade in the central part and an important basilica . In the centre is a building with a yellowish @-@ white dome on four columns . Eleutheropolis was last mentioned in the ancient sources by the near contemporary <unk> of the Piacenza Pilgrim , about 570 . 
 In the 1st and 2nd centuries CE , Christianity penetrated the city due to its location on the route between Jerusalem and Gaza . The city 's first bishop , Justus , was one of the 70 Disciples . In 325 CE , Eleutheropolis was the seat of Bishop Macrinus , who in that year attended the First Council of Nicaea . Epiphanius of Salamis , Bishop of Salamis in Cyprus , was born at Eleutheropolis ; at Ad nearby he established a monastery which is often mentioned in the polemics of Jerome with Rufinus and John , Bishop of Jerusalem . Beit Guvrin is mentioned in the Talmud in the 3rd and 4th centuries , indicating a revival of the Jewish community around that time . The <unk> Judah b . Jacob and the <unk> Jonathan ( referred to in the Talmud as " Yonatan me @-@ Bet Guvrin " or Jonathan of Bet Guvrin ) were residents of the city . The Talmudic region known as Darom was within the area of Eleutheropolis ( " Beit Guvrin " ) , later known by its Arabic corruption ad @-@ <unk> . Excavations at Eleutheropolis show a prosperous city , and confirm the presence of Jews and Christians in the area . It was described as one of Palestine 's five " Cities of Excellence " by 4th @-@ century Roman historian Ammianus Marcellinus . The territory under the administration of Eleutheropolis encompassed most of Idumea , with the districts of <unk> , western Edom and Hebron up to Ein <unk> , and included over 100 villages . 
 = = = Early Islamic period = = = 
 Early Muslim historian al @-@ <unk> mentions Bayt Jibrin ( the name given to it by the Arabs following the Muslim conquest ) as one of ten towns in Jund Filastin ( military district of Palestine ) conquered by the Muslim Rashidun army under ' Amr ibn al- ' As 's leadership during the 630s . Al @-@ <unk> also wrote that al- ' As enclosed a domain to Bayt Jibrin , which he named ' Ajlun , after one of his freemen . The 1904 Analecta <unk> recounts that in 638 the Muslim army beheaded fifty soldiers in Bayt Jibrin from the Byzantine garrison of Gaza who refused to abandon the Christianity and who were then buried in a church built in their honor . In the beginning of the power struggle between Ali and Mu 'awiya for the position of caliph , al- ' As left Medina in the Hejaz and resided in Bayt Jibrin with his two sons Muhammad and Abdullah . The latter died there . 
 The city may have been devastated in 788 , but in 796 , Bayt Jibrin was destroyed by Bedouin tribesmen in an effort to combat Christian influence in the region during a civil war between the Arab tribal federations of the area . According to a monk named Stephen , " it was laid waste , and its inhabitants carried off into captivity " . However , by 985 , the city , by then under Abbasid rule , seemed to have recovered , judging by the writings of the Muslim geographer al @-@ Muqaddasi : 
 " [ Bayt Jibrin ] is a city partly in the hill country , partly in the plain . Its territory has the name of Ad Darum ( the ancient <unk> and the modern <unk> ) , and there are here marble quarries . The district sends its produce to the capital ( Ar Ramlah ) . It is an emporium for the neighbouring country , and a land of riches and plenty , possessing fine domains . The population , however , is now on the decrease .... " 
 There is no marble quarry anywhere in Palestine , but al @-@ Muqaddasi <unk> referred to the underground <unk> quarries known today as " bell caves " . 
 = = = Crusader and Mamluk eras = = = 
 In 1099 , Crusaders invaded Palestine and established the Kingdom of Jerusalem . In 1135 , King Fulk of Jerusalem erected a castle on the lands of Bayt Jibrin , the first of a series of Crusader fortifications built at this time to ensure control over the ports of Caesarea and Jaffa . In 1136 , King Fulk donated the castle to the Knights Hospitallers . In 1168 , the Hospitallers were granted a charter to establish a Frankish colony , which they named " Bethgibelin " . Christian settlers in Beit Jibrin were promised a share of property looted from the Muslims . It was on the itinerary of Benjamin of Tudela , who found three Jews living there when he visited the country . The Ayyubid army under Saladin sacked Bethgibelin in 1187 , after most of the Kingdom of Jerusalem came under Muslim control as a consequence of his victory at the Battle of Hittin . Soon after its capture Saladin ordered the demolition of the Crusader castle . From 1191 @-@ 1192 , the town was held in probate by Henry of Champagne , as lord of the Kingdom of Jerusalem , while Saladin and Richard the Lionheart negotiated a ceasefire . 
 However , the Crusaders remained in control of Bethgibelin until 1244 , when the Ayyubids reconquered it under Sultan as @-@ Salih Ayyub . By 1283 , the Mamluks had taken control and it was listed as a domain of Sultan Qalawun . The city prospered under the Egypt @-@ based Mamluk Sultanate and served as a postal station . During Mamluk rule , Bayt Jibrin administratively belonged to Hebron and was under the jurisdiction of the Shafi 'i ( a school of law in Sunni Islam ) qadi ( head judge ) of that city . 
 = = = Ottoman rule and the ' Azza family = = = 
 Bayt Jibrin and all of Palestine was conquered by the Ottomans after their victory over the Mamluks during the 1516 Battle of Marj Dabiq . Bayt Jibrin subsequently became part of the nahiya ( subdistrict ) of Hebron ( al @-@ <unk> ) , which was part of the sanjak ( " district " ) of Gaza . The Ottomans did not exercise strict control over their territories and tended to keep local leaders in their traditional positions as long as they complied with the higher authorities and paid imperial taxes . During Suleiman the Magnificent 's reign , in 1552 , the destroyed Crusader castle in Bayt Jibrin was partially rebuilt in order to protect the main road between Gaza and Jerusalem . In 1596 , the inhabitants of Bayt Jibrin , consisting of 50 Muslim families , paid taxes on wheat , barley and sesame seeds , as well as goats and beehives . 
 In the 19th century , Bayt Jibrin was the seat of the ' Azza family , who had ruled the area since migrating to Palestine from Egypt . In the 1840s , after the Ottomans attempted to crush local leaders in the Hebron Hills for their refusal to pay taxes , the ' Azza family joined a revolt against Ottoman rule . They had aligned themselves to the ' Amr clan of the Hebron @-@ area village of Dura . Between 1840 @-@ 46 , hostilities were raging between the Qays and Yaman tribo @-@ political factions in southern Palestine . The ' Azza and Amr families , part of the Qays confederation , were constantly clashing with the Yaman @-@ aligned Abu Ghosh clan , who were based in the vicinity of Jerusalem . In 1846 , the shaykh ( chief ) of Bayt Jibrin , Muslih al- ' Azza ( known as the " giant of Bayt Jibrin " ) , the leader of the ' Amr clan , and other local leaders were exiled , but were allowed to return in the early 1850s . 
 In 1855 , the newly appointed Ottoman pasha ( " governor " ) of the sanjak ( " district " ) of Jerusalem , Kamil Pasha , attempted to subdue the rebellion in the Hebron region . Kamil Pasha marched towards Hebron with his army in July 1855 , and after crushing the opposition , he ordered the local shaykhs to summon to his camp . Several of the shaykhs , including the leader of the ' Amr clan and Muslih al- ' Azza , did not obey the summons . Kamil Pasha then requested that the British consul in Jerusalem , James Finn , serve as an envoy and arrange a meeting with Muslih . Finn sent his vice @-@ consul to assure Muslih of his safety in Hebron and convinced him to meet with Kamil Pasha . Muslih was well received in Hebron and returned to Bayt Jibrin escorted by twenty of the governor 's men . Soon after , the Kamil Pasha paid a visit to Bayt Jibrin to settle affairs and collect the town 's overdue taxes . Kamil Pasha took an oath of loyalty from all the local shaykhs in the Hebron region , including those under the rule of Muslih al- ' Azza . 
 In 1838 , American archeologist Edward Robinson was able to locate the site of <unk> . He cited William of Tyre 's reference to the Arabic name . Later travelers who visited Bayt Jibrin during that time were very impressed both by the shaykh of Bayt Jibrin , as well as by his " castle " or " manor " . At the time , the remains of the Crusader fortress still served for defensive purposes in the village . According to Bayt Jibrin 's shaykh , in 1863 , he was in command of 16 villages in the area and pledged " to provide as many as 2 @,@ 000 men to the government if necessary . " In 1864 , however , Muslih 's brother told a traveler that Muslih and his property had been seized on " false charges of treason , " and that he had been banished to Cyprus and then beheaded . 
 Bayt Jibrin 's status began to decline throughout the 19th century . According to Western travelers it was " a small and insignificant village " . The primary factors that contributed to the decline were the Bedouin raids on Bayt Jibrin 's countryside villages , the ' Azza revolt , tribal warfare among the inhabitants of the towns and villages throughout Palestine and epidemics which struck the town and the nearby area . 
 = = = British Mandate era = = = 
 After the British army captured Palestine from the Ottomans in 1917 @-@ 1918 , Bayt Jibrin resumed its role as an important town in the District of Hebron . The population was entirely Muslim , and had two schools , a medical clinic , a bus and a police station . The town 's inhabitants cultivated grain and fruit , and residents from nearby towns flocked to its weekly market or souk . During the winter of 1920 @-@ 1921 there was a severe outbreak of malaria . 157 villagers ( one @-@ sixth of the population ) died with the mortality rate in the district reaching 68 per 1 @,@ 000 . Crops remained unharvested due to lack of people strong enough to work in the fields . The new British regime began a program of sealing open wells , improving drainage and distributing quinine across Palestine . In the 1922 census of Palestine conducted by the British Mandate authorities , Bayt Jibrin had a population of 1 @,@ 420 , all Muslim , increasing the 1931 census to 1 @,@ 804 , still all Muslim , in a total of 369 houses . 
 On January 10 , 1938 , during the Arab National revolt of 1936 @-@ 1939 J. L. Starkey , a well @-@ known archaeologist , was killed by a group of armed Arabs on the track leading from Bayt Jibrin to Hebron . 
 In 1945 Bayt Jibrin had 2 @,@ 430 inhabitants , with a total of 56 @,@ 185 dunams of land . Of this , 2 @,@ 477 <unk> were irrigated or used for plantations , 31 @,@ 616 dunams used for cereals , while 287 dunams were built @-@ up ( urban ) areas . 
 Bayt Jibrin was in the territory allotted to the Arab state under the 1947 UN Partition Plan . 
 = = = 1948 war = = = 
 The First Battalion of the Egyptian Army were ordered to take up position in Bayt Jibrin during the second half of May during the 1948 Arab @-@ Israeli War . At the same time , the New York Times correspondent reported that thousands of Jaffa 's inhabitants had fled inland , including " large numbers " to the Bayt Jibrin area . In October 1948 , the Israeli Army ( IDF ) launched Operation Yoav , which differed from operations three months earlier , as the IDF was now equipped with aircraft , artillery , and tanks . On October 15 – 16 , the IDF launched bombing and strafing attacks on a number of towns and villages , including Bayt Jibrin . According to Morris , the towns caught in the fighting were neither psychologically nor defensively prepared for aerial strikes , and Israeli Air Force bombing of Bayt Jibrin on October 19 set off a " panic flight " of residents from the town . 
 On October 23 , a United Nations @-@ imposed ceasefire went into effect , however , there was an IDF raid on the neighboring police fort on the night of October 24 , which resulted in more villagers fleeing Bayt Jibrin . Israeli troops from the <unk> 'ati Brigade then occupied Bayt Jibrin and its police fort on October 27 . In 2008 , a former resident of the town who was eight months old at the time of the raid , described his family 's ordeal as follows : 
 In the 1948 war , the village was attacked by Israeli military units and bombed by Israeli aircraft . By that time , Beit <unk> already hosted many refugees from neighboring villages . The fighting and bombing frightened the people . They escaped the fighting and sought shelter in the surrounding hills . [ My ] family found protection in a cave 5 km east of the village . They had left everything in their home , hoping to return after a few days when the attack would be over . The Israelis , however , did not allow them to return . Several men of Beit <unk> were killed when they tried to go back . 
 In 1949 , a Jewish communal settlement , Kibbutz Beit Guvrin , was founded on the former town 's lands . The excavated areas of the successive Judahite , Hellenistic , Roman @-@ Byzantine and Crusader towns have been included in a large Israeli national park with major points of attraction for tourists . There is little focus on any traces of Arab presence within the park , the period from the 7th century onward receiving little attention . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Bayt Jibrin was situated in an area of plains and soft hills known as the <unk> ( Shephelah ) in Hebrew , located between the coastal plain to the west and the Hebron Hills to the east . The village was 21 kilometers ( 13 mi ) northwest of Hebron . The average elevation of Bayt Jibrin is 275 meters ( 902 ft ) above sea level . Nearby localities included the depopulated villages of <unk> to the north , al @-@ <unk> to the southwest , al @-@ <unk> to the south and the existing Palestinian towns of Beit Ula to the east and <unk> to the southeast . Historically , it was located on the main road between Cairo and Hebron , via Gaza . 
 In 1945 , Bayt Jibrin 's total land area was 56 @.@ 1 km2 ( 21 @.@ 7 sq mi ) , 98 % of which was Arab @-@ owned . The town 's urban area consisted of 287 m2 ( 0 @.@ 071 acres ) , with 33 @.@ 2 km2 ( 8 @,@ 200 acres ) of cultivable land and 21 @.@ 6 km2 ( 5 @,@ 300 acres ) of non @-@ cultivable land . 54 @.@ 8 % of the town 's land was planted with cereal crops , 6 @.@ 2 % with olives and 4 @.@ 4 % with irrigated crops . 
 The Bayt Jibrin region contains a large number of underground caverns , both natural formations and caves dug in the soft chalk by inhabitants of the region over the centuries for use as quarries , burial grounds , animal shelters , workshops and spaces for raising doves and pigeons . There is estimated to be 800 such caverns , many linked by an underground maze of passageways . Eighty of them , known as the Bell Caves , are located on the grounds of the Beit Guvrin National Park . 
 = = Archaeology = = 
 Today many of the excavated areas of Maresha and Beit Guvrin can be visited as part of the Israeli Beit Guvrin @-@ Maresha National Park . Furthermore , Archaeological Seminars , under the license of the Israel Antiquities Authority , conduct excavations of Maresha 's many quarried systems and invite visitors to participate . 
 In 1838 , the American Bible scholar Edward Robinson visited Bayt Jibrin , and identified it as ancient Eleutheropolis . The remains of the city of Maresha on Tell Sandahanna / Tel Maresha were first excavated in 1898 @-@ 1900 by Bliss and Macalister , who uncovered a planned and fortified Hellenistic city encircled by a town wall with towers . Two Hellenistic and one Israelite stratum were identified by them on the mound . Between 1989 @-@ 2000 , large @-@ scale excavations were held by the Israel Antiquities Authority ( IAA ) under the direction of Prof. Amos <unk> and conducted mainly in the Lower City of Maresha , concentrating both on the surface and on the subterranean complexes . Excavations continued in several subterranean complexes between 2001 and 2008 . 
 The largely preserved remains of the amphitheater built by the Romans were excavated by <unk> . Among other unique finds was a Roman bath that has been confirmed to be the largest in Israel and the Palestinian territories . Many of the ancient city 's olive presses , <unk> and water cisterns can still be seen . Less than 10 percent of the caves on Tel Maresha have been excavated . 
 The ruins of three Byzantine @-@ era churches are located in Bayt Jibrin . A church on a northern hill of the town , later used as a private residence , had elaborate mosaics depicting the four seasons which were defaced in the 1948 Arab @-@ Israeli War . A church south of the town , known as Khirbet Sandahanna , was dedicated to Saint Anne . The New Testament does not give any information about the mother of the Virgin Mary , but the widely circulated apocryphal Gospel of James gives her name as Anne , and her birthplace as Bethlehem . In another Christian tradition though , Bayt Jibrin is the birthplace of Saint Anne . The initial Byzantine church was rebuilt by Crusaders in the 12th century . Today , the apse with its three arched windows and half @-@ dome ceiling are still intact . 
 The wider area of the <unk> has been inhabited for much longer . Excavations were conducted by the Israel Antiquities Authority ( IAA ) about 12 kilometres northeast from Bayt Jibrin at a site located on the same wadi , Nahal Guvrin , near moshav <unk> . The IAA has unearthed there artifacts from a village believed to be 6 @,@ 500 years old , placing it at the end of the Stone Age or at the beginning of the Chalcolithic or " copper @-@ and @-@ stone age " . The finds include pottery vessels and stone tools , among them flint sickle blades , cultic objects , clay figurines of horned animals , ceramic spindle whorls and animal bones belonging to pigs , goats , sheep and larger herbivores . The inhabitants probably chose this area due to the arable land and copious springs flowing even in the rainless summer months . Archaeologists believe the villagers grew grain , as indicated by the sickle blades and the grinding and pounding tools , and raised animals that supplied milk , meat and wool , as attested to by the spindle whorls . The settlement was small in scope , approximately 1 @.@ 5 dunams , but there is evidence of bartering , based on the presence of basalt vessels and other lithic objects brought to the site from afar . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 During the Roman period , Bayt Jibrin had a mixed population of Jews , Christians and pagans . Under Muslim rule , Islam gradually became the dominant religion and by the 20th century , the entire population was Muslim . 
 In Ottoman tax records from 1596 , the town had a population of 275 inhabitants . In the 19th century its population reached 900 . This rose to about 1 @,@ 000 in 1912 , and to 1 @,@ 420 in the next decade . According to the 1931 census of Palestine , Bayt Jibrin 's population was 1 @,@ 804 . A 1945 land and population survey by Sami Hadawi reported a sharp increase to 2 @,@ 430 . The general growth pattern over every 9 – 11 years from 1912 to 1945 was around 400 @-@ 500 . In 1948 , the projected population was 2 @,@ 819 . 
 The number of refugees from Bayt Jibrin , including their descendants , was estimated to be 17 @,@ 310 in 1998 . Many live in the al- ' Azza ( also called Bayt Jibrin ) and <unk> camps in the southern West Bank . 
 = = Culture = = 
 = = = Embroidery = = = 
 Bayt Jibrin , together with Hebron and the surrounding villages , was known for its fine Palestinian embroidery . An example is a woman 's <unk> ( wedding dress ) from Bayt Jibrin , dated about 1900 , in the Museum of International Folk Art ( <unk> ) collection in Santa Fe , New Mexico . The dress is made of handwoven indigo linen with long , pointed wing @-@ sleeves . The <unk> ( " chest @-@ piece " ) is embroidered with the <unk> pattern ; the maya ( " water " ) motif , el @-@ <unk> ( " the bakers wife " ) pattern , and the <unk> ( " cypress " ) motif . The side panels are also covered with cross @-@ stitch embroidery in a variety of traditional patterns . 
 Also on show is a late 19th @-@ century <unk> ( large veil ) from Bayt Jibrin worn at weddings and festivals . It is made of embroidered handwoven black silk with a separate heavy red silk fringe . A woman wore the <unk> mainly on her wedding day , positioned so that when she covered her face the embroidered end would show . Another item in the collection is a headdress ( <unk> ) embroidered with cross @-@ stitch and decorated with Ottoman coins minted in AH 1223 ( 1808 ) , as well as Maria Theresa coins . The <unk> was worn by married women and elaborate pieces were passed down as family heirlooms . Long embroidered headbands made of cotton hanging from both sides were wrapped around the woman 's braids to facilitate the bundling of her hair , then secured to the back of the headdress . 
 = = = Shrines = = = 
 In Islamic tradition , Bayt Jibrin is the burial place of the <unk> ( companion ) of the prophet Muhammad , Tamim al @-@ Dari , who was famously known for his piety and briefly served as the Governor of Jerusalem in the late 7th century . Al @-@ Dari and his family were granted trusteeship over the Hebron Hills , including Bayt Jibrin , and were assigned as the supervisors of the Cave of the Patriarchs ( Ibrahimi Mosque ) in Hebron . His sanctuary is the most venerated site in Bayt Jibrin , located just northwest of it . Until the present day , al @-@ Dari 's sanctuary has been a place of local Muslim pilgrimage . Other Islamic holy sites in the village include maqam for a local shaykh named Mahmud and a tomb for a <unk> ( female religious figure ) named <unk> . 
 = The Legend of Zelda : Four Swords Adventures = 
 The Legend of Zelda : Four Swords Adventures , released as The Legend of Zelda : Four Swords + ( Japanese : ゼルダの伝説 <unk> + , Hepburn : Zeruda no Densetsu : <unk> no <unk> + ) in Japan , is the eleventh installment in Nintendo 's The Legend of Zelda series . It was released for the Nintendo GameCube home video game console in Japan on March 18 , 2004 ; in North America on June 7 , 2004 ; in Europe on January 7 , 2005 ; and in Australia on April 7 , 2005 . The Game Boy Advance handheld game console can be used as a controller when using the Nintendo GameCube – Game Boy Advance link cable bundled with the game in North America and Europe . The game is the only entry in the series that cannot be played on current @-@ generation Nintendo consoles . 
 The game takes Link on an adventure to restore peace to Hyrule after learning that an evil counterpart of himself , Shadow Link , has been created . Four Swords Adventures was considered the 48th @-@ best game ever made for a Nintendo system by Nintendo Power , and received an aggregated 86 out of 100 from Metacritic . It was the third best @-@ selling game of June 2004 in North America , with 155 @,@ 000 units , and has since sold 250 @,@ 000 copies ; it has also sold 127 @,@ 000 units in Japan . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The main mode of Four Swords Adventures is " Hyrulean Adventure " , an episodic , cooperative multiplayer adaptation of conventional The Legend of Zelda gameplay . " Shadow Battle " is a competitive multiplayer battle mode . " Navi Trackers " , present only in the Japanese version of the game ( and displayed briefly at E3 before the US release ) , is a multiplayer stamp rally race . 
 = = = Hyrulean Adventure = = = 
 Hyrulean Adventure is the main campaign of Four Swords Adventures , and can be played by one to four players . It consists of eight worlds , each with three stages and a boss battle . The graphics are similar to that of the Game Boy Advance version , but the maps are static rather than randomly generated , the top @-@ down view is taken from The Legend of Zelda : A Link to the Past , and gameplay includes effects from The Wind Waker . The graphics also include enhanced atmospheric effects such as cloud shadows that slowly move across the ground , heat shimmer , dust storms , and fog . Music is based on that of A Link to the Past , but is rearranged in places . 
 In Hyrulean Adventure , most of the same mechanics as the previously released Four Swords for the Game Boy Advance ( GBA ) are used . The multiplayer version requires each player to have a GBA , which is used as a controller and to which the action transfers when that player 's character goes off the main screen , but the single player game may be played with either a GameCube controller or a GBA . There are always four Link characters ( differentiated by different colors : green , red , blue and purple ) in play , regardless of the number of people playing ; " extra " Links are attached to those directly controlled and positioned around the controlling character . Normally , the extra Links follow the player , but players can separate an individual Link and control independently , or put the four Links into formations . These techniques are required to solve puzzles and defeat enemies . Players are encouraged to work together to gather enough Force Gems to empower the Four Sword , and failing to do so by the time the boss is defeated or the dark barrier is reached results in having to go back to the beginning of the stage to collect more . However , once the requisite gems are collected , players are automatically transported to the dark barrier and therefore do not have to repeat the entire stage . 
 Players can play minigames in multiplayer mode at Tingle 's Tower , which appears in every world , to gain extra multiplayer lives . These eight games are earned by playing though certain stages in multiplayer mode . The minigames include horse racing , hammer tag , monster hunting and five others . 
 = = = Shadow Battle = = = 
 In Shadow Battle , two or more players battle each other until only one is left standing . As in Hyrulean Adventure , each player uses a different @-@ colored Link character and wields various tools to attack the other Links . Initially , there are five stages which players can choose as the battle 's arena . Five bonus maps are unlocked upon completion of Hyrulean Adventure ( these " dark stages " are almost the same as the first five maps , but portals to the dark world appear and the player has limited vision ) . In each stage , items randomly appear , and are usually similar to the items in Hyrulean Adventure . There are many special objects in each stage , which can be used to the player 's advantage . There is also a time limit ; when it reaches zero , the game is tied . 
 = = = Navi Trackers = = = 
 Navi Trackers ( formerly planned as a stand @-@ alone game titled Tetra 's Trackers ) is a game only present in the Japanese version of Four Swords Adventures ( Four Swords + ) . In this game , multiple players use a combination of the television screen and Game Boy Advances to search for members of Tetra 's pirate crew to gain as many stamps as possible within a given time limit . Action takes place on the Game Boy Advance used by each player , with the television screen showing a basic map and Tetra narrating the action . A single @-@ player mode is also available , which allows players to either collect alone or compete against Tingle . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The game begins with the land of Hyrule in a state of fear because of strange happenings that have occurred recently . On a stormy night , Princess Zelda and the shrine maidens fear that the reason for these events is that Vaati 's seal is weakening . She summons Link and brings him to the castle so he can protect her and the other maidens while they open the portal to the Four Sword Sanctuary . When they do , however , a shadowy figure appears from the portal . This figure was Shadow Link , who then kidnapped the maidens of the Shrines and sealed them inside their crystals . Link follows him to the mysterious sanctuary where the Four Sword lies in the Pedestal , keeping the great evil sealed away . Suddenly , Link pulls the Four Sword out of its Pedestal , splitting into three clones of himself to destroy this doppelganger . However , The Seal that imprisoned the Sorcerer of Winds , Vaati , was broken and had released him from his Prison once again , wreaking havoc on the once peaceful kingdom of Hyrule and bringing chaos and horror . 
 As Link and his clones wander the overworld of Hyrule Field on their quest to restore peace to Hyrule , they learn that the creation of Link 's evil counterpart and the release of Vaati is only a small part in an insidious plot to take control of Hyrule . Things complicate as the dimension of the Dark World appears and people are being abducted throughout Hyrule . Four Links learn that not only have the knights of Hyrule mysteriously disappeared , but evil versions of them have been creating havoc . Hyrule castle has been taken over and monsters are appearing everywhere . Four Links agree that they will defeat Ganon and Vaati , and then rescue Zelda to restore peace to Hyrule . 
 It is revealed later in the game that the true villain is Ganon , King of Darkness . He has stolen a powerful trident and used it to take control of parts of Hyrule . Unfortunately , he stole the dark mirror and used it to create Shadow Link and then sent him to kidnap the shrine maidens and trick Link into releasing Vaati . In order to gain as much power as possible and build up his army , Ganon wants to take control of the shrine maidens ' power as well as abducting people and sending them into the Dark World where they would become part of his army . Vaati unknowingly furthered his plans by creating monsters to add to his army . It is revealed that the Knights of Hyrule were murdered by Ganon and their souls were trapped in the World of Darkness where they became creatures of Darkness . Four Links eventually save the shrine maidens , retrieve the Dark Mirror , destroy Shadow Link and Vaati , and face Ganon in a final battle . Trying to stop him from plunging the world into chaos , four Links use the Power of the Maidens of Shrines , Including Zelda , to defeat Ganon , penetrating him . As he was about to become sealed inside , he declared : " I cannot be destroyed by insects of you ! <unk> ! ! ! " 
 After penetrating Ganon , Four Links firmly seal him inside the Four Sword , bringing chaos and horror to an end . Peace returns to Hyrule , souls of the knights are freed from their torment , and the people celebrate as all traces of evil that plagued Hyrule are vanquished . With Ganon defeated and sealed inside , Link returns the Four Sword that sealed darkness away back to its resting pedestal and the Four Links become one again . After the battle , The Maidens of the Shrine use their powers and create a barrier , which is strong enough for the Four Sword to rest before the six maidens leave . Thus , his journey has ended and both of them leave the Sanctuary as Darkness fades away and Light endures in the Land of Hyrule , bringing peace and prosperity . 
 = = Development = = 
 At E3 2003 , Nintendo showcased two Zelda games which would make use of the Game Boy Advance connectivity , Four Swords and Tetra 's Trackers . In December of the same year , it was announced that both games would be together in a single disc , Four Swords + , along with a third , Shadow Battle . Four Swords Adventures was released in Japan with Hyrule Adventure , Shadow Battle , and Navi 's Trackers as three individual games bundled together . It was later announced on June 7 , 2004 , however , that Hyrule Adventures and Navi 's Trackers would be sold as two separate titles in the United States , while the retail status of Shadow Battle was still unknown . This decision was later changed to bundle Hyrule Adventure with Shadow Battle , and to not release Navi 's Trackers in the United States . 
 Despite the fact that translations for the PAL version were finished in October , the game was not released in Europe until early January 2005 . A possible reason for this is so that the game did not compete with The Minish Cap for sales , which in turn was released pre @-@ Christmas in Europe because , unlike North America , it would not cannibalize Nintendo DS sales . 
 Early on the development of Navi Trackers , it was decided that it would include a speech navigation system that talks and advises the player during mini @-@ games . Players type in their name and the system calls players by their name during the game in order to notify them of their turn . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In 2006 , Nintendo Power rated Four Swords Adventures the 48th best game made on a Nintendo system . It received a score of 86 out of 100 based on 55 aggregated reviews from Metacritic , and an average score of 85 % based on 67 reviews from Game Rankings . 
 GameSpot praised the game 's connectivity feature with the Game Boy Advance , claiming that this is " a truly compelling reason to invest in a GameCube @-@ to @-@ GBA link cable " and that " using the Game Boy Advance as a controller has an appreciable impact on the experience " . They also praised the story and said , " One of the differences between the original Four Swords and Adventures is a more persistent narrative . " The video was also applauded , with a critic quoted as remarking , " Adventures does improve on the original Four Swords ' visuals , making the Wind @-@ Waker @-@ derived visual style even more reminiscent of the cel @-@ shaded adventure of Link . " The audio was noted , with a review remarking , " The sound design for Four Swords Adventures will be even more familiar to anyone who has played any Zelda game , and especially to those who have played The Wind Waker . " 
 Four Swords Adventures also received criticism . Game Revolution said about the video , " Graphically , Four Swords Adventures is an odd mix of cheap 2D SNES sprites and nice Gamecube particle effects . It looks a lot like the GBA game , but now wears fancier pants and shows off upgraded visual flourishes , like Wind Waker style curly @-@ Q air <unk> . Still , much of the technology has clearly been ported over from the GBA , creating an inconsistent feel . " They also criticized the requirement of the link cable , saying that " the required use of the GBA for multiplayer does limit the play potential . " 
 Four Swords Adventures was the third best @-@ selling game of June 2004 in North America with 155 @,@ 000 units , and has since sold 250 @,@ 000 copies , becoming a part of the Player 's Choice line . The game also sold 127 @,@ 000 units in Japan . 
 A manga novelization of the game was authored by Akira Himekawa . In it , each of the four Links have a distinct personality : the Link in green ( nicknamed " Green " ) acted similarly to his normal self , focused and brave , the Link in red ( " Red " ) was portrayed as a childish optimist , the one in blue ( " Blue " ) was quick @-@ tempered and aggressive , and the one in violet ( " Vio " ) was aloof and self @-@ possessive . This of course caused the four Links to argue among one another due to their conflicting personas . The four decided to use nicknames of the color they are wearing so they would not confuse each other . 
 = Hungry Like the Wolf = 
 " Hungry Like the Wolf " is a song by the British new wave band Duran Duran . Written by the band members , the song was produced by Colin Thurston for the group 's second studio album Rio . The song was released in May 1982 as the band 's fifth single in the United Kingdom . It reached the top 5 of the UK Singles Chart , and received a silver certification by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) . 
 " Hungry Like the Wolf " ' s Russell Mulcahy @-@ directed music video was filmed in the jungles of Sri Lanka , and evoked the atmosphere of the film Raiders of the Lost Ark . Although the band initially failed to break into the US market , MTV placed the " Hungry Like the Wolf " video into heavy rotation . Subsequently , the group gained much exposure ; the song peaked at the number 3 spot on the Billboard Hot 100 in March 1983 , and Duran Duran became an international sensation . The video won the first Grammy Award for Best Short Form Music Video in 1984 . 
 = = Writing and recording = = 
 " Hungry Like the Wolf " was written and recorded on a Saturday in the spring of 1982 at the basement studios of EMI 's London headquarters . Nick Rhodes started the song 's demo in the morning with a sequencer ; the song was built throughout the day as each band member arrived , and by the evening it was essentially complete . 
 " That track came from fiddling with the new technology that was starting to come in " , guitarist Andy Taylor said in an interview with Blender magazine . This refers to the rhythmic backing track they came up with by joining a Roland TR @-@ 808 drum machine with a sequencer and a Roland Jupiter @-@ 8 keyboard . 
 Rhodes came up with an idea for the backing track in the car while he was going to the studio . He started playing with the Roland Jupiter 8 keyboard , while singer Simon Le Bon was working with the lyrics . The lyrics were inspired by Little Red Riding Hood , and the repeating of the word " do " at the end of each verse takes its melody from the instrumentals in Gordon Lightfoot 's song " If You Could Read My Mind " . Andy Taylor worked out a Marc Bolan @-@ ish guitar part , a very Marshall @-@ sounding Les Paul guitar lick that was added to the track . Then the bass and drums were added , and the whole track was finished that day , including Le Bon 's vocal melody and lyrics . The laugh at the beginning of the song and the screams during the song 's fade @-@ out were performed and recorded live by Rhodes ' girlfriend at the time . 
 The group re @-@ recorded the song for the Rio album a few months later at London 's AIR Studios with producer Colin Thurston , who also recorded the hits " Too Shy " for Kajagoogoo , and " I Want Candy " for Bow Wow Wow . Andy Taylor remembers : " He was a great organizer and arranger , we gave him far more ideas and music than the track actually needed , and he was important in the process of whittling them down to the essential elements . " Thurston and the band decided to keep the demo 's original electronic backing track and just re @-@ record the other instruments and vocals . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Hungry Like the Wolf " received generally positive reviews from contemporary pop music critics . Rob Mitchum of Pitchfork Media in a 2003 review of the " Singles Box Set 1981 @-@ 1985 " , said that " singles don 't come much stronger than ' Hungry Like the Wolf ' , " praising its " bubbly keys around a slashing guitar riff , " adding that the song " show [ s ] off how Duran Duran was a band , not just a synthesizer . " Jon Pareles from The New York Times , said the song " put an oblique , sometimes apocalyptic spin on pop romance in the verses but kept the choruses clear and catchy , never disguising their pop intentions , " adding that the " posing was always a little preposterous , but no less enjoyable for that . " 
 Allmusic 's Ned Raggett said the song " blended a tight , guitar @-@ heavy groove with electronic production and a series of instant hooks , " adding that it was one of Rio 's " biggest smashes " that " open [ ed ] the door in America for the new romantic / synth rock crossover . " Stewart Mason , also from Allmusic , called " Hungry Like the Wolf " a " spectacular pop single " , and " the finest song Duran Duran ever wrote " , adding that it was a " much more kinetic and exciting song than earlier flop singles like ' Planet Earth ' . " 
 = = Music video = = 
 In 1982 , music video director Russell Mulcahy , who had directed the band 's first video " Planet Earth , " was brought back to make the music video for " Hungry Like the Wolf " and two other songs for the band 's 1983 video album . The band had a vision of jungles and exotic women , and Mulcahy suggested Sri Lanka , a country he had just visited . EMI spent $ 200 @,@ 000 to send the group to Sri Lanka ; the band made a stopover there in April , en route to a scheduled Australian tour . Keyboardist Nick Rhodes and guitarist Andy Taylor remained behind to finish the mixing of the Rio album while the rest of the band began filming the video ; they flew straight to Sri Lanka after handing over the final masters to EMI . 
 As it was described in the pop culture book , The 1980s , the video was lush and cinematic , with shots of jungles , rivers , elephants , cafes and marketplaces evoking the atmosphere of the film Raiders of the Lost Ark . Andy Taylor , who contracted a stomach virus serious enough to require hospitalization from accidentally drinking water in the lagoon during the shoot , describes the storyline as " Indiana Jones is horny and wants to get laid . " In the video , singer Simon Le Bon 's head rises in slow motion out of the river as rain pours down , evoking a scene in Apocalypse Now . He then chases a beautiful tiger @-@ like Indian woman played by Bermudian model Sheila Ming , from open markets in the city through obstacles in the jungle . During the chase , Le Bon has his face mopped by a young boy and overturns a bar room table , culminating in a final chase and struggle in a jungle clearing , which is sexually suggestive . In the meantime , the other band members hunt for Le Bon . 
 Less than 2 months after the shoot of the video , the American cable television network MTV put " Hungry Like the Wolf " into heavy rotation , playing it four times a day . The exposure eventually helped propel the single into the top 5 of the Billboard Hot 100 , and the Rio album into the top 10 of the albums chart . Les Garland , senior executive vice president of MTV , said : " I remember our director of talent and artist relations came running in and said , ' You have got to see this video that ’ s come in . ' Duran Duran were getting zero radio airplay at the time , and MTV wanted to try to break new music . ' Hungry Like the Wolf ' was the greatest video I 'd ever seen . " MTV named " Hungry Like the Wolf " the 15th most @-@ played video of the network , and was 11th on the century @-@ end MTV " 100 Greatest Videos Ever Made " . " Hungry Like the Wolf " won the Grammy Award for Best Short Form Music Video at the 26th Grammy Awards in February 1984 , making it the first video to ever win that award . In 2001 , VH1 rated it 31st on the " VH1 : 100 Greatest Videos " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Hungry Like the Wolf " was released in the United Kingdom on 4 May 1982 ; the next week the song debuted at number 35 on the UK Singles Chart , 6 weeks later it reached its peak at number 5 , remaining 6 weeks in the top 10 , and 12 weeks in total . The release of the single helped the band 's album Rio reach the 2nd position of the albums chart . In Ireland the single entered the chart on 23 May 1982 ; reaching the number 4 position on the Irish Singles Chart , becoming the band 's first top 10 hit in that country . Despite achieving commercial success with several top hits in the United Kingdom , the band failed to enter in the US market . Their first album did not chart and failed to yield a hit single . " Hungry Like the Wolf " was released in the United States on 7 June 1982 but did not chart . At first , US radio were reluctant to play the song , but when the newly emerging MTV began playing the accompanying music video in heavy rotation , the exposure pushed " Hungry Like the Wolf " onto AOR playlists . The song entered Billboard 's Hot Mainstream Rock Tracks chart in August 1982 and reached the top of the chart in January 1983 . 
 Following the release of the Carnival EP in September and the David Kershenbaum remaster of Rio in November , the Kershenbaum remix of " Hungry Like the Wolf " was released as a single on 3 December 1982 . " Hungry Like the Wolf " entered the Billboard Hot 100 on 25 December 1982 at number 77 , peaking at number 3 on 26 March 1983 , and remaining 23 weeks on the chart . 10 years later in March 1993 , the single was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . In Canada , the song debuted at number 48 on the RPM singles chart on 22 January 1983 , reaching the top of the chart for 1 week on 19 March 1983 , staying on the chart for 19 weeks and ending at the 10th position of the 1983 year @-@ end chart . It was certified gold by the Canadian Recording Industry Association ( CRIA ) in April 1983 . 
 = = Formats and track listing = = 
 = = = 7 " : EMI . / EMI <unk> United Kingdom = = = 
 " Hungry Like the Wolf " ( Single version ) – 3 : 23 
 " Careless Memories " ( Live ) – 4 : 11 ( Recorded live at Hammersmith Odeon , London , 17 December 1981 ) 
 = = = 12 " : EMI . / 12 EMI <unk> United Kingdom = = = 
 " Hungry Like the Wolf " ( Night version ) – 5 : 14 
 " Careless Memories " ( Live ) – 4 : 11 ( Recorded live at Hammersmith Odeon , London , 17 December 1981 ) 
 Track 1 is remixed by David Kershenbaum . 
 = = = 7 " : Harvest . / B <unk> United States = = = 
 " Hungry Like the Wolf " ( Single version ) – 3 : 23 
 " Careless Memories " ( Live ) – 4 : 11 ( Recorded live at Hammersmith Odeon , London , 17 December 1981 ) 
 Initial US release . 
 = = = 7 " : Harvest . / B <unk> United States = = = 
 " Hungry Like the Wolf " ( Night Version ) – 5 : 14 
 " Hungry Like the Wolf " ( US Album remix ) – 4 : 11 
 US re @-@ release . 
 Both tracks are remixed by David Kershenbaum . 
 = = = CD : Part of " Singles Box Set 1981 @-@ 1985 " = = = 
 " Hungry Like the Wolf " ( Single version ) – 3 : 23 
 " Careless Memories " ( Live ) – 4 : 11 ( Recorded live at Hammersmith Odeon , London , 17 December 1981 ) 
 " Hungry Like the Wolf " ( Night version ) – 5 : 14 
 Track 3 is remixed by David Kershenbaum . 
 = = = CD : Part of Rio 2010 Special Edition ( CD1 ) = = = 
 " Hungry Like the Wolf " ( US Album remix ) – 4 : 02 
 = = = CD : Part of Rio 2010 Special Edition ( CD2 ) = = = 
 " Hungry Like the Wolf " ( Night version ) – 5 : 11 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Simon Le Bon – lead vocals 
 Nick Rhodes – keyboards 
 John Taylor – bass guitar , background vocals 
 Roger Taylor – drums , percussion 
 Andy Taylor – guitar , background vocals 
 Colin Thurston – producer and engineer 
 David Kershenbaum – remixing 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 UK punk @-@ pop band Cranial <unk> recorded a version of the song for their 2006 album Too Fast for Technology . 
 Reel Big Fish recorded a ska version of the song , found on several of their albums . 
 The Young Werewolves recorded a psychobilly version of the song issued on the French release of their album , Cheat the Devil . 
 Subliminal Girls covered the song in 2007 . It was released as a double a side with the track " Self Obsession is an Art Form " . 
 Darren Criss as Blaine Anderson and Matt Bomer as Cooper Anderson covered this song as a mash @-@ up with another Duran Duran song , Rio in the third season of Glee . Also , if you watch the iTunes Movie Trailer for " Alpha And Omega " , you can hear both songs ( except the song , " Hungry Like The Wolf , " is the instrumental part at the beginning of the song ) . 
 American grunge band Hole played the first verse and the chorus of the song on their MTV Unplugged , with Courtney Love introducing it as " the best song ever written " . This version was released on the single for " Doll Parts " . 
 The song was covered by American industrial rock band Black Light Burns . 
 5 Seconds of Summer 's " Hey Everybody ! " references the vocal melody and other elements from the song during its verses . 
 = Tropical cyclone rainfall climatology = 
 A tropical cyclone rainfall climatology is developed to determine rainfall characteristics of past tropical cyclones . A tropical cyclone rainfall climatology can be used to help forecast current or upcoming tropical cyclone impacts . The degree of a tropical cyclone rainfall impact depends upon speed of movement , storm size , and degree of vertical wind shear . One of the most significant threats from tropical cyclones is heavy rainfall . Large , slow moving , and non @-@ sheared tropical cyclones produce the heaviest rains . The intensity of a tropical cyclone appears to have little bearing on its potential for rainfall over land , but satellite measurements over the last several years show that more intense tropical cyclones produce noticeably more rainfall over water . Flooding from tropical cyclones remains a significant cause of fatalities , particularly in low @-@ lying areas . 
 = = Anticipating a flood event = = 
 While inland flooding is common to tropical cyclones , there are factors which lead to excessive rainfall from tropical cyclones . Slow motion , as was seen during Hurricane Danny ( 1997 ) and Hurricane Wilma , can lead to high amounts of rainfall . The presence of mountains / hills near the coast , like across much of Mexico , Haiti , the Dominican Republic , Central America , Madagascar , Réunion , China , and Japan acts to magnify rainfall potential due to forced upslope flow into the mountains . Strong upper level forcing from a trough moving through the Westerlies and its associated cold front , as was the case during Hurricane Floyd , can lead to high amounts even from systems moving at an average forward motion . Larger tropical cyclones drop more rainfall as they precipitate upon one spot for a longer time frame than average or small tropical cyclones . A combination of two of these factors could be especially crippling , as was seen during Hurricane Mitch in Central America . During the 2005 season , flooding related to slow @-@ moving Hurricane Stan 's broad circulation led to 1 @,@ 662 – 2 @,@ 000 deaths . 
 = = General distribution within a tropical cyclone = = 
 Isaac Cline was the first to investigate rainfall distribution around tropical cyclones in the early 1900s . He found that a larger proportion of rainfall falls in advance of the center ( or eye ) than after the center 's passage , with the highest percentage falling in the right front quadrant . Father Viñes of Cuba found that some tropical cyclones have their highest rainfall rates in the rear quadrant within a training ( non @-@ moving ) inflow band . Normally , as a tropical cyclone intensifies , its heavier rainfall rates become more concentrated around its center . Rainfall is found to be heaviest in tropical cyclone 's inner core , whether it be the eyewall or central dense overcast , within a degree latitude of the center , with lesser amounts farther away from the center . Most of the rainfall in tropical cyclones is concentrated within its radius of gale @-@ force ( 34 knots / 39 mph / 63 km / h ) winds . Rainfall is more common near the center of tropical cyclones overnight . Over land , outer bands are more active during the heating of the day , which can act to restrict inflow into the center of the cyclone . Recent studies have shown that half of the rainfall within a tropical cyclone is stratiform in nature . The chart to the right was developed by Riehl in 1954 using meteorological equations that assume a gale radius of about 140 miles ( 230 km ) , a fairly symmetric cyclone , and does not consider topographic effects or vertical wind shear . Local amounts can exceed this chart by a factor of two due to topography . Wind shear tends to lessen the amounts below what is shown on the table . 
 = = Relation to storm size = = 
 Larger tropical cyclones have larger rain shields , which can lead to higher rainfall amounts farther from the cyclone 's center . This is generally due to the longer time frame rainfall falls at any one spot in a larger system , when compared to a smaller system . Some of the difference seen concerning rainfall between larger and small storms could be the increased sampling of rainfall within a larger tropical cyclone when compared to that of a compact cyclone ; in other words , the difference could be the result of a statistical problem . 
 = = Slow / looping motion on rainfall magnitude = = 
 Storms which have moved slowly , or loop , over a succession of days lead to the highest rainfall amounts for several countries . Riehl calculated that 33 @.@ 97 inches ( 863 mm ) of rainfall per day can be expected within one @-@ half degree , or 35 miles ( 56 km ) , of the center of a mature tropical cyclone . Many tropical cyclones progress at a forward motion of 10 knots , which would limit the duration of this excessive rainfall to around one @-@ quarter of a day , which would yield about 8 @.@ 50 inches ( 216 mm ) of rainfall . This would be true over water , within 100 miles ( 160 km ) of the coastline , and outside topographic features . As a cyclone moves farther inland and is cut off from its supply of warmth and moisture ( the ocean ) , rainfall amounts from tropical cyclones and their remains decrease quickly . 
 = = Vertical wind shear impact on rainfall shield = = 
 Vertical wind shear forces the rainfall pattern around a tropical cyclone to become highly asymmetric , with most of the precipitation falling to the left and downwind of the shear vector , or downshear left . In other words , southwesterly shear forces the bulk of the rainfall north @-@ northeast of the center . If the wind shear is strong enough , the bulk of the rainfall will move away from the center leading to what is known as an exposed circulation center . When this occurs , the potential magnitude of rainfall with the tropical cyclone will be significantly reduced . 
 = = = Effect of interaction with frontal boundaries / upper level troughs = = = 
 As a tropical cyclone interacts with an upper @-@ level trough and the related surface front , a distinct northern area of precipitation is seen along the front ahead of the axis of the upper level trough . This type of interaction can lead to the appearance of the heaviest rainfall falling along and to the left of the tropical cyclone track , with the precipitation streaking hundreds of miles or kilometers downwind from the tropical cyclone . The stronger the upper trough picking up the tropical cyclone , the more significant the left of track shift in the rainfall distribution tends to be . 
 = = Mountains = = 
 Moist air forced up the slopes of coastal hills and mountain chains can lead to much heavier rainfall than in the coastal plain . This heavy rainfall can lead to landslides , which still cause significant loss of life such as seen during Hurricane Mitch in Central America . 
 = = Global distribution = = 
 Globally , tropical cyclone rainfall is more common across the northern hemisphere than across the southern hemisphere . This is mainly due to the normal annual tropical cyclone distribution , as between half and two @-@ thirds of all tropical cyclones form north of the equator . Rainfall is concentrated near the 15th parallel in both hemispheres , with a less steep dropoff seen with latitude across the northern hemisphere , due to the stronger warm water currents seen in that hemisphere which allow tropical cyclones to remain tropical in nature at higher latitudes than south of the equator . In the southern hemisphere , rainfall impacts will be most common between January and March , while north of the equator , tropical cyclone rainfall impacts are more common between June and November . Japan receives over half of its rainfall from typhoons . 
 = = United States tropical cyclone rainfall statistics = = 
 Between 1970 @-@ 2004 , inland flooding from tropical cyclones caused a majority of the fatalities in the United States . This statistic changed in 2005 , when Hurricane Katrina 's impact alone shifted the most deadly aspect of tropical cyclones back to storm surge , which has historically been the most deadly aspect of strong tropical cyclones . On average , five tropical cyclones of at least tropical depression strength lead to rainfall across the contiguous United States annually , contributing around a quarter of the annual rainfall to the southeast United States . While many of these storms form in the Atlantic Basin , some systems or their remnants move through Mexico from the Eastern Pacific Basin . The average storm total rainfall for a tropical cyclone impacting the lower 48 from the Atlantic Basin is about 16 inches ( 406 mm ) , with 70 – 75 percent of the storm total falling within a 24 @-@ hour period . The highest point total was seen during Amelia 1978 , when 48 inches ( 1 @,@ 218 mm ) fell upon central Texas . 
 = = = Printed media = = = 
 Ivan Ray Tannehill . Hurricanes . Princeton University Press : Princeton , 1942 . 
 Herbert Riehl . Tropical Meteorology . McGraw @-@ Hill Book Company , Inc . : New York , 1954 . 
 Terry Tucker . Beware the Hurricane ! Hamilton Press : Bermuda , 1966 . 
 = = Related external links = = 
 Individual Tropical Cyclone Rainfall Pages for the United States and Mexico 
 Individual Tropical Cyclone Rainfall Pages for Puerto Rico / U.S. Virgin Islands 
 Maximum amounts in the lower 48 United States by state 
 Typhoon Rainfall Statistics and Forecasting ( China ) 
 Deadliest , <unk> , and Most Intense United States Tropical Cyclones From 1851 to 2004 
 Are You Ready ? Hurricanes 
 = Ali Hewson = 
 Alison " Ali " Hewson ( née Stewart ; born 23 March 1961 ) is an Irish activist and businesswoman . She is the wife of singer and musician Paul Hewson , known as Bono , from the rock group U2 . 
 Raised in Raheny , she met her future husband at a young age at Mount Temple Comprehensive School and married him in 1982 . She was awarded a degree in politics and sociology from University College Dublin in 1989 . The couple have four children together and live at residences in Ireland , France , and the United States . She has inspired several U2 songs , most famously " Sweetest Thing " . 
 Hewson became involved in anti @-@ nuclear activism in the 1990s . She narrated Black Wind , White Land , a 1993 Irish documentary about the lasting effects of the Chernobyl disaster , and has worked closely with activist Adi Roche . She has been a patron of Chernobyl Children 's Project International since 1994 and has participated in a number of aid missions to the high @-@ radiation exclusion zones of Belarus . She has also campaigned against Sellafield , the northern English nuclear facility . In 2002 she helped lead an effort which sent more than a million postcards , urging the site be closed , to Prime Minister Tony Blair and others . Hewson has repeatedly been discussed by tabloid newspapers as a possible candidate for political offices , including President of Ireland . None of these suggestions have come to fruition . 
 Hewson is the co @-@ founder of two ethical businesses , the <unk> fashion line in 2005 and Nude Skincare products in 2007 . The former , intended to promote fair trade with Africa , has struggled to become a viable business . French conglomerate LVMH has made substantial investments into both companies . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Alison Stewart was born on 23 March 1961 , the daughter of Terry and Joy Stewart . She has an older brother , Ian , and nephew , aspiring model Ross Stewart , who both live in Australia . The Stewart family , who resided in the suburb of Raheny on Dublin 's Northside , raised their children as Protestants . Her father was a self @-@ educated electrical worker who , according to Hewson , was " constantly questioning " things . Her mother , who was a housewife , had a secretarial career in mind for her daughter . 
 Alison studied at Mount Temple Comprehensive School . At the age of twelve , she met Paul Hewson , who was in the year above at the school . He pursued her immediately , but she initially kept her distance , labeling him " an <unk> " even though she secretly admired him . In September 1974 , Paul 's mother Iris died suddenly , leaving him emotionally adrift and in conflict with his father and brother . Soon after , Alison began taking care of Paul : cleaning his clothes , walking to school with him , and cooking for him . In September 1976 , Paul met the other members of what would become U2 ; the band members adopted nicknames , and Paul soon became known as Bono . At around the same time , he and Ali , as she was known , began dating , and soon became a steady couple in the Dublin area . It took Stewart a while to enjoy the band 's music , as her own tastes ran toward her father 's Frank Sinatra and Nat King Cole records . 
 At one point , the pair split up , but soon reunited . The relationship became more serious as she accompanied him in his efforts to break through in the music industry , and by 1979 they were discussing marriage , conditional upon his career becoming established . In the meantime she worked in a motor insurance company and in her father 's electrical business . 
 = = Marriage and family = = 
 Hewson married Bono on 21 August 1982 in a Church of Ireland ceremony at All Saints Church , Raheny . The ceremony combined rituals of both conventional Protestantism and the Shalom Friendship group that Bono and other U2 members had belonged to . In debt to U2 's record label , Island Records , the couple could not afford a honeymoon , but Island founder Chris Blackwell gave them use of the Goldeneye estate he owned in Jamaica . Having returned to Ireland , the couple moved to a small mews house in Howth , which they shared with the rest of U2 . 
 As the band broke through in popularity with the War Tour in 1983 , Ali Hewson did not readily adapt to the new circumstances . After seeing her with the group at a trendy Hollywood nightspot , journalist <unk> Ann Vare commented that Ali looked " as out of place as a <unk> in a brothel . " Although she had wanted to become a nurse , Hewson gave up on the notion , as the intense schooling required would have been incompatible with the direction that her husband 's life had taken . Instead she focused on studying in the social sciences , to give her an ability to understand social policy and make a difference to people , similar to what nursing would have enabled . By Bono 's own description , the marriage hit a period of strain in 1986 due to time commitments during the group 's recording of The Joshua Tree . Tensions continued in 1987 during the subsequent Joshua Tree Tour . 
 Ali received a degree in social science , politics and sociology from University College Dublin in 1989 at age 28 , giving birth to the couple 's first daughter , Jordan , two weeks before her final exams . Further plans to earn a master 's degree in moral and political ethics were derailed by the birth of their second daughter , Memphis Eve , in 1991 . Two sons , Elijah Bob <unk> Guggi Q and John Abraham , were born in 1999 and 2001 , respectively . Being effectively a single parent while U2 toured was difficult for Hewson , but she now found Bono helpful even at a distance . 
 = = Activism = = 
 In late 1985 , following U2 's participation in Live Aid , Bono and Hewson spent five weeks as aid volunteers in <unk> during the 1983 – 1985 famine in Ethiopia . She saw children with no possessions and at risk of death ; despite this , to her they appeared more spiritually alive than those in Ireland who had material comforts but seemed spoiled and spiritually unaware . In 1986 , the couple travelled to strife @-@ torn areas in Nicaragua and El Salvador on a visit organised by Central American Mission Partners . 
 In 1992 , Hewson participated in Greenpeace protests against the Sellafield plant for nuclear reprocessing , located across the Irish Sea in Cumbria , England . She was especially set against the under @-@ construction Thermal Oxide <unk> Plant component being opened . She was aboard Greenpeace 's MV Solo when it staged a publicity @-@ oriented " raid " wherein the band members landed on the beach at the plant in rubber dinghies , but she said she had not been responsible for that particular protest . 
 This involvement led her to become interested in the Chernobyl nuclear disaster of 1986 . After a request by activist Adi Roche , she went to blighted , high @-@ radiation exclusion zones in Belarus for three weeks to narrate part of Black Wind , White Land . The 1993 Irish documentary , shown on RTÉ , highlighted the plight of fallout victims of the Chernobyl event . Hot Press magazine wrote that Hewson had " obvious gifts as a presenter , which include a sense of quiet compassion that draws forth the best from the people she talks with . " Another reviewer said that the documentary was very effective until she started speaking . 
 Since 1994 , Hewson has been a patron of Chernobyl Children 's Project International ( shortened to Chernobyl Children International in 2010 ) , an organisation founded and run by Roche that works with children , families , and communities that continue to be affected by Chernobyl . Through the years , Hewson has taken at least ten trips to Belarus and other nations in the region despite the risk to her health . She has organised overland aid convoys and sometimes driven ambulances filled with medical supplies herself ; in one case she had to retreat quickly when a fire spread in a village a few miles from Chernobyl . Hewson has made sure her own children met those from Chernobyl with birth deformities and other illnesses , so that they would have a broader appreciation of the world and what to be thankful for . She has said that fundraising for those affected is very difficult , given that many people believe the problems of Chernobyl are all in the past . 
 She was aware from the outset that her circumstances would make her vulnerable to " ladies who lunch " -style remarks ( sometimes made against women , married to wealthy , high @-@ profile men , who engage in charitable activities ) , but said , " People who criticise these women are probably giving into cynicism , and I think if you get cynical about life , you lose the real meaning of it . " In 2007 , she became a member of the board of directors for Chernobyl Children 's Project International , a role that would give her a voice in the organisation 's policy making . In 2009 , she staged a public abseil of the 17 @-@ storey Elysian Tower in Cork to raise funds for the organisation . 
 She returned to the Sellafield issue in 2002 , noting that while Ireland had no nuclear power plants itself , Belarus had been the most affected region even though Chernobyl was not in it , and that was " exactly what could happen in Ireland if there was an explosion at Sellafield . " In addition , she feared the ongoing low @-@ level emissions from Sellafield : " I started to wonder how safe it was for [ children ] to play on the beach or to swim in the sea or even to eat fish . " In the aftermath of the 11 September 2001 attacks , she also viewed the plant as vulnerable to terrorists . 
 In April 2002 , Hewson was one of the leaders of an effort which delivered over a million postcards demanding that the facility be shut down ; recipients included British Prime Minister Tony Blair , Prince Charles , and Norman Askew , head of British Nuclear Fuels Limited . ( The message to the first said , " Tony , look me in the eye and tell me I 'm safe . " ) She personally delivered a giant postcard to Blair at 10 Downing Street . The Shut Sellafield Campaign had its postcards stocked in <unk> and Dunnes Stores supermarkets , and Hewson publicly engaged Tesco when they refused to do the same . The campaign was backed by celebrities , including Ronan Keating and Samantha Mumba , and Hewson made many newspaper and radio appearances on its behalf . It was the first prolonged exposure Hewson had to the public eye , after two decades of mostly being focused upon maintaining her privacy . Her continued activism also meant that she too would not always be around for the couple 's children . 
 As the postcard effort was reaching its peak , tabloid newspapers speculated that the Labour Party wanted to put Hewson up for the Irish presidential election of 2004 , with the Daily Mirror quoting an unnamed party insider as saying , " She 's a mother of four but she has always had world issues at heart and she 'd make the perfect candidate . " ( Labour had succeeded with its candidate Mary Robinson in the 1990 election but came in fourth with Roche in the 1997 election . ) Hewson stated that she had not been approached , and that " It 's not a serious proposition . It would obviously be a huge honour if I was asked to take on such a huge task , but for one thing I 'm not sure I 'm qualified , and for another I 've got four small kids to bring up first . " She also expressed contentment with incumbent President Mary McAleese staying for another term . She jokingly added that she could not see Bono agreeing to live in a smaller house . Hewson received a media mention two years later as a possible Social Democratic and Labour Party candidate in the 2004 European Parliament elections after John Hume had stood down . The notion of her running for Irish president came up again in 2008 in conjunction with the 2011 election ; columnist Fiona Looney wrote in the Daily Mail that while " she is certainly a decent and smart woman " , the position was better held by someone with a stronger background and more diplomatic experience . Hewson demurred once more , saying she did not speak the Irish language well enough , this time adding humorously that she could not see her husband being willing to walk behind her at events . The candidate that Labour did put up , Michael D. Higgins , won the post . Notwithstanding this speculation , Hewson generally <unk> away from political comments in the media . 
 Hewson has long advocated for a children 's museum for Ireland , inspired by a positive experience her daughters had at the Dallas Children 's Museum in the mid @-@ 1990s . In 2003 , plans were announced to build the so @-@ called Exploration Station as part of an overall € 500 million Heuston Gate development project near the Dublin Heuston railway station . The children @-@ oriented science centre was to be owned by the Irish Children 's Museum charitable trust , with Hewson as a prominent member of the museum . Hewson said , " Seeing as we 're nearly the last European country in on it , we can learn from children 's museums already up and running and expand on them . " However , over the next few years the science centre faced significant cost overruns in the planning stages and a possible European Commission investigation into how the Office of Public Works had handled the awarding of the contract for it . The effects of the financial crisis of 2007 – 2008 then put a halt to the entire Heuston Gate project . As of November 2012 , there were no signs that the Heuston Gate or science centre projects would be revived . 
 In 2015 Hewson signed an open letter which the ONE Campaign had been collecting signatures for ; the letter was addressed to Angela Merkel and Nkosazana Dlamini @-@ Zuma , urging them to focus on women as they serve as the head of the G7 in Germany and the AU in South Africa respectively , which will start to set the priorities in development funding before a main UN summit in September 2015 that will establish new development goals for the generation . 
 = = Business career = = 
 In 2005 , Hewson , Bono and designer Rogan Gregory co @-@ founded the <unk> fashion label . It was intended to help bring about positive change in Africa through a fair trade @-@ based relationship rather than by direct aid . Another aim of the label was to set an ethical example in an industry they felt had long exploited child labour . She said they wanted " to show that you can make a for @-@ profit business where everybody in the chain is treated well . " Hewson had not been particularly interested in fashion prior to this undertaking . 
 Hewson emphasised that Edun would have to be profitable to be considered a success , but in this it struggled . She later admitted that the couple were naive about what it takes to make a successful fashion enterprise . Edun encountered problems with both quality of goods and delivery times from their African suppliers , and most of the stores originally carrying the line dropped it . It lost € 9 @.@ 7 million in 2007 and € 12 @.@ 8 million in 2008 , suffering along with the rest of the apparel sector from the credit crisis of 2008 . 
 After the couple had put $ 20 million of their own funds into the venture , they sold 49 percent of it to French conglomerate LVMH in 2009 . The relaunched Edun featured Sharon <unk> as its new chief designer . By 2010 , the company had outsourced much of the manufacturing for its new fashion line to China , generating some negative reactions , while simpler garments were still African @-@ made . Hewson said that business realities compelled this action , but that she hoped more work could be done in Africa in the future . Hewson devoted a large amount of time to Edun , saying in 2011 , " I think [ the fashion industry ] is the toughest business there is , " and that despite the obstacles and struggles , " you just keep going . " The proposition remained difficult , however , and Edun lost € 6 @.@ 8 million in 2011 and € 5 @.@ 9 million in 2012 . The <unk> said the company was in an investment phase and they were satisfied with the five @-@ year strategic business plan underway . 
 Hewson is also co @-@ founder , along with Bryan Meehan , of Nude skincare – a luxury , natural skincare company . Established in 2007 , the venture sought to combine ethical principles and environmentally friendly , yet chic , packaging , with a high @-@ performance product based on probiotics and omega oils . 
 In 2009 , Hewson brought legal action in England against Stella McCartney for bringing out Stella Nude , a new eau de toilette version of the Stella perfume , saying that it amounted to copyright infringement of her own Nude Skincare . Hewson lost in the High Court when Mr Justice Floyd ruled against her . 
 In February 2011 , LVMH purchased 70 percent of Nude skincare . The following year , Hewson said that being part of a much larger corporation gave them research and development resources that they previously lacked and a more focused approach to marketing . She added , " It took us much longer to get here than we anticipated . But we still have very big ambitions for the brand to go much farther . " Hewson herself has pale skin and very dark hair , wears little jewellery , and has eschewed cosmetic surgery . The Evening Standard described Hewson 's style as " the antithesis of bling " and columnist Amanda Brunker wrote that at age 50 her attractive appearance " seems to defy all the odds " given her hectic lifestyle . 
 = = Hewson and U2 = = 
 Hewson has served as at least partial inspiration for many Bono @-@ authored U2 songs , going back to the track " Another Time , Another Place " from their 1980 début album Boy . She helped Bono get through a bad period of writer 's block during the lead @-@ up to the 1983 War album , particularly in the composition of the lyrics to " Sunday Bloody Sunday " . She inspired the personal themes in " New Year 's Day " , from the same record . That album and the accompanying War Tour brought financial success to the band , and Bono and Hewson moved into a three @-@ level , three @-@ room Martello tower in Bray . The group 's 1984 song " Promenade " reflects both that location and the spiritual aspects of his desire for her . 
 The U2 song " Sweetest Thing " was written for Hewson as a gift because Bono forgot her birthday whilst recording with the band during The Joshua Tree sessions . Originally released as a B @-@ side in 1987 , it was later re @-@ recorded and released as a single from the compilation album The Best of 1980 – 1990 in 1998 . Hewson agreed to appear in the single 's music video as long as all proceeds from it went to Chernobyl Children 's Project . 
 Bono wrote the lyric of the 1988 song " All I Want Is You " as a meditation on the idea of commitment . He later said , " [ It ] ' s clearly about a younger version of myself and my relationship with Ali , " and added that by nature he was a wanderer , not a family man , and that " The only reason I 'm here is because I met someone so extraordinary that I just couldn 't let that go . " U2 lyrics usually have several possible levels of interpretation , and it is not always possible to definitively ascribe Hewson 's influence upon them , but music writer Niall Stokes believes that inspiration from Hewson is pronounced throughout the group 's 1997 album Pop , particularly on " Staring at the Sun " , which he believes reflects her Chernobyl Children 's Project involvement and the feelings of both danger and hopefulness that it triggered in Bono . Stokes also believes that the 2000 song " When I Look at the World " is an explicit acknowledgement of Hewson 's strength and commitment as exemplified by that Chernobyl work , while others think it is about Jesus or God . Bono has seemed to deflect those interpretations , saying that song is in part a hard @-@ edged look at himself from the eyes of one losing faith . In any case , Bono has said that he does not feel constrained in his writing or interviews by what Hewson might think , as " [ she ] doesn 't read newspapers . Or listen to the radio . There 's a mysterious distance between us . " Not known for being musical herself , Hewson did perform Lady Gaga 's " Telephone " , as a duet with her husband , to serenade their daughter Eve at her 21st birthday celebration at a club in Las Vegas in 2012 . 
 Hewson and her family live in Killiney , in south County Dublin , in a mansion and grounds that overlook the Irish Sea and that have been expanded by purchasing the adjoining property . Bill Clinton and Salman Rushdie are among those who have stayed at the guest house there . With U2 bandmate The Edge , the couple co @-@ own a 20 @-@ room villa in Èze in the Alpes @-@ Maritimes in the south of France , where Bono and Hewson often mix with top celebrities . Hewson in particular has been friendly with several supermodels , which she uses to her advantage when booking charity events . Bono and Hewson also own a $ 14 @.@ 5 million penthouse apartment at The San Remo on the Upper West Side of Manhattan , which they purchased from Steve Jobs . By 2011 , the couple 's fortune was placed at € 572 million . 
 While her husband has provoked a variety of critical responses , some negative ; assessments of Hewson have generally been favourable , characterising her as down @-@ to @-@ earth . She views herself as " not a typical rock star wife " . Their marriage has been considered one of the most long @-@ lived and stable in the entertainment world . She does have to deal with the psychological effects of her husband coming off tour and readjusting to domestic life . After the extended 1992 – 1993 Zoo TV Tour , full of sensory overloads and alternate stage personae for Bono , the couple began a practice of hosting Sunday lunches at home , to establish a sense of regular , ordinary activities . The family became fixtures at Sunday services in Killiney as well , with a bond of Christianity still existing between the couple . She has stated , " I 've no desire to be a star , " seeing the effect intense public attention has had on both her husband and on Adi Roche . While she dislikes being referred to as " Bono 's wife " , she has said , " [ ... ] I really don 't have a big problem with my own identity , because I am a very private person , so I 've always let Bono take the brunt of anything that was coming along . He is happy to do that ; I am quite happy to make my own way around things . " 
 = = Awards and honours = = 
 The Cranberries ' 2001 song " Time Is <unk> Out " was inspired by Hewson 's work with Chernobyl Children 's Project . In 2002 , Hewson received an honorary Doctor of Laws degree from the National University of Ireland for her work on environmental issues , particularly the Chernobyl Children 's Project . Bono and Ali Hewson were given the Council of Fashion Designers of America board of directors ' Special Tribute Award in 2007 for their humanitarian work via the Edun clothing line . Hewson was also voted Sexiest Celebrity Other Half in a 2008 poll by <unk> 
 = Weather = 
 Weather is the state of the atmosphere , to the degree that it is hot or cold , wet or dry , calm or stormy , clear or cloudy . Most weather phenomena occur in the troposphere , just below the stratosphere . Weather refers to day @-@ to @-@ day temperature and precipitation activity , whereas climate is the term for the statistics of atmospheric conditions over longer periods of time . When used without qualification , " weather " is generally understood to mean the weather of Earth . 
 Weather is driven by air pressure , temperature and moisture differences between one place and another . These differences can occur due to the sun 's angle at any particular spot , which varies by latitude from the tropics . The strong temperature contrast between polar and tropical air gives rise to the jet stream . Weather systems in the mid @-@ latitudes , such as extratropical cyclones , are caused by instabilities of the jet stream flow . Because the Earth 's axis is tilted relative to its orbital plane , sunlight is incident at different angles at different times of the year . On Earth 's surface , temperatures usually range ± 40 ° C ( − 40 ° F to 100 ° F ) annually . Over thousands of years , changes in Earth 's orbit can affect the amount and distribution of solar energy received by the Earth , thus influencing long @-@ term climate and global climate change . 
 Surface temperature differences in turn cause pressure differences . Higher altitudes are cooler than lower altitudes due to differences in compressional heating . Weather forecasting is the application of science and technology to predict the state of the atmosphere for a future time and a given location . The system is a chaotic system ; so small changes to one part of the system can grow to have large effects on the system as a whole . Human attempts to control the weather have occurred throughout human history , and there is evidence that human activities such as agriculture and industry have modified weather patterns . 
 Studying how the weather works on other planets has been helpful in understanding how weather works on Earth . A famous landmark in the Solar System , Jupiter 's Great Red Spot , is an anticyclonic storm known to have existed for at least 300 years . However , weather is not limited to planetary bodies . A star 's corona is constantly being lost to space , creating what is essentially a very thin atmosphere throughout the Solar System . The movement of mass ejected from the Sun is known as the solar wind . 
 = = Causes = = 
 On Earth , the common weather phenomena include wind , cloud , rain , snow , fog and dust storms . Less common events include natural disasters such as tornadoes , hurricanes , typhoons and ice storms . Almost all familiar weather phenomena occur in the troposphere ( the lower part of the atmosphere ) . Weather does occur in the stratosphere and can affect weather lower down in the troposphere , but the exact mechanisms are poorly understood . 
 Weather occurs primarily due to air pressure , temperature and moisture differences between one place to another . These differences can occur due to the sun angle at any particular spot , which varies by latitude from the tropics . In other words , the farther from the tropics one lies , the lower the sun angle is , which causes those locations to be cooler due to the indirect sunlight . The strong temperature contrast between polar and tropical air gives rise to the jet stream . Weather systems in the mid @-@ latitudes , such as extratropical cyclones , are caused by instabilities of the jet stream flow ( see baroclinity ) . Weather systems in the tropics , such as monsoons or organized thunderstorm systems , are caused by different processes . 
 Because the Earth 's axis is tilted relative to its orbital plane , sunlight is incident at different angles at different times of the year . In June the Northern Hemisphere is tilted towards the sun , so at any given Northern Hemisphere latitude sunlight falls more directly on that spot than in December ( see Effect of sun angle on climate ) . This effect causes seasons . Over thousands to hundreds of thousands of years , changes in Earth 's orbital parameters affect the amount and distribution of solar energy received by the Earth and influence long @-@ term climate . ( See Milankovitch cycles ) . 
 The uneven solar heating ( the formation of zones of temperature and moisture gradients , or frontogenesis ) can also be due to the weather itself in the form of cloudiness and precipitation . Higher altitudes are typically cooler than lower altitudes , which is explained by the lapse rate . In some situations , the temperature actually increases with height . This phenomenon is known as an inversion and can cause mountaintops to be warmer than the valleys below . Inversions can lead to the formation of fog and often act as a cap that suppresses thunderstorm development . On local scales , temperature differences can occur because different surfaces ( such as oceans , forests , ice sheets , or man @-@ made objects ) have differing physical characteristics such as reflectivity , roughness , or moisture content . 
 Surface temperature differences in turn cause pressure differences . A hot surface warms the air above it causing it to expand and lower the density and the resulting surface air pressure . The resulting horizontal pressure gradient moves the air from higher to lower pressure regions , creating a wind , and the Earth 's rotation then causes deflection of this air flow due to the Coriolis effect . The simple systems thus formed can then display emergent behaviour to produce more complex systems and thus other weather phenomena . Large scale examples include the Hadley cell while a smaller scale example would be coastal breezes . 
 The atmosphere is a chaotic system , so small changes to one part of the system can grow to have large effects on the system as a whole . This makes it difficult to accurately predict weather more than a few days in advance , though weather forecasters are continually working to extend this limit through the scientific study of weather , meteorology . It is theoretically impossible to make useful day @-@ to @-@ day predictions more than about two weeks ahead , imposing an upper limit to potential for improved prediction skill . 
 = = Shaping the planet Earth = = 
 Weather is one of the fundamental processes that shape the Earth . The process of weathering breaks down the rocks and soils into smaller fragments and then into their constituent substances . During rains precipitation , the water droplets absorb and dissolve carbon dioxide from the surrounding air . This causes the rainwater to be slightly acidic , which aids the erosive properties of water . The released sediment and chemicals are then free to take part in chemical reactions that can affect the surface further ( such as acid rain ) , and sodium and chloride ions ( salt ) deposited in the seas / oceans . The sediment may reform in time and by geological forces into other rocks and soils . In this way , weather plays a major role in erosion of the surface . 
 = = Global Weather Video for Year 2015 = = 
 EUMETSAT created " A Year in Weather 2015 " a narrated video of the earth 's weather photographed from weather satellites for the entire year 2015 . Geostationary satellite photographs from EUMETSAT , the Japan Meteorological Agency and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration were assembled to show weather changing on earth for 365 days in a time lapse video . 
 = = Major wind and pressure systems and related weather = = 
 = = Effect on humans = = 
 Weather , seen from an anthropological perspective , is something all humans in the world constantly experience through their senses , at least while being outside . There are socially and scientifically constructed understandings of what weather is , what makes it change , the effect it has on humans in different situations , etc . Therefore , weather is something people often communicate about . 
 = = = Effects on populations = = = 
 Weather has played a large and sometimes direct part in human history . Aside from climatic changes that have caused the gradual drift of populations ( for example the desertification of the Middle East , and the formation of land bridges during glacial periods ) , extreme weather events have caused smaller scale population movements and intruded directly in historical events . One such event is the saving of Japan from invasion by the Mongol fleet of Kublai Khan by the Kamikaze winds in 1281 . French claims to Florida came to an end in 1565 when a hurricane destroyed the French fleet , allowing Spain to conquer Fort Caroline . More recently , Hurricane Katrina redistributed over one million people from the central Gulf coast elsewhere across the United States , becoming the largest diaspora in the history of the United States . 
 The Little Ice Age caused crop failures and famines in Europe . The 1690s saw the worst famine in France since the Middle Ages . Finland suffered a severe famine in 1696 – 1697 , during which about one @-@ third of the Finnish population died . 
 = = Forecasting = = 
 Weather forecasting is the application of science and technology to predict the state of the atmosphere for a future time and a given location . Human beings have attempted to predict the weather informally for millennia , and formally since at least the nineteenth century . Weather forecasts are made by collecting quantitative data about the current state of the atmosphere and using scientific understanding of atmospheric processes to project how the atmosphere will evolve . 
 Once an all @-@ human endeavor based mainly upon changes in barometric pressure , current weather conditions , and sky condition , forecast models are now used to determine future conditions . Human input is still required to pick the best possible forecast model to base the forecast upon , which involves pattern recognition skills , teleconnections , knowledge of model performance , and knowledge of model biases . The chaotic nature of the atmosphere , the massive computational power required to solve the equations that describe the atmosphere , error involved in measuring the initial conditions , and an incomplete understanding of atmospheric processes mean that forecasts become less accurate as the difference in current time and the time for which the forecast is being made ( the range of the forecast ) increases . The use of ensembles and model consensus helps to narrow the error and pick the most likely outcome . 
 There are a variety of end users to weather forecasts . Weather warnings are important forecasts because they are used to protect life and property . Forecasts based on temperature and precipitation are important to agriculture , and therefore to commodity traders within stock markets . Temperature forecasts are used by utility companies to estimate demand over coming days . On an everyday basis , people use weather forecasts to determine what to wear on a given day . Since outdoor activities are severely curtailed by heavy rain , snow and the wind chill , forecasts can be used to plan activities around these events , and to plan ahead and survive them . 
 = = Modification = = 
 The aspiration to control the weather is evident throughout human history : from ancient rituals intended to bring rain for crops to the U.S. Military Operation Popeye , an attempt to disrupt supply lines by lengthening the North Vietnamese monsoon . The most successful attempts at influencing weather involve cloud seeding ; they include the <unk> and low stratus dispersion techniques employed by major airports , techniques used to increase winter precipitation over mountains , and techniques to suppress hail . A recent example of weather control was China 's preparation for the 2008 Summer Olympic Games . China shot 1 @,@ 104 rain dispersal rockets from 21 sites in the city of Beijing in an effort to keep rain away from the opening ceremony of the games on 8 August 2008 . Guo Hu , head of the Beijing Municipal Meteorological Bureau ( BMB ) , confirmed the success of the operation with 100 millimeters falling in Baoding City of Hebei Province , to the southwest and Beijing 's <unk> District recording a rainfall of 25 millimeters . 
 Whereas there is inconclusive evidence for these techniques ' efficacy , there is extensive evidence that human activity such as agriculture and industry results in inadvertent weather modification : 
 Acid rain , caused by industrial emission of sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides into the atmosphere , adversely affects freshwater lakes , vegetation , and structures . 
 Anthropogenic pollutants reduce air quality and visibility . 
 Climate change caused by human activities that emit greenhouse gases into the air is expected to affect the frequency of extreme weather events such as drought , extreme temperatures , flooding , high winds , and severe storms . However , some experts argue these claims are unfounded and take issue with these conclusions . 
 Heat , generated by large metropolitan areas have been shown to minutely affect nearby weather , even at distances as far as 1 @,@ 600 kilometres ( 990 mi ) . 
 The effects of inadvertent weather modification may pose serious threats to many aspects of civilization , including ecosystems , natural resources , food and fiber production , economic development , and human health . 
 = = <unk> meteorology = = 
 <unk> meteorology is the study of short @-@ lived atmospheric phenomena smaller than mesoscale , about 1 km or less . These two branches of meteorology are sometimes grouped together as " mesoscale and microscale meteorology " ( MMM ) and together study all phenomena smaller than synoptic scale ; that is they study features generally too small to be depicted on a weather map . These include small and generally fleeting cloud " puffs " and other small cloud features . 
 = = Extremes on Earth = = 
 On Earth , temperatures usually range ± 40 ° C ( 100 ° F to − 40 ° F ) annually . The range of climates and latitudes across the planet can offer extremes of temperature outside this range . The coldest air temperature ever recorded on Earth is − 89 @.@ 2 ° C ( − 128 @.@ 6 ° F ) , at Vostok Station , Antarctica on 21 July 1983 . The hottest air temperature ever recorded was 57 @.@ 7 ° C ( 135 @.@ 9 ° F ) at ' <unk> , Libya , on 13 September 1922 , but that reading is queried . The highest recorded average annual temperature was 34 @.@ 4 ° C ( 93 @.@ 9 ° F ) at <unk> , Ethiopia . The coldest recorded average annual temperature was − 55 @.@ 1 ° C ( − 67 @.@ 2 ° F ) at Vostok Station , Antarctica . 
 The coldest average annual temperature in a permanently inhabited location is at Eureka , Nunavut , in Canada , where the annual average temperature is − 19 @.@ 7 ° C ( − 3 @.@ 5 ° F ) . 
 = = Extraterrestrial within the Solar System = = 
 Studying how the weather works on other planets has been seen as helpful in understanding how it works on Earth . Weather on other planets follows many of the same physical principles as weather on Earth , but occurs on different scales and in atmospheres having different chemical composition . The Cassini – Huygens mission to Titan discovered clouds formed from methane or ethane which deposit rain composed of liquid methane and other organic compounds . Earth 's atmosphere includes six latitudinal circulation zones , three in each hemisphere . In contrast , Jupiter 's banded appearance shows many such zones , Titan has a single jet stream near the 50th parallel north latitude , and Venus has a single jet near the equator . 
 One of the most famous landmarks in the Solar System , Jupiter 's Great Red Spot , is an anticyclonic storm known to have existed for at least 300 years . On other gas giants , the lack of a surface allows the wind to reach enormous speeds : gusts of up to 600 metres per second ( about 2 @,@ 100 km / h or 1 @,@ 300 mph ) have been measured on the planet Neptune . This has created a puzzle for planetary scientists . The weather is ultimately created by solar energy and the amount of energy received by Neptune is only about 1 ⁄ 900 of that received by Earth , yet the intensity of weather phenomena on Neptune is far greater than on Earth . The strongest planetary winds discovered so far are on the extrasolar planet HD 189733 b , which is thought to have easterly winds moving at more than 9 @,@ 600 kilometres per hour ( 6 @,@ 000 mph ) . 
 = = Space weather = = 
 Weather is not limited to planetary bodies . Like all stars , the sun 's corona is constantly being lost to space , creating what is essentially a very thin atmosphere throughout the Solar System . The movement of mass ejected from the Sun is known as the solar wind . Inconsistencies in this wind and larger events on the surface of the star , such as coronal mass ejections , form a system that has features analogous to conventional weather systems ( such as pressure and wind ) and is generally known as space weather . Coronal mass ejections have been tracked as far out in the solar system as Saturn . The activity of this system can affect planetary atmospheres and occasionally surfaces . The interaction of the solar wind with the terrestrial atmosphere can produce spectacular aurorae , and can play havoc with electrically sensitive systems such as electricity grids and radio signals . 
