 = Small Mercies = 
 Small Mercies were an Australian alternative rock group from Brisbane , which formed in 1997 . They used the names , Seventh Avenue and Blaik , before adopting Small Mercies in 2004 . Their final line @-@ up was Steve Blaik on lead vocals and guitar , Marty O 'Brien on drums , Danny Procopis on lead guitar , and Jeff Reeves on bass guitar . Small Mercies released two EPs , Is This Life ? ( 2003 ) and Off the Record ( 2004 ) , and one studio album , Beautiful Hum ( May 2008 ) . Their highest charting release , " Innocent " ( May 2007 ) , reached the ARIA Singles Chart Top 40 and was nominated at the ARIA Music Awards of 2007 for Breakthrough Artist – Single . By December 2010 the group had disbanded . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation and early EPs = = = 
 Small Mercies were established in 1997 in Brisbane by Steve Blaik ( a.k.a Steve Martin ) on lead vocals ( later on guitar ) , Marty O 'Brien on drums , and Danny Procopis on lead guitar – all attended local secondary schools , St. Laurence 's College ( Blaik ) and Padua College ( O 'Brien and Procopis ) . The trio were initially named <unk> Trip before changing to Blaik ( styled as <unk> ) . By 1999 the band were renamed Seventh Avenue and also included Simon O 'Connor on rhythm guitar and Shaun Spooner on bass guitar and backing vocals – both also from Padua College and both were ex @-@ <unk> , another Brisbane group . 
 During 2001 Seventh Avenue were finalists for the Brisbane Rock Award , which earned them the right to play at Queen Street Mall Basement . This performance attracted <unk> Entertainment 's Greg Shaw , who became their manager . The band worked with Stuart Stuart ( The Veronicas ) , Dave Nicholas ( INXS , Sting ) , Trey Bruce ( Faith Hill ) and Randy Staub ( Nickelback , Metallica ) on song writing or recordings . They met John Woodruff ( Savage Garden , Evermore ) , after he had heard their early demos , who became their next manager in 2001 . He recommended them to Sony BMG . 
 In 2002 the band 's name returned to Blaik , they released material on their official website , such as a four @-@ track , Blaik Sampler ( December 2002 ) , which includes an early version of " Innocent " . In June 2003 they recorded with Bruce producing at <unk> Studios , Byron Bay . Blaik released a five @-@ track EP , Is This Life ? , in November that year . 
 Under the name , Small Mercies , in May 2004 they signed with Modern Music . They released a five @-@ track EP , Off the Record , on 10 September 2004 on Sony BMG and Modern Music . Their producer was Dave Nicholas . " Pellet Gun " , a track from the EP , was issued as a single , it was co @-@ written by Blaik , O 'Brien , O 'Connor , Procopis and Spooner . It was added to the Triple J play list and In October 2007 it appeared on Power On – Rock Hits 2007 , a various artists ' compilation album . By 2005 the band 's line @-@ up was Blaik , Procopis , O 'Brien , and Jeff Reeves on bass guitar . 
 = = = Beautiful Hum = = = 
 Small Mercies contacted their next producer , Matt Wallace ( Faith No More , Maroon 5 , Train ) , after he left a message on their MySpace website : " Hey guys , love this stuff . Are you still looking for a producer ? " Wallace was at the top of their " wish list " of possible producers . The group recorded their debut album , Beautiful Hum ( May 2008 ) , over an eight @-@ week span in late 2006 in Los Angeles and San Fernando Valley , working at The Pass and Sound City Studios . The recording was mixed by Tim Palmer , who had worked with Pearl Jam and U2 . The album was released on 24 May 2008 , which reached the top 60 of the ARIA Albums Chart . 
 The first single from the album , " Innocent " , was released on 28 May 2007 , which reached the ARIA Singles Chart top 40 . The track was co @-@ written by Blaik , Procopis and Stuart . At the ARIA Music Awards of 2007 " Innocent " was nominated for Breakthrough Artist – Single . It also appeared on the ARIA End of Year Charts : Top 50 Australian Artist Singles 2007 . " Innocent " was used on the TV promo ad for United States series , Prison Break . 
 The album 's second single , " Sorry " ( November 2007 ) , made the top 60 . In November they appeared at the Bourbon Fest in Sydney , alongside Spiderbait and After the Fall . Small Mercies supported tours by headlining bands , Hinder ( October 2007 ) , Nickelback and Daughtry ( May 2008 ) . In April 2008 they travelled to the US to perform at the Tribeca Film Festival in New York , <unk> in Los Angeles and backing Goo Goo Dolls at the Rose Bowl . Through the rest of 2008 they toured Australia to promote the album . By December 2010 Small Mercies had disbanded . In June 2014 Blaik performed as a solo artist after having been in a duo , the Associates , with Stuart McLean . 
 = = Musical styles and influences = = 
 Small Mercies and their antecedents ' music was influenced by numerous artists . In January 2001 Blaik described 7th Avenue 's connections , " bands like Live , Counting Crows and Pearl Jam so it ’ s not too heavy ... We mainly play covers at gigs but we add our own flavour as well . It ’ s a change that keeps us interested and our influence comes through in the music . " He identified his favourite albums : August and Everything After by Counting Crows , Live 's Throwing Copper , and The Joshua Tree by U2 . Blaik summarised that he " loves great storytellers " . As <unk> , the band , in June 2003 their website wrote that their sound was " emotional folk pop " . 
 Blaik , the vocalist , described recording Off the Record as " five guys in a room playing rock music ... hoping that the music strikes a chord with those who listen to it . " It showed the influences of U2 , Counting Crows , Aerosmith and Pearl Jam . Jacqui Curtis of The Program felt the EP " offers listeners yet another melodic rock band with ever @-@ so @-@ catchy tunes to add to their rotation of summer jams ... [ which ] delivers five delectable rock tracks . " Curtis described how " Pellet Gun " , the lead single " couples hard @-@ hitting lyrics and memorable guitar riff ... and attacks every listener 's past loves with an attitude and vindictiveness that the heartbroken , dumped and hard @-@ done @-@ by deserve . Picture yourself burning your ex 's clothes and you 'll find the essence of ' Pellet Gun ' . " 
 In an interview on Australian Music Online Blaik listed his favourite Australian artists , and specified some of their attributes or albums : INXS and their lead singer Michael Hutchence 's ability " to create so much power and emotion " ; Powderfinger 's dedication and uniqueness , and Odyssey Number Five which had " everything that I love about Powderfinger " ; Crowded House especially Neil Finn 's song writing capabilities ; Silverchair 's Diorama which was " a journey from beginning to end " ; The Cruel Sea 's live performances ; and End of Fashion 's self @-@ titled debut album , which he opined " represent to us a place that we would want to be in the near future . " He also acknowledged AC / DC , especially their Back in Black album , as being highly influential , claiming " I don 't think I know a single musician who doesn 't have this record and this band in their record collection " , and asking " How can you not be inspired by this band ? " 
 For Beautiful Hum the band provided about 50 tracks and , according to Wallace , there was " not a clunker in the bunch . " He described Beautiful Hum as somewhat of a " best of " album , as there was so much content to choose from . Blaik told Tim Colman of The Sydney Morning Herald that " There are actually some songs on the record that are four or five years old , they 've sort of just evolved as the band 's evolved . The songs have progressed to a point where they 're really representative of where the band is now . " In November 2007 FasterLouder 's <unk> caught their performance at the Chapel in Melbourne , she felt they provided " Emotionally charged melodies ... ringing guitar work from Procopis and Blaik ’ s charismatic stage persona " moving from " a real rock @-@ edged buzz " with " Sorry " to " a slower , evocative track " with " Fools " . 
 American Society of Composers , Authors and Publishers ( ASCAP ) reported that critics had found that Small Mercies ' " sound has elements of Matchbox 20 , Maroon 5 , Bon Jovi and Nickelback with memorable melodies , along with the heartfelt voice of Steve Blaik and the songs he creates with writing partner , guitarist Danny Procopis . " Elisa <unk> of <unk> described " how distinctly international their sound is " on the album , where the " sound is fresh , Steve Blaik 's vocals are unique and appealing to the ears and the songs fulfill their rock agenda . " <unk> website 's <unk> praised " Innocent " as " an epic rock ballad that beckons for lighters and mobile phones to be raised in salutation " but noticed that for the album 's later tracks " The band seems to run out of steam , with most of the songs ending up sounding the same as the last . " 
 In an interview in the Cairns community newspaper , Cairns Bulletin , O 'Brien described their musical forte : " Rock 's such a broad term ... we do a lot of harder stuff but we also do softer variations " and that his fellow members know " which buttons to press to make things kick in and when to give space when one needs it . " 
 = = Members = = 
 Steve Blaik – lead vocals , guitar ( 1997 – 2010 ) 
 Marty O 'Brien – drums , percussion ( 1997 – 2010 ) 
 Danny Procopis – lead guitar ( 1997 – 2010 ) 
 Simon O 'Connor – rhythm guitar ( 1999 – 2004 ) 
 Shaun Spooner – bass guitar , backing vocals ( 1999 – 2004 ) 
 Jeff Reeves – bass guitar , backing vocals ( 2005 – 2010 ) 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Studio albums = = = 
 Beautiful Hum ( 24 May 2008 ) AUS – No. 54 
 = = = Extended plays = = = 
 Blaik Sampler ( by Blaik ) ( December 2002 ) 
 Is This Life ? ( by Blaik ) ( November 2003 ) 
 Off the Record ( 10 September 2004 ) 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 " Pellet Gun " ( August 2004 ) 
 " Innocent " ( 28 May 2007 ) AUS – No. 38 <unk> – No. 41 
 " Sorry " ( November 2007 ) AUS – No. 54 
 " Don 't You Know Who I Am ? " ( April 2008 ) 
 = Northern cardinal = 
 The northern cardinal ( Cardinalis cardinalis ) is a North American bird in the genus Cardinalis ; it is also known colloquially as the <unk> or common cardinal . It can be found in southern Canada , through the eastern United States from Maine to Texas and south through Mexico . It is found in woodlands , gardens , shrublands , and swamps . 
 The northern cardinal is a mid @-@ sized songbird with a body length of 21 – 23 cm ( 8 @.@ 3 – 9 @.@ 1 in ) . It has a distinctive crest on the head and a mask on the face which is black in the male and gray in the female . The male is a vibrant red , while the female is a dull reddish olive . The northern cardinal is mainly granivorous , but also feeds on insects and fruit . The male behaves territorially , marking out his territory with song . During courtship , the male feeds seed to the female beak @-@ to @-@ beak . A clutch of three to four eggs is laid , and two to four clutches are produced each year . It was once prized as a pet , but its sale as a cage bird was banned in the United States by the Migratory Bird Treaty Act of 1918 . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The northern cardinal is one of three birds in the genus Cardinalis and is included in the family Cardinalidae , which is made up of passerine birds found in North and South America . 
 The northern cardinal was one of the many species originally described by Linnaeus in his 18th @-@ century work , Systema Naturae . It was initially included in the genus Loxia , which now contains only crossbills . In 1838 , it was placed in the genus Cardinalis and given the scientific name Cardinalis virginianus , which means " Virginia cardinal " . In 1918 , the scientific name was changed to <unk> cardinalis to honor Charles Wallace Richmond , an American ornithologist . In 1983 , the scientific name was changed again to Cardinalis cardinalis and the common name was changed to " northern cardinal " , to avoid confusion with the seven other species also termed cardinals . 
 The common name , as well as the scientific name , of the northern cardinal refers to the cardinals of the Roman Catholic Church , who wear distinctive red robes and caps . The term " northern " in the common name refers to its range , as it is the northernmost cardinal species . 
 = = = Subspecies = = = 
 There are 19 subspecies : 
 C. c. cardinalis ( Linnaeus , 1758 ) 
 C. c. affinis Nelson , 1899 
 C. c. canicaudus Chapman , 1891 
 C. c. carneus ( Lesson , 1842 ) 
 C. c. <unk> ( Banks , 1963 ) 
 C. c. coccineus Ridgway , 1873 
 C. c. <unk> J.L. Peters , 1913 
 C. c. floridanus Ridgway , 1896 
 C. c. <unk> S.F. Baird , 1860 
 C. c. littoralis Nelson , 1897 
 C. c. magnirostris Bangs , 1903 
 C. c. mariae Nelson , 1898 
 C. c. phillipsi Parkes , 1997 
 C. c. saturatus Ridgway , 1885 
 C. c. <unk> ( Huey , 1940 ) 
 C. c. <unk> Nelson , 1899 
 C. c. superbus Ridgway , 1885 
 C. c. townsendi ( van Rossem , 1932 ) 
 C. c. <unk> Ridgway , 1887 
 = = Description = = 
 The northern cardinal is a mid @-@ sized songbird with a body length of 21 – 23 @.@ 5 cm ( 8 @.@ 3 – 9 @.@ 3 in ) and a wingspan of 25 – 31 cm ( 9 @.@ 8 – 12 @.@ 2 in ) . The adult weighs from 33 @.@ 6 – 65 g ( 1 @.@ 19 – 2 @.@ 29 oz ) , with an average 44 @.@ 8 g ( 1 @.@ 58 oz ) . The male averages slightly larger than the female . The adult male is a brilliant crimson red color with a black face mask over the eyes , extending to the upper chest . The color becomes duller and darker on the back and wings . The female is fawn , with mostly grayish @-@ brown tones and a slight reddish tint on the wings , the crest , and the tail feathers . The face mask of the female is gray to black and is less defined than that of the male . Both sexes possess prominent raised crests and bright coral @-@ colored beaks . The beak is cone @-@ shaped and strong . Young birds , both male and female , show coloring similar to the adult female until the fall , when they molt and grow adult feathers . They are brown above and red @-@ brown below , with brick @-@ colored crest , forehead , wings , and tail . The legs and feet are a dark pink @-@ brown . The iris of the eye is brown . The plumage color of the males is produced from carotenoid pigments in the diet . Coloration is produced from both red pigments and yellow carotenoid pigments . Northern cardinal males possess the ability to metabolize carotenoid pigments to create plumage pigmentation of a color different from the ingested pigment . When fed only yellow pigments , males become a pale red color , rather than a yellow . However , there are rare " yellow morph " cardinals , where all feathers ( except for black face mask ) and beak are a moderate yellow color . During the winter months , both male and female will fluff up their down feathers in order to trap warm air next to their body and keeping cold air from reaching their body . The down feathers are small and hairlike at the base of each flight feather . The legs and feet of almost all birds are thin and lack feathers , and so are vulnerable to rapid heat loss . Therefore , many take turns tucking one leg at a time into their body to keep them warm while still using the other to stand . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Northern cardinals are numerous across the eastern United States from Maine to Texas and in Canada in the provinces of Ontario , Quebec , New Brunswick and Nova Scotia . Its range extends west to the U.S. – Mexico border and south through Mexico to the Isthmus of Tehuantepec , northern Guatemala , and northern Belize . An allopatric population is found on the Pacific slope of Mexico from Jalisco to Oaxaca ; note that this population is not shown on the range map . The species was introduced to Bermuda in 1700 . It has also been introduced in Hawaii and southern California . Its natural habitat is woodlands , gardens , shrublands , and swamps . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 = = = Song = = = 
 The northern cardinal is a territorial song bird . The male sings in a loud , clear whistle from the top of a tree or another high location to defend his territory . He will chase off other males entering his territory . He may mistake his image on various reflective surfaces as an invading male , and will fight his reflection relentlessly . The northern cardinal learns its songs , and as a result the songs vary regionally . Mated pairs often travel together . 
 Both sexes sing clear , whistled song patterns , which are repeated several times , then varied . Some common phrases are described as <unk> @-@ a @-@ dote , <unk> @-@ a @-@ dote @-@ dote @-@ dote , purdy , purdy , purdy ... whoit , whoit , whoit , whoit , what @-@ cheer , what @-@ cheer ... wheet , wheet , wheet , wheet and cheer , cheer , cheer , what , what , what , what The northern cardinal has a distinctive alarm call , a short metallic chip sound . This call often is given when predators approach the nest , in order to give warning to the female and nestlings . In some cases it will also utter a series of chipping notes . The frequency and volume of these notes increases as the threat becomes greater . This chipping noise is also used by a cardinal pair to locate each other , especially during dusk hours when visibility wanes . 
 = = = Predators = = = 
 Northern cardinals are preyed upon by a wide variety of predators native to North America , including falcons , all Accipiter hawks , shrikes , and several owls , including long @-@ eared owls , and eastern screech owls . Predators of chicks and eggs include milk snakes , <unk> constrictors , blue jays , eastern gray squirrels , fox squirrels , eastern chipmunks , and domestic cats . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 The diet of the northern cardinal consists mainly ( up to 90 % ) of weed seeds , grains , and fruits . It is a ground feeder and finds food while hopping on the ground through trees or shrubbery . It will also consume insects , including beetles , cicadas , grasshoppers , and snails ; it feeds its young almost exclusively on insects . Other common items include corn ( maize ) and oats , sunflower seeds , the blossoms and bark of elm trees , and drinks maple sap from holes made by <unk> , an example of commensalism . During the summer months it shows preference for seeds that are easily husked , but is less selective when food is scarce during winter . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 Pairs mate for life , and stay together year @-@ round . Mated pairs sometimes sing together before nesting . During courtship they may also participate in a bonding behavior where the male collects food and brings it to the female , feeding her beak @-@ to @-@ beak . If the mating is successful , this mate @-@ feeding may continue throughout the period of incubation . 
 Males sometimes bring nest material to the female , who does most of the building . She crushes twigs with her beak until they are pliable , then turns in the nest to bend the twigs around her body and push them into a cup shape with her feet . The cup has four layers : coarse twigs ( and sometimes bits of trash ) covered in a leafy mat , then lined with grapevine bark and finally grasses , stems , rootlets , and pine needles . The nest typically takes three to nine days to build ; the finished product is 5 @.@ 1 – 7 @.@ 6 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 – 3 @.@ 0 in ) tall , 10 @.@ 1 cm ( 4 @.@ 0 in ) across , with an inner diameter of about 7 @.@ 6 cm ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) . Cardinals do not usually use their nests more than once . The female builds a cup nest in a well @-@ concealed spot in dense shrub or a low tree 1 – 3 m ( 3 @.@ 3 – 9 @.@ 8 ft ) off the ground . The nest is made of thin twigs , bark strips , and grasses , lined with grasses or other plant fibers . Eggs are laid one to six days following the completion of the nest . The eggs are white , with a tint of green , blue or brown , and are marked with lavender , gray , or brown blotches which are thicker around the larger end . The shell is smooth and slightly glossy . Three or four eggs are laid in each clutch . Eggs measure approximately 26 mm × 19 mm ( 1 @.@ 02 in × 0 @.@ 75 in ) in size . The female generally incubates the eggs , though , rarely , the male will incubate for brief periods of time . Incubation takes 12 to 13 days . Young fledge 10 to 11 days after hatching . Two to three , and even four , broods are raised each year . The male cares for and feeds each brood as the female incubates the next clutch of eggs . 
 The oldest wild cardinal banded by researchers lived at least 15 years and 9 months , although 28 @.@ 5 years was achieved by a captive bird . Annual survival rates for adult northern cardinals have been estimated at 60 to 65 % ; however , as with other passerine birds , the high mortality of juveniles means that the average lifespan is only about a year . 
 = = Relationship with humans = = 
 The northern cardinal is found in residential areas throughout its range . Backyard birders attract it using feeders containing seeds , particularly sunflower seeds and safflower seeds . Although some controversy surrounds bird feeding , an increase in backyard feeding by humans has generally been beneficial to this species . It is listed as a species of least concern by the IUCN Red List , with an estimated global range of 5 @,@ 800 @,@ 000 km2 ( 2 @,@ 200 @,@ 000 sq mi ) and a global population of some 100 million . Populations appear to remain stable and not threatened to reach the threshold of inclusion as a threatened species , which requires a decline of more than 30 % in ten years or three generations . It was once prized as a pet due to its bright color and distinctive song . In the United States , this species receives special legal protection under the Migratory Bird Treaty Act of 1918 , which also banned their sale as cage birds . It is also protected by the Convention for the Protection of Migratory Birds in Canada . It is illegal to take , kill , or possess northern cardinals , and violation of the law is punishable by a fine of up to US $ 15 @,@ 000 and imprisonment of up to six months . 
 In the United States , the northern cardinal is the mascot of numerous athletic teams ; however , most teams portray the bird with a yellow beak and legs . In professional sports , it is the mascot of the St. Louis Cardinals of Major League Baseball 's National League and the Arizona Cardinals of the National Football League . In college athletics , it is the mascot of many schools including Ball State University , The Catholic University of America , Illinois State University , Iowa State University , Lamar University , the Massachusetts College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences , North Idaho College , Saint John Fisher College , the State University of New York at Plattsburgh , the University of Louisville , the University of the Incarnate Word , Wesleyan University , and Wheeling Jesuit University . 
 = = State bird = = 
 The northern cardinal is the state bird of seven states , more than any other species : Illinois , Indiana , Kentucky , North Carolina , Ohio , Virginia , and West Virginia . It was also a candidate to become the state bird of Delaware , but lost to the Delaware Blue Hen . 
 = The Road Not Taken ( Fringe ) = 
 " The Road Not Taken " is the nineteenth episode of the first season of the American science fiction drama television series Fringe . It centers on the death of a young woman ( Jennifer Ferrin ) , who spontaneously combusts in the middle of a street . The Fringe team 's investigation leads them to learn more about the drug trials Olivia ( Anna Torv ) experienced as a child , as well as other revelations . 
 The episode 's story was written by Akiva Goldsman , while the teleplay was co @-@ written by executive producer Jeff Pinkner and supervising producer J.R. Orci . It was directed by Fred Toye . The title is based on the Robert Frost poem of the same name . Robert Chiappetta and Glen Whitman , frequent contributors to the series , aided in the episode 's production by " find [ ing ] a new and gruesome way to blow people up , " and rooting its explanation in science . 
 It first aired in the United States on May 5 , 2009 on the Fox network . An estimated 9 @.@ 245 million viewers watched the episode , making it the network 's fifth most watched show for the week . " The Road Not Taken " received mostly positive reviews from television critics , with many praising Olivia 's visions of the other universe and John Noble 's performance . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Fringe Division investigates the case of a woman ( Jennifer Ferrin ) who " spontaneously combusts " in the middle of a busy New York street . The team discovers that the victim is the subject of a ZFT experiment to cultivate pyrokinesis . As they investigate , Olivia ( Anna Torv ) experiences " visions " while awake . Walter ( John Noble ) suggests she is seeing a parallel universe which has branched off from our own . Olivia and Peter ( Joshua Jackson ) visit an agoraphobic website designer ( Clint Howard ) who is apparently aware of William Bell , the drug trials , and the coming war , although his credibility comes into question when he believes himself to be a character in the plot of Star Trek . 
 Using information from her visions , Olivia tracks down the victim 's twin sister , who only moments before was kidnapped for more ZFT experimentation . Harris ( Michael Gaston ) is revealed to be responsible for the crimes , and while closing in on him , Olivia gets locked in a room with the twin sister , whose unstable pyrokinetic abilities threaten both their lives . With Olivia 's guidance , the woman focuses her energy on Harris and incinerates him . Olivia finds out that the sisters were part of the same nootropic drug trial that she was as a child . She presses Walter to reveal why he and William Bell were developing " supersoldiers , " but Walter only shares that it was for protection against some impending doom that he regrettably cannot recall . 
 Meanwhile , Walter reveals that the ZFT manuscript was written by William Bell , and that the copy of the manuscript that ZFT uses is missing a chapter dealing with ethics . He locates the original , but the Observer ( Michael Cerveris ) shows up and takes Walter away , cryptically stating : " it is time to go . " Nina Sharp ( Blair Brown ) visits Broyles ( Lance Reddick ) to discuss the Observer , and is later shot in her hotel by two masked gunmen using a suppressed pistol . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode 's teleplay was co @-@ written by supervising producer J.R. Orci and executive producer Jeff Pinkner , based on a story by Akiva Goldsman . Producer Frederick E. O. Toye served as director . Goldsman had joined the series half way through the season by writing and directing the mythology @-@ riddled episode " Bad Dreams " , and was instrumental in convincing the showrunners to depict more Fringe mythology earlier than planned , most notably with the depiction of parallel universes . The title of " The Road Not Taken " is based on the Robert Frost poem of the same name . 
 New Media consultants and scientists Robert Chiappetta and Glen Whitman aided in the production of the episode . They had worked on the series throughout the first season , with their role ranging from directly writing episodes to advising the others on scientific concepts . Whitman later explained that they " come to us with questions : Is this possible ? Where can we go with this ? Then we go and read the very technical articles , or talk with scientists , and then translate that into the storytelling medium of our show . " For " The Road Not Taken " , he and Chiappetta were asked to again " find a new and gruesome way to blow people up , " this time by rooting it in the concept of pyrokinesis . Chiappetta explained , " They wanted to have someone spontaneously combust and burn up . So this is where we sort of leaned back into our mythology . " 
 They and the episode writers developed a storyline in which a victim 's childhood experimentation , when they were injected with something , was now " coming back to haunt them . " Whitman noted that the concept , like others in the show , was based on real scientific knowledge , " The notion is , some kind of a medical treatment that they were given allowed their brain to command vibrations that would take place . It really is true that essentially what heat is is vibrations of atoms , so if your brain can cause some kind of vibration to take place , eventually you could create enough heat to even create a flame . " Pinkner added , " And if you haven 't yet mastered pyrokinesis and the ability to excite molecules that are outside your body , well then your going to excite the ones inside your body and you 're going to blow up , sadly . " 
 For Harris ' immolation scene , first unit director Gary Rake emphasized safety , explaining that " everyone really has to think about what ’ s going on and really focus tonight . This is a quintessential moment where we can ’ t have any mistakes . " Everything in the scene was flame retardant , and a special burn unit crew was present . Actor Michael Gaston 's arm , immersed in a special gel , was actually inflamed and then extinguished after filming was cut . Then , Gaston 's stand @-@ in , stuntman Don Hewitt , Jr , was completely set on fire . Hewitt wore the same costume , a wig , a face shield , and was also covered in a flammable gel . It was Gaston 's final episode with the series . 
 Actress Jasika Nicole , who plays junior FBI agent Astrid Farnsworth , described the episode in a May 2009 interview , " It 's about spontaneously combusting . This is the episode I get to get out of the lab . I remember thinking I can 't wait to see what the set 's going to look like and how they will make it look when the spontaneous combusting takes place . And we get there and it 's just smoke on the walls , like a kitchen fire . I thought that was so funny because I thought there were going to be body parts everywhere , like a small explosion . But it 's a really good episode , which leads you into the coolest parts of the finale episode . " 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The episode contains many cultural references , which Annalee Newitz of io9 attributed to the episode 's writers : " It was bound to happen that one day these four <unk> would get together and spawn an episode so packed with in @-@ <unk> pop culture references that smacking is probably in order . " Peter and Walter reference the 1984 supernatural comedy film Ghostbusters while investigating the opening scene 's case , and later debate the origin of the term pyrokinesis , coined by author Stephen King in his 1981 novel Firestarter . Emmanuel Grayson refers to the titular character of the 1982 science fiction film Star Trek II : The Wrath of Khan , as well as Romulans and the United Federation of Planets , when describing government conspiracies to Peter and Olivia . Grayson also believes himself to be Mr. Spock . This reference is made even more appropriate by the fact that Spock 's mother was named Amanda Grayson . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " The Road Not Taken " was first broadcast in the United States on May 5 , 2009 on the Fox network . It was watched by an estimated 9 @.@ 245 million viewers , making it the network 's fifth most watched show for the week . The episode earned a 4 @.@ 0 / 10 ratings share among adults aged 18 to 49 , meaning that it was seen by 4 @.@ 0 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 10 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of broadcast . Fox later aired repeats of season one episodes , including " The Road Not Taken " , that featured Twitter posts by some of Fringe 's cast and producers . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The episode received generally positive reviews from television critics . TV Squad 's Jane Boursaw called the episode 's case " an interesting premise " and was pleased that " things are really , REALLY starting to come together in a big way , which is good , considering that the finale is fast approaching " . Annalee Newitz of io9 declared it to be " one of the most rewarding episodes ever for people who love the show 's mythology , " and found Olivia 's universe @-@ hopping ability to be " truly cool " . Newitz concluded that " this was a truly awesome episode with a lot of payoff for those of us who have been glued to the set every Tuesday night , looking for answers . " The website later listed " The Road Not Taken " as one of the " crucial " episodes new viewers must watch to get into the show . Television Without Pity graded the episode with a A- . 
 Noel Murray of The A.V. Club complimented the episode 's opening scene for providing a succinct synopsis of the season to new viewers who may have been newly discovering the series after watching its lead @-@ in , American Idol . Though he graded the episode with an A- , Murray did however critique its climatic scene for being " clumsily paced and staged " . Murray mainly found positive aspects with the episode , explaining , " For a show that started out being a fairly dour procedural with wacky mad @-@ scientist elements , Fringe has really worked its way into that fantasy / sci @-@ fi sweet @-@ spot , where its own forward momentum makes the ridiculous look likely and arcane mythology seem well @-@ worth the time to sort through and analyze . " Other highlights Murray found was Noble 's performance , which he considered his " finest moment in the series to date , " and Olivia 's visions of the other universe . 
 IGN 's Ramsey Isler rated the episode with a score of 9 @.@ 2 out of 10 . He thought that after a " stereotypical , over @-@ the @-@ top " characterization in past episodes , Gaston " stepped up his portrayal " as Harris and was " annoying ... in a much more believable way . " Isler found the revelation surrounding Harris to be " deliciously surprising , " and wrote that the " last twenty minutes of the episode really ramped up the suspense and action . " However , the IGN reviewer thought that while the conversation with Grayson was an " hilarious homage to Leonard Nimoy , it seemed completely superfluous in terms of the overall storyline . " Isler concluded his review on a positive note by focusing on Noble 's performance , calling it " one of the best scenes [ he ] has ever done as Walter Bishop . It was emotional , believable , and perfectly accurate for a character that has a high level of self @-@ loathing and remorse for what he 's done , and the hopeless frustration of not being able to remember exactly why he did it . " 
 = Sunda Strait campaign of January 1794 = 
 The Sunda Strait campaign of January 1794 was a series of manoeuvres and naval actions fought between warships and privateers of the French Republic and a squadron of vessels sent by the British East India Company to protect trade in the region , later augmented by Dutch warships . The campaign developed as French forces based on Île de France reacted more quickly than the British forces in the Indian Ocean to the expansion of the French Revolutionary Wars on 1 February 1793 . French privateers rapidly spread along the British trade routes in the Far East , becoming concentrated around the narrow Sunda Strait between the islands of Java and Sumatra in the Dutch East Indies . These ships were soon joined by French Navy frigates and began to inflict losses on shipping in the region . The Royal Navy forces in the Indian Ocean were deployed elsewhere and so the East India Company , the private enterprise that ruled much of British India in the 1790s and maintained their own fleet and navy , raised a squadron of armed merchant ships to patrol the Strait and drive off the raiders . 
 The arrival of this British force on 2 January 1794 was initially a success , the squadron over @-@ running and capturing two large and well @-@ armed privateers on the on 22 January , not long after the French vessels had been beaten off during an attack on the British trading post at Bencoolen . On 24 January an action against a larger French squadron was fought in the Strait itself , but ended inconclusively and the squadrons divided , the British receiving the Dutch frigate Amazone as reinforcements . The French subsequently turned southwards out of the Strait and attacked Bencoolen again on 9 February , capturing an East Indiaman in the harbour before returning to Île de France with their prize . 
 = = Background = = 
 On 1 February 1793 , the French Republic declared war on Great Britain and the Dutch Republic , extending the already existing French Revolutionary Wars . It took several months for news of the outbreak of war to reach British India , messages arriving at Calcutta from Consul George Baldwin at Alexandria on 11 June . The Royal Navy commander in the region , Commodore William Cornwallis , immediately set about demanding the surrender of the French trading posts in India . Most fell within a few days , but the major port of Pondicherry refused , and was besieged from 1 August . The siege lasted a month before the French commander capitulated under bombardment from British land and naval forces . With the French presence eliminated from India , Cornwallis was ordered to return to Europe , leaving minimal naval forces in the Indian Ocean . 
 The Indian Ocean formed a vital part of Britain 's trade links with the wider British Empire . India was controlled by the East India Company , a commercial organisation that maintained its own army and navy in Indian waters and owned a fleet of large merchant ships known as East Indiamen . These vessels ranged in size between 400 and 1500 tons burthen ( bm ) , carried up to 30 cannons and were capable in certain conditions of fighting warships , although a frigate was usually more than a match for an individual East Indiaman . These ships sailed on an annual route from China , the East Indies or India carrying trade goods such as spices , tea or silk to Britain . There the goods were sold , and replaced with general cargo including military equipment and troops for the journey back to the Indian Ocean . 
 One of the most vital parts of the Indian trade route was through the Sunda Strait between the islands of Sumatra and Java in the Dutch East Indies , through which most of the China and East Indies trade passed on its journey to the Indian Ocean . French ships , both Navy warships and commercially owned privateers , operated along the Indian trade routes from their base at the isolated island of Île de France and recognised the strategic importance of the Sunda Straits . As soon as news of war arrived at Île de France French ships spread out into the Indian Ocean in search of British and Dutch merchant shipping , gathering in significant numbers off the Sunda Straits . 
 On 27 September 1793 French cruisers achieved their first major victory when three privateers mounting more than 20 guns each attacked the East Indiaman Princess Royal , under Captain James Horncastle , off <unk> ( or <unk> or Anger ) Point in the Sunda Strait . Although Horncastle resisted , the privateers outgunned him and eventually forced him to strike . 
 = = East India Company deployment = = 
 With the Royal Navy unable to provide forces to protect trade in the East Indies , the East India Company authorities in India decided to form a squadron from their own ships to patrol the region . Three East Indiamen , Wiliam Pitt , Britannia and Nonsuch , were diverted from their regular route for the service , accompanied by the brig Nautilus and under the overall command of Commodore Charles Mitchell . On 2 January 1794 this force passed Singapore and entered the Malacca Strait , sailing eastwards in search of French raiders . As the British squadron travelled along the northern coast of Sumatra , two French privateers attacked the East India Company ’ s trading post at Bencoolen on the southern coast . The privateers were the 30 @-@ gun Vengeur under Captain Corosin and the 26 @-@ gun Résolu under Captain <unk> , and on 17 January they approached the mouth of Rat Island Basin close to Bencoolen where the 32 @-@ gun East Indiaman Pigot lay at anchor . Pigot , under Captain George Ballantyne , had a crew of 102 men , but was completely unprepared for action . At 08 : 15 Vengeur opened fire at 150 yards ( 137 m ) , maintaining the battle for an hour and 45 minutes before hauling off so that Résolu could continue the combat . Ballantyne defended his vessel intelligently , positioning Pigot so that the French could only approach one at a time through the narrow mouth of the bay . This allowed him to drive off each ship in turn , the privateers falling back together at 10 : 20 with damaged rigging . Pigot too had suffered , with one man killed and sufficient damage to the rigging to require several weeks of repairs . After immediate repairs had been completed , Corosin abandoned Bencoolen and retreated to the Sunda Strait in search of weaker targets . 
 Early on 22 January , Mitchell 's squadron , reinforced by the East Indiaman Houghton , stopped a merchant ship for inspection and as the ship was searched two new sails appeared to the southwest near Shown Rock in the <unk> Islands . Suspicious of the identity of the new arrivals , Mitchell sent Britannia and Nonsuch in pursuit and the ships turned away . As the East Indiamen closed with the fleeing ships , they were identified as Vengeur and Résolu . The British vessels soon outran the French and the French opened fire to which the larger British vessels responded . Captain Thomas Cheap of Britannia engaged Vengeur while Captain John Canning of Nonsuch attacked Résolu at 10 : 45 and were soon supported by William Pitt and Houghton . The overwhelming numbers and size of the British squadron soon convinced Corosin and <unk> that further resistance was pointless and 45 minutes after the first shots were fired both surrendered . Corosin died in the aftermath of the battle after losing a leg and another 11 French sailors were killed and 25 wounded , while British losses were one killed and two wounded on Britannia . Both raiders were subsequently supplied with crews from the East Indiaman squadron . 
 = = Battle of the Sunda Strait = = 
 On the morning of 24 January , most of Mitchell 's squadron lay at anchor off the island of Pulau Panjang in Bantam Bay on the northwestern tip of Java , with Nonsuch and the new prizes remaining in the <unk> Islands about 15 miles ( 24 km ) distant . At 06 : 00 , sails were sighted in the northern part of the Sunda Strait passing the small island of Dwars in de Weg that were rapidly identified as three frigates and a brig . These were in fact the French naval squadron from Île de France , consisting of the frigates Prudente and Cybèle , the brig Vulcain and the captured Princess Royal , now renamed Duguay @-@ Trouin , under the overall command of Captain Jean @-@ Marie Renaud . Canning attempted to communicate with the strange vessels , but by 13 : 00 it was obvious from their lack of response that these were enemy ships , and the greatly outnumbered Canning made all sail northeast with his prizes to avoid destruction . 
 During the evening heavy rain squalls reduced visibility and prevented any decisive movement by either side , but on 25 January the French squadron had rounded St. Nicholas Point at the northwestern tip of Java and was in full pursuit of Canning 's ships , which had been joined by Houghton . <unk> in particular was struggling to escape the advancing enemy , but Mitchell had realised the danger and was sailing to intercept the French . At 06 : 30 Houghton , Nonsuch and Vengeur joined with the remainder of Mitchell 's force and two hours later Renaud 's ships met the British line , <unk> just managing to reach safety in the shelter of the large East Indiamen despite being hit repeatedly in the latter stages of the chase . For an hour the two squadrons continued a general exchange of fire at long @-@ range , before Mitchell turned William Pitt , Houghton and Nonsuch towards the French at 09 : 30 , the latter two both managing to hit Cybèle with destructive broadsides . Firing continued for another 18 minutes as Renaud withdrew , eventually anchoring off the island of Pulau Baby . Neither commander was keen to continue the action , Mitchell fearing that his undermanned ships would not be able to properly engage the better armed French vessels . Casualties among the French squadron are not known , but the only loss on the British ships was on Nonsuch , which had a man killed in combat with Cybèle . 
 = = Final operations = = 
 In need of reinforcement and resupply , Mitchell drew his squadron back to Batavia and was there joined by the 36 gun Dutch frigate Amazone under Captain <unk> and an armed merchant ship . Mitchell 's ships then cruised the Sunda Strait for another two weeks without discovering any enemy vessels , before concluding the operation on 8 February and returning to the Indian Ocean via Bencoolen . Cheap died of an illness in June , but Mitchell survived and on his return to Britain in 1796 was knighted by King George III , and presented with £ 8 @,@ 000 ( the equivalent of £ 829 @,@ 000 as of 2016 ) as reward and compensation for his diversion to the Straits . The Dutch meanwhile retained their warships for a raid on Sourabaya where two French corvettes were sheltering . Both were captured without a fight and sent back to France as cartels carrying French prisoners . 
 The French squadron under Renaud had used the retreat of Mitchell 's force to also withdraw into the Indian Ocean via Bencoolen , reaching the British trading post on 9 February . There Pigot was still undergoing repairs and was taken by surprise and captured . As the merchant ship was manoeuvred out of the bay , Renaud demanded the surrender of the small Fort Marlborough nearby and was informed that the fort was well armed and that the arrival of Mitchell 's squadron was expected at any moment . Unwilling to continue the engagement with Mitchell , Renaud withdrew immediately without assaulting the fort . The French squadron subsequently returned to Île de France where , in the Action of 22 October 1794 , they drew away two British warships that blockaded the island . 
 The Sunda Strait and surrounding waters remained an important strategic location throughout the war , although the subsequent organisation of East Indiamen into convoys and the return of a Royal Navy presence in the region assisted in limiting losses to French privateers and smaller warships . On more than one occasion convoys of East Indiamen successfully discouraged large squadrons from attempting attacks on the valuable merchant craft with their size and power . 
 = = Orders of battle = = 
 = = = East India Company = = = 
 = = = French Navy and privateers = = = 
 = Oslo Airport Station = 
 Oslo Airport Station ( Norwegian : Oslo lufthavn stasjon ) , also known as Gardermoen Station , is a railway station located in the airport terminal building of Oslo Airport , Gardermoen in Norway . Located on the Gardermoen Line , it is served by the Airport Express Trains , express trains to Trondheim and Oslo , regional trains to Lillehammer and Skien ( via Oslo ) and commuter trains to Eidsvoll and Kongsberg ( via Oslo ) . 
 The station is located 48 kilometres ( 30 mi ) from Oslo Central Station . The station is manned , and there is a single bus route , and several coach services , to and from the airport . It opened in 1998 , along with the new airport . During 2000 – 2001 , there were several derailments at the station . South of the station is a terminal for unloading freight trains carrying aviation fuel . 
 = = Location = = 
 Gardermoen is at kilometer marker 51 @.@ 85 ( 32 @.@ 22 mi ) from Oslo S , but the actual distance is only 48 @.@ 07 km ( 29 @.@ 87 mi ) . This is because the distance markers follow the slightly longer Hoved Line between Oslo and Lillestrøm . The station is built directly below the airport terminal , and access is obtained via escalators or elevators located in the airport 's arrival hall . North of the station , the tracks run in a tunnel below the terminal and runway area . The tracks on platform 2 and 3 only have connection southwards ; north of the station they are only connected to a short turning track . 
 Aviation fuel is transported to the airport by train . CargoNet hauls a daily train load of fuel from <unk> , with an unloading terminal just south of the passenger station . They are the only freight trains to use the Gardermoen Line . 
 = = Services = = 
 Norwegian State Railways ( NSB ) and the Airport Express Train are the only companies that operate to the station . The outer side platforms ( 1 and 4 ) serve NSB trains , while the two inner island platforms ( 2 and 3 ) serve the Airport Express Trains . 
 The station is manned , from 07 : 00 to 22 : 00 on weekdays , with reduced opening hours on weekends . The platform ( but not necessarily the trains ) are wheelchair accessible , and an escort service for disabled persons can be <unk> . Baggage trolleys are available , and a wide selection of services , including cafes , kiosks , banks and police , are available at the airport terminal , as are taxis . A single local bus route , Ruter no . 855 , also serves the airport from Kløfta , Jessheim and Maura . There are many coaches from all parts of the country that also serve the airport , as well as coach services to Oslo operated by <unk> and SAS Ground Services . 
 = = = Airport Express Train = = = 
 The Flytoget airport express train services operate six times per hour . Three run directly to Oslo Central Station ( Oslo S ) in nineteen minutes and terminate there ; the other three services make an additional stop at Lillestrøm Station , then continue beyond Oslo Central towards Drammen Station , a total of eight stops . Total travel time to Drammen is 60 minutes . In 2007 , the Airport Express Train had 5 @.@ 35 million passengers . 
 = = = Norwegian State Railways = = = 
 The Oslo Commuter Rail operated by NSB , provides one service in each direction each hour — line 450 from Kongsberg Station via Oslo Central to Eidsvoll Station . NSB also provides one regional service in each direction per hour towards Skien Station ( via Oslo Central ) and Lillehammer Station . On the Dovre Line to Trondheim Central Station , five daily express trains are also offered , including one NSB Night Train . Northbound trains use track 1 , while southbound trains use track 4 . 
 = = History = = 
 The decision to build the station , railway and airport was taken by the Parliament on 8 October 1992 . NSB Gardermobanen , a subsidiary of the Norwegian State Railways , was created to build the line and station , as well as operate the Flytoget airport express train services . Construction of the station was performed in parallel with the construction of the airport , and the station is built in the same style as the rest of the airport , in postmodernist concrete and wood . 
 The station was taken into use on 27 September 1998 , and public services commenced along with the opening of the airport on 8 October 1998 . In 2001 , as part of a reorganization of NSB Gardermobanen , the ownership of the station was transferred to the Norwegian National Rail Administration . 
 = = = Incidents = = = 
 In 2000 – 01 , the Airport Express Train experienced three derailments with empty trains at Gardermoen ; one caused by the engineer falling asleep and two by the train passing a red light . No more such accidents occurred after automatic train control was installed in 2001 . 
 = Anne Hyde = 
 Anne Hyde ( 12 March 1637 – 31 March 1671 ) was Duchess of York and of Albany as the first wife of the future King James II of England . Originally an Anglican , she converted to Catholicism soon after her marriage to James . This took place in 1660 after she became pregnant by him , but he is said to have promised to marry her the year before . The two first met in the Netherlands while Anne was living in the household of James ' sister Mary . James and Anne had eight children , but six died in early childhood . The two who survived to adulthood were Lady Mary , who succeeded her father after his deposition during the Glorious Revolution of 1688 and Lady Anne , who succeeded her brother @-@ in @-@ law and became the first monarch of Great Britain . 
 Born the daughter of a commoner – Edward Hyde ( later created Earl of Clarendon ) , Anne is best known for her marriage to James , which caused much gossip . Two months after the marriage , Anne gave birth to the couple 's first child , who had obviously been conceived out of wedlock . Until near the end of Anne 's life , some observers disapproved of James ' decision to marry Anne ; but not King Charles II , James ' brother , who wanted the marriage to take place . Another cause of disapproval was the public affection James showed towards Anne , such as kissing and leaning against each other , which was considered improper behaviour from man to wife during the seventeenth century . 
 James was a known philanderer who kept many mistresses , for which Anne often reproached him , once even complaining to the king , who sent one of James ' mistresses to the countryside where she remained until her death . Nonetheless , James fathered many illegitimate children . Years after Anne had herself converted , James avowed his Catholicism , which was a contributing factor to the Glorious Revolution . This was through Anne ’ s influence ; she had been exposed to Catholicism during visits to the Netherlands and France , and was strongly attracted thereto . She suffered from advanced breast cancer and died shortly after giving birth to her last child . 
 = = Early years ( 1637 – 60 ) = = 
 In 1629 , Edward Hyde married his first wife , Anne <unk> of <unk> . Six months into the marriage Anne caught smallpox , miscarried and died . Three years later , Hyde married Frances Aylesbury . In 1637 , Anne , the couple 's eldest daughter , was born at Cranbourne Lodge in Windsor . Almost nothing except that she was named after Edward Hyde 's first wife is known of her life before 1649 , when her family fled to the Netherlands after the execution of the deposed King Charles I. They settled in Breda , where they were offered a home by Mary , Princess Royal and Princess of Orange , who had done the same with many English fugitives . The Princess appointed Anne a maid of honour , apparently against the wishes of her mother and late father . 
 Anne became a general favourite with the people she met either at The Hague or at the Princess of Orange 's country house at <unk> . She was very attractive and stylish , and attracted many men . One of the first men to fall in love with Anne was Spencer Compton , a son of the Earl of Northampton . However , Anne quickly fell in love with Henry Jermyn , who returned her feelings . Anne dismissed Jermyn just as quickly when she met James , Duke of York , the son of the deposed king . On 24 November 1659 , two or three years after she first met him , James promised he would marry Anne . Charles , James ' brother , forced him reluctantly into this , saying that her strong character would be a positive influence on his weak @-@ willed brother . 
 = = Duchess of York ( 1660 – 71 ) = = 
 = = = Marriage = = = 
 Anne was visibly pregnant and the couple were obliged to marry . They held an official but private marriage ceremony in London on 3 September 1660 , following the restoration of the monarchy . The wedding took place between 11 at night and 2 in the morning at Worcester House – her father 's house in the Strand – and was solemnised by Dr. Joseph Crowther , James ' chaplain . The French Ambassador described Anne as having " courage , cleverness , and energy almost worthy of a King 's blood " . The couple 's first child , Charles , was born in October of that year , but died seven months later . Seven children followed : Mary ( 1662 – 1694 ) , James ( 1663 – 1667 ) , Anne ( 1665 – 1714 ) , Charles ( 1666 – 1667 ) , Edgar ( 1667 – 1671 ) , Henrietta ( 1669 – 1669 ) , and Catherine ( 1671 – 1671 ) . All of their sons and two of their daughters died in infancy . 
 Even well after their marriage , some observers disapproved of the prince 's decision , regardless of what he had promised beforehand . Samuel Pepys said of the marriage : " ... that the Duke of York 's marriage with her hath undone the kingdom , by making the Chancellor so great above reach , who otherwise would have been but an ordinary man , to have been dealt with by other people ... " After Anne 's death , the royal court tried to find a new wife for James , but this new wife was not , under any circumstances , to be of humble birth . As good a father as Pepys portrayed James to be , he strangely stated that Anne and James were unaffected by the death of their firstborn son . Pepys also described Anne as " not only the proudest woman in the world , but the most <unk> . " Even in the minds of Anne 's future son @-@ in @-@ law , William III of Orange and that of her cousin @-@ by @-@ marriage , Sophia of Hanover , the stigma of the Hydes ' lowly birth remained . 
 = = = Domestic life = = = 
 Anne experienced problems in her married life . She was not very much liked at court and James <unk> with younger mistresses such as Arabella Churchill , with whom he fathered many illegitimate children , including two born during Anne 's lifetime ; thus he was called " the most unguarded <unk> of his time . " Anne was not oblivious to this : Pepys wrote that she was jealous and chided James , but he also wrote that Anne and James were notorious for showing their affections publicly , kissing and leaning on each other . Pepys also wrote that when James fell in love with Lady Chesterfield , Anne complained to King Charles so insistently that Lady Chesterfield had to retreat to the countryside , where she remained until she died . 
 Anne became drawn to Catholicism , to which both she and James had been exposed during their time abroad and converted to it almost immediately after the Restoration . John Callow states that Anne " made the greatest single impact upon his thinking . " James also converted to Catholicism eight or nine years after Anne , but he still attended Anglican services until 1676 . James preferred to associate himself with Protestant people , such as John Churchill , whose wife later became a very close friend of Anne 's youngest surviving daughter Lady Anne . King Charles at the time opposed Catholicism and insisted that James ' children be raised in the Anglican faith , although he converted to Catholicism on his deathbed . James and Anne 's surviving daughters were raised as Anglicans . 
 = = = Death and legacy = = = 
 Anne was ill for 15 months after the birth of her youngest son , Edgar . She bore Henrietta in 1669 and Catherine in 1671 . Anne never recovered from Catherine 's birth . Ill with breast cancer , she died on 31 March 1671 . On her deathbed , her two brothers Henry and Laurence tried to bring an Anglican priest to give her communion , but Anne refused and she received viaticum of the Catholic Church . Two days after her death , her embalmed body was interred in the vault of Mary , Queen of Scots at Westminster Abbey 's Henry VII Chapel . In June 1671 , Anne 's only surviving son Edgar died of natural causes , followed by Catherine in December , leaving Ladies Mary and Anne as the Duke of York 's heiresses . 
 After Anne Hyde 's death , a portrait of her painted by Willem Wissing was commissioned by the future Mary II ; this used to hang above the door of the Queen 's Drawing Room of the Garden House at Windsor Castle . Two years after the death of his first wife , James married a Catholic princess , Mary of Modena , who bore James Francis Edward , James ' only son to survive to adulthood . James became king of England , Ireland , and Scotland in 1685 , but was deposed during the Glorious Revolution of 1688 . The throne was then offered by Parliament to Anne 's eldest daughter Mary and her husband William of Orange . After Mary died in 1694 and William in 1702 , Anne Hyde 's youngest daughter Anne became Queen of the three Kingdoms and , in 1707 , the first sovereign of the united Kingdom of Great Britain . 
 = = Issue = = 
 = = Style and arms = = 
 Following her marriage , Anne was styled as Her Royal Highness the Duchess of York . 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = = Media portrayals = = 
 In the 2003 mini @-@ series , Charles II : The Power and The Passion ( or The Last King ) , Anne Hyde is portrayed by Tabitha Wady . 
 = New Waddell Dam = 
 The New Waddell Dam is an embankment dam on the Agua Fria River in Maricopa County , Arizona , 35 miles ( 56 km ) northwest of Phoenix . It serves as part of the Central Arizona Project ( CAP ) while also providing water for the Maricopa Water District . The dam creates Lake Pleasant with water from the Agua Fria and also the CAP aqueduct . In addition , it affords flood protection , hydroelectric power production and recreational opportunities . Construction on the dam began in 1985 and ended in 1994 . Its reservoir submerged the Old Waddell Dam which was completed in 1927 after decades of planning . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Old Waddell Dam = = = 
 First referred to as the Frogs Tank Dam , the original Waddell Dam was the ambition of local businessmen who wanted to develop a project that used the Agua Fria for the irrigation of around 100 @,@ 000 acres ( 40 @,@ 000 ha ) of land . This was to be accomplished with a storage dam , diversion dam and system of canals . Their advancement of the project began in 1888 with the formation of the Agua Fria Water and Land Company . The company hired George Beardsley 's Agua Fria Construction Company , and in 1892 , construction on the project began . In 1895 , Beardsley died , and his brother William who was now president of the Water and Land Company helped continue the project . In 1896 , due to a lack of funding caused by poor nationwide economic conditions , the project was halted . The Water and Land Company soon went bankrupt , but William Beardsley would keep the project alive . Work had been primarily done on the diversion dam and canal while only the foundation of the storage dam , a gravity dam , was completed . The diversion dam , Camp Dyer Diversion Dam , was named after Edgar J. Dyer , a surveyor on the project . 
 After nearly 30 years of struggling with funding and pursuing various deals , William Beardsley hired engineer Carl Pleasant to assist with designing . Pleasant recommended hiring the engineer firm Peckham and James to draft plans for the storage dam at the Frogs Tank site . The gravity dam design was dropped , and a relatively new , cheaper and improved but controversial design was adopted : the multiple @-@ arch buttress dam . In 1925 , under a new state law , Beardsley was able to create the Beardsley @-@ Agua Fria Water Conservation District . Under the new district , funds could be raised through a bond issue . On December 20 , 1925 , the construction contract was signed , but the bonds had yet to be purchased . Five days before the contract was signed , Beardsley died . His son , Robert took direction of the project along with Pleasant . In early 1926 , Pleasant eventually sold the needed bonds to the New York firm Brandon , Gordon and Waddell . The firm sent Donald Ware Waddell to oversee construction . 
 Although the initial implementation of worker camps and site preparation had begun in 1925 , the main effort of construction began in 1926 with the diversion of the Agua Fria River . In that same year , the dam was renamed to Pleasant Dam . By February 1927 , concrete pouring for the 20 buttresses was nearing completion . The dam was complete in October 1927 . Its construction employed a maximum of 600 workers and cost over $ 3 @.@ 3 million . Prior to its inauguration , cracks were discovered in the dam 's buttresses . This led to much controversy over the new design of the dam and whether it was safe in the long @-@ term which delayed its inauguration until February 1928 . The situation was exacerbated on 12 March 1928 after the St. Francis Dam in California had a catastrophic failure . In 1929 , after a series of hearings and debates , which eventually reached the state legislature , the State Water Commissioner ordered the spillway for the dam to be lowered 24 feet ( 7 @.@ 3 m ) to prevent excess water levels and stress on the dam . It was also required that specific water levels in the reservoir be maintained . The dam was rehabilitated until 1935 , and a steel roadbed was installed atop it that same year . In the early 1960s , it was renamed the Waddell Dam . 
 = = = New Waddell Dam = = = 
 In 1973 , construction on the Central Arizona Project ( CAP ) began while many of its facilities were still being planned and approved . One integral part of the project was a storage dam on the Salt River , Orme Dam . However , in 1977 , US President Jimmy Carter recommended that Orme Dam and two other projects on the Gila River System be removed from the CAP plan because of their negative impacts and cost . While the two other projects ( Hooker and Charleston Dam ) were easily removed , Orme was not . Orme 's removal was hampered by controversy that led to the creation of the Central Arizona Water Control Study ( CAWCS ) in 1979 after Secretary of the Interior Cecil D. Andrus requested that the Bureau of Reclamation identify a replacement . In 1980 , the CAWCS recommended the removal of any storage units on the Gila River . Recent flooding within the CAWCS area and the Orme Dam problem led to an expansion of the study to include dams for flood control . 
 Three years later , the Bureau of Reclamation and the State of Arizona agreed on an alternative to Orme . This was known as Plan 6 , and it recommended four projects : a reconstruction of the Stewart Mountain Dam , a new or larger Roosevelt Dam , the Cliff Dam on the Verde River and finally , the New Waddell Dam on the Agua Fria River ( a tributary of the Gila River ) . On November 6 , 1981 , the Secretary of the Interior James G. Watt recommended Plan 6 . In April 1984 , it was approved with the exception of the Cliff Dam , which needed further study and would eventually be removed from CAP . 
 In 1985 , construction on the New Waddell Dam began with the excavation of its foundation . A diversion tunnel was constructed along with another to divert water releases from the Old Waddell Dam to the Beardsley Canal . Construction on the dam 's intakes continued through 1991 , and by the end of 1992 , a controlled breach was performed on two arches of the Old Waddell Dam , allowing its reservoir to fill freely behind the New Waddell Dam , which was already mostly inundated . By 1994 , the reservoir was filled and had nearly tripled the size of the Old Waddell Dam reservoir . In that same year , the dam 's pump @-@ generating plant ( New Waddell Pump @-@ Generating Plant ) began operation . The dam 's cost was in excess of $ 625 million . Large sediment releases from the New Waddell Dam deteriorated the Camp Dyer Diversion Dam 1 @.@ 25 miles ( 2 @.@ 01 km ) downstream . This masonry dam had to be rehabilitated by the Bureau in 1992 . 
 = = Design and operation = = 
 The New Waddell Dam is 300 ft ( 91 m ) high from the riverbed and 440 feet ( 130 m ) high from its bedrock foundation . It is a zoned earth @-@ fill type and is 4 @,@ 700 ft ( 1 @,@ 433 m ) long ; containing 16 @,@ 200 @,@ 000 cu yd ( 12 @,@ 385 @,@ 789 m3 ) of material . The dam has a crest width of 35 feet ( 11 m ) and a base width of 1 @,@ 514 feet ( 461 m ) . The reservoir created by the dam , Lake Pleasant , has a capacity of 1 @,@ 108 @,@ 600 acre feet ( 1 @.@ <unk> × 109 m3 ) at its maximum elevation above sea level : 1 @,@ 725 feet ( 526 m ) . At maximum elevation , its surface area is 12 @,@ 040 acres ( 4 @,@ 870 ha ) . The maximum conservation storage level of the reservoir is 1 @,@ 702 feet ( 519 m ) when the reservoir has a surface area of 9 @,@ 970 acres ( 4 @,@ 030 ha ) . Conservation storage for the reservoir is 812 @,@ 100 acre feet ( 1 @.@ <unk> × 109 m3 ) and minimum storage 40 @,@ 500 acre feet ( 50 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 m3 ) . The dam sits at the head of a 1 @,@ 459 square miles ( 3 @,@ 780 km2 ) catchment area . 
 Located 1 @.@ 25 miles ( 2 @.@ 01 km ) northwest of the dam and serving excess water levels are two different spillways : a 590 feet ( 180 m ) long un @-@ gated free flow with a crest elevation of 1 @,@ 706 @.@ 5 feet ( 520 @.@ 1 m ) and a 370 feet ( 110 m ) long fuse plug embankment with an elevation of 1 @,@ 711 feet ( 522 m ) . The free flow spillway has a discharge capacity of 187 @,@ 000 cubic feet per second ( 5 @,@ 300 m3 / s ) and the fuse plug 129 @,@ 000 cubic feet per second ( 3 @,@ 700 m3 / s ) . At an elevation of 1 @,@ 728 feet ( 527 m ) , both spillways would have a combined capacity of 316 @,@ 000 cubic feet per second ( 8 @,@ 900 m3 / s ) . 
 Water from the dam 's reservoir is released through its outlet works or power plant to either the Waddell Canal or into Hank Raymond Lake , which is formed just downstream of the dam by the Camp Dryer Diversion Dam . The diversion dam is a composite concrete and masonry dam with a height of 79 feet ( 24 m ) and length of 872 feet ( 266 m ) . It can store up to 590 acre feet ( 730 @,@ 000 m3 ) at an elevation of 1 @,@ 445 feet ( 440 m ) . Water from Hank Raymond Lake is diverted into the Beardsley Canal , which has a main extension 33 miles ( 53 km ) long to serve 60 square miles ( 160 km2 ) of the Maricopa Water District ( MWD ) . The Beardsley Canal also has an interconnection 4 @.@ 5 miles ( 7 @.@ 2 km ) south of the dam at 33 ° 46 ′ 48 ″ N 112 ° 16 ′ 54 ″ W with the CAP aqueduct that allows it to receive additional water from that source . Water released into the 4 @.@ 7 miles ( 7 @.@ 6 km ) long Waddell Canal first travels under the Agua Fria River via a 2 @,@ 440 feet ( 740 m ) long siphon before being returned to the surface canal where it continues south to meet the CAP aqueduct just west of Arizona State Route 303 . The capacity of the pump @-@ generating plant , <unk> Canal and siphon is 3 @,@ 000 cubic feet per second ( 85 m3 / s ) while the outlet works for the diversion dam and Beardsley Canal are 5 @,@ 600 cubic feet per second ( 160 m3 / s ) , but only 4 @,@ 300 cubic feet per second ( 120 m3 / s ) can be diverted to the canals at a time . 
 Water from the New Waddell Dam reservoir augments supply in the CAP and helps deliver 15 % more CAP water to Arizona . Water in Lake Pleasant is divided between the CAP ( 658 @,@ 300 acre feet ( 812 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 m3 ) ) and MWD ( 162 @,@ 142 acre feet ( 199 @,@ 999 @,@ 000 m3 ) ) . Water from the CAP aqueduct is also drawn into Lake Pleasant via the New Waddell Pump @-@ Generating Plant . During the winter months , when energy rates are low , additional water in the aqueduct is pumped a maximum of 192 feet ( 59 m ) up into the lake for storage . During the summer months , when energy rates are higher , water is released back down through the generators for hydroelectric power production . Sale of this electricity is being used to pay part of the dam 's cost . The pump @-@ generating plant contains four pumps and four pump @-@ generators and has an installed capacity of 45 megawatts ( 60 @,@ 000 hp ) . 
 = = Recreation = = 
 Lake Pleasant , created by the dam , offers recreational opportunities to tourists and locals . The lake is served by a marina and surrounding areas containing over 450 picnic sites , 225 camping sites and several miles of trails . Because the lake is seasonal , fluctuating up to 125 feet ( 38 m ) annually , these facilities are located for accessibility . 
 = = Environmental impact = = 
 Before the New Waddell Dam was constructed , two phases of a three @-@ phase study were carried out to determine the effects of the dam on fisheries . Completed in 2005 , the third phase of the study determined that the larger reservoir has less nutrient concentrations due to CAP water introduction and that water fluctuations have reduced fish cover , likely affecting food and spawning . Large mouth bass populations have also declined but striped bass have entered the lake , likely by eggs transferred through CAP water . Around the lake , Reclamation has taken steps to protect wildlife habitats , including those for bald eagles and Gila <unk> . 
 = Jake Long = 
 Jake Edward Long ( born May 9 , 1985 ) is an American football offensive tackle for the Baltimore Ravens of the National Football League ( NFL ) . He played college football at Michigan , where he was a two @-@ time consensus All @-@ American , and was drafted by the Miami Dolphins first overall in the 2008 NFL Draft . He has also played for the St. Louis Rams . 
 In high school , Long was the first player in his high school 's history to earn all @-@ state " Dream Team " ( all @-@ class state team ) honors in football from the Detroit News . He was a two @-@ time first @-@ team All @-@ Metro League player in both basketball and football , where he was honored both on offense and defense . In baseball , he was a two @-@ time second @-@ team All @-@ Metro League selection . In both basketball and football , he led his team to regular and post season success that had not been seen in many years . 
 At the University of Michigan , he redshirted for a year and then became a starter at offensive tackle for the football team in the third game of his redshirt freshman season . He earned second @-@ team All @-@ Big Ten Conference recognition and Rivals.com Freshman All @-@ American recognition . In 2006 and 2007 , he earned Big Ten Offensive Lineman of the Year and first @-@ team All @-@ Big Ten recognition . In 2006 he was an Outland and Lombardi Trophy watch lists selection and in 2007 he was a finalist for both awards . He was a consensus first @-@ team All @-@ American in 2006 , and a unanimous first @-@ team All @-@ American in 2007 . 
 After being drafted by Miami , he became an immediate starter and has started every game that the team has played since he has been a member . At the conclusion of his rookie season , he was selected to numerous All @-@ Rookie teams and was a substitute Pro Bowl selection . Long has followed up on a successful rookie season by earning Pro Bowl roster spots in 2009 , 2010 and 2011 . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Long was born in Lapeer , Michigan , the son of John and Denise Long . He attended Lapeer East High School , where he was the first player in his high school 's history to earn all @-@ state " Dream Team " ( all @-@ class state team ) honors in football . In baseball he played first base . 
 Long played basketball , baseball and football in high school . Although Long was a 2001 Flint , Michigan All @-@ Metro League lineman on both sides of the ball as a defensive end and offensive lineman , in Lapeer East 's final game of the 2001 season , he rushed for three touchdowns . As a junior that football season , he was listed at 6 feet 7 inches ( 2 @.@ 01 m ) , 270 pounds ( 122 kg ) . In Long 's first start as a varsity basketball player on December 4 , 2001 , he led all scorers although he only scored one first half point . That season he helped lead Lapeer East to an unbeaten 14 – 0 Metro League record ( 17 – 3 ) overall as they prepared for the Michigan High School Athletic Association ( MHSAA ) tournament . It was the first unbeaten Metro League season by any team since 1989 and Lapeer East 's first unbeaten season since 1980 . Long was an All @-@ Metro league first team selection , but his team lost in the 2002 Class A district semifinal on the road . By the end of the basketball season , he was listed at 6 feet 7 inches ( 2 @.@ 01 m ) , 290 pounds ( 132 kg ) . As a junior , he was a second @-@ team All @-@ Metro League baseball selection as an infielder . By the end of his junior year , he had already set the school home run record in baseball and was the fifth @-@ ranked high school football prospect in the state of Michigan ( future Michigan teammate and co @-@ captain LaMarr Woodley was number one ) . 
 After his junior year of high school , he attended the University of Michigan football camp , which ran from June 16 – 21 . At the conclusion of the camp , Michigan Wolverines football head coach Lloyd Carr offered him a scholarship as an offensive tackle . Long , who was a lifelong Michigan Wolverines fan , responded with a verbal commitment . At the time , Long weighed 305 pounds ( 138 kg ) and Michigan hoped he would bulk up to 330 pounds ( 150 kg ) by the time he arrived . Long had made official visits to Michigan , Michigan State , Notre Dame , Ohio State and Purdue . 
 In his 2002 senior season , Long helped lead Lapeer East to their first season opener win since 1995 and their first state playoff appearance since 1993 . That season , the football team set a school record by posting a nine @-@ game winning streak , which started after an October 6 , 2001 loss the prior year . The team achieved its first state playoff win in its 27 @-@ year history that season . The team 's 9 – 2 record was the best in school history , and Long was again chosen as an All @-@ Metro League selection on both offense and defense . That season he became the first Lapeer East player selected to the All @-@ state Dream Team in 2002 . Although he was All @-@ State as a lineman , Long often lined up at fullback and accumulated four career touchdowns . He finished the season as the number two football prospect in the state behind Woodley according to the Detroit News . Long led the basketball team to a second consecutive undefeated Metro League championship season , which was the first repeat league champion since 1996 and Lapeer East 's first repeat championship since 1982 . Long was again first @-@ team All @-@ Metro League , and he was selected as an honorable mention 2003 Associated Press Class A All @-@ State basketball player . Long was again a second @-@ team All @-@ Metro League selection as a first baseman . Following his senior season , Long was selected to play in the 23rd annual Michigan High School All @-@ Star Football Game on July 26 at Michigan State University . 
 = = College career = = 
 Long accepted an athletic scholarship to attend the University of Michigan , where he played for head coach Lloyd Carr 's Michigan Wolverines football team from 2003 to 2007 . As a freshman , Long was on the 2003 Michigan Wolverines football team roster , but Tony Pape and Adam <unk> were the starting offensive tackles . He was redshirted for the year as he bulked up to 330 pounds ( 150 kg ) . Long traveled with the team to the 2004 Rose Bowl , but did not play in the game . 
 On June 16 , 2004 , following his freshman year , he was hospitalized in an intensive @-@ care unit for smoke inhalation injuries when a house rented by nine Michigan Wolverine players caught fire . Long , sleeping in his bedroom on the second floor of the house , awoke to the sound of fire alarms . He attempted to exit his room through the door , but was forced back by smoke . Long then knocked out the screen of a window and jumped out of the building . Two floors below , covered in soot , Long had escaped the fire , landing two stories below on a roommate 's parked car . Later at the hospital , Long underwent procedures that required tubes be put down his throat to suction black phlegm from his lungs . The tubes also performed Long 's breathing while he lay unconscious for the first few days . He was released from the University of Michigan Medical Center and was able to spend Father 's Day ( June 20 ) back in Lapeer . 
 As a sophomore member of the 2004 Michigan Wolverines football team , Long competed with senior Dave <unk> and juniors Mike Kolodzieg , Rueben Riley and Mike <unk> for the starting position vacated by the graduated Pape . Long impressed the coaches by playing through a turf toe injury . The battle came down to him and Kolodzieg . Long made his Michigan debut on September 4 , 2004 , in a 43 – 10 victory over Miami University . He made the travel squad , but he did not play against Notre Dame in the Michigan – Notre Dame rivalry game the following week at Notre Dame Stadium . Kolodzieg started the first two games , but Michigan averaged only 85 @.@ 5 yards rushing , which ranked 94th nationally among 117 Division I teams . Long became a starter in the third game on September 18 against the San Diego State Aztecs football team . Over the course of the season , he started eight games and Kolodzieg started 4 at right offensive tackle . Kolodzieg also started one game at left tackle . A week after Long was moved into the starting lineup , David Baas was moved from left offensive guard — where he had been a 2003 second team All @-@ American — to center so that Leo <unk> , Jr. could enter the starting lineup . After the move , Baas was the co @-@ Rimington Trophy winner that season . The team finished the season as the 2004 Big Ten Conference Co @-@ Champions and were awarded the Big Ten Conference 's Bowl Championship Series Bowl game bid . By the time Michigan was preparing for the 2005 Rose Bowl , the team was averaging 156 @.@ 18 rushing yards per game , which ranked 56th in the nation . Long earned a second team All @-@ Big Ten Conference recognition from the coaches , while linemates guard Matt Lentz , tackle Adam <unk> and tight end Tim Massaquoi were first @-@ team selections . Baas was Big Ten Offensive Lineman of the Year . Long also received honorable mention All @-@ Big Ten recognition from the media . Long and teammates Chad Henne and Mike Hart were named to Rivals.com 's 2004 Freshman All @-@ America first team . Long had post @-@ season shoulder surgery and missed 2005 spring practice . In fact , because of the large number of injured players , the team canceled the culminating spring practice intrasquad scrimmage game and instead held an open practice in which players participated in drills . 
 In August 2005 , Long suffered an ankle injury and was sidelined as the 2005 Michigan Wolverines football team 's season began . The injury had been caused in training camp when he was zone blocking alongside center Mark Bihl , who got tangled up with nose tackle Gabe Watson . The two fell against the outside of Long 's leg and rolled over it . The injury required surgery . Long did not return to the lineup until October 22 on the third possession against the Iowa Hawkeyes . He was the lead blocker on the game @-@ winning overtime touchdown . He started the game the subsequent week against the Northwestern Wildcats . Two weeks later , following a bye week , Long got injured during the first half against the Indiana Hoosiers , and his foot was put in a protective boot . The second foot injury was expected to end his season . He appeared in the subsequent rivalry game against the Ohio State Buckeyes , and during the first play , he opposed Bobby Carpenter and Carpenter got a broken leg . After the game , Long appeared to need immediate surgery , which would have caused him to miss the 2005 Alamo Bowl . By the time of the game on December 28 , though , he was ready to play . As the team prepared for 2006 spring practice , the left @-@ handed Long was moved from right tackle to left tackle where he would be protecting the blindside of right @-@ handed quarterbacks . 
 Long entered the season for the 2006 Michigan Wolverines football team listed on numerous preseason conference and national teams as well as watchlists for awards such as the Outland Trophy and Lombardi Trophy . He was on the preseason Outland Trophy watch list along with Levi Brown , Joe Thomas , Justin Blalock , and Herbert Taylor . Long was considered the heart of the Michigan offense , and his teammates voted the redshirt junior to be a co @-@ captain along with senior Woodley . Before the season started , Carr replaced offensive coordinator Terry Malone with Mike <unk> who had previously been offensive coordinator from 1997 – 1999 . Following the 7 – 5 2005 season which was the worst Michigan season since 1984 's 6 – 6 @-@ year , there was pressure on Carr to turn things around and he sought a lighter , faster and better conditioned team . During the offseason , Long reduced his weight from 338 pounds ( 153 kg ) to 316 pounds ( 143 kg ) to improve his agility , speed and conditioning . Under the new coordinator and with newly sculpted fitter athletes the offensive scheme was shifted to concentrate on the zone blocking system . The system was similar to the one used by the Denver Broncos when they won back @-@ to @-@ back Super Bowls and by the Atlanta Falcons to help Warrick Dunn achieve a career @-@ high in rushing yards while the team led the NFL in rushing yards in consecutive seasons . By mid @-@ November , Michigan had flourished under the new system with an 11 – 0 record , and some of the credit for the success was attributed to Long , the team captain and offensive leader . Long was recognized as a first @-@ team All @-@ Big Ten selection by both the coaches and the media and was selected as the Big Ten Offensive Lineman of the Year . Long was also part of a Michigan record @-@ setting three American Football Coaches Association ( AFCA ) All @-@ America Team selections along with Woodley and Leon Hall . Long was a consensus ( meaning at least half of the recognized lists , which are AP , AFCA , FWAA , TSN , and the WCFF selected him ) 2006 College Football All @-@ America Team first @-@ team <unk> by Associated Press ( AP ) , AFCA , Football Writers Association of America ( FWAA ) , Walter Camp Football Foundation , Sports Illustrated , Pro Football Weekly , ESPN , CBS Sports , Rivals.com , Scout.com. He was a second @-@ team All @-@ American selection by the College Football News . Long was the first offensive lineman who was a Michigan high school graduate selected to the first @-@ team by the FWAA since Paul Seymour was selected to the 1972 College Football All @-@ America Team . Long was believed to be a likely mid to high first round selection if he had chosen to declare himself eligible for the 2007 NFL Draft , but he chose to use his last year of collegiate eligibility and stay for a fifth year . His decision to stay was what convinced Hart to stay in college . Michigan opposed the 2006 USC Trojans football team in the 2007 Rose Bowl and the offensive line that had surrendered 18 quarterback sacks in the first 12 games , allowed 6 in the 32 – 18 loss to finish the season 11 – 2 . Long became a member of senior honorary society Order of Angell . 
 Long was a co @-@ captain of the 2007 Michigan Wolverines football team , and he again began the season on the Outland Trophy and Rotary Lombardi Award watch lists . He was elected to serve as tri @-@ captain along with Hart and Shawn Crable . Entering the season , the team was picked by the Big Ten media members to win the conference . The season was eagerly anticipated with returning seniors Long , Hart and Chad Henne in key roles , but the season quickly began to fall apart when the team lost to the two @-@ time defending FCS champion Appalachian State Mountaineers in the opening game . The loss put Long in a position of having to defend his coach and teammates to ESPN and the nation . In the second game , the team suffered its worst defeat since 1968 and its first consecutive home losses to start the season since 1959 . This presented a leadership challenge to Long as team captain . As Michigan won its next eight games , Long was described in the press as the team 's most valuable player and an offensive lineman who should be considered for the Heisman Trophy since he was likely to be the first overall pick in the NFL draft . In early November , Long was named one of four finalists ( along with Glenn Dorsey , Chris Long , James Laurinaitis ) for the Lombardi award that Woodley had won the year before . He was named as an Outland Trophy finalist along with Dorsey and Anthony Collins . When the win streak ended the week before his final Michigan – Ohio State game , he accepted the blame on behalf of the offensive line although the teams offensive stars were injured . At the conclusion of the Big Ten Conference schedule , he was selected again as first @-@ team All @-@ Big Ten selection by both the coaches and the media and as the Big Ten Offensive Lineman of the Year . Long , Michael Crabtree and Darren McFadden were the only unanimous offensive 2007 College Football All @-@ America Team selections by AP , AFCA , FWAA , Walter Camp , Sporting News , Sports Illustrated , Pro Football Weekly , ESPN , CBS Sports , College Football News , Rivals.com , and Scout.com. In coach Carr 's final game before retirement and Long 's final game as a Wolverine , the team won the 2008 Capital One Bowl against the Florida Gators in a game that included an attempted Jake Long tackle eligible screen pass . Long declined an invitation to participate in the 2008 Senior Bowl . From February 21 – 24 , 2008 , Long attended the NFL Combine , where he excelled . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = 2008 NFL Draft = = = 
 Regarded as the top offensive tackle available in the 2008 NFL Draft , Long drew comparisons to Ryan Tucker . His 37 repetitions of 225 pounds on the bench press tied Vernon Gholston for the highest total at the 2008 NFL Combine . In addition to being one of eight offensive tackles drafted in the first round that year , Long is only the third offensive tackle ever to be taken with the first overall pick in the NFL Draft , after Hall of Famer Orlando Pace ( 1997 , a 5 @-@ time All @-@ Pro and All @-@ Decade team for the 2000s ) and Hall of Famer Ron Yary ( 1968 , an 8 @-@ time All @-@ Pro and All @-@ Decade team for the 1970s ) . The Dolphins drafted Long 's college teammate , quarterback Chad Henne , in the second round of the draft . 
 = = = Miami Dolphins = = = 
 More than two weeks before the 2008 NFL Draft , the Miami Dolphins , who owned the right to make the first selection in the draft determined that they wanted to negotiate with Long to be their pick and met with Tom Condon , Long 's sports agent . On April 22 , 2008 , in advance of the April 26 and 27 draft , Long agreed to a five @-@ year , $ 57 @.@ 75 million deal with the Miami Dolphins . The deal included $ 30 million in guaranteed money and made Long the first overall pick in the 2008 NFL Draft . This made him , as of that date , the highest paid offensive lineman in NFL history . At Dolphins minicamp on May 2 , Long was assigned number 79 and he thought he would have to negotiate with Drew <unk> for the number 77 that he had worn since high school . However , after he failed his physical exam , <unk> was released from the team , and before training camp Long was assigned number 77 . 
 Long 's ascension with the Dolphins was part of an effort to overhaul the offensive line that had allowed 42 sacks and produced the 29th @-@ rated of 32 offenses the previous season . The Dolphins hired new coach Tony <unk> and employed Bill Parcells as Executive Vice President in charge of football operations . Long was immediately slated to play left tackle . He was the only rookie expected to be a starter for the 2008 Miami Dolphins . According to the South Florida Sun @-@ Sentinel , at the end of training camp , Long was one of three rookies listed as first @-@ string on the depth chart . Jake Long was nominated for Rookie of the Week in the tenth week of the 2008 season , but lost out to Broncos WR Eddie Royal . Other players who were nominated for rookie of the week that same week were Matt Ryan , <unk> Green @-@ Ellis , and Joe Flacco . At the end of the season , Long was selected to nine All @-@ rookie teams by Pro Football Writers Association , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Sports Network , <unk> , Sporting News , Scout.com and <unk> Scouting Service . On January 20 , 2009 , Long was selected to the 2009 Pro Bowl , replacing Jason Peters for the AFC 's squad . Long gave up just 2 @.@ 5 sacks his rookie season , compared to the 11 @.@ 5 allowed by Peters in 2008 . 
 In 2009 , Long yielded only 4 sacks and was ranked the second best offensive tackle . He was selected as a starter for the 2010 Pro Bowl . He was not selected to the first team All @-@ Pro losing out to Ryan <unk> , who gave up 8 sacks , and Joe Thomas , who is ranked the best offensive tackle in the NFL . Long was selected to the second team All @-@ Pro and was named a starter for the AFC Pro Bowl . Long joins Richmond Webb as the only Dolphins offensive tackles to be named starters in the Pro Bowl and is the first Dolphins offensive lineman to be named to back @-@ to @-@ back Pro Bowls since Webb played in seven straight from 1990 to 1996 . Long did not participate in the game due to injury and was replaced on the Pro Bowl roster by D <unk> Ferguson . The following season Long was named as a starter for the 2011 Pro Bowl , while Ferguson was named as a reserve . 
 During the 2011 NFL season , Long 's 61 games started streak snapped when he suffered a back ailment . Subsequently , he was placed on injured reserve with a torn right biceps for the final week of the season . The roster move came one day after he was selected to the 2012 Pro Bowl . He was named as a Pro Bowl starter for the third consecutive season . He missed the Pro Bowl for the 2011 season . However , he was named the Dolphins ' Ed Block Courage Award recipient . In addition , he was listed as the 59th player on the NFL Top 100 Players of 2012 . 
 = = = St. Louis Rams = = = 
 During the 2013 NFL offseason , Long became a free agent . He received two contract offers : an extension from the Miami Dolphins , and a contract from the Rams . On March 17 , 2013 , Long signed a four @-@ year , $ 36 million contract with the Rams . At the October 6 , 2013 , contest against the Jacksonville Jaguars , the Rams gave the first 15 @,@ 000 fans to arrive at the game free Jake Long figurines . On October 26 , 2014 , Long sustained another torn ACL against the Kansas City Chiefs and he missed the rest of the season . He was released along with Scott Wells on the eve of free agency on March 9 , 2015 . Long was coming off of back @-@ to @-@ back seasons with torn <unk> and was about to cost the Rams $ 10 million against the salary cap . 
 = = = Atlanta Falcons = = = 
 On September 15 , 2015 , Long signed a one @-@ year , $ 1 @,@ 568 @,@ 750 contract with the Atlanta Falcons . 
 = = = Baltimore Ravens = = = 
 On July 26 , 2016 , Long agreed on a 1 @-@ year deal with the Baltimore Ravens . 
 = = Personal = = 
 After surviving the fire during his second year of college , Long got a tattoo of Saint Joseph on his right biceps . His aunt had placed a card of the saint under his pillow while he was in the hospital in intensive care . He also has a tattoo of the family name on his other arm . Long has two brothers : John and Joseph ( " Joe " ) . Joe Long attended Wayne State University . Jake Long married his college sweetheart , Jacqueline Laurian , on March 10 , 2012 . 
 = Belle ( Disney song ) = 
 " Belle " is a song written by composer Alan Menken and lyricist Howard Ashman for Walt Disney Pictures ' 30th animated feature film Beauty and the Beast ( 1991 ) . Originally recorded by American actress and singer Paige O 'Hara and American actor Richard White , " Belle " , a mid @-@ tempo French and classical music @-@ inspired song , incorporates both Broadway and musical theatre elements . The film 's first song and opening number , " Belle " appears during Beauty and the Beast as a large scale operetta @-@ style production number that introduces the film 's heroine Belle , considered a book @-@ loving nonconformist by the townspeople of the village , who has grown weary of the provincial life in which she is supposed to live , and Gaston , the film 's narcissistic villain who wishes to desire her hand in marriage despite Belle 's rejections . 
 " Belle " has been universally acclaimed by film and music critics . Musically , the song has been compared to various musical numbers from the musical films West Side Story ( 1961 ) and The Sound of Music ( 1965 ) , as well as the Broadway musicals Fiddler on the Roof and She Loves Me . At the 64th Academy Awards in 1992 , " Belle " was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Original Song , but ultimately lost to the film 's title song . The song was similarly featured in the Broadway musical based on the film , originally performed by American actress and singer Susan Egan . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = History and writing = = = 
 In an attempt to replicate the unprecedented success of The Little Mermaid ( 1989 ) , Walt Disney Animation Studios decided to adapt the traditional fairy tale " Beauty and the Beast " into an animated feature film . Although originally conceived as an animated film with " no songs in it whatsoever " under the direction of Richard Purdum , Disney CEO Jeffrey Katzenberg was unsatisfied with the dark and somber direction in which the film was headed , and ultimately ordered that it be re @-@ written as a " Broadway @-@ style musical with a strong heroine " instead , similar in concept to The Little Mermaid . Disney then hired lyricist Howard Ashman and composer Alan Menken to write the film 's songs and assist in the " transform [ ing of ] Beauty and the Beast into a musical " , the pair having just recently collaborated on scoring The Little Mermaid . 
 According to Menken , the " plot @-@ furthering songs " in Beauty and the Beast , including " Belle " , developed quite naturally as a result of the fact that the film was written to " almost ... exist as a stage musical " , having been " presented in the style of a traditional Broadway musical . " According to Broadway actress and singer Paige O 'Hara , who both recorded the song and provided the voice of Belle , Ashman and Menken " wanted to leave the pop music sound of Mermaid behind and go for something more Jerome Kern / Rodgers & Hammerstein " for Beauty and the Beast . The film 's songs and musical numbers , which were written to both " propel the plot " and offer " character development " , were heavily influenced by French , classical and traditional Broadway music . Additionally , Menken described " Belle " and the other Beauty and the Beast songs to The New York Times as " tangents from 18th @-@ century France " . 
 Written in a style that Menken would later admit is very " distant from contemporary pop " , the songwriters were initially skeptical of " Belle " , fearful of the song 's potential to " end their careers at Disney " if it was not well received . Described by the film 's producer Don Hahn as a " Gilbert & Sullivan operetta style " song , " Belle " reveals a lot of information " in a very short time " . Ashman and Menken initially doubted that the filmmakers would appreciate their very theatrical approach to animation . Much to their surprise , " Belle " was ultimately very well @-@ liked and " adored by the [ creative ] team " , becoming one of the film 's few songs to remain unmodified during production . 
 = = = Context and composition = = = 
 Hoping to write a song that would successfully " portray [ Belle ] in a world that is so protected and safe " , Ashman and Menken drew inspiration from a story @-@ telling style that is often reserved for traditional operettas . As Beauty and the Beast 's opening number , " Belle " , a " pivotal moment ... in the narrative " , plays a significant role in the film by introducing both the film 's heroine , Belle , after whom the song is named , and Gaston , the film 's villain . While Belle , a book @-@ loving and intelligent nonconformist who has grown frustrated with her predictable village life , longs for an adventure similar to the ones she reads about in her books , Gaston is a narcissistic hunter who seeks her hand in marriage . In roughly five minutes , the song explains both Belle and Gaston 's roles in Beauty and the Beast to the audience . The song also voices the opinions of the townsfolk and " sets up the overall theme and foreshadows what makes the town so oppressive to [ Belle ] " ; while the villagers award Belle high praise for her doubtless Beauty , they see her as odd because of her love of books and ridicule her for her non @-@ conformity . However , they appraise Gaston for his looks and masculinity . 
 According to Irving Tan of Sputnikmusic , " Belle " is an " idyllic , orchestra @-@ driven " musical number , written in the style of a traditional operetta . Commonly regarded as the film 's " I Want " song , a term originally coined and popularized by Ashman himself , " Belle " offers its protagonist an opportunity to " expresses her yearnings " . Described by Filmtracks.com as a " snare @-@ tapping song " , " Belle " is , according to sheet music originally published by Walt Disney Music Publishing , a Broadway @-@ inspired and musical theatre @-@ influenced song , performed at a moderate " pastorally " tempo of 80 beats per minute in the key of D major . Combined , O 'Hara 's soprano and White 's baritone vocal ranges span approximately two octaves , from the low note of A3 , sung by White , to the high note G5 , sung by O 'Hara . Additionally , actors Alec Murphy , Mary Kay Bergman and Kath Soucie 's vocals are also featured on the track . In total , " Belle " runs a length of five minutes and nine seconds . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 " Belle " has garnered widespread acclaim from both film and music critics . Filmtracks.com hailed the song as " among the most satisfying and clever cast pieces in history , " worthy of its nomination for the Academy Award for Best Original Song . Additionally , Filmtracks.com similarly lauded the song 's reprise , drawing similarities between its own instrumentation and that of " The Sound of Music " from The Sound of Music ( 1965 ) . <unk> 's Irving Tan described the song as " idyllic " . 
 Jennie Punter of The Globe and Mail hailed " Belle " as " one of the most delightful openings of any movie musical " . The New York Times ' Janet Maslin was very enthusiastic about the song , praising the way in which it advances the film 's plot , while describing " Belle " as " a spectacular opening number that captures the essence of this film 's appeal . " Additionally , Maslin drew similarities between " Belle " and some of the songs featured in the musical film West Side Story ( 1961 ) . Beliefnet called the song a " joyous introductory " . Pete Vonder Haar of the Houston Press liked both the song and its reprise , admitting to the inevitability of having to experience an " unexpected swell of emotion " when both songs are heard . Highlighting the song as one of the film 's most notable , Sandie Angulo Chen described " Belle " as an " infectious " song " that reveals how different Belle is from the other Disney heroines " . While describing the song as a " teeming ... opener " , TV Guide positively compared " Belle " to some of the songs featured in the musicals Fiddler on the Roof and She Loves Me . James Berardinelli of ReelViews described " Belle " as " the animated equivalent of Broadway show @-@ stoppers , with all the energy and audacity of something choreographed by Busby Berkeley . " Similarly , the New York Post 's Lou Lumenick also hailed " Belle " as a " show @-@ stopper " . 
 Ranking Beauty and the Beast Disney 's third greatest animated film while hailing it as " the best Disney movie musical , " Gregory Ellwood of HitFix wrote , " you can 't argue the cinematic joy in numbers such as the opening ' Belle ' . " Ranking Beauty and the Beast the " Best Disney Soundtrack ... of the Past 25 Years " , Moviefone 's Sandie Angulo Chen highlighted " Belle " , commenting , " There 's an infectious quality to all of the Alan Menken and Howard Ashman songs , like the opening number of ' Belle ' ( that reveals how different Belle is from the other Disney heroines ) . " 
 = = = Accolades and legacy = = = 
 Alongside " Be Our Guest " and " Beauty and the Beast " , " Belle " was one of the three Beauty and the Beast songs that received an Academy Award nomination for Best Original Song at the 64th Academy Awards in 1992 . " Belle " ultimately lost to the film 's title and theme song . According to producer Don Hahn , Disney was actually hoping that the award would go to " Beauty and the Beast " and promoted the song heavily , spending significantly less money and attention on " Belle " . Oh No They Didn 't ranked " Belle " at number twenty in its article " The Top 25 Disney Songs of All Time " . 
 " Belle " is often considered one of Disney 's most underrated songs . In 2014 , the New York Post included the song among " The best ( and the most underrated ) Disney songs , " with author Gregory E. Miller deeming it " a musical @-@ theater classic . " 
 " Belle " is heavily parodied in the animated musical film South Park : Bigger , Longer & Uncut ( 1999 ) through its opening number , " Mountain Town " . Filmtracks.com described the parody as " a delightful introductory piece " . Amy Keating Rogers , a writer working on the animated television series My Little Pony : Friendship Is Magic , mentioned she was influenced by the song as she wrote " Pinkie the Party Planner " , the first musical number that appears in the musical @-@ intensive episode " Pinkie Pride " . 
 = = Live performances and cover versions = = 
 O 'Hara first performed " Belle " live at the 64th Academy Awards ceremony in 1992 , at which the song was nominated for Best Original Song . In spite of the fact that the producers of the telecast wanted well @-@ known " pop stars " to perform the song at the ceremony , Disney executives Michael Eisner and Jeffrey Katzenberg were adamant that " Belle " be performed by the original artist by whom it was recorded . The producers also gave O 'Hara the option to lip @-@ synch the song . However , she opted to perform it live instead . O 'Hara was also forced to wear a rendition of Belle 's blue and white costume from the film , of which she was harshly critical because she felt that it was " much too frilly " , and Belle is supposed to dress " much simpler . " She likened the costume to something that the fairy tale character Little Bo Peep would wear . O 'Hara admitted that she was very nervous before her performance . However , actress Angela Lansbury , who provided the voice of the character Mrs. Potts in the film and was to perform " Beauty and the Beast " at the ceremony , comforted her by telling her , " Paige , if I sang like you I wouldn ’ t be nervous . " 
 In August 2011 , O 'Hara performed an abridged version of " Belle " live during the Disney Legends awards ceremony , at which O 'Hara was also a recipient . The performance was a Beauty and the Beast medley , during which O 'Hara musically combined " Belle " with " Beauty and the Beast " and " Be Our Guest " . 
 = Trouble ( Coldplay song ) = 
 " Trouble " is a song recorded by the British alternative rock band Coldplay for their debut album , Parachutes . The band wrote the song and co @-@ produced it with British record producer Ken Nelson . The song 's musicscape is minimalist built around a piano . 
 The song was released on 26 October 2000 as the album 's third single . It reached number 10 on the UK Singles Chart , making it the band 's second top 10 single in the country . Although " Trouble " failed to chart on the United States , the music press deemed it almost as successful as its predecessor , " Yellow " . Two different music videos for the single were released . 
 An associated EP titled Trouble – Norwegian Live EP was released in the summer of 2001 , consisted of five tracks recorded live by the band at Rockefeller Music Hall in Oslo , Norway . 
 = = Production = = 
 According to Coldplay 's lead singer Chris Martin , the song 's writing was inspired by his own behaviour . Martin recalls , " There were some bad things going in our band ... the song is about behaving badly towards somebody you really love and I was certainly doing that to some members of the band . " He added that he supposed it was about time to stop acting like a <unk> . The four members of Coldplay are credited as co @-@ writers of " Trouble " . 
 British record producer Ken Nelson and the band produced " Trouble " for their debut album , Parachutes . The track was recorded four times before the band got the take they preferred . The backing track was first recorded , and each time they add to see if it was working . They , however , decided that the first three versions were not " working " . The last take was recorded into Pro Tools with a shaker to provide the rhythm to the track . For the backing track , Will Champion played the drums and Martin on the piano which they recorded in a little wooden room . After Guy Berryman 's bass was recorded , guitarist Jonny Buckland added the guitar section . In recording the piano section of the track , the band used two microphones — one was brighter @-@ sounding and the other had a fuller sound . Nelson , who wanted to keep the song simple , chose the fuller sound microphone for the mixing . 
 " Trouble " was mixed in New York by American mix engineer Michael Brauer . The initial mixed version , which was sent back to the band and Nelson , fell short of their desired quality , so it had to be redone . According to Nelson , " the vocal was <unk> and the piano was too bright " . Despite this , Nelson did not blame Brauer because he was recording the album when the track was being mixed . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The song 's lyrics have " softer emotional themes " , including apologies , unrequited love , and longing . Its musicscape follows the minimalistic approach . " Trouble " is built around a piano , with a snare drum background that was mixed very low . The snare drum section tends to be inaudible when the guitars come in . According to the sheet music published by Musicnotes , Inc . , the song 's time signature follows the common 4 / 4 , with a tempo of 70 beats per minute . Martin 's vocal range in the song spans from F ♯ 3 to A4 , the highest note being sung using the falsetto register , despite the fact Martin can reach this note in full voice . 
 = = Release = = 
 " Trouble " was released as the third single off Parachutes on 26 October 2000 in the United Kingdom , and more than a year later on 18 December 2001 in the United States . An extended play titled Trouble – Norwegian Live EP was released in the summer of 2001 . In 2003 , the song was featured on Coldplay 's live album called Live 2003 . 
 As they have for their other songs , Coldplay has refused to accept several offers to use " Trouble " for promotional tools . In 2004 , the band rejected a multi @-@ million Euro offer from Diet Coke and Gap to use the song and " Don 't Panic " , the fourth single from the album . They asked manager Phil Harvey to not refer such offers to them because " a discussion might lead to compromise " . American actor Sylvester Stallone was interested to use the song for the soundtrack of his 2001 film Driven , but the band declined . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Trouble " was a commercial success . It reached number 10 on the UK Singles Chart , making it the band 's second top 10 single in the United Kingdom after " Yellow " . The performance of " Trouble " has been attributed to the " colossal home sales " of Parachutes in the United Kingdom . 
 The positive reception of the single continued when the British outfit Lost Witness made a remixed version of the song , which was released and became " an unlikely dance floor anthem " . With three singles successfully released , the band decided to abandon their initial plans of issuing " Don 't Panic " as the fourth single of the album , deemed enough for a single album in the United Kingdom . " Don 't Panic " , however , was eventually released in some European regions . 
 In the United States , the single 's chart performance was nearly as successful as that of " Yellow " ' s . It has reached number 23 on the Billboard Adult Top 40 and 28 on the Billboard Modern Rock Tracks . Martin has claimed that the single had saved them from being a " one @-@ hit wonder " band . The band , thinking it was not a " great single " , surmised it would not perform well in the United States . 
 = = Music videos = = 
 The original European version of the music video for " Trouble " was directed by British director Sophie Muller . The video footage was shot in a Newhall , California ranch . A Wild West @-@ themed video , it features Martin as a prisoner in a dark warehouse , tied with ropes to a chair , being circled by cars in the freezing cold . The other members of the band are seen on the upper floor in a slow motion sequence where Buckland and Champion struggle with bassist Guy Berryman , tying him to another chair and forcing him to look in front . At this point , Martin 's struggling causes his chair to tip over , and he hits the ground on his side . He sings the final line of the song ( " They spun a web for me ... " ) , before the darkness abruptly turns to daylight . A beautiful sunrise is then revealed , but as the camera pans out , it is revealed to be fake and part of a large theater backdrop , with Martin still lying on his side , tied to the chair . 
 A US version of the music video was directed by Tim Hope . The video follows the motif of " Don 't Panic " by showing the band as two @-@ dimensional cut @-@ outs . The band are aboard a horse carriage that cruises along a forest . On top of a mountain , a woman ( Nerys Davies ) waters plants inside a house . A little crow flies from the carriage up to the house , where it transforms into a more menacing bird . It flies over the house and turns into a black cloud , which pours rain onto the land . The rain burns little holes on the things it falls into , and crow feathers protrude from the holes . Finally a tornado grabs the house and lifts it from its foundations placing it along others in a more suburban setting . Its acclaimed visuals earned Tim Hope an MTV Video Music Award for Best Art Direction in 2002 . It was also nominated for Breakthrough Video . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Chris Martin : vocals , piano , acoustic guitar , mellotron 
 Jonny Buckland : electric guitar 
 Guy Berryman : bass guitar 
 Will Champion : drums , percussion 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Single = = = 
 = = = Norwegian Live EP = = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Mérens horse = 
 The Mérens or Cheval de Mérens , still occasionally referred to by the older name of Ariégeois pony , is a small , rustic horse native to the Pyrenees and Ariégeois mountains of southern France , where the Ariège River flows , and northern Spain , near Andorra . Two general types , a small , light traditional mountain horse and a taller , sportier modern type , are found . Always black in color , Mérens must meet strict physical standards in order to be registered in the stud book . The breed is known for its sure @-@ footedness on mountain terrain , as well as for its endurance , hardiness and docility . The French breed registry organizes regional offices , and partners with other national organizations in Europe to preserve and promote the breed . The organization enforces rigorous selection of breeding stock , with a goal of increasing quality in the breed . In the past , the Mérens was used for farm work , draft work and as pack horses . Today it is mainly used as a saddle horse , although some members of the breed have been successful in carriage driving . Many Mérens are taken on an annual transhumance ( seasonal migration ) , in which they are moved higher in the mountains during the summer and into the valleys for the winter . An old practice , it fell into disfavor , but has recently re @-@ emerged . 
 Thought to have originated in prehistoric times , the exact early history of the Mérens remains a mystery . Theories on its origins include descent from Iberian horses , similar to many regional mountain horses , or possibly Oriental horses brought to the area by settlers from the east . Small black horses from the area of Ariège have been recorded as early as the time of Julius Caesar , as well as being associated with Charlemagne . They pulled artillery for Napoleon 's Grand Army , as well as being used by farmers , dock workers , miners and smugglers moving goods through the Pyrenees mountains . They were frequently seen at local horse fairs , and were used to breed mules in a cross with Catalan donkeys . By the end of the 19th century , they had gained a reputation as light cavalry horses . At the same time , however , uncontrolled crossbreeding led to a decline in the purebred population , and in 1908 the local agricultural society was put in charge of the breed . The breed registry was created in 1933 , and in 1948 the first stud book was created under the control of the French National Stud . 
 In the second half of the 20th century , the population sharply declined , as mechanization transferred work in cavalry and agriculture to machines . By the 1970s , the Mérens was on the verge of extinction , with only 40 horses registered in the stud book . The breed was saved by members of the hippie movement , who re @-@ settled in the Ariège mountains , boosting the local economy and restarting breeding programs . The Mérens also benefited from a new surge in popularity in riding horses , and between 1975 and 1985 its population rebounded , leading the breeding program to be considered an example for the conservation of rare breeds . The herd size remains relatively small , however , and one genetic study considers the traditional type of the breed to be endangered and recommends that efforts should be focused on its preservation . 
 = = Naming = = 
 The Mérens was traditionally bred in the village of Mérens @-@ les @-@ Vals in the department of Ariège . The French National Stud calls the breed the " Mérens " , a name which was officially mentioned for the first time in 1866 . Laetitia Bataille , a French horse breeding specialist , considers the use of " Mérens " incorrect , and prefers the names " Ariégeois " , " Cheval de Mérens " or " <unk> " . Jean @-@ Louis <unk> , a traditionalist breeder , prefers the name " <unk> " , saying that " Mérens " refers to the village and the valley in which it is located , not the horse breed . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 The traditional Mérens is a small , light horse , well adapted to the mountains , while modern Mérens are increasingly more sporting in style . The breed is known for its elegance , and in 2005 was ranked as one of the 23 most beautiful horse breeds by the French magazine Cheval <unk> . Since 1948 , Mérens horses must meet certain physical standards in order to be admitted to the stud book . In this time , the admission criteria have changed several times . Currently , the general appearance of a Mérens is strong and compact , with energetic movement . The Mérens , like many mountain horses , is calm , docile and hardworking . The report of a comprehensive study on the heritability of the breed 's temperament was published in <unk> <unk> in 2010 . It is a versatile breed , and very hardy , able to live all year outside without suffering from the weather . Mérens are known for their endurance , agility and sure @-@ footedness . They require very little care , and can survive on poor food , even when working . They are resistant to cold , but react poorly to heat . Mérens foals are often born in the snow , without human intervention , but are usually handled and accustomed to humans from an early age . They show increased resistance to the anticoagulant properties of some varieties of fern , the consumption of which can cause bloody sweats and blood in the urine in other horses . 
 The breed standard for the Mérens gives an ideal height of 14 @.@ 1 to 15 @.@ 1 hands ( 57 to 61 inches , 145 to 155 cm ) and a weight of 400 to 500 kilograms ( 880 to 1 @,@ 100 lb ) . The desired size for stallions is 14 @.@ 2 1 ⁄ 2 hands ( 58 @.@ 5 inches , 149 cm ) and 14 @.@ 1 hands for mares . Horses smaller than 14 @.@ 2 hands ( 58 inches , 147 cm ) can be considered ponies for some equestrian competitions . Horses bred in the valleys and plains are larger than those bred in the mountains ; the latter average around 12 @.@ 3 1 ⁄ 2 hands ( 51 @.@ 5 inches , 131 cm ) . The coat is always black , but may have a reddish cast during the winter . Foals may be born black , silver @-@ grey or coffee @-@ colored , but become black as they grow . <unk> on the body is desirable . 
 The head has a straight or slightly concave facial profile , a flat forehead , and wide , short ears . A distinguishing characteristic of the breed is a " beard " of hair growing below the cheeks . Small white markings are allowed on the face , but never on the legs . The neck is of medium length in the modern Mérens , and often shorter and broader in the traditional version . The shoulders are sloping and moderately long , and the chest wide and deep . Pronounced withers are favored in those Mérens used for pack horses , but as with most mountain horses , many traditional Mérens have wide , flat withers . The girth is deep . The back is generally shorter in modern Mérens than in the traditional version , where horses with long , strong backs were preferred for use as pack horses . The croup is well @-@ muscled and the tail low @-@ set . The legs are strong and solid , with well @-@ defined joints . They tend to be quite short , and some have hocks set too close together , a recurrent fault in mountain horses . The feet are large and well @-@ formed , allowing the horses to go without shoes . There is abundant feathering on the lower legs . 
 = = Registration = = 
 In France , the breed is organized by SHERPA ( Syndicat hippique des <unk> de la race <unk> <unk> / Union of Horse Breeders of the Ariege Pyrenees ) in La Bastide @-@ de @-@ <unk> , which has about 400 members and 600 horses in the stud book . SHERPA unites eleven regional offices whose purpose is to organize Mérens breeders and enthusiasts . The role of SHERPA is to decide the overall direction of the breed in partnership with the French National Stud . It promotes the Mérens at fairs , national shows and international exhibitions , as well as publishing newsletters and breeder lists . SHERPA also organizes the annual breed show in <unk> . 
 Only purebred Mérens may be registered in the breed stud book . The selection of stallions is rigorous , based on tests at the age of three . The breeding goal is to produce horses with the ideal conformation and good character . The gaits are subject to particular observation in all stallions , and during the three @-@ year @-@ old inspections , they must perform a dressage test , a cross @-@ country jumping test , a test on the longe line and a physical inspection . The Mérens has one of the most stringent inspection procedures , and breeders aim to achieve a steady increase in the quality of the breed . Mares are evaluated during a breed competition organized by the French National Stud . 
 French breeding of the Mérens is divided between two schools of thought . The first is traditional breeders seeking to preserve the original type , that of a light draft horse living high in the mountains year @-@ round and retaining the hardiness for which the breed is known . The second comes from the conversion of the Mérens to a leisure horse in the 1980s , and aims to transform the physical type of the breed into a more sports @-@ oriented horse to ensure the survival of the breed . This dichotomy has become a source of tension between farmers and users of the breed . 
 Several countries besides France have populations of Mérens , and a few have breed registries and stud books that are recognized by the French . In Italy , the Mérens is the only foreign breed among the " breeds of limited distribution " recognised by the AIA , the national breeders ' association . Mérens are found mostly in northwestern Italy , in the provinces of Cuneo and Turin , but has spread to other mountain regions such as the valleys of Bergamo and Trento . The Italian breed registry for the Mérens is based in Cuneo . A Belgian non @-@ profit organization has been organizing the breed in that country since June 2005 , and was recognized as an official stud book by the Belgian Ministry of Agriculture in August 2006 . An agreement has been signed with the French breed registry to recognize the Belgian stud book as a daughter organization . Mérens are also present in the Netherlands , Switzerland and Germany , where there are recognized stud books and active breeding populations . There are some Mérens in the Czech Republic and members of the breed have also been exported to India and Tunisia . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 The department of Ariege is known for the annual transhumance ( seasonal migration ) of cattle , sheep and horses , including many members of the Mérens breed . Each year , in June , hundreds of horses are moved to summer pastures at around 1 @,@ 500 metres ( 4 @,@ 900 ft ) in altitude , where they live in a semi @-@ feral state , traveling on steep mountain paths and weathering storms and other climactic variations . In October , they return to the valleys for the winter . An old tradition , the transhumance fell out of favor , but has been reintroduced to Ariege by the association <unk> en Couserans . Since 2000 , the association has worked with local horse breeders to promote the return to the annual practice . Around 500 Mérens make the transhumance each year . Herds are usually led by an experienced mare marked with a bell , as is done with cattle . A stallion can accompany the mares with foals to maintain cohesion of the herd and prevent it from mixing with other herds on the mountain slopes . The behavior of <unk> herds is midway between that of feral horses and domesticated horses who are around humans year @-@ round . Some horses , raised high in the mountains , stay there year @-@ round and do not perform the transhumance . 
 = = History = = 
 The history of the Mérens is closely linked to its homeland in the Pyrenees , as evidenced by the many myths and legends in which it plays a role . The origins of the Mérens are very old , and are commonly said to be lost in the mists of time . It is native to the upper valley of Ariege , near Andorra . The direct ancestor of the Mérens was probably in this valley during the Quaternary Period , approximately 15 @,@ 000 years ago . These wild horses probably moved to the mountains to escape global warming that accompanied the end of the last glacial period . 
 The physical characteristics of the Mérens are the result of the harsh mountain environment where they live , and they are reminiscent of the horses in the cave drawings at Niaux , made some 13 @,@ 000 years ago . These images depict animals with dense coats and a skull shaped like the modern Mérens , with a beard @-@ like protrusion of hair under the jawbone . 
 The Mérens may be of Iberian origin , as are most breeds from the area of the Pyrenees . It resembles the Norwegian Dole Gudbrandsdal and the British Fell and Dales ponies . Unlike the latter , the Mérens has never been crossed with the Friesian horse . Another theory of origin for the Mérens is based on the straight or concave facial profile ( which distinguishes them from the convex @-@ profiled Iberian horses ) , and asserts that they are descended from Oriental horses brought to Ariege by settlers from the east . With the isolation of their mountain homeland , the Mérens has undergone very little intermingling with foreign breeds . 
 = = = Antiquity and Middle Ages = = = 
 Julius Caesar mentions small black horses that resemble the Mérens in his Commentarii de Bello Gallico ( Commentaries on the Gallic War ) , when discussing the defeat of Crassus by the <unk> and their cavalry . Historian Paul <unk> was the first to link the animals discussed by Caesar to the Mérens , although the relationship has not been definitely established . The location of the <unk> is the subject of controversy , with some authors placing them in the district of <unk> and others near Foix . The Mérens may have been used as a pack animal by the Romans , who may have taken some of the animals with them when they left . The small black horse from the Pyrenees is described throughout antiquity . 
 There are also several mentions of what may be Mérens during the Middle Ages . They have been associated with Charlemagne , and a Carolingian statue showing Charlemagne on a small horse has been examined , and shown that the animal resembles a Mérens , standing no more than 13 @.@ 3 hands ( 55 inches , 140 cm ) at the shoulder . The legend of the founding of L 'Hospitalet @-@ près @-@ l <unk> depicts a traveler who , exhausted by the cold , kills his horse and buries himself in the steaming bowels , swearing that he will build a small hospital in the place if he survives . 
 The local Cathars held a special place in their religion for horses , especially through their belief in the transmigration of souls . There was also a belief in Pamiers that knights took their horses with them when they died . In the 12th century , the Cathar princess Esclarmonde of Foix climbed to the fortress of Château de Montségur on the back of a small , sure @-@ footed black horse . In the 14th century , the same small black horses are mentioned as accompanying the armies of Gaston III , Count of Foix . 
 = = = 18th and 19th centuries = = = 
 Horses from Ariege were requisitioned for Napoleon 's Grand Army during his Russian campaign . They were used mainly to pull artillery , as were most horses of this type from French territory at the beginning of the 19th century . A popular legend has them becoming famous during the crossing of the Berezina River during the Battle of Berezina . 
 The Mérens has long been used as a delivery and courier horse , as well as being used by local farmers . It has also been used by the winemakers of Languedoc , gardeners and dock workers , as well as continuing to be used by French armies , who appreciated its endurance . The breed was used in the mines , both under saddle and in harness . It was used by smugglers moving goods through the mountains between France and Spain , mainly carrying wood and minerals , and was known for its endurance and sense of direction . 
 Mérens horses were sold at the Tarascon @-@ sur @-@ Ariege horse fair , and were popular with merchants from the large cities . The breed was sometimes called " <unk> " , after the town , and was famous for the high quality of its legs and the ability to survive on poor food . It was used to breed mules , and the Pyrenees mule was derived from a cross between Catalan donkeys and horses of the Breton , Mérens and other breeds . Before World War I , almost 1 @,@ 000 Pyrenees mules were born annually in the Ariege department . The first breed show was organized in 1872 . By the end of the 19th century , horses from the Pyrenees were known for their use as light cavalry . They were praised for their agility , sure @-@ footedness , robust constitutions , and endurance , a result of their semi @-@ feral existence in the Pyrenees mountains . 
 = = = 20th century = = = 
 Starting the late 19th century , uncontrolled crossbreeding created a decline in the population of purebred Mérens . By the early 20th century , some breeders in L 'Hospitalet and Mérens @-@ les @-@ Vals began to work against these crossings with outside breeds and bred only horses with conformation similar to the original Mérens . These breeders wanted to keep alive the traditional Mérens , which they valued for its hardiness and versatility . In 1908 , control of breeding was given to the President of the Société d ’ Agriculture de l ’ Ariège ( Agricultural Society of Ariege ) , Gabriel Lamarque , who was dedicated to the preservation of the breed . In 1933 , the Syndicat d 'élevage du Mérens ( Breeding Society of Mérens ) was created , and in 1948 the first stud book was created under the control of the French National Stud . 
 In 1946 , the French army ceased to use the Mérens for drawing artillery in the mountains , and this corresponded to the beginning of the decline of the breed . The population fell dramatically during the second half of the 20th century , due to the modernization and mechanization of transport and agriculture . In 1950 in Senegal , the Mérens was used in attempts to create a horse tougher than the native M <unk> , but the breeding program was not enough to significantly increase the Mérens population . The use of the Mérens in agriculture continued into the 1970s , and like many French draft breeds , it was also bred for slaughter to produce horse meat . The mountains of Ariege acted as a sanctuary , preventing the Mérens , as well as other breeds such as Gascon cattle and <unk> sheep , from disappearing completely . By the early 1970s , however , the Mérens was on the verge of extinction . 
 By the early 1970s , there remained only 40 Mérens horses registered in the breed studbook . The breed was saved from extinction by utopian communities believing in an ecological apocalypse . As part of the hippie movement , people wanting to live on the fringe of society settled in the small villages of Ariege . They boosted the local economy , including encouraging the resumption of the breeding of Mérens . At the same time , the story of the semi @-@ feral horse Bonbon became a local phenomenon . This Mérens , orphaned following an accident , was raised on bottle @-@ fed goat milk . He was then sold to a horse @-@ dealer before later returning to his homeland and winning prizes as a stallion . He died at twenty , having returned to his herd high in the mountains . 
 Meanwhile , the Mérens breed was revived as a fashionable animal of leisure by Lucien Lafont de <unk> , a national expert in horse breeding . He moved the efforts of farmers towards breeding sport pony @-@ style animals , and the breed , originally called the " Mérens horse " , was renamed the " Mérens pony " for commercial and administrative reasons . With good breeding management and promotion , the population numbers of the breed gradually recovered . Between 1975 and 1985 , the number of Mérens doubled from 2 @,@ 000 to 4 @,@ 000 animals , and its rescue is considered a good example of saving an endangered breed . 
 In 1977 , the Mérens was introduced to the island of Réunion , where its breeding is now part of the local economy . It is used as a saddle horse and for hauling . The breed is also used for equestrian tourism on the mountains of the island , where it is particularly well suited for the steep terrain and climate , taking tourists into volcanic regions covered in ash . 
 A national center for the breeding of Mérens was open in 1990 by SHERPA to offer support for the preservation of the breed . The equestrian center includes a living museum for the presentation of the breed . In 1997 , SHERPA offered a Mérens to then @-@ Prime Minister of Britain Tony Blair . On January 1 , 1998 , the Mérens was removed from the classification of " pony " and returned to the category of " horse " by the French National Stud . In 2000 , the Mérens breed was chosen by Jean @-@ Louis <unk> to launch the first breeding farm for certified organic horses intended for leisure use rather than human consumption . The horses are fed a natural diet , <unk> with a mixture of garlic and clay , treated using a combination of homeopathy and osteopathy , and moved high in the mountains during the transhumance each year . 
 = = = Present = = = 
 Today , Mérens closest to the original type and lifestyle are found in the valleys of the high mountains of the Pyrenees , near Andorra . The majority of Mérens breeding still takes place in Ariege , the traditional homeland of the breed . However , they can also be found in almost all regions of France , including the Alps , the Cévennes , the Centre , the Massif Central and the Île @-@ de @-@ France . Besides the annual breed show in <unk> , Mérens are also commonly seen at the Paris International Agricultural Show and other major horse shows . 
 The total herd size is relatively small . The population numbers stabilized somewhat at the beginning of the 21st century , with around 1500 broodmares , 150 active stallions and 500 births per year . In 2006 , 455 new foals were registered , 1 @,@ 051 mares and 89 stallions were listed as active breeding stock and there were 306 breeders , a term applied to anyone who has at least one active broodmare . In the same year , the Mérens made up 2 percent of total horses in France . A genetic study in 2008 considers the original type of the breed to be endangered . The author suggested that the Mérens should be a conservation priority in order to maintain the maximum genetic diversity among French horse breeds . 
 = = Uses = = 
 In the past Mérens horses were used for farm work , particularly on steep or difficult terrain , as packhorses and for draft work in mining or hauling timber or sledges . Today , following breeding selection towards a slightly taller and livelier type , they are used principally as saddle horses , especially for trekking in mountainous areas ; but have also proved successful in carriage driving . Some have been used for vaulting , dressage , show jumping and three @-@ day eventing . 
 The Mérens is now considered a multi @-@ purpose recreational horse that is also attached to the cultural identity of the Ariege region . They are used for leisure and competitive trail riding . They are consistently ranked in the French national competitive trail riding championships , and in 1998 , a Mérens finished second in the European Championships . In 1998 , Stéphane Bigot made a crossing of the Pyrenees on a Mérens . Many tourist facilities now offer guided trail rides through the mountains of Ariege on Mérens horses , with some centers having a stable consisting entirely of members of the breed . 
 Several equine therapy centers use the Mérens in their program . Other uses for the breed include various agricultural work , including logging , where sure @-@ footed mountain horses can be used to access areas where equipment cannot go . Mounted police sometimes use the Mérens . A few are bred for their milk , which can be used in the manufacture of various products . 
 = Itzam K 'an Ahk II = 
 Itzam K 'an Ahk II ( Mayan pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> <unk> ] ) , also known as Ruler 4 , was an ajaw of Piedras Negras , an ancient Maya settlement in Guatemala . He ruled during the Late Classic Period , from 729 – 757 AD . Itzam K 'an Ahk II ascended to the throne upon the death of K 'inich Yo 'nal Ahk II , who may have been his father . Itzam K 'an Ahk II may have fathered the following three kings of Piedras Negras : Yo 'nal Ahk III , Ha ' K 'in Xook , and K 'inich Yat Ahk II . Following Itzam K 'an Ahk II 's demise , he was succeeded by Yo 'nal Ahk III in 757 AD . Itzam K 'an Ahk II left behind several monuments , including stelae at Piedras Negras and a large mortuary temple now known as Pyramid O @-@ 13 . In addition , the details of his life and his K 'atun @-@ jubilee were commemorated on Panel 3 , raised by K 'inich Yat Ahk II several years following Itzam K 'an Ahk II 's death . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Lineage = = = 
 Itzam K 'an Ahk II , also known as Ruler 4 , was born on November 18 , 701 AD ( 9 @.@ 13 @.@ 9 @.@ 14 @.@ 15 7 Men 18 K <unk> 'in in the Long Count ) . Of the three extant references to Itzam K 'an Ahk 's birth , not a single one mentions his pedigree or parentage , suggesting that Itzam K 'an Ahk was not a direct descendant of his predecessor , K 'inich Yo 'nal Ahk II . Despite this , Simon Martin and Nikolai Grube point out that in one portrait , the ajaw is shown with a turtle @-@ <unk> belt ornament , suggesting that one of Itzam K 'an Ahk 's ancestors may have indeed had the word auk , or turtle , in their name , signifying royalty . With this being said , Stela 40 — discussed later — shows what could be Itzam K 'an Ahk 's mother in Teotihuacano garb , suggesting that Itzam K 'an Ahk was emphasizing potential connections to Teotihuacan , possibly the home of his mother . Martin and Grube also point out that this stela was erected exactly 83 <unk> 'in , or about 59 years , following the death of Itzam K 'an Ahk I , a former ajaw of Piedras Negras who lent his name to Itzam K 'an Ahk II , insinuating some sort of " special link " between the two rulers . 
 = = = Reign = = = 
 Itzam K 'an Ahk II 's accession to the throne occurred on November 9 , 729 AD ( 9 @.@ 14 @.@ 18 @.@ 3 @.@ 13 7 Ben 16 K <unk> 'in ) . In 749 AD , the ajaw celebrated the jubilee of his one K 'atun . This celebration was attended by many dignitaries , including local nobles such as a b 'aah sajal ( " first ruler " ) named K 'an Mo ' Te ' who had served K 'inich Yo 'nal Ahk II . The events of this banquet were later recorded by the final ajaw of Piedras Negras , K 'inich Yat Ahk II on Panel 3 ; this artifact shows Itzam K 'an Ahk II lecturing the interregnum ruler of Yaxchilan , Yopaat <unk> II , about a past incident in which Yaxchilan had acknowledged the superiority of Piedras Negras . The K 'atun @-@ jubilee , therefore , has been interpreted by some Mayanists to have marked a period wherein Piedras Negras had eclipsed Yaxchilan in power . This celebration was followed by another festival in which Itzam K 'an Ahk II performed a " descending macaw " dance , and a nighttime feast wherein fermented cacao beans were served . 
 Bellicose action seems to have occurred during his reign , as a pyrite disc found in his tomb depicts the severed head of a leader from Hix Witz . Houston et al. argue that the Hix Witz polity was subordinate to Piedras Negras , largely based on the pyrite disk and because the Maya center is identified on Panel 7 , erected earlier by Itzam K 'an Ahk I , as a " tributary bearing plumes and textiles " to Piedras Negras . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 Itzam K 'an Ahk II 's almost thirty @-@ year reign was one marked by " hegemony over neighboring kingdoms " . The ruler died on November 26 , 757 AD ( 9 @.@ 16 @.@ 6 @.@ 11 @.@ 17 7 <unk> 0 Pax ) , and he was buried three days later . According to Panel 3 , the burial took place at the mythical location ho <unk> <unk> , which has been deduced to mean , Pyramid O @-@ 13 , Itzam K 'an Ahk II 's memorial temple . Itzam K 'an Ahk II was succeeded by Yo 'nal Ahk III on March 10 , 758 AD . Due to the apparent veneration of Itzam K 'an Ahk II 's burial site by the succeeding kings , it has been hypothesized that Itzam K 'an Ahk II introduced a new reigning <unk> to Piedras Negras , and that the following three kings — Yo 'nal Ahk III , Ha ' K 'in Xook , and K 'inich Yat Ahk II — may have been his sons . 
 = = Monuments = = 
 = = = Stelae = = = 
 Itzam K 'an Ahk II constructed at least five known stelae : 9 , 10 , 11 , 22 , and 40 . Stelae 9 , 10 , and 11 were all erected in front of or near Structure J @-@ 3 . Stela 11 , which was erected in August of 731 AD , is of the niche variety , meaning it depicts the ruler seated in a small hollow , or niche , and it was erected to commemorate the accession of the individual to the position of ajaw . The monument shows the ajaw flanked by subjects , witnesses to the ceremonies explored on the face of the stela . The expanse in front of the stone slab is designated as a space for offerings , denoted by the depiction of a sacrificed human near the bottom of the monument . The monument was discovered by Teoberto Maler in two pieces on the ground ; the front was in good condition , and some pigment was still visible . The glyphs on the upper right have been weathered , but the sides are largely intact . In the 1960s , looters cut the fallen monument into two halves for easier removal . The top portion is currently housed in the Museum of Fine Arts in Houston , Texas , whereas the bottom half is in a private collection in Switzerland . 
 Stela 9 was discovered in three pieces by Maler in 1899 . The fragments had been moderately weathered , and the base was later found in situ by the University of Pennsylvania 's University Museum . In the 1960s , looters removed the carved captives that had appeared on the left of the monument 's front . Stela 10 has been highly eroded , resulting in the loss of most of the monument 's details . In addition to the decay , the head ornament has been removed , and its current whereabouts are unknown . Stela 22 was dedicated on the East Group Plaza , located in front of Structure O @-@ 12 's terrace . The monument 's dedication initiated the East Group Plaza as a new center for sculpture and stelae . While previous stele had faced other directions , Stela 22 faced northwest towards the site 's acropolis , creating " a new axis of dialogue across the site . " 
 Stela 40 is of particular note because it contains the depiction o the aforementioned woman dressed in Teotihuacano garb ; it shows Itzam K 'an Ahk II scattering what appears to be either blood or incense into a " <unk> " , the name for a vent or a hollow duct that goes from the outer of a temple or structure into an inner tomb . Simon and Grube argue that " the connection between the living and the dead is manifested [ on this stela ] as a ' knotted cord ' or breath which travels down to enter the nose of the deceased " . The female on the stela , denoted only by an " upside down vase " glyph , has been inferred to be Itzam K 'an Ahk II 's mother ; Pitts argues that the monument " offers an interesting vignette of Itzam K 'an Ahk II and his loyalty to a female ancestor , probably his mother . " 
 = = = Pyramid O @-@ 13 = = = 
 Pyramid O @-@ 13 is the name given to the hypothesized mortuary temple of K 'inich Yat Ahk II . According to Stephen Houston et al . , it was nearly twice as large as any of the previous buildings constructed at Piedras Negras . The pyramid itself changed substantially in the following years after Itzam K 'an Ahk II 's demise . K 'inich Yat Ahk II reset the older Panel 2 and installed two new panels , Panels 1 and the now @-@ famous Panel 3 . Megan O 'Neil argues that these changes were made in order for the ruling ajaw to have an " engagement with the past " . The pyramid was also the location of the stelae of Piedras Negras 's three last known rulers . All three of the aforementioned leaders revered the site as a dynastic shrine , suggesting some sort of familial connection with K 'inich Yat Ahk II . 
 In 1997 , an excavation led by Héctor Escobedo discovered a tomb , Burial 13 , underneath the plaza floor at the front of the pyramid 's frontal stairs which may have been the place of interment for Itzam K 'an Ahk II . Inside the tomb were discovered the remains of three humans : one adult male and two adolescents . Over 100 artifacts , including pieces of jade and ornaments , were found scattered about . There was evidence that the tomb had been reentered and disturbed after it had been sealed ; many bones were missing and there was evidence that the remaining body parts had been burnt long after the flesh had decomposed . Eventually , it was concluded that the apparent destruction was part of a ritual that had been described in Panel 3 , called el <unk> <unk> , or " house @-@ burning at the burial " , and that it had been carried out by K 'inich Yat Ahk II . However , Stephen D. Houston cautions that , while Burial 13 might be the resting place of Itzam K 'an Ahk II , it has not been conclusively proven . 
 It has been pointed out that , architecturally , both the O @-@ 13 Pyramid and the Late Classic Temple of the Inscriptions at Palenque , are nearly identical ; both have the same number of substructure terraces , and both pyramids ' substructures have exactly five doors . Furthermore , both pyramids were built into the sides of existing hills . Damien Marken and Kirk Straight , use this — as well as inscriptions on stelae at Palenque — to argue that there was some sort of relationship between the two polities . 
 = Sibu = 
 Sibu / <unk> / ( simplified Chinese : <unk> ; traditional Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> ) is an inland town at the central region of Sarawak and the capital of Sibu District in Sibu Division , Sarawak , Malaysia . The town is located on the island of Borneo . The town covers an area of 129 @.@ 5 square kilometres ( 50 @.@ 0 sq mi ) . It is located at the confluence of the Rajang and Igan Rivers , some 60 kilometres from the South China Sea and approximately 191 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 119 mi ) north @-@ east of the state capital Kuching . The population is mainly dominated by Chinese especially the Fuzhou people . Other ethnic groups such as indigenous Melanau , Malay , and Iban are also present in this region . The town population as of the year 2010 is 162 @,@ 676 . 
 Sibu was settled by James Brooke in 1862 when he built a fort in the town to fend off attacks by indigenous Dayak people . Following this , a small group of Chinese Hokkien people settled around the fort to carry out business activities safely in the town . In 1901 , Wong Nai Siong led a large scale migration numbering 1 @,@ 118 Foochow Chinese from Fujian province of China into Sibu . This made Sibu being referred popularly as " New Fuzhou " . Sibu bazaar and the first hospital in Sibu was built by the Brooke government . Lau King Howe Hospital and a number of Methodist schools and churches were built in the 1930s . However , the town of Sibu was burnt to the ground twice in 1889 and in 1928 but it was rebuilt after that . There was no fierce fighting in Sibu during the Japanese occupation of Sarawak in 1941 . The Japanese installed a new Resident at Sibu in June 1942 and Sibu was renamed to " Sibu @-@ shu " in August 1942 . After the Japanese surrender in 1945 , Sarawak was ceded to the British as Crown Colony . This has caused a dissatisfaction amongst a group of young Melanau people in Sibu who were pro @-@ independence . As a result , the second British Governor of Sarawak , Sir Duncan George Stewart was assassinated by Rosli Dhobi when he visited Sibu in December 1949 . Rosli was later hanged to death at Kuching Central Prison in 1950 . Sibu and the Rajang basin also became the centre of communist activities from 1950 and it continued even after the Sarawak independence in 1963 . A Rajang Security Command ( <unk> ) was then established to curb Communist activities in the area . Communist insurgency in Sarawak was significantly impaired in 1973 and later ended in 1990 . Sibu was upgraded to the municipality status in 1981 . The town received a royal visit in September 2001 . The town is also a gateway to Sarawak Corridor of Renewable Energy ( SCORE ) since 2008 . In 2011 , 110th anniversary of Foochow settlement was celebrated in Sibu . 
 Sibu is the main tourist gateway to the Upper Rajang River , with its small riverine towns and its many Iban and Orang Ulu longhouses . Among the notable landmarks in Sibu are Wisma Sanyan , the tallest building in Sarawak , Lanang Bridge ( one of the longest river bridge in Sarawak ) and the biggest town square in Malaysia near the Wisma Sanyan . Lau King Howe Memorial Museum is the first and the only medical museum in Malaysia . Sibu Central Market is the biggest indoor market in Sarawak . Among the tourists attractions in Sibu are Sibu Heritage Centre , Tua Pek Kong Temple , Bawang Assan longhouses , Sibu Old Mosque , Jade Dragon Temple , Bukit Aup Jubilee Park , Bukit Lima Forest Park , Sibu Night Market , Borneo Cultural Festival ( BCF ) , and Sibu International Dance Festival ( <unk> ) . Timber and shipbuilding industries are the two major economic activities in Sibu . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 Before 1873 , Sibu was called " Maling " , which was named after a bend of the Rajang river called " Tanjung Maling " opposite the present day town of Sibu near the confluence of Igan and Rajang rivers . On 1 June 1873 , the third division of Sarawak ( present day Sibu Division ) was created under Brooke administration . The division was later named after the native <unk> fruit which can be found abundantly at the region . <unk> is known as " Buah <unk> " in the Iban language . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Bruneian Empire = = = 
 In the 15th century , the Malays living in southern Sarawak displaced the immigrant Iban people towards the present @-@ day Sibu region . Throughout the 17th and 18th century , the Rajang basin was rife with tribal wars between Ibans and indigenous people in the Rajang basin . Sometimes , the Ibans would form a loose alliance with the Malays to attack the Kayan tribes and perform raids on Chinese and Indonesian ships passing through the region . 
 = = = Brooke dynasty = = = 
 James Brooke started to rule Sarawak ( present day Kuching ) in 1841 after he obtained the territory from the Bruneian Empire . In 1853 , Sarawak has expanded its territory to include the Sibu region . Sibu was a small village with several shop @-@ houses . Such shophouses were built with atap roofs , wooden walls , and floors . The earliest inhabitants of Sibu were Melanau people , followed by Ibans , and Malay people in the 1850s . There used to be a Sibu Fort ( Fort Brooke ) , which was built by Rajah Brooke in 1862 . The fort was located at the present day Channel Road in Sibu . It served as an administrative centre for the Brookes in Sibu . However , it was demolished in 1936 . It was common for the White Rajah to build such forts to stake his territorial claim as well as means of protection . The existence of Sibu Fort is proven by historical writings : 
 There is a fort in Sibu , as indeed there is at most of the river places in Sarawak ... 
 The fort at Sibu was close to the Resident Dr. Hose 's house and was attacked by Dayaks only a few years ago . Johnson , one of Dr. Hose 's assistants , showed me a very long Dayak canoe capable of seating over one hundred men ... 
 The river at Sibu was of great width , over a mile across , in fact , and close to the bank is a Malay village , and a bazaar where the wily Chinaman does a thriving trade in the wild produce of the country , and makes huge profits out of the Dayaks and other natives on this river . 
 On 13 May 1870 , the fort was attacked by 3 @,@ 000 Kanowit Dayaks under the leadership of a Dayak chief named <unk> or <unk> @-@ ri . The Dayaks tried to cut through the door of the fort by using axes but they were later defeated by the Brookes . There were 60 wooden shops in Sibu according to Sarawak Gazette published on 24 January 1871 . In 1873 , the third division of Sarawak was created with the town of Sibu included in the division . 
 The first Chinese arrival in Sibu was in the 1860s . A group of Hokkien people built two rows of 40 shophouses around Sibu Fort ( Fort Brooke ) . The Hokkien Chinese were a minority at that time , mostly consisting of <unk> and Min Nan people who were doing business . A small number of Chiang Chuan ( <unk> ) and Amoy people later arrived at Sibu mostly due to commercial interests . By 1893 , <unk> Anak <unk> and his followers arrived in Sibu . They built a longhouse at Pulau <unk> , which is an island at the bend of Rajang River opposite Sibu near the confluence of Rajang and Igan Rivers . He was a loyal war @-@ leader to the Brookes and has helped to quash Iban rebellions around Upper <unk> and Lupar rivers in the 1860s and 1880s . In 1903 , he was the first Iban to operate a rubber plantation in Kuching . He later invested the profits of his rubber plantation to shop @-@ houses and lands in Sibu . 
 On 10 February 1889 , the town of Sibu was burnt to the ground . This has caused a developmental delay in Sibu . The first hospital in Sibu was built by the Brooke government in 1912 . It was a wooden single @-@ storey building measuring 50 to 60 feet long , with an outpatient department , male and female wards . On 8 March 1928 , Sibu was again consumed by a great fire . However , the Tua Pek Kong Temple remained intact . The locals considered this a miracle . 
 = = = Chinese Foochow settlement = = = 
 Wong Nai Siong , a Christian scholar from <unk> County , Fujian province of China , learnt about Sarawak and the White Rajahs through his son @-@ in @-@ law , Dr Lim Boon Keng . Disillusioned with the Qing Dynasty 's heavy handed approach against the Boxer Rebellion where Chinese Christians were specially targeted for murder , Wong Nai Siong decided to search for a new settlement overseas , focusing on areas in South East Asia . Previously , in September 1899 , he had searched fruitlessly in Malaya and Indonesia . 
 Wong got an approval from Charles Brooke to look for a new settlement in the Rajang basin . In April 1900 , Wong travelled 13 days up the Rajang River before he decided to choose Sibu as the new settlement for his Foochow clansmen , because the area near Rajang delta would be suitable for growing crops . An agreement was signed on 9 July 1900 between Wong Nai Siong and the Brooke government in Kuching to allow Chinese settlers into the area . 
 On 21 January 1901 , the first batch of 72 settlers arrived at Sibu and settled at the Sungai Merah area , about 6 km from the town of Sibu at that time . On 16 March 1901 , the second batch of 535 settlers arrived . This day has been called as the " New Foochow Resettlement Day " . In June 1901 , final batch of 511 settlers arrived in Sibu . Sibu has been commonly referred to " New Fuzhou " ( <unk> ) since then . This brought the total number of Foochow settlers to 1 @,@ 118 . Wong Nai Siong was appointed as " Kang Choo " ( <unk> ) , meaning " port master " for the Foochow settlement in Sibu . The settlers planted sweet potatoes , fruits , sugar cane , vegetables , and coarse grains at high grounds and rice in wetlands . Following their work in Sibu , most settlers choose to stay and called the place as their new home . Together with American pastor , Reverend James Matthew Hoover , Wong was also involved in the building of schools and churches in Sibu such as the Methodist church in 1902 and Ying Hua Methodist school at Sungai Merah in 1903 . From 1903 to 1935 , James Hoover helped to build 41 churches and 40 schools in Sibu . Between 1902 and 1917 , 676 Cantonese people arrived in Sibu . 
 In 1904 , Wong opposed the sale of opium and the building of a casino in the Sibu area , proposed by the Brooke government . He was later expelled by the Sarawak government due to failure to repay debt . Wong and his family left Sibu in July 1904 . Rev. James Hoover took over Wong 's role to manage the Sibu settlement . He introduced the first rubber seedlings to Sibu in 1904 . He build a Methodist church in 1905 . The church was later renamed to <unk> Methodist church in 1925 . Hoover stayed at the Rajang basin for another 31 years until his death from malaria in 1935 at Kuching general hospital . The construction of Lau King Howe Hospital was completed in 1936 to accommodate the growing population of Sibu . The hospital served Sibu people for 58 years until 1994 when a new hospital was constructed in Sibu . 
 By 1919 , the influence of Chinese Civil War had spread to Sarawak when Kuomintang set up its first branches in Sibu and Kuching . Charles Brooke opposed such political activity by the local Chinese and had expelled several local Kuomintang leaders . However , Charles Vyner Brooke was more receptive of such activities by local Chinese . The local Chinese also participated in a donation drive to aid Kuomintang in its fight against Japanese invasion on China mainland . After World War II ended , local Kuomintang leaders supported the cessation of Sarawak to British as Crown Colony but the local communist leaders were against it . Clashes between the communist and the Kuomintang supporters were common . The Kuomintang branches in Sarawak were finally dissolved in 1949 when the party lost a war on China mainland to the Communist party and retreated to Taiwan . However , clashes between the both sides continued until 1955 when Kuomintang 's newspaper was banned by the colonial British government in May 1951 ; while Communist 's <unk> ceased to exist in 1955 due to financial difficulties . 
 = = = Japanese occupation = = = 
 Japanese forces landed in Miri on 16 December 1941 . They conquered Kuching on 24 December 1941 . On 25 December 1941 , Sibu was bombed by 9 Japanese warplanes flown from Kuching . The Resident of Third Division , Andrew Macpherson believed that the Japanese would start to invade Sibu following the air attack . He and his officer later fled Sibu to the upstream of Rajang River . They planned to pass through Batang Ai and trek through the forests to reach Dutch Borneo . However , they were caught and killed by the Japanese at Ulu <unk> , Sarawak . 
 In the evening of 26 December 1941 , Sibu people started to ransack an unguarded government rice storeroom . Some villagers staying along the Rajang River also came to steal for daily necessities . The situation soon got out of control . British Sime Darby company , Borneo Company Limited , and Chinese businessmen became the victims of the riots . The Chinese businessman decided to form a security alliance to calm down the chaos . On 29 January 1942 , a Japanese advance team was invited from Kuching to restore order in Sibu . The advance team later fled Sibu and back to Kuching . The power vacuum continued to exist in the third division until 23 June 1942 , when the Japanese headquarter in Kuching sent Senda @-@ Ni @-@ Jiro ( <unk> ) to become the new Resident of the Third Division of Sarawak . After he took office , he immediately declared that Imperial Japanese Army would take total control of people 's lives and property . On 8 August 1942 , Sibu was renamed to " Sibu @-@ shu " ( <unk> ) . 
 The Japanese started to impose expensive taxes on Chinese people . The Japanese also started a Sook Ching operation ( <unk> ) on suspected anti @-@ Japanese individuals . Under extreme torture , some Chinese individuals gave a false name @-@ list of anti @-@ Japanese groups . These lists of names would later led to death of innocent individuals at Bukit Lima execution ground while some individuals were sent to a prison at Kapit . 
 = = = British Crown Colony = = = 
 After the Japanese occupation of Sarawak ended in 1945 , the last Rajah of Sarawak , Charles Vyner Brooke , decided to cede the state as part of the British crown colony . This proposal had met with fierce opposition from the Sarawakians which later developed into the anti @-@ cession movement of Sarawak . Rosli Dhobi was a Sarawak nationalist from Sibu and a member of the Malay Youth Movement ( Gerakan Pemuda Melayu ) where the main objective of the movement was to achieve Sarawak independence from the British rule . At the age of 17 , he assassinated Sir Duncan George Stewart , the second governor of colonial Sarawak on 3 December 1949 . He and three of his friends ( Awang Ramli Amit , Bujang <unk> , and <unk> <unk> ) were then sentenced to death by hanging and were buried at the Kuching Central Prison on 2 March 1950 . 
 After 46 years , his remains was moved from the Kuching Central Prison and buried at the Sarawak Heroes Mausoleum near Sibu Town Mosque on 2 March 1996 . To honour his involvement in the anti @-@ colonial movement against the British , he and his associates who were involved in the assassination were later given a full state funeral by Sarawak state government . 
 = = = Communist insurgency = = = 
 After the defeat of Kuomintang at mainland China in 1949 , Sibu communist members started to establish themselves in Sarawak in the early 1950s . Huang Sheng Zi ( <unk> ) from Bintangor became the president of Borneo Communist Party ( BCP ) . BCP activities mostly concentrated in Sibu , Sarikei , and Bintangor . His brother , Huang Zeng Ting ( <unk> ) , who was also a communist , played an important role in the formation of first political party in Sarawak , Sarawak United Peoples ' Party ( SUPP ) and became the party 's first executive secretary . Sarawak Liberation League ( SLL ) was formed in 1954 following the consolidation of BCP with several other communist organisations . 
 The expansion of communism in Sibu relied heavily on student movements in several schools such as Chung Hua Secondary School ( <unk> ) , Catholic High school ( <unk> ) , and Wong Nai Siong High School ( <unk> ) . Some of the communist strong points in Sibu were at Oya road and Queensway ( now Jalan Tun Abang Haji Openg ) . The movement was also supported by the intelligentsia and workers in Sibu . For example , Dr Wong Soon Kai supported the movement by supplying free medication . Kampung Tanjung <unk> villagers were among those being harassed into providing food and medical supplies to the communists . On 30 March 1971 , the communists launched an anti @-@ porn movement . In early 1973 , they launched another campaign which opposed tax increase and inflation of prices while endorsing an increase in workers ' wages . Some of the communist volunteers would start to distribute pamphlets at shophouses , schools , and the wharf terminal . The group also started military operation against police stations and naval bases . Communist guerillas would behead anyone who was suspected of being a government informant . The town was put under on @-@ and @-@ off 24 @-@ hour curfews for several months . 
 On 25 March 1973 , the Sarawak government , led by chief minister Abdul Rahman Ya 'kub started to clamp down on communist activities at the Rajang basin by setting up " Rajang Special Security Area " . A day later , Rajang Security Command ( <unk> ) was formed as a result of co @-@ operation of civil , military , and police command headquarters . By August 1973 , several communist members were captured by the government . The captured members provided crucial details for the government to further impair the communist movement . On 22 September 1973 , Abdul Rahman started " Operation Judas " . A total of 29 people from the town of Sibu were captured . Among those captured were doctors , lawyers , businessmen , teachers , and one former member of parliament . Following the surrender of a communist movement in Sri Aman on 21 October 1973 , the communist activities at Rajang basin began to subside and would not be able to recover to its previous strength . Communist movement of Sarawak finally ended in 1990 . 
 = = = Recent developments = = = 
 On 1 November 1981 , the local council which administered the town of Sibu ( Sibu Urban District Council ) was upgraded to Sibu Municipal Council . The area of administration of Sibu expanded from 50 km2 to 129 @.@ 5 km2 . In 1994 , Sibu Airport and Sibu Hospital were constructed . In 2001 , Wisma Sanyan construction was completed . Yang di @-@ Pertuan Agong of Malaysia , Sultan Salahuddin Abdul Aziz Shah visited Sibu from 16 to 17 September 2001 to close a month @-@ long Malaysian Independence Day Celebration at Sibu Town Square . 
 Between 1999 and 2004 , Sibu Municipal Council decided to adopt the swan as a symbol of Sibu to inspire the people to work towards the goal of becoming a city in the future . Since then , a Swan statue has been erected near the Sibu wharf terminal and another statue is located in the town centre . Sibu is also nicknamed as " Swan City " . This came from a legend where famine in Sibu ended when a flock of swans flew through the skies of Sibu . There is another story where the Sibu Chinese immigrants regarded Sibu Melanau people as " Go " people because a staple food of Melanau staple food was " <unk> " . Coincidentally , " Go " pronunciation is similar to Hokkien pronunciation of " Swan " . This reminded Sibu Chinese immigrants of " Swan River " back in Fuzhou , China . Therefore , they decided to name the Rajang River as " Swan River " ( <unk> ) . 
 In 2006 , the Lanang Bridge connecting Sibu to Sarikei was opened . Sibu also functions as the gateway to Sarawak Corridor of Renewable Energy ( SCORE ) . The town of Sibu and its surrounding areas has been the subject of several developmental projects since 2008 . In 2011 , the 110th anniversary of Foochow settlement was celebrated in Sibu . However , Sibu 's population growth and economic development is relatively slow when compared to Miri and Bintulu . 
 = = Government = = 
 Sibu has two members of parliament representing the two parliamentary constituencies of the town : Lanang ( constituency no : <unk> ) and Sibu ( constituency no : <unk> ) . The town also elects five representatives into the Sarawak State Assembly : Bukit Assek , <unk> , Bawang Assan , Pelawan , and Nangka . 
 = = = Local authorities = = = 
 A local council was first set up in Sibu on 31 January 1925 during the era of Brooke administration . It was later upgraded to Sibu Urban District Council ( SUDC ) in 1952 . After 29 years of administration , SUDC was upgraded to Sibu Municipal Council ( SMC ) on 1 November 1981 . SMC administers the town with a jurisdiction area of 129 @.@ 5 km2 from the banks of Rajang River to Salim road uptown . SUDC and SMC headquarters were housed inside the Sibu Town Hall for 38 years from 1962 to 2000 . SMC headquarters was later relocated to Wisma Sanyan in 2001 . The chairman of SMC is Tiong Thai King . The outskirts of Sibu such as Sibu Jaya and <unk> District are administered by Sibu Rural District Council ( <unk> ) covering a total area of 6 @,@ 000 km2 . <unk> headquarters is also located inside the Wisma Sanyan tower . 
 Sibu Islamic Complex opened in September 2014 . It houses Sibu Resident Office , Sibu District Office , State Treasury Office , Social Welfare Department , and State Islamic Religious Department ( <unk> ) . 
 = = = International relations = = = 
 As of 2015 , Sibu is twinned to fifteen places in China : 
 = = Geography = = 
 Sibu town is located near the Rajang delta at the confluence of Rajang and Igan rivers . Peat swamp forests and alluvial plains are particularly prevalent in the Sibu Division . The Sibu town is located on a deep peat soil . This has caused problems in infrastructure development because buildings and roads will slowly sink into the ground after its construction completion . The location of Sibu in lowland peat swamps have subjected it to frequent floods which was about 1 to 3 times per year . Therefore , Sibu Flood Mitigation project was started to relieve the area from the floods . The highest elevation in Sibu is a peak at Bukit Aup Jubilee Park measuring 59 m above sea level . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Sibu has a tropical rainforest climate according to Köppen climate classification . The Sibu town has high temperatures of 30 – 33 ° C ( 86 – 91 ° F ) and low temperatures of 22 @.@ 5 – 23 ° C ( 72 @.@ 5 – 73 @.@ 4 ° F ) . Annual rainfall is approximately 3 @,@ 200 millimetres ( 130 in ) , with relative humidity between 80 and 87 % . Sibu receives between 4 and 5 hours of sunlight per day with yearly average daily values of global solar radiation of 15 @.@ 2 MJ / m2 . Cloud cover over Sibu reduces during the months of June and July ( 6 @.@ 75 <unk> ) but increases from November to February ( 7 <unk> ) . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 The change in Sibu 's population since 1947 is shown below : 
 = = = Ethnicity = = = 
 According to the 2010 Malaysian census , the town of Sibu ( excluding suburban area ) has total population of 162 @,@ 676 . Chinese ( 63 @.@ 4 % , 101 @,@ 019 ) is the largest ethnic group in the town , followed by indigenous people ( 35 @.@ 7 % , 56 @,@ 949 ) , Indians ( 0 @.@ 5 % , 598 ) , and non @-@ Malaysians ( 3 @,@ 236 ) . Among the indigenous tribes , there are Iban ( 26 @,@ 777 ) , Malays ( 16 @,@ 646 ) , Melanau ( 10 @,@ 028 ) , Bidayuh ( 1 @,@ 337 ) , and other indigenous tribes ( 874 ) . A majority of the non @-@ Malaysians are Indonesian workers employed at plywood and sawmills factories . There are also a number of illegal workers employed by syndicates to tap rubber . A number of foreign Chinese nationals and Indonesians are also working in massage parlours . 
 = = = Languages = = = 
 Since the majority of the town population is made up of Foochow and Hokkien Chinese , Mandarin Chinese , Fuzhou dialect and Hokkien Chinese are commonly spoken . The majority of Sibu Chinese are multilingual and are able to speak both Malay and English . Indigenous languages such as Sarawak Malay , Melanau , Bidayuh and Iban are also spoken . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 The majority of the Chinese population in Sibu are Christians while other Chinese practice Buddhism , Taoism , and Confucianism . Some of the Iban in Sibu are Christians . Malays and Melanaus are Muslims . Respective religious groups are free to hold their processions in the town . Several notable religious buildings in the town are Sacred Heart Cathedral , <unk> Methodist Church , Tua Pek Kong Temple , and An @-@ Nur Mosque . Yu Lun San Tien En Si ( <unk> ) or Jade Dragon Temple is located at <unk> Sibu @-@ Bintulu Road . The temple combined Buddhism , Taoism and Confucianism under one roof . It is claimed to be the largest temple in South East Asia . 
 = = Economy = = 
 In the early days , Chinese Foochow settlers in Sibu tried to convert the town into a rice cultivation centre . However , this vision did not materialise because the soil was not suitable for rice cultivation . In August 1909 , Charles Brooke agreed to grant land titles to Sibu Chinese farmers and encouraged them to cultivate rubber plantations . The rise of rubber prices from 1909 to 1911 had encouraged another 2 @,@ 000 Foochow settles to come to Sibu . The demand for rubber rose again during Korean War between 1950 and 1953 and has benefited Sibu rubber plantations . Local farmers later used the profits from rubber plantations into setting up shops at Sungai Merah and Durin bazaars and involve in more profitable timber industry . During the Sarawak Communist Insurgency in the 1970s , rural farmers had to abandon their rubber plantations because of martial law declared by the state government which forbade them for helping the communists operating in the jungles . 
 The timber industry in Sibu flourished during the 1940s and 1950s and its economic importance surpassed rubber plantations in the 1960s . Several global timber conglomerates such as the Rimbunan Hijau Group , Ta Ann Holdings Berhad , Sanyan Group , WTK , The Sarawak Company , and Asia <unk> Company set up their headquarters in Sibu . Timber processing and exports become the main economic driving force in Sibu . Development of the timber industry in Sibu has been supported by loans given by the earliest Chinese banks in Sibu such as Wah Tat Bank ( 1929 ) , Hock Hua Bank ( 1952 ) , and Kong Ming Bank ( 1965 ) . Following the introduction of " Banking and Financial Institutions Act of 1989 " ( <unk> ) by the Malaysian federal government , Kong Ming Bank was acquired by EON Bank in 1992 , followed by the merger of Wah Tat Bank with Hong Leong Bank and the merger of Hock Hua Bank with Public Bank Berhad in the year 2000 . In 1958 , HSBC started its banking operation in Kuching , followed by Sibu in 1959 . It was responsible for supporting several timber conglomerates in Sibu such as WTK and Ta Ann Holdings Berhad . In November 2013 , HSBC decided to close down all its commercial banking sectors in Sarawak after the bank was alleged for supporting non @-@ sustainable logging operations in Sarawak . 
 Shipbuilding business in Sibu started in the 1930s to supply wooden boats for river and coastal navigation . It flourished in 1970s and 1980s along with increase in exports of tropical timber from Sarawak . It later shifted its focus into steel boat building . Some of the vessels in demand are tug boats for towing logs , barges for carrying logs , anchor handlers , Offshore Support Vessels ( OSV ) , ferries , and express boats for carrying passengers . Most of the boats built are of small and medium in size . There are a total of 40 shipyards in Sibu . A majority of the workers are welders . In 2003 , 17 of the shipyards were relocated to <unk> Panjang Integrated Shipyard Shipbuilding Industrial Zone , Sibu . This included Yong Chin Kui , Far East , and <unk> . The boats built in Sibu are often exported to neighbouring state of Sabah , Peninsular Malaysia , Singapore , Indonesia and United Arab Emirates . In the year 1991 , a total of US $ 50 million was earned for shipbuilding business in Sibu . In 2011 , Sibu ship exports stood at RM 525 million . Sibu is also the only city in Sarawak to possess a vehicle assembly plant . The plant is operated by N.B. Heavy Industries Sdn . Bhd . , and it has been assembling <unk> , International and JAC commercial vehicles since 2010 . Sibu has two industrial areas : Upper Lanang Industrial estate ( Mixed Light Industries ) and <unk> Panjang Ship Building Industrial Zone . 
 There are two river ports at Sibu : Sibu port and Sungai Merah port , located at 113 km and 116 km along from the mouth of the Rajang river , respectively . Sibu port has maximum gross register tonnage ( GRT ) of 10 @,@ 000 tonnes while Sungai Merah port has a maximum GRT of 2 @,@ 500 tonnes . Sibu port is used mainly for handling timber and agricultural products while Sungai Merah port is used for handling fuel oil products . Rajang Port Authority ( RPA ) is located at Sibu port operation centre . RPA has earned a total revenue of RM 30 @.@ 1 million for the financial year of 2012 . 
 = = Transport = = 
 = = = Land = = = 
 Roads in Sibu are under the jurisdiction of Sibu Municipal Council ( SMC ) . Some of the notable roads in Sibu are Brooke Drive , Archer Street , and Wong Nai Siong Street . Kwong Ann roundabout is located near Brooke Drive in town centre while Bukit Lima roundabout is located near Wong King Huo Street in the uptown area . Sibu is also connected to other major towns and cities in Sarawak such as Kuching by Pan Borneo Highway . In early 2011 , Sibu @-@ Tanjung Manis Highway was opened . In April 2006 , Lanang Bridge connecting Sibu to Sarikei and Bintangor across the Rajang River was opened . Toll @-@ free Durin Bridge was opened in October 2006 connecting Sibu to other places such as <unk> . The Durin bridge is located near the satellite township of Sibu Jaya . 
 = = = = Public transport = = = = 
 The town of Sibu has two bus stations . The local bus station is located at the waterfront near the Sibu wharf terminal . The long @-@ distance bus station is located at Pahlawan Street , near the Sungai <unk> region . Jaya Li Hua Commercial Centre and Medan Hotel are located next to the long @-@ distance bus station . The local bus station at the waterfront serves the town area , Sibu Airport , Sibu Jaya , Kanowit , and Sarikei . Lanang Bus serves the connection between the local bus station and the long @-@ distance bus station while <unk> <unk> buses serves Sibu Airport and satellite township of Sibu Jaya . On the other hand , the long @-@ distance bus station serves Kuching , Bintulu , and Miri via the Pan Borneo Highway . Some of the buses serving at the long @-@ distance bus station are <unk> , Suria Bus , and Borneo Highway Express . 
 Taxis in Sibu operates 24 hours a day . Taxis can be found at the airport , big hotels , taxi stands at the wharf terminal , and at Lintang Street . Taxi services are also offered for travel to nearby regions such as Mukah , Bawang Assan , Sarikei , and Bintangor . Kong Teck car rental is available at the airport . 
 = = = Water = = = 
 Sibu wharf terminal is located at Kho Peng Long Street near the Rajang river waterfront . It provides an alternative means of transport for the people living along the Rajang River . Among the destinations that can be reached by express boats from Sibu includes <unk> , <unk> , Daro , Kapit , Kanowit , Kuching , Sarikei , and Song . Sibu floating market which is made up of several large boats can also be seen from the wharf terminal . The boats are responsible to carry groceries to rural communities living along the river and do not have access to roads . There used to be a <unk> River Cruise which operated along the Rajang River from Sibu to <unk> Rapids Resort but its operation was terminated in 2012 due to logistical and operational difficulties . 
 = = = Air = = = 
 Sibu Airport was built in 1994 , located at 25 km from the town of Sibu and 1 km from the satellite township of Sibu Jaya . In 2008 , the airport handled 831 @,@ 772 passengers on 14 @,@ 672 flights and 735 metric tonnes of cargo . In April 2010 , the airport was allocated <unk> million by the Malaysian federal government for the upgrade of the terminal building . The airport terminal building is the second largest in Sarawak after the Kuching International Airport . The airport has a 2 @.@ 75 km runway and it serves Malaysia Airlines , Air Asia , and MASWings with direct flights to all major towns in Sarawak , such as Miri , Bintulu , Kuching , Kota Kinabalu , Kuala Lumpur , and Johor Bahru . In October 2011 , Firefly airline terminated its services in Sarawak while Malindo Air terminated its services to Sibu Airport in June 2014 due to low number of passengers . 
 = = Other utilities = = 
 = = = Courts of law , legal enforcement , and crime = = = 
 The court complex is located at Tun Abang Haji Openg Street , Sibu . It contains the High Court , Sessions Court , and the Magistrate Court . The Sibu town also has a Syariah Court located at Kampung <unk> Street with jurisdictions in Sibu , Kanowit and <unk> districts . There is one district police headquarters at Tun Abang Haji Openg Street . The Sibu central police station is located at Kampung <unk> Street . Sungai Merah police station and Lanang police station are also located in Sibu town area . There is also a prison in Sibu . 
 Tiong King Sing , an MP from Bintulu , has voiced concerns about gangsterism in Sarawak especially the Sibu town back in 2007 . As a result , " Operation <unk> <unk> " was started in 2008 to clamp down gangsterism in Sarawak . In September 2013 , Sibu police chief announced that " Lee Long " , " Sungai Merah " , and " Tua Chak Lee " gangs ceased to exist and Sibu town is free from organised gangsterism . There were 25 gangster groups in Sibu back in 2007 ; there are 7 groups as of 9 October 2013 . In September 2014 , Royal Malaysian Police headquarter at Bukit Aman , Kuala Lumpur , stated that 16 local gangster groups are still active in Sarawak especially in Sibu but they do not pose any serious security threats . This raised new concerns that such groups still pose a serious security risk in Sibu town and Sarawak in general . 
 = = = Healthcare = = = 
 Sibu Hospital is the second largest hospital in Sarawak and the secondary referral hospital for the central region of Sarawak which includes 5 divisions : Sibu , Kapit , Mukah , Sarikei , and <unk> . There are 8 district hospitals in these divisions that are referred to Sibu . Sibu Hospital is also a teaching hospital for undergraduates from Universiti Malaysia Sarawak ( UNIMAS ) . There are also two private medical centres in Sibu : KPJ Sibu Specialist Medical Centre and Rejang Medical Centre . 
 Lanang and Oya <unk> are located in Sibu . There are also five 1Malaysia clinics in Sibu . The Bandong 1Malaysia clinic became the first 1Malaysia Clinic nationwide to offer echocardiography screening . There are also several pharmacy outlets in Sibu : B Y Chan pharmacy , Central Pharmacy , Lot 9 Pharmacy near by Delta Mall and Cosway Pharmacy . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 Sibu has about 85 primary schools and 23 secondary schools . The Sibu primary and secondary schools under the National Education System are managed by Sibu District Education Office located at Brooke Drive , Sibu . The oldest school in Sibu is Sacred Heart High School which was formed in 1902 by Rev. Father <unk> . This was followed by Rev James Hoover where he formed Methodist Anglo @-@ Chinese School in 1903 . The school later evolved into Methodist primary and secondary schools in 1947 . Uk <unk> primary school , built in 1926 , is one of the oldest Chinese primary schools in Sibu . Built in 1954 , St Mary primary school is the oldest English stream school in Sibu Division . Sibu also has five Chinese independent schools . The most notable ones are Catholic High School ( 1961 ) and Wong Nai Siong High School ( 1967 ) . All the Chinese independent schools in Sibu are under the purview of The United Association of Private Chinese Secondary School , Sibu Division , which is in turn under the purview of Sarawak Dong Zong and Dong Zong headquarters in Selangor . All the Chinese independent schools students will sit for Unified Examination Certificate ( UEC ) In 2013 , Woodlands International School opened in Sibu offering Cambridge International Examinations ( CIE ) course . 
 In 1997 , United College Sarawak ( UCS ) was established in Sibu at <unk> Street . It was renamed to Kolej Laila Taib ( <unk> ) in 2010 . This college offers business , accounting , civil engineering , architecture , Electrical and Electronic Engineering and quantity surveying courses . University College of Technology Sarawak ( <unk> ) , located just opposite the <unk> , commenced its maiden intake of new undergraduate students in September 2013 . This university is established to provide human capital for the development of Sarawak Corridor of Renewable Energy ( SCORE ) . In 1967 , Pilley Memorial Secondary School was established in Sibu . In April 1991 , the school was upgraded to Methodist Pilley Institute ( MPI ) and it started to offer accounting , business management , and computer science courses . 
 Sarawak Maritime Academy was formed under the Shin Yang Group of Companies . It offers Diploma in Nautical ( DNS ) and Diploma in Marine Engineering courses . Sacred Heart College started to offer Diploma in Hotel Management courses in 2010 . Rimbunan Hijau ( RH ) Academy was established in 2005 and it started to offer training in automotive , oil palm plantations , hospitality , and business management in 2007 . Sibu Nursing College and ITA college offers nursing @-@ related programmes . In 1954 , the Methodist Theological School was established in Sibu . It is affiliated with Methodist Church in Malaysia and is accredited by the Association for Theological Education in South East Asia ( <unk> ) . 
 Long distance study centres ( Pendidikan Jarak <unk> , <unk> ) in Sibu are opened by Universiti Utara Malaysia ( <unk> ) at Lanang and Universiti Putra Malaysia ( UPM ) at Sibu Jaya . Universiti Malaysia Sarawak ( UNIMAS ) opened its Centre for Academic Information Services ( CAIS ) - Integrated Learning Facilities ( ILF ) at Sibu for undergraduate medical students undergoing their training at Sibu Hospital . Open University Malaysia ( OUM ) also opens a Sibu Learning Centre . 
 = = = Libraries = = = 
 The first public library in Sibu was started as Methodist Missionary Library in the 1950s . It was taken over by Sibu Urban District Council ( SUDC ) in 1955 . It was moved to the present location at <unk> road in 1986 as SMC public library . The library underwent a major upgrade in 2014 . Another public library named " Ling Zi Ming Cultural centre " ( <unk> ) was established by the local Chinese community under the Sibu Chinese Chamber of Commerce and Industry ( SCCCI , <unk> ) in 1980 . It houses Chinese books collections . Another library named Sibu Jaya public library is located at the satellite township of Sibu Jaya , 26 km from the town of Sibu . 
 = = Culture and leisure = = 
 = = = Attractions and recreational spots = = = 
 = = = = Cultural = = = = 
 Since 2005 , Borneo Cultural Festival ( BCF ) is held by Sibu Municipal Council ( SMC ) in July every year at Sibu Town Square , for a period of 10 days . It is a celebration of traditional music , dances , contests , beauty pageant , food stalls , fun fairs , and product exhibitions . There are 3 separate stages for Iban , Chinese , and Malay performances . It draws around 20 @,@ 000 people every year . BCF was stopped briefly in 2011 before it was resumed in 2012 . Sibu has hosted the National Chinese Cultural Festival ( <unk> ) twice : in 2001 ( 18th Festival ) and 2009 ( 26th Festival ) which lasted for 3 days . Among the activities organised during this festival were cultural village ( a venue designated to showcase cultural heritages from various ethnicity ) , lantern riddles , cultural dances , Chinese songs , dragon dances , and Chinese calligraphy . Sibu International Dance Festival ( <unk> ) was started in 2012 . It is usually held between June to September every year , which lasted for 5 days . It attracted around 14 to 18 international dance troupes for performances in Sibu . It includes activities such as workshops , conferences , outdoor performances , and a dance concert . 
 There are 9 Bawang Assan Iban longhouses which are 40 minutes away from the town of Sibu . The longhouses can be dated back from 18th century traditional longhouses to present day modern longhouses . Visitors can enjoy traditional rice wine <unk> and other delicacies such as <unk> <unk> , kain <unk> , and <unk> . These Iban longhouses showcase their lifestyles , customs , traditional dance , and music . <unk> are also available at these longhouses . There are 3 ceramic factories in Sibu . Ceramic designs mainly depicts traditional culture of the natives . 
 = = = = Historical = = = = 
 Sibu Heritage Trail was launched in 2012 to include 9 landmarks in Sibu , which are : Sibu Heritage Centre , Sibu Old Mosque ( Masjid Al @-@ Qadim , built in 1883 ) , Warriors Memorial Site ( present burial site of Rosli Dhobi , near An @-@ Nur Mosque ) , oldest Muslim cemetery , Lau King Howe Hospital Memorial Museum , Hoover Memorial Square , Tua Pek Kong Temple , and Sibu Central Market . All the 9 landmarks can be reached by 2 kilometres of walking distance from each other . Sibu Heritage Centre is housed in a former Sibu Town Hall . It displays the early beginnings of Sibu , Iban and Malay cultures , with Chinese porcelain and clay vases which can be dated back to the era of Imperial China . Tua Pek Kong Temple is a Buddhist and Taoist Temple which was established in 1870 . The 7 @-@ storey Guanyin Pagoda ( Goddess of Mercy ) was built in the 1980s . The Lau King Howe Hospital Memorial Museum is the only medical museum in Malaysia . It displays dental , surgical , and obstetric services offered by the hospital from the 1950s to 1990s . Sungai Merah ( Red River ) Heritage Walk is the landmark of the earliest settlement of Foochow Chinese in Sibu in 1901 . There is a walking trail at the Sungai Merah river front leading up to Wong Nai Siong Memorial Garden . James Hoover Memorial Garden is also located near the Sungai Merah Heritage Walk . 
 = = = = Leisure and conservation areas = = = = 
 Bukit Aup Jubilee Park was opened in March 1993 . It is located 10 km away from the town of Sibu . It has a total undulating land of 24 acres ( 0 @.@ 097 km2 ) . The park was the two consecutive winner of National Landscaping Competition Award in 1997 and 1998 . The highest peak in the park , Bukit Aup ( 59 m above sea level ) was originally a traditional burial ground for Iban warriors . The burial ground has since been relocated to a nearby village for the development of the park . However , the Iban community still regarded the peak as a sacred place and frequently brought offerings for the benevolent spirit named Nanga Bari . 
 Bukit Lima peat swamp forest reserve , covering 390 hectares ( 3 @.@ 9 km2 ) , was gazetted as protected area since October 1929 . In January 2001 , Bukit Lima Forest Park covering 219 hectares ( 2 @.@ 19 km2 ) was constructed in the peat swamp forest and opened to the public . It has two separate trails of wooden planks of 3 @.@ 5 km and 2 @.@ 5 km long respectively . The park also has a 3 @-@ storey concrete watchtower for sightseeing . The park is managed by Sarawak Forestry Corporation ( SFC ) . 
 Sibu has other urban and suburban parks such as Kutien Memorial Garden , Hin Hua Memorial Park , and <unk> Lake Garden . The Kutien Memorial Garden located at Lanang Street is managed by Sibu Kutien Association . The Kutien Garden showcase the association 's history and events . The Hin Hua Memorial Park is established by Sibu Heng Hua community where their earliest arrival in Sibu was in 1911 . YMCA Camp Resort is located away from the town . It provides facilities for camping and retreat . 
 = = = = Sports = = = = 
 Sibu has one stadium named Tun Zaidi Stadium at Old Airport Road . A new indoor stadium construction is also planned to replace the old stadium . 
 Sibu BASE jump is an annual event that is held in September every year since 2009 , which lasts for 3 days . Night jumps are also performed if the weather is fair . The BASE jumping usually takes place from the top of Wisma Sanyan which is 126 m high and is the tallest building in Sarawak . The number of jumpers has increased from 11 jumpers in 2009 to 45 jumpers in 2014 . In 2013 , world 's first tandem BASE jumping from a building ( Wisma Sanyan in Sibu ) was done by Sean <unk> ( world @-@ renowned BASE jumper ) , carrying Rudy Anoi ( chief executive of Sarawak Tourism Board , Sibu branch ) with him . 
 Since 2001 , Sarawak Health Marathon is held every year at Bukit Aup <unk> Park , Sibu . The run can be divided into 6 categories , including 21 km Men ’ s and Ladies ’ Open , 7 km Men ’ s Fun Run and Boys ’ Junior , 2 @.@ 5 km Girls ’ Junior , and 2 @.@ 5 km Ladies Fun Run . 
 = = = = Other sights = = = = 
 Sibu Gateway is a landmark at the downtown area which includes an illuminated fountain , a garden , and a Swan statue surrounded by 12 Chinese zodiac signs . Rajang Esplanade is one of the 22 community parks in Sibu , mostly donated by Chinese clan associations . Rajang Esplanade has a walkway along the Rajang riverfront from Sibu wharf terminal to Kingwood Hotel with <unk> 's association playground along the way . It offers a scene of muddy river with timber barges , express boats , and fishing boats commuting on the river . Several mural paintings depicting historical lifestyles and local cuisines are found at various locations in Sibu . 
 = = = = Other events = = = = 
 Sibu Bike Week is an event that is held in December every year since 2011 . It is a 3 @-@ day event aimed to bring all the enthusiasts of <unk> , cars , audio systems , BMX , Zumba , and paintball to share their hobbies and experiences . It has attracted about 2 @,@ 000 bikers around the world . Among the activities held during Sibu Bike Week are Miss Sibu Bike Week Pageant , Tattoo queen and King competition . Borneo Talent Award ( BTA ) is held every year in Sibu since 2011 at Sibu Civic Centre . It showcases performances of singing , dancing , acrobatics , mimicry , playing musical instruments , magic show , and art performances . 
 = = = = Shopping = = = = 
 Sibu features a number of shopping malls : Wisma Sanyan , Medan Mall , Sing Kwong Shopping Complex , Farley Departmental Store , Delta Mall , Star Mega Mall , <unk> and Giant Hypermarket . 
 The Sibu Night Market was established in 1973 . It was situated in the town centre . Local traders will usually set up their mobile stalls from 5 pm to 10 pm every day . The stalls offer household goods , footwear , fashion items , and varieties of food . In August 2012 , the market was relocated to Butterfly Garden at Cross Road near the Tua Pek Kong Temple to ease traffic jams . 
 The Sibu Central Market is the biggest indoor market in Sarawak . It is located at Channel Street , opposite the Sibu wharf terminal . The central market has food stalls on top floor with dry and wet market on the ground floor . Among the items on sale in this market are exotic fruits , jungle produce , handicrafts , Bario rice , and poultry . There are 1 @,@ 100 stalls in the market on weekdays and 400 @-@ 500 additional stalls on weekends when the indigenous people from the interior brought their jungle produce to the market . 
 = = Cuisine = = 
 The " Bandong walk " project was started in 2012 and is scheduled to be completed in 2015 . This project is set to make the Bandong area a halal food hub of local delicacies for the locals and the tourists . Common dishes in Sibu include : 
 Kam Pua noodle ( also known as <unk> ) — noodles tossed in pork lard or vegetable oil , fried shallots , spring onions and sometimes soy sauce and / or chili sauce . It is available at almost all coffee shops and food stalls . Halal <unk> noodles are available . 
 <unk> Mian <unk> ( also known as <unk> ) — a savoury soup with soft rice cake is available at several stalls as a hefty breakfast or a late night supper . It is often served with fish balls and squid . 
 Bian <unk> ( also known as <unk> , <unk> , or Wonton ) — a meat dumpling which can be served dry or in a soup . 
 Gom bian ( also known as <unk> or <unk> ) — a Foochow delicacy made with flour , baked in an oven and eaten either with or without meat and gravy . It is somewhat similar to a bagel . However , it can be either in a crisp or soft version . Traditional soft <unk> dipped in pork sauce can be sought from Chung Hua road and the Sunday Market at <unk> road . There are deep fried variations available throughout the town of Sibu . 
 You <unk> Gui ( also known as <unk> , <unk> , Yau Char <unk> , or <unk> <unk> in Malay ) — deep fried twin dough batter often dipped in soup or chili sauce . It is often eaten together with porridge or " Bak Kut Teh " （ <unk> ） . 
 Bek Ding <unk> ( also known as <unk> or Pek Ting Ngor ) : The soup of eight essences — Chinese soup containing at least eight herbal ingredients . 
 <unk> Kassim — Indian @-@ style <unk> ( also known as <unk> or <unk> <unk> ) . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 = = = Politics = = = 
 Tun Datuk Patinggi Abang Muhammad Salahuddin Abang <unk> , 3rd and 6th Governor of Sarawak . 
 Tun Datuk Patinggi Ahmad Zaidi <unk> , 5th Governor of Sarawak . 
 Tun Datuk Patinggi Tuanku Bujang Tuanku Othman , 2nd Governor of Sarawak . 
 YBhg . Tan Sri Dr. Wong Soon Kai , former Deputy Chief Minister of Sarawak and former President of Sarawak United People 's Party ( SUPP ) . 
 Datuk Robert Lau Hoi Chew , former Member of Parliament for Sibu and former Malaysian Deputy Minister of Transport . 
 YB Datuk Tiong Thai King , former Member of Parliament for Lanang and chairman of Sibu Municipal Council ( SMC ) . 
 Wong Ho Leng , former Member of Parliament for Sibu , Sarawak State Legislative Member for Bukit Assek and former Chairman of Sarawak Democratic Action Party ( DAP ) . 
 YB Datuk Seri <unk> Yusof , Minister of Public Works and Member of Parliament for Petra Jaya , Kuching . 
 YBhg . Dato ' Awang <unk> Awang Ali <unk> , former Sarawak State Legislative Member for Nangka and former Chairman of Kuching Port Authority . 
 YBhg . Vincent Goh Chung Siong , former Sarawak State Legislative Member for Pelawan and Chairman of Rajang Port Authority . 
 YB Dr. <unk> <unk> , Assistant Minister for Science Research and Biotechnology and Sarawak State Legislative Member for Nangka . 
 = = = Business = = = 
 Tan Sri Datuk Sir Tiong <unk> King , Chairman of Rimbunan Hijau Group and elder brother of Datuk Tiong Thai King . He was listed as one of the 10 richest Malaysians and also one of the Malaysians receiving the knighthood from the British Government . 
 Datuk Lau Hui Siong , Founder of See Hua Group which publishes See Hua Daily News , The Borneo Post , and Utusan Borneo . 
 = = = Others = = = 
 Ting Ming Siong , a food stall operator , known as the Guinness World Record Holder for the " Most wedding attended by a best man " . He attended 1 @,@ 393 weddings from September 1975 to 2 February 2006 ) 
 Gloria Ting Mei Ru , Miss Malaysia World 2004 . 
 Datuk Dr. <unk> Daim , former Director of Education , Malaysia and recipient of National Education Leadership 2011 Award in conjunction of National Level Teachers Day 2011 in Kuching . 
 = 1761 Milestone = 
 The 1761 Milestone is a milestone on 640 South Main Street in Woonsocket , Rhode Island . The stone originally marked the junction of a Colonial highway from Great Road and an east @-@ west route from Boston , Massachusetts , to the state of Connecticut . The stone was rediscovered during the installation of an electrical road ( likely a tram ) . In 1898 , the stone was reportedly restored to its original location by the local chapter of the Daughters of the American Revolution . The stone is embedded in a low retaining wall at the corner of South Main Street and Smithfield Road . It was added to the National Register of Historic Places on November 24 , 1982 , and is historically significant as Colonial @-@ era highway marker . 
 = = History = = 
 The 1761 Milestone is a historic marker that marked the junction of a Colonial highway . In 1761 , it was located at the intersection of Great Road , from Providence , Rhode Island , to Mendon , Massachusetts , and an east @-@ west route from Boston , Massachusetts , into Connecticut . Currently , the marker rests near the intersection of South Main Street and Smithfield Road ( previously Great Road ) and occupies the land designated by the Woonsocket Assessor as plat 4 @-@ C , lot 69 . 
 The 2 feet ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) by 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) marker is described by the National Register of Historic Places ( NRHP ) nomination form as an " odd @-@ shaped piece of grey slate , somewhat broken and effaced ... " It bears a boldly cut inscription of an unknown stonecutter ; the inscription is likened to 18th @-@ century handwriting and lacks a calligraphic pattern . The marker reads " Miles to [ B ] <unk> 1761 " , but according to Rhode Island : A Guide to the Smallest State it read , " Miles to Boston 47 " . 
 In 1898 , it was reported that the stone was unearthed during the installation of electrical road ( likely for a tram ) and restored to its original location by the Woonsocket chapter of the Daughters of the American Revolution . Sometime later , the Daughters of the American Revolution placed a bronze plaque on the stone , but it was absent at the time of its nomination in 1982 . The marker is currently mortared into a retaining wall at the edge of the sidewalk on 640 South Main Street at the intersection and has been since prior to 1982 . As of 2013 , a Daughters of the American Revolution plaque is present . 
 = = Importance = = 
 The National Register of Historic Places nomination states the marker is at its original site and is historically important because " [ t ] his milestone is the only extant Woonsocket property which well recalls this era in the early history of American overland transportation , and it is one of but a handful of such stones surviving in Rhode Island that marks inter @-@ colonial highways . " It was added to the National Register of Historic Places on November 24 , 1982 . 
 = The Mambo Kings = 
 The Mambo Kings is a 1992 French – American drama film directed by Arne Glimcher . It is an adaptation of Oscar Hijuelos 's 1989 Pulitzer Prize @-@ winning novel The Mambo Kings Play Songs of Love . The film stars Armand Assante and Antonio Banderas as Cesar and Nestor Castillo , brothers and aspiring musicians who flee from Cuba to America in the hopes of reviving their failed musical careers . The Mambo Kings marks the directing debut of Glimcher and features Banderas in his first English @-@ language role . 
 Glimcher purchased the film rights to Hijuelos 's novel in 1988 , before hiring Cynthia Cidre to write the screenplay . Various studios rejected the film , and after an unsuccessful pre @-@ production development at Universal Studios , the project moved to Warner Bros. , with Regency Enterprises and Le Studio Canal + agreeing to co @-@ finance the film . When Warner Bros. wanted Jeremy Irons and Ray Liotta in the lead roles , Glimcher had to convince executives to cast Assante and Banderas instead . Filming for The Mambo Kings took place in Los Angeles , on sets recreating 1950s New York . 
 The film received mostly positive reviews from critics , but underperformed at the box office , grossing only $ 6 @,@ 742 @,@ 168 during its domestic theatrical release . For its original song " Beautiful Maria of My Soul " , The Mambo Kings earned nominations from several groups , including the Academy Awards . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In the early 1950s , Cuban brothers and musicians Cesar ( Armand Assante ) and Nestor Castillo ( Antonio Banderas ) flee from Havana , Cuba after getting into a violent dispute with the mobster owners of a club where they performed . Eventually ending up in New York City , the brothers work at menial jobs while attempting to revive their musical careers . At a nightclub where Cesar briefly crashes the act of mambo star Tito Puente , they make new friends and connections , as well as meeting cigarette girl Lanna Lake ( Cathy Moriarty ) , who falls quickly into a love affair with Cesar . 
 Nestor , in the meantime , remains oblivious to other women while continually composing his ode to his lost Cuban love , Maria ( Talisa Soto ) . He writes version after version of the same ballad , " Beautiful Maria of My Soul " , until by chance one day he encounters Delores ( Maruschka Detmers ) , a shy but attentive young woman who wishes to become a schoolteacher . When she becomes pregnant , they decide to get married . 
 Fate intervenes one night at a club , where the Castillo brothers have a part @-@ time job . Nestor 's love ballad captures the interest of one of the customers , who turns out to be the Cuban bandleader and American television star Desi Arnaz ( played by his son , Desi Arnaz , Jr . ) . After a pleasant evening in Nestor and Delores 's home , Arnaz generously invites the struggling Castillos to sing and act on an episode of his smash sitcom series , I Love Lucy . 
 Fame does not last , however . Nestor is not as ambitious as his brother and desires nothing more than to own his own small club . He is in love with Delores , but lacks the passion he felt for his beloved Maria back home . Cesar , meantime , suppresses his true feelings , that a woman like Delores would actually be perfect for him . Cesar eventually reveals to Nestor that Maria left him for a Cuban mobster in exchange for cancelling a contract hit against Nestor . 
 There are tragic consequences one snowy night when the Castillo brothers ' car veers off the road and into a tree . Cesar , in the back seat of the vehicle , is barely hurt , but Nestor , having driven the car , is killed . The life of Cesar , shattered , is never the same . To honor his brother 's memory , Cesar opens his own small club , which is well received . Delores pays him a visit and asks him to sing Nestor 's song for her . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Armand Assante as Cesar Castillo 
 Antonio Banderas as Nestor Castillo 
 Cathy Moriarty as Lanna Lake 
 Maruschka Detmers as Delores Fuentes 
 Desi Arnaz , Jr. as Desi Arnaz , Sr. 
 Roscoe Lee Browne as Fernando Perez 
 Celia Cruz as <unk> Montoya 
 Vondie Curtis @-@ Hall as Miguel Montoya 
 Talisa Soto as Maria Rivera 
 Tito Puente as Himself 
 Thomas F. Duffy as Mulligan 
 Frank Grillo as <unk> 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Arne Glimcher , an art dealer based in New York City and a fan of mambo music , learned that Oscar Hijuelos was writing a novel relating to the subject . In 1988 , Hijuelos sent Glimcher a manuscript of his novel The Mambo Kings Play Songs of Love . Glimcher purchased the film rights before the novel was published one year later . He hired Cuban @-@ born screenwriter Cynthia Cidre to write the script . Cidre spent a year and a half working on the screenplay , and after 24 drafts , she had stripped the story down to cover only half of Hijuelos 's 407 @-@ page book . When asked about the modification of his novel in the film adaptation , Hijuelos said , " My only concern was that the Cuban culture be treated with respect and the music be authentic and accurate to the period . " 
 Various studios rejected the project , until Glimcher persuaded Tom Pollock , chairman of Universal Studios , to financially back the film on a low budget . Before production could begin however , Pollock insisted that footage from the television series I Love Lucy be a key part of the film . Following Lucille Ball 's death in 1989 , Glimcher was unable to secure the rights to use footage for the film . After Universal cancelled production of The Mambo Kings , the project moved to Warner Bros. ; Glimcher met with the studio 's president Terry Semel , who introduced him to producer Arnon Milchan , who agreed to co @-@ financed The Mambo Kings with his production company Regency Enterprises and the French @-@ based film studio Le Studio Canal + . The film was given a production budget of $ 15 @.@ 5 million . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Armand Assante and Antonio Banderas were Glimcher 's ideal choices for the roles of Cesar and Nestor Castillo . Prior to The Mambo Kings , Assante had appeared in a number of films but had not yet broken out as a major star ; Banderas , a Spanish actor , had moved to Los Angeles , California , hoping to make an international debut with his first English speaking role . Warner Bros. , however , wanted to cast Jeremy Irons as Cesar and Ray Liotta as Nestor . Both actors had received critical acclaim for their performances in Reversal of Fortune and Goodfellas respectively , and the studio felt that they would appeal to a wider audience . 
 Through a translator , Glimcher told Banderas to work on improving his English for one month before performing a screen test opposite Irons . The Spanish actor , lacking the ability to speak English , learned his lines phonetically . Despite Irons 's excellent screen test , Glimcher thought he was wrong for the part and insisted on Assante ; he thought the charm and seductiveness of Assante made him perfect for the role , and the studio eventually gave in . 
 Annabella Sciorra was originally cast as Nestor ’ s new love interest Delores , a role that eventually went to actress Maruschka Detmers when Sciorra was forced to pull out . Detmers was given the role just two weeks prior to filming . Glimcher cast Cathy Moriarty as Cesar 's girlfriend Lanna Lake based on the actress 's performance in Raging Bull . 
 Desi Arnaz , Jr. was chosen to portray his father , Desi Arnaz , in a scene in which the Castillo brothers appear on an episode of I Love Lucy . In preparing for his role , Arnaz , Jr. dyed his hair black and wore an ID bracelet , ring and pin , all of which had belonged to his late father . " I wasn 't trying to look exactly like him , " he explained . " It was more about getting his essence and mannerisms . " In an effort to re @-@ create the mambo world of the 1950s , Glimcher hired musicians Tito Puente and Celia Cruz to appear . 
 = = = Filming and design = = = 
 The Mambo Kings was filmed in Los Angeles , California , which was used to create a 1950s @-@ era New York City . The Palladium Ballroom , a long @-@ gone New York City concert hall , was recreated and serves as a centrepiece in the film . In describing the look of the film , production designer Stuart Wurtzel stated , " There are lots of photographs and some film from that period . ... There 's a film called Mambo Madness from 1955 with some footage of Tito Puente and Desi Arnaz we looked at , and we got pictures from the Cuban Society in New York and from libraries . The Cuban community has been enormously supportive of the film , so we 've also been privy to the private archives of many people . " Ann Roth served as costume designer , using vintage textiles to create the custom @-@ made wardrobe . The I Love Lucy segment of the film was filmed at Ren @-@ Mar Studios , the former site of Desilu Productions . The set of the <unk> ' living room was re @-@ created , with film editors intercutting footage with Banderas , Assante and Arnaz , Jr. with an actual episode featuring Lucille Ball . " 
 = = = Music and soundtrack = = = 
 Assante and Banderas did their own singing , and studied to master the instruments their characters use in the film . Assante practiced on drums , preparing for a scene in which his character plays a musical number with Tito Puente . Banderas worked to mimic the correct posture and finger placements for his character 's trumpet performances , while the actual playing was performed by Arturo Sandoval . 
 Music supervisor Robert Kraft used existing music from the 1950s , all of which had to be re @-@ recorded , as they were originally recorded in mono sound . The song " Beautiful Maria of My Soul " was written for the film by Glimcher , and composed by Kraft . The motion picture soundtrack features a number of original master recordings , re @-@ recorded tracks and mambo music from Arturo Sandoval , Tito Puente and Celia Cruz . The soundtrack was released by Elektra Records . 
 = = Release = = 
 The Mambo Kings was distributed by one entity , Warner Bros. , who originally planned to release the film on December 25 , 1991 . It first premiered at the Miami Film Festival on February 7 , 1992 before being released theatrically on February 28 , 1992 . 
 The film was released on VHS and laserdisc on September 2 , 1992 , and on DVD on August 17 , 2005 . The DVD includes an unrated version of the film that restores one deleted scene . Other features include a behind @-@ the @-@ scenes featurette and an audio commentary by Arne Glimcher . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The Mambo Kings was well received by critics . The film currently holds an 83 % " fresh " rating on the online review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes , based on a total of 24 reviews . 
 Film critic Peter Travers of Rolling Stone wrote that the film " runs on pure emotion " , and that it " celebrates the mysterious power of a music that can make you feel like dancing and bring you to your knees . " Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times wrote that the film 's " story is as old as the movies , but The Mambo Kings is so filled with energy , passion and heedless vitality that it seems new , anyway . " Ebert and his colleague , Gene Siskel , gave the film a " Two Thumbs Up " rating on their syndicated television program , Siskel and Ebert and the Movies . Rita Kempley of The Washington Post praised the film 's director , writing that " Glimcher shows an <unk> 's taste in his choice of both cast and crew . The look of " The Mambo Kings " is doubtless richer than the text , which is , however , strengthened by Glimcher 's nostalgia for the teenage , eager America of the 1950s . " Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly wrote , " The Mambo Kings is most fun when it practically dares you to swoon . It 's a movie you don 't have to believe to enjoy . " Betty Goodwin of the Los Angeles Times praised the film 's visual style : " The innocence of the pre @-@ MTV ' 50s mambo scene is expressed through meticulously real details and honest styling . " 
 Desson Howe of The Washington Post wrote a mixed review , writing that the film is " beautifully filmed and flashily edited " , but that it " has nothing to offer . " Vincent Canby of The New York Times , gave the film a negative review , writing , " There are times when the director doesn 't even seem to know where to put the camera . Scenes unravel without dramatic point . No amount of breathless editing and fancy graphics can disguise the amateur nature of the enterprise . " In The Philadelphia Inquirer , Roger E. Hernandez criticized the film for its portrayal of Cubans . Hernandez wrote , " The main problem here was the accents . The characters were supposed to be Cuban , but , with the exception of salsa star Celia Cruz , none sounded it . " Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times criticized Glimcher 's direction , writing in his review , " ... when it comes to directing dramatic sequences , he is on his own and lacking in resources to make what drama there is come to a coherent or meaningful point . " 
 Desi Arnaz , Jr. voiced his support of the film , stating that he and his sister Lucie Arnaz , " loved the story being told in this movie . " Arnaz , Jr. said , " It is an amazing saga of people in search of the American dream . It is my <unk> story . It is the story of many people who came to this country with hopes and dreams . " Tito Puente praised the film prior to its theatrical release , stating , " I 've seen the movie twice , and I loved it the second time . The first time I couldn 't get into it . I was watching for too many details , I guess . But now I 've seen it a second time , and I think it 's great . " 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 In its first week of release , The Mambo Kings grossed $ 319 @,@ 793 , having been released in 32 theatres in North America . The film earned an additional $ 299 @,@ 418 in its second week . After three weeks of release , The Mambo Kings grossed $ 2 @,@ 192 @,@ 258 domestically . At the end of its theatrical run , the film had grossed $ 6 @,@ 742 @,@ 168 , well below its $ 15 @.@ 5 million budget . 
 = = = Nominations = = = 
 The song " Beautiful Maria of My Soul " received a Best Original Song nomination at the 65th Academy Awards . It was also nominated at the 50th Golden Globe Awards for Best Original Song , and at the 35th Grammy Awards for " Best Song Written Specifically for a Motion Picture or for Television " category . The film received a second Grammy nomination for " Best Instrumental Composition Written for a Motion Picture or for Television " for the song " Mambo Caliente " which was composed by Arturo Sandoval . 
 = = Stage play = = 
 The Mambo Kings inspired a musical stage play of the same name in 2005 . It was produced by Daryl Roth and Jordan Roth , with lyrics by Arne Glimcher and music by Carlos <unk> . The Mambo Kings premiered at the Golden Gate Theatre in San Francisco , California , opening on May 31 , 2005 . The stage version featured <unk> Morales and Jaime Camil as Cesar and Nestor Castillo , with supporting performers including Christiane Noll , David Alan Grier , Cote de Pablo and Justina Machado . The production cancelled plans to open on Broadway theatre after a critically panned tryout engagement in San Francisco . 
 = Hoysala architecture = 
 Hoysala architecture is the building style developed under the rule of the Hoysala Empire between the 11th and 14th centuries , in the region known today as Karnataka , a state of India . Hoysala influence was at its peak in the 13th century , when it dominated the Southern Deccan Plateau region . Large and small temples built during this era remain as examples of the Hoysala architectural style , including the Chennakesava Temple at Belur , the Hoysaleswara Temple at Halebidu , and the Kesava Temple at Somanathapura . Other examples of Hoysala craftsmanship are the temples at <unk> , Amruthapura , <unk> , Mosale , Arasikere , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . Study of the Hoysala architectural style has revealed a negligible Indo @-@ Aryan influence while the impact of Southern Indian style is more distinct . 
 Temples built prior to Hoysala independence in the mid @-@ 12th century reflect significant Western Chalukya influences , while later temples retain some features salient to Chalukyan art but have additional inventive decoration and ornamentation , features unique to Hoysala artisans . Some three hundred temples are known to survive in present @-@ day Karnataka state and many more are mentioned in inscriptions , though only about seventy have been documented . The greatest concentration of these are in the Malnad ( hill ) districts , the native home of the Hoysala kings . 
 The Karnata Dravida tradition which covers a period of about seven centuries began in the 7th century under the patronage of the Chalukya dynasty of Badami , developed further under the Rashtrakutas of Manyakheta during the 9th and 10th centuries and the Western Chalukyas ( or Later Chalukyas ) of Basavakalyan in the 11th and 12th centuries . Its final development stage and transformation into an independent style was during the rule of the Hoysalas in the 12th and 13th centuries . Medieval inscriptions displayed prominently at temple locations give information about donations made toward the maintenance of the temple , details of consecration and on occasion , even architectural details . 
 = = Temple deities = = 
 Hinduism is a combination of secular and sacred beliefs , rituals , daily practices and traditions that has evolved over the course of over two thousand years and embodies complex symbolism combining the natural world with philosophy . Hindu temples began as simple shrines housing a deity and by the time of the Hoysalas had evolved into well articulated edifices in which worshippers sought transcendence of the daily world . Hoysala temples were not limited to any specific organised tradition of Hinduism and encouraged pilgrims of different Hindu devotional movements . The Hoysalas usually dedicated their temples to Shiva or to Vishnu ( two of the popular Hindu gods ) , but they occasionally built some temples dedicated to the Jain faith as well . Worshippers of Shiva are called Shaivas and worshippers of Vishnu are called Vaishnavas . While King Vishnuvardhana and his descendants were Vaishnava by faith , records show that the Hoysalas maintained religious harmony by building as many temples dedicated to Shiva as they did to Vishnu . Most of these temples have secular features with broad themes depicted in their sculptures . This can be seen in the famous Chennakesava Temple at Belur dedicated to Vishnu and in the Hoysaleswara temple at Halebidu dedicated to Shiva . The Kesava temple at Somanathapura is different in that its ornamentation is strictly <unk> . Generally Vaishnava temples are dedicated to Keshava ( or to Chennakeshava , meaning " Beautiful Vishnu " ) while a small number are dedicated to <unk> and <unk> ( Narayana and Narasimha both being Avatars , or physical manifestations , of Vishnu ) with Lakshmi , consort of Vishnu , seated at his feet . Temples dedicated to Vishnu are always named after the deity . The Shaiva temples have a Shiva linga , symbol of fertility and the universal symbol of Shiva , in the shrine . The names of Shiva temples can end with the suffix <unk> meaning " Lord of " . The name " Hoysaleswara " , for instance , means " Lord of Hoysala " . The temple can also be named after the devotee who commissioned the construction of the temple , an example being the <unk> temple at <unk> , named after the devotee <unk> . The most striking sculptural decorations are the horizontal rows of moldings with detailed relief , and intricately carved images of gods , goddesses and their attendants on the outer temple wall panels . 
 The <unk> Lakshmi Devi ( " Goddess of Wealth " ) Temple is an exception as it is dedicated to neither Vishnu nor Shiva . The defeat of the Jain Western Ganga Dynasty ( of present @-@ day south Karnataka ) by the Cholas in the early 11th century and the rising numbers of followers of Vaishnava Hinduism and Virashaivism in the 12th century was mirrored by a decreased interest in Jainism . However , two notable locations of Jain worship in the Hoysala territory were Shravanabelagola and Kambadahalli . The Hoysalas built Jain temples to satisfy the needs of its Jain population , a few of which have survived in Halebidu containing icons of Jain tirthankaras . They constructed stepped wells called Pushkarni or Kalyani , the ornate tank at <unk> being an example . The tank has twelve minor shrines containing Hindu deities . 
 The two main deities found in Hoysala temple sculpture are Shiva and Vishnu in their various forms and avatars ( incarnations ) . Shiva is usually shown with four arms holding a trident and a small drum among other emblems that symbolize objects worshiped independently of the divine image with which they are associated . Any male icon portrayed in this way is Shiva although a female icon may sometimes be portrayed with these attributes as Shiva 's consort , Parvati . Various depictions of Lord Shiva exist : showing him naked ( fully or partially ) , in action such as slaying a demon ( Andhaka ) or dancing on the head of a slain elephant ( <unk> ) and holding its skin up behind his back . He is often accompanied by his consort Parvati or shown with Nandi the bull . He may be represented as Bhairava , another of Shiva 's many manifestations . 
 A male figure depicted holding certain objects such as a conch ( symbol of eternal , heavenly space ) and a wheel ( eternal time and destructive power ) is Vishnu . If a female figure is depicted holding these objects , she is seen as his consort , Lakshmi . In all the depictions Vishnu is holding four objects : a conch , a wheel , a lotus and a mace . These can be held in any of the icon 's hands , making possible twenty @-@ four different forms of Vishnu , each with a unique name . Apart from these , Vishnu is depicted in any of his ten <unk> , which include Vishnu sitting on Anantha ( the celestial snake and keeper of life energy also known as Shesha ) , Vishnu with Lakshmi seated on his lap ( <unk> ) , with the head of a lion disemboweling a demon on his lap ( <unk> ) , with head of a boar walking over a demon ( Varaha ) , in the Krishna avatar ( as Venugopala or the cow herder playing the Venu ( flute ) , dancing on the head of the snake Kaliya , lifting a hill such as Govardhana ) , with his feet over head of a small figure ( Vamana ) , along with Indra riding an elephant , with Lakshmi seated on Garuda , and the eagle ( stealing the <unk> tree ) . 
 = = Temple complex = = 
 The focus of a temple is the centre or sanctum sanctorum ( garbhagriha ) where the image of the deity resides , so temple architecture is designed to move the devotee from outside to the garbhagriha through ambulatory passageways for circumambulation and halls or chambers ( mantapas ) that become increasingly sacred as the deity is approached . Hoysala temples have distinct parts that are merged to form a unified organic whole , in contrast to the temples of Tamil country where different parts of a temple stand independently . Although superficially unique , Hoysala temples resemble each other structurally . They are characterised by a complex profusion of sculpture decorating all the temple parts chiseled of soft soapstone ( <unk> schist ) , a good material for intricate carving , executed mostly by local craftsmen , and exhibit architectural features that distinguish them from other temple architectures of South India . 
 Most Hoysala temples have a plain covered entrance porch supported by lathe turned ( circular or bell @-@ shaped ) pillars which were sometimes further carved with deep fluting and moulded with decorative motifs . The temples may be built upon a platform raised by about a metre called a " jagati " . The jagati , apart from giving a raised look to the temple , serves as a <unk> or " circumambulation path " for circumambulation around the temple , as the <unk> ( inner sanctum ) provides no such feature . Such temples will have an additional set of steps leading to an open mantapa ( open hall ) with parapet walls . A good example of this style is the Kesava Temple at Somanathapura . The jagati which is in unity with the rest of the temple follows a star @-@ shaped design and the walls of the temple follow a zig @-@ zag pattern , a Hoysala innovation . 
 Devotees can first complete a ritual circumambulation on the jagati starting from the main entrance by walking in a clockwise direction ( towards the left ) before entering the mantapa , following the sculptural clockwise @-@ sequenced reliefs on the outer temple walls depicting a sequence of epic scenes from the Hindu epics . Temples that are not built on a jagati can have steps flanked by elephant balustrades ( parapets ) that lead to the mantapa from ground level . An example of a temple that does not exhibit the raised platform is the <unk> temple in <unk> , Hassan District . In temples with two shrines ( dvikuta ) , the <unk> ( the shrines or <unk> ) may be placed either next to each other or on opposite sides . The <unk> temple at <unk> is unique to Hoysala architecture as it has four shrines around a common center and a fifth shrine within the same complex for the deity Bhairava ( a form of Shiva ) . In addition , four minor shrines exist at each corner of the courtyard ( <unk> ) . 
 = = Architectural elements = = 
 = = = Mantapa = = = 
 The mantapa is the hall where groups of people gather during prayers . The entrance to the mantapa normally has a highly ornate overhead lintel called a <unk> ( makara is an imaginary beast and torana is an overhead decoration ) . The open mantapa which serves the purpose of an outer hall ( outer mantapa ) is a regular feature in larger Hoysala temples leading to an inner small closed mantapa and the shrine ( s ) . The open mantapas which are often spacious have seating areas ( asana ) made of stone with the mantapa 's parapet wall acting as a back rest . The seats may follow the same staggered square shape of the parapet wall . The ceiling here is supported by numerous pillars that create many bays . The shape of the open mantapa is best described as staggered @-@ square and is the style used in most Hoysala temples . Even the smallest open mantapa has 13 bays . The walls have parapets that have half pillars supporting the outer ends of the roof which allow plenty of light making all the sculptural details visible . The mantapa ceiling is generally ornate with sculptures , both mythological and floral . The ceiling consists of deep and domical surfaces and contains sculptural depictions of banana bud motifs and other such decorations . 
 If the temple is small it will consist of only a closed mantapa ( enclosed with walls extending all the way to the ceiling ) and the shrine . The closed mantapa , well decorated inside and out , is larger than the vestibule connecting the shrine and the mantapa and has four lathe @-@ turned pillars to support the ceiling , which may be deeply domed . The four pillars divide the hall into nine bays . The nine bays result in nine decorated ceilings . Pierced stone screens ( Jali or <unk> ) that serve as windows in the <unk> ( hall ) and <unk> ( congregation hall ) is a characteristic Hoysala stylistic element . 
 A porch adorns the entrance to a closed mantapa , consisting of an awning supported by two half @-@ pillars ( engaged columns ) and two parapets , all richly decorated . The closed mantapa is connected to the shrine ( s ) by a vestibule , a square area that also connects the shrines . Its outer walls are decorated , but as the size the vestibule is not large , this may not be a conspicuous part of the temple . The vestibule also has a short tower called the <unk> or " nose " upon which is mounted the Hoysala emblem . In Belur and Halebidu , these sculptures are quite large and are placed at all doorways . 
 The outer and inner mantapa ( open and closed ) have circular lathe @-@ turned pillars having four brackets at the top . Over each bracket stands sculptured figure ( s ) called <unk> or <unk> . The pillars may also exhibit ornamental carvings on the surface and no two pillars are alike . This is how Hoysala art differs from the work of their early overlords , the Western Chalukyas , who added sculptural details to the circular pillar base and left the top plain . The lathe @-@ turned pillars are 16 , 32 , or 64 @-@ pointed ; some are bell @-@ shaped and have properties that reflect light . The <unk> <unk> at Halebidu is a good example . According to Brown , the pillars with four monolithic brackets above them carry images of <unk> and <unk> ( sculpture of a woman , displaying stylized feminine features ) . This is a common feature of Chalukya @-@ Hoysala temples . According to Sastri , the shape of the pillar and its capital , the base of which is square and whose shaft is a monolith that is lathe turned to render different shapes , is a " remarkable feature " of Hoysala art . 
 = = = Vimana = = = 
 The vimana , also called the cella , contains the most sacred shrine wherein resides the image of the presiding deity . The vimana is often topped by a tower which is quite different on the outside than on the inside . Inside , the vimana is plain and square , whereas outside it is profusely decorated and can be either stellate ( " star @-@ shaped " ) or shaped as a staggered square , or feature a combination of these designs , giving it many projections and recesses that seem to multiply as the light falls on it . Each projection and recess has a complete decorative articulation that is rhythmic and repetitive and composed of blocks and mouldings , obscuring the tower profile . Depending on the number of shrines ( and hence on the number of towers ) , the temples are classified as ekakuta ( one ) , dvikuta ( two ) , trikuta ( three ) , <unk> ( four ) and <unk> ( five ) . Most Hoysala temples are ekakuta , dvikuta or trikuta , the Vaishnava ones mostly being trikuta . There are cases where a temple is trikuta but has only one tower over the main shrine ( in the middle ) . So the terminology trikuta may not be literally accurate . In temples with multiple disconnected shrines , such as the twin temples at Mosale , all essential parts are duplicated for symmetry and balance . 
 The highest point of the temple ( kalasa ) has the shape of a water pot and stands on top of the tower . This portion of the vimana is often lost due to age and has been replaced with a metallic pinnacle . Below the kalasa is a large , <unk> sculptured structure resembling a dome which is made from large stones and looks like a helmet . It may be 2 m by 2 m in size and follows the shape of the shrine . Below this structure are domed roofs in a square plan , all of them much smaller and crowned with small <unk> . They are mixed with other small roofs of different shapes and are ornately decorated . The tower of the shrine usually has three or four tiers of rows of decorative roofs while the tower on top of the <unk> has one less tier , making the tower look like an extension of the main tower ( <unk> calls it the " nose " ) . One decorated roof tier runs on top of the wall of a closed mantapa above the heavy eaves of an open mantapa and above the porches . 
 Below the superstructure of the vimana are temple " eaves " projecting half a meter from the wall . Below the eaves two different decorative schemes may be found , depending on whether a temple was built in the early or the later period of the empire . In the early temples built prior to the 13th century , there is one eave and below this are decorative miniature towers . A panel of Hindu deities and their attendants are below these towers , followed by a set of five different mouldings forming the base of the wall . In the later temples there is a second eave running about a metre below the upper eaves with decorative miniature towers placed between them . The wall images of gods are below the lower eaves , followed by six different mouldings of equal size . This is broadly termed " horizontal treatment " . The six mouldings at the base are divided in two sections . Going from the very base of the wall , the first horizontal layer contains a procession of elephants , above which are horsemen and then a band of foliage . The second horizontal section has depictions of the Hindu epics and Puranic scenes executed with detail . Above this are two friezes of <unk> or <unk> ( imaginary beasts ) and <unk> ( swans ) . The vimana ( tower ) is divided into three horizontal sections and is even more ornate than the walls . 
 = = = Sculpture = = = 
 In Hoysala art Hardy identifies two conspicuous departures from the more austere Western ( Later ) Chalukya art : ornamental elaboration and a profusion of iconography with figure sculptures , both of which are found in abundance even on the superstructure over the shrine . Their medium , the soft chlorite schist ( Soapstone ) enabled a virtuoso carving style . Hoysala artists are noted for their attention to sculptural detail be it in the depiction of themes from the Hindu epics and deities or in their use of motifs such as <unk> , kirtimukha ( gargoyles ) , <unk> ( miniature decorative towers ) on pilaster , makara ( aquatic monster ) , birds ( hamsa ) , spiral foliage , animals such as lions , elephants and horses , and even general aspects of daily life such as hair styles in vogue . 
 <unk> , a common form of Hoysala sculpture , is an old Indian tradition going back to Buddhist sculpture . Sala is the sala tree and <unk> is the chaste maiden . In the Hoysala idiom , <unk> figures are decorative objects put at an angle on the outer walls of the temple near the roof so that worshipers circumambulating the temple can view them . 
 The <unk> <unk> are pillar images that show traces of Chola art in the Chalukyan touches . Some of the artists working for the Hoysalas may have been from Chola country , a result of the expansion of the empire into Tamil @-@ speaking regions of Southern India . The image of <unk> on one of the pillars in the mantapa ( closed hall ) of the Chennakeshava temple is an example of Chola art . 
 General life themes are portrayed on wall panels such as the way horses were reined , the type of stirrup used , the depiction of dancers , musicians , instrumentalists , and rows of animals such as lions and elephants ( where no two animals are identical ) . Perhaps no other temple in the country depicts the Ramayana and Mahabharata epics more effectively than the <unk> temple at Halebidu . 
 Erotica was a subject the Hoysala artist handled with discretion . There is no exhibitionism in this , and erotic themes were carved into recesses and niches , generally miniature in form , making them inconspicuous . These erotic representations are associated with the Shakta practice . 
 Apart from these sculptures , entire sequences from the Hindu epics ( commonly the Ramayana and the Mahabharata ) have been sculpted in a clockwise direction starting at the main entrance . The right to left sequence is the same direction taken by the devotees in their ritual circumambulation as they wind inward toward the inner sanctum . Depictions from mythology such as the epic hero Arjuna shooting fish , the elephant @-@ headed god Ganesha , the Sun god Surya , the weather and war god Indra , and Brahma with Sarasvati are common . Also frequently seen in these temples is Durga , with several arms holding weapons given to her by other gods , in the act of killing a buffalo ( a demon in a buffalo 's form ) and Harihara ( a fusion of Shiva and Vishnu ) holding a conch , wheel and trident . Many of these friezes were signed by the artisans , the first known instance of signed artwork in India . 
 = = Research = = 
 According to <unk> , surveys in modern times have indicated that 1000 – 1500 structures were built by the Hoysalas , of which about a hundred temples have survived to date . The Hoysala style is an offshoot of the Western Chalukya style , which was popular in the 10th and 11th centuries . It is distinctively Dravidian , and according to Brown , owing to its features , Hoysala architecture qualifies as an independent style . While the Hoysalas introduced innovative features into their architecture , they also borrowed features from earlier builders of Karnata like the Kadambas , Western Chalukyas . These features included the use of <unk> schist or soapstone as a basic building material . Other features were the stepped style of vimana tower called the Kadamba shikhara , which was inherited from the Kadambas . Hoysala sculptors made use of the effect of light and shade on carved walls , which poses a challenge for photography of the temples . The artistry of the Hoysalas in stone has been compared to the finesse of an ivory worker or a goldsmith . The abundance of jewellery worn by the sculpted figures and the variety of hairstyles and headdresses depicted give a fair idea of the lifestyles of the Hoysala times . 
 = = Notable craftsmen = = 
 While medieval Indian artisans preferred to remain anonymous , Hoysala artisans signed their works , which has given researchers details about their lives , families , guilds , etc . Apart from the architects and sculptors , people of other guilds such as goldsmiths , ivory carvers , carpenters , and silversmiths also contributed to the completion of temples . The artisans were from diverse geographical backgrounds and included famous locals . Prolific architects included <unk> <unk> , a native of <unk> in Tumkur district , who also built temples for the Western Chalukyas . <unk> <unk> built the Kesava Temple at Somanathapura and worked on forty other monuments , including the <unk> temple at Amruthapura . <unk> specialised in ornamentation , and his works span six decades . His sculptures were typically signed in shorthand as Malli or simply Ma . <unk> and his son <unk> from Balligavi were the architects of Chennakesava Temple at Belur ; <unk> was the chief architect of the Hoysaleswara Temple at Halebidu . Their influence is seen in other temples built by the Hoysalas as well . Names of other locals found in inscriptions are <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and Bama , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . Artists from Tamil country included <unk> and <unk> . 
 = = List of notable temples from the Hoysala era = = 
 = All Around the World ( Justin Bieber song ) = 
 " All Around the World " is a song by Canadian recording artist Justin Bieber , from his third studio album , Believe ( 2012 ) . It was written by Bieber , Sir Nolan and Nasri of The Messengers in collaboration with Ludacris , who guest features . This was the second collaboration between Bieber and Ludacris , having previously collaborated on " Baby " ( 2010 ) . It was first released on June 4 , 2012 , as a promotional single from the album . The song was released as the fourth international single , and the fifth and final US single on February 26 , 2013 . The Eurodance track features a similar instrumentation to songs by Britney Spears , Chris Brown and Usher . Lyrically , it features Bieber singing to his love interest that " all around the world , people want to be loved " . " All Around the World " received mostly positive reviews from music critics , who welcomed the song 's Eurodance style . The song had moderate success worldwide , reaching the top ten in several countries , such as Belgium , Canada and Norway . Bieber promoted the song through live performances and a music video . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 In late 2011 , Bieber confirmed to radio network Capital FM that he was recording material for his third studio album , which was originally going to be released in early 2012 . He later spoke to MTV News and revealed that Believe would surprise people in different ways , since it is musically a departure from his previous works . " All Around the World " was written and produced by The Messengers and Nolan <unk> , while Bieber and Ludacris wrote additional lyrics . On May 25 , 2012 , an unmastered version of the track leaked online . The cover art for the promotional single was unveiled on June 4 , 2012 , and features Bieber holding an acoustic guitar over his shoulder , standing on the surface of the world , while the moon is glowing behind him . The same day , the track was released on iTunes Store through The Island Def Jam Music Group . The song was later released as the fourth international single , and the fifth and final US single on February 26 , 2013 . 
 It is an Eurodance song , which incorporates heavy synthpop elements in its instrumentation and is similar to previous works by producer David Guetta . Contemporary critics compared the track to Britney Spears ' " Till the World Ends " ( 2011 ) and Chris Brown 's " Beautiful People " ( 2011 ) . Lyrically , Bieber sings for his love interest and says that " all around the world , people want to be loved " . The track opens with he singing , " You 're beautiful , beautiful / You should know it / I think it 's time , think it 's time / That you show it " , lines that were compared to One Direction 's " What Makes You Beautiful " ( 2011 ) . As the track follows , Bieber encourages girls to release their inner beauty : " Light it up , so explosive / Why you acting so shy , holding back / DJ bring that back . " During the rap section , Ludacris references their previous collaboration on " Baby " ( 2010 ) , saying , " Once again , the dynamic duo is back at it ! / JB , Ludacris ! / I love everything about you / You 're imperfectly perfect / Everyone 's itching for beauty / But they 're just scratching the surface . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 " All Around the World " received mostly positive reviews from music critics . Jenna Rubenstein of MTV thought that the " fist @-@ pumping club banger " is a complete departure from Bieber 's previous work , while Diadem <unk> of the International Business Times stated that the singer joined the " ' synth @-@ pop ' bandwagon " along with Britney Spears , Chris Brown and Usher . Jocelyn Vena also of MTV stated that the song could have been recorded by Usher , due to its " grinding , fist @-@ pumping " background . Entertainment Weekly columnist Ray Rahman gave " All Around the World " a positive review , and stated : " a Euro beat worthy of The Wanted ? The vocal swagger of Chris Brown ? Lyrics smacking of One Direction ? Check , check , and check , please ! " Rick Florino of Artistdirect rated " All Around the World " five out of five stars , and commented that the track is not only a sequel to " Baby " , but is also " a whole new level for pop itself . " Becky Bain of Idolator explained that the song is a good example of how Bieber is taking " baby steps to ' <unk> ' adulthood through the evolution of his music — keep the content G @-@ Rated , but make the beat something the older club @-@ going crowd can enjoy . So far , it ’ s working . " Amy Sciaretto of Pop Crush gave the track a mixed review , and deemed it as highly similar to the work of Spears , stating : " If you told us this song was penned for Britney Spears for her last album Femme Fatale , we 'd Believe it , because the computerized style and the thick vocal effects remind us of recent Brit material . It 's safe to say that ' All Around the World ' is a club banger . And while we love Bieber , it 's not our favorite song on Believe so far . " 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 In the United States , " All Around the World " debuted at its peak number 22 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart on June 23 , 2012 , becoming the week 's best @-@ debuting single . On the Pop Songs chart , it peaked at number 19 . On the Canadian Hot 100 , it peaked at number ten . " All Around the World " debuted on the UK Singles Chart at its peak of number 30 , for the week ending June 16 , 2012 . In Denmark , it debuted at its peak of number seven , remaining five weeks on the chart . On the Norwegian Singles Chart , it peaked at number three . " All Around the World " debuted at number 56 on Sweden 's national singles chart , later peaking at number 41 and then fell out after two weeks . The track also peaked at number 34 in Australia and 15 in New Zealand , lasting for two weeks in both countries . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The official video was premiered on April 12 , 2013 . " Blessed and grateful to do what i do # <unk> . Thanks " , he wrote linking to the video . It is a " tour video " which is entirely composed of Bieber showing his point of view while he is touring the world and is largely based on his performance over Mexico City . It also illustrates vistas from the places he visited and documents national monuments including the Elizabeth Tower , the Eiffel Tower , the Sydney Opera House , Taj Mahal , pyramids of Giza , the Coliseum and Christ the Redeemer statue in Brazil . Ludacris , joins Bieber in the video during the rap portion of the song . It also included images of the singer posing with fans , and others crying and screaming for him . 
 <unk> Saad from Los Angeles Times noted that the video " briefly makes us sympathetic toward the Biebs and his eyebrow @-@ raising behavior this last year , which has included speeding , possibly smoking pot and frequently walking around shirtless " and named the fans ' part " memorable " . The same noted Ryan Seacrest 's website , saying " proves that no matter where he goes , there will always be plenty of fans to support him " . Entertainment Weekly notes that it " show off Justin Bieber in an all @-@ white suit and in a leather @-@ jacket outfit . Ludacris appears for a guest @-@ verse , indicating that this may all be a stealth prequel to Fast & Furious 6 " . Idolator 's Christina Lee described the video as " flashy " and wrote that it " offers a rose @-@ colored view of his superstar status " . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Bieber performed " All Around the World " at the Capital FM Summertime Ball 2012 . For the performance , he sported fingerless gloves , a Union Jack tank with matching vest , and jeans . The singer also performed the track during a promotional concert in Europe on June 4 , 2012 , along with " Boyfriend " and " Die in Your Arms " . Bieber also performed " All Around the World " and " Boyfriend " at the 2012 MuchMusic Video Awards on June 17 . The song is also used as Bieber 's 2012 @-@ 13 Believe Tour 's opening song . Entering from the upper portion of the arena , Bieber was lowered onto the center of the stage wearing a massive pair of charcoal @-@ colored wings . He was quickly joined by a troupe of male backing dancers as the song was played . Fireworks exploded , laser lights shot wildly from the ceiling , confetti fell to the floor and plumes of smoke were released from the bottom of the stage . Sophie A. Schillaci from The Hollywood Reporter gave a negative review for the performance and wrote that " if you can move past Justin Bieber ’ s bizarre stage entrance , flying in on a set of ginormous metal wings to the tune of ' All Around the World ' , it 's hard not to smile at his show " . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Certifications = = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = ISO 3166 @-@ 2 : SJ = 
 ISO 3166 @-@ 2 : SJ is the entry for Svalbard and Jan Mayen in ISO 3166 @-@ 2 , part of the ISO 3166 standard published by the International Organization for Standardization ( ISO ) . The standard defines codes for names of principal subdivisions of all countries coded in ISO 3166 @-@ 1 . Svalbard and Jan Mayen does not exist as an administrative region , but rather consists of two separate parts of Norway under separate jurisdictions — Svalbard and Jan Mayen . Further subdivision for Svalbard and Jan Mayen occurs under Norway 's entry , ISO 3166 @-@ 2 : NO , namely NO @-@ 21 for Svalbard and NO @-@ 22 for Jan Mayen . There are currently no ISO 3166 @-@ 2 codes for Svalbard and Jan Mayen . 
 = = Allocation = = 
 Svalbard and Jan Mayen constitute two outlying areas of Norway . Svalbard is an archipelago in the Arctic about midway between mainland Norway and the North Pole . The group of islands ranges from 74 ° to 81 ° north latitude , and from 10 ° to 35 ° east longitude . The Svalbard Treaty of 1920 recognizes Norwegian sovereignty , and the 1925 Svalbard Act established administration by the appointed Governor of Svalbard . Jan Mayen is a volcanic island in the Arctic Ocean located at the border of the Norwegian Sea and the Greenland Sea . Since 1994 , the island has been administrated by the County Governor of Nordland , with some authority delegated to the station commander . 
 Allocation of codes for Svalbard and Jan Mayen occurs under Norway 's entry in ISO 3166 @-@ 2 , ISO 3166 @-@ 2 : NO . By virtue of the collective ISO 3166 @-@ 1 code SJ , Svalbard and Jan Mayen were grouped together and allocated the Internet country code top @-@ level domain ( ccTLD ) .sj. As with Bouvet Island 's TLD .bv , policy prohibits any registration with the .sj domain , forcing institutions connected to Svalbard to use Norway 's domain .no. 
 = = List of codes = = 
