 = = Plot = = 
 SG @-@ 1 and Jack O 'Neill attend a Tok 'ra extraction ceremony for Ba 'al , the last of the Goa 'uld System Lords . Ba 'al claims , however , that he is merely the last clone and that the real Ba 'al has a fail @-@ safe plan . The real Ba 'al travels back in time to 1939 Earth and massacres the crew of the Achilles , the ship carrying the Stargate to the United States ; the captain lives long enough to drop the bomb Ba 'al left overboard and keep the ship from being destroyed . In the present , people and objects start disappearing , including Vala Mal Doran and Teal 'c . Jack is killed by the clone , but Samantha Carter , Daniel Jackson and Cameron Mitchell reach the Stargate . They are surprised to emerge inside the derelict Achilles , which has drifted to the Arctic — Ba 'al 's actions have created a timeline in which the Stargate Program never happened . After escaping from the sinking Achilles , they are rescued by a team led by Colonel Jack O 'Neill . Although General Landry believes their story ( after intensive interrogation ) , they are denied permission to change the timeline . In the alternate timeline , Daniel is still trying to convince people about his theories of the pyramids , Carter died in a space shuttle accident and Mitchell does not exist at all because his grandfather was the Achilles captain . The three are separated and given new lives to lead . 
 A year passes , and SG @-@ 1 is called back into action when Goa 'uld <unk> appear . Ba 'al has brought the other System Lords under his control and now stands ready to conquer Earth , with Qetesh , still residing in Vala 's body , as his queen and Teal 'c as his First Prime . SG @-@ 1 is brought to President Henry Hayes and General George Hammond , who inform them that , based on SG @-@ 1 's accounts , they have recovered the Antarctic Stargate and are excavating the Antarctic Ancient outpost to reach the weapon that saved Earth in the original timeline . SG @-@ 1 is sent in F @-@ 15s to McMurdo Station to gate to <unk> <unk> , another Ancient outpost , to retrieve a Zero Point Module to power the Antarctic outpost . 
 Above Earth , Ba 'al 's armada arrives . To the displeasure of his subordinates , the other System Lords , Ba 'al announces that he will treat the Tau <unk> leniently . Suspicious about Ba 'al 's thorough knowledge of Earth , Qetesh betrays him and forces him to tell her everything . She orders the destruction of McMurdo and the Ancient outpost in Ba 'al 's name , but she kills Ba 'al when Teal 'c discovers what she is doing . As Teal 'c escapes to an Al <unk> , Qetesh orders the fleet to bombard Earth , while she goes to secure Ba 'al 's time machine . 
 Amidst the massive Goa 'uld attack , SG @-@ 1 is rerouted to Russia , as the Russians had retrieved the Achilles ' Stargate from the ocean floor . Teal 'c arrives at the facility as well , seeking to use the Stargate to reach the time machine before Qetesh . The two sides agree to a truce and arrive together at Ba 'al 's time machine : a vast underground supercomputer connected to hundreds of satellites that monitor solar flares that could intersect the wormhole formed by the Stargate ; the flares are necessary for time travel . SG @-@ 1 must wait for the right flare with which to journey to the past , but when Qetesh 's troops attack , they are forced to dial the Stargate to the year 1929 - ten years before their target date . Sam and Daniel are killed in the firefight , and only Mitchell reaches the Stargate before Teal 'c , mortally wounded , blows himself and Qetesh up . After a decade of waiting , an older Mitchell stows away on the Achilles and kills Ba 'al and his troops when they come through the Stargate . In the now @-@ restored timeline , SG @-@ 1 , completely unaware of the previous events , watch the extraction proceed without incident . On Earth , Daniel wonders what Ba 'al meant by his fail @-@ safe . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Ben Browder as Colonel Cameron " Cam " Mitchell and Mitchell 's grandfather , the captain of the Achilles 
 Amanda Tapping as Colonel Samantha " Sam " Carter 
 Christopher Judge as Teal 'c 
 Michael Shanks as Dr. Daniel Jackson 
 Claudia Black as Vala Mal Doran and Qetesh 
 Beau Bridges as Major General Henry " Hank " Landry 
 Richard Dean Anderson as Major General ( & Colonel ) Jonathan " Jack " O 'Neill 
 Cliff Simon as Ba 'al 
 Don S. Davis as Lieutenant General George Hammond 
 William Devane as President Henry Hayes 
 = = Production = = 
 Stargate : Continuum was written by Brad Wright and directed by Martin Wood . Some scenes for this film were already shot at the end of March 2007 , but the original start date was set for May 22 , 2007 at Vancouver 's Bridge Studios . The production budget was US $ 7 million . Due to the postponement of this film until the 5th season of Stargate Atlantis was airing , there is a continuity error with Carter and Mitchell 's rank . In the ending credits they are listed as lieutenant colonels . However , when they fly the F @-@ 15s they are each wearing the rank of colonel . This is due to the fact that during filming producers realized that the film would probably be released after Carter character had been promoted on Atlantis . In the season 5 premiere of that show , Sam , already a colonel , leaves Atlantis to attend the extraction , thus setting this film about a year after The Ark of Truth . 
 The original draft for the film started with a view of the Tok 'ra city , but Brad Wright eventually decided that the film should start in Stargate Command ( SGC ) to show what SG @-@ 1 represented . When writing lines for the character Jack O 'Neill , Wright tried to write lines that felt " natural " and not " forced , " saying it was of major importance . The inclusion of many recurring characters from the series Stargate SG @-@ 1 was decided on to make old fans feel more " welcome " to the new film . The unnamed Captain of the Achilles ' dead body was originally supposed to be revealed when SG @-@ 1 traveled back to Earth ; Wright commented on the case , calling it " gross " . Richard Dean Anderson was not supposed to appear at the start of the film , where he was killed . According to Wright , he was only set to appear in the alternate timeline in Antarctica because that 's what Wright " asked him to do . " 
 Due to a scheduling conflict , actor Michael Shanks was unavailable to shoot the scenes in the Arctic . However , Jackson was on the boat with Cameron Mitchell and Samantha Carter in the preceding scenes . In order to make his disappearance plausible , Wright decided that Jackson would develop frostbite after stepping in water and be unable to continue with the others . When commenting on the dialogue scenes , Wright commented that scenes like that would be " cut off " because of the time constraints in the Stargate SG @-@ 1 and Atlantis episodes , and further commented that they could keep these scenes since the film is " longer " than the episodes . 
 The film includes scenes filmed at the U.S. Navy 's Applied Physics Laboratory Ice Station in the Arctic , 200 nautical miles ( 230 mi ; 370 km ) north of Prudhoe Bay , Alaska . These scenes feature Richard Dean Anderson , Amanda Tapping and Ben Browder . They were filmed from March 23 to 29 , 2007 . The film also features the USS Alexandria ( SSN @-@ 757 ) . The Arctic filming included scenes shot on the ice , scenes shot with the Alexandria as a backdrop , scenes shot on board the Alexandria , and shots of the Alexandria surfacing and submerging . Because of the minimal facilities , the Arctic scenes were filmed with only the three actors and a four @-@ man crew . Director Martin Wood worked as an extra in one scene ( as " Major Wood " ) , as did another member of the film crew . The captain of the Alexandria , Cmdr. Mike Bernacchi , and members of her crew played themselves . Barry L. Campbell , head of operations at the San Diego @-@ based U.S. Navy Arctic Submarine Laboratory , who had arranged the opportunity to film in Arctic , also appeared as a seaman . Writer Brad Wright also had a cameo appearance , as an F @-@ 15 pilot . 
 The film is dedicated to the memory of Paul McCann and Anthony <unk> , who lost their lives during an accident under the ice cap on the submarine HMS Tireless ( S88 ) at the time of filming . The film took 19 days to shoot , plus five days of shooting in the Arctic ( they were there for seven days ) . The film , Continuum was placed in Guinness World Records in the category for farthest north film shoot . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The film premiered at San Diego Comic @-@ Con International on July 25 , 2008 , attended by the cast . The film was released on both DVD and Blu @-@ ray Disc on July 29 , 2008 . The film was also released on August 6 , 2008 in Australia and was released in the United Kingdom on August 18 , 2008 after being broadcast on the British TV channel , Sky1 on August 12 . On its debut in the United Kingdom and Ireland Stargate : Continuum received 543 @,@ 000 viewers , placing the film first in the top ten broadcasts for Sky One . The film would go on to gross over US $ 8 million in the United States . The film premiered on Sci @-@ Fi Channel in the US on April 3 , 2009 . 
 A reviewer for Sky1 called the film a " thoroughly enjoyable romp . " Nix from Sci Fi Cool said in his review , " it ends exactly the same way that most , if not all , <unk> episodes usually end : It leaves you satisfied , and wanting more . " Reviewer Christopher Monfette of IGN gave the film 7 out of 10 and said it was a decent film , but ultimately did not meet the " level of great science fiction " . Don Houston from DVD Talk commented that the " budget was too low " for the writers to " support the ideas at hand " . Mark Wilson from About.com said the film was just another way for the producers to return to some of their favorite characters , but concluded that it was a " solid " film . Darren Sumner and David Read from GateWorld called it a " great movie " , and said it was even better than Stargate : The Ark of Truth . Dean <unk> said it was " one of the better direct @-@ to @-@ video " releases that year . 
 Stargate : Continuum won the High @-@ Def Disc Awards 2008 category for Best <unk> Blu @-@ ray . The film was nominated for 6 Constellation Awards in 2008 , the results were announced on July 11 , 2009 . The film won one award out of six nominations . Claudia Black received the award for " Best Female Performance in a 2008 Science Fiction Film , TV Movie , or Mini @-@ Series " for her portrayal of Vala Mal Doran . The film was also nominated for a total of 11 Leo Awards in 2009 . The results were announced on May 8 and 9 , 2009 , the film won three awards : Brad Wright won in the category " Best Screenwriting in a Feature Length Drama " , Michael Shanks won " Lead Performance by a Male in a Feature Length Drama " for his portrayal of Daniel Jackson and the three production crew members Paul Sharpe , Iain Pattison and Graeme Hughes won " Best Overall Sound in a Feature Length Drama " . 
 The two Stargate direct @-@ to @-@ DVD movies to date , Stargate : Continuum and Stargate : The Ark of Truth , were re @-@ released in the United States as a Double @-@ Pack DVD on March 3 , 2009 ; the Double @-@ Pack is also available on Blu @-@ ray . A third Stargate SG @-@ 1 film to follow Continuum has been permanently shelved . If made , it would have reportedly centered on the character of Jack O 'Neill and would be titled Stargate : Revolution . 
 = = Awards = = 
 In 2009 , Stargate : Continuum was nominated for 11 Leo awards and won three of them . 
 = Tennessee Coal , Iron and Railroad Company = 
 The Tennessee Coal , Iron and Railroad Company ( 1852 – 1952 ) , also known as TCI and the Tennessee Company , was a major American steel manufacturer with interests in coal and iron ore mining and railroad operations . Originally based entirely within Tennessee , it relocated most of its business to Alabama in the late nineteenth century . With a sizable real estate portfolio , the company owned several Birmingham satellite towns , including Ensley , Fairfield , <unk> , Edgewater and Bayview . 
 At one time the second largest steel producer in the USA , TCI was listed on the first Dow Jones Industrial Average in 1896 . However , in 1907 , the company was merged with its principal rival , the United States Steel Corporation . The Tennessee Coal , Iron and Railroad Company was subsequently operated as a subsidiary of U. S. Steel for 45 years until it became a division of its parent company in 1952 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 The Tennessee Coal , Iron and Railroad Company was founded as the Sewanee Furnace Company , a small mining concern established in 1852 by Nashville entrepreneurs seeking to exploit Tennessee 's rich coal reserves and the 19th century railroad boom . After losing money , the business was sold to New York investors in 1859 and reorganized as the Tennessee Coal and Rail Company , but the outbreak of the Civil War the following year saw the fleeting company repossessed by local creditors . It became Tennessee 's leading coal extractor over the next decade , mining and transporting coal around the towns of Cowan and Tracy City in the Cumberland Mountains , and soon branched out into coke manufacture . This practice of both extracting and moving coal to market by building private rail tracks was not unusual at the time , as by owning the tracks that served their mines , businesses could undercut rivals at market by saving money on transportation . A Thomas O 'Connor purchased the company in 1876 and expanded the business into iron manufacture in order to stimulate coke sales , building a blast furnace near Cowan . The business was subsequently renamed the Tennessee Coal , Iron , and Railroad Company . TCI never again changed its name , despite a later expansion into Alabama following the 1886 purchase of the Birmingham @-@ based Pratt Coal and Iron Company . Such was the industrial importance of Alabama to TCI that in 1895 , the company relocated its offices to Birmingham , relegating its native state to relative unimportance . 
 <unk> investments and the purchase of major competitors in 1888 and 1892 under the direction of financier Hiram Bond , TCI Corporate General Superintendent , saw the firm grow rapidly . The corporation was for several decades one of the few major heavy industries based in the largely agricultural Southern United States , by a wide margin the largest blast furnace operator in the South and at one time the second largest steel producer on the continent . Its 1900 asset sheet listed 17 blast furnaces , <unk> beehive coke ovens , 120 Solvay coke ovens , 15 red ore mines , as well an extensive network of railroads , although following the panic of 1893 the company shifted its primary interests from railroads to steel . TCI 's largest industrial plant was located in Ensley , a company town founded in 1886 on the outskirts of Birmingham , Alabama , by company president Enoch Ensley . Ensley ( map of ) was served by the sizable Birmingham Southern Railroad , one of TCI 's early acquisitions , and from 1899 contained four 200 @-@ ton blast furnaces . In 1906 two more furnaces were constructed , and 40 @,@ 000 tonnes of steel were produced that year , feeding Ensley 's integrated rail , wire and plate mills . The company was fiercely competitive with the larger Pittsburgh steel businesses to the north , owing to the remarkable fact that all the natural resources required to produce steel were located in abundance within a relatively small radius of the Birmingham mills . 
 = = = From forced labor to paternalism = = = 
 The Tennessee Coal , Iron and Railroad Company was one of the largest users of prison laborers , mostly Blacks convicted of petty crimes , as a method for paying fines . This practice was common for obtaining coal mining labor in Alabama at the close of the Reconstruction era . The number of convicts employed increased after U.S. Steel acquired TCI in 1907 , as did the brutality of the conditions in which they labored . In 1908 , the first full year of U. S. Steel 's ownership of TCI , almost 60 prison workers died from workplace @-@ related accidents . 
 In the 1910s , TCI undertook a comprehensive program to stabilize its labor force , excluding prison laborers , by developing rigorously @-@ planned " model villages " , thereby improving worker health , welfare and loyalty . This paternalistic approach carried with it obvious benefits for workers and their families , but also drew criticism for limiting the free movement and organization of labor . 
 = = = Listing on the Dow Jones Index and merger with U. S. Steel = = = 
 The Tennessee Coal , Iron and Railroad Company 's status was bolstered when it became one of the first 12 companies to be listed on the inaugural Dow Jones Industrial Average , compiled in May 1896 . However , it was not long before TCI was eclipsed by its principal competitor , the United States Steel Corporation , a huge conglomerate formed in 1901 out of the enormous Carnegie and Federal steel empires . By the time of the Panic of 1907 , U. S. Steel felt confident enough to launch a takeover bid of its Southern rival . On the morning of Saturday November 2 , banker and tycoon J. P. Morgan , one of the founders of U. S. Steel , convened a meeting in his library and there suggested that U. S. Steel purchase the stock of an insolvent Wall Street brokerage firm , Moore and Schley , which had secured huge loans against 6 million TCI shares . This was not an entirely selfish gesture , as Morgan recognised that the failure of Moore and Schley would send investor confidence in the markets into a nose @-@ dive . E. H. Gary , president of U. S. Steel , agreed in principle to this transaction , yet argued that without careful political maneuvering the deal would be seen by Congress as an effort to create a monopoly and thereby encounter troublesome federal anti @-@ trust litigation . Morgan himself had been burnt by crusading Washington trust @-@ busters in 1902 when his Northern Securities Company had been forcibly broken up by the government in a landmark test case . 
 In response to his concerns , Morgan sent Gary on an urgent mission to Washington that Sunday so that the deal might be vetted by President Theodore Roosevelt himself before the stock exchange opened the next day . Convinced by Gary that U. S. Steel only wished to purchase Moore and Schley 's stock in order to inject liquidity into the firm and thereby shore up investor confidence in the wider economy , Roosevelt granted the transaction antitrust immunity in November 1907 , a decision for which he was later derided by critics as a hypocrite . Indeed , in 1911 the federal government sought to undo what it perceived to be Roosevelt 's mistake and ( without success ) sued U. S. Steel . In the meantime , Moore and Schley was saved from collapse , the panic soon subsided and U. S. Steel was rewarded with a valuable prize - a controlling stake in TCI . U. S. Steel immediately replaced the Tennessee Coal , Iron and Railroad Company on the Dow Jones Index , where it remained until 1991 . 
 = = = U. S. Steel = = = 
 TCI was not fully incorporated into U. S. Steel , and continued to operate as an extremely profitable subsidiary of its parent company well into the 20th century . Immediately following the merger , a venture was launched to create a new , larger TCI plant to the west of Ensley and at the center of a new company town , and so in 1910 work on the planned community of Corey , Alabama , began . Named after an executive who later committed suicide , Corey was soon renamed Fairfield , and the steel works there opened in 1917 . With the discovery of new coking coal and ore deposits in the region , and with the aid of U. S. Steel 's enormous capital , the Fairfield works were quickly expanded with the construction of new steel mills and rail links . Several rolling mills were completed in 1917 , which produced ship materials for the nearby shipbuilding plants in Chickasaw , Alabama , in support of America 's sudden entry into World War I. In 1920 a direct rail line between Fairfield and <unk> , the new port of Birmingham on the Warrior River was opened . This was followed by the completion of the ' High Ore Line Railroad ' , which connected the Red Mountain and the Fairfield works ; trains literally rolled down the hill from mine to mill . In 1923 a merchant steel mill was completed , followed by the opening of a sheet products mill in 1926 . 
 TCI proved to be so efficient at making cheap steel that a post @-@ merger internal tariff ( the ' Pittsburgh Tariff ' ) was levied by U. S. Steel from 1909 on all steel coming out of the Birmingham region . This was an effort to negate the competitive edge of Birmingham steel over U.S. Steel 's own Pittsburgh product . 
 TCI 's independence as a separate legal entity from its parent corporation ended in 1952 , a century after the founding of the Sewanee Furnace Company , when the it became the Tennessee Coal & Iron Division of U. S. Steel . The memory of the historic importance of TCI was not lost when a short book to celebrate the Tennessee Company 's centenary was published by U. S. Steel in 1960 : Biography of a Business . Stagnation and decline began in 1962 when a majority of the mines in the Birmingham region were closed as domestic ores and coal were superseded by cheaper foreign products , especially from Venezuela . The 1970s and 80s brought about a downsizing and eventual consolidation of the Fairfield and Ensley works , mirroring the general decline of heavy industry in the USA throughout those decades . 
 = = Current operations = = 
 The last relic of the Tennessee Coal , Iron and Railroad Company , the Fairfield Plant , continues to be operated by U. S. Steel as one of its five integrated steel mills in the USA . It is the largest steel @-@ making plant in Alabama , employing 2 @,@ 000 workers as of September 2006 , down from a peak of 45 @,@ 000 during World War II . With a single blast furnace and three basic oxygen process furnaces , amongst other various mills and production facilities , the plant produces 2 @.@ 4 million tons of raw steel per annum and 640 @,@ 000 tons of seamless tubular and sheet products , mainly for purchase by the booming oil industry . 
 August 17 , 2015 , U. S. Steel President and CEO Mario Longhi announced , " We have determined that the permanent shut @-@ down of the Fairfield Works blast furnace , steelmaking and most of the finishing operations is necessary . " The decision does not impact Fairfield Tubular Operations or the electric arc furnace ( EAF ) construction project . 1 @,@ 600 workers will be laid off by November 17 , 2015 . 
 = A Fish Called Selma = 
 " A Fish Called Selma " is the nineteenth episode of The Simpsons ' seventh season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on March 24 , 1996 . The episode features Troy McClure , who attempts to resurrect his acting career by marrying Selma Bouvier . Show runners Bill Oakley and Josh Weinstein were fans of Phil Hartman and wished to produce an episode that focused on his character McClure . Freelance writer Jack Barth wrote the episode , and Mark Kirkland directed it . 
 Barth 's script underwent a substantial rewrite in the show 's writing room , including the expansion of the Planet of the Apes musical and addition of the song " Dr. Zaius " . The episode ran too long because of the slow pace of Troy and Selma 's speech . Consequently , guest star Jeff Goldblum rerecorded his dialogue as MacArthur Parker at a faster speed . The episode received generally positive reviews , with particular praise given to Hartman and the musical . Entertainment Weekly placed the episode eighth on their list of the top 25 The Simpsons episodes . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Chief Wiggum pulls Troy McClure over for dangerous driving . Not wishing to be required to wear his glasses while driving , Troy goes to the DMV to get his license changed to remove the requirement . He offers to take DMV employee Selma Bouvier to dinner if she lets him pass the eye test , to which she agrees . After dinner , photographers notice Troy leaving with a human woman ( rumors about a sexual abnormality concerning fish had essentially destroyed Troy 's career ) and the story hits the news . The next day , Troy 's agent , MacArthur Parker , calls and says that he can get work again if he continues seeing Selma . Troy continues to date her and his career begins to recover . On his agent 's advice , Troy asks Selma to marry him ; overjoyed , she agrees . 
 The night before the wedding , a drunk Troy tells Homer the reason for his marriage : he doesn 't really love Selma , and he just plans to use her as a sham wife to help further his career . Although Homer fails to act , Marge and Patty try to explain it to Selma , who accuses them of just being envious . She confronts Troy , who shamelessly admits that their marriage is a sham . Troy explains to Selma that even though their marriage is a sham , she has everything she could want and will be " the envy of every other sham wife in town " . Selma has doubts , but accepts the situation because she fears being alone . Parker thinks he can get Troy the part of McBain 's sidekick in McBain IV : Fatal Discharge , but concludes he will have a better chance if he has a family . Troy and Selma try to conceive a child , but neither feels comfortable with their situation , and Selma finally leaves after deciding that bringing a child into a loveless family is wrong . Troy turns down the role of McBain 's sidekick to direct and star in his own film , The <unk> <unk> of Professor Horatio <unk> . 
 = = Production = = 
 Show runners Bill Oakley and Josh Weinstein were fans of actor Phil Hartman , who had been a recurring guest star since the second season . They decided to produce an episode entirely about his character Troy McClure to give Hartman as much to do as possible . Oakley wanted to explore Troy 's character because he had never interacted with the show 's other characters before , only appearing on television . The writers chose the plot idea of Troy 's marriage to Selma Bouvier because she was " always marrying people " . The episode 's first draft was written by freelance writer Jack Barth , although the rest of the writing staff rewrote it . One aspect of the rewrite was the song " Dr. Zaius " from the Planet of the Apes musical , which the staff consider to be one of the greatest musical numbers ever written for The Simpsons . Weinstein pitched it in the writer 's room as " Rock Me Dr. Zaius " , in parody of the 1985 song " Rock Me Amadeus " by Falco . It expanded into a full song primarily concocted by George Meyer , who included " corny " aspects of vaudeville . The line " From <unk> @-@ A to <unk> @-@ Z " in the final song of the musical was written by David Cohen . Oakley commented that he has heard the line " all over the world " . Director Mark Kirkland was pleased that Troy was the star of the episode ; he enjoyed interpreting Hartman 's voice performance because it allowed him and the other animators to " open [ McClure ] up visually as a character " . Due to the slow talking speed of Troy and Selma , the episode 's audio track was 28 minutes long which meant that multiple scenes had to be cut , including Troy 's bachelor party . After the cast had completed their original recording , guest star Jeff Goldblum rerecorded his dialogue as MacArthur Parker at a faster speed to further shorten it . His character 's design was loosely modeled on him , as well as a real @-@ life " sleazy Hollywood agent " . The animators watched several of Goldblum 's films , including The Tall Guy , in order to get a better representation of his performance . 
 Throughout " A Fish Called Selma " it is hinted that Troy engages in strange sexual activity . The writers initially did not know what the " unsavory " sexual preference would be , but eventually decided on a fish fetish , a suggestion from executive producer James L. Brooks , since it was " so perverted and strange , that it was over the top " . At the episode 's table reading , a female staff member demanded the line , " From now on she 's smoking for two " , be removed from the script ; however , her request was denied . On the walls of the Pimento Grove restaurant , the animators placed caricatures of every single guest star who had appeared on the show up to that point , as well as pictures of the fictional celebrities of the show . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The episode 's title is a reference to the film A Fish Called Wanda , while the opening scene features a parody of The Muppets . McClure appears in a musical version of Planet of the Apes ; the song " Dr. Zaius " is a parody of " Rock Me Amadeus " by Falco . The scene with Selma and Troy smoking is similar to Now , Voyager . The house that McClure lives in is based on the <unk> in California and his car is a DeLorean DMC @-@ 12 . The showbiz news anchors , voiced by Hank Azaria and Pamela Hayden , are based on Entertainment Tonight hosts John Tesh and Mary Hart , respectively . McClure describes Jub @-@ Jub the iguana as " Everywhere You Want to Be " in reference to a Visa commercial . Ken Keeler pitched the name MacArthur Parker , in reference to the song " MacArthur Park " , written by Jimmy Webb and first recorded by Richard Harris . Selma 's costumes are modeled on the clothes of Marilyn Monroe . At the wedding , Homer sings " Rock and Roll Part 2 " by Gary Glitter in his head . 
 The rumours of Troy McClure having a bizarre fetish for marine life mirror sex rumours about Richard Gere and a hamster . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " A Fish Called Selma " finished tied for 66th place in the weekly ratings for the week of March 18 – March 24 , 1996 , with a Nielsen rating of 7 @.@ 8 . It was the sixth @-@ highest rated show on the Fox Network that week . Entertainment Weekly placed the episode eighth on their list of the top 25 The Simpsons episodes . IGN named the episode the best of the seventh season , stating that it seemed the " obvious pick " . They called the musical the best moment of the episode and " maybe even the whole show " . In a later review , IGN 's Robert Canning praised Phil Hartman 's performance as " simply the best of any guest appearance on The Simpsons " . He concluded by saying : " Sure , [ the episode 's ] writing is smart and the jokes are funny , but without Phil Hartman as Troy McClure , ' A Fish Called Selma ' would only be good . With Hartman , it 's fantastic ! " Michael Moran of The Times ranked the episode as the best in the show 's history . In 2012 , Johnny Dee of The Guardian listed it as one of his five favorite episodes in the history of The Simpsons , noting that " Key to The Simpsons longevity is the minor characters who only crop up every season or so . And none more so than Troy McClure " . 
 Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , the authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , were pleased that " Troy McClure gets a starring role at last " . Empire called the episode the " high point " of the show 's " long @-@ standing love affair with The Planet of the Apes " , and cited it as McClure 's " finest hour " . Kimberly Potts of AOL Television named the episode the 14th best episode of the show . Dave Foster of DVD Times praised the episode , as well as Jeff Goldblum 's participation on the audio commentary . He stated : " for those yet to witness Troy McClure 's musical take on Planet of the Apes , well , you might say you haven 't lived ! Musical parody at its very best , the visuals and aural delights in this one brief sequence guarantee this season a recommendation being one of the most inspired moments of The Simpsons many seasons . " 
 = Spark the Fire = 
 " Spark the Fire " is a song recorded by American singer and songwriter Gwen Stefani . The song was released on December 1 , 2014 . It was originally intended to be featured on Stefani 's third studio album This Is What the Truth Feels Like , but it was scrapped in favor of new material . Stefani wrote " Spark the Fire " in collaboration with the song 's producer Pharrell Williams . It is a dance @-@ pop and hip hop track that incorporates funk . Along with the previous single , " Baby Don 't Lie " , the track was marketed as Stefani 's musical comeback as a solo artist . 
 Critical responses to " Spark the Fire " were mixed with critics negatively comparing it to Stefani and Williams ' previous collaboration " Hollaback Girl " , while others favored it compared to " Baby Don 't Lie " . Lyrically , the song serves as a " comeback " , discussing topics such as partying , having a good time , and feminism . " Spark the Fire " charted on Russia 's music chart at number 326 , failing to impact any other country 's main chart , managing only to peak on the lower ends of the US Dance Club and Pop Digital Songs charts . Stefani performed the song live during various public appearances , including The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon where she performed it alongside a medley mix of her previous singles . 
 = = Background = = 
 After releasing two solo albums , Love . Angel . Music . Baby ( 2004 ) and The Sweet Escape ( 2006 ) , Stefani returned to work with her band No Doubt , and in 2012 they released their sixth studio album , Push and Shove . During that time , she claimed , " I never need to do that or want to do it again . I 'm happy being in No Doubt . " However , after an appearance during Pharrell Williams ' performance at the 2014 Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival , Pharrell teased that the rare live appearance from Stefani was the start of a comeback effort for the singer . Shortly after her Coachella performance , Stefani performed " Hollaback Girl " live on The Voice to further promote her upcoming role on the show . 
 During an interview for MTV News during New York Fashion Week , Stefani confirmed that she was working on new material for a solo album and a No Doubt album ; she also stated , " I 'm going into the studio tonight with Pharrell [ Williams ] , I 'm going to be writing and also just seeing what comes along my way . I 've been recording a few things . " Williams completed , " When I tell you she 's killing it , it 's another level . " In an interview with the Windy City Media Group , Stefani said " [ the song ] was so perfect for my story @-@ for what I was feeling in my own personal life @-@ that I didn 't even get it as a feminist anthem . I thought it was just about me ! I was just feeling me . " After the release of " Baby Don 't Lie " a month prior , " Spark the Fire " was released on December 1 , 2014 . 
 = = Composition and lyrics = = 
 " Spark the Fire " was written by Stefani and Pharrell Williams ; Williams serves as the track 's sole producer . The song is a dance @-@ pop and hip hop track , with inclusions of funk music and heavy percussion . August Brown of the Los Angeles Times described the song as " full of vintage Pharrell moves : pep @-@ band drum lines , percussive blips and a lot of open space for Stefani 's gum @-@ smacking shouts " . Lyrically , the song discusses several different themes ; Feminism and " girl power " is made clear in the lyric " It is time for the girl species to grow / I am a Libra / Let 's balance the scales " , while partying and clubbing is made clear in the lyric " Who got the lighter ? / Let 's spark the fire " . In a 2014 interview with Scott T. Sterling , Williams stated that the " coolest part " of the song was " the sound and direction " , particularly the song 's lyrics <unk> " feminism and women standing up for themselves , and standing together " . He described the song as inspired by his feeling that " the female species has been suppressed long enough " , calling the lyric " Enough 's enough . Who 's got the lighter ? / Let 's spark the fire " Stefani 's way of demanding more respect for women . In an interview with PopSugar 's Lindsay Miller , Stefani identified the song as being " a very personal song " and " my journey " instead of a feminist anthem , but supported Williams ' interpretation , saying " I love when people discover their own opinions about a song " . Miller described Stefani 's hesitation with the word feminism as " com [ ing ] more from a place of humility than an attempt to avoid controversy " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Spark the Fire " received mixed reviews from critics . August Brown , writing for the Los Angeles Times , praised the single for being " a welcome return to the studio styles " of both Stefani and Williams . Hayden Manders of Refinery29 gave the single a positive review , calling it " a throwback for the modern age " and " a song of unity " . BreatheHeavy 's Jordan Miller praised the song for having " that typical Gwen sass combined with Pharrell ’ s signature quirky beats and rhythm " . Miller chose the lyrics " get off my cloud " as an <unk> of Stefani 's vocal delivery being " rap @-@ sing @-@ talking business " . However , he later criticized both " Spark the Fire " and " Baby Don 't Lie " for being " bland " . 
 With a more divided opinion , Slant Magazine 's Alexa Camp called the song " an attempt to repeat those past hits than update the singer 's sound for ' 2015 ' " , but described it as an improvement over the previous single " Baby Don 't Lie " , while Eliza Berman of Time said that " though it 's more repetitive and packs less oozing attitude than " Hollaback Girl " , it should serve the club nearly as well . " In a negative review , Lucas Villas of AXS described the song as " a dud " and viewed it as " a whole lot of hot air " that failed in its attempt of " rekindling [ the ] past magic " behind Stefani and Williams ' 2005 collaboration " Hollaback Girl " . Marc Hogan of Wondering Sound was critical of the song 's lyrics , saying " a look at Stefani ’ s prior discography might suggest there ’ s not much fuel left for this particular theme " , and compared them to her previous work with No Doubt on the song " Start the Fire " from the 2001 album Rock Steady . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background and synopsis = = = 
 The music video was released on December 1 , 2014 on Stefani 's official YouTube account . The video was produced by Stefani 's long @-@ time collaborator , Sophie Muller . At the beginning of the video , Stefani is shown floating on a cloud over an animated cityscape . For the video 's remainder , Stefani parties in an underground nightclub with friends while groups of animated emoticons and animated figures flash on the screen . During the song 's bridge before the last chorus , Stefani visually acts out the song 's lyrics with the help of several emoticons . Scott <unk> of Stereogum described the video 's storyline as " a cartoon universe and an underground club with pop @-@ up video @-@ style graphics flying by " ; <unk> further stated that the video also includes glimpses of " a conspicuous workstation that prints pizza and a Chrysler Fiat 500L " . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The video received predominantly positive reviews from critics . Eliza Berman of Time magazine gave the video a positive review , saying " it comes to life in the colorful blend of animation and reality " . Berman described the video 's feminist message as " consist [ ed ] of bringing together a bunch of attractive dancers dressed in L.A.M.B. , burning down the club with confidence " . Erin Strecker from Billboard compared the music video to the video for " Baby Don 't Lie " , stating " Stefani dons black and white in an animated , colorful world " . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Stefani and Williams performed the song live on the December 1 , 2014 episode of The Voice . The performance opened with Stefani floating down to the stage on a huge , animated cloud head and dressed in a powder @-@ blue , cloud @-@ decorated jumpsuit . Williams also joined her on the stage , wearing a dark blue Adidas tracksuit . Stefani then performed " Spark the Fire " on New Year 's Eve with Carson Daly on December 31 , 2014 . On February 2 , 2015 , Stefani performed the song on The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon , along with a medley of her previous singles " Rich Girl " , " What You Waiting For ? " , and " The Sweet Escape " . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Joseph Smith = 
 Joseph Smith , Jr . ( December 23 , 1805 – June 27 , 1844 ) was an American religious leader and founder of Mormonism and the Latter Day Saint movement . When he was twenty @-@ four , Smith published the Book of Mormon . By the time of his death fourteen years later , he had attracted tens of thousands of followers and founded a religious culture that continues to the present . 
 Smith was born in Sharon , Vermont , but by 1817 , he had moved with his family to the burned @-@ over district of western New York , a site of intense religious revivalism during the Second Great Awakening . According to Smith , he experienced a series of visions , including one in which he saw " two personages " ( presumably God the Father and Jesus Christ ) and others in which an angel named Moroni directed him to a buried book of golden plates inscribed with a Judeo @-@ Christian history of an ancient American civilization of Israelites who traveled to the Americas from <unk> six centuries before the birth of Christ . In 1830 , Smith published what he said was an English translation of these plates , the Book of Mormon . The same year he organized the Church of Christ , calling it a restoration of the early Christian church . Members of the church were later called " Latter Day Saints " , or " Mormons " , and in 1838 , Smith announced a revelation that renamed the church as the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints . 
 In 1831 , Smith and his followers moved west , planning to build a <unk> American Zion . They first gathered in Kirtland , Ohio , and established an outpost in Independence , Missouri , which was intended to be Zion 's " center place " . During the 1830s , Smith sent out missionaries , published revelations , and supervised construction of the expensive Kirtland Temple . Nevertheless , the collapse of the church @-@ sponsored Kirtland Safety Society and violent skirmishes with non @-@ Mormon Missourians caused Smith and his followers to establish a new settlement at Nauvoo , Illinois , where he became a spiritual and political leader . In 1844 , Smith and the Nauvoo city council angered non @-@ Mormons by destroying a newspaper that had criticized Smith 's power and practice of polygamy . After Smith was imprisoned in Carthage , Illinois , he was killed when a mob stormed the jailhouse . 
 Smith published many revelations and other texts that his followers regard as scripture . His teachings include unique views about the nature of God , cosmology , family structures , political organization , and religious collectivism . His followers regard him as a prophet comparable to Moses and Elijah , and several religious denominations consider themselves the continuation of the church he organized , including The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints and the Community of Christ . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Early years ( 1805 – 27 ) = = = 
 Joseph Smith , Jr. was born on December 23 , 1805 , in Sharon , Vermont , to Lucy Mack Smith and her husband Joseph Sr. , a merchant and farmer . After suffering a crippling bone infection when he was seven , the younger Smith hobbled around on crutches for three years . In 1816 – 17 , after an ill @-@ fated business venture and three years of crop failures , the Smith family moved to the western New York village of Palmyra , and eventually took a mortgage on a 100 @-@ acre ( 40 ha ) farm in the nearby town of Manchester . 
 During the Second Great Awakening , the region was a hotbed of religious enthusiasm ; and between 1817 and 1825 , there were several camp meetings and revivals in the Palmyra area . Although Smith 's parents disagreed about religion , the family was caught up in this excitement . Smith later said he became interested in religion at about the age of twelve ; without doubt , he participated in church classes and read the Bible . As a teenager , he may have been sympathetic to Methodism . With other family members , Smith also engaged in religious folk magic , not an uncommon practice at the time . Both his parents and his maternal grandfather reportedly had visions or dreams that they believed communicated messages from God . Smith said that although he had become concerned about the welfare of his soul , he was confused by the claims of competing religious denominations . 
 Years later Smith said that in 1820 he had received a vision that resolved his religious confusion . While praying in a wooded area near his home , he said that God , in a vision , had told him his sins were forgiven and that all contemporary churches had " turned aside from the gospel . " Smith said he told the experience to a preacher , who dismissed the story with contempt ; but the experience was largely unknown , even to most Mormons , until the 1840s . Although Smith may have understood the event as a personal conversion , this " First Vision " later grew in importance among Mormons , who today see it as the first event in the " restoration of the Gospel " . 
 Smith said that in 1823 while praying one night for forgiveness from his sins , he was visited by an angel named Moroni , who revealed the location of a buried book made of golden plates , as well as other artifacts , including a breastplate and a set of interpreters composed of two seer stones set in a frame , which had been hidden in a hill in Manchester near his home . Smith said he attempted to remove the plates the next morning but was unsuccessful because the angel prevented him . Smith reported that during the next four years , he made annual visits to the hill but each time returned without the plates . 
 Meanwhile , the Smith family faced financial hardship due in part to the November 1823 death of Smith 's oldest brother Alvin , who had assumed a leadership role in the family . Family members supplemented their meager farm income by hiring out for odd jobs and working as treasure seekers , a type of magical supernaturalism common during the period . Smith was said to have an ability to locate lost items by looking into a seer stone , which he also used in treasure hunting , including several unsuccessful attempts to find buried treasure sponsored by a wealthy farmer in Chenango County , New York . In 1826 , Smith was brought before a Chenango County court for " glass @-@ looking " , or pretending to find lost treasure . The result of the proceeding remains unclear as primary sources report various conflicting outcomes . 
 While boarding at the Hale house in Harmony , Pennsylvania , Smith began courting Emma Hale . When Smith proposed marriage , Emma 's father Isaac Hale objected because Smith was " a stranger " who had no means of supporting his daughter other than money digging , of which he disapproved . Smith and Emma eloped and were married on January 18 , 1827 , after which the couple began boarding with Smith 's parents in Manchester . Later that year , when Smith promised to abandon treasure seeking , Hale offered to let the couple live on his property in Harmony and help Smith get started in business . 
 Smith said that he made his last annual visit to the hill on September 22 , 1827 , taking Emma with him . This time , he said he retrieved the plates and put them in a locked chest . He said the angel commanded him not to show the plates to anyone else but to publish their translation , reputed to be the religious record of early indigenous Americans who were Israelites who had come to the Americas from Jerusalem . Smith said that the plates were engraved in an unknown language , reformed Egyptian , and he told associates that he was capable of reading and translating <unk> archaeological , linguistic , or other evidence of the use of Egyptian writing in ancient America has been discovered . Although Smith had left his treasure hunting company , his former associates believed he had double @-@ crossed them by taking for himself what they considered joint property . After they ransacked places where a competing treasure @-@ seer said the plates were hidden , Smith decided to leave Palmyra . 
 = = = Founding a church ( 1827 – 30 ) = = = 
 In October 1827 , Smith and his pregnant wife moved from Palmyra to Harmony ( now Oakland ) , Pennsylvania , aided by money from a relatively prosperous neighbor , Martin Harris . Living near his in @-@ laws , Smith transcribed some characters that he said were engraved on the plates , and then dictated a translation to his wife . 
 In February 1828 , Martin Harris arrived to assist Smith by transcribing his dictation . Harris also took a sample of the characters to a few prominent scholars , including Charles Anthon , who Harris said initially authenticated the characters and their translation but then retracted his opinion after learning that Smith was supposed to have received the plates from an angel . Anthon denied Harris 's account of the meeting , claiming instead that he had tried to convince Harris that he had been the victim of a fraud . Nevertheless , Harris returned to Harmony in April 1828 , encouraged to continue as Smith 's scribe . 
 Smith continued to dictate to Harris until mid @-@ June 1828 , when Harris began having doubts about the project , fueled in part by his wife 's skepticism . Harris convinced Smith to let him take the existing 116 pages of manuscript to Palmyra to show a few family members , including his wife . Harris lost the manuscript — of which there was no other copy — at about the same time Smith 's wife , Emma , gave birth to a son , Alvin , who died the same day . Smith said that as punishment for losing the manuscript the angel took away the plates and revoked his ability to translate . During this dark period Smith briefly attended Methodist meetings with his wife until a cousin of hers objected to inclusion of a " practicing necromancer " on the Methodist class roll . 
 Smith said that the angel returned the plates to him on September 22 , 1828 , and he resumed dictation in April 1829 , after he met Oliver Cowdery , who replaced Harris as his scribe . They worked full time on the manuscript between April and early June 1829 , and then moved to Fayette , New York , where they continued to work at the home of Cowdery 's friend Peter Whitmer . When the narrative described an institutional church and a requirement for baptism , Smith and Cowdery baptized each other . <unk> was completed around July 1 , 1829 . 
 Although Smith had previously refused to show the plates to anyone , he told Martin Harris , Oliver Cowdery , and David Whitmer that they would be allowed to see them . These men , known collectively as the Three Witnesses — along with a later group of Eight Witnesses composed of male members of the Whitmer and Smith families — signed statements testifying that they had seen the golden plates ; the eight witnesses also said they had actually handled the plates . According to Smith , the angel Moroni took back the plates once Smith finished using them . 
 The completed work , the Book of Mormon , was published in Palmyra on March 26 , 1830 , by printer E. B. Grandin , Martin Harris having mortgaged his farm to finance it . Soon after , on April 6 , 1830 , Smith and his followers formally organized the Church of Christ , and small branches were established in Palmyra , Fayette , and Colesville , New York . The Book of Mormon brought Smith regional notoriety and opposition from those who remembered his money @-@ digging and the 1826 Chenango County trial . After Cowdery baptized several new members , the Mormons received threats of mob violence ; and before Smith could confirm the newly baptized members , he was arrested and brought to trial as a disorderly person . He was acquitted , but both he and Cowdery had to flee Colesville to escape a gathering mob . In probable reference to this period of flight , Smith said that Peter , James , and John had appeared to him and had ordained him and Cowdery to a higher priesthood . 
 Smith 's authority was undermined when Oliver Cowdery , Hiram Page , and other church members also claimed to receive revelations . In response , Smith dictated a revelation which clarified his office as a prophet and an apostle and which declared that only he held " the keys of the mysteries , and the revelations " with the ability to inscribe scripture for the church . Shortly after the conference , Smith dispatched Cowdery , Peter Whitmer , and others on a mission to proselytize Native Americans . Cowdery was also assigned the task of locating the site of the New Jerusalem . 
 On their way to Missouri , Cowdery 's party passed through northeastern Ohio , where Sidney Rigdon and over a hundred followers of his variety of <unk> <unk> converted to Mormonism , more than doubling the size of the church . Rigdon soon visited New York and quickly became Smith 's primary assistant . With growing opposition in New York , Smith gave forth as revelation that Kirtland was the eastern boundary of the New Jerusalem and that his followers must gather there . 
 = = = Life in Ohio ( 1831 – 38 ) = = = 
 When Smith moved to Kirtland , Ohio , in January 1831 , he encountered a religious culture that included enthusiastic demonstrations of spiritual gifts , including fits and trances , rolling on the ground , and speaking in tongues . Smith tamed these outbursts by producing two revelations that brought the Kirtland congregation under his own authority . Rigdon 's followers had also been practicing a form of communalism , and this Smith adopted , calling it the United Order . Smith had promised church elders that in Kirtland they would receive an endowment of heavenly power , and at the June 1831 general conference , he introduced the greater authority of a High ( " Melchizedek " ) Priesthood to the church hierarchy . 
 Converts poured into Kirtland . By the summer of 1835 , there were fifteen hundred to two thousand Mormons in the vicinity , many expecting Smith to lead them shortly to the Millennial kingdom . Though the mission to the Indians had been a failure , the missionaries sent on their way by a government Indian agent , Cowdery reported that he had found the site of the New Jerusalem in Jackson County , Missouri . After Smith visited in July 1831 , he agreed , pronouncing the frontier hamlet of Independence the " center place " of Zion . Nevertheless , Rigdon disapproved , and for most of the 1830s the church remained divided between Ohio and Missouri . Smith continued to live in Ohio , but visited Missouri again in early 1832 in order to prevent a rebellion of prominent church members , including Cowdery , who believed the church in Missouri was being neglected . Smith 's trip was hastened by a mob of Ohio residents who were incensed over the United Order and Smith 's political power ; the mob beat Smith and Rigdon unconscious , tarred and feathered them , and left them for dead . 
 In Jackson County , Missouri residents resented the Mormon newcomers for both political and religious reasons . Tension increased until July 1833 , when non @-@ Mormons forcibly evicted the Mormons and destroyed their property . Smith advised them to bear the violence patiently until they were attacked a fourth time , after which they could fight back . After armed bands exchanged fire and one Mormon and two non @-@ Mormons were killed , the old settlers brutally expelled the Mormons from the county . 
 Smith ended the communitarian experiment and changed the name of the church to the " Church of Latter Day Saints " before leading a small paramilitary expedition , later called Zion 's Camp , to aid the Missouri Mormons . As a military endeavor , the expedition was a failure ; the men were outnumbered and suffered from dissension and a cholera outbreak . Nevertheless , Zion 's Camp transformed Mormon leadership , and many future church leaders came from among the participants . After the Camp returned , Smith drew heavily from its participants to establish five governing bodies in the church , all originally of equal authority to check one another ; among these five groups was a quorum of twelve apostles . Smith gave a revelation saying that to redeem Zion , his followers would have to receive an endowment in the Kirtland Temple , and in March 1836 , at the temple 's dedication , many participants in the promised endowment saw visions of angels , spoke in tongues , and prophesied . 
 In late 1837 , a series of internal disputes led to the collapse of the Kirtland Mormon community . Smith was blamed for having promoted a church @-@ sponsored bank that failed and accused of engaging in a sexual relationship with his serving girl , Fanny Alger . Building the temple had left the church deeply in debt , and Smith was hounded by creditors . Having heard of a large sum of money supposedly hidden in Salem , Massachusetts , Smith traveled there and received a revelation that God had " much treasure in this city " . But after a month , he returned to Kirtland empty @-@ handed . 
 In January 1837 , Smith and other church leaders created a joint stock company , called the Kirtland Safety Society , to act as a quasi @-@ bank . The company issued bank notes capitalized in part by real estate . Smith encouraged the Latter Day Saints to buy the notes and invested heavily in them himself , but the bank failed within a month . As a result , the Latter Day Saints in Kirtland suffered intense pressure from debt collectors and severe price volatility . Smith was held responsible for the failure , and there were widespread defections from the church , including many of Smith 's closest advisers . After a warrant was issued for Smith 's arrest on a charge of banking fraud , Smith and Rigdon fled Kirtland for Missouri on the night of January 12 , 1838 . 
 = = = Life in Missouri ( 1838 – 39 ) = = = 
 By 1838 , Smith had abandoned plans to redeem Zion in Jackson County . After Smith and Rigdon arrived in Missouri , the town of Far West became the new Mormon " Zion " . In Missouri , the church also received a new name , the " Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints " , and construction began on a new temple . In the weeks and months after Smith and Rigdon arrived at Far West , thousands of Latter Day Saints followed them from Kirtland . Smith encouraged the settlement of land outside Caldwell County , instituting a settlement in Adam @-@ <unk> @-@ Ahman , in Daviess County . 
 During this time , a church council expelled many of the oldest and most prominent leaders of the church , including John Whitmer , David Whitmer , W. W. Phelps , and Oliver Cowdery . Smith explicitly approved of the expulsion of these men , who were known collectively as the " dissenters " . 
 Political and religious differences between old Missourians and newly @-@ arriving Mormon settlers provoked tensions between the two groups , much as they had years earlier in Jackson County . By this time , Smith 's experiences with mob violence led him to believe that his faith 's survival required greater militancy against anti @-@ Mormons . Around June 1838 , recent convert Sampson Avard formed a covert organization called the Danites to intimidate Mormon dissenters and oppose anti @-@ Mormon militia units . Though it is unclear how much Smith knew of the Danites ' activities , he clearly approved of those of which he did know . After Rigdon delivered a sermon that implied dissenters had no place in the Mormon community , the Danites forcibly expelled them from the county . 
 In an oration given at the town 's Fourth of July celebration , Rigdon declared that Mormons would no longer tolerate persecution by the Missourians and spoke of a " war of extermination " if Mormons were attacked . Smith implicitly endorsed this speech , and many non @-@ Mormons understood it to be a thinly @-@ veiled threat . They unleashed a flood of anti @-@ Mormon rhetoric in newspapers and in stump speeches given during the 1838 election campaign . 
 On August 6 , 1838 , non @-@ Mormons in Gallatin tried to prevent Mormons from voting , and the election @-@ day scuffles initiated the 1838 Mormon War . Non @-@ Mormon vigilantes raided and burned Mormon farms , and Danites and other Mormons pillaged non @-@ Mormon towns . During this period Smith 's heated rhetoric encouraged some of his followers to take aggressive measures Smith himself might not have approved . Under the impression that an approaching group of armed men were a band of vigilantes , Mormons attacked the Missouri state militia in what became known as the Battle of Crooked River . Governor Lilburn Boggs then ordered that the Mormons be " exterminated or driven from the state " . Even though they were yet unaware of Boggs 's order , on October 30 a party of Missourians surprised and killed seventeen Mormons in the Haun 's Mill massacre . 
 The following day , the Latter Day Saints surrendered to 2 @,@ 500 state troops and agreed to forfeit their property and leave the state . Smith was immediately brought before a military court , accused of treason , and sentenced to be executed the next morning ; but Alexander Doniphan , Smith 's former attorney and a brigadier general in the Missouri militia , refused to carry out the order . Smith was then sent to a state court for a preliminary hearing , where several of his former allies testified against him . Smith and five others , including Rigdon , were charged with " overt acts of treason " , and transferred to the jail at Liberty , Missouri , to await trial . 
 Smith 's months in prison with an ill and whining Rigdon strained their relationship . Meanwhile Brigham Young , then @-@ president of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles , rose to prominence among the Mormon faithful when he organized the move of about 14 @,@ 000 Saints to Illinois and eastern Iowa . Smith bore his imprisonment stoically . Understanding that he was effectively on trial before his own people , many of whom considered him a fallen prophet , he wrote a personal defense and an apology for the activities of the Danites . " The keys of the kingdom , " he wrote , " have not been taken away from us " . Though he directed his followers to collect and publish their stories of persecution , he also urged them to moderate their antagonism toward non @-@ Mormons . On April 6 , 1839 , after a grand jury hearing in Davis County , Smith and his companions escaped custody , almost certainly with the connivance of the sheriff and guards . 
 = = = Life in Nauvoo , Illinois ( 1839 – 44 ) = = = 
 Many American newspapers criticized Missouri for the Haun 's Hill massacre and the state 's expulsion of the Latter Day Saints , and Illinois accepted Mormon refugees who gathered along the banks of the Mississippi River , where Smith purchased high @-@ priced , swampy woodland in the hamlet of Commerce . Smith also attempted to portray the Latter Day Saints as an oppressed minority and unsuccessfully petitioned the federal government for help in obtaining reparations . During the summer of 1839 , while Latter Day Saints in Nauvoo suffered from a malaria epidemic , Smith sent Brigham Young and other apostles to missions in Europe , where they made numerous converts , many of them poor factory workers . 
 Smith also attracted a few wealthy and influential converts , including John C. Bennett , the Illinois quartermaster general . Bennett used his connections in the Illinois legislature to obtain an unusually liberal charter for the new city , which Smith named " Nauvoo " ( Hebrew <unk> , meaning " to be beautiful " ) . The charter granted the city virtual autonomy , authorized a university , and granted Nauvoo habeas corpus power — which allowed Smith to fend off extradition to Missouri . Though Mormon authorities controlled Nauvoo 's civil government , the city promised an unusually liberal guarantee of religious freedom . The charter also authorized the Nauvoo Legion , an autonomous militia whose actions were limited only by state and federal constitutions . " Lieutenant General " Smith and " Major General " Bennett became its commanders , thereby controlling by far the largest body of armed men in Illinois . Smith made Bennett Assistant President of the church , and Bennett was elected Nauvoo 's first mayor . In 1841 , Smith began revealing the doctrine of plural marriage to a few of his closest male associates , including Bennett , who used it as an excuse to seduce numerous women wed and unwed . When embarrassing rumors of " spiritual <unk> " got abroad , Smith forced Bennett 's resignation as Nauvoo mayor . In retaliation , Bennett wrote " lurid exposés of life in Nauvoo " . 
 The early Nauvoo years were a period of doctrinal innovation . Smith introduced baptism for the dead in 1840 , and in 1841 , construction began on the Nauvoo Temple as a place for recovering lost ancient knowledge . An 1841 revelation promised the restoration of the " fulness of the priesthood " ; and in May 1842 , Smith inaugurated a revised endowment or " first anointing " . The endowment resembled rites of freemasonry that Smith had observed two months earlier when he had been initiated into the Nauvoo Masonic lodge . At first , the endowment was open only to men , who were initiated into the Anointed Quorum . For women , Smith introduced the Relief Society , a service club and sorority within which Smith predicted women would receive " the keys of the kingdom " . Smith also elaborated on his plan for a millennial kingdom . No longer envisioning the building of Zion in Nauvoo , Smith viewed Zion as encompassing all of North and South America , with Mormon settlements being " stakes " of Zion 's metaphorical tent . Zion also became less a refuge from an impending tribulation than a great building project . In the summer of 1842 , Smith revealed a plan to establish the millennial Kingdom of God , which would eventually establish theocratic rule over the whole earth . 
 By mid @-@ 1842 , popular opinion had turned against the Mormons . After an unknown assailant shot and wounded Missouri governor Lilburn Boggs in May 1842 , anti @-@ Mormons circulated rumors that Smith 's bodyguard , Porter Rockwell , was the shooter . Though the evidence was circumstantial , Boggs ordered Smith 's extradition . Certain he would be killed if he ever returned to Missouri , Smith went into hiding twice during the next five months before the U.S. district attorney for Illinois argued that Smith 's extradition to Missouri would be unconstitutional . ( Rockwell was later tried and acquitted . ) In June 1843 , enemies of Smith convinced a reluctant Illinois Governor Thomas Ford to extradite Smith to Missouri on the old charge of treason . Two law officers arrested Smith , but were intercepted by a party of Mormons before they could reach Missouri . Smith was then released on a writ of habeas corpus from the Nauvoo municipal court . While this ended the Missourians ' attempts at extradition , it caused significant political fallout in Illinois . 
 In December 1843 , Smith petitioned Congress to make Nauvoo an independent territory with the right to call out federal troops in its defense . Smith then wrote to the leading presidential candidates and asked them what they would do to protect the Mormons . After receiving noncommittal or negative responses , Smith announced his own third @-@ party candidacy for President of the United States , suspended regular proselytizing , and sent out the Quorum of the Twelve and hundreds of other political missionaries . In March 1844 , following a dispute with a federal bureaucrat , Smith organized the secret Council of Fifty with authority to decide which national or state laws Mormons should obey . The Council was also to select a site for a large Mormon settlement in Texas , California , or Oregon , where Mormons could live under theocratic law beyond other governmental control . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 By the spring of 1844 , a rift developed between Smith and a half dozen of his closest associates . Most notably , William Law , Smith 's trusted counselor , and Robert Foster , a general of the Nauvoo Legion , disagreed with Smith about how to manage Nauvoo 's economy . Both also said that Smith had proposed marriage to their wives . Believing the dissidents were plotting against his life , Smith excommunicated them on April 18 , 1844 . These dissidents formed a competing church and the following month , at Carthage , the county seat , they procured indictments against Smith for perjury and polygamy . 
 On June 7 , the dissidents published the first ( and only ) issue of the Nauvoo Expositor , calling for reform within the church and appealing to the political views of the county 's anti @-@ Mormons . The paper decried Smith 's new " doctrines of many Gods " , alluded to Smith 's theocratic aspirations , and called for a repeal of the Nauvoo city charter . It also attacked Smith 's practice of polygamy , implying that Smith was using religion as a pretext to draw unassuming women to Nauvoo in order to seduce and marry them . 
 Fearing the newspaper would bring the countryside down on the Mormons , the Nauvoo city council declared the Expositor a public nuisance and ordered the Nauvoo Legion to destroy the press . Smith , who feared another mob attack , supported the action , not realizing that suppression of the press would sooner incite an attack than libel would . 
 Destruction of the newspaper provoked a strident call to arms from Thomas C. Sharp , editor of the Warsaw Signal and longtime critic of Smith . Fearing an uprising , Smith mobilized the Nauvoo Legion on June 18 and declared martial law . Officials in Carthage responded by mobilizing their small detachment of the state militia , and Governor Thomas Ford appeared , threatening to raise a larger militia unless Smith and the Nauvoo city council surrendered themselves . Smith initially fled across the Mississippi River , but shortly returned and surrendered to Ford . On June 23 , Smith and his brother Hyrum rode to Carthage to stand trial for inciting a riot . Once the Smiths were in custody , the charges were increased to treason . 
 On June 27 , 1844 , an armed mob with blackened faces stormed Carthage Jail where Joseph and Hyrum were being held . Hyrum , who was trying to secure the door , was killed instantly with a shot to the face . Smith fired a pepper @-@ box pistol that a friend had lent him for self @-@ defense , then sprang for the window . He was shot multiple times before falling out the window , crying , " Oh Lord my God ! " He died shortly after hitting the ground , but was shot several times more before the mob dispersed . Five men were later tried for his murder , but all were acquitted . Smith was buried in Nauvoo , and is currently interred there at the Smith Family Cemetery . 
 Throughout his life Smith had been sharply criticized by newspaper editors , and after his death newspapers were almost unanimous in portraying Smith as a religious fanatic . Conversely , within Mormonism , Smith was memorialized first and foremost as a prophet , martyred to seal the testimony of his faith . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Impact = = = 
 Smith attracted thousands of devoted followers before his death in 1844 and millions in the century that followed . Among Mormons , he is regarded as a prophet on par with Moses and Elijah . In a 2015 compilation of the 100 Most Significant Americans of All Time , Smithsonian magazine ranked Smith first in the category of religious figures . 
 Mormons and ex @-@ Mormons have produced a large amount of scholarly work about Smith , and to a large extent the result has been two discordant pictures of very different people : a man of God on the one hand , and on the other , a fraud preying on the ignorance of his followers . Believers tended to focus on his achievements and religious teachings , <unk> his personal defects , while detractors focused on his mistakes , legal troubles , and controversial doctrines . During the first half of the 20th century , some writers suggested that Smith might have suffered from epileptic seizures or from psychological disorders such as paranoid delusions or manic @-@ depressive illness that might explain his visions and revelations . Many modern biographers disagree with these ideas . More nuanced interpretations range from viewing Smith as a prophet who had normal human weaknesses , a " pious fraud " who believed he was called of God to preach repentance and felt justified inventing visions in order to convert people , or a gifted " <unk> " who was the product of his Yankee environment . Biographers , Mormon and non @-@ Mormon , agree that Smith was one of the most influential , charismatic , and innovative figures in American religious history . 
 Memorials to Smith include the Joseph Smith Memorial Building in Salt Lake City , Utah , the Joseph Smith Building on the campus of Brigham Young University , and a granite obelisk marking his birth place . 
 = = = Religious denominations = = = 
 Smith 's death resulted in a succession crisis . Smith had proposed several ways to choose his successor , but had never clarified his preference . Smith 's brother Hyrum , had he survived , would have had the strongest claim , followed by Smith 's brother Samuel , who died mysteriously a month after his brothers . Another brother , William , was unable to attract a sufficient following . Smith 's sons Joseph III and David also had claims , but Joseph III was too young and David was yet unborn . The Council of Fifty had a theoretical claim to succession , but it was a secret organization . Some of Smith 's chosen successors , such as Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer , had left the church . 
 The two strongest succession candidates were Brigham Young , senior member and president of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles , and Sidney Rigdon , the senior member of the First Presidency . In a church @-@ wide conference on August 8 , most of the Latter Day Saints elected Young , who led them to the Utah Territory as The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints ( LDS Church ) . Membership in Young 's denomination surpassed 14 million members in 2010 . Smaller groups followed Sidney Rigdon and James J. Strang , who had based his claim on an allegedly @-@ forged letter of appointment . Others followed Lyman Wight and Alpheus Cutler . Many members of these smaller groups , including most of Smith 's family , eventually coalesced in 1860 under the leadership of Joseph Smith III and formed what was known for more than a century as the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints ( now Community of Christ ) , which now has about 250 @,@ 000 members . As of 2013 , members of the denominations originating from Smith 's teachings number approximately 15 million . 
 = = Family and descendants = = 
 The first of Smith 's wives , Emma Hale , gave birth to nine children during their marriage , five of whom died before the age of two . The eldest , Alvin ( born in 1828 ) , died within hours of birth , as did twins Thaddeus and Louisa ( born in 1831 ) . When the twins died , the Smiths adopted another set of twins , Julia and Joseph , whose mother had recently died in childbirth ; Joseph died of measles in 1832 . In 1841 , Don Carlos , who had been born a year earlier , died of malaria . In 1842 , Emma gave birth to a stillborn son . Joseph and Emma had four sons who lived to maturity : Joseph Smith III , Frederick Granger Williams Smith , Alexander Hale Smith , and David Hyrum Smith ( born in 1844 after Smith 's death ) . As of 2013 , DNA testing had provided no evidence that Smith had fathered any children by women other than Emma . 
 Throughout her life , Emma Smith frequently denied that her husband had ever taken additional wives . Emma said that the very first time she ever became aware of a polygamy revelation being attributed to Smith by Mormons was when she read about it in Orson Pratt 's periodical The Seer in 1853 . Emma campaigned publicly against polygamy , and was the main signatory of a petition in 1842 , with a thousand female signatures , denying that Smith was connected with polygamy . As president of the Ladies ' Relief Society , Emma authorized publishing a certificate in the same year denouncing polygamy , and denying her husband as its creator or participant . Even on her deathbed , Emma denied Joseph 's involvement with polygamy , stating , " No such thing as polygamy , or spiritual <unk> , was taught , publicly or privately , before my husband 's death , that I have now , or ever had any knowledge of ... He had no other wife but me ; nor did he to my knowledge ever have " . 
 After Smith 's death , Emma Smith quickly became alienated from Brigham Young and the church leadership . Young , whom Emma feared and despised , was suspicious of her desire to preserve the family 's assets from inclusion with those of the church , and thought she would be even more troublesome because she openly opposed plural marriage . When most Latter Day Saints moved west , she stayed in Nauvoo , married a non @-@ Mormon , Major Lewis C. <unk> , and withdrew from religion until 1860 , when she affiliated with the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints , first headed by her son , Joseph Smith III . Emma never denied Smith 's prophetic gift or repudiated her belief in the authenticity of the Book of Mormon . 
 = = Revelations = = 
 According to Richard Bushman , the " signal feature " of Smith 's life was " his sense of being guided by revelation " . Instead of presenting ideas with logical arguments , Smith dictated authoritative revelations and let people decide whether to believe . Smith 's teachings came primarily through his revelations , which read like scripture : oracular and open to interpretation . Smith and his followers viewed his revelations as being above teachings or opinions , and Smith 's actions seemed to indicate that he believed in his revelations as much as his most loyal followers . 
 Smith 's first recorded revelation was a rebuke from God for having let Martin Harris lose 116 pages of Book of Mormon manuscript , chastising him for " fearing man more than God " . The revelation was given in the voice of God rather than as a declaration mediated through Smith ; and subsequent revelations assumed a similar authoritative style , often opening with words such as " <unk> O ye people which profess my name , saith the Lord your God . " 
 = = = Book of Mormon = = = 
 The Book of Mormon has been called the longest and most complex of Smith 's revelations . It is organized as a compilation of smaller books , each named after its main named narrator or a prominent leader . It tells the story of the rise and fall of a religious civilization beginning around 600 BC and ending in 421 AD . The story begins with a family that leaves Jerusalem , just before the Babylonian captivity . They eventually construct a ship and sail to a " promised land " in the Western Hemisphere . There , they are divided into two factions : <unk> and <unk> . The <unk> become a righteous people who build a temple and live the law of Moses , though their prophets teach a Christian gospel . The book explains itself to be largely the work of Mormon , a <unk> prophet and military figure . The book closes when Mormon 's son , Moroni , finishes engraving and buries the records written on the golden plates . 
 Christian themes permeate the work ; for instance , <unk> prophets in the Book of Mormon teach of Christ 's coming , and talk of the star that will appear at his birth . After the crucifixion and resurrection in Jerusalem , Jesus appears in the Americas , repeats the Sermon on the Mount , blesses children , and appoints twelve disciples . The book ends with Moroni 's exhortation to " come unto Christ " . 
 Early Mormons understood the Book of Mormon to be a religious history of the indigenous peoples of the Americas . Smith 's followers view it as a companion to the Bible and an additional witness of Christ , akin to a large apocryphal work . Modern historian Fawn Brodie has called the Book of Mormon a response to pressing cultural and environmental issues of Smith 's times , saying that Smith composed the Book of Mormon drawing from scraps of information available to him ; Dan Vogel , another historian , says that the work is autobiographical in nature . 
 Smith never said how he produced the Book of Mormon , saying only that he translated by the power of God and implying that he had transcribed the words . The Book of Mormon itself states only that its text will " come forth by the gift and power of God unto the interpretation thereof " . As such , considerable disagreement about the actual method used exists . For at least some of the earliest dictation , Smith is said to have used the " <unk> and <unk> " , a pair of seer stones he said were buried with the plates . Later , however , he is said to have used a chocolate @-@ colored stone he had found in 1822 that he had used previously for treasure hunting . Joseph Knight said that Smith saw the words of the translation while he gazed at the stone or stones in the bottom of his hat , excluding all light , a process similar to divining the location of treasure . Sometimes , Smith concealed the process by raising a curtain or dictating from another room , while at other times he dictated in full view of witnesses while the plates lay covered on the table . After completing the translation , Smith gave the brown stone to Cowdery , but continued to receive revelations using another stone until about 1833 when he said he no longer needed it . 
 Although the Book of Mormon drew many converts to the church , Fawn Brodie argued in 1945 that the " book lives today because of the prophet , not he because of the book . " Smith had assumed a role as prophet , seer , and apostle of Jesus Christ , and by early 1831 , he was introducing himself as " Joseph the Prophet " . The language of authority in Smith 's revelations was appealing to converts , and the revelations were given with the confidence of an Old Testament prophet . 
 = = = Moses and Abraham = = = 
 Smith said that in June 1830 , he received a " revelation of Moses " in which Moses saw " the world and the ends thereof " and asked God questions about the purpose of creation and man 's relationship to God . This revelation initiated a revision of the Bible on which Smith worked sporadically until 1833 and which remained unpublished at his death . Smith said that he believed the Bible had been corrupted through the ages , and that his revision worked to restore the original intent ; it added long passages rewritten " according to his inspiration " . While many changes involved straightening out seeming contradictions or making small clarifications , other changes added large " lost " portions to the text . For instance , Smith 's revision nearly tripled the length of the first five chapters of Genesis in what would become the Book of Moses . 
 The Book of Moses begins with Moses ' inquiring of God as to the purpose of creation , and is told in this account that God made the earth and heavens to bring humans to eternal life . The book also provides an enlarged account of the Genesis creation narrative and expands the story of Enoch , the ancestor of Noah . In the narrative , Enoch speaks with God , receives a prophetic calling , and eventually builds a city of Zion so righteous that it was taken to heaven . The book also elaborates and expands upon foreshadowing and " types " of Christ , in effect Christianizing the Old Testament . 
 In 1835 Smith encouraged some Latter Day Saints in Kirtland to purchase rolls of ancient Egyptian papyri from a traveling exhibitor . Over the next several years , Smith worked off and on as events allowed , to produce a supposed translation of one of these rolls , which he published in 1842 as the Book of Abraham . The Book of Abraham speaks of the founding of the Abrahamic nation , astronomy , cosmology , lineage and priesthood , and gave another account of the creation story . The papyri from which Smith dictated the Book of Abraham were thought to have been lost in the Great Chicago Fire , but several fragments were rediscovered in the 1960s , were translated by Egyptologists , and were determined to be part of the Book of the Dead with no connection to Abraham . 
 = = = Other revelations = = = 
 According to Parley P. Pratt , Smith dictated revelations orally , and they were recorded by a scribe without revisions or corrections . Revelations were immediately copied , and then circulated among church members . Smith 's revelations often came in response to specific questions . He described the revelatory process as having " pure Intelligence " flowing into him . Smith , however , never viewed the wording to be infallible . The revelations were not God 's words verbatim , but " couched in language suitable to Joseph 's time " . In 1833 Smith edited and expanded many of the previous revelations , publishing them as the Book of Commandments , which later became part of the Doctrine and Covenants . 
 Smith gave varying types of revelations . Some were temporal , while others were spiritual or doctrinal ; some were received for a specific individual , while others were directed at the whole church . Notable revelations include an 1831 revelation called " The Law " containing directions for missionary work , rules for organizing society in Zion , a reiteration of the Ten Commandments , an injunction to " administer to the poor and needy " , and an outline for the law of consecration . An 1832 revelation called " The Vision " added to the fundamentals of sin and atonement , introduced doctrines of life after salvation , the theme of exaltation , and a heaven with degrees of glory . Another 1832 revelation " on Priesthood " was the first to explain priesthood doctrine . Three months later , Smith gave a lengthy revelation called the " Olive Leaf " containing themes of cosmology and eschatology , and discussing subjects such as light , truth , intelligence , and sanctification ; a related revelation given in 1833 put Christ at the center of salvation . 
 Also in 1833 , at a time of temperance agitation , Smith delivered a revelation called the " Word of Wisdom , " which counseled a diet of wholesome herbs , fruits , grains , a sparing use of meat , and recommended that Latter Day Saints avoid " strong " alcoholic drinks , tobacco , and " hot drinks " ( later interpreted to mean tea and coffee ) . The Word of Wisdom was not originally framed as a commandment , but a recommendation . As such , Smith and other Latter Day Saints did not strictly follow this counsel , though it later became a requirement in the LDS Church . In 1835 Smith gave the " great revelation " that organized the priesthood into quorums and councils , and served as a complex blueprint for church structure . Smith 's last revelation on the " New and Everlasting Covenant " was recorded in 1843 , and dealt with the theology of family , the doctrine of sealing , and plural marriage . 
 Before 1832 , most of Smith 's revelations dealt with establishing the church , gathering his followers , and building the City of Zion , while later revelations dealt with the priesthood , endowment , and exaltation . The revelations slowed in Kirtland during the autumn of 1833 , and again after the dedication of the Kirtland Temple , as Smith relied more heavily on his own teachings . Smith moved away from written revelations opening with " verily thus saith the Lord " and taught more in sermons , conversations , and letters . For instance , the doctrines of baptism for the dead and the nature of God were introduced in sermons , and one of Smith 's most famed statements about there being " no such thing as immaterial matter " was recorded from a casual conversation with a Methodist preacher . 
 = = Views and teachings = = 
 = = = Cosmology and theology = = = 
 Smith taught that all existence was material , including a world of " spirit matter " so fine that it was invisible to all but the purest mortal eyes . Matter , in Smith 's view , could neither be created nor destroyed ; the creation involved only the reorganization of existing matter . Like matter , Smith saw " intelligence " as co @-@ eternal with God , and taught that human spirits had been drawn from a pre @-@ existent pool of eternal intelligences . Nevertheless , spirits could not experience a " fullness of joy " unless joined with corporeal bodies , according to Smith . The work and glory of God , then , was to create worlds across the cosmos where inferior intelligences could be embodied . 
 Though Smith initially viewed God the Father as a spirit , he eventually began teaching that God was an advanced and glorified man , embodied within time and space . By the end of his life , Smith was teaching that both God the Father and Jesus were distinct beings with physical bodies , but the Holy Spirit was a " personage of Spirit " . Through the gradual acquisition of knowledge , according to Smith , those who received exaltation could eventually become like God . These teachings implied a vast hierarchy of gods , with God himself having a father . In Smith 's cosmology , those who became gods would reign , unified in purpose and will , leading spirits of lesser capacity to share immortality and eternal life . 
 In Smith 's view , the opportunity to achieve exaltation extended to all humanity ; those who died with no opportunity to accept saving ordinances could achieve exaltation by accepting them in the afterlife through ordinances performed on their behalf . Smith said that children who died in their innocence would be guaranteed to rise at the resurrection and receive exaltation . Apart from those who committed the eternal sin , Smith taught that even the wicked and disbelieving would achieve a degree of glory in the afterlife . 
 = = = Religious authority and ritual = = = 
 Smith 's teachings were rooted in <unk> <unk> . He taught that the Church of Christ restored through him was a latter @-@ day restoration of the early Christian faith , which had been lost in the Great Apostasy . At first , Smith 's church had little sense of hierarchy ; his religious authority was derived from visions and revelations . Though Smith did not claim exclusive prophethood , an early revelation designated him as the only prophet allowed to issue commandments " as Moses " . This religious authority encompassed economic and political as well as spiritual matters . For instance , in the early 1830s , he temporarily instituted a form of religious communism , called the United Order , that required Latter Day Saints to give all their property to the church , which was divided among the faithful . He also envisioned that the theocratic institutions he established would have a role in the worldwide political organization of the Millennium . 
 By the mid @-@ 1830s , Smith began teaching a hierarchy of three priesthoods — the Melchizedek , the <unk> , and the Patriarchal . Each priesthood was a continuation of biblical priesthoods through patrilineal succession or ordination by biblical figures appearing in visions . Upon introducing the Melchizedek or " High " Priesthood in 1831 , Smith taught that its recipients would be " endowed with power from on high " , thus fulfilling a need for a greater holiness and an authority commensurate with the New Testament apostles . This doctrine of endowment evolved through the 1830s , until in 1842 , the Nauvoo endowment included an elaborate ceremony containing elements similar to Freemasonry and the Jewish tradition of Kabbalah . The endowment was extended to women in 1843 , though Smith never clarified whether women could be ordained to priesthood offices . 
 Smith taught that the High Priesthood 's endowment of heavenly power included the sealing powers of Elijah , allowing High Priests to effect binding consequences in the afterlife . For example , this power would enable proxy baptisms for the dead and priesthood marriages that would be effective into the afterlife . Elijah 's sealing powers also enabled the second anointing , or " fulness [ sic ] of the priesthood " , which , according to Smith , sealed married couples to their exaltation . 
 = = = Theology of family = = = 
 During the early 1840s , Smith unfolded a theology of family relations called the " New and Everlasting Covenant " that superseded all earthly bonds . He taught that outside the Covenant , marriages were simply matters of contract , and that in the afterlife individuals married outside the Covenant or not married would be limited in their progression . To fully enter the Covenant , a man and woman must participate in a " first anointing " , a " sealing " ceremony , and a " second anointing " ( also called " sealing by the Holy Spirit of Promise " ) . When fully sealed into the Covenant , Smith said that no sin nor blasphemy ( other than the eternal sin ) could keep them from their exaltation in the afterlife . According to Smith , only one person on earth at a time — in this case , Smith — could possess this power of sealing . 
 Smith taught that the highest level of exaltation could be achieved through " plural marriage " ( polygamy ) , which was the ultimate manifestation of this New and Everlasting Covenant . Plural marriage , according to Smith , allowed an individual to transcend the angelic state and become a god , accelerating the expansion of one 's heavenly kingdom . 
 = = = = Polygamy = = = = 
 Smith had by some accounts been teaching a polygamy doctrine as early as 1831 , and there is unconfirmed evidence that Smith was a polygamist by 1835 . Although the church had publicly repudiated polygamy , in 1837 there was a rift between Smith and Oliver Cowdery over the issue . Cowdery suspected that Smith had engaged in a relationship with his serving girl Fanny Alger . Smith never denied a relationship , but insisted it was not adulterous , presumably because he had taken Alger as a plural wife . 
 In April 1841 , Smith wed Louisa <unk> ; and during the next two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years he married or was sealed to about 30 additional women , ten of whom were already married to other men ( this was generally done with the knowledge and consent of their husbands , and the records and circumstances of several of these unions support that they may have been considered " eternity @-@ only " <unk> ) . Ten of Smith 's plural wives were between the ages of fourteen and twenty ; others were over fifty . The practice of polygamy was kept secret from both non @-@ Mormons and most members of the church . 
 Polygamy caused a breach between Smith and his first wife , Emma . Although Emma knew of some of her husband 's marriages , she almost certainly did not know the extent of his polygamous activities . In 1843 , Emma temporarily accepted Smith 's marriage to four women boarded in the Smith household , but she soon regretted her decision and demanded that the other wives leave . In July , Smith dictated a revelation directing Emma to accept plural marriage , but the two were not reconciled until September , after Emma began participating in temple ceremonies . 
 = = = Political views = = = 
 While campaigning for President of the United States in 1844 , Smith had opportunity to take political positions on issues of the day . Smith considered the U.S. Constitution , and especially the Bill of Rights , to be inspired by God and " the [ Latter Day ] Saints ' best and perhaps only defense . " . He believed a strong central government was crucial to the nation 's well @-@ being and thought democracy better than tyranny — although he also taught that a theocratic monarchy was the ideal form of government . In foreign affairs , Smith was an expansionist , though he viewed " expansionism as brotherhood " . 
 Smith favored a strong central bank and high tariffs to protect American business and agriculture . He disfavored imprisonment of convicts except for murder , preferring efforts to reform criminals through labor ; he also opposed courts @-@ martial for military deserters . He supported capital punishment but opposed hanging , preferring execution by firing squad or beheading . 
 Smith published a pro @-@ slavery essay in 1836 but later opposed the practice . During his presidential campaign , he proposed abolishing it by 1850 and compensating slaveholders through sale of public lands . Smith said he did not believe blacks to be inherently inferior to whites ; he welcomed both freemen and slaves into the church . However , he opposed baptizing slaves without permission of their masters , and he opposed miscegenation . 
 Smith declared that he would be one of the instruments in fulfilling Nebuchadnezzar 's statue vision in the Book of Daniel : that secular government would be destroyed without " sword or gun " , and would be replaced with a " <unk> " Kingdom of God . Smith taught that this kingdom would be governed by theocratic principles , but that it would also be <unk> and democratic , so long as the people chose wisely . 
 = = = Ethics and behavior = = = 
 A succinct statement of ethics by Smith is found in his 13th Article of Faith : 
 We believe in being honest , true , chaste , benevolent , virtuous , and in doing good to all men ; indeed , we may say that we follow the admonition of Paul — We believe all things , we hope all things , we have endured many things , and hope to be able to endure all things . If there is anything virtuous , lovely , or of good report or praiseworthy , we seek after these things . 
 Smith said his ethical rule was , " When the Lord commands , do it " . 
 He also taught : 
 that which is wrong under one circumstance , may be and often is , right under another . God said thou shalt not kill — at another time he said thou shalt utterly destroy . This is the principle on which the government of heaven is conducted — by revelation adapted to the circumstances in which the elders of the kingdom are placed . Whatever God requires is right ... even things which may be considered abominable to all those who do not understand the order of heaven . 
 Beginning in the mid @-@ 1830s and into the 1840s , as the Mormon people became involved in conflicts with the Missouri and Illinois state governments , Smith taught that " Congress has no power to make a law that would abridge the rights of my religion , " and that they were not under the obligation to follow laws they deemed as being contrary to their " religious privilege " . Smith may have thus felt justified in promoting polygamy despite its violation of some traditional ethical standards . 
 = Triumphant ( Get ' Em ) = 
 " Triumphant ( Get ' Em ) " is a song by American singer and songwriter Mariah Carey . It was written and produced by Carey , Jermaine Dupri and Bryan @-@ Michael Cox , with additional writing credits and features by American rappers Rick Ross and Meek Mill . Released on August 3 , 2012 , Carey revealed that she wrote the song during difficult and personal experiences in her life , and that through writing , helped alleviate the pain . She later stated that " Triumphant ( Get ' Em ) " was written when her husband Nick Cannon was in the hospital with acute kidney failure in early 2012 , and was also inspired by the death of her past collaborator and friend , Whitney Houston . 
 The song is a midtempo R & B and hip hop ballad that " mixes a soft beat with piano accompaniment . " Its lyrics convey a message of self @-@ worth and perseverance , with Carey urging listeners to " Reach for the stars / Be all that you are . " The song made little impact commercially ; many felt the singer was overshadowed by the hip @-@ hop duo , and should have had more presence on her comeback single . Two accompanying versions were released alongside the original , titled the " Pulse Club " and " Vintage Throwback " remixes . Like the reception , commercial impact has been generally low . Most critics attribute this to the song 's low appeal to Top 40 formats and mainstream channels . 
 An accompanying music video for " Triumphant ( Get ' Em ) " was shot in New York City . Directed by Nick Cannon , it officially premiered on August 21 , 2012 on Carey 's official website and the following day digitally . The video , featuring a victorious boxing theme , portrays Carey and Ross as promoters as they cheer Mill during his match . The clip was generally well received , due to its cinematography and ties with the song 's theme of perseverance and being " triumphant " . Carey performed the song live for the first time on September 5 , 2012 at Rockefeller Center . The performance marked the beginning of the new NFL season , starting with the New York Giants Vs . Dallas Cowboys game at the MetLife Stadium in New Jersey . 
 = = Background and production = = 
 In September 2011 , less than six months after giving birth to twins , Carey tweeted a picture of herself and Jermaine Dupri in a recording studio working on new material for her currently untitled upcoming fourteenth studio album , with the picture 's caption reading " So happy to be back in the studio with the one & only @ Mr _ Dupri aka <unk> ! We are back together . " Following more speculation of the singer 's return to the studio , Carey posted photos of herself and Rick Ross in Miami during late April , where the song was produced . Later revealed as the lead single from the singer 's upcoming , yet @-@ untitled fourteenth studio album , " Triumphant ( Get ' Em ) " was written and produced by Carey , Dupri and Bryan @-@ Michael Cox , with Ross and Meek Mill providing their verses . <unk> several hints regarding the song to the media , Carey explained the song 's conception in a series of tweets on July 30 , 2012 : " I wrote Triumphant when I was going through a difficult time and it helped me get through it . When u hear it , pay attention to the lyrics . " In an interview with MTV , Cox explained what fans would be able to expect from the song and why he felt Ross and Mill were " the perfect fit . " He expressed how the " inspirational song " is close to Carey 's heart and thought fans would become " emotionally attached " to it . Cox also added that Carey had committed herself to working on the album before she knew she was pregnant , but decided to halt its production until after she had given birth . With regard to the inclusion of the hip @-@ hop duo , he explained how they became involved with the project : 
 I think that Rick Ross is resilient , and Meek Mill [ is ] a new hot rapper , who 's really hot , one of my favorite new hip hop artists . Rick Ross , who 's always been one of my favorites , he 's resilient . I think that , through the years , people try to count him out , and he always comes back , comes back harder , comes back with bigger and better records . So I think that the theme of ' Triumphant , ' I think that he fits the theme of that whole concept the best , really , because through it all , Rick Ross always comes out on top . 
 In a conference call with Billboard , Carey revealed that she wrote " Triumphant ( Get ' Em ) " while her husband , Nick Cannon , was hospitalized receiving medical treatment for mild kidney failure , saying " There 's a lot of things you can take from there that can keep you going in a tough situation . " Carey also added that the song was written around the time her friend , singer Whitney Houston , had died . " ' We were actually in the hospital together when we saw it on TV . ' [ ... ] It was important for me to write something that would ... help me get through the moment . That ’ s where ‘ Stay triumphant , keep on living ’ came from . " Carey also expressed why she chosen Ross and Mill , or any hip @-@ hop artist in general on the track , claiming that they are " different " and how she is always experimenting on collaborations with varying and new artists . When asked why she chose not to release a lead single which was dance influenced , Carey explained how she felt regarding the current music scene ; " I think it would be incredible if we could bring back the days when R & B records didn 't have to cross over but be massive hits on their own , " and that was the reason why she did not want to conform to what is currently on trend . Additionally , she felt that " Triumphant ( Get ' Em ) " , potentially , would be able to generate cross @-@ appeal , and not only cater Mainstream Top 40 . With specific emphasis on the dance music scene and its popularity , Carey stated that while she was pregnant , the vast majority of music that was being released was dance and electronic music , saying " I was pregnant forever , and I was being tortured day and night by techno music . I was complaining to everyone who was listening . One time I made dinner for L.A. Reid , and we were both sitting there like ' What happened ? ' " It saddened Carey that R & B and hip @-@ hop music was being " bowled over " by dance music , and therefore wanted to remain true to herself by making traditional R & B music : 
 " I 'm collaborating with a lot of my favorite people but the main thing is [ that ] I 'm not trying to follow any particular trend . I want it to be well received . I want to stay true to myself and the music that I love and make the fans happy . It would be incredible if we can bring back the days where R & B songs didn 't have to cross over . It makes me sad that there are so many talented R & B artists that don 't get the chance that they should . " 
 = = Artwork and release = = 
 Carey revealed the single 's artwork via her Instagram account on July 30 , 2012 . Iona Kirby for The Daily Mail wrote that Carey is known for her " powerful voice , diva tendencies and voluptuous figure " and that she has managed to combine all three qualities in the artwork for " Triumphant ( Get ' Em ) " . She continued describing Carey 's gown as a " flesh @-@ coloured dress with cut @-@ out panels and a saucy split up one side . " Kirby was complimentary of the artwork , writing that Carey " sizzles " on the cover and that the " strapless frock leaves very little to the imagination as she <unk> for the camera . " A critic for the Belfast Telegraph also noted that Carey poses " seductively " for the shot . Robbie Daw for Idolator noted that it appeared as though the artwork had been photoshopped and that it is reminiscent of the cover art of Carey 's tenth studio album , The Emancipation of Mimi ( 2005 ) . <unk> Walsh for The Sun also noted a resemblance to the latter cover , writing " The cover shots for ' Triumphant ' are somewhat reminiscent ... which also sees her wearing a figure hugging gold dress while she strikes a similar pose . " A writer from MTV found the shot " endlessly entertaining " , while Declan Cashin of The Independent wrote : " Carey is depicted in golden hues as if she 's radiating the precious shimmering element from her very being . " 
 On August 1 , a 30 @-@ second low quality snippet of Ross ' verse was released , only one day prior to its scheduled release . Carey later confirmed via her official Twitter account that " Triumphant ( Get ' Em ) " would make its premiere on August 2 , 2012 at 3 : 45pm on the B96 Chicago radio station . However , the station failed to premiere the song , and instead made its official debut on her website . The song received its official radio release later that day at 6 : 20pm CST on the B96 radio station , almost three hours later than scheduled . It was made available to download digitally via iTunes on August 3 , 2012 , in The Netherlands , Belgium , Ireland , Italy , Switzerland , and the United Kingdom . On August 7 , " Triumphant ( Get ' Em ) " made its stateside digital download premiere . Island / Def Jam serviced the hip @-@ hop version to R & B / hip @-@ hop radio on August 13 , and currently " mapping out strategies to deliver other versions across dance formats . " 
 = = Composition and lyrics = = 
 " Triumphant ( Get ' Em ) " is a midtempo R & B and hip hop ballad that " mixes a soft beat with piano accompaniment . " Written during a difficult time in Carey 's personal life , the song boasts inspirational lyrics of self @-@ worth and achievement . The song begins with an introductory verse from Mill , followed by Ross on the second verse . Though " cooing " throughout the chorus , Carey 's begins singing during the song 's bridge and final crescendo , where she displays her whistle register . The track opens with Mill , whose verse quickly sums up the theme of the track : " The only way to make it to the top is if you go and get it from the bottom ... I remember they said that it ain 't my turn / Just look at me now / Try to hold me down , but I ain 't gonna stop / ' Cause I 'm gonna climb to the mountaintop . " During the song 's chorus , Carey sings of not being able to be torn down by others and " staying triumphant " , before continuing : " Don 't let ' em ever count you out / Realize all things are possible / In your heart who 's the greatest / Reach for the stars / Be all that you are . " 
 During the second verse , Ross ' lyrics are somewhat different , " Red bottom <unk> house big as Baltimore " and " With a blonde bombshell trying to bond with your boy . " Additionally , he makes reference to strippers , as well as driving with a suspended drivers ' license . Throughout the bridge , Carey sings about achieving despite surrounding odds : " In spite of the chains that bind you / You can see the mountain top / It ’ s not too far . " Additionally , towards the last chorus , the singer releases a series of her " signature " high notes . During an August 2 , conference call , Carey described how she felt working with the duo , and how she felt Ross ' voice blended well with her own : " Working with Ross and Meek on the same record was incredible . Obviously Ross is a star and everybody loves him . I 'm a fan of his music , " said Carey on the collaboration . " I really , really wanted to work with him . I love the tone of his voice . I think the contrast of his voice and mine would be something special . I always like to do collaborations that people might think are different . " 
 = = Remixes = = 
 After the original version of " Triumphant ( Get ' Em ) " was released , Carey 's official website premiered two other versions of the song , the " Vintage Throwback Remix " and the " Pulse Club Remix " . While the song 's initial release was tepidly received by critics , reviewers were more favorable towards the remixes . The remixes only feature Carey and eliminate the extensive rap verses with which many critics took issue . According to Carey 's manager , Randy Jackson , three versions of the song were released in order to monopolize all radio formats and cater to multiple audiences . In an interview with Billboard , Jackson expressed how they would remind Carey 's fans of her earlier remixes , which she would always re @-@ do her vocals : " The vintage throwback mix will remind fans of remixes she did years ago , and she 's had a lot of Billboard No. 1 dance hits as well . She went in and re @-@ sang the vocals , knowing that the two verses on this first version of this single with Meek and Ross were going to be hip @-@ hop verses where people were rapping . We wanted to have something for all of her fans . " 
 During a press release for the single and its accompanying remixes , Carey said the following regarding the re @-@ recorded vocals : " I ’ ve always had so much fun re @-@ singing my songs for the club / dance mixes . It gives me the freedom to sing as powerfully as I want and to rewrite the songs specifically for the genre . " Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine , who was critical of the song 's original version , praised the " Vintage Throwback Remix " . He felt it was more of what the original " should have been " and concluded : " a rousing vocal arrangement at the song 's climax sells Mariah 's inspirational message of perseverance and harks back to her ' 90s heyday . " Idolator 's Becky Bain called the remix far more " captivating " than the original , and felt its re @-@ recorded vocals showcased the singer 's " one @-@ of @-@ a @-@ kind range . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical = = = 
 While some critics appreciated the features and urban appeal of " Triumphant ( Get ' Em ) " , many criticized Carey 's lack of presence on the song . While describing the singer as taking the " back @-@ seat " throughout a large portion of the song , Becky Bain from Idolator complimented Carey 's vocal runs towards the bridge and final chorus . Spin 's Julianne Shepherd felt that while a strong release , " Triumphant ( Get ' Em ) " didn 't feature enough of Carey , given the near three @-@ year gap between her last release , Memoirs of an Imperfect Angel ( 2009 ) . A writer from Rolling Stone described the singer as " <unk> AWOL " throughout most of the song , but felt that she was " on @-@ point " during her part . In a similar vein , Robert <unk> from Digital Spy was disappointed with the song 's " lack of Mariah Carey . " 
 While Rap @-@ Up hailed " Triumphant ( Get ' Em ) " as an " uplifting anthem " , Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine called the song the " worst lead single ( possibly the worst single , period ) of her two @-@ decade @-@ plus career . " He criticized Carey 's lack of originality with the song ; describing its production as " dated " . Leah Collins of the The Vancouver Sun felt the track 's lyrics lacked inspiration , comparing them to poems from Hallmark Cards . A critic from Artistdirect awarded the song five out of five stars , writing , " with soulful swagger and classic R & B poise , she delivers the track 's stadium @-@ size hook over bombastic , orchestral production . " 
 = = = Commercial = = = 
 Following in suit of its lukewarm critical response , " Triumphant ( Get ' Em ) " has made little impact since its release . The song made its chart debut on the US Billboard Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart on August 9 , 2012 , at number 97 . It debuted on the US Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart for the issue dated August 25 , 2012 , at number 15 , representing the 25 songs charting under the Billboard Hot 100 . During the week dated August 11 , 2012 , the single debuted at number three on the South Korea Gaon International Chart , with 35 @,@ 870 digital download sales . " Triumphant ( Get ' Em ) " entered the UK Singles Chart issue dated at number 144 on August 15 , 2012 , and at number 29 on the UK R & B Chart . Similarly , it charted at number 135 during its debut week on the French Singles Chart . In Spain , the song debuted at number 36 on August 12 , 2012 . Critics have attributed the song 's initial weak charting to its urban sound , describing it as having little Mainstream Top 40 or crossover appeal . According to The Huffington Post , due to radio 's bias against artists over age 40 , " It ’ s not like people are listening to the song and deciding they don ’ t like it ; [ with Mariah ] they are not even listening . If radio isn ’ t playing it , then that ’ s a problem . " 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 An accompanying music video for " Triumphant ( Get ' Em ) " was shot on July 29 and July 30 , 2012 , in New York City . It was directed and produced by Carey 's husband Nick Cannon . Described as a " tease " by Rap @-@ Up , Carey tweeted a picture of herself on set of the music video . Dressed in a red satin gown and " dripping with diamonds " , Carey was photographed lying on a sofa . Three days prior to the video 's release , Carey released a promotional still on her official Instagram account . Featuring Mill with his back towards the camera , the word " <unk> " was splayed across his golden robe . Another photo surfaced later on that day , revealing the trio 's entrance into the boxing auditorium . Reviewing the second still , MTV 's Julia <unk> described Carey 's ensemble as " ever @-@ glamorous " , and assured the video would not disappoint . After viewing the shots , Jocelyn Vena , also from MTV , felt the video 's theme was a " fitting metaphor for the song . " The video premiered on BET 's 106 & Park on August 21 , 2012 . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The music video revolves around a boxing match theme . Mill portrays an underground boxer , while Carey and Ross , presumably as promoters . Opening with the entrance of the trio , the video begins with a hooded Mill entering a large dark auditorium . As he walks towards the ring , Carey and Ross accompany him on each side . As the video progresses into the first verse , close @-@ up shots of Mill during the match are shown , as a large audience cheers them on . Additionally , Mill can be seen rapping to the song 's lyrics as the camera zooms on him during each round recovery . During the chorus , Carey makes a secondary appearance in a floor @-@ length copper gown , while standing on a large golden and lightened platform . During Ross ' verse , DJ Khaled makes a cameo appearance as the former is shown on the golden stage , as well as ringside . As the song progresses , Carey is shown as a " ring girl " , walking around with several numbered signs . Towards the end of the match , scenes are interspersed with Carey standing alone in the ring belting the remainder of the song . During the video 's climax , confetti falls to the ground as she completes the song and walks to the ring 's edge . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Following its premiere , the video for " Triumphant ( Get ' Em ) " was generally well received by critics . E ! ' s Bruna Nessif commended Carey 's " post @-@ baby body " , and wrote " [ the singer ] made sure to let us know that her comeback isn 't only in the music world , but physically , too . " Tanner Stransky from Entertainment Weekly felt the video was " very fitting " for the song 's vibe , and felt it presented " a distinct level of Mimi <unk> . " A reporter from the Daily Mail called the visuals " sizzling " , and complimented the singers moments on the golden stage as " glittering " and " fabulous " . The Hollywood Reporter 's David Lipshutz described the video as a " glitzy clip " . Additionally , he outed its final segment of " Carey singing while confetti rain down " as the video 's highlight . While noting the video 's " classic Mimi fashions " , MTV 's Jocelyn Vena expressed how Carey 's ringside singing during the finale truly tied in with the song 's message of " overcoming adversity " . Marc Hogan of Spin noted it as " expensive @-@ looking and cinematic " , while a writer from CNN described the singer as " glamorous as ever . " 
 = = Live performance = = 
 Carey performed the song live only one time on September 5 , 2012 at Rockefeller Center . Sharing the stage with both No Doubt and Cee Lo Green , the hour long program was filmed live at 7 : 30PM EST on NBC . The performances marked the beginning of the new NFL season , starting with the New York Giants Vs . Dallas Cowboys at the MetLife Stadium in East Rutherford , New Jersey . According to the CBS News , Carey says she 's " thrilled to be performing in New York – her hometown – and adds she 's looking forward to making the season launch ' even more festive . ' " 
 = = Track listing and formats = = 
 Digital download 
 " Triumphant ( Get ' Em ) " [ featuring Rick Ross and Meek Mill ] — 4 : 10 
 Digital download – Pulse Club Remix 
 " Triumphant " ( Pulse Club Remix Extended ) — 5 : 27 
 Digital download – Vintage Throwback Mix 
 " Triumphant " ( Vintage Throwback Mix ) — 4 : 53 
 = = Credits = = 
 Personnel 
 Songwriting – Mariah Carey , Jermaine Dupri , Bryan @-@ Michael Cox , William L. Roberts II , Robert R. Williams 
 Production – Mariah Carey , Jermaine Dupri , Bryan @-@ Michael Cox 
 Credits adapted from Rap @-@ Up . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Jeanne Calment = 
 Jeanne Louise Calment ( French pronunciation : ​ [ <unk> <unk> <unk> ̃ ] ; 21 February 1875 – 4 August 1997 ) was a French supercentenarian who has the longest confirmed human lifespan on record , living to the age of 122 years , 164 days . She lived in Arles , France , for her entire life , outliving both her daughter and grandson by several decades . Calment became especially well known from the age of 113 , when the centenary of Vincent van Gogh 's visit brought reporters to Arles . Her lifespan has been thoroughly documented by scientific study . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Calment was born in Arles on 21 February 1875 . Her father , Nicolas Calment ( 28 January 1838 – 22 January 1931 ) , was a shipbuilder , and her mother , Marguerite Gilles ( 20 February 1838 – 18 September 1924 ) , was from a family of millers . She had an older brother , François ( 25 April 1865 – 1 December 1962 ) . Some of her close family members also lived an above @-@ average lifespan , although none lived anywhere near as long as Jeanne : her older brother François lived to the age of 97 , her father to six days shy of 93 , and her mother to 86 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In 1896 , at the age of 21 , she married her double second cousin , Fernand Nicolas Calment , a wealthy store owner . Their paternal grandfathers were brothers , hence the same surname , and their paternal grandmothers were also sisters . His wealth made it possible for Calment never to have to work ; instead she led a leisured lifestyle , pursuing hobbies such as tennis , cycling , swimming , rollerskating , piano , and opera . Fernand died in 1942 at the age of 73 after suffering from a bout of food poisoning . 
 Their only child , a daughter named Yvonne Marie Nicolle Calment ( 19 January 1898 – 19 January 1934 ) , produced a grandson , Frédéric <unk> , on 23 December 1926 . Yvonne died on her 36th birthday from pneumonia , after which Calment raised Frédéric herself . Frédéric became a doctor , but died at age 36 in an automobile accident on 13 August 1963 . 
 In 1965 , at age 90 and with no heirs , Calment signed a deal to sell her apartment to lawyer André @-@ François Raffray , on a contingency contract . Raffray , then aged 47 years , agreed to pay her a monthly sum of 2 @,@ 500 francs ( € 381 @.@ 12 ) until she died . Raffray ended up paying Calment the equivalent of more than € 140 @,@ 000 which was more than double the apartment 's value . After Raffray 's death from cancer at the age of 77 , in 1995 , his widow continued the payments until Calment 's death . During all these years , Calment used to say to them that she " competed with Methuselah " . 
 = = Recognition = = 
 In 1985 , Calment moved into a nursing home , having lived on her own until age 110 . Her international fame escalated in 1988 , when the centenary of Vincent van Gogh 's visit to Arles provided an occasion to meet reporters . She said at the time that she had met Van Gogh 100 years before , in 1888 , as a thirteen @-@ year @-@ old girl in her father 's fabric shop , where he wanted to buy some canvas , later describing him as " dirty , badly dressed and disagreeable " , and " very ugly , ungracious , impolite , sick " . Calment recalled selling coloured pencils to Van Gogh , and seeing the Eiffel Tower being built . At the age of 114 , she appeared briefly in the 1990 film Vincent and Me as herself , becoming the oldest actress ever to appear in a motion picture . 
 A documentary film about her life , entitled Beyond 120 Years with Jeanne Calment , was released in 1995 . In 1996 , Time 's Mistress , a four @-@ track CD of Calment speaking over a background of rap , was released . On her 122nd birthday on 21 February 1997 , it was announced that she would make no more public appearances , as her health had seriously deteriorated . Jean @-@ Marie <unk> , the French demographer and <unk> , said that this " allowed her to die , as the attention had kept her alive . " She died on 4 August of that same year of unknown causes . 
 Both before and after Calment 's death , there have been several claims to have surpassed her age ( see <unk> longevity claims ) , but none of these have been proven and Calment therefore continues to hold the record for the oldest verified person ever . 
 = = Record breaking = = 
 After her 1988 interview , at age 113 , Calment was given the Guinness title " world 's oldest living person " . However , in 1989 , the title was withdrawn and given to Carrie C. White of Florida , who claimed to have been born in 1874 , although this has been discounted by subsequent census research . On White 's death on 14 February 1991 , Calment , then a week shy of 116 , became the oldest recognized living person . 
 On 17 October 1995 , Calment reached 120 years and 238 days to become the " oldest person ever " according to Guinness , surpassing <unk> Izumi of Japan , whose claim ( 120 years 237 days old at the time of his death on 21 February 1986 , Calment 's 111th birthday ) was discounted in February of 2011 , more than thirteen years after Calment 's death . 
 = = Health and lifestyle = = 
 Calment 's remarkable health presaged her later record . At age 85 ( 1960 ) , she took up fencing , and continued to ride her bicycle up until her 100th birthday ( 1975 ) . She was reportedly neither athletic nor fanatical about her health . Calment lived on her own until shortly before her 110th birthday , when it was decided that she needed to be moved to a nursing home after starting a small fire in her house , caused by a cooking accident , which has been attributed to complications with sight . However , Calment was still in good shape , and continued to walk until she fractured her femur during a fall at age 114 years 11 months ( January 1990 ) , which required surgery . 
 It has been claimed that Calment smoked cigarettes from the age of 21 ( 1896 ) to 117 ( 1992 ) . According to one source , she smoked no more than two cigarettes per day . After her operation , Calment needed to use a wheelchair . In 1994 , age 119 , she weighed 45 kilograms ( 99 lb ) . 
 Calment ascribed her longevity and relatively youthful appearance for her age to a diet rich in olive oil ( which she also rubbed onto her skin ) , as well as a diet of port wine , and ate nearly one kilogram ( 2 @.@ 2 lb ) of chocolate every week . She also credited her calmness , saying , " That 's why they call me Calment . " Calment reportedly remained mentally intact until her very end . 
 = = Death = = 
 On 4 August 1997 , around 10 AM Central European Time , Calment died at age 122 of natural causes . After her death , 116 @-@ year @-@ old Marie @-@ Louise Meilleur became the oldest recognized living person . 
 = = Verification = = 
 Exceeding any other longevity case reported , Calment establishes the record as the most @-@ verifiable supercentenarian ever recorded . Beginning with the 1876 census ( Calment is listed as a one @-@ year @-@ old ) , she was indexed within fourteen census documents until 1975 ( conducted sometime after she celebrated her 100th birthday ) . She was still managing independently at the time . 
 = John Horsefield = 
 John Horsefield ( 18 July 1792 – 6 March 1854 ) was an English handloom weaver and amateur botanist after whom the daffodil Narcissus ' <unk> ' is named . Horsefield had little formal schooling , and acquired most of his botanical knowledge through self @-@ study and involvement in local botanical groups , which provided a venue for working class people to share knowledge , in part by pooling money to purchase books . 
 Horsefield founded one such society , the Prestwich Botanical Society , and was later president of a larger botanical society covering a wide area around north Manchester . He made several botanical discoveries and cultivated two new plants . A number of his writings about the working class and also some poetry were published , but nothing concerning botany other than in connection with the subject of the working class . He lived most of his life near Whitefield in Lancashire , in dire poverty . At the time of his death he had been married for 42 years and had fathered eleven children . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Born on 18 July 1792 , John Horsefield was the eldest son of Charles Horsefield , a barely literate man from whom he received encouragement in his early botanical interests . He reminisced in later life that both his father and his grandfather had been interested in botany and in floriculture . His birthplace was probably Besses o ' th ' Barn in Whitefield close to Prestwich , which became his home . His mother claimed he was born " dead " and had to be revived ; his childhood was dogged by poor health . 
 Horsefield learned to read during a single year 's attendance at school when he was six , after which he went to work for a gingham weaver . His education continued with twice @-@ weekly evening tuition in writing and arithmetic until he was around 15 years old . James Cash , a journalist , amateur botanist and the first chairman of the Manchester Cryptogamic Society , says Horsefield received some education for a short time when he started work : the weaver for whom he served charged two shillings ( 10p ) per calendar quarter to instruct his young employees in reading . This instruction took the form of the employees reading out lessons to him while they worked at their handlooms . An avid reader , his interest in botany was piqued when he obtained a copy of Nicholas Culpeper 's 1653 book , The Complete Herbal , of which he said , " The wonderful properties that are there ascribed to plants excited in me a strong desire to get acquainted with the plants themselves . " Thereafter he attended working @-@ men 's botanical societies and meetings in public houses , thus meeting a broad church of people with interests not only in the science of botany but also in floriculture , herbalism and horticulture . 
 Horsefield and his father were members of an early @-@ 19th century loose grouping of Mancunian amateur botanists , and of a short @-@ lived botanical society for working men in Whitefield . Horsefield attended meetings of the former group in 1808 , which was referred to as the " Manchester Society of Botanists " or the " Botanist Society " . Anne Secord , a historian of 19th century popular science , quotes an attendee of the society , Thomas Heywood , who describes it as being " without any regular place of meeting , without funds , without books and without rules ; a sort of members , but no body , having only one object in common – their love of plants " . 
 The Whitefield society arranged for funds to be pooled to buy books for communal use , enabling the 16 @-@ year @-@ old Horsefield to read James Lee 's 1760 work , An Introduction to Botany . It provided information on Linnaean taxonomy as it applied to plants , and from it Horsefield copied details onto a piece of paper he pinned to his loom to commit them to memory while he was working . He earned the respect of other botanists for his abilities in the sphere of collection and identification of species and was the first to find the <unk> <unk> moss in England . 
 Horsfield met his future wife Esther <unk> ( 1793 / 94 – 1872 ) at a botanical meeting in 1812 . The couple were married on 20 December 1812 at St Mary 's Church , Oldham . 
 = = Leadership = = 
 The meetings he attended in his early life were a part of a movement in the study of botany by artisans . This had been initiated by George Caley , James Crowther , John Dewhurst , John Mellor and Edward Hobson , the last of whom Horsefield met in 1809 at a meeting held at Radcliffe Bridge and whose knowledge he held in high regard . It was part of a broader working class movement involving the study of nature and natural history that developed in the late 18th century and continued into the next . 
 There is some evidence to suggest that in the period of social unrest that followed the end of the Napoleonic Wars , and which saw the introduction of the Seditious Meetings Act , gatherings of botanists may have been used as cover for the activities of politically radical reformers such as Samuel Bamford . Horsefield , who witnessed the Peterloo Massacre of 1819 , had such sympathies and recounted that 
 With politics I had little to do practically ; but in 1816 , after the war was over – an event which I had been taught to look to for the restoration of good trade – finding ourselves disappointed , that year of dear provisions and no work turned all my neighbours , as well as myself , into a kind of politicians . " Parliamentary Reform " was the cry . I attended several reform meetings in 1816 , and for a few years after . I attended one at Bury and one at Middleton , at each of which Samuel Bamford presided . 
 The Peterloo Massacre was the last political meeting Horsefield attended , although he retained a general interest in the subject of radical politics . He attended the Manchester Mechanics ' Institute , supported the idea of self @-@ education and , according to Harvey Taylor , a historian , " typified the Lancashire <unk> seeker after self @-@ culture . " Having obtained his own garden in 1819 , he promoted his interests by founding the Prestwich Botanical Society on 11 September 1820 , presiding over meetings in a pub where plant specimens were brought together for identification and where those who could not read were taught the science of botany by those who could . He was president of the society for 32 years , during which time at least 131 books were purchased by the society for communal use . Writing in December 1829 , Horsefield explained that the Prestwich Society met on the second Monday of each month and usually had between 12 and 20 members , who were charged a monthly 6d . ( 2 ½ p ) subscription . The subscription , which was common to such societies , was intended to pay for books and create a fund for the purchase of drink ; the pub landlord provided the meeting and storage space at no charge as long as sufficient drink was consumed , a practice known as " wet rent " . 
 In 1830 he succeeded Hobson as president of an organisation with a wider geographical base and which held Sunday meetings in pubs for the purpose of educating the amateur artisan botanists . The Manchester botanist Leo Grindon ( 1818 – 1904 ) described this body as " the united societies of the whole district " , while another , Richard Buxton , who led an impoverished life like Horsefield , referred to it as the " General Botanical Meetings " whose gatherings took place at venues between Clayton , Eccles , Manchester , Middleton , Newton Heath and Radcliffe . Horsefield explained the didactic purpose of these societies as 
 [ W ] e instruct one another by continually meeting together ; so that the knowledge of one becomes the knowledge of all , and we make up for the deficiency of education by constant application to the subject . 
 He noted how the procedure for imparting the knowledge had to be changed such that , certainly by the 1850s and possibly as early as 1830 , the president 's role was to select specimens from those brought to the meeting and identify them to the attendees , who sat in silence . Horsefield describes this change as being necessary because previously the president 
 taking a specimen off the table ... gave it to the man on his left hand , telling him at the same time its generic and specific name ; he passed it on to another , and so on round the room ; and all the other specimens followed in a similar manner . But , from the noise and confusion caused by each person telling his neighbour the name of the specimen , some being unable to pronounce it , some <unk> it , and all talking at once , we have been constrained of late years to adopt another method . 
 He championed these working people in print , praising their self @-@ taught skills , demanding they be accorded the respect of others working in the botanical field and using them as an example to counter generalised accusations such as those made by John Claudius Loudon that the textile workers of Lancashire were ignorant and degraded . He composed verses , including The Botanists ' Song , which acknowledged the conviviality obtained from meeting in pubs with the words " science circles with the glass " . But he did not produce any written works directly relating to botany , and in 1847 turned down the opportunity to write on the flora of Manchester with Buxton , whom he met in 1826 while they were independently studying plant life on Kersal Moor and whom he introduced to the Prestwich Botanical Society . Buxton was of the opinion that Horsefield was " not a mere country herbalist , but an excellent scientific botanist " , and the 1826 meeting presented Buxton with opportunities to meet a like @-@ minded circle of men where previously his had been a solitary pursuit . 
 Horsefield did not confine his scientific interests to botany , as he also studied algebra , mensuration and astronomy . Charles Horsefield had also encouraged his son in the last pursuit , taking him to meet Robert Ward , an astronomer in Blackley who had a telescope . John Horsefield developed an interest in the subject to the extent that he constructed an orrery , much to the bewilderment of his neighbours . 
 Cash notes that when constructing his orrery , Horsefield asked a local man to manufacture a golden ball to represent the sun and the man replied that " Aw 'll mak ' thee one an ' charge thee now 't for 't ; but , let me tell thee , fancy folk like thee ' re a <unk> poor " . Indeed , he was : all of his interests were indulged despite a background of dire poverty , and he remarked of his celebrity in botanical circles that " fame is not bread " . He remained a gingham weaver and during his lifetime the sole financial benefit from his interests came when he raised a new hybrid lily – <unk> <unk> – in his garden and sold it to a Manchester nurseryman , Thomas Watkinson , for £ 10 . His poverty caused him to be exempted from contributing to the book fund of the Prestwich Botanical Society from the mid @-@ 1820s , and he was later exempted from paying into the liquor funds of both that society and the wider @-@ based group . These concessions demonstrate the extent to which his knowledge was appreciated and occurred despite the teetotal Hobson having to pay into a liquor fund of which by definition he took no advantage . Horsefield received £ 13 10s. from a subscription that was started in 1853 in another attempt to alleviate his <unk> state . After his death on 6 March 1854 , Esther , with whom he had six sons and five daughters , received £ 37 from this fund , and he left 37 bulbs of one of the earliest hybrid daffodils to be cultivated , Narcissus <unk> , that raised another £ 2 11s ( £ 2 @.@ 55 ) . N. <unk> became one of the most popular and extensively grown varieties of daffodil . 
 = = Death = = 
 John Horsefield died on 6 March 1854 , aged 62 , probably as a consequence of a strangulated hernia that had been masked by a tumour . He was buried on 10 March 1854 at the St. Mary 's Church , Prestwich , although at some point in his life it seems that he had upset the authorities of the established church for reasons unknown . His table tomb was listed as a Grade II monument by English Heritage in 2012 . 
 The epitaph on his tomb was written by Charles Swain ( 1807 – 1874 ) . It reads : 
 Bamford commemorated him in a poem written in 1855 , and Grindon wrote in 1882 that Horsefield was " one of the most celebrated of the old Lancashire operative botanists " . Esther died on 17 June 1872 . Their son , James , and his wife , Alice , are also commemorated on the headstone . 
 = Mind Over Murder = 
 " Mind Over Murder " is the fourth episode of the first season of the animated comedy series Family Guy . It originally aired on Fox in the United States on April 25 , 1999 . The episode features Peter after he is placed under house arrest , and decides to open his own bar in the family 's basement . The bar immediately becomes a success among Peter 's male friends when his wife , Lois , begins to sing and dance in front of them while wearing revealing clothing . Meanwhile , Stewie attempts to create a time travel device in order to escape the pain of teething . 
 The episode was written by Neil Goldman and Garrett Donovan and directed by Roy Allen Smith , all series firsts . Much of the episode 's humor is structured around cutaway sequences that parody popular culture , including those centered on The Chronicles of Narnia , Sesame Street , Homicide : Life on the Street , Mentos , and the assassination of Abraham Lincoln . The title " Mind Over Murder " was inspired by 1930s and 1940s radio programs , particularly the radio thriller anthology Suspense , which featured several elements pertaining to death and murder . The episode featured performances by guest stars Carlos Alazraqui , Butch Hartman , Alex Rocco , Leslie Uggams and Wally Wingert , along with several recurring voice actors for the series . It was rated TV @-@ 14 ( D , L ) in the United States and 12 in the United Kingdom . 
 The episode received praise from IGN television critic Ahsan Haque for its storyline and use of cultural references . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Stewie is in terrible pain from teething and cannot find comfort anywhere . When his mother Lois tells him that his pain will ultimately pass , it gives him the idea to build a machine that will move time forward to the point where his teething will have already stopped . Meanwhile , Lois tells Peter to drive their other son Chris to his soccer match , then come right back to look after Stewie . However , Peter 's friend Quagmire is there , and has brought beer , so Peter decides to ignore Lois and stay at the game . While there , another member of the crowd insults Chris . Angered , Peter punches this person in the face , only to discover that it is a pregnant woman who looks and sounds like a man . 
 Peter is put under house arrest for assault and soon begins to miss his friends . Peter has a vision of the Pawtucket Patriot , a fictional ale mascot , from his ale can label and on his advice opens a bar in his basement so that his friends can come to visit . The basement bar soon becomes a local hotspot . Lois is upset about this , until she gets a chance to sing on stage before an appreciative crowd . As she savors the spotlight over the next few days , Peter becomes increasingly uncomfortable with the attention she is getting , especially from the male patrons . Peter demands that she quit singing , but she refuses . 
 Peter is soon cornered by the neglected wives of his bar 's patrons , and invites them to drag their husbands out from his bar . Meanwhile , Stewie ’ s time machine plans are accidentally discovered by Lois , who shows them around to the bar 's patrons . Angered and upset that his plans have been discovered , Stewie runs upstairs . Soon after , the wives storm the bar and Lois tells them that she only wants to feel appreciated and special , something to which all the other women relate . Meanwhile , Quagmire accidentally starts a fire . 
 Upstairs , Stewie takes drastic measures to protect his plans , programming the machine to go back in time before he drew them up . In the bar , Peter and Lois have a heart @-@ to @-@ heart conversation , and they do not immediately notice that the bar is burning . When they try to escape , the stairs become blocked and they are trapped . Stewie reverses time just as Peter is having an epiphany about how poorly he treats Lois , and seconds before the basement bar goes up in flames . They all travel back in time , to when Lois asked Peter to take Chris to the game . While he is getting ready , Peter trips on Stewie 's time machine , destroying it and injuring his leg , thus preventing him from taking Chris to his soccer match , while Stewie is left to suffer with more teething pain . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Mind Over Murder " was written by Neil Goldman and Garrett Donovan and directed by Roy Allen Smith , all of whom made their series debut with this episode . Peter Shin , who has since supervised other episodes of the show , acted as supervising director . Writer Andrew Gormley and voice actor Mike Henry acted as staff writers in this episode , while Ricky Blitt and Chris Sheridan worked as the story editors . In addition to the regular cast , the episode featured the voices of actors Leslie Uggams , Wally Wingert , Alex Rocco and Carlos Alazraqui . Recurring guest voice actors included actress Lori Alan and writer and animator Butch Hartman . 
 The title " Mind Over Murder " , like the titles of the first three episodes of the season , was inspired by 1930s and 1940s radio programs , particularly the radio thriller anthology Suspense , which featured several elements pertaining to death and murder . This convention was dropped in the fifth episode of the season , " A Hero Sits Next Door " , partly to make the episodes easier to distinguish by their titles . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 When Lois confronts Peter about the mess he is making in their house , he says he is terrible at housework . From this comes a cutaway which shows Peter doing the laundry . When he climbs into the machine in search of a missing sock , he falls into a wintry world where he encounters Mr. Tumnus from The Chronicles of Narnia . 
 While Peter is under house arrest he states that he is becoming bored of everything in the house including the television shows , which he feels have blended together . A cutaway features Bert and Ernie from the children 's television series Sesame Street , in a mix with the crime drama Homicide : Life on the Street . 
 When the Griffin family is watching television they see a commercial for Mentos @-@ brand mints , which features the American stage actor John Wilkes Booth as he attempts to assassinate Abraham Lincoln . 
 When Stewie starts to feel pain around the inside of his mouth , Lois notices and states that he is teething . Stewie quickly responds by asking her to kill him , or to shake him like a British nanny , a reference to the Louise Woodward case . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In his 2008 flashback review , Ahsan Haque of IGN praised the episode , rating it a 9 / 10 , praising the " integration between the random jokes and the storyline " , in comparison to later episodes . He criticized the " one @-@ dimensional " nature of Stewie 's character , but was impressed by the amount of story featured in this half @-@ hour episode . In another article , Haque named Stewie 's time machine plan from " Mind Over Murder " number five in his list of " Stewie 's Top 10 Most Diabolical Evil Plans " . 
 Robin Pierson of The TV Critic gave the episode a mixed review , giving it a 55 % . Pierson praised the episode 's plot , the handling of Peter and Stewie , and some of the cutaways . He criticized the relationship between Lois and Peter as unconvincing . At the end of his review he stated , " Family Guy doesn ’ t seem to have found the right balance yet between silliness and seriousness . So far its plots have been either irrelevant or emotionally unappealing . This was also a bit short on good jokes . " 
 = German U @-@ boat bases in occupied Norway = 
 German U @-@ boat bases in occupied Norway operated between 1940 and 1945 , when the Kriegsmarine ( German navy ) , converted several naval bases in Norway into submarine bases . Norwegian coastal cities became available to the Kriegsmarine after the invasion of Denmark and Norway in April 1940 . Following the conclusion of the Norwegian Campaign ( June 1940 ) , the occupying Germans began to transfer U @-@ boats stationed in Germany to many Norwegian port cities such as Bergen , Narvik , Trondheim , Hammerfest and Kirkenes . Initial planning for many U @-@ boat bunkers began in late 1940 . Starting in 1941 , the Todt Organisation began the construction of bunkers in Bergen and Trondheim . These bunkers were completed by <unk> & <unk> AG between 1942 and 1943 . 
 The Kriegsmarine generally used U @-@ boats stationed in Norway to extend its range of operation in the North Atlantic and Arctic Oceans . The Norwegian bases housed U @-@ boats that took part in the interception of Allied convoys crossing the Arctic Ocean to the Soviet Union . Following the liberation of France by the Western Allies in 1944 , U @-@ boat activity in many Norwegian ports increased . With the French ports captured or cut off , many German U @-@ boats re @-@ located to Norwegian port cities . 
 During the German occupation of Norway , the Kriegsmarine stationed over 240 U @-@ boats in the Nordic country at one time or another , most of them members of the 11th U @-@ boat Flotilla , which had 190 U @-@ boats in its fleet during the flotilla 's entire career . Other well @-@ known flotillas in Norway included the 13th and 14th Flotillas . 
 = = German invasion of Norway = = 
 Germany invaded both Norway and Denmark on 9 April 1940 . Norway was very important to Germany for two reasons : firstly as a base for naval units to harass Allied shipping in the North Atlantic and Arctic Oceans , and secondly to secure shipments of iron ore coming in from Sweden through the port of Narvik . During Operation Weserübung , Denmark fell in less than a day , becoming the briefest invasion in recorded military history . The Norwegians put up a stiffer resistance to the invading German forces . Nonetheless , by May the southern half of Norway was under German control . Following the German invasion of France and the Low Countries , the Allies were forced to evacuate Narvik , leaving the country to the Germans who would occupy it until the end of the war . After the invasion , Vidkun Quisling led the collaborationist government of Norway , based around the fascist Nasjonal Samling ( " National Gathering " ) party . 
 = = German use of Norwegian ports = = 
 During the occupation , several of the nation 's naval ports were turned into U @-@ boat bases that were used to harass Allied shipping in the North Atlantic and Arctic Oceans . These included Bergen , Narvik , Trondheim , Hammerfest and Kirkenes . Over 240 U @-@ boats were stationed in Norway at various times during the war , most of them were members of the 11th U @-@ boat Flotilla which had 190 U @-@ boats in its fleet during the flotilla 's career . Other well @-@ known flotillas in Norway included the 13th and 14th flotillas . 
 = = = Bergen = = = 
 The southern port of Bergen was captured by the Germans on 9 April 1940 , on the first day of the invasion . The Germans immediately saw the potential for several Norwegian harbours and ports to function as bases of operation for the Kriegsmarine 's U @-@ boats patrolling the North Sea and the Arctic Ocean . It would become the home of the 11th U @-@ boat Flotilla . 
 Bergen was the first Norwegian port to be established as a U @-@ boat base . From July 1940 to the end of the war in May 1945 , 270 U @-@ boat patrols originated in Bergen . Bergen was also the site where the only type XXI submarine left for a patrol in the war ; U @-@ 2511 left the port on 3 May 1945 . 
 Planning for the first U @-@ boat bunker in Bergen began in late 1940 and was undertaken by the German military engineering group , the Todt Organisation . It coordinated the building of the first U @-@ boat bunker in Bergen , codenamed Bruno , as well as several other U @-@ boat bunkers along the Norwegian coast . The construction of Bruno began in 1941 . When it was completed it had seven pens , three of which were " dry " docks and three of which were " wet " docks . The seventh pen was used for storing fuel , torpedoes and other essentials . The bunker itself had a roof up to 6 metres ( 20 ft ) thick and was 131 metres ( 430 ft ) by 143 metres ( 469 ft ) in area . Once Bruno was completed , it could hold up to 9 U @-@ boats . 
 Bergen remained a quiet base during the first few years of the occupation , experiencing only one large Allied air attack . In 1943 , the U @-@ boat base added two new bunkers , U @-@ Stützpunkt Prien and U @-@ Stützpunkt <unk> along with a shipyard named Danziger Werft . 
 The U @-@ boat base at Bergen grew exponentially after the liberation of France by the Western Allies , when the senior commanding officer of U @-@ boat operations in the west ( " <unk> West " ) was moved from Angers , France to the city . A large expansion program was conducted at the base and several new anti @-@ aircraft guns were set up to protect the U @-@ boat bunkers . More engineers and technicians were moved to Bergen to accommodate the increased technical requirements of the base as well . Two more bunkers named Werft <unk> 1 and <unk> 2 were also built during this time . 
 In late 1944 several British air attacks damaged the U @-@ boat bases in Bergen . During one of these attacks , a ' Tallboy ' bomb went straight through the roof of pen 3 , damaging it beyond repair and putting it out of action for the remainder of the war . The base was handed over to the Allies , along with the rest of occupied Norway , on 8 May 1945 when all German forces in Europe surrendered . As a result of the intensive bombing of the city in late 1944 and 1945 , the Bergen area was one of the worst damaged regions in the south of Norway at the conclusion of the war . 
 = = = Trondheim = = = 
 Trondheim was an important U @-@ boat base in Norway during the war . It was the home of the 13th flotilla and sent out around 55 U @-@ boat patrols between June 1940 and the end of the war in May 1945 . 
 The list of <unk> U @-@ boats in Trondheim included following : U @-@ 310 , U @-@ 315 , U @-@ 483 , U @-@ 773 , U @-@ 775 , U @-@ 861 , U @-@ 953 , U @-@ 978 , U @-@ 994 , U @-@ 995 , U @-@ 1019 , U @-@ 1064 and U @-@ 1203 . 
 Two U @-@ boat bunkers , codenamed " Dora I " and " Dora II " , were planned to be built in Trondheim to provide additional repair facilities outside Germany itself . Like the bunkers in Bergen , the two bunkers in Trondheim came under the control of the Todt Organisation . Only " Dora I " , which the Kriegsmarine took charge of in 1943 , was completed before the end of the war . At 153 feet ( 47 m ) long and 105 feet ( 32 m ) wide it had five pens with space to hold seven U @-@ boats . Construction of " Dora II " began in 1942 but was never completed . If finished it would have been 168 feet ( 51 m ) long by 102 feet ( 31 m ) wide , with four pens capable of holding six U @-@ boats . 
 = Littlest Pet Shop ( 2012 TV series ) = 
 Littlest Pet Shop is a Canadian – American children 's animated television series developed by Julie McNally @-@ Cahill and Tim Cahill for Hasbro Studios . Based on the Littlest Pet Shop and Blythe toys owned by Hasbro , the show follows a Blythe Baxter , a teenage girl who , after moving into an apartment in a metropolitan area , gains the ability to communicate with animals . Located below her apartment is the eponymous pet store where Blythe works and talks to a group of pets who regularly reside at a day care in the shop . Worried that a corrupt rival business will drive their shop out of business , the pets depend on Blythe to drive business into the store with her pet fashion designs . 
 The show debuted on November 10 , 2012 , and ran for four season and 104 episodes . Littlest Pet Shop is produced by Hasbro Studios and DHX Media . Animated using Flash , completion of a single episode takes roughly one year , with several in production at once . The show has received mixed reception ; it has been criticised for its embedded marketing , while reviewers have given praise to the writing . Several crew members have additionally received accolades for their work on the show . The series finale aired on June 4 , 2016 . 
 The series is a part of the company 's franchise reboot , where Hasbro released a new line of Littlest Pet Shop toys designed to more closely resemble the characters on the show . A mobile game and comic book adaptation were also commissioned . 
 = = Plot and cast = = 
 The series follows Blythe Baxter ( Ashleigh Ball ) , a teenage girl living with her air pilot father , Roger ( Michael <unk> ) . Forced to move out from her suburban hometown following her father 's promotion , she moves into an apartment located in a crowded city . Their complex is located above the eponymous Littlest Pet Shop — a pet store that also serves as a day camp for numerous pets — where Blythe works as a fashion designer . Her adventure begins when she discovers that she alone can miraculously understand and talk to the pets that regularly stay at the shop , in addition to most other animals on the planet . As she and the pets spend time together , they find the pet shop jeopardized by larger pet store managed by Fisher Biskit ( Samuel Vincent ) and his snooty twin daughters , <unk> and Brittany Biskit ( Shannon Chan @-@ Kent ) . To avoid being dispersed , the pets convince Blythe to remain an employee . 
 The pets who reside in the day camp of the store are Pepper ( Tabitha St. Germain ) , a wisecracking skunk passionate about comedy ; Minka ( Kira Tozer ) , a bouncy spider monkey with a flair for painting and visual arts ; Penny Ling ( <unk> Loewen , Laura <unk> in song ) , a sensitive giant panda interested in rhythmic gymnastics ; Russell ( Vincent ) , a hedgehog who is often the self @-@ appointed leader of his animal <unk> ; Sunil ( Peter New ) , a mongoose and magician hopeful ; Vinnie ( Kyle Rideout ) , a clumsy gecko obsessed with dancing ; and Zoe ( Nicole Oliver , <unk> Epp in song ) , a diva @-@ like dog with a talent for singing . Other human characters include Mrs. Twombly ( Kathleen Barr ) , owner of the shop and Blythe 's boss , and <unk> Song ( Chan @-@ Kent ) , Sue Patterson ( Tozer ) , and Jasper Jones ( Barr ) , Blythe 's schoolmates . 
 = = Background = = 
 Hasbro owns the rights of both Blythe and Littlest Pet Shop , toy lines respectively introduced in 1972 and 1992 . Manufactured through their Kenner Products division , Hasbro acquired the Cincinnati @-@ based company , then owned by Tonka , in 1991 . Hasbro sold these toys under the name of this division until they closed down Kenner 's original Cincinnati headquarters in 2000 . <unk> Television had produced an earlier animated show based on Littlest Pet Shop in 1995 for Hasbro , but the 2012 Littlest Pet Shop series marked the first adaptation of the Blythe doll to a character on television . A prior incarnation of such a character is the protagonist of Littlest Pet Shop Presents , an unrelated animated miniseries produced by Cosmic Toast Studios . This series was released by Hasbro exclusively on the Internet . 
 Julie McNally @-@ Cahill and Tim Cahill developed Littlest Pet Shop , having joined Hasbro Studios in September 2011 . The two serve as both executive producers and story editors on the show ; also working as executive producers are Chris <unk> and Kirsten Newman . The show was announced in March 2011 , based on Hasbro 's 2010 introduction of the Blythe Loves Littlest Pet Shop toy line . Margaret Loesch , then the CEO of the Hub Network — a network partly owned by Hasbro and Discovery Communications — commissioned the series . 
 = = Production = = 
 Given Hasbro 's framework for Littlest Pet Shop , the developers Cahills pitched their adaptation of the property . Hasbro originally felt discouraged over having the show set at the pet store , finding the exchange of animals they thought would come from that disconcerting . The Cahills saw the studio 's definition of such stores as antiquated , convincing them that most modern locations provide grooming and day care services as opposed to merely selling pets . Production followed quickly , much to their surprise . 
 The studio defined only Blythe and the pets as characters , so the Cahills sought to expand the human character 's fictional universe , designing Blythe 's friends , Mrs. Twombly , and the Biskit twins . Julie explained that she and her husband 's preference for quirky comedy inspired that of the show . While the show is aimed at a demographic of young girls , Julie said that she and the writers attempt to cater to boys of the same age and parent viewers simultaneously . Original music for the show is accomplished by film and television composers Daniel Ingram and Steffan Andrews . Ingram wrote that the urban setting of Littlest Pet Shop prompted the use of a modern style of music . The score incorporates pop and other cultural influences for the same reason . Ingram found Hasbro 's pushing of the limitations for music in daytime television a source of pride . 
 Each 22 @-@ minute episode takes approximately a year to complete ; three to four episodes are produced simultaneously . Storyboard artists depict scenes using <unk> Pro . Adapting these boards to limited animation , studio DHX Media handles the designs , poses and key frames of movement for each character appearing in a given scene for an episode , as well as background art . DHX hands these assets to a separate studio , where the remaining animation is finished using Adobe Flash . The speed of production is throttled slightly by Blythe having two unique outfits per episode , according to director Joel Dickie . Supervising director Dallas Parker similarly explained that the variety of assets created for each episode challenged the process of Flash animation in reusing movements . 
 = = Release = = 
 The Hub Network aired the first two episodes of Littlest Pet Shop in succession on November 10 , 2012 . The network scheduled these episodes to succeed the third season premiere of Friendship Is Magic , based on the My Little Pony toy line , also owned by Hasbro . The network ordered 26 episodes for its first season , concluding it on April 27 , 2013 . A second season , also of 26 episodes , premiered on November 2 , 2013 , and concluded on April 12 , 2014 . A third season of the same amount of episodes aired from May 31 , 2014 , to March 7 , 2015 . During this season , the network shifted management and was renamed to Discovery Family . According to show writer Roger <unk> , a fourth and final season will be aired , beginning November 7 , 2015 . 
 = = Related products = = 
 = = = Mobile game = = = 
 As part of a contractual agreement with Hasbro , Gameloft developed a mobile game based on the show . Released in the same year the show premiered , on November 22 , the game is of the city @-@ building genre . The game , Littlest Pet Shop , is freemium software — microtransactions allows users to speed up the progression of the game . The game provides over 150 animal companions for users to collect ; minigames allow players to take care of these pets . Its initial release was for the iOS platform . An Android port was released shortly afterwards . 
 Writing in TouchArcade , Jared Nelson wrote that the game is unexceptional for players who are not fans of the toy line . While in the United Kingdom the game was subject of controversy concerning its incorporation of in @-@ app purchases , the Advertising Standards Authority deemed it acceptable . The organization found that the instructions detailing purchases did not coerce players to make such purchases . 
 = = = Comic book = = = 
 IDW Publishing was commissioned to adapt Littlest Pet Shop to a comic book . An adaptation made up of five issues , released from May 7 to September 17 , 2014 , was written by Georgia Ball and Matt Anderson and illustrated by Nico Peña and Antonio Campo . Anderson had worked on the shorter , contained stories , while Ball had scripted the remainder of each issue . 
 Different from the other Hasbro properties Ball had worked on , she explained that Hasbro wanted the comic to entertain readers rather than be morally didactic . She likened this to the principle of " no hugging , no learning " coined on the set of Seinfeld . Apart from that , the studio gave Ball license to give Blythe hobbies not depicted on the show . Ball focused on writing stories that would appeal to readers transitioning from primary to secondary education . She described the structure for the comic as a daily drama , while Anderson thought of it as slice of life . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Shout ! Factory has secured North American distribution rights for programs broadcast by the Hub Network and Discovery Family , releasing several DVD sets for Littlest Pet Shop . Primal Screen , a distributor located in the United Kingdom , obtained the rights for its first two seasons for most of Western Europe and the Middle East . Beyond Home Entertainment handles distribution in Australia . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Littlest Pet Shop became one of the Hub Network 's top programs in 2013 . Both the show and Friendship Is Magic were outperforming shows aimed at similar demographics internationally , according to Stephen Davis , president of Hasbro Studios . Hasbro rebooted their toy line in accordance with the show ; newer collections features customizable sets for fans to " create , decorate and personalize their own scenes " inspired by episodes . 
 Writing for the parent @-@ focused organization Common Sense Media , Emily Ashby found the show unimpressive . She praised Blythe as a model of " integrity , self @-@ confidence , loyalty , and creativity " but found fault with product placement and the " run @-@ of @-@ the @-@ mill " pet characters . Mercedes Milligan of Animation Magazine , however , described the varied personalities of the pet characters as the most endearing trait of the show . Writing in Entertainment Weekly , Hillary Busis found the Biskit twins amusing as characters . Busis praised the twenty @-@ first episode of the first season in particular , which contains a parody of both Toddlers & <unk> and the Christopher Guest – directed film Best in Show . An homage to Star Trek was singled out by Hanh Nguyen in TV Guide . 
 Tori Michel of About Entertainment gave praise to a DVD set containing five episodes of the first season . She wrote that despite the intended demographic , older children in elementary and middle school would find the writing humorous , while girls would find the pet characters entertaining the most . The Dove Foundation member Donna Rolfe gave the same set a full five stars . 
 The show was nominated at the 40th Daytime Creative Arts Emmy Awards for the song " If You 're a Guy " in 2013 , but it lost this to 3rd & Bird . Oliver 's portrayal of Zoe won her an award from <unk> and the Union of British Columbia Performers . New , who voices Sunil , was nominated for this but lost to Oliver . Ingram and Andrews were nominated for Leo Awards for their work as composers of the episode " Lights , Camera , Mongoose ! " in 2014 . The duo later won this nomination in common . 
 = Maryland Route 177 = 
 Maryland Route 177 ( MD 177 ) is a state highway in the U.S. state of Maryland . Known as Mountain Road , the highway runs 10 @.@ 92 miles ( 17 @.@ 57 km ) from MD 2 in Pasadena east to Gibson Island . MD 177 serves as an arterial highway through Pasadena , Jacobsville , and the Lake Shore area of northeastern Anne Arundel County . The highway is paralleled by MD 100 through Pasadena and Jacobsville . MD 177 originally began near what is now its western intersection with MD 648 , which was originally part of MD 2 . A short section of the highway was built in Pasadena in the early 1910s . MD 177 was extended east through Jacobsville in the early 1920s and to Gibson Island in the late 1920s . The highway was extended west in the late 1930s after MD 2 was relocated to its present four @-@ lane divided highway . A freeway section of MD 177 was constructed between MD 3 in Glen Burnie and MD 2 in the mid @-@ 1960s ; the freeway was renumbered MD 100 when that highway was completed from Pasadena to Jacobsville in the early 1970s . Congestion east of MD 100 led to the addition of a reversible lane in 1999 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 MD 177 begins at an intersection with MD 2 ( Governor Ritchie Highway ) in Pasadena just north of MD 2 's interchange with MD 100 ( Paul T. Pitcher Memorial Highway ) . The state highway heads east as a six @-@ lane divided highway which drops to four lanes at its intersection with a ramp from southbound MD 10 ( Arundel Expressway ) and ramps to and from westbound MD 100 . MD 177 passes under MD 10 , spawns a ramp onto northbound MD 10 , and meets the southern end of MD 648 ( Baltimore – Annapolis Boulevard ) at Lipin 's Corner . At the next intersection , unsigned MD 915 ( Long Hill Road ) splits to the south . MD 177 continues east as a two @-@ lane road that regularly gains a center turn lane . The state highway intersects another section of MD 648 ( Waterford Road ) , Catherine Avenue , and Edwin Raynor Boulevard on its way to Jacobsville . In the center of Jacobsville , MD 177 intersects MD 607 , which heads south as Magothy Bridge Road and north as Hog Neck Road . 
 East of Jacobsville , MD 177 receives the eastern end of MD 100 . There is no direct access from eastbound MD 100 to westbound MD 177 . The state highway becomes a three @-@ lane road with the center lane controlled by lane use signals . During rush hours , there are two lanes in the relevant direction ; at all other times , the center lane serves as a center left turn lane . The eastern end of the three @-@ lane section is at South Carolina Avenue in the community of Lake Shore . MD 177 continues east as a two @-@ lane road and passes a loop of Old Mountain Road . At Pinehurst Road , which leads to Downs Memorial Park , the route veers southeast toward Gibson Island . MD 177 reaches its eastern terminus at the gatehouse that guards the private island community on the north side of the mouth of the Magothy River at the Chesapeake Bay . 
 MD 177 is a part of the National Highway System as a principal arterial from MD 100 in Jacobsville to Pinehurst Road near Gibson Island . 
 = = History = = 
 The first portion of MD 177 to be constructed was the portion of the Baltimore – Annapolis Boulevard between what are now MD 648 and MD 915 at Lipin 's Corner . That highway , which was designated MD 2 in 1927 , was paved as a 16 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 9 m ) wide macadam road in 1911 and 1912 . This segment of the Boulevard was widened to 22 feet ( 6 @.@ 7 m ) with a pair of 3 @-@ foot ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) concrete shoulders by 1926 . Mountain Road itself was paved as a 14 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) wide concrete road from Lipin 's Corner east to just east of the modern Waterford Road segment of MD 648 . By 1921 , the concrete road was extended east to Jacobsville . The paved portion of Mountain Road was extended east to near Woods Road by 1923 . MD 177 was completed as a concrete highway to Gibson Island in 1928 . MD 177 was widened to at least 18 feet ( 5 @.@ 5 m ) from Lipin 's Corner to Gibson Island by 1930 . After MD 2 was relocated to Governor Ritchie Highway in 1936 , MD 177 was extended west from Lipin 's Corner to the new four @-@ lane divided highway by 1939 . MD 177 was reconstructed from Lipin 's Corner to east of Jacobsville to ameliorate curves in 1952 . 
 A westward freeway extension of MD 177 was under construction from MD 3 ( Glen Burnie Bypass ) east to MD 2 by 1963 . The freeway opened as MD 177 in 1964 with intermediate interchanges at MD 174 and Oakwood Road . In 1966 , the freeway was extended slightly east to terminate at Mountain Road at an intersection at the site of today 's ramps to and from westbound MD 100 . By 1967 , an extension of the freeway east to beyond Jacobsville was proposed . The eastward freeway extension opened in 1971 ; however , the extension and the freeway west to MD 3 were designated MD 100 . MD 177 was expanded to a divided highway from MD 2 to MD 10 when the latter freeway was extended south from MD 648 to MD 100 between 1987 and 1989 . The divided highway was extended east to Lipin 's Corner in 1997 . Since the late 1970s , heavy traffic on MD 177 east of MD 100 has spurred efforts to build a bypass of the Lake Shore section or widen the highway , projects that have been opposed by residents who fear increased development on the peninsula . Congestion on the highway was eased significantly when lane use signals were added to allow the center lane of the highway to become a travel lane during rush hours in July 1999 . 
 = = Junction list = = 
 The entire route is in Anne Arundel County . 
 = Congolese Independence Speech = 
 The Speech at the Ceremony of the Proclamation of the Congo 's Independence was a short political speech given by Patrice Lumumba on 30 June 1960 . The address marked the independence of Congo @-@ Léopoldville ( the modern @-@ day Democratic Republic of the Congo ) from Belgium and became a famous example of an attack on colonialism . 
 Lumumba , the first Congolese Prime Minister , gave the address during the official independence commemorations at the Palais de la Nation in Léopoldville ( modern @-@ day Kinshasa ) . The ceremony was intended to mark the harmonious end of Belgian rule and was attended by both Congolese and Belgian dignatories , including King Baudouin . Lumumba 's speech , which was itself unscheduled , was in large part a response to Baudouin 's speech which argued that the end of colonial rule in the Congo had been depicted as the culmination of the Belgian " civilising mission " begun by Leopold II in the Congo Free State . 
 Lumumba 's speech , broadcast live on the radio across the world , denounced colonialism and was interpreted as an affront to Belgium and Baudouin personally . While it was well @-@ received within the Congo , it was widely condemned internationally as unnecessarily confrontational and for showing ingratitude at a time when Belgium had granted independence to the state . The speech nearly provoked a diplomatic incident between the Congo and Belgium and Lumumba later gave further speeches attempting to adopt a more conciliatory tone . 
 The speech itself has since been praised for its use of political rhetoric , and is considered a landmark moment in the independence of the Congo . It has also been cited as a contributory factor to the subsequent Congo Crisis and in Lumumba 's murder in 1961 . Since its deliverance , the speech has been widely reprinted and has been depicted in paintings and film . 
 = = Background = = 
 Colonial rule in the Congo began in the late 19th century . King Leopold II of Belgium , frustrated by Belgium 's lack of international power and prestige , attempted to persuade the Belgian government to support colonial expansion around the then @-@ largely unexplored Congo Basin . The Belgian government 's ambivalence about the idea led Leopold to eventually create the colony on his own account . With support from a number of Western countries , who viewed Leopold as a useful buffer between rival colonial powers , Leopold achieved international recognition for a personal colony , the Congo Free State , in 1885 . By the turn of the century , however , the violence of Free State officials against indigenous Congolese and the ruthless system of economic extraction had led to intense diplomatic pressure on Belgium to take official control of the country , which it did in 1908 , creating the Belgian Congo . 
 Belgian rule in the Congo was based around the " colonial trinity " ( trinité coloniale ) of state , missionary and private company interests . The privileging of Belgian commercial interests meant that large amounts of capital flowed into the Congo and that individual regions became specialised . On many occasions , the interests of the government and private enterprise became closely tied and the state helped companies break strikes and remove other barriers imposed by the indigenous population . The country was split into nesting , hierarchically organised administrative subdivisions , and run uniformly according to a set " native policy " ( politique indigène ) — in contrast to the British and the French , who generally favoured the system of indirect rule whereby traditional leaders were retained in positions of authority under colonial oversight . There was also a high degree of racial segregation . Large numbers of white immigrants who moved to the Congo after the end of World War II came from across the social spectrum , but were nonetheless always treated as superior to blacks . 
 An African nationalist movement developed in the Belgian Congo during the 1950s , primarily among the black middle @-@ class évolués . The movement was divided into a number of parties and groups which were broadly divided on ethnic and geographical lines and opposed to one another . The largest , the Mouvement National Congolais ( MNC ) , was a united front organisation dedicated to achieving independence " within a reasonable " time and was led by , among others , Patrice Lumumba . The MNC 's main rival was the Alliance des Bakongo ( ABAKO ) , led by Joseph Kasa @-@ Vubu , who advocated a more radical ideology than the MNC , based around calls for immediate independence and the promotion of regional identity . In the aftermath of rioting in the capital Léopoldville ( modern @-@ day Kinshasa ) in 1959 , the independence of the Congo was agreed at the 30 June 1960 and a constitution ( loi fondamentale ) was agreed , creating a semi @-@ presidential constitution . Kasa @-@ Vubu was proclaimed President , and Lumumba Prime Minister . 
 = = The speech = = 
 = = = Background and context = = = 
 The speech was given as part of the official ceremony held at the Palais de la Nation in Léopoldville ( modern @-@ day Kinshasa ) marking the end of Belgian colonial rule in the country . 
 The official programme for the Independence Day celebrations began with a Te Deum at the Cathedral of Notre @-@ Dame @-@ du @-@ Congo . The service began at 9 : 00 am , after which delegates returned to the Palais de la Nation which had been the residency of the Belgian Governor @-@ General of the Congo . Some leading Congolese musicians , notably Joseph <unk> and his band , Le Grand <unk> et l <unk> Jazz , performed specially @-@ written songs commemorating independence there until 11 : 00 am . These included <unk> Cha Cha , one of <unk> 's best @-@ known works . After this , the official speeches - the main component of the day 's festivities - began . In the audience were dignitaries from both Belgium and the Congo as well as the international press . 
 King Baudouin , representing Belgium , gave the first speech in which he praised the " genius " of his ancestor , King Leopold II , who begun the colonisation of the Congo on his own initiative in the 1880s . Baudouin depicted the end of colonial rule in the Congo as the culmination of the Belgian " civilising mission " and spoke of the close relations he hoped would be maintained between the two countries . Following the end of the King 's speech , Kasa @-@ Vubu gave a short and uncontroversial address thanking the King for his attendance and for his best wishes . Both speeches were applauded vigorously . In a change to the schedule , Joseph Kasongo , the President of the Congolese Assembly who was presiding over the ceremonies , invited Lumumba to give an address as Lumumba had requested him to do so . The invitation came as a surprise to the audience , who had not expected Lumumba to take any part in the ceremony . 
 Kasongo and Thomas Kanza , a member of Lumumba 's government , had been requested to visit Lumumba at his house on the morning of 30 June before the start of the ceremonies to look over an early draft of Lumumba 's planned speech . The Belgian pacifist , Jean Van <unk> , may also have been present at the meeting . Kanza had also spent the car journey to the Te Deum re @-@ reading the speech and making corrections . Lumumba then made his own alterations to the script during the speeches given by Baudouin and Kasa @-@ Vubu . 
 = = = Content = = = 
 The speech begins with Lumumba addressing his speech to the Congolese people and praising independence as the culmination of the struggle of the nationalist movement , rather than the result of Belgian concessions . 
 The speech continued , outlining the personal suffering of the nationalists during the course of the struggle . Lumumba then turned to enumerating the suffering of ordinary Congolese people under colonialism , through forced labour , systematic racial discrimination , land seizure , wealth disparity and physical maltreatment at the hand of the colonial state . 
 Independence , Lumumba argued , had brought the end to these forms of suffering . Through its democratic institutions , Congolese self @-@ government would deliver social justice and fair wages . Racial discrimination and repression would be abolished and the Congo would become " the pride of Africa " and an example to the Pan @-@ African movement . Lumumba called upon other states , particularly Belgium , to support the Congo to establish mutually beneficial relations between the " two equal and independent countries " . He also appealed to the Congolese to abandon internecine tribal factionalism . 
 Concluding , Lumumba appealed to all the Congolese to make sacrifices for the future of the Congo . Lumumba finally called for Congolese people to respect the rights of non @-@ indigenous settlers in the country , and warned that if they breached Congolese laws they would be exiled . The speech finishes with the observation that " the Congo 's independence is a decisive step towards the liberation of the whole African continent " and the exclamations " Long live independence and African unity ! Long live the independent and sovereign Congo ! " 
 The speech was originally delivered in French language . 
 = = = Analysis = = = 
 The speech has been praised for its use of political rhetoric . In particular , the speech has been cited as exemplifying the three functions of rhetoric ; by the way it was framed within the independence proceeding , its deliberative function and oratorical vibrancy . Others have argued that the dynamics between Lumumba , Kasa @-@ Vubu and Baudouin during the ceremony " represent a microcosm of the relations between Africans and Europeans " in early post @-@ colonial Africa , with each representing a different stance towards the others . 
 The speech has been hailed as a " classic of African nationalism " and praised for providing a response to the " patronizing " speech given by Baudouin or as an example of speaking the truth to power It was also praised as a public exposé of traits of colonialism glossed over during the independence ceremonies . 
 Jean @-@ Claude <unk> argued that the speech was the result of Lumumba 's growing frustration with the process of independence which he believed might represent a purely nominal change in government with no real effects . Lumumba blamed Kasa @-@ Vubu and his colleagues for failing to publicly oppose this situation . Gender historians have therefore argued that the speech was the result of Lumumba 's growing feeling of emasculation . Others have pointed to the influence of Belgian Socialist delegates and representatives of the Guinean President , Ahmed Sékou Touré , who had a strongly Marxist ideology , all of whom hoped a public and international denouncement of colonialism would help them politically . 
 David Van <unk> praised the speech as " memorable " , but argued that it damaged Lumumba 's own legacy . Since Lumumba and his party represented only a third of Congolese popular opinion , Van <unk> accused Lumumba 's claim to speak for all Congolese people " divisive " and questioned whether it was appropriate given the context : " Lumumba 's address contained more of a look back than a look forward , more rage and hope , more rancour than magnanimity , and therefore more rebellion than statesmanship " . He also compared it to the Communist Julien Lahaut 's republican heckling of Baudouin 's <unk> in 1950 . Like Lumumba , Lahaut was subsequently murdered after he had " claimed all the attention " at the public event . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The speech was applauded by Congolese delegates in the audience at the Palais de la Nation and broadcast by radio across the country . It was also broadcast live in Belgium by the state broadcaster , RTBF . After its delivery , the ceremonies were halted . Baudouin marched out of the room . A short inspection of local sites was arranged with Kasa @-@ Vubu and lunch was served to cover the delay and an official lunch was held by the Congo River . After the break , Lumumba was persuaded by the outgoing Belgian resident , Walter Ganshof van der Meersch , to give a second speech which attempted to strike a more conciliatory tone between the two countries . In his second speech , Lumumba praised Baudouin and stated that " I would not wish my feelings to be wrongly interpreted " . After Lumumba 's second speech , the official act of independence was signed by Lumumba and the Belgian Prime Minister Gaston Eyskens , as well as by the Foreign Ministers of both countries , bringing the official ceremonies to an end . The delegates then visited a performance of Congolese folklore at the Roi Baudouin Stadium before heading to an evening reception . At this event , Lumumba gave a further conciliatory speech the same evening , written for him by Eyskens and drank a toast to Baudouin . The King , and much of the Belgian delegation , returned to Brussels on 1 July . 
 The majority international reaction was extremely critical of Lumumba . Lumumba 's attack on colonialism was especially interpreted as an attack on Belgium itself and nearly provoked a diplomatic incident between the two countries . International observers though the speech unwise , ungrateful and tactless . The confrontational attitude taken by Lumumba appeared to confirm Belgian and American suspicions that Lumumba was a dangerous radical . Between September 1960 and January 1961 , partly at the instigation of the two countries , Lumumba was deposed from power , arrested and executed with the complicity of both the Congolese and Katangese governments . 
 The initial address received a mixed reception within the Congo . In some quarters it was widely supported . However , some believed that it merely highlighted the fact that Lumumba was inexperienced ( and overly provocative ) in comparison with Kasa @-@ Vubu 's measured and diplomatic approach . Members of Lumumba 's own party , including Kanza , praised the speech itself but believed that the venue in which it had been delivered was inappropriate . Lumumba 's address was also notably acclaimed by figures within the international Pan @-@ African and Black Power movements including Malcolm X. The speech may have further heightened racial violence between white settlers and native Congolese which were already distrustful . As a result of the threat to its expatriates , Belgium deployed troops to the country and , amid mounting violence , several regions of the Congo , notably Katanga , seceded and declared their own independence , starting five @-@ years of violence and political unrest known as the Congo Crisis . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 While the speech was filmed during its delivery , the film of the speech has only survived as fragments and in some sections only the original audio survives . Transcriptions of the speech were later published in multiple print editions , some of which were altered as propaganda to show Lumumba in a better light after his death in 1961 . The main collected edition of Lumumba 's speeches , Lumumba Speaks , was prefaced by the French philosopher Jean @-@ Paul Satre . Today , the speech forms an important part of Congolese popular memory , particularly among " Lumumbists " who claim to represent Lumumba 's ideological position in modern Congolese politics . 
 The scene was painted by the noted Congolese artist <unk> Kanda @-@ <unk> in his distinctive cartoon @-@ like style . The result , entitled <unk> Lumumba <unk> and painted in 1972 or 1973 , hangs in the Tropenmuseum in Amsterdam . The speech itself was dramatized in the 2000 film , Lumumba , directed by Raoul Peck in which Eriq <unk> played the role of Lumumba . It was backed by a specially composed score , entitled Le Discours ( " The Speech " ) , by the French composer Jean @-@ Claude Petit . 
 = Lemony Snicket 's A Series of Unfortunate Events = 
 Lemony Snicket 's A Series of Unfortunate Events is a 2004 American black comedy fantasy film directed by Brad Silberling . It is a film adaptation of A Series of Unfortunate Events by Lemony Snicket , covering the first three books The Bad Beginning , The Reptile Room , and The Wide Window . The film stars Jim Carrey as the villainous Count Olaf who adopts three wealthy orphan siblings in an attempts to steal their late parents ' fortune . Nickelodeon Movies purchased the film rights to Daniel Handler 's book series in 2000 and soon began development of a film with Barry Sonnenfeld attached to direct . Handler adapted the screenplay and courted Jim Carrey for Count Olaf . Sonnenfeld eventually left over budget concerns in January 2003 and Brad Silberling took over . Robert Gordon rewrote Handler 's script , and principal photography started in November 2003 . A Series of Unfortunate Events was entirely shot using sound stages and backlots at Paramount Pictures and Downey Studios . The film received generally favorable reviews from critics , grossed approximately $ 209 million worldwide , and won the Academy Award for Best Makeup . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Lemony Snicket ( Jude Law ) is documenting the whereabouts of the Baudelaire children from inside a clock tower . Violet Baudelaire ( Emily Browning ) , her intelligent brother Klaus ( Liam Aiken ) , and their baby sister Sunny ( Kara and Shelby Hoffman ) are orphaned when a mysterious fire destroys their house and kills their parents . Mr. Poe ( Timothy Spall ) , in charge of the Baudelaire fortune , entrusts them to their closest relative , Count Olaf ( Jim Carrey ) , who only wants their money and makes them do harsh chores . 
 On the day that Olaf receives full custody , he drives to a gas station claiming that he is buying soda . However , it turns out that he parked the car , with the children inside , directly on a railroad crossing next to the gas station in the hope of it getting hit by a train . Thankfully , Violet and Klaus are able to throw a nearby switch in the tracks , causing the train to miss them . Mr. Poe then arrives at the scene , mistakenly thinking that Sunny was driving the car , and takes the children away . Olaf promises that he will find them . 
 The orphans are then taken to stay with their uncle , Dr. Montgomery Montgomery ( Billy Connolly ) , a kind , caring , and rather lonely ( until the children came along ) herpetologist , who is planning to take the children with him on a study in Peru . However , Olaf arrives in disguise as an Italian scientist named Stephano . Violet tries to tell Monty the truth , but he thinks that Stephano is after a snake called The Incredibly Deadly Viper . Monty is found dead the following morning and the authorities have been tricked into thinking that the viper was responsible , but Sunny is able to prove it is actually a friendly , harmless creature . 
 Mr. Poe then takes the children to live with their Aunt Josephine ( Meryl Streep ) , an irrationally afraid woman who is obsessed with proper grammar . While shopping at a market , Violet and Klaus encounter Olaf , disguised as a sailor named Captain Sham who pretends to be romantically interested in Josephine . When the <unk> get home after shopping , Josephine is gone and a hurricane is approaching . Klaus decodes a note left by Josephine and discovers that she is in Curdled Cave . During the hurricane , the children discover in a secret room that there were people investigating fires . The children escape the house before it falls in to the lake . 
 The children sail on Lake Lachrymose , finding Josephine . Before they reach civilization , their boat is attacked by leeches ; Olaf appears , takes the children away and abandons Josephine in the boat to be eaten alive by the leeches . 
 The <unk> are then placed back in Olaf 's custody after he " rescued " them . Olaf and Violet are then immediately involved in a play called The Marvelous Marriage , which involves their characters being married . However , Olaf has set up the performance to be an actual legal marriage because the law states that if relatives are married they are entitled to their spouses ' money . Olaf enlists the help of his neighbor Justice Strauss ( Catherine O 'Hara ) to perform in the " play " and unwittingly officiate the marriage . Olaf explains to Violet that Sunny is being held hostage in a cage and if Violet does not say her " lines " or finds a loophole , Sunny will fall to her death . The ceremony goes as Olaf planned and he reveals that the marriage is legal , to the horror of the judge and audience . 
 Klaus escapes and finds a secret part of Olaf 's estate . After adjusting an eye @-@ shaped window , Klaus realizes that it was Olaf that caused their family mansion to catch fire . Klaus uses the window to burn the marriage certificate , foiling the Count 's plans . Olaf is tried for his action and sentenced to be put through the hardships he had caused the children , and a life sentence in prison . However , when a jury of his peers overturn his sentence , Olaf escapes . Violet , Klaus and Sunny are allowed to visit their old home one last time . A letter lost in the mail finally arrives , and inside is a spyglass announcing their family 's secret society . Snicket recounts that despite the children 's misfortune , they still had each other thus making them " Very Fortunate Indeed " . 
 = = Cast = = 
 The film featured uncredited appearances by Jane Lynch as a realtor , Helena Bonham Carter as Beatrice Baudelaire , and Dustin Hoffman as a critic . 
 Author Daniel Handler initially viewed Count Olaf as being a James Mason @-@ type . Carrey was not familiar with the book series when he was cast , but he became a fan of the series . " Handler 's books are just a bold and original way to tell a children 's story , " the actor explained . Carrey was also attracted to the role despite self @-@ parody concerns . Director Brad Silberling was open to Carrey 's idea of improvisation for various scenes , especially the Stephano and Captain Sham alter egos . To make his prosthetic makeup more comfortable and easier to apply , Carrey shaved his head bald for the part . The actor 's inspiration for Olaf 's voice was combining the voices of Orson Welles and Béla Lugosi . 
 Emily Browning was cast as Violet Baudelaire when she auditioned at a casting call in Australia . She was sent Handler 's original script when Barry Sonnenfeld was planning to direct , and she screen tested for the part using an English accent . The actor was not cast until Silberling took over ; her character 's accent was then changed to American . Browning became a fan of the books after reading Handler 's original script . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Nickelodeon Movies purchased the film rights of the A Series of Unfortunate Events book series in May 2000 . Paramount Pictures , owner of Nickelodeon Movies , agreed to co @-@ finance , along with Scott Rudin . Various directors , including Terry Gilliam and Roman Polanski , were interested in making the film . One of author Daniel Handler 's favorite candidates was Guy Maddin . In June 2002 , Barry Sonnenfeld was hired to direct . He was chosen because he previously collaborated with Rudin and because of his black comedy directing style from The Addams Family , Addams Family Values and Get Shorty . Sonnenfeld referred to the Lemony Snicket books as his favorite children 's stories . The director hired Handler to write the script with the intention of making Lemony Snicket as a musical , and cast Jim Carrey as Count Olaf in September 2002 . 
 The film suffered setbacks in development in December 2002 . Rudin left Unfortunate Events over budget concerns . While Sonnenfeld and Carrey remained , Sonnenfeld admitted he was skeptical of Paramount 's $ 100 million budget . The studio decided that changing the shoot from Hollywood to Wilmington , North Carolina would be less expensive . The April 2003 start date was also pushed back . Paramount eventually settled the situation in January 2003 by enlisting help from DreamWorks to co @-@ finance the film , but Sonnenfeld vacated the director 's position . Rudin and Sonnenfeld had no involvement with the film afterward , but were credited as executive producers . Carrey remained with approval over the hiring of the next director . 
 Brad Silberling signed on to direct in February 2003 . He was not familiar with the book series when he was first approached . He quickly read the first three books and was excited that " Hollywood was taking a chance to put over $ 100 million to adapt these inventive children 's books onto screen " . Handler , who wrote eight drafts of the script for Sonnenfeld , was replaced by Robert Gordon in May 2003 . Handler approved of the changes that were made to his original screenplay . " I was offered credit on the film for screenwriting by the Writers Guild of America , " Handler continued , " but I didn 't take it because I didn 't write it . I felt like it would be an insult to the guy who did . " 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Filming was set to begin in October 2003 , but it was pushed back . Principal photography for Lemony Snicket 's A Series of Unfortunate Events began on November 10 , 2003 , using the sound stages and backlot at Paramount Studios in Hollywood . Director Brad Silberling avoided using too many digital or chroma key effects because he wanted the younger actors to feel as if they were working in a realistic environment . Olaf 's mansion occupied two sound stages , while the graveyard and the ruins of the Baudelaire mansion were constructed on the Paramount back lot . After 21 weeks of shooting at Paramount , production then moved to Downey Studios , a former NASA facility in Downey , California , for eight more weeks . Downey housed the circular railroad crossing set complete with forced perspective scenery , as well as a newly constructed water tank complete with over one million gallons of water . The water tank was instrumental in filming scenes set at <unk> Beach , Lake Lachrymose , Damocles Dock and Curdled Cave . Filming for A Series of Unfortunate Events ended on May 29 , 2004 . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 Silberling , production designer Rick Heinrichs and costume designer Colleen Atwood all aimed for the film 's setting to be ambiguous , giving it a " timeless " feel . Heinrichs also added steampunk designs to the period . To contribute to the setting , Silberling hired Emmanuel Lubezki as the cinematographer because he was impressed with the trio 's work on Sleepy Hollow . 
 Lubezki compared the cinematic similarities to Sleepy Hollow , notably the monochromatic look of both films . He also chose a specific color palette backdrop for A Series of Unfortunate Events . " The story is very episodic , so we picked a different color scheme for each section . For example " , Lubezki continued , " Count Olaf 's house has a lot of greens , blacks and grays ; the house of Uncle Monty has a lot of greens and browns and a bit of yellow ; and the house of Aunt Josephine has blues and blacks . " The railroad crossing set was constructed on a cyclorama , which was the most ambitious setpiece for the art department on using elements of " in house " special effects and matte paintings . 
 = = = Visual effects = = = 
 Industrial Light & Magic ( ILM ) , supervised by Stefen Fangmeier , created the film 's 505 visual effects @-@ shots . The filmmakers used as few digital effects as possible , though the train and smoke for the railroad crossing scene was entirely created using computer animation . ILM also used color grading techniques for the Lake Lachrymose scene , which required complete animation for the leeches . The digital animators studied footage of the 2003 Atlantic hurricane season to accurately depict Hurricane Herman , which was ILM 's most ambitious use of computer @-@ generated imagery ( CGI ) for the film . Nexus Productions designed the opening " Littlest Elf " animated sequence by modeling it after stop motion animation and completing it with computer animation . The snakes at Uncle Monty 's house were a combination of real snakes and animatronics . The animatronics , primarily the Incredibly Deadly Viper , were used as reference models that ILM later enhanced using CGI . Because working with infants was sometimes risky in producing a film , four scenes involving Sunny Baudelaire required CGI with motion capture technology . Among these are the shot of Sunny hanging on to a table by her teeth , catching a spindle with her mouth and the scene where she is entangled with the Incredibly Deadly Viper . Animation supervisor Colin Brady used his baby daughter for motion capture recording . A remote controlled animatronic of Sunny was also designed by Kevin Yagher . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 In October 2002 , Nickelodeon Movies hired Activision ( who actually had a partnership with DreamWorks ) to create the film 's tie @-@ in video game . The agreement also included options for sequels . Director Brad Silberling delivered his first cut of the film to the studio in August 2004 . Fearing his original version was " too dark " , Paramount and DreamWorks conducted test screenings . The film was then re @-@ edited over family @-@ friendliness concerns . Given its December release , the film 's marketing campaign was criticized for being a deliberately anti @-@ holiday comedy with taglines like , " Taking the cheer out of Christmas " and " <unk> . Misadventures . Mayhem . Oh Joy . " The premiere for Lemony Snicket 's A Series of Unfortunate Events was held at the Cinerama Dome on December 13 , 2004 . A 20 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 1 @,@ 900 m2 ) tent display on Vine Street was decorated with pieces from the film 's sets . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Lemony Snicket 's a Series of Unfortunate Events was released on DVD and VHS on April 26 , 2005 . A Portuguese @-@ labeled All @-@ Region Blu @-@ ray was released in 2012 and then an American Region A Blu @-@ ray was released on September 9 , 2014 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The film was released in the United States and Canada on December 17 , 2004 in 3 @,@ 620 theaters , earning $ 30 @,@ 061 @,@ 756 in its opening weekend . In its run , A Series of Unfortunate Events managed to stay in the number one position for its first week , before facing competition from Meet the Fockers , The Aviator and Coach Carter . The film eventually grossed $ 118 @,@ 634 @,@ 549 in US totals and $ 90 @,@ 439 @,@ 096 elsewhere , coming to a worldwide total of $ 209 @,@ 073 @,@ 645 . It was the highest grossing film under the Nickelodeon Movies banner until being surpassed by The Last Airbender , Rango , The Adventures of Tintin : The Secret of the Unicorn , Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles and The SpongeBob Movie : Sponge Out of Water . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Lemony Snicket 's A Series of Unfortunate Events received generally positive reviews . On Rotten Tomatoes , the film has a rating of 72 % , based on 160 reviews , with an average rating of 6 @.@ 7 / 10 . The site 's critical consensus reads , " Although it softens the nasty edges of its source material , Lemony Snicket 's A Series of Unfortunate Events is a gothic visual treat , and it features a hilariously manic turn from Jim Carrey as the evil Count Olaf . " On Metacritic , gave the film a score of 62 out of 100 , based on 37 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " . Robert K. Elder of the Chicago Tribune praised Rick Heinrichs 's production design and Jim Carrey for having a balanced performance as a scene stealer . Elder called the film " exceptionally clever , hilariously gloomy and bitingly subversive . " Desson Thomson from The Washington Post reasoned over a fellow film @-@ goer 's characterization of Count Olaf , " Olaf is a humorless villain in the book . He 's not amusing like Carrey at all . To which I would counter : If you can 't let Carrey be Carrey , put someone boring and less expensive in the role . In his various disguises he 's rubbery , inventive and improvisationally inspired . I particularly liked his passing imitation of a dinosaur . " Ty Burr , writing in The Boston Globe , observed , " Director Brad Silberling has essentially made a Tim Burton movie without the weird shafts of adolescent pain . At the same time , Silberling 's not a hack like Chris Columbus , and Snicket has more zip and inspired <unk> than the first two Harry Potter films . The film 's no masterpiece , but at least you 're in the hands of people who know what they 're doing . The movie , like the books , flatters children 's innate sense that the world is not a perfect place and that anyone who insists otherwise is trying to sell you something . How you deal with the cognitive dissonance of a $ 125 million Hollywood picture telling you this is up to you . At least there are no Lemony Snicket Happy Meals . Yet . " Internet reviewer James Berardinelli felt that " the film is first and foremost a fantasy , but there are dark currents running just beneath the surface . I give Silberling credit for not allowing them to swallow the film . Lemony Snicket 's A Series of Unfortunate Events manages to remain witty throughout . " Roger Ebert gave a mixed review : " Jim Carrey is over the top as Count Olaf , but I suppose a character named Count Olaf is over the top by definition . I liked the film , but I 'll tell you what . I think this one is a tune @-@ up for the series , a trial run in which they figure out what works and what needs to be tweaked . The original Spider @-@ Man was a disappointment , but the same team came back and made Spider @-@ Man 2 , the best superhero movie ever made . " Scott Foundas of Variety gave a negative review , criticizing the filmmakers for sacrificing the storyline in favor of visual elements such as set design and cinematography . He wrote , " A Series of Unfortunate Events suggests what Mary Poppins might have looked like had Tim Burton directed it . Not surprisingly , Burton 's longtime production designer Rick Heinrichs was responsible for the sets , while ace Emmanuel Lubezki ( Burton 's Sleepy Hollow ) contributed the expressionistic lighting schemes . " 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Makeup designer Valli O 'Reilly and Bill Corso won the Academy Award for Best Makeup . Production designer Rick Heinrichs and set decorator Cheryl <unk> ( Art Direction ) , Colleen Atwood ( Costume Design ) and composer Thomas Newman ( Original Music Score ) were also nominated for their work at 77th Academy Awards . The film lost the Saturn Award for Best Fantasy Film to Spider @-@ Man 2 , but was honored for its DVD special edition release . O 'Reilly and Corso were also nominated for the Saturn Award for Best Make @-@ up , but lost to Hellboy . 
 = = Cancelled franchise and future = = 
 Paramount Pictures , DreamWorks Pictures and Nickelodeon Movies hoped the film would become a franchise like the Harry Potter film series . Jim Carrey thought his character would be good as the basis for a film franchise since it would allow him to dive into a new role . " I don 't have a deal [ for a sequel ] , but it 's one that I wouldn 't mind doing again because there are so many characters , " the actor explained in December 2004 . " I mean , it 's just so much fun . It 's so much fun being a bad actor playing a character ... " In May 2005 , producer Laurie MacDonald said " Lemony Snicket is still something Paramount is interested in pursuing and we 're going to be talking with them more . " 
 In October 2008 , Daniel Handler said that " a sequel does seem to be in the works . Paramount has had quite a few corporate <unk> , which has led to many a delay . Of course , many , many plans in Hollywood come to naught , but I 'm assured that another film will be made . Someday . Perhaps . " In June 2009 , Silberling confirmed he still talked about the project with Handler , and suggested the sequel be a stop motion film because the lead actors have grown too old . " In an odd way , the best thing you could do is actually have Lemony Snicket say to the audience , ' Okay , we pawned the first film off as a mere dramatization with actors . Now I 'm afraid I ’ m going to have to show you the real thing . ' " 
 In November 2014 , Netflix was in talks of creating an online television series for all of the books . Barry Sonnenfeld , who was in original talks to direct the film , will direct the series , which is set to be released online in 2016 . Neil Patrick Harris has been cast to play Count Olaf . 
 = = Video game = = 
 A video game based on the books and film ( more so the film , as the name and many plot elements seen in the movie but not the book are seen ) was released in 2004 by <unk> Games and Activision for the PlayStation 2 , GameCube , Xbox , Game Boy Advance , and the PC as Lemony Snicket 's A Series of Unfortunate Events . The player plays as all three orphans at points in the game , and encounters characters such as Mr. Poe , Uncle Monty and Aunt Josephine , along with villains such as Count Olaf , the hook @-@ handed man , the white @-@ faced women , and the bald @-@ headed man . The game , like the movie , follows only the first three books in the series . Although never mentioned in the game , there are some references to <unk> , such as in the first level where a package is delivered from the " Very Fast Delivery Service . " The note attached to the package also reads at the end , " P.S. The world is quiet here " , which is the motto of <unk> 
 = Medusa ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Medusa " is the twelfth episode of the eighth season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network on February 11 , 2001 . The episode was written by Frank Spotnitz and directed by Richard Compton . " Medusa " is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . The episode received a Nielsen rating of 8 @.@ 2 and was viewed by 13 @.@ 8 million viewers . Overall , the episode received mixed reviews from critics . 
 The series centers on FBI special agents Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) and her new partner John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) — following the alien abduction of her former partner , Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) — who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . In this episode , a string of bizarre deaths in the tunnels of the Boston subway system sees Doggett join a team of professionals underground to investigate . Meanwhile , Scully has to defy the train authorities above land , who are determined to get the trains up and running within hours . 
 " Medusa " was allotted a " huge budget " , due mostly to the fact that a replica of the Boston subway had to be recreated . Robert Patrick later called the eventual set " the biggest damned thing I 'd seen in my life . " Cheri Montesanto @-@ Medcalf and Matthew Mungle , the show 's make @-@ up effect producers , used several unorthodox ingredients to create the effect of melted flesh ; in addition to the use of normal prosthetic make @-@ up , the two also used a combination of figs and Fruit Roll @-@ Ups . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Boston , an undercover cop waits for the subway , alone . Suddenly , a suspicious man appears , jumping the fare barrier . Eventually , they both get onto a train and the police officer draws his gun as the man starts to walk towards him from behind . Suddenly , the subway comes to a screeching halt , flashes of light are seen , and the train loses power . Later , when the train is back up and running , a batch of commuters enter the subway car and find the undercover cop with the flesh on half his face and his left arm stripped down to the bone . 
 Agents Scully and Doggett arrive at the operations center to investigate . However , they are rudely greeted by Deputy Chief Karras and Lieutenant Bianco of the transit police ; the two eagerly want the FBI to get the job done fast in order that subways can be reopened in five hours , and Karras is also irritated that Scully performed an autopsy on the body . Even after an autopsy , Scully has no idea what killed the man , and the CDC is unable to find any biological or chemical agents in the subway . 
 Doggett and Scully are soon introduced to a strike @-@ force that will be going into the subway to investigate . The group includes Steven Melnick , a structural engineer and Dr. <unk> Lyle , CDC employee specializing in pathogens . Scully , however , decides the plan will work better if Doggett acts as her eyes and ears while she analyzes the situation from up in the CDC . Using cameras and microphones , she will watch and hear what is happening . After the plans are made . Doggett leads the team into the dark tunnel . 
 While in the tunnels , Melnick gets a burn on the back of his neck suggesting a chemical leak . However , the test of the nearby puddle shows nothing dangerous : It is just salt water . Melnick mentions that the tunnels run along the harbor in some places and that they get sea water leakages from time to time . Moving ahead , the team finds an abandoned section of the subway tunnels . Out of the tunnel bursts a man with his rib cage and teeth exposed who knocks Doggett down : he is the suspected robber , eaten away like the other man . His condition proves that he did not kill the man and that there may , in fact , might be a contagion . While looking around , the teams discover three bodies with the same gruesome injuries , wrapped in plastic . It soon becomes clear that someone is covering up the problem in the subway . 
 Lyle spots an unknown person running away from them in the subway and the team follows . When the group approaches the spot where the train lost power , Melnick starts crying out in pain . Visible electrical flashes start destroying the skin on his left arm . Scully tells Doggett to pour water on it , which stops the flashes . Lyle takes the badly injured Melnick to the surface and Doggett continues onward with Bianco . When Melnick returns to the surface , he seems to be getting worse , but Lyle appears healthy . Scully then sees the three bodies being taken away by non @-@ CDC hazmat people . When Scully confronts Karras about this , he says that he is organizing it . Scully tells Karras that she has already organized the CDC to collect the bodies and accuses Karras of attempting a cover @-@ up . Although Karras tries to deny his involvement , he eventually allows her to send the bodies to the actual CDC . 
 Back in the tunnels , Doggett notices a green glow on Bianco in a dimly lit former subway station . As such , he refuses to allow the lieutenant to leave . Bianco runs away , forcing Doggett to give chase . He learns from Scully that Karras has gone ahead of plan and allowed the passengers onto the platforms and the subway will start back up , despite the danger . After analyzing various water samples found at the scene , Scully meets with Dr. Kai Bowe , a marine biologist , who explains that the sample contains a unique microscopic sea creature called a medusa which are made out of calcium and are bioluminescent . However , Bowe does not know why the electrical reaction happens . When Doggett finds the wounded Bianco , he finds that his condition has gotten worse . Doggett then carries Bianco on his back and helps him continue through the tunnels . They soon encounter a boy with no signs of the luminous green substance on him . Scully realizes that sweat is causing the chemical electrical reaction since it is conductive to calcium ions . The boy does not have well developed sweat glands yet so the medusas are not affecting him . Doggett follows the boy to a major leak from the bay with the green glow on all the walls . Suddenly , an oncoming subway approaches the group — Karras has allowed the subway to resume schedule . Doggett uses Bianco ’ s gun to connect the third rail with the water and kill the medusas , preventing further exposure . 
 Later , Scully comes to see Doggett in the hospital . Scully informs him that Bianco and Melnick are with plastic surgeons , the boy is with social services , and no criminal charges will be pressed against Karras since the electrical charge of the third rail destroyed the proof of the medusas in the tunnel . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Medusa " was written by executive producer Frank Spotnitz and directed by Richard Compton . Reportedly , because of the scope of the episode , a " huge budget " was allotted for the entry . Because the episode was written to take place in a subway system , a set meeting the requirements of the script had to be created . The eventual set was designed to mirror the actual Boston subway , a system that serves more than 700 @,@ 000 people a day . According to star Robert Patrick , " They got us in there , and we did it , and they built a huge subway tunnel set on a soundstage . " Patrick later described the set as " the biggest damned thing I 'd ever seen in my life . " In real life , the Boston subway system is " fondly " called the T , short for the Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority . In " Medusa " , the " T " , was changed to an " M " " for fictional purposes " . 
 Cheri Montesanto @-@ Medcalf and Matthew Mungle , the show 's make @-@ up effect producers , used several unorthodox ingredients to create the effect of melted flesh ; in addition to the use of normal prosthetic make @-@ up , the two also used a combination of figs and Fruit Roll @-@ Ups . Several of the characters in the episode were named after real @-@ life individuals . The characters of <unk> Lyle and Kai Bowe were named after two Writers Guild trainees on The X @-@ Files staff who served during the first part of the eighth season . Furthermore , the character Steven Melnick is named after the Vice President of Media Relations for 20th Century Fox Television . Melnick had formerly served as the publicist for the series . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Medusa " first aired on Fox on February 11 , 2001 . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 8 @.@ 2 , meaning that it was seen by 8 @.@ 2 % of the nation 's estimated households . The episode was viewed by 8 @.@ 27 million households , and 13 @.@ 8 million viewers . The episode ranked as the 41st most @-@ watched episode for the week ending February 11 . The episode subsequently debuted in the United Kingdom on the BBC Two on May 26 , 2002 . Fox promoted the episode with the tagline " Underneath the street lies the ultimate in terror . " 
 Critical reception to the episode was mostly mixed . Television Without Pity writer Jessica Morgan rated the episode a " B " . Despite the moderate praise , however , Morgan did make a jest at the portrayal of the subway in the show , noting that it was not realistic ; she wrote that the set was the " cleanest , emptiest subway station in world [ … ] No urine . No trash . It 's nicer than my apartment , really . " Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen gave the episode a mixed review and rated it two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five . Despite writing that " on paper [ ' Medusa ' is ] the right episode at the right time " , the two criticized the episode , noting that " the teaser never really makes sense in light of the relations offered , the appearance of the mute boy is a messy contrivance , and the ending is too abrupt . " 
 Zack Handlen of The A.V. Club awarded the episode an " B – " . While noting that the episode possessed " a few decent ideas , and a wasted setting " , the " story never sparks " . He largely blamed the episode 's antagonistic organism , noting that they are not " all that memorable " and " not even all that monster @-@ y " . Despite this , he wrote positively of the show 's use of Scully , arguing that , " the fun of the episode is watching Scully watch Doggett and his team … slowly work through the closed off subway tunnels , finding bodies wrapped in plastic and other mysteries beside . " 
 Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique gave the episode a slightly negative review and awarded it one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of four . Despite noting , " after episodes about butt @-@ crawling and vomiting , it 's a relief to have one in which people die when their skin and muscles are fried away by microscopic sea creatures called medusas " , Vitaris was critical of the plot , likening it to " cliche [ d ] " 1970 's movies that featured the " obstreperous official insisting the plane must fly or the skyscraper is fire @-@ proof , even when the potential for catastrophe is staring him in the face . " Spotnitz later admitted during a Reddit <unk> that the episode was his least @-@ favorite that he had written because " the concept just wasn 't clear or compelling enough to sustain the hour . " 
 = Heinz @-@ Wolfgang Schnaufer = 
 Heinz @-@ Wolfgang Schnaufer ( 16 February 1922 – 15 July 1950 ) was a German Luftwaffe night fighter pilot and is the highest scoring night fighter ace in the history of aerial warfare . A flying ace or fighter ace is a military aviator credited with shooting down five or more enemy aircraft during combat . All of his 121 victories were claimed during World War II at night , mostly against British four @-@ engine bombers , for which he was awarded the coveted Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves , Swords and Diamonds ( German : Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes mit Eichenlaub , Schwertern und Brillanten ) on 16 October 1944 , Germany 's highest military decoration at the time . He was nicknamed " The Spook of St. Trond " , from the location of his unit 's base in occupied Belgium . 
 Born in Calw , Schnaufer grew up in the Weimar Republic and Third Reich as the first of four children of Alfred Schnaufer and his wife Martha . The family owned and operated a winery business . Schnaufer , a good student and already a glider pilot at school , began military service in the Wehrmacht by joining the Luftwaffe in 1939 . After training at various pilot and fighter @-@ pilot schools , he was posted to Nachtjagdgeschwader 1 ( NJG 1 — 1st Night Fighter Wing ) , operating on the Western Front , in November 1941 . He flew his first combat sorties in support of Operation Cerberus , the breakout of the German ships Scharnhorst , Gneisenau , and Prinz Eugen from Brest . Schnaufer participated in the Defence of the Reich campaign from 1942 onwards , in which he would achieve most of his success . He claimed his first aerial victory on the night of 1 / 2 June 1942 . As the war progressed , he accumulated further victories and he later became a squadron leader and group commander . He was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross on 31 December 1943 for reaching 42 aerial victories . 
 Schnaufer achieved his 100th aerial victory on 9 October 1944 and was awarded the Diamonds to his Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves and Swords on 16 October . He was appointed Geschwaderkommodore ( wing commander ) of Nachtjagdgeschwader 4 ( NJG 4 ) on 4 November 1944 . By the end of hostilities , Schnaufer 's night fighter crew held the unique distinction that every member — radio operator and air gunner — was decorated with the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross . Schnaufer was taken prisoner of war by British forces in May 1945 . After his release a year later , he returned to his home town and took over the family wine business . He sustained injuries in a road accident on 13 July 1950 during a wine @-@ purchasing visit to France , and died in a Bordeaux hospital two days later . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Heinz @-@ Wolfgang Schnaufer was born on 16 February 1922 in Calw , located in the Free People 's State of Württemberg of the German Reich , during the Weimar Republic era . He was the first of four children of mechanical engineer ( <unk> @-@ Ingenieur ) and merchant Alfred Schnaufer and his wife Martha , née Frey . The other three children were his brother Manfred , his sister <unk> and his brother Eckart . His father owned and operated the family business , the winery Schnaufer @-@ <unk> ( lit . " Schnaufer 's Castle Mountain Winery " ) , in the <unk> , Calw . 
 The winery had been founded by both his father and his grandfather , Hermann Schnaufer , in 1919 , shortly after World War I. Following the death of his grandfather in 1928 the winery was run by his father alone . When his father unexpectedly died in 1940 , his mother ran the business until the children took over the winery after World War II . The company then expanded the business and in addition to the winery offered wine imports , sparkling wines , and a distillery for wine and liqueur . The distribution channel worked with agents and sales offices throughout Germany . 
 Schnaufer , at the age of six , went to the local Volksschule ( primary school ) at Calw . After completing his fourth grade , he received two years of schooling at the Oberschule , also in Calw . At an early age he expressed his wish to join an organisation of military character and joined the Deutsches Jungvolk ( German Youth ) in 1933 . After completing his sixth grade at school he took and passed the entry examination at the <unk> National Political Institutes of Education ( <unk> <unk> — Napola ) , a secondary boarding school founded under the recently established Nazi state . The goal of the Napola schools was to raise a new generation for the political , military and administrative leadership of the Third Reich . Schnaufer was considered a very good student , finishing top of his class every year . Aged seventeen he graduated with his Abitur ( diploma ) in November 1939 with distinction . At the Napola school he also received the Reich Youth Sports Badge ( <unk> ) , the base @-@ certificate of the German Life Saving Association ( Deutsche Lebens @-@ <unk> @-@ Gesellschaft ) , the bronze Hitler Youth @-@ Performance Badge ( HJ @-@ <unk> ) , and completed his B @-@ license to fly glider aircraft . In 1939 Schnaufer was one of two students posted to the Napola in Potsdam . The Flying Platoon ( <unk> ) stationed in Potsdam centralised all the destined flyers from all the <unk> . Here he learned to fly glider aircraft , at first short hops on the DFS SG 38 <unk> , and later on the two @-@ seater <unk> <unk> 4 which was towed by a Klemm Kl 25 . During his stay at Potsdam , the film producer Karl Ritter was making the Ufa film Cadets in Potsdam . The Napola had detached two companies to work on the film , among them Schnaufer . It remains unclear exactly what role he played in this film . 
 Following his graduation from school , Schnaufer passed his entry exams for officer cadets of the Luftwaffe . He joined the Luftwaffe on 15 November 1939 and underwent his basic military training at the <unk> 42 ( 42nd Flight Training Regiment ) at <unk> . Schnaufer was appointed as Fahnenjunker ( cadet ) on 1 April 1940 . He then received his flight training at the Flugzeugführerschule A / B 3 ( <unk> A / B 3 — flight school for the pilot license ) at <unk> , now the Cottbus @-@ Drewitz Airport . He completed his A / B flight training on 20 August 1940 . He was trained to fly the Focke @-@ Wulf Fw 44 , Fw 56 and Fw 58 , and the Heinkel He 72 , HD 41 and He 51 , the Bücker Bü 131 , the Klemm Kl 35 , the Arado Ar 66 and Ar 96 , the Gotha Go 145 and the Junkers W 34 and A 35 . 
 Schnaufer then attended the advanced Flugzeugführerschule C 3 ( <unk> C 3 — advanced flight school ) at Alt <unk> near Torgau and the blind flying school Blindflugschule 2 ( BFS 2 — 2nd blind flying school ) at Neuburg an der Donau from August 1940 to May 1941 . This qualified him to fly multi @-@ engine aircraft . During this assignment he was promoted to Fähnrich ( cadet sergeant ) on 1 September 1940 , to Oberfähnrich ( rank equivalent to Company Sergeant Major ) on 1 February 1941 and to the officer rank of Leutnant ( second lieutenant ) on 1 April 1941 . He was then posted for ten weeks to the Zerstörerschule ( destroyer school ) at Wunstorf near Hanover . At Wunstorf , Schnaufer and the radio operator ( Bordfunker ) Friedrich Rumpelhardt were assigned as an aircrew team on 3 July 1941 . Schnaufer 's previous radio operator had proved unable to cope with aerobatics , and Schnaufer thoroughly tested Rumpelhardt 's ability to cope with aerobatics before they teamed up . Here the two decided to volunteer to fly night fighters to defend against the increasing Royal Air Force ( RAF ) Bomber Command offensive against Germany . Following their training at Wunstorf , the two were sent to the Nachtjagdschule 1 ( 1st night fighter school ) at Schleißheim near Munich , formerly the Zerstörerschule 1 ( ZS 1 — 1st destroyer school ) , to learn the rudiments of night @-@ fighting . The night fighter training was carried out on the Ar 96 , the Fw 58 and the Messerschmitt Bf 110 . Training at night focused on night takeoffs and landings , cooperation with searchlights , radio @-@ beacon direction finding and cross country flights . 
 = = World War II = = 
 In November 1941 , Schnaufer was posted to the II . Gruppe of Nachtjagdgeschwader 1 ( II . / NJG 1 — 2nd group of the 1st Night Fighter Wing ) at the time based at Stade near Hamburg . Here , Schnaufer was assigned to the 5 . Staffel ( 5 . / NJG 1 — 5th squadron of 1st Night Fighter Wing ) . The Bf 110 's of II . / NJG 1 at the time were not equipped with airborne radar such as the Lichtenstein radar . Night fighter intercept tactics had matured since their early beginnings in July 1940 , and II . Gruppe had already been credited with 397 victories . Missions against enemy bombers at the time were usually flown by means of ground @-@ controlled interception , although the Luftwaffe was already experimenting with airborne radar . This air defence system , consisting of a series of radar stations with overlapping coverage , layered three deep , was conceived by Generalleutnant ( lit . Lieutenant General ; equivalent to Major General ) Josef Kammhuber and was organised in the so @-@ called Kammhuber Line . Conceptually , the system was based on a combination of ground @-@ based radar stations , search lights and a <unk> ( fighter pilot control officer ) . The <unk> had to vector the airborne night fighter by means of radio communication to a point of visual interception of the illuminated bomber . These interception tactics were referred to as the Himmelbett ( canopy bed ) procedure . 
 On 15 January 1942 , II . / NJG 1 transferred to Sint @-@ Truiden — Saint @-@ Trond in the French pronunciation — in Belgium . Schnaufer entered front @-@ line service at a time when the RAF was reassessing the air offensive against Germany . The effectiveness of British Bomber Command to accurately hit German targets had been questioned by the War Cabinet Secretary David <unk> @-@ Butt who published the Butt Report in August 1941 . The report in parts concluded that the British crews failed to navigate to , identify , and bomb their targets . Although the report was not widely accepted by senior RAF commanders , Prime Minister Winston Churchill , instructed Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief Richard Peirse that during the winter months only limited operations were to be conducted . Flight operations were also hindered by bad weather in the first months of 1942 , so II . / NJG 1 only saw very limited action during that period . 
 = = = Channel Dash and night fighter pilot = = = 
 On 8 February 1942 , II . Gruppe was transferred to <unk> Air Base without having scored any victories while stationed at Sint @-@ Truiden . The objective of this assignment was to give the German battleships Scharnhorst and Gneisenau and the heavy cruiser Prinz Eugen fighter protection in the breakout from Brest to Germany . The Channel Dash operation ( 11 – 13 February 1942 ) by the Kriegsmarine ( Navy ) was codenamed Operation Cerberus by the Germans . In support of this , the Luftwaffe under the leadership of General der Jagdflieger ( General of the Fighter Force ) Adolf Galland , formulated an air superiority plan dubbed Operation Donnerkeil for the protection of the three German capital ships . II . / NJG 1 was briefed of these plans on the early morning on 12 February . The plan called for protection of the German ships at all costs . The crews were told that if they ran out of ammunition they must ram the enemy aircraft . To the relief of the night fighters they were assigned to the first @-@ line reserves . The operation , which surprised the British , was successful and the night fighters were kept in their reserve role . On the evening of 12 February , II . / NJG 1 was relocated to Amsterdam Airport Schiphol . On the afternoon of 13 February , Schnaufer flew a reconnaissance mission over the <unk> and the North Sea and then relocated to Westerland on the island of Sylt . They then relocated again to Aalborg @-@ West in Denmark from where they made a low @-@ level flight in close formation over the Skaggerak , landing at Stavanger @-@ Sola . Over the following days they operated from the airfield at Forus , making a short term landing at Bergen @-@ Herdla . In total , Schnaufer made two operational flights without contact with the enemy . Following this assignment they relocated to 5 . Staffel 's new base in Germany at Bonn @-@ Hangelar via Oslo @-@ Gardermoen , Aalborg , and Lüneburg . 
 Following the analysis of the Butt Report , the British High Command made a number of decisions in February 1942 that changed the nature of the bomber war against Germany . On 14 February , Air Chief Marshal Norman Bottomley issued the " Area Bombing Directive " , which lifted the restrictions placed on the bombers in 1941 . Air Chief Marshal Arthur Harris , commonly known as " Bomber " Harris , was appointed Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of Bomber Command . These decisions , coupled with the introduction of Gee , a radio navigation system which enabled better target @-@ finding and bombing accuracy , led to the first Allied 1 @,@ 000 bomber raid . In Operation Millennium , the RAF targeted and bombed Cologne on the night of 30 / 31 May 1942 . Schnaufer did not participate in the missions in defence of Cologne . The Himmelbett procedure had limitations in the number of aircraft which can be controlled . Therefore , only the most experienced crews were deployed , and Rumpelhardt and Schnaufer , who had yet to achieve their first aerial victory , were left out . Prior to Operation Millennium , Schnaufer had been appointed Technischer <unk> ( TO — Technical Officer ) on 10 April 1942 and was located at Sint @-@ Truiden again . As a Technical Officer , Schnaufer was responsible for the supervision of all technical aspects such as routine maintenance , servicing and modifications of the Gruppe . In this role he was no longer a member of the 5 . Staffel but was then a member of the Stab ( staff ) of II . / NJG 1 . 
 Schnaufer claimed his first aerial victory on their thirteenth combat mission flown one day after the attack on Cologne on the night 1 / 2 June 1942 . Nominally this was the RAF 's second 1 @,@ 000 bomber raid against Germany , although the attacking force actually numbered 956 aircraft . Schnaufer shot down a Handley Page Halifax south of Louvain in Belgium . The aircraft probably was a Halifax from No. 76 Squadron piloted by Sergeant Thomas Robert Augustus West , which was shot down at 01 : 55 on 2 June 1942 and crashed at Grez @-@ <unk> , 15 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) south of Louvain . West and another member of the crew were killed . This victory was achieved by ground @-@ controlled interception through the Kammhuber Line . Once near to the target , Rumpelhardt had visually found the bomber and directed Schnaufer into attack position from below and astern . The Halifax caught on fire after two firing passes . During this mission the Himmelbett flight officer vectored them to a second bomber , a Bristol Blenheim . The attack had to be aborted after Hauptmann ( Captain ) Walter Ehle shot down the bomber from a more favourable attack position . Shortly before 03 : 00 , they were then flying in the vicinity of Ghent , they spotted another target . Schnaufer made two unsuccessful attacks . During their third attack , which closed the distance to 20 metres ( 66 ft ) , they were hit by the defensive gunfire . Schnaufer was hit in his left calf , the port engine was burning , the rudder control cables were severed , and an electrical short circuit caused the landing lights to be permanently on . Rumpelhardt and Schnaufer considered bailing out but decided to make an attempt for their home airfield after they managed to put out the flames and restart the engine . While Rumpelhardt made radio contact with the Sint @-@ Truiden airbase , Schnaufer landed the aircraft without rudder control and on ailerons and engine @-@ power alone . This was the only time that their aircraft sustained damage in combat or any member of the crew was wounded . Both Rumpelhardt and Schnaufer were awarded the Iron Cross 2nd Class ( Eisernes Kreuz 2 . Klasse ) for their first aerial victory . Schnaufer had hoped that he could stay on active duty and that the bullet lodged in his calf would isolate itself . However , he had to be admitted to a hospital in Brussels from 8 – 25 June for surgery . Rumpelhardt was given home leave until 26 June while Schnaufer was in the hospital . 
 Schnaufer had to wait two months to achieve another victory , claiming the destruction of two Vickers Wellingtons and one Armstrong Whitworth Whitley within the space of 62 minutes in the early hours of 1 August . Rumpelhardt and Schnaufer flew their first combat mission with the Lichtenstein radar on the night 5 / 6 August 1942 . Though they managed to make contact with an enemy aircraft they failed to shoot it down . On the night of the 24 / 25 August 1942 , Schnaufer became an ace ( his fifth aerial victory ) , when he filed a claim for another Wellington . This was the first time Rumpelhardt had guided him into contact using the Lichtenstein airborne radar . His next claim was made on the night of 28 / 29 August . This was probably a No. 78 Squadron Halifax II <unk> , piloted by Sergeant John A. B. Marshall of the Royal Australian Air Force , on a secondary attack against Saarbrücken . The primary attack force was targeting Nuremberg that night . On the night of the 21 / 22 December 1942 , Schnaufer shot down an Avro Lancaster ; his first victory against this type . It was Schnaufer 's seventh victory . Schnaufer may also have been responsible for the destruction of another Lancaster that night . Rumpelhardt and Schnaufer had attacked a Lancaster and observed it catching fire followed by the aircraft plunging earthwards . Hauptmann Wilhelm Herget from I. / Nachtjagdgeschwader 4 ( I. / NJG 4 — 1st group of the 4th Night Fighter Wing ) had also attacked a four @-@ engined bomber in the same vicinity . The draw decided in favour of Herget who was given credit for the destruction of the Lancaster . 
 = = = Rumpelhardt is absent = = = 
 By the end of 1942 , Schnaufer 's total stood at seven , with three victories recorded on the night of 1 August , which had earned him the Iron Cross 1st Class ( Eisernes Kreuz 1 . Klasse ) in early September 1942 . From 29 November to 16 December 1942 , Rumpelhardt was confined to the hospital bed with high fever . Rumpelhardt then attended various officer training courses from February to October 1943 . Between 14 May to 3 October 1943 , Schnaufer claimed 21 further aerial victories in Rumpelhardt 's absence ; 12 with Leutnant Dr. Leo Baro , five with Oberfeldwebel Erich <unk> , two with Oberleutnant Freymann and two with Unteroffizier Heinz <unk> as his radio operators . Unteroffizier Heinz Wenning had also flown with Schnaufer on three flights while Rumpelhardt was out ill . 
 II . / NJG 1 saw little action in the first few months of 1943 , and Schnaufer did not claim his next aerial victory until 14 May 1943 . II . / NJG 1 Himmelbett control areas were located to catch the bombers heading for the Ruhr Area . Bomber Command had only made ten major attacks in that region from January to April 1943 . Consequently , II . / NJG 1 claimed no victories in January , two in February , one in March and three in April . Schnaufer 's number of aerial victories increased again during the Battle of the Ruhr . Schnaufer , with Baro as his radio operator , shot down a No. 214 Squadron Short Stirling <unk> at 02 : 14 on 14 May 1943 on an attack mission against Bochum . Four members of the crew , including pilot Sergeant R. M. Gibney , lost their lives . His next victory on the same mission at 03 : 07 , his 9th overall , was a No. 98 Squadron Halifax <unk> returning from Bochum . The captain , Sergeant G. Dane and 2nd pilot Sergeant J. H. Body were killed in the crash . On the night of 29 / 30 May , Bomber Command attacked Wuppertal . Schnaufer and Baro took off on the first wave at 23 : 51 on 29 May and returned at 02 : 31 on the 30 May . They shot down two Stirlings , one at 00 : 48 and the other at 02 : 22 , and one Halifax at 01 : 43 . 
 In June 1943 , Schnaufer filed claims for a further five aerial victories . Schnaufer and Baro were scrambled on 11 / 12 June in Bomber Command 's attack on Düsseldorf , and on 16 / 17 June in defence of Cologne . However , in both missions they failed to make contact with the enemy . Their next success came when they shot down a Stirling from No. 218 Squadron on 22 June 1943 at 01 : 33 . With Baro on the radio and radar , they managed another victory over a Wellington on 25 June 1943 at 02 : 58 . On 29 June 1943 , the two shot down three bombers in another attack on Cologne , a Lancaster and two Halifax bombers at 01 : 25 , 01 : 45 and 01 : 55 respectively . This brought the number of aerial victories he was credited with up to seventeen . Schnaufer was promoted to Oberleutnant ( first lieutenant ) on 1 July 1943 . He had been eligible for this promotion since April 1943 , why he was overlooked at the time remains unknown . 
 Schnaufer claimed his last two aerial victories with Baro operating the radio on the night of 3 / 4 July , Bomber Command had again targeted Cologne . Their victims were a No. 196 Squadron Wellington shot down at 00 : 48 and a No. 149 Squadron Stirling at 02 : 33 , bringing his total to 19 victories . His next radio operator was Oberleutnant Freymann , the signals operator of II . Gruppe . Under Himmelbett control they shot down a No. 49 Squadron Lancaster , on another Cologne bombing mission , on 9 July 1943 at 02 : 33 . He was awarded the Honour Goblet of the Luftwaffe ( Ehrenpokal der Luftwaffe ) on 26 July 1943 . 
 In mid @-@ July , the Battle of the Ruhr was coming to an end and Bomber Command refocused its efforts on the port city of Hamburg in northern Germany . The codename for the attack was Operation Gomorrah ; the objective was the destruction of Hamburg . The operations began on 24 July 1943 and during four major night @-@ attacks by the RAF and two minor day @-@ attacks by United States Army Air Forces ( USAAF ) between 40 @,@ 000 and 50 @,@ 000 civilians were killed . To counter the mounting success of the German night fighter force , which was directly attributed to the introduction of the Lichtenstein radar , the RAF introduced Window ( Chaff or <unk> to the Germans ) . Window was a radar countermeasure in which aircraft spread a cloud of small , thin pieces of aluminium which effectively made it impossible for the German radar operator to identify the genuine target . Saturation of the Himmelbett control areas by a bomber stream and the introduction of Window practically made the previous Himmelbett procedure obsolete . This was also evident to the German high command . To counter these British measures two new strategies were pursued , Wilde Sau ( Wild Boar ) and Zahme Sau ( Tame Boar ) . Wilde Sau , conceived by Hans @-@ Joachim Herrmann , was a technique by which the RAF bombers were mainly engaged by single @-@ seat fighter planes , illuminated by searchlights , over the target area . The Zahme Sau procedure , proposed by Viktor von Loßberg , called for a night fighter to infiltrate the bomber stream . The position , altitude , and general direction was then broadcast . The information was received by other night fighters , who navigated to the bomber stream by themselves . In Zahme Sau , the German night fighters were tracked and radio @-@ controlled by means of Y @-@ <unk> ( Y @-@ Control ) . Schnaufer did not make any claims during Operation Gomorrah . Their next success came when he and Freymann shot down a Lancaster on 10 / 11 August 1943 at 00 : 32 . The target that night was Nuremberg and it was the first aerial victory of the entire German night fighter force achieved by Y @-@ Control . This was also the last victory with Freymann and his last as a member of II . Gruppe . 
 = = = Squadron leader of the 12 . / NJG 1 = = = 
 Schnaufer was transferred to IV Gruppe of NJG 1 ( IV . / NJG 1 — 4th group of the 1st Night Fighter Wing ) , based in the Netherlands at Leeuwarden Air Base , where he was appointed Staffelkapitän ( squadron leader ) of the 12 . Staffel ( 12 . / NJG 1 — 12th squadron of 1st Night Fighter Wing ) on 13 August 1943 . He took over command from Oberleutnant Eberhard <unk> , who had been taken prisoner of war . At the time , IV . / NJG 1 was under the leadership of Gruppenkommandeur ( Group Commander ) Hauptmann Hans @-@ Joachim Jabs . Jabs ' first impression of Schnaufer was not entirely favourable . Shortly after Schnaufer 's arrival , on one of his first missions in Leeuwarden , Schnaufer had taken right of way during taxiing . This forced Jabs into second place in order of takeoff , an act of insubordination and perceived as arrogant by Jabs . 
 Schnaufer , who had received the German Cross in Gold ( Deutsches Kreuz in Gold ) on 16 August 1943 , flew his first operational mission with 12 . / NJG 1 on the night of 17 / 18 August 1943 . Although uncertain , it is assumed that <unk> was Schnaufer 's radio and radar operator on this mission . Bomber Command had targeted Peenemünde and the V @-@ weapons test centre that night . Schnaufer , who had been tasked with leading one of the first Zahme Sau missions under Y @-@ Control , had to abort the mission early due to engine trouble . 
 Around mid @-@ September 1943 , the two @-@ man Bf 110 crew was augmented by a third member , sometimes referred to as <unk> ( air mechanic ) or <unk> ( air gunner ) . The reason for this was that the decline of the Himmelbett procedure , the introduction of the broadcast procedure Zahme Sau , and the growing threat of RAF intruder night fighter operations , had necessitated the need for another pair of watchful eyes to the rear . Unteroffizier Wilhelm Gänsler , who had already contributed to 17 claims made by Hauptmann Ludwig Becker , was Schnaufer 's new lookout . With <unk> and Gänsler as his crew , Schnaufer claimed his 26th aerial victory on 23 September 1943 over a No. 218 Squadron Stirling during a Wilde Sau intercept mission . 
 In the second half of 1943 , Schnaufer and his crew began experimenting with upward @-@ firing autocannons , dubbed Schräge Musik . This allowed the night fighter to approach and attack the bombers from below — outside the enemy crew 's usual field of view . An attack by a Schräge Musik @-@ equipped night fighter typically came as a complete surprise to the bomber crew , who only realised a night fighter was close by when they came under fire . It is not exactly known when Schnaufer 's Bf 110 was equipped with Schräge Musik . Rumpelhardt stated that the weapons system was installed prior to his return from officer training . It is also not exactly known how many of his victories had been claimed using the upwards firing cannons . According to Fritz <unk> , who had known Schnaufer since Flugzeugführerschule C 3 , 20 to 30 of Schnaufer 's aerial victories had been claimed using upwards firing guns . 
 Rumpelhardt had returned from his officer training courses in early October 1943 and rejoined Schnaufer 's crew . Gänsler , Rumpelhardt and Schnaufer claimed aerial victories 29 and 30 on 9 October . Oberleutnant Schnaufer was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross ( Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes ) for 42 victories on 31 December 1943 . The presentation was made by Generalmajor ( lit . Major General ; equivalent to Brigadier ) Joseph Schmid , commanding general of the I. Jagdkorps ( 1st Fighter Corps ) , on 3 January 1944 . 
 On the night before his 22nd birthday , on 15 February 1944 , Schnaufer and his crew claimed aerial victories 45 to 47 . Bomber Command had sent 561 Lancasters and 314 Halifax four @-@ engined bombers , supported by de Havilland Mosquito night @-@ fighters and bombers , destined for Berlin . Schnaufer , who had been suffering from stomach pains all day , and his crew returned to Leeuwarden at 00 : 14 . Rumpelhardt had been the first to congratulate him on his birthday over the intercom . Their fellow airmen had prepared a birthday celebration . The stomach pains had become unbearable and Schnaufer was taken to a hospital with appendicitis . He stayed in the hospital for about two weeks before , together with Rumpelhardt , he went on vacation back home . <unk> lifting his suitcase , the stitches burst , mandating further hospitalisation . He flew his first mission after these events on 19 March 1944 . 
 = = = Group commander of the IV . / NJG 1 = = = 
 Schnaufer was appointed Gruppenkommandeur IV . / NJG 1 on 1 March 1944 , taking over command of the Gruppe from Jabs who was given command of NJG 1 . He was promoted to Hauptmann on 1 May 1944 . Schnaufer became an ace @-@ in @-@ a @-@ day for the first time on 25 May 1944 when he claimed five RAF bombers shot down between 01 : 15 and 01 : 29 for victories 70 to 74 . The bombers had targeted the railway marshalling yard at Aachen . 
 On 6 June 1944 , the Western Allied forces landed in Normandy , during Operation Overlord . In support of the invasion of Normandy General Dwight D. Eisenhower , the Supreme Allied Commander , assigned Bomber Command to support the ground forces . On the night of 12 / 13 June , Schnaufer claimed his first victory following the invasion when 671 bombers attacked various railway targets in France . Schnaufer claimed three bombers shot down that night , the first as a Lancaster and the second and third as a Lancaster or Halifax , between 00 : 27 and 00 : 34 . 
 Hauptmann Schnaufer was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves ( Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes mit Eichenlaub ) on 24 June following four aerial victories claimed on 22 June , which took his total to 84 victories . For Schnaufer , July 1944 was less successful than the previous three months . He claimed two bombers on the night of 20 / 21 July and three on 28 / 29 July , taking his total to 89 aerial victories . One day later , on 30 July , he received a letter from Göring telling him that he had been awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves and Swords ( Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes mit Eichenlaub und Schwertern ) . Hitler himself made the presentation . It is said that when he came to the presentation his first words were , " Where is the night fighter ? " Shortly following the presentation of the Schwerter both Rumpelhardt and Gänsler received the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross on 8 August . His crew was the only night fighter crew in the entire Luftwaffe of which all crew members wore this decoration . 
 In early September 1944 , NJG 1 was forced to abandon its airfields in the Netherlands and Belgium . Continuous heavy attacks by RAF and USAAF bombers and strafing by Allied fighter @-@ bombers rendered the airfields unsuitable for operations . On 2 September , VI . / NJG 1 relocated from Sint @-@ Truiden to Dortmund @-@ <unk> . Schnaufer achieved his 100th victory on 9 October 1944 , when he claimed two bombers shot down from an attack force of 415 bombers targeting Bochum . In recognition of this achievement , he was honourably mentioned in the Wehrmachtbericht on 10 October 1944 and awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves , Swords and Diamonds ( Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes mit Eichenlaub , Schwertern und Brillanten ) on 16 October 1944 . He was the 94th Luftwaffe pilot to achieve the century mark . 
 = = = Wing commander of Nachtjagdgeschwader 4 = = = 
 Schnaufer was then appointed Geschwaderkommodore ( wing commander ) of Nachtjagdgeschwader 4 ( NJG 4 — 4th Night Fighter Wing ) on 20 November 1944 ; the youngest Geschwaderkommodore in the Luftwaffe at the age of 22 . The Geschwaderstab and the II . Gruppe were stationed at Gütersloh . He flew his first combat mission as Geschwaderkommodore on the 22 November 1944 from Gütersloh and claimed two victories in the area of Dortmund . Schnaufer and his crew flew from Gütersloh to Berlin @-@ Staaken on 27 November 1944 for the official presentation of the Diamonds to the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves and Swords by Hitler . Following the official photo session by Hitler 's photographer Heinrich Hoffmann , Schnaufer met with Oberst ( Colonel ) Nicolaus von Below , Hitler 's Luftwaffe adjutant , at the Reichsluftfahrtministerium ( Ministry of Aviation ) . Here Schnaufer and his crew were filmed for the German newsreels Die Deutsche Wochenschau . Three days later they returned to Gütersloh . 
 Schnaufer became the leading night fighter pilot on 9 November 1944 . Schnaufer surpassed Oberst Helmut Lent 's record of 102 night @-@ time victories , after he claimed three Lancasters shot down from a force of 235 Lancasters from No 5 . Group which attacked the Dortmund @-@ Ems Canal . Schnaufer , whose victory total stood at 106 at the end of 1944 , failed to shoot down a single bomber in January 1945 . It was his first month without filing a claim since April 1943 . 
 Schnaufer was ordered to Carinhall , the residence of the Reichsmarschall Hermann Göring , on 8 February 1945 . Göring informed him about the intent to appoint him as Inspekteur der Nachtjäger ( Inspector of the night fighter force ) , a role held by Oberst Werner Streib at the time . Schnaufer pushed back , not wanting to push out his friend and mentor from this position . He argued that he would better serve the German cause fighting the enemy . Göring was convinced and Schnaufer remained in his position as Geschwaderkommodore . 
 The British propaganda radio station <unk> Calais ( Soldiers ' Radio Calais ) congratulated Schnaufer on account of his 23rd birthday on 16 February 1945 . The radio station explicitly addressed the soldiers of NJG 4 stationed in Gütersloh followed by the song " Das <unk> " [ The Bogeyman ] praising him for the honorary title given to him by the British bomber crews " The spook of St. Trond " . 
 Schnaufer 's greatest one @-@ night success and the second time he became an ace @-@ in @-@ a @-@ day was on 21 February 1945 , when he claimed nine Lancaster heavy bombers in the course of one day . Two were claimed in the early hours of the morning and a further seven , in just 19 minutes , in the evening between 20 : 44 and 21 : 03 . On 7 / 8 March , he claimed three RAF four @-@ engine bombers for victories 119 to 121 . These were his last victories of the war . He was then banned from further combat flying and was given the task of evaluating the then new Dornier Do 335 , a twin @-@ engine heavy fighter with a unique " push @-@ pull " layout , for its suitability as night fighter . Disobeying his ban from combat flying , he flew his last mission of the war on 9 April 1945 . Attempting to chase a Lancaster , he took off from <unk> Air Base at 22 : 00 and landed after 79 minutes at 23 : 19 without success . 
 = = Prisoner of war = = 
 Schnaufer was taken prisoner of war by the British Army in Schleswig @-@ Holstein in May 1945 . According to Schumann , he was taken to England for interrogation . In this account British authorities were especially interested in knowing whether his achievements had been made under the influence of methamphetamine or other stimulating psychoactive drugs which induce temporary improvements in either mental or physical functions or both . He was released later that year in November following a bout of diphtheria . 
 According to Hinchliffe , this is an incorrect statement . Hinchliffe based his account on Rumpelhardt 's testimony who claims that Schnaufer was never taken to England . Rumpelhardt was released on 4 August 1945 and soon after Schnaufer was admitted to a hospital in Flensburg , ill with a combination of diphtheria and scarlet fever . Interrogation had begun in late May 1945 by a team of twelve officers from the Department of Air Technical Intelligence ( DAT ) , led by Air Commodore Roderick Aeneas Chisholm . The German prisoners were brought to Eggebek . Here they conducted a number of interviews with various members of the night fighter force . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 Following his release from the hospital and as a prisoner of war — the exact date is unknown — Schnaufer took over the family wine business . He had never planned to run the family winery as his ambition had always been to pursue an officer 's career in the Luftwaffe . However , in the immediate aftermath of World War II the business had virtually ceased to exist and Schnaufer was given the task of rebuilding it from scratch . He had to re @-@ establish business links to suppliers and customers and to consolidate them . Then he had to make new contacts in order to facilitate expansion and growth of the business . Lastly , he had to create an infrastructure which supported the growth of the business . 
 As the wine business began to prosper , Schnaufer also gave thought to alternative employment possibilities in peacetime aviation . With his wartime friend Hermann Greiner , he traveled from Weil am Rhein to Bern in Switzerland to meet South American diplomats ; the two hoped to find employment as pilots in South America . To get to Bern , they crossed the Swiss @-@ German border illegally . The meeting was a failure . As they returned to Germany , they were caught by Swiss border guards attempting to make a second illegal border crossing . The Swiss handed them over to the French occupation authorities and they were imprisoned in Lörrach , where they remained until Schnaufer managed to make contact with a French general , who was a customer of the Schnaufer winery and had them released . This misadventure kept him away from his business for about half a year . 
 In July 1950 , Schnaufer was on a wine buying visit to France . On the afternoon of the 13 July , he was heading south on the Route Nationale No. 10 in his Mercedes @-@ Benz 170 convertible with a registration number " <unk> 44 @-@ <unk> " . Just south of Bordeaux , at about 18 : 30 , he was involved in a collision with a Renault 22 truck . The accident occurred at the intersection of road D1 , present @-@ day <unk> , and the N10 , present @-@ day <unk> , in <unk> ( 44 ° 42 ′ 04 ″ N 0 ° 42 ′ 20 ″ W ) . The truck , driven by Jean Antoine <unk> , was carrying a 6 metric tons ( 5 @.@ 9 long tons ; 6 @.@ 6 short tons ) load of empty gas cylinders . The collision ruptured the fuel tank of the Mercedes and ignited the petrol . Witnesses to the accident quickly put out the flames . Alice <unk> gave first aid to Schnaufer , who was bleeding from a wound from the back of his head . The police appeared at the scene of the accident at about 19 : 30 , followed by an ambulance shortly thereafter . Schnaufer had suffered a fractured skull , and was immediately taken to the Saint @-@ André Hôpital in Bordeaux . 
 Schnaufer never regained consciousness and succumbed to his injuries at the hospital two days later on 15 July 1950 . The investigation into the accident concluded that though the impact of the two vehicles was severe , it seemed unlikely that the collision itself was the cause of his injuries . It was speculated that at least one of the truck 's cargo of 30 empty gas cylinders , which were thrown off by the collision , had struck Schnaufer on the head . Subsequently the truck driver was charged with manslaughter and breach of traffic regulations before a court at <unk> , <unk> . The hearing began on 29 July 1950 and concluded with his conviction on 16 November 1950 . <unk> was found guilty of not yielding the right of way , and his speed was considered too high . It was ruled that as a consequence of not observing the law , he involuntarily caused the death of Schnaufer . 
 Schnaufer 's Messerschmitt Bf 110 G @-@ 4 / U 8 was brought to England after the war . The aircraft was displayed in London 's Hyde Park . The port @-@ side vertical stabiliser of this twin tailed aircraft , tallying all his victories , is preserved at the Imperial War Museum in London . A fin from another Bf 110 flown by Schnaufer is at the Australian War Memorial in Canberra . The street " Heinz @-@ Schnaufer @-@ Straße " in Calw was named after him . 
 = = Aerial victory credits = = 
 Heinz @-@ Wolfgang Schnaufer was the top @-@ scoring night fighter pilot of World War II . He was credited with 121 aerial victories claimed in just 164 combat missions . His victory total includes 114 RAF four @-@ engine bombers ; arguably accounting for more RAF casualties than any other Luftwaffe fighter pilot and becoming the third highest Luftwaffe claimant against the Western Allied Air Forces . His flight book indicated 2 @,@ 300 takeoffs and 1 @,@ 133 flying hours . 
 Until late 1944 , Schnaufer documented his aerial victories with detailed geographical locations . After this date , he claimed his victories over territory occupied by the Allies , and his victories were logged in a <unk> ( grid reference ) , for example " KP @-@ IP " . The grid map was composed of rectangles measuring 15 minutes of latitude by 30 minutes of longitude , an area of about 360 square miles ( 930 km2 ) . 
 This and the ♠ ( Ace of spades ) indicates those aerial victories which made Schnaufer an ace @-@ in @-@ a @-@ day , a term which designates a fighter pilot who has shot down five or more airplanes in a single day . This along with the + ( plus ) indicates almost certain identification . This along with the * ( asterisk ) indicates probable identification . This along with the ? ( question mark ) indicates possible identification . 
 = = Awards = = 
 Front Flying Clasp of the Luftwaffe for Night Fighters in Gold 
 Combined Pilots @-@ Observation Badge 
 Wound Badge in Black 
 Iron Cross ( 1939 ) 
 2nd Class ( 2 June 1942 ) 
 1st Class ( 19 October 1942 ) 
 Honour Goblet of the Luftwaffe ( Ehrenpokal der Luftwaffe ) on 26 July 1943 as Leutnant and pilot 
 German Cross in Gold on 16 August 1943 as Oberleutnant in the II . / NJG 1 
 Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves , Swords and Diamonds 
 Knight 's Cross on 31 December 1943 as Oberleutnant and Staffelführer of 12 . / NJG 1 
 507th Oak Leaves on 24 June 1944 as Hauptmann and Gruppenkommandeur of IV . / NJG 1 
 84th Swords on 30 July 1944 as Hauptmann and Gruppenkommandeur of IV . / NJG 1 
 21st Diamonds on 16 October 1944 as Hauptmann and Gruppenkommandeur of IV . / NJG 1 
 Mentioned in the Wehrmachtbericht on 10 October 1944 
 = = = Wehrmachtbericht reference = = = 
 = = Dates of rank = = 
 = Max Weber = 
 Karl Emil Maximilian " Max " Weber ( German : [ <unk> <unk> ] ; 21 April 1864 – 14 June 1920 ) was a German sociologist , philosopher , jurist , and political economist whose ideas profoundly influenced social theory and social research . Weber is often cited , with Émile Durkheim and Karl Marx , as among the three founders of sociology . 
 Weber was a key proponent of methodological <unk> , arguing for the study of social action through interpretive ( rather than purely empiricist ) means , based on understanding the purpose and meaning that individuals attach to their own actions . Unlike Durkheim , he did not believe in <unk> and rather proposed that for any outcome there can be multiple causes . 
 Weber 's main intellectual concern was understanding the processes of rationalisation , secularisation , and " disenchantment " that he associated with the rise of capitalism and modernity , and which he saw as the result of a new way of thinking about the world . 
 Weber is best known for his thesis combining economic sociology and the sociology of religion , elaborated in his book The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism , in which he proposed that ascetic Protestantism was one of the major " elective affinities " associated with the rise in the Western world of market @-@ driven capitalism and the rational @-@ legal nation @-@ state . He argued that it was in the basic tenets of Protestantism to boost capitalism . Thus , it can be said that the spirit of capitalism is inherent to Protestant religious values . 
 Against Marx 's historical materialism , Weber emphasised the importance of cultural influences embedded in religion as a means for understanding the genesis of capitalism . The Protestant Ethic formed the earliest part in Weber 's broader investigations into world religion ; he went on to examine the religions of China , the religions of India and ancient Judaism , with particular regard to their differing economic consequences and conditions of social stratification . 
 In another major work , Politics as a Vocation , Weber defined the state as an entity that successfully claims a " monopoly of the legitimate use of physical force within a given territory " . He was also the first to categorise social authority into distinct forms , which he labelled as charismatic , traditional , and rational @-@ legal . His analysis of bureaucracy emphasised that modern state institutions are increasingly based on rational @-@ legal authority . 
 Weber also made a variety of other contributions in economic history , as well as economic theory and methodology . Weber 's analysis of modernity and rationalisation significantly influenced the critical theory associated with the Frankfurt School . 
 After the First World War , Max Weber was among the founders of the liberal German Democratic Party . He also ran unsuccessfully for a seat in parliament and served as advisor to the committee that drafted the ill @-@ fated democratic Weimar Constitution of 1919 . After contracting Spanish flu , he died of pneumonia in 1920 , aged 56 . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life and family background = = = 
 Karl Emil Maximilian Weber was born in 1864 , in Erfurt , Province of Saxony , Prussia . He was the oldest of the seven children of Max Weber Sr. , a wealthy and prominent civil servant and member of the National Liberal Party , and his wife Helene ( <unk> ) , who partly descended from French Huguenot immigrants and held strong moral absolutist ideas . Weber Sr. ' s involvement in public life immersed his home in both politics and academia , as his salon welcomed many prominent scholars and public figures . The young Weber and his brother Alfred , who also became a sociologist and economist , thrived in this intellectual atmosphere . Weber 's 1876 Christmas presents to his parents , when he was thirteen years old , were two historical essays entitled " About the course of German history , with special reference to the positions of the Emperor and the Pope " , and " About the Roman Imperial period from Constantine to the migration of nations " . In class , bored and unimpressed with the teachers – who in turn resented what they perceived as a disrespectful attitude – he secretly read all forty volumes of Goethe , and it has been recently argued that this was an important influence on his thought and methodology Before entering the university , he would read many other classical works . Over time , Weber would also be significantly affected by the marital tension between his father , " a man who enjoyed earthly pleasures " , and his mother , a devout Calvinist " who sought to lead an ascetic life " . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 In 1882 Weber enrolled in the University of Heidelberg as a law student . After a year of military service , he transferred to the University of Berlin . After his first few years as a student , during which he spent much time " drinking beer and fencing " , Weber would increasingly take his mother 's side in family arguments and grew estranged from his father . Simultaneously with his studies , he worked as a junior lawyer . In 1886 Weber passed the examination for <unk> , comparable to the bar association examination in the British and American legal systems . Throughout the late 1880s , Weber continued his study of law and history . He earned his law doctorate in 1889 by writing a dissertation on legal history titled Development of the Principle of Joint Liability and the Separate Fund in the Public Trading Company out of Household and Trade Communities in Italian Cities . This work was used as part of a longer work On the History of Trading Companies in the Middle Ages , based on South @-@ European Sources , published in the same year . Two years later , Weber completed his <unk> , Roman Agrarian History and its Significance for Public and Private Law , working with August <unk> . Having thus become a Privatdozent , Weber joined the University of Berlin 's faculty , lecturing and consulting for the government . 
 = = = Early work = = = 
 In the years between the completion of his dissertation and habilitation , Weber took an interest in contemporary social policy . In 1888 he joined the Verein für <unk> , a new professional association of German economists affiliated with the historical school , who saw the role of economics primarily as finding solutions to the social problems of the age and who pioneered large scale statistical studies of economic issues . He also involved himself in politics , joining the left @-@ leaning Evangelical Social Congress . In 1890 the Verein established a research program to examine " the Polish question " or <unk> : the influx of Polish farm workers into eastern Germany as local labourers migrated to Germany 's rapidly industrialising cities . Weber was put in charge of the study and wrote a large part of the final report , which generated considerable attention and controversy and marked the beginning of Weber 's renown as a social scientist . From 1893 to 1899 Weber was a member of the <unk> Verband ( Pan @-@ German League ) , an organization that campaigned against the influx of the Polish workers ; the degree of Weber 's support for the Germanisation of Poles and similar nationalist policies is still debated by modern scholars . In some of his work , in particular his provocative lecture on " The Nation State and Economic Policy " delivered in 1895 , Weber criticises the immigration of Poles and blames the Junker class for perpetuating Slavic immigration to serve their selfish interests . 
 Also in 1893 he married his distant cousin Marianne Schnitger , later a feminist activist and author in her own right , who was instrumental in collecting and publishing Weber 's journal articles as books after his death , while her biography of him is an important source for understanding Weber 's life . They would have no children and it is usually acknowledged that their marriage was never consummated . The marriage granted long @-@ awaited financial independence to Weber , allowing him to finally leave his parents ' household . The couple moved to Freiburg in 1894 , where Weber was appointed professor of economics at the university , before accepting the same position at the University of Heidelberg in 1896 . There Weber became a central figure in the so @-@ called " Weber Circle " , composed of other intellectuals such as his wife Marianne , Georg Jellinek , Ernst Troeltsch , Werner Sombart , Marc Bloch , Robert Michels and György Lukács . Weber also remained active in the Verein and the Evangelical Social Congress . His research in that period was focused on economics and legal history . 
 In 1897 Max Weber Sr. died two months after a severe quarrel with his son that was never resolved . After this , Weber became increasingly prone to depression , nervousness and insomnia , making it difficult for him to fulfill his duties as a professor . His condition forced him to reduce his teaching and eventually leave his course unfinished in the autumn of 1899 . After spending months in a sanatorium during the summer and autumn of 1900 , Weber and his wife travelled to Italy at the end of the year and did not return to Heidelberg until April 1902 . He would again withdraw from teaching in 1903 and not return to it till 1919 . Weber 's ordeal with mental illness was carefully described in a personal chronology that was destroyed by his wife . This chronicle was supposedly destroyed because Marianne Weber feared that Max Weber 's work would be discredited by the Nazis if his experience with mental illness were widely known . 
 = = = Later work = = = 
 After Weber 's immense productivity in the early 1890s , he did not publish any papers between early 1898 and late 1902 , finally resigning his professorship in late 1903 . Freed from those obligations , in that year he accepted a position as associate editor of the Archives for Social Science and Social Welfare , where he worked with his colleagues Edgar Jaffé and Werner Sombart . His new interests would lie in more fundamental issues of social sciences ; his works from this latter period are of primary interest to modern scholars . In 1904 , Weber began to publish some of his most seminal papers in this journal , notably his essay The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism , which became his most famous work and laid the foundations for his later research on the impact of cultures and religions on the development of economic systems . This essay was the only one of his works from that period that was published as a book during his lifetime . Some other of his works written in the first one and a half decades of the 20th century – published posthumously and dedicated primarily from the fields of sociology of religion , economic and legal sociology – are also recognised as among his most important intellectual contributions . 
 Also in 1904 , he visited the United States and participated in the Congress of Arts and Sciences held in connection with the World 's Fair ( Louisiana Purchase Exposition ) in St. Louis . A monument to his visit was placed at the home of relatives whom Weber visited in Mt . Airy , North Carolina . 
 Despite his partial recovery evident in America , Weber felt that he was unable to resume regular teaching at that time and continued on as a private scholar , helped by an inheritance in 1907 . In 1909 , disappointed with the Verein , he co @-@ founded the German Sociological Association ( Deutsche Gesellschaft für Soziologie , or DGS ) and served as its first treasurer . He would , however , resign from the DGS in 1912 . In 1912 , Weber tried to organise a left @-@ wing political party to combine social @-@ democrats and liberals . This attempt was unsuccessful , in part because many liberals feared social @-@ democratic revolutionary ideals . 
 = = = Political involvements = = = 
 At the outbreak of World War I , Weber , aged 50 , volunteered for service and was appointed as a reserve officer and put in charge of organizing the army hospitals in Heidelberg , a role he fulfilled until the end of 1915 . Weber 's views on the war and the expansion of the German empire changed during the course of the conflict . Early on he supported the nationalist rhetoric and the war effort , though with some hesitation as he viewed the war as a necessity to fulfill German duty as a leading state power . In time , however , Weber became one of the most prominent critics of German expansionism and of the Kaiser 's war policies . He publicly attacked the Belgian annexation policy and unrestricted submarine warfare and later supported calls for constitutional reform , democratisation and universal suffrage . 
 Weber joined the worker and soldier council of Heidelberg in 1918 . He then served in the German delegation to the Paris Peace Conference and as advisor to the Confidential Committee for Constitutional Reform , which drafted the Weimar Constitution . Motivated by his understanding of the American model , he advocated a strong , popularly elected presidency as a constitutional counterbalance to the power of the professional bureaucracy . More controversially , he also defended the provisions for emergency presidential powers that became Article 48 of the Weimar Constitution . These provisions were later used by Adolf Hitler to subvert the rest of the constitution and institute rule by decree , allowing his regime to suppress opposition and gain dictatorial powers . 
 Weber also ran , unsuccessfully , for a parliamentary seat , as a member of the liberal German Democratic Party , which he had co @-@ founded . He opposed both the leftist German Revolution of 1918 – 1919 and the ratification of the Treaty of Versailles , principled positions that defied the political alignments in Germany at that time , and which may have prevented Friedrich Ebert , the new social @-@ democratic President of Germany , from appointing Weber as minister or ambassador . Weber commanded widespread respect but relatively little influence . Weber 's role in German politics remains controversial to this day . 
 In the case of Weber 's critique of the left , he complained that the leaders of the leftist Spartacus League which was led by Karl Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg and controlled the city government of Berlin while Weber was campaigning for his party : " We have this [ German ] revolution to thank for the fact that we cannot send a single division against the Poles . All we see is dirt , muck , dung , and horse @-@ play — nothing else . Liebknecht belongs in the madhouse and Rosa Luxemburg in the zoological gardens . ” Weber was at the same time critical of the Versailles Treaty which he believed unjustly assigned " war guilt " to Germany when it came to World War I. Weber believed that many countries were guilty of starting World War I , not just Germany . In making this case , Weber argued that “ In the case of this war there is one , and only one power that desired it under all circumstances through its own will and , according to their political goals required : Russia . . . . It never crossed [ my ] mind that a German invasion of Belgium [ in 1914 ] was nothing but an innocent act on the part of the Germans . " 
 Later that same month , in January 1919 , after Weber and Weber 's party were defeated for election , Weber delivered one of his greatest academic lectures Politics as a Vocation which was a reflection on the inherent violence and dishonesty found among the politicians , a profession in which only recently Weber was so personally active . About the nature of politicians , he concluded that " In nine out of ten cases they are <unk> puffed up with hot air about themselves . They are not in touch with reality , and they do not feel the burden they need to shoulder ; they just intoxicate themselves with romantic sensations . " 
 = = = Last years = = = 
 Frustrated with politics , Weber resumed teaching during this time , first at the University of Vienna , then , after 1919 , at the University of Munich . His lectures from that period were collected into major works , such as the General Economic History , Science as a Vocation and Politics as a Vocation . In Munich , he headed the first German university institute of sociology , but never held a professorial position in sociology . Many colleagues and students in Munich attacked his response to the German Revolution and some right @-@ wing students held protests in front of his home . Max Weber contracted the Spanish flu and died of pneumonia in Munich on 14 June 1920 . At the time of his death , Weber had not finished writing his magnum opus on sociological theory : Economy and Society . His widow Marianne helped prepare it for its publication in 1921 – 22 . 
 = = Max Weber 's thought = = 
 Max Weber 's bureaucratic theory or model is sometimes also known as the " Legal @-@ Rational " model . The model tries to explain bureaucracy from a rational point of view via nine main characteristics or principles ; these are as follows : 
 = = = Max Weber 's Bureaucratic Model ( Legal @-@ Rational Model ) = = = 
 Weber wrote that the modern bureaucracy in both the public and private sector relies on the following principles . 
 " First , it is based on the general principle of precisely defined and organized across @-@ the @-@ board competencies of the various offices . These competencies are underpinned by rules , laws , or administrative regulations . " For Weber , this means 
 A rigid division of labor is established which clearly identifies the regular tasks and duties of the particular bureaucratic system . 
 There are firmly established chains of command , and the duties and capacity to coerce others to comply is described by regulation . 
 Regular and continuous execution of the assigned duties is undertaken by hiring people with particular qualifications which are certified . 
 Weber notes that these three aspects " constitute the essence of bureaucratic administration ... in the public sector . In the private sector , these three aspects constitute the essence of a bureaucratic management of a private company . " 
 Main Principles ( Characteristics ) : 
 Specialized roles . 
 Recruitment based on merit ( e.g. tested through open competition ) . 
 Uniform principles of placement , promotion , and transfer in an administrative system . 
 <unk> with systematic salary structure . 
 Hierarchy , responsibility and accountability . 
 Subjection of official conduct to strict rules of discipline and control . 
 Supremacy of abstract rules . 
 Impersonal authority . ( e.g. Office bearer does not bring the office with him ) . 
 Political neutrality . 
 Merits : Max Weber himself noted , real bureaucracy will be less optimal and effective than his ideal type model . Each of Weber 's principles can degenerate , more so , when it is utilized to analyze the individual level in the organization . But when implemented in a group setting in an organization , some form of efficiency and effectiveness can be achieved , especially with regards to better output . This is especially true when the Bureaucratic model emphasizes qualification ( merits ) , specialization of job @-@ scope ( labour ) , hierarchy of power , rules and discipline . 
 <unk> : However , competencies , efficiency and effectiveness can be unclear and contradictory especially when dealing with oversimplified matters . In a dehumanized bureaucracy , inflexible in distributing the job @-@ scope , with every worker having to specialize from day one without rotating tasks for fear of decreasing output , tasks are often routine and can contribute to boredom . Thus , employees can sometimes feel that they are not part of the organization 's work vision and missions . Consequently , they do not have any sense of belonging in the long term . Furthermore , this type of organization tends to invite exploitation and underestimate the potential of the employees , as creativity of the workers is brushed aside in favour of strict adherence to rules , regulations and procedures . 
 = = = Inspirations = = = 
 Weber 's thinking was strongly influenced by German idealism and particularly by neo @-@ Kantianism , to which he had been exposed through Heinrich Rickert , his professorial colleague at the University of Freiburg . Especially important to Weber 's work is the neo @-@ Kantian belief that reality is essentially chaotic and incomprehensible , with all rational order deriving from the way in which the human mind focuses its attention on certain aspects of reality and organises the resulting perceptions . Weber 's opinions regarding the methodology of the social sciences show parallels with the work of contemporary neo @-@ Kantian philosopher and pioneering sociologist Georg Simmel . 
 Weber was also influenced by Kantian ethics , which he nonetheless came to think of as obsolete in a modern age lacking in religious certainties . In this last respect , the influence of Friedrich Nietzsche 's philosophy is evident . According to the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , the " deep tension between the Kantian moral imperatives and a Nietzschean diagnosis of the modern cultural world is apparently what gives such a darkly tragic and agnostic shade to Weber 's ethical worldview " . Another major influence in Weber 's life was the writings of Karl Marx and the workings of socialist thought in academia and active politics . While Weber shares some of Marx 's consternation with bureaucratic systems and <unk> them as being capable of advancing their own logic to the detriment of human freedom and autonomy , Weber views conflict as perpetual and inevitable and does not host the spirit of a materially available utopia . Though the influence of his mother 's Calvinist religiosity is evident throughout Weber 's life and work , and though he maintained a deep , lifelong interest in the study of religions , Weber was open about the fact that he was personally irreligious . 
 As a political economist and economic historian , Weber belonged to the " youngest " German historical school of economics , represented by academics such as Gustav von Schmoller and his student Werner Sombart . But , even though Weber 's research interests were very much in line with that school , his views on methodology and the theory of value diverged significantly from those of other German historicists and were closer , in fact , to those of Carl Menger and the Austrian School , the traditional rivals of the historical school . ( See section on Economics . ) 
 = = = Methodology = = = 
 Unlike some other classical figures ( Comte , Durkheim ) Weber did not attempt , consciously , to create any specific set of rules governing social sciences in general , or sociology in particular . In comparison with Durkheim and Marx , Weber was more focused on individuals and culture and this is clear in his methodology . Whereas Durkheim focused on the society , Weber concentrated on the individuals and their actions ( see structure and action discussion ) and whereas Marx argued for the primacy of the material world over the world of ideas , Weber valued ideas as motivating actions of individuals , at least in the big picture . 
 Sociology , for Max Weber , is : 
 ... a science which attempts the interpretive understanding of social action in order thereby to arrive at a causal explanation of its course and effects . 
 Weber was concerned with the question of objectivity and subjectivity . Weber distinguished social action from social behavior , noting that social action must be understood through how individuals subjectively relate to one another . Study of social action through interpretive means ( Verstehen ) must be based upon understanding the subjective meaning and purpose that individuals attach to their actions . Social actions may have easily identifiable and objective means , but much more subjective ends and the understanding of those ends by a scientist is subject to yet another layer of subjective understanding ( that of the scientist ) . Weber noted that the importance of subjectivity in social sciences makes creation of fool @-@ proof , universal laws much more difficult than in natural sciences and that the amount of objective knowledge that social sciences may achieve is precariously limited . Overall , Weber supported the goal of objective science , but he noted that it is an unreachable goal – although one definitely worth striving for . 
 There is no absolutely " objective " scientific analysis of culture .... All knowledge of cultural reality ... is always knowledge from particular points of view .... an " objective " analysis of cultural events , which proceeds according to the thesis that the ideal of science is the reduction of empirical reality to " laws " , is meaningless ... [ because ] ... the knowledge of social laws is not knowledge of social reality but is rather one of the various aids used by our minds for attaining this end . 
 The principle of " methodological individualism " , which holds that social scientists should seek to understand <unk> ( such as nations , cultures , governments , churches , corporations , etc . ) solely as the result and the context of the actions of individual persons , can be traced to Weber , particularly to the first chapter of Economy and Society , in which he argues that only individuals " can be treated as agents in a course of subjectively understandable action " . In other words , Weber argued that social phenomena can be understood scientifically only to the extent that they are captured by models of the behaviour of purposeful individuals , models that Weber called " ideal types " , from which actual historical events will necessarily deviate due to accidental and irrational factors . The analytical constructs of an ideal type never exist in reality , but provide objective benchmarks against which real @-@ life constructs can be measured . 
 We know of no scientifically <unk> ideals . To be sure , that makes our efforts more arduous than in the past , since we are expected to create our ideals from within our breast in the very age of subjectivist culture . 
 Weber 's methodology was developed in the context of a wider debate about methodology of social sciences , the Methodenstreit . Weber 's position was close to historicism , as he understood social actions as being heavily tied to particular historical contexts and its analysis required the understanding of subjective motivations of individuals ( social actors ) . Thus Weber 's methodology emphasises the use of comparative historical analysis . Therefore , Weber was more interested in explaining how a certain outcome was the result of various historical processes rather than predicting an outcome of those processes in the future . 
 = = = Rationalisation = = = 
 Many scholars have described rationalisation and the question of individual freedom in an increasingly rational society , as the main theme of Weber 's work . This theme was situated in the larger context of the relationship between psychological motivations , cultural values and beliefs ( primarily , religion ) and the structure of the society ( usually determined by the economy ) . 
 By rationalisation , Weber understood first , the individual cost @-@ benefit calculation , second , the wider , bureaucratic organisation of the organisations and finally , in the more general sense as the opposite of understanding the reality through mystery and magic ( disenchantment ) . 
 The fate of our times is characterised by rationalisation and <unk> and , above all , by the " disenchantment of the world " 
 Weber began his studies of the subject in The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism , in which he argued that the redefinition of the connection between work and piety in Protestantism and especially in ascetic Protestant denominations , particularly Calvinism , shifted human effort towards rational efforts aimed at achieving economic gain . In Protestant religion , Christian piety towards God was expressed through one 's secular vocation ( secularisation of calling ) . The rational roots of this doctrine , he argued , soon grew incompatible with and larger than the religious and so the latter were eventually discarded . 
 Weber continued his investigation into this matter in later works , notably in his studies on bureaucracy and on the classification of legitimate authority into three types – Rational @-@ legal , traditional and charismatic – of which the rational @-@ legal ( through bureaucracy ) is the dominant one in the modern world . In these works Weber described what he saw as society 's movement towards rationalisation . Similarly , rationalisation could be seen in the economy , with the development of highly rational and calculating capitalism . Weber also saw rationalisation as one of the main factors setting the European West apart from the rest of the world . Rationalisation relied on deep changes in ethics , religion , psychology and culture ; changes that first took place in the Western civilisation . 
 What Weber depicted was not only the secularisation of Western culture , but also and especially the development of modern societies from the viewpoint of rationalisation . The new structures of society were marked by the differentiation of the two functionally intermeshing systems that had taken shape around the organisational cores of the capitalist enterprise and the bureaucratic state apparatus . Weber understood this process as the institutionalisation of purposive @-@ rational economic and administrative action . To the degree that everyday life was affected by this cultural and societal rationalisation , traditional forms of life – which in the early modern period were differentiated primarily according to one 's trade – were dissolved . 
 Features of rationalisation include increasing knowledge , growing impersonality and enhanced control of social and material life . Weber was ambivalent towards rationalisation ; while admitting it was responsible for many advances , in particular , freeing humans from traditional , restrictive and illogical social guidelines , he also criticised it for dehumanising individuals as " cogs in the machine " and curtailing their freedom , trapping them in the bureaucratic iron cage of rationality and bureaucracy . Related to rationalisation is the process of disenchantment , in which the world is becoming more explained and less mystical , moving from polytheistic religions to monotheistic ones and finally to the Godless science of modernity . Those processes affect all of society , removing " sublime values ... from public life " and making art less creative . 
 In a dystopian critique of rationalisation , Weber notes that modern society is a product of an individualistic drive of the Reformation , yet at the same time , the society created in this process is less and less welcoming of individualism . 
 How is it at all possible to salvage any remnants of " individual " freedom of movement in any sense given this all @-@ powerful trend ? 
 = = = Sociology of religion = = = 
 Weber 's work in the field of sociology of religion started with the essay The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism and continued with the analysis of The Religion of China : Confucianism and Taoism , The Religion of India : The Sociology of Hinduism and Buddhism and Ancient Judaism . His work on other religions was interrupted by his sudden death in 1920 , which prevented him from following Ancient Judaism with studies of early Christianity and Islam . His three main themes in the essays were the effect of religious ideas on economic activities , the relation between social stratification and religious ideas and the distinguishable characteristics of Western civilisation . 
 Weber saw religion as one of the core forces in society . His goal was to find reasons for the different development paths of the cultures of the Occident and the Orient , although without judging or valuing them , like some of the contemporary thinkers who followed the social Darwinist paradigm ; Weber wanted primarily to explain the distinctive elements of the Western civilisation . In the analysis of his findings , Weber maintained that Calvinist ( and more widely , Protestant ) religious ideas had had a major impact on the social innovation and development of the economic system of the West , but noted that they were not the only factors in this development . Other notable factors mentioned by Weber included the rationalism of scientific pursuit , merging observation with mathematics , science of scholarship and jurisprudence , rational systematisation and bureaucratisation of government administration and economic enterprise . In the end , the study of the sociology of religion , according to Weber , focused on one distinguishing part of the Western culture , the decline of beliefs in magic , or what he referred to as " disenchantment of the world " . 
 Weber also proposed a socioevolutionary model of religious change , showing that in general , societies have moved from magic to polytheism , then to pantheism , monotheism and finally , ethical monotheism . According to Weber , this evolution occurred as the growing economic stability allowed professionalisation and the evolution of ever more sophisticated priesthood . As societies grew more complex and encompassed different groups , a hierarchy of gods developed and as power in the society became more centralised , the concept of a single , universal God became more popular and desirable . 
 = = = = The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism = = = = 
 Weber 's essay The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism is his most famous work . It is argued that this work should not be viewed as a detailed study of Protestantism , but rather as an introduction into Weber 's later works , especially his studies of interaction between various religious ideas and economic behaviour as part of the rationalisation of the economic system . In The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism , Weber put forward the thesis that Calvinist ethic and ideas influenced the development of capitalism . He noted the post @-@ Reformation shift of Europe 's economic centre away from Catholic countries such as France , Spain and Italy , and toward Protestant countries such as the Netherlands , England , Scotland and Germany . Weber also noted that societies having more Protestants were those with a more highly developed capitalist economy . Similarly , in societies with different religions , most successful business leaders were Protestant . Weber thus argued that Roman Catholicism impeded the development of the capitalist economy in the West , as did other religions such as Confucianism and Buddhism elsewhere in the world . 
 The development of the concept of the calling quickly gave to the modern entrepreneur a fabulously clear conscience – and also industrious workers ; he gave to his employees as the wages of their ascetic devotion to the calling and of co @-@ operation in his ruthless exploitation of them through capitalism the prospect of eternal salvation . 
 Christian religious devotion had historically been accompanied by rejection of mundane affairs , including economic pursuit . Weber showed that certain types of Protestantism – notably Calvinism – were supportive of rational pursuit of economic gain and worldly activities dedicated to it , seeing them as endowed with moral and spiritual significance . Weber argued that there were many reasons to look for the origins of modern capitalism in the religious ideas of the Reformation . In particular , the Protestant ethic ( or more specifically , Calvinist ethic ) motivated the believers to work hard , be successful in business and reinvest their profits in further development rather than frivolous pleasures . The notion of calling meant that each individual had to take action as an indication of their salvation ; just being a member of the Church was not enough . Predestination also reduced agonising over economic inequality and further , it meant that a material wealth could be taken as a sign of salvation in the afterlife . The believers thus justified pursuit of profit with religion , as instead of being fuelled by morally suspect greed or ambition , their actions were motivated by a highly moral and respected philosophy . This Weber called the " spirit of capitalism " : it was the Protestant religious ideology that was behind – and inevitably led to – the capitalist economic system . This theory is often viewed as a reversal of Marx 's thesis that the economic " base " of society determines all other aspects of it . 
 Weber abandoned research into Protestantism because his colleague Ernst Troeltsch , a professional theologian , had begun work on the book The Social Teachings of the Christian Churches and Sects . Another reason for Weber 's decision was that Troeltsch 's work already achieved what he desired in that area : laying the groundwork for a comparative analysis of religion and society . 
 The phrase " work ethic " used in modern commentary is a derivative of the " Protestant ethic " discussed by Weber . It was adopted when the idea of the Protestant ethic was generalised to apply to the Japanese people , Jews and other non @-@ Christians and thus lost its religious connotations . 
 = = = = The Religion of China : Confucianism and Taoism = = = = 
 The Religion of China : Confucianism and Taoism was Weber 's second major work on the sociology of religion . Hans H. Gerth edited and translated this text into English , with an introduction by C. K. Wang . Weber focused on those aspects of Chinese society that were different from those of Western Europe , especially those aspects that contrasted with Puritanism . His work also questioned why capitalism did not develop in China . He focused on the issues of Chinese urban development , Chinese patrimonialism and officialdom and Chinese religion and philosophy ( primarily , Confucianism and Taoism ) , as the areas in which Chinese development differed most distinctively from the European route . 
 According to Weber , Confucianism and Puritanism are mutually exclusive types of rational thought , each attempting to prescribe a way of life based on religious dogma . Notably , they both valued self @-@ control and restraint and did not oppose accumulation of wealth . However , to both those qualities were just means to the final goal and here they were divided by a key difference . Confucianism 's goal was " a cultured status position " , while Puritanism 's goal was to create individuals who are " tools of God " . The intensity of belief and enthusiasm for action were rare in Confucianism , but common in Protestantism . Actively working for wealth was unbecoming a proper Confucian . Therefore , Weber states that it was this difference in social attitudes and mentality , shaped by the respective , dominant religions , that contributed to the development of capitalism in the West and the absence of it in China . 
 = = = = The Religion of India : The Sociology of Hinduism and Buddhism = = = = 
 The Religion of India : The Sociology of Hinduism and Buddhism was Weber 's third major work on the sociology of religion . In this work he deals with the structure of Indian society , with the orthodox doctrines of Hinduism and the heterodox doctrines of Buddhism , with modifications brought by the influence of popular religiosity and finally with the impact of religious beliefs on the secular ethic of Indian society . In Weber 's view , Hinduism in India , like Confucianism in China , was a barrier for capitalism . The Indian caste system made it very difficult for individuals to advance in the society beyond their caste . Activity , including economic activity , was seen as unimportant in the context of the advancement of the soul . 
 Weber ended his research of society and religion in India by bringing in insights from his previous work on China to discuss similarities of the Asian belief systems . He notes that the beliefs saw the meaning of life as otherworldly mystical experience . The social world is fundamentally divided between the educated elite , following the guidance of a prophet or wise man and the uneducated masses whose beliefs are centered on magic . In Asia , there was no Messianic prophecy to give plan and meaning to the everyday life of educated and uneducated alike . Weber juxtaposed such Messianic prophecies ( also called ethical prophecies ) , notably from the Near East region to the exemplary prophecies found on the Asiatic mainland , focused more on reaching to the educated elites and enlightening them on the proper ways to live one 's life , usually with little emphasis on hard work and the material world . It was those differences that prevented the countries of the Occident from following the paths of the earlier Chinese and Indian civilisations . His next work , Ancient Judaism was an attempt to prove this theory . 
 = = = = Ancient Judaism = = = = 
 In Ancient Judaism , his fourth major work on the sociology of religion , Weber attempted to explain the factors that resulted in the early differences between Oriental and Occidental religiosity . He contrasted the <unk> asceticism developed by Western Christianity with mystical contemplation of the kind developed in India . Weber noted that some aspects of Christianity sought to conquer and change the world , rather than withdraw from its imperfections . This fundamental characteristic of Christianity ( when compared to Far Eastern religions ) stems originally from ancient Jewish prophecy . 
 Weber claimed that Judaism not only fathered Christianity and Islam , but was crucial to the rise of the modern Occidental state ; Judaism 's influence was as important as Hellenistic and Roman cultures . 
 Weber 's premature death in 1920 prevented him from following his planned analysis of Psalms , the Book of Job , Talmudic Jewry , early Christianity and Islam . 
 = = = = Economy and Society = = = = 
 Weber 's magnum opus Economy and Society is a collection of his essays which he was working on at the time of his death in 1920 . After his death , the final organization and editing of the book fell to his widow Marianne Weber . The final German form published in 1921 reflected very much Marianne Weber 's work and intellectual commitment . Beginning in 1956 , the German jurist Johannes <unk> began editing and organizing the German edition of Economy and Society based on his study of the papers that Weber left at his death . 
 English versions of Economy and Society were published as a collected volume in 1968 as edited by Gunther Roth and Claus <unk> . As a result of the various editions in German and English , there are differences between the organization of the different volumes . 
 Economy and Society includes a wide range of essays dealing with Weber 's views regarding Sociology , Social Philosophy , Politics , Social Stratification , World Religion , Diplomacy , and other subjects . The book is typically published in a two volume set in both German and English , and is more than 1000 pages long . 
 = = = = Theodicy of Fortune and Misfortune = = = = 
 The Theodicy of fortune and misfortune within sociology is the theory , as Weber suggested , of how " members of different social classes adopt different belief systems , or theodices , to explain their social situation " . 
 The concept of theodicy was expanded mainly with the thought of Weber and his addition of ethical considerations to the subject of religion . There is this ethical part of religion , including " ( 1 ) soteriology and ( 2 ) theodicy . These mean , respectively , how people understand themselves to be able to be in a correct relationship with supernatural powers , and how to explain evil – or why bad things seem to happen to those who seem to be good people " . There is a separation of different theodicies with regard to class . " <unk> of misfortune tend to the belief that wealth and other manifestations of privilege are indications or signs of evil .... In contrast , theodicies of fortune emphasise the notion that privileges are a blessing and are deserved . " Weber also writes that " the affluent embrace good fortune theodicies , which emphasise that prosperity is a blessing of God ... [ while ] theodices of misfortune emphasise that affluence is a sign of evil and that suffering in this world will be rewarded in the next . " Thus these two distinctions can be applied not only to class structure within society but denomination and racial segregation within religion . 
 Weber defines the importance of societal class within religion by examining the difference between the two theodicies and to what class structures they apply . The concept of " work ethic " is attached to the theodicy of fortune ; thus , because of the Protestant " work ethic " , there was a contribution of higher class outcomes and more education among Protestants . Those without the work ethic clung to the theodicy of misfortune , believing wealth and happiness were granted in the afterlife . Another example of how this belief of religious theodicy influences class , is that those of lower status , the poor , cling to deep religiousness and faith as a way to comfort themselves and provide hope for a more prosperous future , while those of higher status cling to the sacraments or actions that prove their right of possessing greater wealth . 
 These two theodicies can be found in the denominational segregation within the religious community . The main division can be seen between the mainline Protestant and evangelical denominations and their relation to the class into which their particular theodicy pertains . For example , mainline churches , with their upper class congregations , " promote [ d ] order , stability , and conservatism , and in so doing proved to be a powerful source of legitimation of the status quo and of existing disparities in the distribution of wealth and power " because much of the wealth of the church comes from the congregation . In contrast , Pentecostal churches adopted the theodicy of misfortune . They instead " advocated change intended to advance the cause of justice and fairness " . Thus the learned and upper class religious churches who preach the theodicy of fortune , ultimately support capitalism and corporation , while the churches who adopted the theodicy of misfortune , instead preached equality and fairness . 
 = = = Politics and government = = = 
 In political sociology , one of Weber 's most influential contributions is his " Politics as a Vocation " ( Politik als Beruf ) essay . Therein , Weber unveils the definition of the state as that entity that possesses a monopoly on the legitimate use of physical force . , Weber wrote that politics is the sharing of state 's power between various groups , and political leaders are those who wield this power . A politician must not be a man of the " true Christian ethic " , understood by Weber as being the ethic of the Sermon on the Mount , that is to say , the injunction to turn the other cheek . An adherent of such an ethic ought rather to be understood to be a saint , for it is only saints , according to Weber , that can appropriately follow it . The political realm is no realm for saints ; a politician ought to marry the ethic of attitude and the ethic of responsibility ( " <unk> vs <unk> " ) and must possess both a passion for his vocation and the capacity to distance himself from the subject of his exertions ( the governed ) . 
 Weber distinguished three ideal types of political leadership ( alternatively referred to as three types of domination , legitimisation or authority ) : 
 charismatic domination ( familial and religious ) , 
 traditional domination ( patriarchs , patrimonialism , feudalism ) and 
 legal domination ( modern law and state , bureaucracy ) . 
 In his view , every historical relation between rulers and ruled contained such elements and they can be analysed on the basis of this tripartite distinction . He notes that the instability of charismatic authority forces it to " <unk> " into a more structured form of authority . In a pure type of traditional rule , sufficient resistance to a ruler can lead to a " traditional revolution " . The move towards a rational @-@ legal structure of authority , utilising a bureaucratic structure , is inevitable in the end . Thus this theory can be sometimes viewed as part of the social evolutionism theory . This ties to his broader concept of rationalisation by suggesting the inevitability of a move in this direction . 
 Bureaucratic administration means fundamentally domination through knowledge . 
 Weber described many ideal types of public administration and government in his masterpiece Economy and Society ( 1922 ) . His critical study of the bureaucratisation of society became one of the most enduring parts of his work . It was Weber who began the studies of bureaucracy and whose works led to the popularisation of this term . Many aspects of modern public administration go back to him and a classic , hierarchically organised civil service of the Continental type is called " Weberian civil service " . As the most efficient and rational way of organising , bureaucratisation for Weber was the key part of the rational @-@ legal authority and furthermore , he saw it as the key process in the ongoing rationalisation of the Western society . 
 Weber listed several preconditions for the emergence of the bureaucracy : The growth in space and population being administered , the growth in complexity of the administrative tasks being carried out and the existence of a monetary economy – these resulted in a need for a more efficient administrative system . Development of communication and transportation technologies made more efficient administration possible ( and popularly requested ) and democratisation and rationalisation of culture resulted in demands that the new system treat everybody equally . 
 Weber 's ideal bureaucracy is characterised by hierarchical organisation , by delineated lines of authority in a fixed area of activity , by action taken ( and recorded ) on the basis of written rules , by bureaucratic officials needing expert training , by rules being implemented neutrally and by career advancement depending on technical qualifications judged by organisations , not by individuals . 
