 = = = Second World War = = = 
 In anticipation of the Second World War , Crawford expressed the view that he would " remain neutral " and not take sides , not because he favoured fascism over liberal democracy but because he saw both as repugnant forms of capitalist society which would ultimately be swept away by a socialist revolution ; in his words the war would be " a clash of imperialisms , a gangsters ' feud " . After war broke out , he decided that in the event of a German invasion of Britain he would destroy all of his leftist literature lest he be persecuted for possessing it . 
 In November 1940 , the German Luftwaffe began bombing Southampton , where the OS offices were located . Crawford removed some of the old OS maps and stored them in the garage of his house at Nursling , while also unsuccessfully urging the Director @-@ General to remove the OS ' archives of books , documents , maps and photographs to a secure location . Subsequently , the OS headquarters were destroyed in the bombing , resulting in the loss of most of their archive . The refusal of the OS administration to take his warnings seriously infuriated Crawford , exacerbating his anger about the civil service 's red tape and bureaucracy . In his words , " trying to get a move on in the Civil Service was like trying to swim in a lake of glue " . Resigning his membership of various British societies , he unsuccessfully tried to find employment abroad . 
 With little for an archaeology officer to do at the OS in wartime , in the summer of 1941 Crawford was seconded to the Royal Commission on the Historical Monuments of England " for special duties during wartime " . They assigned him to carry out a project of photographic documentation in Southampton for the National Buildings Record , producing images of many old buildings or architectural features that were threatened by the Luftwaffe 's bombing campaign . He appreciated the value of this work , taking 5000 photographs over the course of the war . In 1944 , the Council for British Archaeology was founded , and while Crawford was invited to serve on its first council , he declined to do so , being lukewarm about the project . 
 = = Later life : 1946 – 1957 = = 
 In 1946 , at the earliest possible opportunity , Crawford resigned his post at the OS , where he was replaced by Charles Philips . He nevertheless retained his interest in Southampton and its architecture , in particular that of the Middle Ages , and in 1946 was a founding member of a lobby group , Friends of Old Southampton , which sought to protect the city 's historic architecture from destruction amid post @-@ war development . During the post @-@ war period he also came to be preoccupied and terrified by the prospect of a nuclear war , urging archaeological authorities to make copies of all their information and disperse it in different locations to ensure that knowledge survived any forthcoming Third World War . Retaining his left @-@ wing interests , in 1945 and 1946 he had some involvement with the Labour Party , although elsewhere he mocked the " ignorant " who thought that Labour " genuinely " represented socialism . In the latter part of the 1940s he became increasingly disillusioned with the Soviet Union after reading Arthur Koestler 's Darkness at Noon , a book about Joseph Stalin 's Great Purge and Moscow show trials , as well as learning of how Soviet scientists who did not support the ideas of Trofim Lysenko had been persecuted . In 1950 , after reading the memoir of Margarete Buber @-@ Neumann , he declared himself to be " fanatically anti @-@ Soviet [ and ] anti @-@ communist " . 
 In 1949 , Crawford was elected a Fellow of the British Academy , and in 1950 he became a Commander of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire . In 1952 he was made an honorary Doctor of Letters by the University of Cambridge for his contributions to aerial archaeology . 
 Crawford returned his attention to Sudanese archaeology , describing Sudan as " an escape @-@ land of the mind at a time when the island of Britain was an austere prison " . At the invitation of the Sudanese government , he visited the country on an archaeological reconnaissance trip in January 1950 , before visiting the Middle Nile in 1951 . At Nursling , he wrote a book on the northern Sudanese Funj Sultanate of <unk> , which appeared in the same year as his long @-@ delayed report on the Abu Geili excavation , co @-@ written with Frank Addison . He followed this with the 1953 book Castles and Churches in the Middle Nile Region . Another of Crawford 's book projects in this period was a short history of Nursling , as well as an introductory guide to landscape studies , Archaeology in the Field , published in 1953 . In 1955 he then published his autobiography , Said and Done , which G. E. Daniel and Mark <unk> — the authors of Crawford 's entry in the Dictionary of National Biography — described as " a vivacious and amusing autobiography in which his character comes clearly through . " 
 After the discovery of prehistoric rock art on Stonehenge in 1953 , Crawford decided to examine the megalithic monuments in Brittany to examine the engravings there . Inspired by this subject , in 1957 he then published The Eye Goddess , a book in which he argued for the existence of a religion devoted to a Mother Goddess that was found across the Old World from the Palaeolithic through to the period of Christianisation , and which he believed was evidenced through various abstract depictions of eyes in prehistoric rock art . Similar ideas of a Neolithic religion devoted to a great goddess were also espoused in the works of Childe and Glyn Daniel that same decade , resulting in the observation from the later historian Ronald Hutton that " whether or not there was ever an ' Age of the Goddess ' in Neolithic Europe , there certainly was one among European intellectuals in the mid twentieth century " . Crawford 's book was nevertheless not well received academically . 
 Another of Crawford 's interests were cats , and he learned how to mimic cat noises , performing these on a BBC broadcast , " The Language of Cats " , which proved popular and resulted in his receiving a range of fan letters . A publisher in the United States invited him to write a book on the subject , but Crawford never completed it . In the mid @-@ 1950s , Crawford began to take an interest in astronomy and cosmological ideas about the origin of the universe , favouring Fred Hoyle 's steady state theory about an eternal universe with no beginning or end . 
 In 1951 , an edited volume , Aspects of Archaeology in Britain and Beyond : Essays Presented to O. G. S. Crawford , was published , having been edited by Grimes and brought out to mark Crawford 's 65th birthday . Reviewing the anthology for Antiquity , J. v. d . Waals and R. J. Forbes described it as " an exquisite birthday present " . Many of Crawford 's associates worried about him , aware that he lived alone – with only the company of his elderly housekeeper and cats – at his cottage in Nursling , lacking either a car or telephone . It was there that he died in his sleep on the night of 28 – 29 November 1957 . He had arranged for some of his letters and books to be destroyed , while others were to be sent to the Bodleian Library , with the proviso that some of them would not be opened until the year 2000 . His body was buried in the church graveyard at Nursling . In accordance with his instructions , the title " Editor of Antiquity " was inscribed on his gravestone , reflecting his desire to be remembered primarily as an archaeologist . On Crawford 's death , editorship of Antiquity was taken on by Daniel . 
 = = Personality = = 
 Crawford 's socialist beliefs were known to his colleagues and associates , as was his antipathy toward religion . While he became an atheist during his time at Marlborough College , it is not known exactly when he embraced socialism . He placed a strong emphasis on personal self @-@ sufficiency , and openly expressed contempt for those who required social interaction for their own happiness . His adult life was a solitary one , with no family and no dependents . His sexual orientation remains unknown , with Bowden noting that Crawford 's interactions with women were " cordial but not significant . " He was fond of cats , and kept several as pets , also rearing pigs for food as well as growing vegetables in his garden at Nursing . A heavy smoker , he was known for rolling his own cigarettes . 
 Crawford was often irritable and some colleagues found him exasperating to work with . He was known for his lack of patience , and when angry or frustrated was known to fling his hat to the floor in a gesture of rage . His biographer Kitty Hauser noted that " apparently trifling events left an indelible mark on him " , for he would remember a perceived slight for decades . However , Bowden expressed the view that while Crawford " had a quick temper , which he strove to control ... he was essentially a friendly man " , adding that he could be " clubbable , hospitable and kind " . 
 Jonathan Glancey referred to Crawford as " a compelling if decidedly cantankerous anti @-@ hero " and an " essentially Victorian eccentric " . Hauser characterised him as " a very British combination of a snob and a rebel " , also noting that he was " no great intellectual " . Similarly , Clark expressed the view that " Crawford 's achievements " stemmed from his " moral integrity and singleness of mind " rather than " any outstanding intellectual brilliance " , while the journalist Neal Ascherson described Crawford as " not conventionally intellectual " . Ascherson added that Crawford was " withdrawn , generally ill at ease with other members of the human species except on paper , and suspicious of personal celebrity " , in this way Ascherson contrasting him with his " gregarious " contemporaries Wheeler and Daniel . 
 Daniel characterised Crawford as having a " messianic desire " to promote archaeology " to the people of the world " . However , he was opinionated and dogmatic and expressed disdain for those who viewed the past in a different manner to himself . Piggott noted that Crawford was unable to sympathise with the perspectives of those studying past societies through a discipline other than archaeology , such as history or art history , and that he moreover could not sympathise with " anyone not as passionately concerned as himself in field antiquities " . For example , in one of his publications , Crawford dismissed historians as being " bookish " and " clean @-@ booted " . The archaeologist Jacquetta Hawkes commented that in Crawford 's editorials for Antiquity , he directed " righteous indignation " toward " everybody from the State , Dominion and Colonial Governments , Universities and Museums , to tardy reviewers and careless proof @-@ correctors . " 
 Wheeler – who considered Crawford to be " one of my closest friends " – claimed that the latter was " an outspoken and uncompromising opponent " and a man who had a " boyish glee in calling the bluff of convention " . He added that Crawford exhibited the " divine impatience of the pioneer " and that he had an " inability to work in harness . If he joined a committee or a <unk> , he did so only to resign at the first opportunity . " Piggott described Crawford as a mentor who " was encouraging , helpful , and unconventional : his racy outspoken criticism of what then passed for the archaeological Establishment was music to a schoolboy 's ear " . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Crawford was much respected by his peers . According to Hauser , at the time of his death Crawford had " acquired an almost mythical status among British archaeologists as the uncompromising – if eccentric – progenitor of them all . " In 1999 , the archaeologist John Charlton referred to Crawford as " one of the pioneers of British archaeology this century " , while nine years later Ascherson described him as " beyond question one of the great figures of the ' modern ' generation which transformed British archaeological practice and its institutions between 1918 and – say – 1955 . " Ascherson noted that Crawford 's contributions to archaeology had little to do with archaeological theory and more to do with " the institutions and tools ... which he bequeathed to his profession " , including Antiquity . Crawford devoted little time to interpreting the archaeological record , and when he did so usually embraced functionalist interpretations , believing that people in traditional societies devoted almost all of their time to survival rather than behaving according to religious or symbolic concepts ; in his he was typical of his time and was influenced by Marxist materialism . 
 Crawford was recognised for his contributions to bringing archaeology to a wide sector of the British public . The archaeologist Caroline Malone stated that many viewed Crawford as " an ' amateur 's ' archaeologist , providing the means to publish and comment outside the restrictions of local journals and to offer a vision of a new and universal discipline " . Clark expressed the view that Crawford " always hankered to restore the flesh and blood and to make the past a reality to the living generation " , and in doing so helped to attract a greater public audience for British archaeology than many of his colleagues . Wheeler remarked that " he was our greatest archaeological publicist ; he taught the world about scholarship , and scholars about one another . " Commenting on Crawford 's editorship of Antiquity , Hawkes expressed the view that his " skill in steering between over @-@ simplification and over @-@ specialization has enabled the Magazine to succeed admirably in its role as go @-@ between for experts and public . " 
 Crawford 's system of documenting archaeological sites in the OS ' Archaeological Record provided the blueprint on which both the later National Archaeological Records in England , Scotland , and Wales , and the local sites and monuments records were based . In the 21st century , Crawford 's photographic archive stored at Oxford University 's Institute of Archaeology was still consulted by archaeologists seeking to view how various sites appeared during the first half of the 20th century . In 2008 , Kitty Hauser 's biography , Bloody Old Britain , was published . Reviewing her work for The Guardian , Glancey described it as " a truly fascinating and unexpected book " . Writing in Public Archaeology , Ascherson characterised it as " full of clever perception and sympathetic insight " but was critical of its lack of references and " occasional mistakes of fact " . 
 = David Beharall = 
 David Alexander Beharall ( born 8 March 1979 ) is a British entrepreneur and former professional English footballer who retired after a knee injury while playing for Stockport County in 2006 . 
 Since retiring he has set up a number of successful businesses and won North West Entrepreneur of the year as well as an award for his work within social media . Beharall now owns and runs digital agency <unk> 
 Beharall started off his football playing career for Newcastle United in 1996 and graduated to the first team in 1998 . While at St James ' Park he had loan spells at Grimsby Town and Oldham Athletic in 2001 and 2002 before joining Oldham for a fee of £ 150 @,@ 000 in March 2002 . He left Oldham in February 2005 to join Carlisle United on a free transfer and a year later in February 2006 Beharall joined Stockport County before retiring due to a knee injury 3 months later . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Newcastle United = = = 
 Beharall started off his playing career at hometown club Newcastle United in 1996 where he graduated to the first team in 1998 after being captain to the youth and reserve teams . Beharall made his first FA Premier League start and his début for Newcastle in the 3 – 1 loss against Everton on 17 April 1999 . Beharall started another 3 FA Premier League games during the 1998 – 99 season . During the 1999 – 00 season , Beharall played 2 more premier league games ; the 3 – 3 draw against Wimbledon and the 5 – 1 loss at Manchester United . The match against Manchester United turned out to be his last match for the club . After two years without a first team appearance , Beharall wanted to join Preston North End on loan after spending two days at Deepdale in early January 2001 , but Preston 's manager David Moyes decided against the move . 
 = = = Grimsby Town = = = 
 With first team opportunities running out at Newcastle , Beharall joined Grimsby Town in August 2001 originally on trial , with a view to a loan move due to Grimsby 's lack of central defenders . After his trial he joined The Mariners on loan in August 2001 for 3 months and made his début in a 1 – 0 win against Crewe Alexandra on 11 August . David played another 15 league and cup games for Grimsby Town , including the 2 – 1 cup upset they inflicted on Liverpool in the Football League Cup 3rd round at Anfield on 9 October 2001 . Beharall gave away the penalty that Liverpool midfielder Gary McAllister scored as he was judged to have handled the ball in the penalty box . That goal gave Liverpool the lead with 19 minutes left but goals from Marlon <unk> and Phil Jevons in stoppage time cancelled out Beharall 's mistake and Grimsby pulled off a big cup upset . Beharall <unk> his loan spell in November 2001 . 
 = = = Oldham Athletic = = = 
 Ten days after leaving Grimsby Town , Beharall was on the move again , this time to Oldham Athletic on a loan deal to the end of the season . Beharall made his <unk> in a 0 – 0 draw against Stoke City on 21 November 2001 . He played 17 league games , two FA Cup and two Football League Trophy matches during his loan spell at Oldham , scoring one goal in the 89th minute in a 1 – 1 draw against Wigan Athletic on 15 December 2001 . Beharall was bought by Oldham Athletic on 6 March 2002 for £ 150 @,@ 000 on a three @-@ year contract after impressing during his loan deal . David played one more league game for The Latics during the 2001 – 02 season against Wigan on 9 March , a match which Wigan won 1 – 0 . In the 2002 – 03 season Beharall played 32 league , 4 League and 3 FA Cup games for Oldham under the management of Iain Dowie , who replaced Mick Wadsworth in the summer of 2002 . In the pre @-@ season of the 2003 – 04 season , he suffered an injury which left him out of action until October 2003 . During this time in August 2003 Beharall was a victim of a carjacking when he and team mate Adam Griffin were attacked when they stopped at a cash machine with Beharall leaving <unk> in the passenger seat and his £ 21 @,@ 000 Mercedes @-@ Benz <unk> car parked at a Texaco garage in Oldham . Griffin was left defenseless with one of the attackers holding him at knifepoint and another man hit Griffin 's left arm with an iron bar , then dragging and throwing Griffin to the ground . Beharall left his wallet and mobile phone in the car but was relieved that he and Griffin were OK . During the 2003 – 2004 season Beharall played 7 league , 2 FA Cup and 2 Football league games , he also scored 2 league goals against Plymouth Argyle on 1 November 2003 . After playing only 6 league games during the 2004 – 05 season new manager Brian Talbot , Beharall left the club on 24 January 2005 after agreeing a settlement figure . 
 = = = Carlisle United = = = 
 Nine days after leaving Oldham , Beharall joined Carlisle United , with him signing a contract until July 2006 . This was the first time in his career he played for a non @-@ league club . Beharall made his debut for the club in the 2 – 2 draw against Gravesend & Northfleet on 12 February 2005 . In the 2004 – 2005 season . Beharall was part of Carlisle 's return to the Football League , playing 14 matches ( 3 of these being playoff matches ) and playing 1 FA Trophy match . He scored one Conference goal , in the 2 – 1 win at Farnborough Town on 2 April 2005 . Beharall 's pre @-@ season preparations were ruined by an injury which made him miss the start of Carlisle 's season , but the MRI scan revealed he had not suffered a tear to any of the major knee ligaments . When he returned from injury in October 2005 , Beharall played 6 League and 2 Football League Trophy matches . Most of these appearances came in October and November . However , with the lack of opportunities , Beharall left Carlisle by mutual consent on 1 February 2006 . 
 = = = Stockport County = = = 
 After being released by Carlisle , Beharall decided to join League 2 strugglers Stockport County until the end of the 2005 – 06 season , after playing well in a reserve match for County prior to his move , he had high hopes of saving the club from relegation and also hoped to impress the County manager Jim Gannon enough to earn a new contract for the following season . Beharall made his début for County in the 2 – 1 away victory against Chester City . Beharall played another 11 league games during the 2005 – 06 for Stockport and was starting contract negotiations the managed Jim Gannon , but in May 2006 Beharall retired due to an ongoing bad knee injury . 
 = = Statistics = = 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = Promotions = = = 
 2004 – 05 : Conference National Playoff Winner ( promotion to League Two ) – Carlisle United 
 = NBA Store = 
 The NBA Store is a series of officially licensed retailers which sell merchandise for the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) . The most prominent of these stores is located in the United States on Fifth Avenue and 45th Street , Manhattan , New York . There are four other locations outside the United States : two in Beijing , China and two in the Metro Manila , Philippines . 
 The New York location is run by online retailer Fanatics , who also runs the League 's online store at <unk> The NBA Store sells over 35 @,@ 000 pieces of NBA merchandise and features several attractions ; it is often visited by players , celebrities , and political leaders . It also serves as a headquarters for the NBA where the association hosts charity events . 
 Since opening its first store in 1998 , the NBA has seen increasing business opportunities in foreign markets mainly due to the influx of new international players . The biggest growth has been in China , where players Yao Ming and Yi Jianlian , combined with the interest generated by the 2008 Summer Olympics , created enough demand to open two new stores . The NBA has also expanded into games like Second Life where it created a virtual NBA Store in 2007 . 
 The original Fifth Avenue store closed on February 13 , 2011 . The league temporarily relocated the store in a smaller space at 590 Fifth Avenue until August 2015 . The new location , located at 545 Fifth Avenue , opened on December 21 , 2015 . 
 = = New York City = = 
 Established in the fall of 1998 , the 25 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 2 @,@ 300 m2 ) store offers free video games , TV screens displaying live broadcasts and game action footage , and other attractions , like player measurement charts . Among its many products , the store sells current NBA & WNBA jerseys , replica jerseys of retired players , footwear , collectibles , photography , and other gifts . It has several departments , such as a home section , where customers can buy items like pillows , plates , and other NBA related items . NBA employees , including players , receive a 30 % discount on their purchases . 
 Construction involved removing beams to make space for a 36 @-@ by @-@ 54 @-@ foot hole in the bottom three floors of the existing 41 story building . Steve <unk> has been the store 's concierge since it opened in 1998 . The store is frequently visited by celebrities , tourists , and NBA players who are in town to play the New York Knicks or New Jersey Nets . The NBA Store has been visited by important guests such as former President Bill Clinton , and the Mayor of London , Ken Livingstone , who received a personal tour by NBA Commissioner David Stern . The store is also host to The NBA Store Concert Series , concert events where musical artists perform at the store 's half court ; some previous performers include : Michelle Branch , Destiny 's Child , Run DMC , and Aaron Carter . 
 The NBA Store in New York City allowed its customers to rent areas for birthday parties or other private celebrations and has hosted charity events in the past . During Christmas 2006 , the wife of NBA player Dwyane Wade volunteered at the NBA Store Holiday Toy Drive . The New York Knicks regularly held events like Autographs for Supplies at the NBA Store where New York players like Eddy Curry , Zach Randolph , and WNBA 's Kym Hampton meet fans and signs items in an effort to raise school supplies for children and stress academics . In 2007 , the store held a fashion exhibition to celebrate the Casual Male Retail Group acquisition of the men 's big & tall clothing company Jared M. , a company popular among athletes and celebrities for its custom sportswear ; several NBA players were happy to show their support since the founder had fitted many of them in the past . 
 In 2007 , the most sold team paraphernalia were from the Los Angeles Lakers , New York Knicks , and the 2006 NBA champions the Miami Heat . The following year , the Lakers and Knicks retained their top spots , but the Heat were replaced by the new 2008 NBA champions the Boston Celtics . 
 The NBA Store 's main outlet in New York was closed in February 13 , 2011 due to high rent . " The amount of dollars the landlord is requiring from the next tenant , we couldn 't find a way to make it work , " NBA executive vice president of global merchandising Sal LaRocca said . While the league searched for a new location the store operated temporarily at 590 Fifth Avenue until August 2015 . The store reopened at its new permanent location at 545 Fifth Avenue on December 21 , 2015 . 
 = = Beijing , China = = 
 The NBA also sells its products outside the United States , most notably in China . The NBA 's international operations only provide 10 percent of total profit ; however , the NBA has seen a recent increase in possible business opportunities abroad . 
 Statistics revealed that 300 million out of China 's 1 @.@ 3 billion population played basketball , additionally " 83 percent of males between 15 to 61 years old are interested in the game , " and the NBA was reported to be " the most popular sports league in the country . " In 2006 , it was reported that the NBA was planning to open its first store in Beijing , China ( on <unk> Street ) or Shanghai , China . Partly due to Yao Ming ( 1st overall pick in 2002 ) and Yi Jianlian 's ( 6th overall pick in 2007 ) popularity in their home country , the NBA now sells its products in some 30 @,@ 000 to 50 @,@ 000 retail locations in China . During the 2006 season the NBA broadcast its games in 215 countries and had 83 foreign players , about a quarter of the total players . In 2008 , it had 75 players from 32 different countries . 
 On January 14 , 2008 , the NBA announced the formation of NBA China ( " a joint venture of the NBA , broadcaster ESPN and Chinese companies " ) , " that will conduct all of the league ’ s businesses in Greater China " , the new entity will be led by Tim Chen ( former CEO of Microsoft Greater China ) . In preparation for the 2008 Summer Olympics in China , the NBA opened a flagship store in Beijing ; the <unk> Group was chosen to lead marketing operations for the retail chain @-@ store . 
 The NBA currently has two stores in China ( both in Beijing ) and according to CEO Chen plans to expand " up to 1 @,@ 000 in the next five years . " The first store was opened on July 15 , 2008 ; it has " 300 square meters of retail space " and sells about 400 different items ; about 1 @,@ 000 people showed up for the opening . According to the International Herald Tribune , merchandise sales in China were expected to increase by 60 percent in 2008 . About one third of the traffic received at nba.com comes from their Chinese area ( <unk> ) written in Mandarin built by the Plus Factory , a New York City firm with offices in Beijing . 
 Reports on NBA jersey sales over the last three years ( 2006 – 2009 ) reveal that Kobe Bryant of the Los Angeles Lakers is the most sold jersey in China ; however , Yao Ming fell from 6th to 10th and then back to 6th while his Houston Rockets teammate Tracy McGrady remained ranked third for two straight seasons then fell to fourth in 2009 . 
 = = Second Life = = 
 The MMORPG Second Life , an Internet @-@ based virtual game world , offers its members the option of playing or shopping at a digital replica of the NBA Store . The 3 @-@ D virtual replica was launched on May 1 , 2007 , during the NBA Finals between the San Antonio Spurs and the Cleveland Cavaliers as a way of reaching the global audience and expanding the NBA 's business in the virtual world . The virtual NBA Store is part of the NBA 's virtual headquarters ; other facilities include a T @-@ Mobile arena where player 's avatars can take pictures or watch Finals footage on a JumboTron . At the time of its launch , the NBA was the " first professional sports league to unveil a comprehensive headquarters in a virtual world . " The virtual store 's entrance is modeled after the New York City location , featuring the same double revolving doors and gold NBA lettering . 
 In 2004 , the NBA Live series for home video game consoles introduced an EA NBA Store feature , where players can purchase digital shoes and jerseys with points earned through the completion of in @-@ game tasks . 
 = Kenzō Tange = 
 Kenzō Tange ( <unk> <unk> , Tange Kenzō , 4 September 1913 – 22 March 2005 ) was a Japanese architect , and winner of the 1987 Pritzker Prize for architecture . He was one of the most significant architects of the 20th century , combining traditional Japanese styles with modernism , and designed major buildings on five continents . Tange was also an influential patron of the Metabolist movement . He said : " It was , I believe , around 1959 or at the beginning of the sixties that I began to think about what I was later to call structuralism " , ( cited in Plan 2 / 1982 , Amsterdam ) , a reference to the architectural movement known as Dutch <unk> . 
 Influenced from an early age by the Swiss modernist , Le Corbusier , Tange gained international recognition in 1949 when he won the competition for the design of Hiroshima Peace Memorial Park . He was a member of CIAM ( Congres <unk> d 'Architecture Moderne ) in the 1950s . He did not join the group of younger CIAM architects known as Team X , though his 1960 Tokyo Bay plan was influential for Team 10 in the 1960s , as well as the group that became Metabolism . 
 His university studies on urbanism put him in an ideal position to handle redevelopment projects after the Second World War . His ideas were explored in designs for Tokyo and Skopje . Tange 's work influenced a generation of architects across the world . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Born on 4 September 1913 in Osaka , Japan , Tange spent his early life in the Chinese cities of Hankow and Shanghai ; he and his family returned to Japan after learning of the death of one of his uncles . In contrast to the green lawns and red bricks in their Shanghai abode , the Tange family took up residence in a thatched roof farmhouse in Imabari on the island of Shikoku . 
 After finishing middle school , Tange moved to Hiroshima in 1930 to attend high school . It was here that he first encountered the works of Swiss modernist , Le Corbusier . His discovery of the drawings of the Palace of the Soviets in a foreign art journal convinced him to become an architect . Although he graduated from high school , Tange 's poor results in mathematics and physics meant that he had to pass entrance exams to qualify for admission to the prestigious universities . He spent two years doing so and during that time , he read extensively about western philosophy . Tange also enrolled in the film division at Nihon University 's art department to dodge Japan 's drafting of young men to its military and seldom attended classes . 
 In 1935 Tange began the tertiary studies he desired at University of Tokyo 's architecture department . He studied under <unk> Kishida and <unk> Uchida . Although Tange was fascinated by the photographs of Katsura villa that sat on Kishida 's desk , his work was inspired by Le Corbusier . His graduation project was a seventeen @-@ hectare ( 42 @-@ acre ) development set in Tokyo 's Hibiya Park . 
 = = Early career = = 
 After graduating from the university , Tange started to work as an architect at the office of Kunio Maekawa . During his employment , he travelled to Manchuria , participating in an architectural design competition for a bank , and toured Japanese @-@ occupied Jehol on his return . When the Second World War started , he left Maekawa to rejoin the University of Tokyo as a postgraduate student . He developed an interest in urban design , and referencing only the resources available in the university library , he embarked on a study of Greek and Roman marketplaces . In 1942 , Tange entered a competition for the design of the Greater East Asia Co @-@ Prosperity Sphere Memorial Hall . He was awarded first prize for a design that would have been situated at the base of Mount Fuji ; the hall he conceived was a fusion of Shinto shrine architecture and the plaza on Capitoline Hill in Rome . The design was not realised . 
 In 1946 , Tange became an assistant professor at the university and opened Tange Laboratory . In 1963 , he was promoted to professor of the Department of Urban Engineering . His students included <unk> Otani , <unk> Kurokawa , Arata <unk> , Hajime <unk> and Fumihiko Maki . 
 = = Post war reconstruction = = 
 Tange 's interest in urban studies put him in a good position to handle post war reconstruction . In the summer of 1946 he was invited by the War Damage Rehabilitation Board to put forward a proposal for certain war damaged cities . He submitted plans for Hiroshima and Maebashi . His design for an airport in Kanon , Hiroshima was accepted and built , but a seaside park in Ujina was not . 
 The Hiroshima authorities took advice about the city 's reconstruction from foreign consultants , and in 1947 Tam Deling , an American park planner , suggested they build a Peace Memorial and preserve buildings situated near ground zero , that point directly below the explosion of the atomic bomb . In 1949 the authorities enacted the Hiroshima Peace Memorial Reconstruction Act , which gave the city access to special grant aid , and in August 1949 , an international competition was announced for the design of the Hiroshima Peace Memorial Park . 
 Tange was awarded first prize for a design that proposed a museum whose axis runs through the park , intersecting Peace Boulevard and the atomic bomb dome . The building is raised on massive columns , which frame the view along the structure 's axis . 
 = = Projects = = 
 = = = Peace Centre in Hiroshima = = = 
 Work on the Peace Centre commenced in 1950 . In addition to the axial nature of the design , the layout is similar to Tange 's early competition arrangement for the Greater East Asia Co @-@ Prosperity Sphere Memorial Hall . 
 In the initial design the Hiroshima Peace Memorial Museum was dominated by adjoining utility buildings , which were linked to it by high @-@ level walkways . Tange refined this concept to place the museum prominently at the centre , separate from the utility buildings ( only one of which was subsequently designed by him ) . In addition to architectural symbolism , he thought it important for the design to centre around the building that houses the information about the atomic explosion . 
 The museum is constructed from bare reinforced concrete . The primary museum floor is lifted six metres above the ground on huge <unk> and is accessible via a free @-@ standing staircase . The rhythmical facade comprises vertical elements that repeat outwards from the centre . Like the exterior , the interior is finished with rough concrete ; the idea was to keep the surfaces plain so that nothing could distract the visitor from the contents of the exhibits . 
 The Peace Plaza is the backdrop for the museum . The plaza was designed to allow 50 thousand people to gather around the peace monument in the centre . Tange also designed the monument as an arch composed of two hyperbolic paraboloids , said to be based on traditional Japanese ceremonial tombs from the Kofun Period . 
 = = = The Ise Shrine = = = 
 In 1953 Tange and the architectural journalist and critic Noboru <unk> were invited to attend the reconstruction of the Ise Shrine . The shrine has been reconstructed every 20 years and in 1953 it was the 59th iteration . Normally the reconstruction process was a very closed affair but this time the ceremony was opened to architects and journalists to document the event . The ceremony coincided with the end of the American Occupation and it seemed to symbolise a new start in Japanese architecture . In 1965 when Tange and <unk> published the book Ise : Prototype of Japanese Architecture , he likened the building to a modernist structure : an honest expression of materials , a functional design and prefabricated elements . 
 = = = The Kagawa Prefectural Government Hall = = = 
 The Kagawa Prefectural Government Hall on the island of Shikoku was completed in 1958 . Its expressive construction could be likened to the Daibutsu style seen at the <unk> @-@ ji in Nara . The columns on the elevation bore only vertical loads so Tange was able to design them to be thin , maximising the surfaces for glazing . Although the hall has been called one of his finest projects , it drew criticism at the time of its construction for relying too heavily on tradition . 
 = = = Tange 's own home = = = 
 Tange 's own home , designed in 1951 and completed in 1953 , uses a similar skeleton structure raised off the ground as the Hiroshima Peace Museum ; however , it is fused with a more traditional Japanese design that uses timber and paper . The house is based on the traditional Japanese module of the tatami mat , with the largest rooms designed to have flexibility so that they can be separated into three smaller rooms by fusuma sliding doors . The facade is designed with a rhythmic pattern ; it comprises two types of facade designs ( " a " and " b " ) that are ordered laterally in an a @-@ b @-@ a @-@ a @-@ b @-@ a arrangement . The house is topped with a two @-@ tier roof . Kazuo Shinohara 's 1954 house at <unk> is remarkably similar in its design , although it is built with steel and has a simpler rhythm in its facade . 
 = = = Town Hall , Kurashiki = = = 
 The fortress @-@ like town hall in Kurashiki was designed in 1958 and completed in 1960 . When it was constructed it was situated on the edge of the old town centre connecting it with the newer areas of the town . Kurashiki is better known as a tourist spot for its old <unk> style houses . 
 Set in an open square , the building sits on massive columns that taper inwards as they rise . The elevation consists of horizontal planks ( some of which are omitted to create windows ) which overlap at the corners in a " log cabin " effect . The entrance is covered with a heavy projecting concrete canopy which leads to a monumental entrance hall . The stair to this hall ascends in cantilevered straight flights to the left and right . The walls to this interior are bare shuttered concrete punctured by windows reminiscent of Le Corbusier 's La Tourette . The Council Chamber is a separate building whose raked roof has seating on top of it to form an external performance space . 
 = = = Tokyo Olympic arenas = = = 
 The Yoyogi National Gymnasium is situated in an open area in Yoyogi Park on an adjacent axis to the Meiji Shrine . The gymnasium and swimming pool were designed by Tange for the 1964 Tokyo Olympics , which were the first Olympics held in Asia . Tange began his designs in 1961 and the plans were approved by the Ministry of Education in January 1963 . The buildings were placed to optimize space available for parking and to permit the smoothest transition of incoming and outgoing people . 
 Inspired by the skyline of the Colosseum in Rome , the roofs have a skin suspended from two masts . The buildings were inspired by Le Corbusier 's Philips Pavilion designed for Brussel 's World Fair and the Ingalls Rink Yale University 's hockey stadium by Eero Saarinen ( both structures completed in 1958 ) . The roof of the Philips pavilion was created by complex hyperbolic paraboloid surfaces stretched between cables . In both cases Tange took Western ideas and adapted them to meet Japanese requirements . 
 The gymnasium has a capacity of approximately 16 @,@ 000 and the smaller building can accommodate up 5 @,@ 300 depending on the events that are taking place . At the time it was built , the gymnasium had the world 's largest suspended roof span . Two reinforced concrete pillars support a pre @-@ stressed steel net onto which steel plates are attached . The bottom anchoring of this steel net is a heavy concrete support system which forms a distinct curve on the interior and exterior of the building . In the interior , this structural anchor is used to support the grandstand seats . The overall curvature of the roof helps protect the building from the damaging effects of strong winds . 
 Tange won a Pritzker Prize for the design ; the citation described the <unk> as " among the most beautiful buildings of the 20th century " . 
 = = = Supreme Court Building of Pakistan = = = 
 The Supreme Court of Pakistan Building is the official and principle workplace of the Supreme Court of Pakistan , located in <unk> Constitution Avenue Islamabad , Pakistan . Completed in 1965 , it is flanked by the Prime Minister 's Secretariat to the south and President 's House and the Parliament Building to the north . 
 Designed by Tange , to a design brief prepared by the Pakistan Environmental Protection Agency , the complex was engineered and built by CDA Engineering and Siemens Engineering . 
 = = = Osaka Exposition 1970 = = = 
 In 1965 the Bureau of International Expositions decided that Japan should host the 1970 Exposition . 3 @.@ 3 square kilometres ( 1 @.@ 3 sq mi ) of land in the Senri Hills near Osaka were put aside for its use . Tange and Uzo Nishiyama were appointed as planners for the masterplan by the Theme Committee . Tange assembled a group of twelve architects to design the infrastructure and facilities for the Expo . 
 At the centre of the Expo was the Festival Plaza . Tange conceived that this plaza ( with its <unk> space frame roof ) would connect the display spaces and create a setting for a " festival " . The plaza divided the site into a northern zone for pavilions and a southern zone for administration facilities . The zones were interconnected with moving pathways . 
 = = Architectural circle = = 
 = = = Congres International d 'Architecture Moderne = = = 
 Tange 's first placing in the design competition for the Hiroshima Peace Memorial Park gained him recognition from Kunio Maekawa . The elder architect invited Tange to attend the Congres International d 'Architecture Moderne ( CIAM ) . Founded in 1928 this organization of planners and architects had initially promoted architecture in economic and social context , but at its fourth meeting in 1933 ( under the direction of Le Corbusier ) it debated the notion of the " Functional City " . This led to a series of proposals on urban planning known as " The Athens Charter " . By the 1951 CIAM meeting that was held in Hoddesdon , England , to which Tange was invited , the Athens Charter came under debate by younger members of the group ( including Tange ) who found the Charter too vague in relation to city expansion . The " Athens Charter " promoted the idea that a city gains character from its continual changes over many years ; this notion was written before the advent of mass bombings and the Second World War and therefore held little meaning for Tange who had evidenced the destruction of Hiroshima . The discussions at Hoddesdon sowed discontent within CIAM that eventually contributed to its breakup after their Dubrovnik meeting in 1956 ; the younger members of CIAM formed a splinter group known as Team X , which Tange later joined . Tange presented various designs to Team X in their meetings . At a 1959 meeting in Otterlo , Holland , one of his presentations included an unrealised project by <unk> Kikutake ; this project became the basis of the Metabolist Movement . 
 When Tange travelled back to Japan from the 1951 CIAM meeting , he visited Le Corbusier 's nearly complete Unité d <unk> in Marseilles , France . He also looked at the sketches for the new capital of Punjab at Chandigarh , India . 
 = = = Tokyo World Design Conference and urban planning = = = 
 Tange had left the Team X Otterlo conference early to take up a tenure at Massachusetts Institute of Technology . His experiences at the conference may have led him to set his fifth year students a project to design a 25 @-@ thousand @-@ person residential community to be erected in Boston over the bay . The scheme comprised two giant A @-@ frame structures that resembled Tange 's competition entry for the World Health Organisation 's headquarters on Lake Geneva . Both this scheme and the earlier ones by Kikutake formed the basis of Tange 's speech to the Tokyo World Design Conference in 1960 . In his speech he used words such as " cell " and " metabolism " in relation to urban design . The Metabolist movement grew out of discussions with other members of the conference . Amongst them were <unk> Kurokawa , <unk> <unk> , Alison and Peter Smithson , Louis Kahn , Jean <unk> , B. V. Doshi and Jacob <unk> . The conference ended with Tange 's presentation of the Boston plan and his own scheme , " The Tokyo Plan – 1960 " . 
 Tange argued that the normal urban pattern of a radial centripetal transportation system was a relic of the Middle Ages and would not handle the strain placed upon it by the world 's mega cities , which he qualified as those with populations greater than 10 million . Rather than building up a city from a civic centre , Tange 's proposal was based on civic axis , developing the city in a linear fashion . Three levels of traffic , graded according to speed , would facilitate the movement of up to 2 @.@ 5 million people along the axis , which would be divided into vertebrae @-@ like cyclical transportation elements . The sheer size of the proposal meant that it would stretch out across the water of Tokyo Bay . Tange 's proposals at this conference play a large part in establishing his reputation as " The West 's favourite Japanese architect " . 
 In 1965 Tange was asked by the United Nations to enter a limited competition for the redevelopment of Skopje , which was at that time a city of Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia . The town had been heavily destroyed by an earthquake in 1963 . Tange won 60 % of the prize ; the other 40 % was awarded to the Yugoslav team . Tange 's design furthered ideas put forward in the earlier " Tokyo Plan " . 
 Tange further developed his ideas for expandable urban forms in 1966 when he designed the Yamanashi Broadcasting and Press Centre in Kōfu . It was designed for three media companies : a newspaper printing plant , a radio station and a television studio . To allow for future expansion Tange grouped the similar functions of three offices together in three zones . The newspaper printing machinery was on the ground floor , sealed studios on the upper floors and offices on glass walled floors surrounded by balconies . The services , including stairs and lifts , are housed in 16 reinforced concrete columns that are of five @-@ metre ( 17 ft ) diameter . Space was left between the cluster of functional space to allow for future expansion , although these have been used for gardens and terraces . 
 = = = The <unk> and Architects Team = = = 
 Tange 's inspiration for his design office came from his friend Walter Gropius who he had first met at the CIAM meeting in 1951 . While lecturing at the Bauhaus , Gropius had placed great importance on teaching architects , especially imparting on them the concept of working together as a team . The <unk> and Architects Team was founded in 1961 and became Kenzō Tange Associates . Tange promoted a very flat hierarchy in the practice : partners were equal in importance and were encouraged to participate in every project . Multiple options were developed simultaneously , and research on individual schemes was encouraged . 
 = = Later career = = 
 During the 1970s and 1980s Tange expanded his portfolio to include buildings in over 20 countries around the world . In 1985 , at the behest of Jacques Chirac , the mayor of Paris at that time , Tange proposed a master plan for a plaza at Place d 'Italie that would interconnect the city along an east @-@ west axis . 
 For the Tokyo Metropolitan Government Building , which opened in 1991 , Tange designed a large civic centre with a plaza dominated by two skyscrapers . These house the administration offices whilst a smaller seven @-@ storey building contains assembly facilities . In his design of a high tech version of <unk> Communications Centre , Tange equipped all three buildings with state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art building management systems that monitored air quality , light levels and security . The external skin of the building makes dual references to both tradition and the modern condition . Tange incorporated vertical and horizontal lines reminiscent of both timber boarding and the lines on semiconductor boards . 
 Tange continued to practice until three years before his death in 2005 . He disliked postmodernism in the 1980s and considered this style of architecture to be only " transitional architectural expressions " . His funeral was held in one of his works , the Tokyo Cathedral . 
 Tadao Ando , one of Japan 's greatest living architects , likes to tell the story of the stray dog , a stately <unk> , that wandered into his studio in Osaka some 20 years age , and decided to stay . " First , I thought I would call her Kenzo Tange ; but then I realised I couldn 't kick Kenzo Tange around . So I called her Le Corbusier instead . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The modular expansion of Tange 's Metabolist visions had some influence on <unk> with their plug @-@ in mega structures . The Metabolist movement gave momentum to Kikutake 's career . Although his Marine City proposals ( submitted by Tange at CIAM ) were not realised , his <unk> City Hall ( 1966 ) was a more Metabolist example of Tange 's own <unk> Cultural Centre ( 1962 ) . Although the Osaka Expo had marked a decline in the Metabolist movement , it resulted in a " handing over " of the reigns to a younger generation of architects such as Kazuo Shinohara and Arata <unk> . 
 In an interview with Jeremy Melvin at the Royal Academy of Arts , Kengo Kuma explained that , at the age of ten , he was inspired to become an architect after seeing Tange 's Olympic arenas , which were constructed in 1964 . 
 For <unk> Banham , Tange was a prime exemplar of the use of Brutalist architecture . His use of <unk> <unk> concrete finishes in a raw and undecorated way combined with his civic projects such as the redevelopment of Tokyo Bay made him a great influence on British architects during the 1960s . Brutalist architecture has been criticised for being soulless and for promoting the exclusive use of a material that is poor at withstanding long exposures to natural weather . 
 He received the AIA Gold Medal in 1966 . 
 Tange 's son Paul <unk> Tange graduated from Harvard University in 1985 and went on to join Kenzō Tange Associates . He became the president of Kenzo Tange Associates in 1997 before founding Tange Associates in 2002 . 
 = = Awards = = 
 From the Japanese Wikipedia article 
 = = = Japan = = = 
 Architectural Institute of Japan best picture award ( Ehime Prefectural Museum ) ( 1954 ) 
 Architectural Institute of Japan Special Award ( National Indoor Stadium ) ( 1965 ) 
 Order of Culture ( 1980 ) 
 Architectural Institute of Japan Award ( 1986 ) for contributions to the international development and establishment of modern architecture in Japan . 
 Prince Takamatsu Memorial World Culture Prize in the building sector category ( 1993 ) 
 Grand Cordon of the Order of the Sacred Treasure ( 1994 ) 
 Third rank in the order of precedence ( 2005 ; posthumous ) 
 = = = Others = = = 
 United States Institute of Architects , United States of America ( AIA ) 1st Pan @-@ Pacific Ocean Award ( 1958 ) 
 RIBA Gold Medal ( 1965 ) 
 U.S. AIA Gold Medal ( 1966 ) 
 Vatican Order of St. Gregory the Great ( 1970 ) 
 French Academy of Architecture Gold Medal ( 1973 ) 
 Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany ( 1976 ) 
 Commander of the Order of Merit of the Italian Republic ( 1979 ) 
 U.S. Pritzker Prize ( 1987 ) 
 Knight of the Legion of Honour of France ( 1996 ) 
 = = List of selected projects = = 
 1955 : Hiroshima Peace Memorial Museum , Hiroshima 
 1957 : ( Former ) Tokyo Metropolitan Government Building , <unk> 
 1958 : Kagawa Prefectural Government Building the east offices , Takamatsu , Kagawa 
 1960 : Kurashiki City Hall , Kurashiki , Okayama 
 1960 : Rikkyo University Library , Ikebukuro , Tokyo 
 1964 : Yoyogi National Gymnasium for the 1964 Summer Olympics , Tokyo 
 1964 : St. Mary 's Cathedral ( Tokyo Cathedral ) ( Roman Catholic ) , Tokyo 
 1966 : Yamanashi Press and Broadcasting Centre , <unk> , Yamanashi , Japan 
 1966 : Master plan for rebuilding of Skopje , Macedonia , then part of Yugoslavia after the 1963 earthquake 
 1967 : Shizuoka Press and Broadcasting Tower , Ginza , Chuo , Tokyo 
 1967 : Towers of Fiera district ( Regional administration of Emilia @-@ Romagna ) , Bologna , Italy 
 1970 : master plan , massive central " Symbol Zone " , and other work for Expo ' 70 , <unk> , Osaka 
 1970 : <unk> New Town Project , Catania , Italy 
 1977 : Sogetsu Kaikan , Aoyama , Tokyo 
 1979 : <unk> Mori Building , Aoyama , Tokyo 
 1982 : Centro <unk> , Naples 
 1982 : Central Area New Federal Capital City of Nigeria , Nigeria 
 1986 : Nanyang Technological University , Singapore 
 1986 : <unk> Centre , Singapore 
 1986 : Jordan University of Science and Technology , Jordan 
 1986 : University of Science and Technology Oran - Mohamed @-@ <unk> ( AMZ Group ) , Algeria 
 1987 : American Medical Association Headquarters Building , Chicago , Illinois , USA 
 1990 : Presidential Palace , Damascus , Syria ( Initial design , but subsequently resigned from project ) 
 1991 : Tokyo Metropolitan Government Building , Shinjuku , Tokyo 
 1992 : UOB Plaza , Singapore 
 1993 : Phu My Hung Saigon South Master Plan , Ho Chi Minh City , Vietnam 
 1996 : Fuji Television Building , Odaiba , Tokyo 
 1998 : University of Bahrain , Sakhir , Bahrain 
 1998 : <unk> Centre For Health Development , Kobe , Hyōgo 
 2000 : Kagawa Prefectural Government Building the main offices , Takamatsu , Kagawa 
 2000 : Tokyo Dome Hotel 
 2003 : The Linear – Private Apartments , Singapore 
 2005 : Hwa Chong Institution Boarding School , Singapore 
 = Dock Ellis = 
 Dock Phillip Ellis , Jr . ( March 11 , 1945 – December 19 , 2008 ) was an American professional baseball player . A pitcher , Ellis played in Major League Baseball from 1968 through 1979 for the Pittsburgh Pirates , New York Yankees , Oakland Athletics , Texas Rangers , and New York Mets . In his MLB career , he had a 138 – 119 win – loss record , a 3 @.@ 46 earned run average , and 1 @,@ 136 strikeouts . 
 Ellis threw a no @-@ hitter on June 12 , 1970 . He later stated that he accomplished the feat under the influence of LSD . Reporters at the game say they do not believe the claim . Ellis was the starting pitcher for the National League in the All @-@ Star Game in 1971 . That year , the Pirates were World Series champions . Joining the Yankees in 1976 , he helped lead the team to the 1976 World Series , and was named the American League Comeback Player of the Year in the process . 
 Ellis was an outspoken individual who advocated for the rights of players and African Americans . He also had a substance abuse problem , and he acknowledged after his retirement that he never pitched without the use of drugs . After going into treatment Ellis remained sober and devoted the remainder of his life to counseling drug addicts in treatment centers and prisons . He died of a liver ailment in 2008 at the age of 63 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Ellis attended Gardena High School in Gardena , California . At the age of 14 , he began drinking and using drugs . 
 Ellis played for the school 's basketball team , recording 21 assists in one game . He played baseball as an infielder for a local semi @-@ professional team called the " Pittsburgh Pirates Rookies " , along with future major leaguers Bobby Tolan , Roy White , Ron Woods , Reggie Smith , Don Wilson , Bob Watson , and Dave Nelson ; the team was managed by Chet Brewer . However , Ellis refused to play for the Gardena High School baseball team , because a baseball player referred to him as a " <unk> " . 
 When Ellis was caught drinking and smoking marijuana in a high school bathroom during his senior year , the school agreed not to expel him if he agreed to play for the school 's baseball team . He appeared in four games and was named all @-@ league . Ellis then attended Los Angeles Harbor College ( LAHC ) , a junior college . 
 At the age of 17 , Ellis was diagnosed with sickle cell anemia . The diagnosis was later changed to sickle cell trait . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Minor league career ( 1964 – 1968 ) = = = 
 While Ellis attended LAHC , various Major League Baseball teams attempted to sign him to a professional contract , but as he heard the Pittsburgh Pirates gave out signing bonuses of $ 60 @,@ 000 , he held out until the Pirates made him an offer . He was arrested for stealing a car , and given probation . Brewer , working as a scout for the Pirates , signed Ellis to the Pirates ; as a result of the arrest , the Pirates offered Ellis $ 500 a month and a $ 2 @,@ 500 signing bonus . 
 Ellis played for the Batavia Pirates of the Class A New York – Pennsylvania League in 1964 . The next season , he played for the Kinston Eagles of the Class A Carolina League and the Columbus Jets of the Class AAA International League . Ellis pitched in an exhibition game for the Pirates against the Cleveland Indians in July , receiving the win . After the season , the Pirates added Ellis to their 40 @-@ man roster . 
 In 1966 , Ellis played for the Asheville Tourists of the Class AA Southern League , pitching to a 10 – 9 win – loss record , a 2 @.@ 77 earned run average ( ERA ) , and an All @-@ Star Game appearance . The Pirates called Ellis up to the majors near the end of the season , but the team did not use him in a game that year . 
 Ellis started the 1967 season with Columbus . He believed that he was not on the major league club because the Pirates already had a number of African American players ; he felt that the team did not want to alienate white fans . Ellis was sent down to the Macon Peaches of the Southern League , which Ellis believed was due to the length of his hair . Ellis said that he was promoted back to Columbus after shaving his head . He had a 2 – 0 win @-@ loss record with Macon and a 5 – 7 record with Columbus . 
 During his minor league career , Ellis once chased a heckler in the stands with a baseball bat . He also used pills when he pitched , specifically the amphetamines Benzedrine and <unk> . Stressed by the pressure of his " can 't @-@ miss " status as a prospect , Ellis became addicted . Ellis later said that he never pitched a game without using amphetamines . He eventually needed 70 to 85 milligrams ( 1 @.@ 08 – 1 @.@ 31 gr ) per game , between five and twelve capsules , depending on their strength . Ellis acknowledged that he began to use cocaine in the late 1960s . 
 Ellis held out from the Pirates in February 1968 ; he came to terms with the team in March . The Pirates optioned Ellis to Columbus , who moved Ellis from the starting rotation to the bullpen . At Columbus , Ellis credited his work with manager Johnny Pesky and pitching coach Harvey Haddix for improving his performance . 
 = = = Pittsburgh Pirates = = = 
 Ellis made his MLB debut that June , beginning as a relief pitcher . The Pirates moved Ellis into the starting rotation later that season . Ellis pitched his first complete game in September . He had a 6 – 5 win @-@ loss record with a 2 @.@ 51 ERA with the Pirates in 1968 . In 1969 , Ellis made the team 's starting rotation for Opening Day . The struggles of Steve Blass kept Ellis in the starting rotation , as Blass was moved to the bullpen . 
 = = = = June 12 , 1970 , no @-@ hitter = = = = 
 Self @-@ reportedly under the influence of LSD , Ellis threw a no @-@ hitter against the San Diego Padres 2 @-@ 0 on Friday , June 12 , 1970 in the first game of a doubleheader at San Diego Stadium . The Pirates flew to San Diego on Thursday , June 11 for a series against the Padres . Ellis reported that he visited a friend in Los Angeles and used LSD " two or three times . " Thinking it was still Thursday , he took a hit of LSD on Friday at noon , and his friend 's girlfriend reminded him at 2 : 00 PM that he was scheduled to pitch that night . Ellis flew from Los Angeles to San Diego at 3 : 00 PM and arrived at San Diego Stadium at 4 : 30 PM ; the game started at 6 : 05 PM . 
 Ellis threw the no @-@ hitter despite being unable to feel the ball or see the batter or catcher clearly . Ellis said his catcher Jerry May wore reflective tape on his fingers which helped him to see May 's signals . Ellis walked eight batters and struck out six , and he was aided by excellent fielding plays from second baseman Bill Mazeroski and center fielder Matty Alou . 
 As Ellis recounted : 
 I can only remember bits and pieces of the game . I was psyched . I had a feeling of euphoria . I was zeroed in on the [ catcher 's ] glove , but I didn 't hit the glove too much . I remember hitting a couple of batters , and the bases were loaded two or three times . The ball was small sometimes , the ball was large sometimes , sometimes I saw the catcher , sometimes I didn 't . Sometimes , I tried to stare the hitter down and throw while I was looking at him . I chewed my gum until it turned to powder . I started having a crazy idea in the fourth inning that Richard Nixon was the home plate umpire , and once I thought I was pitching a baseball to Jimi Hendrix , who to me was holding a guitar and swinging it over the plate . They say I had about three to four fielding chances . I remember diving out of the way of a ball I thought was a line drive . I jumped , but the ball wasn 't hit hard and never reached me . 
 Ellis reported that he never used LSD during the season again , though he continued to use amphetamines . 
 An animated short film by James <unk> about the game , " Dock Ellis and the LSD No @-@ No " , features narration in Ellis ' own voice , taken from a 2008 NPR interview . 
 = = = = = Assessments of LSD claim = = = = = 
 Bob Smizik of the Pittsburgh Press believes Ellis ' version of events that day , although he did not witness the game in person . Smizik was the reporter who first broke the story . Bill Christine , also of the Pittsburgh Press , does not believe Ellis ' claim and was at the game that day . Christine was a beat reporter who " practically lived with the team that year " . Christine said that he did not notice anything unusual , and says that if Ellis had reported to the stadium only 90 minutes before his scheduled start , reporters would have been told . John <unk> , a reporter who had " extensive interactions " with Ellis over his career , was skeptical about many stories told by Ellis , including the LSD no @-@ hitter . <unk> said that he has not found a teammate who would corroborate the story . However , one of his close friends , Scipio Spinks , a pitcher for the Astros , has said he has no doubt Ellis was telling the truth about his LSD use as he was very familiar with Dock 's drug habits , including the use of LSD . 
 = = = = 1970 – 1971 = = = = 
 Ellis struggled for the remainder of the 1970 season , and finished the year with a 13 – 10 win @-@ loss record as he experienced elbow and shoulder pain . However , he finished second in the NL with four shutouts and seventh with a 3 @.@ 21 ERA . The Pirates won the National League ( NL ) East division championship . Ellis started Game 1 of the 1970 National League Championship Series ( NLCS ) to the Cincinnati Reds . Ellis took the loss , and the Pirates lost the series to the Reds in three games . 
 Ellis worked on his changeup for the 1971 season . He was rewarded by being named the Pirates ' Opening Day starting pitcher ; he defeated the Philadelphia Phillies by a score of 4 @-@ 2 . After a strong start to the 1971 season , posting a 13 – 3 win @-@ loss record , Ellis was named to appear in the 1971 Major League Baseball All @-@ Star Game , held at Tiger Stadium in Detroit . The AL selected Vida Blue of the Oakland Athletics as their starter , and Ellis publicly stated that National League All @-@ Star Team manager Sparky Anderson would " never start two brothers against each other " . Anderson surprised Ellis by naming him the starting pitcher of the All @-@ Star Game . Ellis was the losing pitcher in the game . During the game , Reggie Jackson hit a towering home run off of Ellis . The home run , estimated to have traveled 600 feet ( 180 m ) , tied a 1926 home run hit by Babe Ruth for the longest measured home run on record . The next time the two opposed each other , Ellis beaned Jackson in the face in retaliation for his earlier home run . 
 Ellis started Game 2 of the 1971 NLCS , earning the victory over the San Francisco Giants . During the series , Ellis created a stir by complaining about the Pirates ' lodgings , complaining that the organization was " cheap " . He changed hotels because he said the hotel rooms were too small . Ellis started Game 1 of the 1971 World Series against the Baltimore Orioles . In a losing effort , he lasted only 2 1 ⁄ 3 innings . He allowed four hits and four runs , including two home runs . Though Ellis denied being in pain before the game , he later acknowledged that elbow pain limited his performance , and wondered if his sickle cell trait could be related to this pain . The Pirates defeated the Orioles in seven games to win the World Series . 
 Ellis finished the season with a 19 – 9 win @-@ loss record and a 3 @.@ 06 ERA . He placed fourth in the Cy Young Award balloting . His 19 wins were fifth best in the league , and his <unk> winning percentage was fourth best . 
 = = = = <unk> incident = = = = 
 On May 5 , 1972 , Ellis , Willie Stargell , and Rennie Stennett missed the team bus to Riverfront Stadium . A security guard asked the three for identification ; Stargell and Stennett complied and were allowed in , but Ellis did not have identification with him . The guard said that Ellis did not identify himself , appeared drunk , and " made threatening gestures with a closed fist . " Ellis countered that he was showing his World Series ring as evidence of his affiliation with the Pirates . In response , the guard <unk> Ellis . Ellis was arrested and charged with disorderly conduct . 
 The Reds sued Ellis for assault and Ellis countersued . Before going to trial , the Reds dropped the suit and wrote Ellis a letter of apology . The municipal court dropped the charges against Ellis , though Ellis stated that this incident made him " hate better " . 
 Ellis finished the 1972 season ninth in the NL in ERA ( 2 @.@ 70 ) , sixth in winning percentage ( <unk> ) , fourth in walks per nine innings pitched ( 1 @.@ 818 ) , and first in home runs per nine innings ratio ( 0 @.@ 331 ) . The Pirates won the NL East that year and faced the Reds in the 1972 NLCS . The Pirates pitched Ellis with a sore arm , but the Reds won the series . 
 = = = = 1973 = = = = 
 Ellis said that the scariest moment of his career was when he attempted to pitch while sober in a 1973 game . During pre @-@ game warmups , he could not recreate his pitching mechanics . Ellis went to his locker , took some amphetamines with coffee , and returned to pitch . In August 1973 , pictures circulated of Ellis wearing hair curlers in the bullpen during pre @-@ game warmups . The Pirates told him not to wear curlers on the field again . Ellis agreed , but charged that the Pirates were displaying racism . Ebony devoted a spread to Ellis about his hairstyles , which was inspired by the hair curlers . 
 After Ellis defeated the Reds by a score of 1 @-@ 0 in a 1973 game , Joe Morgan claimed that Ellis threw a spitball . Anderson had the umpire check Ellis , but found no evidence . In his 1980 book , Ellis admitted that wearing hair curlers produced sweat on his hair , which he used to throw a modified version of a spitball . 
 Ellis missed the last month of the season due to tendinitis in his elbow . Despite a strong start from Ellis during the playoff chase in the final week of the season , the Pirates lost the division to the New York Mets . Ellis again led the league in home runs allowed per nine innings pitched ratio ( 0 @.@ 328 ) . 
 = = = = 1974 = = = = 
 Ellis attempted to hit every batter in the Cincinnati Reds lineup on May 1 , 1974 , as he was angry that the Pirates were intimidated by the Big Red Machine . Ellis admired Pete Rose and was concerned about how he would respond , but Ellis decided to do it regardless . Ellis hit Rose , Joe Morgan , and Dan Driessen in the top of the first inning . Cleanup batter Tony Pérez avoided Ellis ' attempts and drew a walk ; the first pitch to Perez was thrown behind him and over his head . Ellis threw two pitches that he aimed at the head of Johnny Bench , at which point Ellis was removed from the game by manager Danny Murtaugh . Ellis ' box score for the game reads as follows : 0 IP , 0 H , 1 R , 1 ER , 1 BB , 0 K. Ellis tied eight other players for the MLB record with the three hit batsmen in the inning . 
 Ellis struggled at the start of the 1974 season , pitching to a 3 – 8 win @-@ loss record and 4 @.@ 54 ERA through July 10 . Subsequently he won eight consecutive games and nine out of ten , pitching seven completed games in that ten @-@ game stretch . A line drive off of the bat of Willie Montañez fractured the fifth metacarpal bone in Ellis ' pitching hand on September 10 , prematurely ending his season . Ellis had the seventh best walks plus hits per inning pitched ratio ( 1 @.@ 155 ) . The Pirates won the NL East , but they lost the 1974 NLCS three games to one to the Los Angeles Dodgers . 
 = = = = 1975 = = = = 
 Healthy to begin the 1975 season , Ellis continued to perform well at the beginning of the season . In August , the Pirates asked Ellis to pitch in the bullpen ; he refused on consecutive nights . On August 15 , 1975 , Ellis refused assignment to the bullpen again ; as a result , the Pirates suspended him for one day . Ellis called for a team meeting the next day , where he was expected to apologize . Instead , he berated Murtaugh , who responded by cursing at Ellis , ordering the pitcher out of the clubhouse and attempting to fight him . Teammate Don <unk> reportedly also tried to fight Ellis . The Pirates suspended Ellis for thirty days and fined him $ 2 @,@ 000 . The suspension was lifted on August 30 when Ellis apologized to Murtaugh . 
 Ellis pitched to an 8 @-@ 9 win @-@ loss record and 3 @.@ 79 ERA during the 1975 season . The Pirates again won the NL East , but were swept by the Reds in the 1975 NLCS in three games . Ellis pitched in relief for two innings in Game 1 . 
 = = = New York Yankees = = = 
 Ellis sensed that he would be traded that offseason due to the fallout from his suspension . On December 11 , Ellis was traded to the New York Yankees of the American League ( AL ) along with pitcher Ken Brett and top infield prospect Willie Randolph , in exchange for pitcher Doc <unk> . Tired of Ellis ' behavior , Pittsburgh general manager Joe L. Brown insisted that the Yankees take Ellis as part of the deal . 
 With the Yankees , Ellis pitched to a 17 – 8 win @-@ loss record with a 3 @.@ 15 ERA during the 1976 regular season . His 17 wins were eighth in the AL , while his <unk> winning percentage was third best . After the season , he was voted the AL Comeback Player of the Year by the United Press International . 
 The Yankees won the AL East division championship in 1976 . Ellis started in Game 3 of the 1976 American League Championship Series ( ALCS ) , getting the win . The Yankees reached the 1976 World Series . Ellis started Game 3 but received the loss , allowing four earned runs in 3 1 ⁄ 3 innings . The Reds defeated the Yankees in four games . 
 = = = Oakland Athletics and Texas Rangers = = = 
 Before the 1977 season , Ellis publicly criticized Yankees owner George Steinbrenner for giving him a raise that was inadequate given his 1976 performance and for interfering with manager Billy Martin . As Ellis refused to sign his contract , and the Yankees did not want to have players who could become free agents , the Yankees traded Ellis with Larry Murray and Marty Perez to the Oakland Athletics for Mike Torrez in April 1977 . Torrez emerged as a top starting pitcher for the Yankees that season , while Ellis struggled . While pitching for Oakland , the team asked him to keep charts . Defiant , Ellis set the charts on fire in the clubhouse , setting off sprinklers . Ellis ranked this as the " craziest " thing he did during his career . 
 On June 15 , 1977 , the Rangers purchased Ellis from the Oakland Athletics . Ellis had a resurgent second half of the 1977 season , going 10 – 6 with a 2 @.@ 90 ERA . Ellis complained about manager Billy Hunter 's liquor policy in 1978 . Hunter , responding to a raucous team flight , banned liquor on team flights ; Ellis vowed that he would bring liquor on the plane to Toronto anyway . Ellis led a player insurrection against manager Billy Hunter 's authoritarian style , declaring that Hunter " may be Hitler , but he ain 't making no lampshade out of me . " The Rangers organization blamed Ellis for the team 's disappointing finish in 1978 and indicated that they would look to trade Ellis . However , owner Brad Corbett sided with Ellis over Hunter , firing Hunter after the season . 
 = = = New York Mets and return to Pittsburgh = = = 
 After starting the 1979 season with a 1 – 5 win @-@ loss record , Ellis was traded to the New York Mets on June 15 , 1979 for minor league pitchers Mike <unk> and Bob Myrick . The Mets , seeking to upgrade their pitching staff due to poor performances and injuries to Pat <unk> and Skip Lockwood , acquired Andy Hassler from the Boston Red Sox on the same day . Ellis went 3 – 7 with a 6 @.@ 04 ERA with the Mets . 
 Ellis requested the Mets send him back to the Pirates . Seeking more pitching in their pennant race , the Pirates purchased Ellis from the Mets on September 21 , 1979 for an undisclosed sum of money ; the price was later revealed to be " something in excess of the waiver price of $ 20 @,@ 000 " . Ellis made three relief appearances with the Pirates that year , retiring after that season . Ellis finished his career with a lifetime win @-@ loss record of 138 – 119 and an ERA of 3 @.@ 46 . 
 = = = Pitching style = = = 
 Ellis threw five distinct pitches : a fastball , a curveball , a changeup , a palmball , and what Ellis called a " sliding fastball " . The latter pitch was distinct from a slider . Ellis trusted his catcher to call pitches , and he rarely asked for a new sign . 
 Ellis kept a notebook , called " The Book " , with detailed information about each hitter 's strengths and weaknesses . He often asked teammates and members of other teams , including pitchers Bob Gibson and Juan Marichal , for advice on how to pitch opposing batters . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Ellis was married four times . His first wife was Paula ; they divorced in 1972 . Ellis ' second wife was <unk> , divorced in 1980 , the third wife was Jacquelyn , and the fourth was <unk> . Ellis had three children and two grandchildren ; both daughters have since died , one in 2003 due to complications arising from type 1 diabetes . Ellis had a daughter , <unk> , with Paula . His son with <unk> , Dock Ellis III ( Trey ) , played college basketball at California State University , Bakersfield . Trey fathered Ellis ' first grandchild , Dock Phillip Ellis IV . Ellis ' youngest daughter Simone , who mothered Ellis ' second grandchild , passed in December 2012 after losing her battle with cancer . Ellis stopped using drugs and alcohol in 1980 , when his son was an infant . 
 Ellis fought for players ' rights , including the right to free agency . Jackie Robinson credited him with trying to further the rights of African American players , but warned him that he said too much . In 1971 , Ellis testified before the United States Senate Subcommittee on Public Health about his experiences with sickle cell and later worked with people who had the disease and raised money for sickle cell research . 
 Ellis collaborated with future United States Poet Laureate Donald Hall on a book , Dock Ellis in the Country of Baseball , published in 1976 . Although Hall knew of the LSD incident , he did not include it in the first edition of his book . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 Ellis retired from baseball in the spring of 1980 , saying that he lost interest in the game . That year , Ellis entered drug treatment , staying for forty days at The Meadows in Wickenburg , Arizona . In 1984 , he revealed that he had pitched his no @-@ hitter under the influence of LSD . 
 Ellis lived in Apple Valley , California . He worked in Victorville , California as a drug counselor . He also counseled prisoners in Pittsburgh and at a prison in <unk> , California . The Yankees hired Ellis in the 1980s to work with their minor league players , including Pascual Perez , whom he counseled for drug problems . In 2005 , Ellis began teaching weekly classes for individuals convicted of driving under the influence . Ellis also appeared in the 1986 film Gung Ho , directed by Ron Howard . 
 In 1989 , Ellis served as player / coach for the St. Petersburg Pelicans of the Senior Professional Baseball Association and went 0 – 2 with a 1 @.@ 76 ERA and seven saves as a part of the team 's bullpen . In 1990 , he allowed no earned runs and recorded two saves for the Pelicans before the league folded . He continued to play in the Los Angeles Veterans League . 
 Ellis was diagnosed with cirrhosis in 2007 and was placed on the list for a liver transplant . Though he had no health insurance , friends from his baseball career helped him to pay his medical bills . However , Ellis suffered heart damage in his last weeks of life , which made a transplant impossible . 
 Ellis died on December 19 , 2008 at Los Angeles County @-@ USC Medical Center due to his liver ailment . Services were held at the Angelus Funeral Home . He is interred at Inglewood Park Cemetery in Inglewood , California . His life was the subject of the critically acclaimed 2014 documentary film , No No : A <unk> . 
 = Battlefield Earth ( film ) = 
 Battlefield Earth ( also referred to as Battlefield Earth : A Saga of the Year 3000 ) is a 2000 American science fiction action film based upon the first half of L. Ron Hubbard 's 1982 novel of the same name . Directed by Roger Christian and starring John Travolta , Barry Pepper , and Forest Whitaker , the film depicts an Earth that has been under the rule of the alien Psychlos for 1 @,@ 000 years and tells the story of the rebellion that develops when the Psychlos attempt to use the surviving humans as gold miners . 
 Travolta , a long @-@ time Scientologist , had sought for many years to make a film of the novel by Hubbard , the founder of Scientology . He was unable to obtain funding from any major studio due to concerns about the film 's script , prospects , and connections with Scientology . The project was eventually taken on in 1998 by an independent production company , Franchise Pictures , which specialized in rescuing stars ' stalled pet projects . Travolta signed on as a co @-@ producer and contributed millions of dollars of his own money to the production , which commenced in 1999 and was largely funded by German film distribution company Intertainment AG . Franchise Pictures was later sued by its investors and was bankrupted in 2004 after it emerged that it had fraudulently overstated the film 's budget by $ 31 million . 
 Battlefield Earth was released on May 12 , 2000 . The film was a major critical and commercial failure and has been called one of the worst films of all time . Reviewers panned the film , criticizing virtually every aspect of the production including Travolta 's acting , which many described as " hammy " , overuse of angled shots and slow @-@ motion , poor script , several plot holes and narrative inconsistencies , art direction , and dialogue . Audiences were reported to have ridiculed early screenings and stayed away from the film after its opening weekend , which led to Battlefield Earth failing to recoup its costs . The film went on to receive a total of nine Golden Raspberry Awards , which until 2012 was the most Razzie Awards given to a single film . It has since become a cult film in the so bad , it 's good vein . 
 Travolta originally envisioned Battlefield Earth as the first of two films to be adapted from the book , as the screenplay only covered the first half of the novel . However , the film 's poor performance at the box office , as well as the collapse of Franchise Pictures , ended plans for a sequel . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In the year 3000 , Earth has been ruled for 1 @,@ 000 years by the Psychlos , a brutal race of giant humanoid aliens . The remnants of humanity are either enslaved by the Psychlos and used for manual labor or survive in primitive tribes living in remote areas outside Psychlo control . Jonnie <unk> Tyler ( Barry Pepper ) , a member of one such tribe , leaves his home in the Rocky Mountains on a journey of exploration . He joins forces with Carlo ( Kim Coates ) , a hunter , but both men are captured by a Psychlo raiding party and transported to a slave camp at the Psychlos ' main base on Earth , a giant dome built over the ruins of Denver , Colorado . 
 Terl ( John Travolta ) , the Psychlo security chief on Earth , has been condemned by his superiors to remain indefinitely at his post on Earth as punishment for an unclear incident involving " the Senator 's daughter " . Aided by his deputy , Ker ( Forest Whitaker ) , Terl devises a plan to buy his way off the planet by making a fortune using human slaves to mine gold in radioactive areas . Psychlos are unable to visit such areas due to the explosive interaction of the gas that they breathe with radionuclide particles . Terl selects Jonnie as his " foreman " for the project and gives him a Psychlo education using a rapid @-@ learning machine . Terl gives Jonnie a party of slaves and a Psychlo flying shuttle and orders him to go out and find gold . 
 After learning the Psychlos ' language , history , and myriad other things from the rapid learning machine , Jonnie plots a human uprising against the Psychlos . He obtains gold from Fort Knox to satisfy Terl 's demands , and uses the free time to plot a revolution . Jonnie and his followers find an abandoned underground U.S. military base with working aircraft , weapons , fuel and nuclear weapons . They use the base 's flight simulators to train themselves in aerial combat . When Terl returns , he orders more gold to be extracted , and tells how in the 21st century the Psychlos conquered Earth in a matter of minutes . Jonnie warns Terl that he will be overthrown and the humans will retake Earth , and cites the United States Declaration of Independence as inspiration , to which Terl scoffs . 
 After a week of training , the rebels launch a mass uprising against the Psychlos using Harrier jump @-@ jets and other weapons . Carlo sacrifices himself to destroy the dome over Denver , and the Psychlos inside suffocate in Earth 's atmosphere , which they are unable to breathe . Jonnie captures a Psychlo teleportation device and uses it to teleport an atomic bomb to the Psychlo home world . The ensuing detonation causes the entire Psychlo atmosphere to explode , wiping out the Psychlo world . The film ends with the humans in control of Earth but facing an uncertain future , along with Terl and Ker who survived the base destruction . Terl is now imprisoned inside Fort Knox in a makeshift cell of gold bars , while Ker sides with the victorious humans , and helps in their hard effort to rebuild their civilization . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Initial deals = = = 
 After Battlefield Earth was published in 1982 , L. Ron Hubbard suggested that a film version of the book was in the works . He gave an interview in February 1983 to the Rocky Mountain News in which he told the reporter , " I 've recently written three screenplays , and some interest has been expressed in Battlefield Earth , so I suppose I 'll be right back in Hollywood one of these days and probably on location in the Denver area for Battlefield Earth when they film it . " 
 Hubbard 's comments suggest that he saw himself being directly involved in the film 's production ; author Stewart Lamont suggests that Hubbard may even have envisioned directing it , given his previous work on Scientology training films . In October 1983 , the film rights were sold by the Church of Scientology 's in @-@ house literary agency , Author Services Inc . , to Salem Productions of Los Angeles . Two films were envisaged , each covering half of the book and tentatively budgeted at $ 15 million each . William <unk> was set as the producer for the film . Veteran screenwriter Abraham Polonsky and British director Ken Annakin were hired to produce a film breakdown , with production scheduled to begin in 1985 . In November 1984 , Santa Monica public relations firm Dateline Communications announced a nationwide contest to promote the film . First and second place prizes were an all @-@ expense paid trip to the film 's production location and a paid walk @-@ on part in the film , and other announced prizes included a trip to Los Angeles for the world premiere , records , cassettes , and hardcover and paperback copies of the novel . A 30 @-@ foot ( 10 m ) high inflatable figure of the film 's villain , Terl , was erected by Scientology officials on Hollywood Boulevard in 1984 in an effort to promote the production , and auditions were held in Denver . The low @-@ budget project soon collapsed , and Hubbard died soon afterwards , in 1986 . 
 Travolta had converted to Scientology in 1975 and subsequently became one of the Church of Scientology 's most prominent supporters . Hubbard sent him an autographed copy of Battlefield Earth when the book was first published in 1982 ; he reportedly hoped that Travolta would turn the book into a film " in the vein of Star Wars and Close Encounters of the Third Kind " . While Travolta was interested , his influence in Hollywood at the time was at a low after participating in a series of flops . He gained renewed influence with the success of the 1994 film Pulp Fiction , which garnered Travolta an Academy Award nomination for Best Actor . He had not forgotten Hubbard 's wishes to see the book on the big screen and took on the task of making Battlefield Earth into a movie . Travolta described the book in interviews as " like Pulp Fiction for the year 3000 " and " like Star Wars , only better " . He lobbied influential figures in Hollywood to fund the project and was reported to have recruited the aid of fellow Scientologists in promoting it . According to Bill Mechanic , the former head of Twentieth Century Fox , " John wanted me to make Battlefield Earth . He had Scientologists all over me . They come up to you and they know who you are . And they go , ' We 're really excited about Battlefield Earth ' . " This did not impress Mechanic : " Do you think in any way , shape , or form that <unk> me out is going to make me want to make this movie ? " 
 Travolta 's involvement in Battlefield Earth was first publicized in late 1995 . He told the New York Daily News that " Battlefield Earth is the pinnacle of using my power for something . I told my manager , ' If we can 't do the things now that we want to do , what good is the power ? Let 's test it and try to get the things done that we believe in . ' " It was assumed from the start that Travolta would star in and produce the film , which would be distributed by Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer ; J. D. Shapiro would write the screenplay . Shapiro was eventually fired because he refused to accept some suggestions from the studio producers that changed the tone of his script , including removing key scenes and characters . In 1997 Travolta 's long @-@ time manager Jonathan Krane signed a two @-@ year deal with Twentieth Century Fox under which that studio would release Battlefield Earth instead of MGM , but the deal with Fox also fell through . James Robert Parish , author of Fiasco : A History of Hollywood 's Iconic Flops , comments that both MGM and Fox regarded the project as too risky on several grounds . Its heavy reliance on special effects would be very expensive , pushing the budget up to as much as $ 100 million ; Hubbard 's narrative was seen as naïve and outdated ; and the " Scientology factor " could work against the film , negating Travolta 's star power . As one studio executive put it , " On any film there are ten variables that can kill you . On this film there was an eleventh : Scientology . It just wasn 't something anyone really wanted to get involved with . " 
 = = = Franchise Pictures = = = 
 In 1998 , the project was taken over by Franchise Pictures , a recently established company whose head , Elie Samaha , a former dry cleaning mogul @-@ turned @-@ nightclub owner , specialized in rescuing stars ' pet projects . Franchise sought out stars whose projects were stalled at the major studios , bringing them aboard at reduced salaries . Samaha 's approach made waves in Hollywood , earning him a reputation of being able to produce star vehicles more cheaply than the larger studios . His unorthodox deals raised eyebrows and the entertainment industry magazine Variety commented that they were " often so complex and variable as to leave outsiders scratching their heads " . As Samaha put it , " I said , ' If John wants to make this movie , what does he want to get paid ? ' ... Because I do not pay anybody what they make . That is not my business plan . ' " He learned of Battlefield Earth from Cassian Elwes , an agent at the theatrical agency William Morris , and approached Travolta . A deal was soon struck and financing was arranged ; Travolta significantly reduced his normal fee of $ 20 million , lowering the film 's cost from the $ 100 million that had previously been forecast , and costs were reduced further by using Canadian locations and facilities . 
 The film was set up as an independent production for Morgan Creek Productions which would release the film through Warner Bros. in the U.S. under an existing distribution agreement . Travolta 's company <unk> Films was also involved , and Travolta invested $ 5 million of his own money in the production . Warner Bros. allocated $ 20 million for the film 's marketing and distribution . Franchise retained the foreign rights , licensing the European distribution rights to the German group Intertainment AG in exchange for 47 % of the production costs which were set at $ 75 million . The Intertainment deal later became the focus of a legal action that bankrupted Franchise . Samaha forecast that the film would be a hit : " My projected numbers on Battlefield Earth are really conservative . I 'm already covered internationally , and there 's no way I 'm going to lose if the movie does $ 35 million domestically . And Travolta has never had an action movie do under $ 35 million . " 
 According to Samaha , he got around the " negative factor " of the Scientology connection by the simple expedient of " yell [ ing ] at everyone , ' This is a science @-@ fiction film starring John Travolta ! ' again and again " . Samaha acknowledged that " everyone thought I was crazy or mentally retarded " for taking on the project , but pitched the film as " Planet of the Apes starring John Travolta " . Others in Hollywood were still skeptical ; an unnamed producer was quoted by the Los Angeles Daily News as saying that " Battlefield Earth has the stench of death . It should never have been made . It 's an $ 80 million vanity project for Travolta . " Travolta 's theatrical agency William Morris was also said to be unenthusiastic , reportedly leading to Travolta threatening to leave them if they did not help him to set up the film . Fellow Scientologist Tom Cruise was said to have warned Warner Bros. that he thought the movie was a bad idea . This was later denied by his spokesperson . 
 = = = Author Services Inc. and Church of Scientology = = = 
 In 1999 , Author Services Inc. said that it was " donating its share of the profits from the film to charitable organizations that direct drug education and drug rehabilitation programs around the world " . It was reported that the merchandising revenues would be passed on to the Scientology @-@ linked groups Narconon , a drug rehabilitation program , and Applied <unk> , which promotes Hubbard 's Study tech , with movie @-@ related sales of the book funding the marketing of Hubbard 's fiction books and the L. Ron Hubbard Writers of the Future contest . The size of the revenue deal was not disclosed by the parties ; Trendmasters , the makers of the Battlefield Earth line of toys , stated that its deal was strictly with Franchise Pictures , which declined to comment , and Warner Bros. stated that its role was limited to distribution and had nothing to do with the associated merchandising deals . 
 In February 2000 , Church of Scientology spokesman Mike Rinder told Tribune Media Services that any spinoff deals based on Hubbard 's novel would benefit Author Services Inc. while another church spokesman , Aron Mason , stated , " The church has no financial interest in Battlefield Earth . Author Services is not part of the Church of Scientology . They are a literary agency without any connection to the church . " 
 Travolta 's manager Jonathan Krane denied that the Church of Scientology was playing any part in the production : " I 've never even dealt with or talked to the church on this . This is an action @-@ adventure , science @-@ fiction story . Period . The movie has nothing to do with Scientology . " Krane stated that the film had been financed " without a dollar coming from the Scientologists " . Some people in Hollywood feared that Travolta was using his box office draw to promote Scientology teachings , and one film producer stated , " This film could encourage kids to embrace the whole strange world of Scientology . " Travolta stated , " I 'm doing it because it 's a great piece of science fiction . This is not about Hubbard . I 'm very interested in Scientology , but that 's personal . This is different . " In a separate interview Travolta commented on the perceived similarities between Battlefield Earth and Scientology : " Well , they are kind of synonymous ... L. Ron Hubbard is very famous for Scientology and Dianetics . On the other hand , he 's equally as famous in the science fiction world . So for people to think that ... look , I don 't want everybody to try Scientology . I don 't really care if somebody thinks that . I 'm not worried about it . You can 't be . The truth of why I 'm doing it is because it 's a great piece of science fiction . I 'm going to be the wickedest 9 @-@ foot alien you 've ever seen in your life . " 
 = = = Pre @-@ production = = = 
 Travolta and his manager , Jonathan Krane , took the lead in hiring the on @-@ set personnel . They initially approached Quentin Tarantino to direct the film . When Tarantino declined , Roger Christian , a protégé of George Lucas , was recruited as the director on the advice of Lucas . Christian had most recently been the second unit director on Lucas ' Star Wars : Episode I – The Phantom Menace . Patrick Tatopoulos was signed to develop the production design and costumes , including the design of the alien Psychlos , and Czech @-@ American composer Elia <unk> was signed to provide the film 's score . Travolta and Krane also signed the cinematographer and most of the principal actors . Corey Mandell , a screenwriter who had previously worked with Ridley Scott on Blade Runner , signed on to write the script for the film , which had previously gone through 10 revisions . Mandell stated in an interview , " I am not a Scientologist ... I came on board because John asked me to read the book and said , ' It 's not a religious book . It 's a science @-@ fiction story . There 's nothing sacred about the story , nothing of the religious philosophy . I was given this to read purely as science fiction – to see whether it was intriguing as a movie . And it was . " 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Filmed in Canada , principal photography took place in Montreal , Saint @-@ Jean @-@ sur @-@ Richelieu and several other Quebec locations during the summer and autumn of 1999 . In January 1999 , Travolta flew his private Boeing 727 on a secret visit to Montreal to scout out locations for shooting . The film was reported to have been the most expensive production shot in Canada up to that point . It was also reported that the production costs would have been twice as high had the film been shot in the United States . Almost every shot in the film is at a Dutch angle , because , according to Roger Christian , he wanted the film to look like a comic book . 
 Travolta 's wife Kelly Preston also appeared in one scene , playing Terl 's " <unk> Psychlo girlfriend " . Travolta originally saw himself in the role of Jonnie , but by the time the movie was actually made , Travolta felt he was too old to play the role , and took the role of the main villain instead . Travolta 's role in the film required what he described as an amazing physical transformation : " I wear a tall head apparatus with strange hair . I have amber eyes and talons for hands . It 's quite remarkable ... I 'm on 4 @-@ foot stilts . " To star in the film , Travolta turned down the movie The Shipping News and postponed production on Standing Room Only . 
 The film was " plagued by bad buzz " before release with the media speculating about the possible influence of Scientology and commenting on the production 's tight security . As the film was entering post @-@ production , the alternative newspaper Mean Magazine obtained a copy of the screenplay . Mean 's staffers changed the script 's title to " Dark Forces " by " Desmond Finch " and circulated it to readers at major Hollywood film production companies . The comments that came back were unfavorable : " a thoroughly silly plotline is made all the more ludicrous by its hamfisted dialog and ridiculously shallow characterizations " , " a completely predictable story that just isn 't written well enough to make up for its lack of originality " . One reviewer labeled the screenplay " as entertaining as watching a fly breathe " . 
 = = Release = = 
 Battlefield Earth was released on May 12 , 2000 , three days after the 50th anniversary of the publication of Hubbard 's book Dianetics : The Modern Science of Mental Health , a date celebrated by Scientologists worldwide as a major Scientology holiday . Its premiere was held on May 10 , 2000 at Grauman 's Chinese Theatre on Hollywood Boulevard in Los Angeles . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The film 's scathingly bad reviews and poor word @-@ of @-@ mouth led to a precipitous falling @-@ off in its grosses . Having earned $ 11 @,@ 548 @,@ 898 from 3 @,@ 307 screens on its opening weekend , its take collapsed by 67 percent to $ 3 @,@ 924 @,@ 921 the following weekend , giving an average take of $ 1 @,@ 158 per screen . The film made 85 percent of its entire domestic gross in its first 10 days and <unk> thereafter , with earnings dropping a further 75 percent by the end of its third week to $ 1 million . The following week , facing earnings of just $ 205 @,@ 745 , Warner Bros. attempted to cut its losses by slashing the number of screens at which the film was being shown . The number was reduced from 2 @,@ 587 to 641 . By its sixth weekend on release , the film was showing on 95 screens and had made $ 18 @,@ 993 in a week – less than $ 200 per screen . 
 The film ultimately earned $ 21 @,@ 471 @,@ 685 in the United States and Canada and $ 8 @,@ 253 @,@ 978 internationally for a total of $ 29 @,@ 725 @,@ 663 worldwide , falling well short of its reported $ 73 million production budget and $ 20 million in estimated marketing costs . Financially , it is regarded as one of the most expensive box office bombs in film history . 
 In a 2006 list of " The top 10 biggest box office failures " , Kat <unk> of MSN Movies placed Battlefield Earth as tied with Inchon for number seven . 
 = = = Merchandising = = = 
 A limited range of merchandising was produced for the film , including posters , a soundtrack CD by Elia Cmíral recorded by the Seattle Symphony , and a re @-@ released version of the novel with a new cover based on the film 's poster . Trendmasters also produced a range of action figures of the main characters , including an 11 @-@ inch ( 280 mm ) figure of Travolta as Terl voicing lines from the film such as " Exterminate all man @-@ animals at will ! " , " You wouldn 't last one day at the academy " , " Man is an endangered species " , and " <unk> ! " . In Hubbard 's novel the term " <unk> " is never used , and Terl instead refers to Jonnie <unk> Tyler as " rat brain " . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 A special edition DVD was released in 2001 , deleting one scene and including two additional scenes which added two minutes to the film 's running time . The DVD includes commentary tracks with director Roger Christian and production , costume and creature designer Patrick Tatopoulos , as well as special features including John Travolta 's alien makeup test . Jeff <unk> of Sci Fi Weekly wrote that " ... the Battlefield Earth Special Edition DVD is packed with information , offering an enlightening glimpse into the creative process behind this imperfect but entertaining picture " . Randy Salas of the Star Tribune described it as the " Best DVD for a bad movie . " A review of the DVD release in the Los Angeles Times was more critical : " A dated visual style , patched @-@ together special effects and ludicrous dialogue combine in a film that is a wholly miserable experience . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Upon release , Battlefield Earth was heavily panned by critics , and is often considered one of the worst films ever made . On Rotten Tomatoes , the film has a " rotten " score of 3 % based on 148 reviews with an average rating of 2 @.@ 3 out of 10 . The critical consensus states : " Ugly , campy and poorly acted , Battlefield Earth is a stunningly misguided , aggressively bad sci @-@ fi folly " . On Metacritic , the film had an average score of 9 out of 100 , based on 33 critics indicating " Overwhelming dislike " . 
 Chicago Sun @-@ Times film critic Roger Ebert gave the film the rating of half a star out of four and described it as " like taking a bus trip with someone who has needed a bath for a long time . It 's not merely bad ; it 's unpleasant in a hostile way . I watched it in mounting gloom , realizing I was witnessing something historic , a film that for decades to come will be the punch line of jokes about bad movies . " Leonard Maltin rated the film a " BOMB " in his book Leonard Maltin 's Movie Guide , writing : " Clumsy plot , misplaced satire , unbelievable coincidences and a leaden pace trample Travolta 's weird but amusing performance . " David Bleiler gave the film one star out of four in the TLA Video & DVD Guide , writing : " This is disjointed , tedious and every bit as bad as its reputation . " Jon Stewart mocked the film on his television program The Daily Show , describing it as " a cross between Star Wars and the smell of ass " . 
 Rita Kempley of The Washington Post commented : " A million monkeys with a million crayons would be hard @-@ pressed in a million years to create anything as cretinous as Battlefield Earth . This film version of L. Ron Hubbard 's futuristic novel is so breathtakingly awful in concept and execution , it wouldn 't tax the smarts of a <unk> . " Elvis Mitchell of The New York Times wrote : " It may be a bit early to make such judgments , but Battlefield Earth may well turn out to be the worst movie of this century " and called it " Plan 9 from Outer Space for a new generation " . The British film critic Jonathan Ross said : " Everything about Battlefield Earth sucks . Everything . The over @-@ the @-@ top music , the unbelievable sets , the terrible dialogue , the hammy acting , the lousy special effects , the beginning , the middle and especially the end . " The Hollywood Reporter summarized the film as being " a flat @-@ out mess , by golly , with massive narrative sinkholes , leading to moments of outstanding disbelief in the muddled writing and shockingly chaotic mise en scène that 's accompanied by ear @-@ pummeling sound and bombastic music " . 
 Particular points that critics held up for censure included its use of angled camera shots ( which , according to the director himself in different reports , are used in all but one frame of the film or even in every single frame ) , derivative special effects and unbelievable plotting . The Providence Journal highlighted the film 's unusual color scheme : " Battlefield Earth 's primary colors are blue and gray , adding to the misery . Whenever we glimpse sunlight , the screen goes all stale yellow , as though someone had urinated on the print . This , by the way , is not such a bad idea . " 
 The film is profiled in Better Living Through Bad Movies by Scott Clevenger and Sheri Zollinger , who comment : " So what new truths have we gleaned from Battlefield Earth ? First , we have learned that spirituality is a fine thing , but it 's probably best to avoid joining denominations that make action movies . " In 2010 , screenwriter J.D. Shapiro wrote an apology letter in The New York Post , saying that his draft was completely different from the final product , and he was very ashamed of the poor quality of Battlefield Earth – " The only time I saw the movie was at the premiere , which was one too many times . " 
 The film was reported to have been greeted with widespread derision in preview screenings for the public and critics . An audience of Los Angeles entertainment journalists , critics and others greeted the film with guffaws and hoots at a screening in Century City , while other viewers in Washington , D.C. and Baltimore responded with derisive laughter or simply walked out . At a post @-@ launch publicity event , Travolta , on asking assembled journalists if they had enjoyed it , received no reply . He later asserted that other filmmakers had enjoyed the movie : " When I felt better about everything was when George Lucas and Quentin Tarantino , and a lot of people that I felt knew what they were doing , saw it and thought it was a great piece of science fiction . " Christian also spoke of an initially positive reception , mentioning an enthusiastic response from both the audience and Tarantino . 
 Responding to the criticism , one of the film 's producers , Elie Samaha , complained : " [ The ] critics were waiting for us to ... chop our heads off . Everybody hated Scientology for some reason . I didn 't know people were so prejudiced . " He argued that despite the film 's poor performance it would cover its costs in due course : " Maybe [ in ] the second cycle with Internet , and HBO , and DVD , you always make your money ... so I 'm not going to lose sleep over one movie that did not perform for us . " 
 The reviews were not uniformly negative . Bob Graham of the San Francisco Chronicle wrote that the film " effectively presented " the " wary , uncomprehending relationship " between the humans and the Psychlos . A review at <unk> 's Movie Reviews was also positive ; Berge Garabedian wrote , " Despite starting off like a bad Star Trek episode , this film eventually graduates to a higher level with great special effects , some really slick bad @-@ ass aliens , an intriguing premise and a good flow of loud , campy fun . " Luke Thompson of New Times LA wrote : " Think Independence Day without the ponderous build @-@ up or self @-@ importance . Imagine how much more enjoyable the other blockbuster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ moment , Gladiator , might have been if Joaquin Phoenix had addressed every one of his rivals as ' Rat brain . ' " Sean Axmaker of the Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer wrote positively of the interaction between Travolta and Whitaker in the film , comparing them to Abbott and Costello . Axmaker wrote that they provide " ... much @-@ needed comic relief in an otherwise humorless paean to freedom " . Axmaker also wrote positively of the production design used in the film , commenting that the director had created " a world of crumbling dead cities and empty malls turned into human hunting grounds ... " Hap <unk> of The Palm Beach Post commented : " ... production designer Patrick <unk> contributes some good work , imagining the ruins of Denver and Washington , D.C. , with echoes of Planet of the Apes . " 
 Battlefield Earth frequently appears on worst film lists , and is included on Rotten Tomatoes ' " 100 Worst of the Worst Movies " list . Rotten Tomatoes ranked the film 27th in the 100 worst reviewed films of the first decade of the 21st century . The Arizona Republic listed it as the worst film of 2000 , and called it a " monumentally bad sci @-@ fi flick " . Richard Roeper placed the film at number five on his list of " 40 movies that linger in the back chambers of my memory vault like a plate of cheese left behind a radiator in a <unk> hotel " . In 2001 the film received the " Worst Picture " award from the Dallas @-@ Fort Worth Film Critics Association . James Franklin of McClatchy @-@ Tribune News Service put the film as the worst of his " summer blockbuster bombs " list , giving it a rating of four stars for " traumatic " on his scale of how the films " generate a perverse sense of nostalgia " . Christopher Null of Filmcritic.com listed the film 's villain Terl at number 8 of his " 10 Least Effective Movie Villains " , writing : " we still can 't imagine how anyone would go face to face with one of these creatures and react with anything other than simple laughter " . In her book I Love Geeks : The Official Handbook , Carrie Tucker cites Battlefield Earth as a cult classic " in the ' so bad it 's good ' genre . " 
 South Park parodied the film at the 2000 MTV Movie Awards . The MTV short was the first time South Park had satirized Scientology , in a piece entitled " The Gauntlet " . The short was primarily a Gladiator parody , with the characters fighting Russell Crowe in the Roman Colosseum ; it included " John Travolta and the Church of Scientology " arriving in a spaceship to defeat Crowe and attempting to recruit the boys into Scientology . Travolta , along with his fellow Scientologists , was depicted as a Psychlo , as he appeared in the film . 
 = = = Golden Raspberry Awards = = = 
 Battlefield Earth swept the 2000 Golden Raspberry Awards and received seven " Razzies " , including Worst Movie of the Year , Worst Actor ( Travolta ) , Worst Supporting Actor ( Pepper ) , Worst Supporting Actress ( Preston ) , Worst Director ( Christian ) , Worst Screenplay ( Mandell and Shapiro ) and Worst Screen Couple ( Travolta and " anyone sharing the screen with him " ) . This tied for the highest number of Razzies won by a single film at that time , with Showgirls achieving seven wins in 1995 . Battlefield Earth was later awarded an eighth Razzie for " Worst Drama of Our First 25 Years " . In 2010 , the film received an award for " Worst Picture of the Decade " , bringing its total number of Razzie Awards to nine and consequently setting a record for the most Razzies won by a single film . That record was surpassed in 2012 when Jack and Jill won ten awards . 
 As Travolta did not attend to collect his trophies , an action figure of Terl , his character , accepted them in his place . Travolta responded a week later to the awards : " I didn 't even know there were such awards . I have people around me whose job it is to not tell me about such things . They 're obviously doing their job . Not every film can be a critical and box office success . It would have been awful only if Battlefield Earth was neither . That 's not the case . It is edging toward the $ 100m mark which means it has found an audience even if it didn 't impress critics . I 'd rather my films connect with audiences than with critics because it gives you more longevity as a performer . " He later insisted that he still felt " really good about it . Here I was taking big chances , breaking a new genre . " 
 Pepper said that he regretted not having been invited to the Razzies and blamed the film 's failure on " a weak script and poor production values " . Writer J. D. Shapiro received his Worst Screenplay award from Razzies founder John J. B. Wilson during a radio program ; he commented that Travolta had called the script " the Schindler 's List of science fiction " . Shapiro also made an appearance to pick up the Worst Picture of the Decade award at the 30th Golden Raspberry Awards , giving a speech quoting negative reviews , and thanking both the studio for firing him and Corey Mandell for " rewriting my script in a way I never , ever , ever — could have imagined or conceived of myself . " 
 The film 's producer , Elie Samaha , declared that he welcomed the " free publicity " , as " the more the critics hit Battlefield Earth , the more DVDs it sells . It is the kind of film that makes a movie legend and we feel we have enough staying power to last long after the critics have quieted down . " 
 = = Controversies = = 
 = = = Scientology influence = = = 
 Stacy Brooks , then @-@ president of the Lisa McPherson Trust , stated : " There 's no way that this movie would be happening without Scientology 's backing ... This is one example of how Scientology insinuates itself in various aspects of the culture . " Mark Bunker characterized the film as a recruitment tactic for the Church of Scientology , stating , " It 's designed to introduce L. Ron Hubbard to a whole new generation of kids . It 's there to plant a favorable seed in children 's minds . " Bunker criticized the promotional methods of the film — instead of granting interviews about the film to the press , John Travolta went on a book tour and signed copies of L. Ron Hubbard 's novel . Bunker stated , " When Michael Caine goes around to promote The Cider House Rules , he doesn 't tour bookstores and sign copies of John Irving 's novel ... Through the movie tie @-@ in with the book , kids will send in the card to get their free poster , and eventually be introduced to Dianetics . " Scientologist Nancy O 'Meara , at the time treasurer of the Foundation for Religious Freedom and currently treasurer of the Scientology @-@ run New Cult Awareness Network , responded to Bunker 's statement : " Gimme a break ... That 's like saying people are going to go see Gladiator and then suddenly find themselves wanting to explore Christianity . " 
 Before the film was released , rumors and allegations began to circulate that Battlefield Earth contained subliminal messages promoting Scientology . Former Scientologist Lawrence Wollersheim , in a press release issued by his group Fight Against Coercive Tactics Network , said that the Church of Scientology " has placed highly advanced subliminal messages in the Battlefield Earth film master to surreptitiously recruit new members from the movie audience and to get the audience to develop a revulsion for psychiatry and current mental health organizations and practices " . Other critics said that the film " is a veiled attempt to gain converts and influence " , and that writers were gagged from making connections between Scientology and the film with threats of lawsuits . Warner Bros. dismissed the claims as " silly nonsense " , the Church of Scientology denounced them as " hogwash " and the media reacted with skepticism ; as the Scottish journalist Duncan Campbell put it , " the only subliminal voice I could detect came about 10 minutes into this 121 @-@ minute film and it seemed to be saying <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> " . When asked about the similarities between the film and Scientology beliefs in intergalactic travel and aliens , church spokesman Aron Mason stated , " That 's a pretty crude parallel ... You 'd have to make some serious leaps of logic to make that comparison . " John Travolta also stated that the film was not inspired by Scientology tenets . 
 = = = Fraud by Franchise Pictures = = = 
 Following the failure of Battlefield Earth and other films independently produced by Franchise Pictures , The Wall Street Journal reported that the FBI was probing " the question of whether some independent motion picture companies have vastly inflated the budget of films in an effort to scam investors " . In December 2000 the German @-@ based Intertainment AG filed a lawsuit alleging that Franchise Pictures had fraudulently inflated budgets in films including Battlefield Earth , which Intertainment had helped to finance . Intertainment had agreed to pay 47 % of the production costs of several films in exchange for European distribution rights , but ended up paying for between 60 and 90 % of the costs instead . The company alleged that Franchise had defrauded it to the tune of over $ 75 million by systematically submitting " grossly fraudulent and inflated budgets " . 
 The case was heard before a jury in a Los Angeles federal courtroom in May – June 2004 . The court heard testimony from Intertainment that according to Franchise 's bank records the real cost of Battlefield Earth was $ 44 million , not the $ 75 million declared by Franchise . The remaining $ 31 million had been fraudulent " padding " . Intertainment 's head Barry Baeres told the court that he had only funded Battlefield Earth because it was packaged as a slate that included two more commercially attractive films , the Wesley Snipes vehicle The Art of War and the Bruce Willis comedy The Whole Nine Yards . Baeres testified that " Mr. Samaha said , ' If you want the other two pictures , you have to take Battlefield Earth — it 's called packaging ' " . Baeres commented : " We would have been quite happy if he had killed [ Battlefield Earth ] " . 
 Intertainment won the case and was awarded $ 121 @.@ 7 million in damages . Samaha himself was declared by the court to be personally liable for $ 77 million in damages . The jury rejected Intertainment 's claims under the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act ( RICO ) statute , which would have trebled the damages if Franchise had been convicted on that charge . The judgment forced Franchise into bankruptcy a few months later . The failure of the film was also reported to have led in 2002 to Travolta firing his manager Jonathan Krane , who had set up the deal with Franchise in the first place . 
 = = Follow @-@ ups and sequels = = 
 Battlefield Earth is significantly shorter than its source novel , covering only the first 436 pages of the 1 @,@ 050 @-@ page book . A sequel covering the remainder of the book was originally planned at the outset . When asked during promotion of the film if there would be a Battlefield Earth 2 , Travolta responded , " Sure . Yeah . " Travolta asserted that the first film would become a cult classic , stating that there were already fan websites dedicated to the film . Corey Mandell , the scriptwriter for the first film , was commissioned to deliver the script for the sequel , and Travolta , Pepper and producer Krane were all signed up to the sequel in their contracts for the first film . Christian and Whitaker were approached to reprise their respective roles , and the producers planned for a 2003 release date so as not to compete with George Lucas ' Star Wars : Episode II – Attack of the Clones . 
 Despite Travolta 's earlier statements , plans for a sequel never came to fruition . According to James Robert Parish 's Fiasco : A History of Hollywood 's Iconic Flops , the disastrous performance of Battlefield Earth and the collapse of Franchise Pictures made it very unlikely that a live @-@ action sequel will be made . In a 2001 interview , Travolta stated that a sequel was not planned : " Ultimately the movie did $ 100 million when you count box office , DVD sales , video and pay per view ... But I don 't know what kind of number it would have to do to justify filming the second part of the book . And I don 't want to push any buttons in the press and stir anybody up about it now . " Author Services announced in 2001 that Pine Com International , a Tokyo @-@ based animation studio , would produce 13 one @-@ hour animated television segments based on the book and rendered in a manga style . The plans appear to have fallen through , and according to Parish , " little has been heard of the series since " . 
 = Bob Chappuis = 
 Robert Richard " Bob " Chappuis ( / <unk> / <unk> @-@ ee @-@ əs ; February 24 , 1923 – June 14 , 2012 ) was an American football player who played halfback and quarterback for the University of Michigan Wolverines in 1942 , 1946 , and 1947 . His college years were interrupted by service in the U.S. Army Air Forces during World War II . Chappuis flew 21 missions as a radio operator and aerial gunner on B @-@ 25 bombers in the European Theater . His aircraft was shot down in February 1945 in the Lombardy region of Northern Italy . Chappuis parachuted from the plane before it crashed , and Italian partisans rescued him by hiding Chappuis and two other crew members for the final three months of the war . 
 After the war , Chappuis returned to Michigan where he broke the Big Nine Conference record for total offense in 1946 and then broke his own record in 1947 . He led the 1947 Michigan team known as the “ Mad Magicians ” to an undefeated season and a 49 – 0 win over the USC Trojans in the 1948 Rose Bowl game . Chappuis was a unanimous All @-@ American selection in 1947 and was named the Most Valuable Player of the 1948 Rose Bowl . His picture appeared on the cover of Time magazine in 1947 in connection with a feature article about Chappuis and the 1947 Wolverines . He placed second in the 1947 Heisman Trophy balloting . 
 During his career he established many football records that lasted for over a generation and became an All @-@ American . He continues to hold the Big Ten Conference single @-@ season passer rating record and the Michigan Wolverines single @-@ season yards / completion records . He was one of the early passing specialists in an era where football players were just beginning to either play on offense or defense instead of both . 
 Chappuis played professional football in the All @-@ America Football Conference ( AAFC ) as a quarterback for the Brooklyn Dodgers and Chicago Hornets in 1948 and 1949 . He led the Dodgers in total offense in 1948 with 1 @,@ 402 yards passing and 310 yards rushing . When both clubs and the AAFC folded , Chappuis retired from football in 1950 . He was elected to the College Football Hall of Fame in 1988 . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Chappuis was born and raised in Toledo , Ohio , the son of Mary Ellen ( née Burchell ) and Sylvan Francis Chappuis . His father — who had played quarterback for Denison University , which is located near Columbus , Ohio — was an executive with a porcelain products company in Toledo . Chappuis graduated from <unk> High School where he was a star football player . When it came time to choose a college , his father said his only preference for his son was that he not attend Ohio State . Chappuis could not provide much of an explanation for his father 's preference : “ Dad just didn 't like Ohio State . ” 
 Chappuis played in nine games for Michigan as a sophomore in 1942 , contributing 220 yards rushing , 358 yards passing , and 30 yards receiving . In his first game as a college halfback , Chappuis completed seven of eighteen passes for a gain of 80 yards , and also rushed for 49 yards in a 9 – 0 win over the Great Lakes Naval Training Station . Chappuis ' predecessor as Michigan 's halfback , Heisman Trophy winner Tom Harmon , completed seven passes in a single game only three times in three years , a feat accomplished by Chappuis in his first game . 
 = = Service in World War II = = 
 Chappuis ' college program was interrupted by military service from 1943 to 1945 . During World War II , Chappuis earned the rank of Lieutenant in the U.S. Army Air Forces . He flew 21 missions as a radio operator and aerial gunner in B @-@ 25 bombers . His crew sunk a cruiser in an Italian harbor , which earned it a citation in September 1944 . He flew his first mission , which was targeting a railroad bridge in the heavily fortified Brenner Pass on Christmas Day 1944 . At the time he flew this first mission , he was a sergeant . On February 13 , 1945 , Chappuis flew his 21st mission when he was assigned to fill in for a sick crew member . Chappuis ’ B @-@ 25 bomber was assigned to bomb a railroad tunnel in the Italian mountains north of the Po River . “ Over the target , a burst of flak knocked out one engine , then the other engine went out . When the order came to bail out , the <unk> went out first , and got stuck in the escape hatch , pinned against the rear of it by the wind pressure . Chappuis kicked him in the only accessible place — his head — and knocked him loose . Then he jumped . ” 
 Chappuis was rescued by an Italian partisan , Aldo Comucci , a 21 @-@ year @-@ old who was in charge of one of the many underground groups operating in the area . Comucci and his band of resistance fighters got to Chappuis before the Germans and hid him and two other American flyers from the same plane for nearly three months until the end of the war . The partisans passed Chappuis and the two other Americans from house to house , and village to village , toward the Swiss frontier . Dressed in shawls — but still wearing G.I. shoes — they once walked undetected past a German sentry . 
 Chappuis and his crewmates finally reached a home in the small town of Asola , Italy , in the Province of Mantua , Lombardy , about 80 miles ( 130 km ) from Milan . The German headquarters was two houses away , and the drill grounds were across the street . Accordingly , Chappuis and the other Americans could not walk near a window or talk above a whisper . They passed the time playing cards with each other and with the Ugolini family with whom they stayed , and reading a well @-@ worn copy of Uncle Tom 's Cabin . The Americans were nearly captured one evening when the Fascist fiancé of one of the Ugolini daughters entered the house unannounced and found the Americans playing cards . He threatened to turn the Americans in , but was persuaded not to when told it would mean the death of his fiancée and her family for aiding the Americans . 
 When V @-@ E Day arrived in early May 1945 , Chappuis and his crewmates stayed in Asola for a week @-@ long celebration . On the night the war ended , residents of Asola removed the seats from the town ’ s theater for a victory ball . While two orchestras played onstage , the liberated townspeople toasted the Americans , and Chappuis danced with the <unk> ' daughters . When Chappuis returned to the United States , he stayed in touch with the <unk> and sent them weekly food packages . Chappuis also stayed in touch with Comucci , the resistance leader who rescued him . In 1974 , Chappuis returned to Italy to meet with Comucci for the first time in 20 years . And in August 1975 , Comucci and his wife traveled to Michigan to visit Chappuis . 
 = = All @-@ American at the University of Michigan = = 
 = = = 1946 season = = = 
 Chappuis returned to Michigan after being discharged from the military and played football in the spring of 1946 . He returned in time to join the Michigan baseball team , where he played in the outfield , led the team in batting , and helped them win the Big Nine championship with a 26 @-@ game winning streak . 
 When football season arrived in the fall , Chappuis was one of many veterans who returned to college and the gridiron after serving in the war . Many of the returning veterans were not in prime football condition at the start of the 1946 season , and Coach Fritz Crisler “ predicted it might be November before ex @-@ servicemen were adjusted physically and mentally to play their top game . ” Chappuis later recalled that he was 23 years old when he returned to school , and some of the returning veterans “ didn 't know if they could get back into the rah @-@ rah of college football , but Fritz took care of that . He really whipped us into shape . ” Despite any difficulties in re @-@ adjusting to civilian life and football , Chappuis broke Otto Graham 's Big Nine Conference record for total offensive yards during the 1946 football season . Though reports differ as to Chappuis ' total yards gained , University of Michigan records show that Chappuis gained 1 @,@ 284 yards in 1946 — 734 yards passing , 501 yards rushing and 49 yards receiving . Chappuis set the new offensive mark in 1946 with a fractured bone in his wrist that he did not report until after the season had ended , at which time an operation was performed . Chappuis later said he knew the x @-@ ray would reveal a fracture , and he would be benched before he even began . He delayed the examination until the season was over because “ the time to break into the lineup is prior to the first game . If I hadn 't , there were so many capable candidates around who could have made good behind our front wall that I 'd never have become a first @-@ stringer by returning in the middle of the season . ” Accordingly , Chappuis played the 1946 season with a fractured wrist and without even bothering to tape the wrist . He was later drafted in December by the Detroit Lions in the fifth round of the 1947 NFL Draft ( 26th overall pick ) . But Chappuis opted to stay in school to finish his collegiate career . 
 = = = 1947 season = = = 
 Given the off @-@ season wrist surgery , Chappuis was questionable for the 1947 season . As the season got underway , Chappuis said the wrist was “ not as loose ” as it was in 1946 , but he felt it was " loose enough . " In the end , Chappuis broke his own Big Nine total offense record by gaining 1 @,@ 405 yards as compared with 1 @,@ 284 yards in 1946 . He completed 48 out of 84 passes for 976 yards , including 11 touchdown passes . He also scored 5 touchdowns and gained 544 yards rushing . In the season opener against Michigan State , Chappuis scored three touchdowns in a 55 – 0 victory , as Michigan outgained the Spartans 504 yards rushing to 56 . Michigan finished the 1947 season with a 21 – 0 victory over Ohio State . In his last game at Michigan Stadium , Chappuis set a Michigan single @-@ game record for total offense that would last 20 years . Altogether , Chappuis accounted for 307 yards , rushing for 90 yards and completing 12 of 27 passes for 217 yards . This stood as a school single @-@ game total offense record for over 20 years . At the end of the 1947 season , Chappuis was named a unanimous first @-@ team All @-@ American . He also finished second to Johnny Lujack in the 1947 Heisman Trophy voting , with Lujack receiving 742 first and second place votes to 555 for Chappuis . Despite the glowing adjectives heaped on him , reporters noted that “ Chappuis can still wear his regular size seven headgear . ” Chappuis gave credit to his line saying , “ Anyone passing behind the protection that line gave me could have done as well . ” In another sign of his modesty on a team with only two two @-@ way players Chappuis said " You have to smell where to go on pass defense — and my sniffer 's not too good . " when asked why he does not play both ways . 
 In addition to having the most accomplished season of his collegiate career , Chappuis was a leader on campus . He was elected president of the Michigan Alpha chapter of the Phi Delta Theta fraternity whose membership included a number of his teammates and prominent University of Michigan athletic alumni such as Tom Harmon , Bob Ufer , and Harry Kipke . Chappuis appeared on the cover of the October 28 , 1947 issue of Look magazine which featured pictures of him on the football field and at the fraternity house . In the magazine , Chappuis and his future wife were also featured about the Michigan campus . He expressed an interest in first playing professional football for a few years before going into the porcelain business with his father . 
 Look magazine devoted over a dozen pictures to showing Chappuis play in the offense . In the 1940s , the offense was perceived as gimmicky and magical and the magazine described how the offense used various fakes and delays to gain the advantage in timing by concealing the point of attack and the attacker . The contemporary football lingo described the basic attack as a " fullback spinner cycle with the backs deployed loosely . " It described an alternate formation as a single @-@ wing formation with direct snap from center to left halfback ( Chappuis ' position ) . The article also describes T maneuvers , lateral passes and end @-@ around plays as part of the offense . 
 = = = Passing “ specialist ” = = = 
 Chappuis drew considerable attention in the national press for his abilities as a passer , one of the game 's first passing “ specialists . ” In November 1947 , Time magazine ran a feature article about Chappuis and the 1947 Wolverines ( with Chappuis ' photograph on the cover ) called “ The Specialist . ” The Time article focused on the new era of specialization marked by coach Fritz Crisler 's decision to field separate offensive and defensive units in 1947 . The article focused on Chappuis as Michigan 's “ prize specialist , ” who was described as “ Crisler 's <unk> . ” “ His job is to throw forward passes and there is no one in 1947 collegiate football who does it better . … In Michigan 's first five games , Specialist Chappuis was on the field less than one @-@ third of the time , but of the 27 passes he threw , 19 were complete – five of them for touchdowns ... When Chappuis fades back to pass , he is a slow @-@ motion study in coolness and concentration . ” 
 Crisler said Chappuis was “ the finest passer I have ever handled and probably one of the best I 've ever seen . He plays as though he had ice water in his veins . ” Crisler felt that “ great passers are born , ” and the difference between a great and a merely good passer is in the eyes . Time noted that Chappuis had great field vision for his downfield receivers and for oncoming defenders . “ Like a good baseball catcher , he throws the ball off his right ear , with a snap motion . He throws what the coaches call a ‘ heavy ball . ’ ” Another writer noted that Chappuis was “ endowed with a passer 's sixth sense , ‘ split vision , ’ ” and an ability to “ pick out his receiver after one glance over the field . ” 
 Time also noted that Chappuis was unlike his predecessor , the “ hail @-@ fellow ” Tom Harmon . “ His <unk> and sharp features earned him the nickname ‘ Bird Face ’ when he was a kid . ” Time also reported that Chappuis “ learns easily , just as he does in the classroom , where he makes a C @-@ plus average seemingly without ever opening a book . ” 
 When Chappuis graduated , he held numerous school records , including most touchdown passes in a career with 23 , a record that was not broken until 30 years later by four @-@ year starter , Rick Leach . He also held the record for most touchdown passes in a season with 13 , a record that was tied by Leach in 1976 . He also held the school record for most career total offensive yards with 3 @,@ 487 , a record broken in 1970 by Don Moorhead . 
 = = = 1948 Rose Bowl and All @-@ Star Game = = = 
 Chappuis played his last game for Michigan in a 49 – 0 win over the USC Trojans in the 1948 Rose Bowl . Chappuis ran for 91 yards , completed 14 of 24 passes for 188 yards , was named the Most Valuable Player , and set Rose Bowl records for total offense and pass completions . The Long Beach Independent reported : “ Bob Chappuis was every inch the All @-@ American he has been tabbed . Running , faking and pivoting beautifully , he averaged 7 yards a crack for 13 carries and completed 14 out of 24 pitches for 188 yards … which gave him a new total offense record of 279 yards for the classic . ” 
 A <unk> of the Rose Bowl was the Rose Bowl Queen nomination of Ann <unk> , the future wife of Bob Chappuis , which was against the tradition of having a queen from Pasadena , California . Buck Dawson , the manager of the Michigan Yearbook who would go on to marry the daughter of Matthew Mann , was the proponent of the nomination . Although tradition was upheld , <unk> 's photograph appeared on the front page of the Los Angeles Times along with the caption " Overlooked Michigan Beauty . " 
 Chappuis was also selected to play for coach Frank Leahy on the College All @-@ Star squad against the Chicago Cardinals , who were the 1947 NFL Champions . In the 15th College All @-@ Star vs. NFL Champion match , the Cardinals scored the biggest victory to date with a 28 – 0 victory . Among the collegians were Lujack and Chuck Conerly . The professional athletes included Paul Christman and Charley <unk> . Supposedly , the 1947 class had a void at fullback , which may have been the problem with their offense in the All @-@ Star game shutout . 
 = = = Celebrity = = = 
 He became a celebrity of sorts at Michigan . He was mentioned in several issues of Time Magazine , and his wedding was even announced in the magazine . In addition , his time at Michigan defined an era in a way that became a permanent reference because his contemporaries would say that they were at Michigan in the Chappuis years . In 1988 he was elected into the College Football Hall of Fame . 
 = = Professional football = = 
 Chappuis was drafted by the Pittsburgh Steelers , and reports in February 1948 indicated that the Steelers had offered him a two @-@ year contract for $ 20 @,@ 000 per year . However , Chappuis passed up the Steelers ' offer , opting instead to play for the new All @-@ America Football Conference ( AAFC ) . In June 1948 , Chappuis signed with Branch Rickey 's Brooklyn Dodgers of the AAFC after coach Carl <unk> outbid the Steelers for his services at $ 17 @,@ 000 . Chappuis had been drafted by the Cleveland Browns , and the Dodgers gave the Browns three draft picks in exchange for the right to sign Chappuis . Rickey had felt that modern football was based on speed and that he could win with a good center , passing quarterback and two tall sprinting ends . Thus , he placed a premium on signing Chappuis , the passing quarterback . The college All @-@ star game caused Chappuis to miss three weeks of practice and he played little in the early season games because he had not learned his plays . 
 In his first professional game against the San Francisco 49ers , Chappuis ran the ball 37 yards to the 49ers six @-@ yard line in the fourth quarter , giving fans “ an indication of what sent all the major professional clubs after his services . ” Chappuis played in 13 games for the Dodgers in 1948 and shared the quarterbacking responsibilities with Bob Hoernschemeyer who played in all 14 games . Chappuis led the team in total offense ( 1712 to 1428 for Hoernschemeyer ) . Chappuis completed 100 of 213 passes for 1 @,@ 402 yards with 15 interceptions and 8 touchdown passes . He also rushed for 310 yards , for an average of 6 @.@ 0 yards per carry , and one rushing touchdown . Although Chappuis led the team in total offense , Hoernschemeyer also made eleven receptions and served as both a kick returner and punt returner at various times during the season . The Dodgers finished the season with a 2 – 12 record and folded after the 1948 season . 
 In 1949 , Chappuis played for the Chicago Hornets , also of the AAFC , but saw only limited playing time as a back @-@ up to Hoernschemeyer and Johnny Clement on a team that went 4 – 10 . When the AAFC went out of existence after the 1949 season , Chappuis retired from football . In announcing his retirement in June 1950 , Chappuis said he was through with professional football and that his ambition then was to enjoy a more leisurely lifestyle and to be able to visit Ann Arbor for those fall football games . 
 = = After football = = 
 After retiring from football , Chappuis worked in various business ventures . In the 1950s , he was in the electrical appliance business in South Bend , Indiana . He spent thirteen years with Central Soya Co. in Fort Wayne , Indiana , retiring in 1983 as the Vice President in charge of Labor Relations . He later formed his own management consulting business in Fort Wayne . 
 Chappuis and his wife , Ann Chappuis , had four children . Chappuis is the uncle of former Michigan and Baltimore Colts strong safety Rick Volk . In 2012 , he was inducted into the Michigan Sports Hall of Fame . 
 Chappuis fell in June 2012 and was hospitalized at the University of Michigan Hospital . He died a few days later on June 14 , 2012 . 
 = = Honors and accolades = = 
 Chappuis has received numerous honors , including the following : 
 Named Most Valuable Player on the 1946 Michigan Wolverines football team ; 
 Named to the All @-@ Big Nine Conference team , 1946 ; 
 Consensus All @-@ American , 1947 ; 
 Named to the All @-@ Big Nine Conference team , 1947 ; 
 Finished second to Johnny Lujack in the Heisman Trophy voting in 1947 ; 
 Named Most Valuable Player of the 1948 Rose Bowl game ; 
 Inducted into the University of Michigan Hall of Honor in 1984 ; and 
 Inducted into the College Football Hall of Fame in 1988 . 
 Inducted into the Rose Bowl Hall of Fame in 1992 . 
 In 2005 , Chappuis was selected as one of the 100 greatest Michigan football players of all time by the " Motown Sports Revival , " ranking 28th on the all @-@ time team . 
 = George Villiers ( 1759 – 1827 ) = 
 George Villiers ( 23 November 1759 – 21 March 1827 ) , styled The Honourable , was a British courtier and politician from the Villiers family . The youngest son of the diplomat Lord Hyde ( later Earl of Clarendon ) , he was an intimate of Princess Amelia and personal supporter of her father , George III . His favour within the Royal Family and his father 's influence brought him a number of sinecures to support him . However , Villiers was more interested in the operation of the royal farms at Windsor Castle than in politics or the duties of his offices . When his bookkeeping as Paymaster of the Marines was carefully examined in 1810 , Villiers ' carelessness and the speculation of his clerk had left him in debt to the Crown by more than £ 250 @,@ 000 . This exposure touched off a public scandal ; Villiers promptly surrendered all his property to the Crown and threw himself on the king 's mercy . The misconduct of Joseph Hunt as Treasurer of the Ordnance to some extent obscured Villiers ' own misconduct , and he was able to retain other sinecures and a stable , if reduced , income from them until his death in 1827 . 
 = = Upbringing and political career = = 
 Villiers was the youngest son of Thomas Villiers , 1st Earl of Clarendon and Charlotte Capell . His maternal grandparents were William Capell , 3rd Earl of Essex and Jane Hyde . George , like his brother , was educated at Eton College and then St John 's College , Cambridge , graduating with an MA in 1779 . It was presumably through the influence of his father , then Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster under the first Pitt ministry , that he was appointed a Groom of the Bedchamber to George III on 13 January 1783 , and Clerk of the Council and Registrar of the Duchy of Lancaster in August 1786 . A polished courtier , Villiers earned the nickname " Tiger " among his party for his vehement support of the king ; although as Fanny Burney observed , his " remarkably slim , slight and delicate person " did not match the nickname . 
 In 1792 , Villiers purchased the support of Lord Warwick , and was returned as Member of Parliament for Warwick in the by @-@ election of 18 January 1792 as a Tory . On 19 March 1792 , shortly after his entry into Parliament , Villiers was appointed to the office of Paymaster of Marines , a sinecure which would ultimately prove his undoing . The salary of the post was fixed at £ 600 p.a. after a reform in 1800 . In 1794 , Villiers became the captain commanding the newly raised Western Troop of the Hertfordshire Gentlemen and Yeomanry @-@ Cavalry . 
 He was elected unopposed in 1796 , but did not stand for the borough in 1802 . Though a friend of Pitt 's government , he rarely attended the House ; George Rose commented in a letter that Villiers 's loss would have no impact on the Tories . While a member of parliament , in 1798 , he married Lord Boringdon 's daughter , Theresa , who would bear him ten children over the next two decades . After leaving Parliament , Villiers continued his presence at Court , and carried messages from the Princess Royal in Stuttgart to the king . In 1803 , the duties of his office as paymaster were extended , and on 9 May , he was reappointed as Paymaster and Inspector @-@ General of Marines , with a salary of £ 1 @,@ 000 p.a. In the same year , he was commissioned a captain in the Watford Volunteer Cavalry . Villiers was prepared to intercede with the king on behalf of Pitt to fulfill the latter 's desire for a more comprehensive ministry , which , however , was frustrated ; and to bring Pitt 's friends into the Ministry of All the Talents in 1806 . 
 Villiers , indeed , enjoyed considerable favour with the king , who granted him a private bounty of £ 400 p.a. in 1804 after being compelled to refuse him an office at Windsor Park . He was allowed to hold simultaneous office as a groom of the bedchamber and paymaster , and the king determined to place him in charge of his farms at Windsor as bailiff . Villiers and his family lived at Windsor Old Lodge until 1805 , when he was appointed ranger of Cranbourne Chase and he moved into Cranbourne Lodge , newly renovated as his residence . Villiers and his wife were particularly intimate with Princess Amelia , the king 's favourite daughter , accounting in part for the Royal favour shown him . With the fall of the Ministry of All the Talents in 1807 and the formation of Portland 's government , the Duke of Cumberland vigorously lobbied Portland to grant Villiers the mastership of the <unk> or some other office , on the grounds of Villiers having rendered " very serious and important services " to the Royal Family , but was unsuccessful . 
 In 1809 , upon the death of John Fordyce , Surveyor General of the Land Revenues of the Crown , Portland proposed to replace that office and that of the Surveyor General of Woods , Forests , Parks , and Chases , then held by Lord Glenbervie , with a three @-@ man commission ( the Commissioners of Woods and Forests ) , and to make Villiers one of the junior commissioners . This reorganisation of the Crown Lands temporarily halted upon Portland 's resignation and the formation of a new government under Spencer Perceval . This created an embarrassing difficulty for Villiers and his interest ; George Canning did not choose to serve under Perceval , and Villiers ' brother @-@ in @-@ law , the 2nd Lord Boringdon , was Canning 's friend . Nor was the proposed appointment of Villiers universally popular ; Lord Glenbervie , the proposed senior commissioner , vented his anger at Perceval 's nomination of Villiers in his journal : 
 Nonetheless , Villiers continued to press his claims to office on Perceval , in a letter of 18 October 1809 . He had , he said , turned down a pension of £ 1 @,@ 200 p.a. for " reasons ... which can never be publicly alluded to " and had received a promise from Portland to replace Fordyce as Surveyor General of the Land Revenues ( a post worth £ 2 @,@ 000 p.a. ) ; Villiers would , however , be satisfied with the commissionership and £ 1 @,@ 000 p.a. in addition , provided that he might retain his office of paymaster . In fact , that office was about to become the engine of Villiers ' political destruction . He appears to have received the sinecure offices of registrar of the Vice @-@ Admiralty Court of Gibraltar and marshal of the Vice @-@ Admiralty Court of Antigua around this time . 
 = = Scandal and disgrace = = 
 The value to the <unk> of an office like that of Paymaster of Marines lay not so much in the official salary attached to it , but in the lax accounting procedures associated with disbursement of funds , which allowed the official to retain large sums of public money in his own hands for many years until accounts were made up . The office of Paymaster General had been reformed in 1783 to avoid these abuses , but these changes had not yet been extended to the Marines during Villiers ' tenure . 
 He appears to have taken little interest in his official duties both as paymaster and inspector @-@ general , leaving affairs in the hands of Edmund Waters . Waters had been his private secretary , and when Villiers came to office as paymaster , Waters was appointed chief clerk in that department , rising to deputy paymaster in 1797 . Waters and Villiers invested in real estate with some of the money passing through the office ; unfortunately for Villiers , Waters was also diverting some of the funds to his own interest in the Opera House , and the accounts of the office were in a shambles . 
 Well aware of the parlous state of the office 's accounts , Waters retired from the Marine Pay Office in 1807 as an independently wealthy man ( only to lose the fortune in his Opera House investments ) . The lax regime in the Pay Office rattled on , however , until 27 December 1809 , when Perceval became aware of the state of Villiers ' accounts . Villiers , to his credit , immediately resigned and took responsibility for his official debts . Perceval allowed him to proffer his resignation directly to the king , but Villiers could not face his master ; Perceval informed the king of the state of affairs in a letter of 15 January 1810 , laying the blame for the situation largely on Waters . Perceval 's letter noted that " reports were circulating on the subject to such an extent as to make it impossible to hope that it would not become the subject of Parliamentary observation . " By this time , Villiers 's accounts had been audited through the year 1804 , revealing him to be in arrears by the staggering sum of £ 280 @,@ 000 through that point . On the advice of his brother @-@ in @-@ law Boringdon , Villiers offered up all his property to the Crown , although he could not hope to pay off the entire sum found wanting by this means . The episode left him in a condition of nervous prostration , the more so as he by now had five children to support . A letter by " A.B. " in Cobbett 's Political Register of 27 January 1810 assailed Villiers for his delinquency and estimated that his debt , with interest , might run to £ 500 @,@ 000 . 
 Fortunately for Villiers , his case was not to be prosecuted with the utmost rigour . He was to some degree protected by the joint efforts of Boringdon 's friends and the Whig George Tierney , as well as his own quick action in surrendering his property through writs of extent ; and the delinquency of Joseph Hunt , Treasurer of the Ordnance attracted attention and saved Villiers from the full wrath of the finance committee . Their report on the matter noted that the writ of extent had been to the amount of £ 264 @,@ 000 , but only £ 91 @,@ 000 had been raised from the sale of his property , and about £ 30 @,@ 000 from securities and the bond posted for him when he took office . The committee recommended the abolition of the office of Paymaster of Marines and the transfer of its duties to the Treasurer of the Navy , a recommendation which was not immediately acted upon . Villiers was left , in Boringdon 's estimation , with a debt of £ 1 @,@ 500 – 2 @,@ 000 , an annual income of £ 2 @,@ 000 – 3 @,@ 000 , and the property in Cranbourne Lodge . 
 However , his disgrace was not over . After his resignation , Villiers had been replaced by Lord Mulgrave 's brother , Edmund Phipps , as paymaster and lost his prospective place as a commissioner of woods and forests . Then , he was informed on 4 May 1810 , after the release of the finance committee 's report , that the king had removed from him the supervision of the farms at Windsor ( he also lost the <unk> ) . The news threw him into a state of great mental distress ; he wrote to the king begging him to suspend judgement on the points raised by the committee 's report . The king replied that it was " indispensable " to remove Villiers from his office under the circumstances , but extended his sympathy and suspended judgement on him . 
 The final disaster for Villiers occurred in November , when Princess Amelia died . After her death , Villiers and his wife attempted to blackmail the Royal Family by threatening ( in a letter to her doctor , Sir Henry Halford ) to release some of her correspondence , much to the shock of her sister , Princess Mary . The family finally moved out of Cranborne Lodge in 1812 . 
 The untangling of his accounts dragged on until 1819 , prolonged by his enemies at the Navy Office and his own fiscal incapacity . At length a balance of £ 220 @,@ 000 was found against him , but by this time his career was hopelessly ruined . He left office as a groom of the bedchamber in 1815 , but retained his vice @-@ admiralty sinecures until his death . In 1824 , he became heir presumptive to the Earldom of Clarendon but died in 1827 without inheriting it . 
 = = Marriage and children = = 
 On 17 April 1798 , George married Theresa Parker . She was a daughter of John Parker , 1st Baron Boringdon and his second wife Hon. Theresa Robinson . Her maternal grandparents were Thomas Robinson , 1st Baron Grantham and Frances Worsley . They had ten children : 
 Georgiana Villiers ( 12 February 1799 – 16 March 1799 ) 
 George Villiers , 4th Earl of Clarendon ( 27 January 1800 – 27 June 1870 ) 
 Thomas Hyde Villiers ( 24 January 1801 – 3 December 1832 ) 
 Hon. Charles Pelham Villiers ( 3 January 1802 – 16 January 1898 ) 
 Lady Maria Theresa Villiers ( 8 March 1803 – 9 November 1865 ) . Married first novelist Thomas Henry Lister on 6 November 1830 , they had a daughter ( d . 1863 ) . After her first husband 's death , she married politician Sir George Cornewall Lewis , 2nd Baronet on 25 October 1844 . 
 Frederick Adolphus Villiers ( 17 February 1805 – 21 November 1806 ) 
 Hon. Edward Ernest Villiers ( 23 March 1806 – 30 October 1843 ) . He married Elizabeth Charlotte Liddell , daughter of Thomas Liddell , 1st Baron Ravensworth , leaving a son and three daughters . Their daughter Edith Villiers married Robert Bulwer @-@ Lytton , 1st Earl of Lytton and became Lady of the Bedchamber to both Queen Victoria and Her Majesty Queen Alexandra . 
 Augustus Villiers ( 2 March 1808 – 24 March 1808 ) 
 Hon. Henry Montagu Villiers ( 4 January 1813 – 9 August 1861 ) , Bishop of Durham from 1860 to his death . 
 Lt. Hon. Augustus Algernon Villiers , RN ( 14 April 1817 – 13 July 1843 ) , died unmarried , Knight of Isabella the Catholic 
 = French battleship Bouvet = 
 Bouvet was a pre @-@ dreadnought battleship of the French Navy . She was laid down in January 1891 , launched in April 1896 , and completed in June 1898 . She was a member of a group of five broadly similar battleships , along with Charles Martel , Jauréguiberry , Carnot , and Masséna , which were ordered in response to the British Royal Sovereign class . Like her half @-@ sisters , she was armed with a main battery of two 305 mm ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) guns and two 274 mm ( 10 @.@ 8 in ) guns in individual turrets . She had a top speed of 17 @.@ 8 kn ( 33 @.@ 0 km / h ; 20 @.@ 5 mph ) . 
 Bouvet spent the majority of her career alternating between the Northern and Mediterranean Squadrons . At the outbreak of World War I , she escorted troop convoys from North Africa to France . She then joined the naval operations off the Dardanelles , where she participated in a major attack on the Turkish fortresses in the straits on 18 March 1915 . During the attack , she was hit approximately eight times by shellfire , though did not suffer fatal damage . She struck a mine at around 3 : 15 , and sank within two minutes ; only some 50 men were rescued from a complement of 710 . Two British battleships were also sunk by mines that day , and the disaster convinced the Allies to abandon the naval campaign in favor of an amphibious assault on Gallipoli . 
 = = Design = = 
 Bouvet was the last member of a group of five battleships built to a broadly similar design , but different enough to be considered unique vessels . The first ship was Charles Martel , which formed the basis for Bouvet and three other ships . Design specifications were identical for each of the ships , but different engineers designed each vessel . The ships were based on the previous battleship Brennus , but instead of mounting the main battery all on the centerline , the ships used the lozenge arrangement of the earlier vessel Magenta , which moved two of the main battery guns to single turrets on the wings . The five ships were built in response to the British Royal Sovereign @-@ class battleships . 
 = = = General characteristics and machinery = = = 
 Bouvet was 117 @.@ 81 meters ( 386 ft 6 in ) long between perpendiculars , and had a beam of 21 @.@ 39 m ( 70 ft 2 in ) and a draft of 8 @.@ 38 m ( 27 ft 6 in ) . She had a displacement of 12 @,@ 007 tonnes ( 11 @,@ 817 long tons ) . Unlike her half @-@ sisters , her deck was not cut down to the main deck level , and her superstructure was reduced in size . She was equipped with two small fighting masts . Bouvet had a standard crew of 666 officers and enlisted men , though her wartime complement increased to 710 . 
 Bouvet had three vertical triple expansion engines each driving a single screw , with steam supplied by twenty @-@ four Belleville water @-@ tube boilers . Her propulsion system was rated at 15 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 11 @,@ 000 kW ) , which allowed the ship to steam at a speed of 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . As built , she could carry 610 t ( 600 long tons ; 670 short tons ) of coal , though additional space allowed for up to 980 t ( 960 long tons ; 1 @,@ 080 short tons ) in total . 
 = = = Armament and armor = = = 
 Bouvet 's main armament consisted of two Canon de 305 mm Modèle 1893 guns in two single @-@ gun turrets , one each fore and aft . She also mounted two Canon de 274 mm Modèle 1893 guns in two single @-@ gun turrets , one amidships on each side , sponsoned out over the tumblehome of the ship 's sides . Her secondary armament consisted of eight Canon de 138 @.@ 6 mm Modèle 1893 guns , which were mounted in single turrets at the corners of the superstructure . She also carried eight 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) quick @-@ firing guns , twelve 3 @-@ pounders , and eight 1 @-@ pounder guns . Her armament suite was rounded out by four 450 mm ( 18 in ) torpedo tubes , two of which were submerged in the ship 's hull . The other two tubes were mounted above water , though these were later removed . 
 The ship 's armor was constructed with nickel steel . The main belt was 460 mm ( 18 in ) thick amidships , and tapered down to 250 mm ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) at the lower edge . Forward of the central citadel , the belt was reduced to 305 mm ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) and further to 200 mm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) at the stem ; the belt extended for the entire length of the hull . Above the belt was 101 mm ( 4 @.@ 0 in ) thick side armor . The main battery guns were protected with 380 mm ( 15 in ) of armor , and the secondary turrets had 120 mm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) thick sides . The conning tower had 305 mm thick sides . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Bouvet was laid down in Lorient on 16 January 1893 , and launched on 27 April 1896 . After completing fitting @-@ out work , she was commissioned into the French Navy in June 1898 . In 1903 , Bouvet was replaced in the Mediterranean Squadron by the new battleship Suffren ; she in turn replaced the old ironclad battleship <unk> in the Northern Squadron . The Squadron remained in commission for only six months of the year . During the annual fleet maneuvers in July – August 1903 , Bouvet served as the flagship of Admiral Gervais , the neutral observer for the simulated battles . During the maneuvers off Golfe @-@ Juan , the battleship Gaulois accidentally rammed Bouvet on 31 January 1903 , though both vessels emerged largely undamaged . 
 By 1906 , Bouvet had returned to the Mediterranean Squadron , which was under the command of Vice Admiral <unk> . Following the eruption of Mount Vesuvius in Naples in April 1906 , Bouvet and the battleships Iéna and Gaulois aided survivors of the disaster . The annual summer fleet exercises were conducted in July and August ; during the maneuvers , Bouvet nearly collided with the battleship Gaulois again . She was assigned to the Second Squadron of the Mediterranean Squadron by 1908 ; she was retained on active service for the year , but with a reduced crew . 
 = = = Loss off the Dardanelles = = = 
 Together with the older French pre @-@ dreadnoughts , Bouvet escorted Allied troop convoys through the Mediterranean until November when she was ordered to the Dardanelles to guard against a sortie by the German battlecruiser SMS Goeben . She bombarded the Turkish fort of Kum Kale , on the Asian side of the strait on 19 February . During the bombardment , Bouvet assisted the battleship Suffren by sending firing corrections via radio while Gaulois provided counter @-@ battery fire to suppress the Ottoman coastal artillery . 
 On 18 March , Bouvet , along with Charlemagne , Suffren , and Gaulois , was to attack the Dardanelles fortresses . The plan called for six British pre @-@ dreadnoughts to suppress the Turkish fortifications , after which the French battleships would attack those same fortifications at close range . The French fleet was commanded by Admiral Émile Guépratte ; the acting Allied commander was Rear Admiral John de Robeck , who stood in for Admiral Sackville Carden . The Allied battleships were arranged in line abreast , in three rows ; Bouvet was stationed in the center of the second row . The force entered the straits at 11 : 30 and bombarded the town of Çanakkale , before turning to the Fortress Hamidieh and other nearby fortifications at 13 : 30 . 
 For the first half @-@ hour , the French and British battleships shelled the forts indiscriminately , before turning to attacking individual gun batteries . In the course of the attack on the fortresses , Bouvet sustained eight hits from Turkish artillery fire . Her forward turret was disabled after the propellant gas extractor broke down . One of the shells destroyed one of her masts . At around 15 : 15 , Bouvet struck mine with a 176 @-@ pound ( 80 kg ) explosive charge , which detonated below the starboard 274 mm gun turret . These mines had been freshly laid a week before the attack , and were unknown to the Allies . 
 Bouvet capsized and sank in about two minutes . The ship was in poor condition at the time due to her age , which likely contributed to her rapid sinking , though there was some speculation that her ammunition magazine exploded . The destruction of the ship caught the Allies by surprise ; her loss came during the height of the bombardment . Torpedo boats and other smaller vessels rushed to pick up survivors , but they rescued only a handful of men . From her complement of 710 men , some 660 were killed in the sinking . 
 Despite the sinking of the Bouvet , the first such loss of the day , the British remained unaware of the minefield , thinking the explosion had been caused by a shell or torpedo . Subsequently two British pre @-@ dreadnoughts , Ocean and Irresistible , were sunk and the battlecruiser Inflexible were damaged by the same minefield . Suffren and Gaulois were both badly damaged by coastal artillery during the engagement . The loss of Bouvet and two other British battleships during the 18 March attack was a major factor in the decision to abandon a naval strategy to take Constantinople , and instead opt for the Gallipoli land campaign . 
 = Styracosaurus = 
 Styracosaurus ( / <unk> / <unk> @-@ RAK @-@ ə @-@ SOR @-@ əs ; meaning " spiked lizard " from the Ancient Greek <unk> / <unk> " spike at the butt @-@ end of a spear @-@ shaft " and sauros / σαῦρος " lizard " ) was a genus of herbivorous ceratopsian dinosaur from the Cretaceous Period ( Campanian stage ) , about 75 @.@ 5 to 75 million years ago . It had four to six long horns extending from its neck frill , a smaller horn on each of its cheeks , and a single horn protruding from its nose , which may have been up to 60 centimetres ( 2 ft ) long and 15 centimetres ( 6 in ) wide . The function or functions of the horns and frills have been debated for many years . 
 Styracosaurus was a relatively large dinosaur , reaching lengths of 5 @.@ 5 metres ( 18 ft ) and weighing nearly 3 tonnes . It stood about 1 @.@ 8 meters ( 6 ft ) tall . Styracosaurus possessed four short legs and a bulky body . Its tail was rather short . The skull had a beak and shearing cheek teeth arranged in continuous dental batteries , suggesting that the animal sliced up plants . Like other ceratopsians , this dinosaur may have been a herd animal , traveling in large groups , as suggested by bonebeds . 
 Named by Lawrence Lambe in 1913 , Styracosaurus is a member of the Centrosaurinae . One species , S. albertensis , is currently assigned to Styracosaurus . Other species once assigned to the genus have since been reassigned elsewhere . 
 = = Description = = 
 Individuals of the Styracosaurus genus were approximately 5 @.@ 5 metres ( 18 ft ) long as adults and weighed around 2 @.@ 7 tonnes . The skull was massive , with a large nostril , a tall straight nose horn , and a <unk> frill ( a neck frill ) crowned with at least four large spikes . Each of the four longest frill spines was comparable in length to the nose horn , at 50 to 55 centimetres long ( 19 @.@ 7 to 21 @.@ 7 in ) . The nasal horn is estimated at 57 centimeters long ( 19 @.@ 7 in ) in the type specimen , but the horn is only partially complete . Based on other nasal horn cores from Styracosaurus and Centrosaurus , this horn may have come to a rounded point at around half of that length . 
 Aside from the large nasal horn and four long frill spikes , the cranial ornamentation was variable . Some individuals had small hook @-@ like projections and knobs at the posterior margin of the frill , similar to but smaller than those in Centrosaurus . Others had less prominent tabs . Some , like the type individual , had a third pair of long frill spikes . Others had much smaller projections , and small points are found on the side margins of some but not all specimens . Modest pyramid @-@ shaped brow horns were present in subadults , but were replaced by pits in adults . Like most ceratopsids , Styracosaurus had large fenestrae ( skull openings ) in its frill . The front of the mouth had a toothless beak . 
 The bulky body of Styracosaurus resembled that of a rhinoceros . It had powerful shoulders which may have been useful in intraspecies combat . Styracosaurus had a relatively short tail . Each toe bore a <unk> ungual which was sheathed in horn . 
 Various limb positions have been proposed for Styracosaurus and ceratopsids in general , including forelegs which were held underneath the body , or , alternatively , held in a sprawling position . The most recent work has put forward an intermediate crouched position as most likely . 
 = = Classification = = 
 Styracosaurus is a member of the Centrosaurinae , a subfamily of large North American horned dinosaurs characterized by their " prominent nasal horns , subordinate brow horns , short squamosals in a short frill , a tall , deep face relative to the chasmosaurines , and a projection into the rear of the nasal fenestra . " Other members of the clade include Centrosaurus ( from which the group takes its name ) , Pachyrhinosaurus , <unk> , Einiosaurus , Albertaceratops , Achelousaurus , Brachyceratops , and Monoclonius , although these last two are dubious . Because of the variation between species and even individual specimens of centrosaurines , there has been much debate over which genera and species are valid , particularly whether Centrosaurus and / or Monoclonius are valid genera , <unk> , or possibly members of the opposite sex . In 1996 , Peter Dodson found enough variation between Centrosaurus , Styracosaurus , and Monoclonius to warrant separate genera , and that Styracosaurus resembled Centrosaurus more closely than either resembled Monoclonius . Dodson also believed one species of Monoclonius , M. nasicornis , may actually have been a female Styracosaurus . However , most other researchers have not accepted Monoclonius nasicornis as a female Styracosaurus , instead regarding it as a synonym of Centrosaurus apertus . While sexual dimorphism has been proposed for an earlier ceratopsian , Protoceratops , there is no firm evidence for sexual dimorphism in any ceratopsid . 
 Below is a cladogram by Andrew T. McDonald in 2011 . 
 = = = Origins and evolution = = = 
 The evolutionary origins of Styracosaurus were not understood for many years because fossil evidence for early ceratopsians was sparse . The discovery of Protoceratops , in 1922 , shed light on early ceratopsid relationships , but several decades passed before additional finds filled in more of the blanks . Fresh discoveries in the late 1990s and 2000s , including Zuniceratops , the earliest known ceratopsian with brow horns , and Yinlong , the first known Jurassic ceratopsian , indicate what the ancestors of Styracosaurus may have looked like . These new discoveries have been important in illuminating the origins of horned dinosaurs in general , and suggest that the group originated during the Jurassic in Asia , with the appearance of true horned ceratopsians occurring by the beginning of the late Cretaceous in North America . 
 Goodwin and colleagues proposed in 1992 that Styracosaurus was part of the lineage leading to Einiosaurus , Achelousaurus and Pachyrhinosaurus . This was based on a series of fossil skulls from the Two Medicine Formation of Montana . The position of Styracosaurus in this lineage is now equivocal , as the remains that were thought to represent Styracosaurus have been transferred to the genus Rubeosaurus . 
 It has been suggested that Styracosaurus albertensis is a direct descendant of Centrosaurus ( C. apertus or C. nasicornis ) , and that it in turn evolved directly into the slightly later species Rubeosaurus ovatus . Subtle changes can be traced in the arrangement of the horns through this lineage , leading from Rubeosaurus to Einiosaurus , to Achelousaurus and Pachyrhinosaurus . However , the lineage may not be a simple , straight line , as a <unk> @-@ like species has been reported from the same time and place as Styracosaurus albertensis . 
 = = Discoveries and species = = 
 The first fossil remains of Styracosaurus were collected in Alberta , Canada by C.M. Sternberg ( from an area now known as Dinosaur Provincial Park , in a formation now called the Dinosaur Park Formation ) and named by Lawrence Lambe in 1913 . This quarry was revisited in 1935 by a Royal Ontario Museum crew who found the missing lower jaws and most of the skeleton . These fossils indicate that S. albertensis was around 5 @.@ 5 to 5 @.@ 8 meters in length and stood about 1 @.@ 65 meters high at the hips . An unusual feature of this first skull is that the smallest frill spike on the left side is partially overlapped at its base by the next spike . It appears that the frill suffered a break at this point in life and was shortened by about 6 centimeters ( 2 in ) . The normal shape of this area is unknown because the corresponding area of the right side of the frill was not recovered . 
 Barnum Brown and crew , working for the American Museum of Natural History in New York , collected a nearly complete articulated skeleton with a partial skull in 1915 . These fossils were also found in the Dinosaur Park Formation , near Steveville , Alberta . Brown and Erich Maren Schlaikjer compared the finds , and , though they allowed that both specimens were from the same general locality and geological formation , they considered the specimen sufficiently distinct from the holotype to warrant erecting a new species , and described the fossils as Styracosaurus parksi , named in honor of William Parks . Among the differences between the specimens cited by Brown and Schlaikjer were a cheekbone quite different from that of S. albertensis , and smaller tail vertebrae . S. parksi also had a more robust jaw , a shorter dentary , and the frill differed in shape from that of the type species . However , much of the skull consisted of plaster reconstruction , and the original 1937 paper did not illustrate the actual skull bones . It is now accepted as a specimen of S. albertensis . 
 In the summer of 2006 , Darren Tanke of the Royal Tyrrell Museum of Palaeontology in Drumheller , Alberta relocated the long lost S. parksi site . Pieces of the skull , evidently abandoned by the 1915 crew , were found in the quarry . These were collected and it is hoped more pieces will be found , perhaps enough to warrant a redescription of the skull and test whether S. albertensis and S. parksi are the same . The Tyrrell Museum has also collected several partial Styracosaurus skulls . At least one confirmed bonebed ( bonebed 42 ) in Dinosaur Provincial Park has also been explored ( other proposed Styracosaurus bonebeds instead have fossils from a mix of animals , and nondiagnostic ceratopsian remains ) . <unk> 42 is known to contain numerous pieces of skulls such as <unk> , jaws and frill pieces . 
 A third species , S. ovatus , from the Two Medicine Formation of Montana , was described by Gilmore in 1930 . The fossil material is limited , with the best being a portion of the parietal bone of the frill , but one unusual feature is that the pair of spikes closest to the midline converge towards the midline , rather than away from it as in S. albertensis . There also may only have been two sets of spikes on each side of the frill , instead of three . The spikes are much shorter than in S. albertensis , with the longest only 295 millimeters ( 11 @.@ 6 in ) long . A 2010 review of <unk> skull remains by Ryan , Holmes , and Russell found it to be a distinct species , and in 2010 McDonald and Horner placed it in its own genus , Rubeosaurus . 
 Several other species which were assigned to Styracosaurus have since been assigned to other genera . S. <unk> , described by Edward Drinker Cope in 1890 as a species of Monoclonius and based on a nasal bone with a broken Styracosaurus @-@ like straight nose horn , was attributed to Styracosaurus in 1915 . " S. <unk> " , mentioned informally by amateur paleontologists Stephen and Sylvia Czerkas in 1990 in a caption to an illustration , is an early name for Einiosaurus . " S. borealis " is an early informal name for S. parksi . 
 = = Paleobiology = = 
 Styracosaurus and other horned dinosaurs are often depicted in popular culture as herd animals . A bonebed composed of Styracosaurus remains is known from the Dinosaur Park Formation of Alberta , about halfway up the formation . This bonebed is associated with different types of river deposits . The mass deaths may have been a result of otherwise non @-@ herding animals congregating around a waterhole in a period of drought , with evidence suggesting the environment may have been seasonal and semiarid . Styracosaurus is known from a higher position in the formation ( relating specifically to its own genus ) than the closely related Centrosaurus , suggesting that Styracosaurus displaced Centrosaurus as the environment changed over time and / or dimension . 
 Paleontologists Gregory Paul and Per Christiansen of the Zoological Museum of the University of Copenhagen in Denmark proposed that large ceratopsians such as Styracosaurus were able to run faster than an elephant , based on possible ceratopsian trackways which did not exhibit signs of sprawling forelimbs . 
 = = = Dentition and diet = = = 
 <unk> were herbivorous dinosaurs ; they probably fed mostly on low growth because of the position of the head . They may , however , have been able to knock down taller plants with their horns , beak , and bulk . The jaws were tipped with a deep , narrow beak , believed to have been better at grasping and plucking than biting . 
 <unk> teeth , including those of Styracosaurus , were arranged in groups called batteries . Older teeth on top were continually replaced by the teeth underneath them . Unlike hadrosaurids , which also had dental batteries , ceratopsid teeth sliced but did not grind . Some scientists have suggested that ceratopsids like Styracosaurus ate palms and cycads , while others have suggested ferns . Dodson has proposed that Late Cretaceous ceratopsians may have knocked down angiosperm trees and then sheared off leaves and twigs . 
 = = = Horns and frill = = = 
 The large nasal horns and frills of Styracosaurus are among the most distinctive facial adornments of all dinosaurs . Their function has been the subject of debate since the first horned dinosaurs were discovered . 
 Early in the 20th century , paleontologist R. S. Lull proposed that the frills of ceratopsian dinosaurs acted as anchor points for their jaw muscles . He later noted that for Styracosaurus , the spikes would have given it a formidable appearance . In 1996 , Dodson supported the idea of muscle attachments in part and created detailed diagrams of possible muscle attachments in the frills of Styracosaurus and Chasmosaurus , but did not subscribe to the idea that they completely filled in the fenestrae . C.A. Forster , however , found no evidence of large muscle attachments on the frill bones . 
 It was long believed that ceratopsians like Styracosaurus used their frills and horns in defence against the large predatory dinosaurs of the time . Although pitting , holes , lesions , and other damage on ceratopsid skulls are often attributed to horn damage in combat , a 2006 study found no evidence for horn thrust injuries causing these forms of damage ( for example , there is no evidence of infection or healing ) . Instead , non @-@ pathological bone resorption , or unknown bone diseases , are suggested as causes . 
 However , a newer study compared incidence rates of skull lesions in Triceratops and Centrosaurus and showed that these were consistent with Triceratops using its horns in combat and the frill being adapted as a protective structure , while lower pathology rates in Centrosaurus may indicate visual rather than physical use of cranial ornamentation , or a form of combat focused on the body rather than the head ; as Centrosaurus was more closely related to Styracosaurus and both genera had long nasal horns , the results for this genus would be more applicable for Styracosaurus . The researchers also concluded that the damage found on the specimens in the study was often too localized to be caused by bone disease . 
 The large frill on Styracosaurus and related genera also may have helped to increase body area to regulate body temperature , like the ears of the modern elephant . A similar theory has been proposed regarding the plates of Stegosaurus , although this use alone would not account for the bizarre and extravagant variation seen in different members of the Ceratopsidae . This observation is highly suggestive of what is now believed to be the primary function , display . 
 The theory of frill use in sexual display was first proposed in 1961 by <unk> . This theory has gained increasing acceptance . Evidence that visual display was important , either in courtship or in other social behavior , can be seen in the fact that horned dinosaurs differ markedly in their adornments , making each species highly distinctive . Also , modern living creatures with such displays of horns and adornments use them in similar behavior . 
 = = Paleoecology = = 
 Styracosaurus is known from the Dinosaur Park Formation , and was a member of a diverse and well @-@ documented fauna of prehistoric animals that included horned relatives such as Centrosaurus and Chasmosaurus , duckbills such as Prosaurolophus , Lambeosaurus , Gryposaurus , Corythosaurus , and Parasaurolophus , tyrannosaurids Gorgosaurus , Daspletosaurus , and armored Edmontonia and Euoplocephalus . 
 The Dinosaur Park Formation is interpreted as a low @-@ relief setting of rivers and floodplains that became more swampy and influenced by marine conditions over time as the Western Interior Seaway transgressed westward . The climate was warmer than present @-@ day Alberta , without frost , but with wetter and drier seasons . Conifers were apparently the dominant canopy plants , with an understory of ferns , tree ferns , and angiosperms . 
 = LOL Smiley Face = 
 " LOL Smiley Face " ( styled as " LOL : - ) " ) is a song by American recording artist Trey Songz . It features rappers Gucci Mane and Soulja Boy Tellem . The three co @-@ wrote the song with producers Troy Taylor and Tony Scales . The song serves as the second single from Songz ' third studio album , Ready . " LOL Smiley Face " is an R & B song featuring bouncy , poppy synths , and lyrically refers to sexting and other electronic multimedia messaging . The song was released as the second single from Songz 's third album Ready on August 24 , 2009 . 
 The song received generally positive reviews from critics , who noted its catchy melody . The song peaked at number fifty @-@ nine on the Billboard Hot 100 and number twelve on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . Rather than releasing a traditional music video , a montage of fans singing and dancing to the track was released . 
 = = Background = = 
 The song was recorded in Atlanta , Georgia , at three different studios , Doppler Studios , Patchwerk Studios and D2 Music Studios . " LOL " was written by its performers , Trey Songz , Gucci Mane and Soulja Boy , and its producers , Troy Taylor and Tony Scales also contributed to the writing process . Taylor recorded the track while Jean Marie Horvat mixed the song . 
 When speaking on the conceptual basis of Ready , Songz said , " You think about a record like ' LOL Smiley Face , ' it 's something real simple , but when you look at the title or listen to the record , you 're like , ' Wow . ' That 's something great from a songwriter 's perspective . I 'm just trying to make hits and classic records that people can vibe to and live their life . " In an interview with <unk> , Songz commented on his thoughts of making a remix of the song , stating , " I think there 's going to be a remix for that song , because a lot of people dig it . A lot of people have hit me up actually about it . That song is blowing up real fast man . " He also stated the possibility of American rapper Nicki Minaj appearing on a remix , saying , " She wanted to do more of a commercial record , a cuter sex record . ' LOL ' was actually already done , but when she heard it , she hit me up , and said ' I love that song . You 're a punk for not putting me on it . ' She 'll definitely be on the remix . " However no remix was seen to be in the works nor did it come to fruition . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The song is derived from R & B , pop and hip hop music . It is backed with heavy percussion and smooth vocals . According to Andrew Rennie of NOW , the song , along with " Neighbors Know My Name " , continues Songz 's usage of his hook @-@ heavy and playful style . Ajitpaul Mangat of Tiny Mix Tapes called the chorus " ringtone ready . " The song is lyrically about sexting , as verses talk about tales of " wired romance . " Its lyrics contain references to Twitter , TwitPic , MySpace , and BlackBerry , and Soulja Boy 's line contains a reference to his song " Kiss Me Thru the Phone . " According to Mark Edward Nero of About.com , the song is aimed at teenage girls . Ken Capobianco of The Boston Globe said that Ready was built about the " popping tracks " of " LOL Smiley Face " and " Say Aah " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Although Mark Edward Nero of About.com called the song " gimmicky " , he said it was " catchy " and " addictive " , commenting that the song " actually deserves creativity points : it 's a silly , lighthearted song that 's not meant to be taken seriously . " Tyler Lewis of PopMatters called the song silly , and in an album review , commented , " The less said about “ LOL : ) ” , the better " , calling the listening experience " frustrating . " Ajitpaul Mangat of Tiny Mix Tapes said that in the song , " we have a genuinely novel pop music moment : a booty call ( an R & B staple ) that only this generation can relate to . " Mangat also commended the song 's beat , chorus , and Soulja Boy 's cameo , commenting , " In the end , it is all somehow apropos . " Chris Ryan of MTV Buzzworthy said the song had an " irrefutably catchy melody " , and complimented the song because of the appearance of Gucci Mane and Soulja Boy , stating , " it 's incredibly playful , as any song about texting should be . " Melanie Fried of Billboard called " LOL Smiley Face " " the most absurdly appealing , tech @-@ savvy song of the year to date " , commenting " Anyone younger than 15 is already texting their friends about their new favorite song . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 On the week ending September 19 , 2009 , " LOL " debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 at number fifty @-@ one , the second highest debut of the week behind Breaking Benjamin 's " I Will Not Bow " . The song peaked at its entry position , remaining on the chart for eight weeks . At the time " LOL " was Songz 's second biggest hit overall , only behind his breakthrough single " Can 't Help but Wait . " On the week labeled October 10 , 2009 , the song peaked at number twelve on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart , as Songz 's seventh overall and fifth top twenty entry on the chart . 
 = = Performance and music video = = 
 Songz and Drake performed the song on music video show 106 & Park on September 2 , 2009 as a part of a medley with " I Need a Girl " and " Successful . " Instead of releasing a typical video for the song , the accompanying clip features fans singing and dancing along to the clip , as well as tweeting and texting the title . The video was released online on November 25 , 2009 . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Songwriting - Trey Songz , Gucci Mane , Soulja Boy , Tony Scales , Troy Taylor 
 Production - Troy Taylor , Tony Scales 
 Recording - Troy Taylor 
 Mixing - Jean Marie Horvat 
 Source 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = River Brue = 
 The River Brue originates in the parish of <unk> in Somerset , England , and reaches the sea some 50 kilometres ( 31 mi ) west at Burnham @-@ on @-@ Sea . It originally took a different route from Glastonbury to the sea , but this was changed by Glastonbury Abbey in the twelfth century . The river provides an important drainage route for water from a low @-@ lying area which is prone to flooding which man has tried to manage through rhynes , canals , artificial rivers and sluices for centuries . 
 The Brue Valley Living Landscape is an ecological conservation project based on the Somerset Levels and Moors and managed by the Somerset Wildlife Trust . The valley includes several Sites of Special Scientific Interest including Westhay Moor , Shapwick Heath and Shapwick Moor . Much of the area has been at the centre of peat extraction on the Somerset Levels . The Brue Valley Living Landscape project commenced in January 2009 to restore and reconnect habitat that will support wildlife . The aim is to be able to sustain itself in the face of climate change while guaranteeing farmers and other landowners can continue to use their land profitably . It is one of an increasing number of landscape scale conservation projects in the UK . 
 = = Course = = 
 The River Brue originates in hills to the southwest of the catchment area , close to the border with Dorset . The same hills are the locale of the sources of the River <unk> and the Dorset Stour which flow south to the English Channel . It descends quickly in a narrow valley to a point just beyond Bruton where it is joined by the River Pitt . Here it takes a meandering route through a broad , flat @-@ bottomed valley between Castle Cary and <unk> . By the time it reaches Baltonsborough it is only some 10 metres ( 33 ft ) above sea level and the surrounding countryside is drained into it by way of numerous rhynes . It passes Glastonbury , where it acts as a natural boundary with nearby village of Street , before flowing in a largely artificial channel across the Somerset Levels and into the River Parrett at Burnham @-@ on @-@ Sea . It is joined by the North Drain , White 's River ( which takes the water of the River Sheppey , Cripps River ( an artificial channel that connects it to the River Huntspill ) and many drainage rhynes ) . It is connect to the River Axe through several of these channels which are controlled by sluices . It is tidal below the sluices at New <unk> Bridge in Highbridge . 
 Bow Bridge is a 15th @-@ century Packhorse bridge over the River Brue in <unk> , Bruton . It is a Grade I listed building , and scheduled monument . The bridge may have been built as a link between the former Bruton Abbey , and its Court House in the High Street . The bridge was restored after floods in 1982 . 
 The River Brue has a long history of flooding . Its lower reaches are close to sea @-@ level , and the river above Bruton drains an area of 31 square kilometres ( 12 sq mi ) into a steep and narrow valley . In 1984 a protective dam was built 1 kilometre ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) upstream from the town . 
 The valley includes several Sites of Special Scientific Interest including Westhay Moor , Shapwick Heath and Shapwick Moor . Much of the area has been at the centre of peat extraction on the Somerset Levels . Large areas of peat were laid down on the Somerset Levels , particularly in the River Brue Valley , during the Quaternary period after the ice sheets melted . The extraction of peat from the Moors is known to have taken place during Roman times , and has been carried out since the Levels were first drained . Peat extraction on the Somerset Moors continues today , although much reduced . 
 = = History = = 
 The area is known to have been occupied since the Neolithic when people exploited the reedswamps for their natural resources and started to construct wooden trackways such as the Sweet and Post Tracks . The Sweet Track , named after the peat digger who discovered it in 1970 and dating from the 3800s BC , is the world 's oldest timber trackway , once thought to be the world 's oldest engineered roadway . The track was built between what was in the early 4th millennium BC an island at Westhay and a ridge of high ground at Shapwick , close to the River Brue . The remains of similar tracks have been uncovered nearby , connecting settlements on the peat bog including the Honeygore , Abbotts Way , Bells , Bakers , Westhay and Nidons trackways . 
 The Levels contain the best @-@ preserved prehistoric village in the UK , Glastonbury Lake Village , as well as two others at Meare Lake Village . Discovered in 1892 by Arthur Bulleid , it was inhabited by about 200 people living in 14 roundhouses , and was built on a morass on an artificial foundation of timber filled with brushwood , bracken , rubble and clay . 
 The valley was used during Romano @-@ British period when it was the site of salt extraction . At the time of King Arthur the Brue formed a lake just south of the hilly ground on which Glastonbury stands . According to legend this lake is one of the locations suggested by Arthurian legend as the home of the Lady of the Lake . Pomparles Bridge stood at the western end of this lake , guarding Glastonbury from the south , and it is suggested that it was here that Sir Bedivere threw Excalibur into the waters after King Arthur fell at the Battle of Camlann . John Leland noted in the 16th century that the bridge had four arches , while W. Phelps in an 1839 illustration as having only two arches , one pointed , probably from the 14th or 15th century , and the other round . Excavations in 1912 found the remains of a second round arch regarded as 12th century work . The current concrete arch bridge was built in 1911 and extended in 1972 . It carries the A39 road over the Brue . 
 = = = Alteration of route = = = 
 Before the 13th century the direct route to the sea at Highbridge was blocked by gravel banks and peat near Westhay . The course of the river partially encircled Glastonbury from the south , around the western side ( through Beckery ) , and then north through the Panborough @-@ Bleadney gap in the Wedmore @-@ Wookey Hills , to join the River Axe just north of Bleadney . This route made it difficult for the officials of Glastonbury Abbey to transport produce from their outlying estates to the Abbey , and when the valley of the river Axe was in flood it backed up to flood Glastonbury itself . Sometime between 1230 and 1250 a new channel was constructed westwards into Meare Pool north of Meare , and further westwards to Mark Moor . It then divided into two channels , one the <unk> cut flowing north through Mark to join the Axe near <unk> , and the other directly west to the sea at Highbridge . During monastic times , there were several fish weirs along the lower reaches of the river . They used either nets or baskets , the fishing rights belonging to the Bishop of Bath and Wells and the Abbot of Glastonbury . 
 = = = Drainage improvements = = = 
 Between 1774 and 1797 a series of enclosures took place in the Brue valley between the Poldens and Wedmore . In 1794 the annual floods filled the whole of the Brue valley . Work by the Commissioners of Sewers led to the 1801 Brue Drainage Act which enabled sections at Highbridge and <unk> 's Bridge to be straightened , and new feeder channels such as the North and South Drains to be constructed . In 1803 the clyse at Highbridge , which had been built before 1485 , was replaced and moved further downstream . 
 The area around Bruton has suffered over the centuries . The earliest recorded damage was in 1768 when a stone bridge was destroyed after the river rose very rapidly . On 28 June 1917 , 242 @.@ 8 millimetres ( 9 @.@ 56 in ) of rain fell in 24 hours at Bruton , leaving a water mark on one pub 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) above the normal level of the river . In 1982 extensive flooding occurred in the town , and as a result in 1984 a protective dam was built 1 kilometre ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) upstream from the town . 
 = = = 19th , 20th and 21st centuries = = = 
 The mouth of the River Brue had an extensive harbour in Roman and Saxon times , before silting up in the medieval period . It was used again as a small harbour in the 17th and 18th centuries , and in 1833 the port of Highbridge was formally opened on the river . A new wharf , known as <unk> Wharf , was built on the Huntspill side of the river mouth by 1904 , and was used for the import of coal and the export of bricks and tiles and agricultural products . The port closed in 1949 . 
 Both Galton 's Canal and Brown 's Canal , which were built in the early 19th century , were connected to the river . The Glastonbury Canal used the course of the River Brue from Highbridge to <unk> 's Bridge , and part of the South Drain to <unk> Corner . The Glastonbury Canal ran for just over 14 miles ( 23 km ) through two locks from Glastonbury to Highbridge , where it entered the River Parrett and from there the Bristol Channel . The canal was authorised by Parliament in 1827 and opened in 1834 . It was operated by The Glastonbury Navigation & Canal Company . Most of it was abandoned as a navigation in 1854 , when a railway was built along the towpath . 
 During the Second World War the Brue was incorporated into GHQ Line and many pillboxes were constructed along the river . Gants Mill at <unk> , near Bruton , is a watermill which is still used to mill cattle feed . A 12 kilowatts ( 16 hp ) hydroelectric turbine was recently installed at the site . There has been a mill here since the 13th century , but the current building was built in 1810 . 
 Following summer floods of 1997 and the prolonged flooding of 1999 – 2000 the Parrett Catchment Project was formed , partly funded by the European Union Regional Development Fund , by 30 organisations , including British Waterways , Campaign to Protect Rural England , Countryside Agency , Department for Environment , Food and Rural Affairs , Environment Agency , Kings Sedgemoor and Cary Vale Internal Drainage Board ( now part of Parrett Internal Drainage Board ) , Levels and Moors Partnership , National Farmers Union , Sedgemoor , Somerset County Council , South Somerset District Council , Taunton Deane and Wessex Water . They aim to tackle twelve areas , which , when combined , will make a significant contribution to reducing the adverse effects of flooding . These include the conversion of arable land , adoption of the Sustainable Drainage Systems ( <unk> ) approach to controlling rainwater runoff from developed areas , dredging , raising riverbanks and improving pumping facilities . Further studies of the possible beneficial effects of woodland in reducing flooding have also been undertaken . 
 During the winter flooding of 2013 – 14 on the Somerset Levels the River Brue overflowed at new year , during the rain and storms from Storm Dirk , with many residents asking for the Environment Agency to resume river dredging . On 24 January 2014 , in light of the continued flooded extent of the Somerset Moors and forecast new rainfall as part of the winter storms of 2013 – 14 in the United Kingdom , both Somerset County Council and Sedgemoor District Council declared a major incident , as defined under the Civil Contingencies Act 2004 . At this time , with 17 @,@ 000 acres ( 6 @,@ 900 ha ) of agricultural land having been under water for over a month , the village of Thorney was abandoned and Muchelney was cut off by flood waters for almost a month . Northmoor Green , which is more commonly known as Moorland , was also severely affected . By the end of January , 17 @,@ 000 acres ( 6 @,@ 900 ha ) of agricultural land , including North Moor , Curry and Hay Moors and Greylake , had been under water for over a month . Bridgwater was partly flooded on 10 February 2014 , when with 20 @,@ 000 sandbags ready to be deployed . Over 600 houses were flooded , and both flooding and groundwater disrupted services including trains on the Bristol to Exeter Line between Bridgwater and Taunton . Further preventative work under the title of the " Brue Catchment River Maintenance Pilot Project " has led to controversy about the need for dredging and maintenance of the river . 
 = = Hydrology and water quality = = 
 At Bruton Dam , the nearest measuring station to the source of the river , the normal level of the river is between 0 @.@ 6 metres ( 2 ft 0 in ) and 2 @.@ 08 metres ( 6 ft 10 in ) with the highest level ever recorded being 10 @.@ 7 metres ( 35 ft ) in 2007 . Within the town of Bruton at Bruton Surgery the normal level is between 0 @.@ 17 metres ( 6 @.@ 7 in ) and 0 @.@ 69 metres ( 2 ft 3 in ) . Further downstream at Lovington the normal level is between 0 @.@ 08 metres ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) and 0 @.@ 56 metres ( 1 ft 10 in ) . The furthest downstream monitoring station at <unk> Hole near Street records a normal range of 0 @.@ 15 metres ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) and 0 @.@ 49 metres ( 1 ft 7 in ) . 
 For the purposes of monitoring of water quality the Brue and Axe are considered together . In 2013 19 water bodies within the area were considered to have moderate water quality with two being poor and four good quality . Agriculture and rural land management is the largest factor affecting water quality followed by the water industry . Transport , industry and manufacturing also have an effect . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 The Brue Valley Living Landscape is a UK conservation project managed by the Somerset Wildlife Trust . The project commenced in January 2009 and aims to restore habitat . It aims to help wildlife sustain itself in the face of climate change while guaranteeing farmers and other landowners can continue to use their land profitably . It is one of an increasing number of landscape scale conservation projects in the UK . 
 The project covers an area of approximately 12 @,@ 500 hectares ( 31 @,@ 000 acres ) encompassing the floodplain of the River Brue from a little east of Glastonbury to beyond the <unk> , Edington and Chilton Moors SSSI in the west . Almost a quarter of the project area is designated as Site of Special Scientific Interest ( SSSI ) , Special Protection Area ( SPA ) and Ramsar site . The project area accounts for almost half of the Somerset Levels and Moors Special Protection Area . The area includes land already managed for conservation by organisations including Somerset Wildlife Trust , Natural England , the Hawk and Owl Trust and the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds . These include Shapwick Heath national nature reserve , Westhay Moor , <unk> Lows National Nature Reserve , Ham Wall and Shapwick Moor . There are 25 scheduled monuments and 746 Historic Environment Records in the project area including internationally important sites such at the Glastonbury Lake Village and Sweet Track . Research on the Somerset Levels and Moors has been crucial to the understanding of the natural and human history of wetlands . The project is based solely on the peat @-@ based soils of the Somerset Moors . It does not extend on to the marine clay soils of the more westerly Levels . 
 The project has set out their major objectives . These include mapping and research on the Brue Valley , engagement with local government , farmers , the conservation sector and other interest community members , to produce a shared local vision . It is hoped to create larger and better connected patches of important habitats , in a way which also benefits the local economy and rural society . The project has received funding from the European Regional Development Fund ( via the WAVE project ) , Natural England 's Wetland Vision and the Viridor Credits scheme . 
 One of the project 's goals is to protect , restore and create areas of reedbed , grazing marsh , fen , raised bog , lowland meadow , purple moor grass and rush pastures and wet woodland . Species of conservation concern ( UK Biodiversity Action Plan priority species ) that are likely to benefit from this project include plants such as : Divided sedge ( Carex <unk> ) , English sticky <unk> ( <unk> anglica ) , Greater water parsnip ( Sium latifolium ) , Lesser butterfly orchid ( Platanthera <unk> ) , Marsh <unk> ( Stellaria palustris ) and Tubular water dropwort ( Oenanthe <unk> ) . The flora provides a habitat for several species of invertebrates . These include moths such as the Argent and sable moth ( <unk> hastata ) , Narrow bordered bee hawk @-@ moth ( <unk> <unk> ) and Narrow bordered bee hawk @-@ moth ( <unk> <unk> ) . While butterfly species include the Small heath ( <unk> <unk> ) , Pearl @-@ bordered fritillary ( Boloria euphrosyne ) and Small pearl @-@ bordered fritillary ( Boloria selene ) . Beetles found in the valley include the Lesser silver water beetle ( <unk> <unk> ) and One @-@ grooved diving beetle ( <unk> <unk> ) . There are also Shining ram 's @-@ horn snails ( <unk> nitida ) and <unk> carder bees ( Bombus sylvarum ) . 
 The River Brue and its tributaries support a population of European eels ( Anguilla anguilla ) . Reptiles found include the European adder ( Vipera berus ) and Grass snake ( Natrix natrix ) . Multiple bird species include Bewick 's swan ( Cygnus columbianus bewickii ) , Eurasian bittern ( Botaurus stellaris ) , Eurasian bullfinch ( <unk> <unk> ) , * Eurasian wigeon ( Anas penelope ) , European starling ( Sturnus vulgaris ) , <unk> ( Anas strepera ) , Grasshopper warbler ( Locustella naevia ) , Hen harrier ( Circus cyaneus ) , House sparrow ( Passer domesticus ) , Linnet ( Carduelis <unk> ) , Marsh harrier ( Circus <unk> ) , Marsh tit ( Poecile palustris ) , Merlin ( Falco columbarius ) , Northern lapwing ( Vanellus vanellus ) , Peregrine ( Falco peregrinus ) , Reed bunting ( Emberiza schoeniclus ) , Short @-@ eared owl ( Asio flammeus ) , Skylark ( Alauda arvensis ) , Song thrush ( Turdus philomelos ) , Teal ( Anas <unk> ) , Willow tit ( Poecile montanus ) and Yellowhammer ( Emberiza citrinella ) . 
 Mammalian species of interest include the Brown hare ( Lepus europaeus ) , Eurasian harvest mouse ( <unk> minutus ) , European otter ( Lutra lutra ) and Water vole ( Arvicola terrestris ) . 
 = = Recreation = = 
 Anglers will find pike in excess of 20 pounds ( 9 @.@ 1 kg ) , with good stocks of chub , dace , roach , bream , tench , perch , rudd , and gudgeon . There are trout in the upper reaches . There are several access points along the river suitable for canoeing , and the river has been paddled as far up as Bruton , but above West Lydford only after recent rain . There are public footpaths alongside many stretches of the river . 
 = Westonzoyland Pumping Station Museum = 
 The Westonzoyland Pumping Station Museum of Steam Power and Land Drainage is a small industrial heritage museum dedicated to steam powered machinery at Westonzoyland in the English county of Somerset . It is a Grade II * listed building . 
 The museum is housed in a 1830 brick @-@ built pumping station which was the first of several similar pumping stations to be built on the Somerset Levels which are prone to flooding . The main attraction is the 1861 Easton and Amos steam engine and pump , the only one still in its original location and in working order . The museum , which is run by a charity , also restores and displays a number of other steam engines and pumps . The steam for the moving exhibits is provided by a Marshall portable boiler . The Westonzoyland Light Railway , a short 2 ft ( 610 mm ) narrow @-@ gauge railway runs the length of the site and is used to carry wood for the boiler . 
 = = History = = 
 The Somerset Moors and Levels , formed from a submerged and reclaimed landscape , consist of a coastal clay belt only slightly above mean sea level , with an inland peat belt at a lower level behind it . Early attempts to control the water levels were possibly made by the Romans ( although records only date from the 13th century ) , but were not widespread . The Domesday Book of 1086 recorded that drainage of the higher grounds was under way . In the Middle Ages , the monasteries of Glastonbury , Athelney and Muchelney were responsible for much of the drainage . Efforts to control flooding on the Parrett were recorded around 1129 . In 1234 , 722 acres ( 2 @.@ 9 km2 ) were reclaimed near Westonzoyland and , from the accounts in Glastonbury Abbey 's rent books , this had increased to 972 acres ( 393 ha ) by 1240 . Flooding of adjacent moor land was partially addressed during the 13th century by the construction of a number of embankment walls to contain the Parrett . They included Southlake Wall , Burrow Wall and Lake Wall . The River Tone was diverted by the Abbot of Athelney and other land owners into a new embanked channel , joining the Parrett upstream from its original confluence . 
 In 1500 , there was 70 @,@ 000 acres ( 283 km2 ) of floodable land of which only 20 @,@ 000 acres ( 81 km2 ) had been reclaimed . In 1597 , 50 acres ( 20 ha ) of land were recovered near the Parrett estuary ; a few years later , 140 acres ( 57 ha ) near Pawlett were recovered by means of embankments ; and three further reclamations , totalling 110 acres ( 45 ha ) , had been undertaken downstream of Bridgwater by 1660 . In the early 17th century , during the time of King James I , abortive plans were made to drain and enclose much of Sedgemoor , which the local Lords supported but opposed by the Commoners who would have lost grazing rights . In 1632 , Charles I sold the Crown 's interest in the scheme , and it was taken over by a consortium that included Sir Cornelius Vermuyden , a Dutch drainage engineer . However , the work was delayed by the English Civil War and later defeated in Parliament after local opposition . In 1638 , it was reported that nearly 2 @,@ 600 acres ( 11 km2 ) of Tealham and Tadham Moors were not reclaimed , with a total of 30 @,@ 500 acres ( 123 @.@ 43 km2 ) being <unk> . Between 1785 and 1791 , much of the lowest part of the peat moors was enclosed . In 1795 , John Billingsley advocated enclosure and the digging of rhynes ( a local name for drainage channels , pronounced " reens " in the east and rhyne to the west ) between plots , and wrote in his Agriculture of the County of Somerset that 4 @,@ 400 acres ( 18 km2 ) had been enclosed in the last 20 years in Wedmore and Meare , 350 acres ( 1 @.@ 4 km2 ) at Nyland , 900 acres ( 3 @.@ 64 km2 ) at Blackford , 2 @,@ 000 acres ( 8 km2 ) at Mark , 100 acres ( 0 @.@ 4 km2 ) in Shapwick and 1 @,@ 700 acres ( 7 km2 ) at Westhay . Little attempt was made during the 17th and 18th centuries to pump water , possibly because the coal @-@ driven Newcomen steam engines would have been uneconomical . It is unclear why windmills were not employed , as they were on the Fens of East Anglia , but only two examples have been recorded on the Levels : one at Bleadon at the mouth of the River Axe , where a sea wall had been built , and the other at Common Moor north of Glastonbury , which was being drained following a private Act of Parliament in 1721 . 
 The first mechanical pumping station on the Somerset Levels was built in 1830 to drain the area around Westonzoyland , <unk> and Othery . The success of the drainage system led to the formation of other drainage boards and the construction of other pumping stations . The pump at Westonzoyland originally comprised a beam engine and scoop wheel ( like a water wheel running backwards ) but , after 25 years , there were problems pumping the water away because the land had dropped as it dried out despite the wheel being raised 15 inches ( 380 mm ) in 1843 . A better method was sought , and in 1861 the present Easton and Amos pump was installed . The Westonzoyland pump lifts water from the rhyne ( pronounced ' reen ' ) into the River Parrett . The pump operated until 1951 , by which time the local drainage system had been linked into King 's Sedgemoor Drain , which discharged further down the River Parrett ; the water levels dropped and the pump was unable to draw the water from the rhyne . Additionally , the Parrett riverbank has now been raised by some 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) in the vicinity of the pumping station and the opening to the river , from the base of the pump @-@ well , is now bricked up . In 1951 a diesel pump , with a capacity of 50 tons per minute , was installed by the Environment Agency in an adjacent building meaning that the steam pump was no longer needed . 
 The station itself is a Flemish bond brick @-@ built property with a slate hipped roof and chimney rising to 71 feet ( 22 m ) in height . A cottage section was added alongside it in the 1860s , to provide accommodation for the station @-@ keeper . Originally given a Grade II listing , the property was upgraded to Grade II * by English Heritage since it is now the only surviving station that still houses a functioning engine . Beside the cottage is a long single @-@ storey building that houses a 1914 Lancashire boiler ; this was used to provide steam . Next to it is a forge , where the keeper would have made a number of his own tools . The boiler required constant running and thus consumed a good deal of coal . 
 = = = Restoration = = = 
 In 1976 , members of the Somerset Industrial Archaeology Society began restoration of the site . The Westonzoyland Engine Trust achieved charitable status in 1980 and in 1990 bought the site from the owners , Wessex Water . The structure of the engine house has been stabilised and the pump house and chimney rebuilt . A new exhibition hall has also been built . 
 Up until early 2010 , the keeper 's cottage had been off @-@ limits to visitors . Two of the ground @-@ floor rooms have now been opened : the living @-@ room is furnished in a 1930s / 40s style , while the old kitchen area currently holds a couple of display cases , with a view to showing hitherto unseen artefacts from the museum 's collection of smaller items . The upper floors remain closed to visitors . 
 = = Museum = = 
 At the western end of the site is the pump house . It houses the 1861 engine which was built by Easton and Amos of London , to a design patented in 1858 by Charles Amos . It is a twin @-@ cylinder , vertical condensing engine , driving a centrifugal pump developed by John Appold . A similar engine was on display at The Great Exhibition of 1851 and was shown to be able to lift 100 tons of water per minute , to a height of 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) . The engine was originally powered by Cornish boilers , but these were replaced in with 1914 Lancashire boiler , with two fire tubes , made by Fred Danks . The boiler is beyond economic restoration . 
 In addition to the Easton and Amos pump , a collection of steam and diesel engines with connections either to the area or to pumping have been assembled on site and regular steam days are held . The oldest item dates from the early 19th century , through to several Victorian engines and onward to the 20th century . These are housed in several different buildings and areas : the exhibition hall , the courtyard , the " wiggly shed " , the pump room and the engine house itself . Most of the machines are in running order , although some are still awaiting restoration . 
 Steam is provided by an elderly Marshall portable boiler – essentially a portable engine without the actual engine . It was built in Gainsborough , Lincolnshire in 1938 before being used by Thames Water as a stand by steam generator . It was given to Kew Bridge Steam Museum ( now the London Museum of Water & Steam ) before being passed on to the Westonzoyland Museum and then restored with a grant from the Preservation of Industrial and Scientific Materials Foundation ( PRISM ) . The boiler provides steam at 50 Pounds per square inch ( psi ) to the other exhibits . It has been fitted with two whistles , one from Wattstown and the other from Ty Mawr Collieries in Wales , both of which were donated by the National Coal Board . Along with the boiler in the outdoor courtyard area are a waterwheel pump unit built by G. H. Harris of Wadebridge , a Lee Howl pump and Lister deep well pump . 
 Engines by a range of other manufacturers are on display . These include ' quick revolution ' engines by <unk> and Morcom , Robey & Co . , Easton and Johnson and Sissons . There are horizontal engines by W. and F. Wills and by J. Culverwell , of Bridgwater . The Culverwell machine is a horizontal single cylinder steam engine originally used in Holt 's Brewery at Burnham @-@ on @-@ Sea , while the Wills engine was used in a brickworks . 
 Additional exhibits include two small de Laval steam turbines by Greenwood & Batley , and a small ' Wessex ' steam turbine milk bottle washer . A winch used to move railway wagons at Hemyock Dairy near Wellington was built by J. Lynn of Sunderland . There is a <unk> Crossley diesel engine dating from 1935 . There is a <unk> <unk> ' Ogden pump ' used to pump condensate from steam lines . The collection includes the boiler which powered the Telescopic Bridge , Bridgwater . 
 Westonzoyland Light Railway is a short 2 ft ( 610 mm ) narrow @-@ gauge railway running alongside the pumping station . It was constructed after the closure of the pumping station to move heavy machinery around the site and is used to transport timber from the wood pile to the boiler . The engines used are a Simplex diesel locomotive , built in 1968 , which was previously at the <unk> Sewage Treatment Works in Sutton Coldfield and a 1949 Lister rail @-@ truck previously used by the Eclipse Peat Company at <unk> . A steam winch built by John Lynch of Sunderland is used to move one of the truck up an inclined place to demonstrate how this would have been done in goods yards and docks . 
 = Delaware Route 24 = 
 Delaware Route 24 ( DE 24 ) is a state highway located in Sussex County , Delaware . The route runs east from Maryland Route 348 ( MD 348 ) at the Maryland border east of Sharptown , Maryland to an intersection with DE 1 in Midway , between Lewes and Rehoboth Beach . Along the way , DE 24 passes through Laurel , Millsboro , and Long Neck . DE 24 intersects U.S. Route 13 ( US 13 ) in Laurel , US 113 / DE 20 in Millsboro , and DE 5 and DE 23 in Long Neck . The road runs concurrent with DE 30 between Mission and Millsboro . DE 24 features an alternate alignment , DE 24 Alternate ( DE 24 Alt . ) , that runs to the north of the route from US 113 in Stockley to DE 24 near Midway . DE 24 was built as a state highway throughout the 1920s , with completion of the entire route by 1931 . DE 24 was assigned onto its current alignment by 1936 . DE 24 Alt. was designated by 2006 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 DE 24 begins at the Maryland border , where it continues west into that state as MD 348 . From the state line the route heads east on two @-@ lane undivided Sharptown Road . The road heads through agricultural areas with some woods and homes , curving to the northeast . DE 24 runs to the south of Laurel Airport and enters the town of Laurel , passing homes . Following this , the route turns north onto West Street . DE 24 curves east and becomes West Market Street , crossing Norfolk Southern 's Delmarva Secondary railroad line as it continues into the downtown of Laurel . At the Central Avenue intersection , the route becomes East Market Street and runs southeast , bending east onto East 4th Street and heading through areas of homes to the south of Records Pond . At the eastern edge of Laurel , DE 24 comes to an intersection with US 13 . 
 Past Laurel , DE 24 heads east on Laurel Road through farmland with some woodland and homes . The route then passes to the north of Trap Pond State Park . The road continues east through a mix of farms and woods with occasional residences , reaching an intersection with DE 30 in Mission . Here , DE 24 turns north to form a concurrency with DE 30 on Millsboro Highway , with the road running northeast . Farther along , residential development increases as the road crosses into Millsboro . At this point the road name becomes Laurel Road as it passes homes and reaches an intersection with US 113 / DE 20 . Past this intersection , DE 24 / DE 30 turns north @-@ northeast on Washington Street . The two routes split into a one @-@ way pair following Main Street northbound and Washington Street southbound , crossing Norfolk Southern 's Indian River Secondary railroad line . The one @-@ way pair heads through the downtown area of Millsboro , rejoining along two @-@ way Main Street and crossing Indian River to the east of Millsboro Pond . A short distance later , DE 24 and DE 30 split at an intersection . 
 Upon splitting from DE 30 , DE 24 heads northeast on John J. Williams Highway , soon curving to the east . The road passes through farmland with some woods and homes and bends to the northeast , coming to an intersection with DE 5 near Oak Orchard . At this point DE 5 turns northeast to form a concurrency with DE 24 . The road heads north through residential and commercial development with some fields as it enters the Long Neck area , where it intersects DE 23 . Here , DE 5 splits from DE 24 by turning northwest onto DE 23 , and DE 24 continues north through a mix of farms , woods , and residential neighborhoods . The road runs through Angola and curves to the northeast , crossing Love Creek . The route continues northeast and intersects DE 1D / DE 24 Alt . Here , DE 1D turns northeast to join DE 24 and the two routes pass homes and businesses as a three @-@ lane road with a center left @-@ turn lane . DE 24 / DE 1D becomes a four @-@ lane undivided road as it comes to its end at an intersection with DE 1 in Midway . 
 DE 24 has an annual average daily traffic count ranging from a high of 20 @,@ 273 vehicles at the northern edge of Millsboro to a low of 1 @,@ 386 vehicles at the intersection with Mt . Pleasant Road west of Laurel . None of DE 24 is part of the National Highway System . 
 = = History = = 
 By 1920 what is now DE 24 existed as a state highway between Mission and Phillips Hill , with the remainder of the route existing as an unimproved county road . At this time the road was under contract as a state highway between Laurel and Pepper and from Phillips Hill to east of Millsboro . The sections under contract were completed by 1924 and the remainder of present @-@ day DE 24 was proposed as a state highway a year later . Completion of these final segments occurred by 1931 . DE 24 was assigned to its current alignment between the Maryland border west of Laurel and DE 14 ( now DE 1 ) in Midway by 1936 . In 1940 , a new bridge was built over Love Creek as part of improving the route east of Millsboro for traffic heading to the beaches in the summer . DE 24 has remained on the same alignment since its inception . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Sussex County . 
 = = Bannered routes = = 
 Delaware Route 24 Alternate ( DE 24 Alt . ) is an alternate route of DE 24 between US 113 in Stockley and DE 24 in Midway . The route heads east from US 113 on two @-@ lane undivided Speedway Road , passing to the north of Georgetown Speedway . DE 24 Alt. then heads southeast onto Zoar Road , passing through agricultural areas with some woods and homes and crossing Norfolk Southern 's Indian River Secondary railroad line . The road continues east through more areas of farms , woods , and residences , turning north and east before crossing DE 30 in Zoar . The route heads east @-@ northeast through more rural areas , turning north onto Hollyville Road . DE 24 Alt. turns northeast and comes to a junction with DE 5 in Hollyville . The road continues east and intersects DE 23 in Hollymount . Here , DE 24 Alt. turns north to join DE 23 on Beaver Dam Road and the two routes continue through agricultural and wooded areas with residential developments , curving to the northeast . In Five Points the road intersects DE 1D , with DE 23 turning to the north and DE 24 Alt. continuing northeast along with DE 1D on Plantation Road . The two routes curve southeast immediately to the south of the intersection between US 9 / DE 404 and DE 1 and head through a mix of farmland and residential development . Finally , the road reaches an intersection with DE 24 where DE 24 Alt. ends and DE 1D turns northeast to join DE 24 . DE 24 Alt. was designated by 2006 . 
 Major intersections 
 The entire route is in Sussex County . 
 = Ronnie Barker = 
 Ronald William George " Ronnie " Barker , OBE ( 25 September 1929 – 3 October 2005 ) was an English actor , comedian and writer . He was known for roles in British comedy television series such as Porridge , The Two Ronnies and Open All Hours . 
 Barker began acting in repertory theatre and decided he was best suited to comic roles . He had his first success at the Oxford Playhouse and in roles in the West End including Tom Stoppard 's The Real Inspector Hound . During this period , he was in the cast of BBC radio and television comedies such as The Navy Lark . He got his television break with the satirical sketch series The Frost Report in 1966 , where he met future collaborator , Ronnie Corbett . He joined David Frost 's production company and starred in ITV shows including a short film . 
 After rejoining the BBC , Barker found fame with the sketch show The Two Ronnies ( 1971 – 1987 ) , with Ronnie Corbett . He starred in the sitcoms Porridge , its sequel Going Straight and Open All Hours . He wrote comedy under his own name , though for much of his written material after 1968 he adopted pseudonyms ( including " Gerald Wiley " ) to avoid pre @-@ judgments of his writing talent . He won a BAFTA for best light entertainment performance four times , among other awards , and received an OBE in 1978 . 
 Later television sitcoms such as The Magnificent Evans and Clarence were less successful and he retired in 1987 . The following year , he opened an antiques shop with his wife , Joy . After 1999 , he appeared in smaller , non @-@ comic roles in films . He died of heart failure on 3 October 2005 , aged 76 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Barker was born Ronald William George Barker on 25 September 1929 in Bedford , Bedfordshire , to Leonard ( known as " Tim " ) and Edith ( known as " Cis " ) Barker . Barker 's elder sister Vera was born in 1926 and his younger sister Eileen was born in 1933 . His father was a clerk for Shell @-@ Mex , and this job saw the family move to Church Cowley Road in Cowley , Oxford when Barker was four . < Barker 's biographer Bob McCabe described his childhood as " a happy time , marred by no <unk> or family tensions , apart from the occasional wet sock . " As a child , Barker enjoyed dressing up , particularly in his father 's pierrot outfit , as well as films , comics and animals . He developed a love of the theatre , often attending plays with his family . The first play he saw was Cottage to Let and he once skipped school to see Laurence Olivier in Henry V. He frequently stood outside stage @-@ doors to collect autographs , his first being the actress Celia Johnson . 
 Barker grew up in the Florence Park area of Cowley , Oxford , and went to Donnington Junior School , Florence Park , Oxford and then the City of Oxford High School for Boys . Barker 's chemistry textbook at Oxford was previously owned by T.E. Lawrence . He found his talent for humour at school and developed his musical ability by singing in the choir at St James 's , his local church . He got in to the sixth form a year early after gaining the School Certificate but he felt what he was learning would be of no use to him in later life and so left as soon as he could . After leaving school he trained as an architect but gave it up after six months , feeling he was not skilled enough . Barker took his sister Vera 's job as a bank clerk at the Westminster Bank ( after she had left to become a nurse ) . Barker harboured dreams of becoming an actor , and took up amateur dramatics , although initially he just saw the pastime as a chance to meet girls . For 18 months while at the bank he worked as an actor and stage manager , making his first appearance in A Murder Has Been Arranged as the musical director of the play @-@ within @-@ a @-@ play . Eventually he gave up his job to become a professional actor . His father did not support his acting ambition . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Theatrical career = = = 
 Barker failed to get into the Young Vic School , but joined the Manchester Repertory Company , which was based in Aylesbury , Buckinghamshire , often taking comic roles in their weekly shows . Initially he was employed as the assistant to the assistant stage manager , earning £ <unk> ( £ 2 @.@ 50 ) a week . He made his debut as a professional actor on 15 November 1948 as Lieutenant Spicer in a performance of J.M. Barrie 's Quality Street . He went on to play the organist in When We Are Married and by his third role , the chauffeur Charles in Miranda , Barker realised he wanted to be a comic actor . He was described as " ha [ <unk> ] the talent to be a great straight actor " , but noted : " I want to make people laugh . Never mind about Hamlet . Forget Richard the Second . Give me Charley 's Aunt . My mission in life was now crystal clear . " He appeared in stage adaptations of Treasure Island and Red Riding Hood before getting his first leading role in The Guinea Pig as a working class boy at a public school . When the production moved to Rhyl , Barker followed . The Manchester Repertory Company closed , as did the Rhyl company shortly after . Barker , aged 20 , then spent some time as a porter at Wingfield Hospital ; he became distressed through his contact with polio patients and so opted to take on the persona of " Charlie " so as not to be himself . He and a male nurse often entertained the patients with comedy routines . He found work at the Mime Theatre Company , performing mimed folk music and dance , which soon folded in Penzance . He made his way back to Oxford and then worked in Bramhall for the Famous Players . There he met actor Glenn Melvyn ; the two became firm friends and Barker stated Melvyn taught him everything he " ever learned about comedy . " 
 He joined the Oxford Playhouse in 1951 and worked there for three years , appearing in plays such as He Who Gets <unk> as the clown . Peter Hall worked with Barker at Oxford and gave him his break , casting him as the <unk> and Joe Silva in his production of Mourning Becomes Electra at the Arts Theatre in London 's West End in 1955 . By the time he had made it to the West End , Barker had appeared in an estimated 350 plays . Barker remained a West End actor for several years , appearing in numerous plays between 1955 and 1968 . These included , in 1955 , two performances each night as he played a gypsy in Listen to the Wind at the Arts Theatre and then a peasant in Summertime later in the evening . Other roles included Mr Thwaites in Double Image in 1956 ( with Olivier ) , Camino Real ( directed by Hall ) in 1957 , French gangster <unk> @-@ <unk> in Irma La Douce for two years from 1958 , Lord Slingsby @-@ Craddock in Mr <unk> in 1964 and <unk> in The Real Inspector Hound in 1968 . He also appeared in several Royal Court Theatre productions , including A Midsummer Night 's Dream as Quince . 
 = = = Early media career = = = 
 Barker 's theatrical success enabled him to move into radio work . Barker , who had previously been known by his birth name " Ronald " , was now referred to as the shortened form " Ronnie " , after a director changed it in the credits , although he did not tell Barker . His first radio appearance was in 1956 , playing Lord <unk> in <unk> 's . He went on to play multiple characters , but primarily the lookout Able Seaman ' Fatso ' Johnson and Lieutenant @-@ Commander Stanton , in The Navy Lark , a navy based sitcom on the BBC Light Programme , which ran from 1959 to 1977 , with Barker featuring in some 300 episodes . He also featured in the show 's radio spin @-@ off The TV Lark as Fatso Johnson , a camera operator , and as a trainee chef in Crowther 's Crowd in 1963 , and had roles on Variety Playhouse . Barker soon began working in film and television . His first acting job on television was in Melvyn 's show I 'm Not Bothered . He appeared in various roles in the comedy series The Seven Faces of Jim from 1962 , alongside Jimmy Edwards and June Whitfield , as well as parts in Bold as Brass and Foreign Affairs ( as Russian embassy worker <unk> Petrovitch ) . This was followed with dramatic parts in A Tale of Two Cities as Jerry Cruncher in 1965 as well as single episode roles in The Saint and The Avengers , in which he played Cheshire , a cat lover . In 1964 he appeared in Galton & Simpson 's gentle comedy , The <unk> , as Ronnie , the illiterate cousin of Harry H Corbett 's <unk> <unk> Pike . Other film work at that time included : Doctor in Distress ( 1963 ) , Father Came Too ! ( 1963 ) and A Home of Your Own ( 1965 ) . 
 In 1966 , Barker got his break with the satirical sketch series The Frost Report , having been recommended for the show by producer James Gilbert . The show starred David Frost , John Cleese and Barker 's future comedy partner Ronnie Corbett , whom he had met in 1963 when Corbett was the barman at the Buckstone Club near the Haymarket Theatre , and the two became friends . Corbett stated in his autobiography that the two had gravitated towards each other because of their similar backgrounds ; neither had attended university , while many of the other Frost Report cast and writers had . Each episode of the show , which was performed and broadcast live , was focused on a single topic and principally revolved around a continuous monologue from Frost , with sketches from Barker , Corbett and Cleese as the show went on . Barker starred alongside Cleese and Corbett in The Frost Report 's best known sketch , which satirised the British class system , with Barker representing the middle class . 
 After the first series , the special Frost Over England was produced , winning the Golden Rose at the Montreux Television Festival . With a second series of the show announced , Frost , recognising their potential , signed both Barker and Corbett up to his production company David Paradine Productions . As part of the deal Barker was given his own show in 1968 , The Ronnie Barker Playhouse , which comprised six separate , thirty @-@ minute plays . Barker starred in each piece as a different character . After two series of The Frost Report on the BBC , totalling 26 half @-@ hour episodes , Frost moved to ITV after helping to set up London Weekend Television . There , Frost hosted Frost on Sunday , with Barker and Corbett following and again performing sketches on the programme . Barker began writing sketches for the programme under the pseudonym Gerald Wiley . Barker and Corbett had a greater role on the show than on The Frost Report and Corbett felt " more aware of what [ they ] were doing . " 
 Barker began using the pseudonym Gerald Wiley when writing sketches because he wished the pieces to be accepted on merit and not just because he , as a star of the programme , had written them ; he continued this tradition with the material he wrote later in his career . Barker brought his sketches in , claiming they had come from Wiley through Barker 's agent Peter <unk> , and they were very well received . To maintain the deception , Barker had criticised material he himself had submitted under the pseudonym ; when a Wiley @-@ credited sketch about a ventriloquist had been poorly received by the audience Barker told Corbett " Well , Gerald Wiley let us down there " , and on another occasion , when looking at a script , " I don 't understand this line . What 's he getting at ? " One of the first sketches he wrote was called " Doctor 's Waiting Room " , with the main part written for Corbett . Barker encouraged Corbett to buy the rights to the sketch and , further maintaining the myth , told him to reject Wiley 's ' request ' for £ 3 @,@ 000 as too expensive , before giving Corbett the sketch for free . Speculation began about Wiley 's identity , with Tom Stoppard , Frank Muir , Alan Bennett and Noël Coward all rumoured . After the second series of Frost on Sunday , the cast and crew were invited to a Chinese restaurant , while Wiley said that he would reveal himself . Barker , who had told Corbett earlier in the day , stood up and announced he was Wiley , although initially nobody believed him . 
 In 1969 Barker was able to write , produce and star as General <unk> in the film <unk> End which featured no dialogue and only " grumble [ s ] and grunt [ s ] " . The Ronnie Barker Playhouse had been designed to find a successful idea for a sitcom , and the episode " Ah , There You Are " by Alun Owen , which introduced the bumbling aristocratic character Lord <unk> , was chosen . The character returned for the 1969 – 1970 series Hark at Barker as the main character ; Barker wrote for the show under the name Jonathan <unk> . As Wiley he wrote the 1971 series Six Dates with Barker . Despite Barker 's success on ITV , LWT 's programme controller Stella Richman opted to fire Frost 's company Paradine ( Frost was sacked from the LWT board ) and as Barker was contracted to the company rather than the network , he lost his job , as did Corbett . 
 = = = Move to the BBC and The Two Ronnies = = = 
 Soon after , Barker , Corbett and Josephine Tewson performed a sketch about Henry VIII at the 1971 BAFTAs , with Barker playing Henry . The two also had to keep the audience entertained for eight or so minutes as the show was stopped because of technical difficulties . Their performance at the award show impressed the BBC 's Head of Light Entertainment Bill Cotton and Controller of BBC One Paul Fox , who were sitting in the audience . Not knowing they were both essentially unemployed , although still contracted to Paradine , Cotton signed the duo up for their own show together , and a series each on their own ; he later joked he " must have offered them too much money . " Barker and Corbett wished to avoid being remembered primarily as a duo , and felt they could not work in the same way as a conventional double act like Morecambe and Wise , and so each maintained their solo careers as well . They each were given a one @-@ off variety special ; Barker 's , called The Ronnie Barker Yearbook , featured a sketch for each month of the year , although because of time constraints the first two had to be cut . Barker also reprised his character Lord <unk> in the sitcom His Lordship <unk> in 1972 . Barker wrote all seven episodes , again with the pseudonym Jonathan <unk> . 
 Their show together was The Two Ronnies , a sketch show which aired for twelve series and eight specials between 1971 and 1987 , to immediate success . The show , as described by Anthony Hayward of The Independent , was " a cocktail of comedy sketches , <unk> , songs and parodies , a long @-@ winded Corbett monologue and a singing star , sandwiched between the opening and closing news summaries . " The usual format consisted of many sketches between the two , an ongoing filmed serial , a solo character sketch from Barker , Corbett 's monologue , a musical number , a special guest , bookended by joke news items , delivered from a desk by the two in the style of newsreaders , before ending with the catchphrase " It 's good night from me – and it 's good night from him . " This was a set format which was used for almost the entirety of the show 's run . The end catchphrase and newsreader characters were devised because Barker found it difficult to appear as himself : Corbett explained that Barker " was a very private man , a quiet man ... He found it almost impossible to talk directly , as himself , to an audience . " Each also had their own solo segments to help ensure they were not totally associated as a double act . Filming took place over four months of each year . After outdoor and serial sketches were filmed on location , the studio material was filmed on Sunday evenings at BBC Television Centre in front a live audience ; the musical finale was filmed the day before without the audience . 
 Barker wrote much of the show 's material , roughly three @-@ quarters , again under the name Gerald Wiley . He was heavily involved with the show 's production , especially the serial . Corbett explained that Barker was a " perfectionist " and " as he wrote it Ronnie knew how he wanted every shot to look . " After filming the show all day , he spent the evenings helping technician Jim Franklin edit it . While filming on location Barker and Corbett would look through all of the potential material for the studio recording of the rest of the show 's content and decide on the running order . He and Corbett always got on , with Barker noting " People refuse to believe that we don 't have rows , tensions , private wars . It 's a strange thing after so many years but we never have . Actually , it 's even more amicable than a marriage – wedlock without the bad patches . Our sense of humour and perception of what 's good and what 's rubbish are uncommonly in tune . " They took turns to play the parts which had the " good lines " . One of the show 's other writers , Barry Cryer , said : " You could write almost anything knowing these two would do it brilliantly . Because they weren 't a double act ; they were two men who worked together and had their own careers . " 
 Barker 's material included the sketch which came to be known as " Four Candles " , airing in 1976 , although in the original script it was entitled " Annie <unk> " . It sees a customer ( Barker ) ask for a series of things in a hardware store . The sketch 's humour derives from similarities in word pronunciation , leading to confusion on the part of the store owner ( Corbett ) . These misunderstandings include the confusion between " four candles " and " fork handles " . The idea for the sketch came from the owners of a hardware shop in Hayes , Hillingdon who wrote in to The Two Ronnies to describe some of the amusing events and misunderstandings in their store . Barker was never happy with the sketch 's final line ( a male assistant asking " What sort of <unk> did you want ? " ) and changed it ( to a female assistant asking " What sort of knockers were you looking for ? " ) for the stage version of The Two Ronnies , although he was still not totally satisfied with it . Nevertheless , the sketch is considered the show 's most famous one and was voted as the show 's best in a TV special , while also placing fifth on Channel 4 's 50 Greatest Comedy Sketches . The original script , hand @-@ written by Barker , was sold for £ 48 @,@ 500 at auction in 2007 after being featured on an episode of Antiques Roadshow the previous year . 
 The show was considered a " national institution " with audiences of between 15 and 20 million regularly tuning in to its 93 episodes . Barker won the BAFTA for Best Light Entertainment Performance in 1971 and 1977 for the show . The Two Ronnies ended with the 1987 Christmas special . In 1978 the two performed a stage version of the show at the London Palladium ; lasting for three months , it followed the same format as the show , with old sketches and some new material , supported by variety acts . Barker 's unease with appearing as himself in the stage show led him to create a fictionalised version of himself to play instead . A second stage series took place in 1983 . Barker was reportedly offended by a sketch called ' The Two <unk> ' on the BBC 's Not the Nine O 'Clock News , which mocked their act as being based on dated innuendo @-@ based humour . 
 After a tip off from Dick Clement and Ian La Frenais , Barker and Corbett opted to move with their families to Sydney , Australia in 1979 for the year to exploit a tax loophole and avoid paying the year 's income tax . They performed their stage show for four weeks in Sydney and a further four in Melbourne ; because of their existing popularity in Australia and , what Corbett terms , the Australian audiences ' " [ comedic ] soul that still related to the UK , " they made no changes to the routine . Barker made no other appearances that year and spent his time writing and engaging in recreational activities . Following the show 's success , Kerry Packer commissioned a six episode TV series of The Two Ronnies in Australia for Nine Network . The show comprised material not yet shown in Australia from The Two Ronnies and new content targeted more towards an Australian audience . They returned for a second series in 1986 . 
 Barker and Corbett also starred in the short , mostly silent , films The Picnic ( 1975 ) and By the Sea ( 1982 ) . By the Sea was Barker 's tribute to the seaside postcard humour of Donald McGill and his most " personal " work . The show was also widely syndicated in North America by PBS and CBC , and in 1980 they appeared in the short @-@ lived NBC variety show The Big Show ; the two were glad the show did not last as they objected to the use of canned laughter by the American networks . 
 = = = Porridge , Open All Hours and other work = = = 
 Following the success of The Two Ronnies , the BBC let Barker decide what he wanted to do . The Two Ronnies took up one third of a year to produce , allowing time for Barker and Corbett to each do a solo project . Barker 's opted to produce some sitcom pilots shown as part of 1973 's Seven of One . Two of these pilots , Open All Hours ( written by Roy Clarke ) and Prisoner and Escort ( written by Dick Clement and Ian La Frenais ) became series . Prisoner and Escort became Porridge , airing from 1974 – 1977 , with Barker starring as the cynical and cunning prisoner Norman Stanley Fletcher . Porridge was the first sitcom to take place in a prison ; The Times said the show " was about what it took to survive in prison , the little day @-@ to @-@ day triumphs over the system that kept the prisoners sane . " The opening sequence of the programme showed Fletcher being directed to his cell , as prison doors are locked behind him , all the while the judge can be heard pronouncing judgement and sentence . The judge 's voice was performed by Barker . The show became a huge success , attracting 15 million viewers and earning what the BBC described as " a chorus of critical acclaim and public adoration for what remains one of the most classic British sitcoms ever produced . " The Times called Fletcher his " finest creation " . Barker privately regarded the series as the finest work of his career . He won the BAFTA for Best Light Entertainment Performance in 1975 for his performance . 
 In 1976 , Barker played Friar Tuck in the film Robin and Marian , directed by Richard Lester . The same year , determined not to be remembered only as Fletcher , Barker opted to end Porridge after two series and instead focused on the second pilot Open All Hours , alongside David Jason . Barker starred as Arkwright , a money @-@ grabbing , stuttering shopkeeper . Arkwright 's stutter was not in the script ; Barker was inspired to use it by Melvyn 's performance and use of a stutter in a 1955 play the two performed at the Palace Theatre called Hot Water . Open All Hours aired one series in 1976 on BBC Two but was not renewed due to low ratings . As a result , Barker backtracked on his earlier decision and produced a third series of Porridge , as well as a film adaptation . It was followed by the spin @-@ off sitcom Going Straight which focused on Fletcher after his release from prison . While not as popular as Porridge , Barker again won the BAFTA for Best Light Entertainment Performance . Plans to further the show were ended when Barker 's co @-@ star Richard Beckinsale died of a heart attack in 1979 aged 31 . With repeats of Open All Hours earning high ratings on BBC One , the BBC commissioned a further series of the show in 1981 , with another two made as well as the show continued its ratings success . Both shows placed in the top ten of the 2004 poll to determine Britain 's Best Sitcom ; Porridge finished seventh and Open All Hours eighth . 
 Barker 's next sitcom , The Magnificent Evans , which was about a Welsh photographer and aired in 1984 , was not successful . His final sitcom , Clarence in which he played Clarence Sale , a removal man with failing sight , aired in 1988 . Barker wrote the show himself , again using a pseudonym , this time as " Bob Ferris " . 
 = = = Retirement and re @-@ appearances = = = 
 In 1987 , before Clarence aired and after rejecting Hall 's offer of the part of Falstaff in a Royal National Theatre production of Henry IV , Part 1 & 2 , Barker retired from show business , aged 58 , " at the height of his fame " , citing a decline in his own writing quality , lack of ambition and ideas , and a desire to go out on top so as not to damage his legacy , as well as concerns about the state of his heart . He had decided to retire in 1985 but his decision was kept secret for two years , Corbett being the only one knowing about it . He made his decision public on an appearance on the chat show Wogan . Retired , Barker opened and ran an antiques shop called The Emporium in Chipping Norton in Oxfordshire and resisted all calls to come out of retirement from then onwards . He joked : " I lose money every week , but it 's a hobby . It 's cheaper than skiing and safer at my age . " Because of its unprofitability , the shop was sold after ten years . He wrote his autobiography , Dancing in the Moonlight : My Early Years on Stage in 1993 and released All I Ever Wrote , his complete scripts , in 1999 . He wrote the play Mum for his daughter Charlotte Barker in 1998 , which was performed at The King 's Head Theatre , but garnered a negative response , with Barker stating it got " the worst notices of any play in the history of the theatre . " 
 Just over a decade after retiring , Barker was persuaded to make occasional appearances on TV again . In 1997 he appeared with Corbett at the Royal Command Performance , driving on stage in a motorcycle as the Two Fat Ladies , and in 1999 he was reunited with Corbett for Two Ronnies Night on BBC One , and the following year for A Tribute to the Two Ronnies . In 2002 , director Richard Loncraine persuaded Barker to appear as Winston Churchill 's butler David Inches in the BBC @-@ HBO drama The Gathering Storm and then cast him in the larger role of the General in the TV film My House in Umbria in 2003 , alongside Maggie Smith ( whom he had , early in their careers , advised to give up acting as he felt she would not be a success ) . In the same year , he briefly reprised his role as Norman Stanley Fletcher in the spoof documentary Life Beyond the Box . 
 Barker received several lifetime achievement awards . He won the Royal Television Society 's award for Outstanding Creative Achievement in 1975 . Sir Alec Guinness presented him with a lifetime achievement honour at the inaugural British Comedy Awards in 1990 , while he received another such honour at the BBC Centenary Programme in 1996 . In 2004 he was given a special BAFTA lifetime achievement award at Ronnie Barker : A BAFTA Tribute , a televised celebratory tribute evening . In 2005 , he and Corbett were part of the first 100 people given stars on London 's Avenue of Stars . Previous awards included the Variety Club of Great Britain Award in 1969 , 1974 and 1980 , the Radio Industry Club Award in 1973 , 1974 , 1977 and 1981 . 
 Following the success of Ronnie Barker : A BAFTA Tribute , Barker wanted to return The Two Ronnies to television and the BBC commissioned The Two Ronnies Sketchbook , a clip show of their best sketches along with newly recorded introductions . These were recorded in one day due to Barker 's declining health and aired in 2005 . The project , when announced , met with " some derision among the professional critics " , but after the first episode drew eight million viewers , they had to " eat their words " . The final special , and Barker 's final appearance on TV – The Two Ronnies Christmas Sketchbook – was recorded in July 2005 as a result of Barker 's failing health and aired posthumously in December . 
 = = Acting and writing style = = 
 Barker became a comic actor in his theatre days , noting " I think it 's better to make people laugh than cry . " He has been described by The Times as " not a comedian , [ but ] an actor with a talent for comedy , " who " slipped into characters with apparent ease . " Barker felt he was funny only in character . The BBC wrote of him : " Able to deliver the great tongue @-@ twisting speeches required of his characters , Barker pronounced himself ' completely boring ' without a script . " Peter Hall spoke of Barker 's skills as a dramatic actor , calling him " the great actor we lost " and lamented that Barker was unable to take a role in one of his Shakespearean productions . Barker , though , preferred comedy , and felt it was " as good and as important as serious work " and he was not " dumbing down " by doing it . Actor Gene Wilder compared him to Charlie Chaplin in saying " no matter how farcical [ his performance ] was ... there was always an element of reality to what he did . " Corbett praised Barker 's skill at playing serious authority figures saying absurd things , using Barker 's verbal dexterity and energetic performances . 
 Barker 's writing style was , for The Times , " based on precise scripts and perfect timing . " It often involved playing with language , including humour involving such linguistic items as <unk> and double entendres . Dennis Baker of The Guardian wrote that Barker " preferred innuendo over the crudely explicit , a restraint that demanded some imagination from the audience and was the essence of his comedy . " Corbett said he had " a mastery of the English language " . 
 In private , he annotated a copy of A Book of Nonsense by Edward Lear , penning punch lines of his own for each limerick . On the title page he wrote , " There was an old fossil named Lear , Whose verses were boring and <unk> . His last lines were worst – just the same as the first ! So I 've tried to improve on them here . " The annotated copy of Lear 's book , signed and dated November 2001 , was auctioned in 2012 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Barker met Joy Tubb in Cambridge while she was a stage manager for two plays he was in . They married nine months later in July 1957 and they had three children : two sons , Larry ( born 1959 ) and Adam ( born 1968 ) , who became an actor , and one daughter , Charlotte ( born 1962 ) , who became an actress . Larry was named after Barker 's idol Laurence Olivier . The family lived in Pinner for many years ; and subsequently in a converted mill in Dean , Oxfordshire . According to Corbett , Barker was " first and foremost a family man . " Joy died in January 2011 , aged 78 . 
 Barker received an OBE in 1978 . He was an avid collector of antiques , books and posters and amassed a collection of over 53 @,@ 000 postcards ; he produced several compilation books of them including Ronnie Barker 's Book of Bathing Beauties , A Pennyworth of Art and Sauce . Barker rarely appeared in public , and when he did it was almost always in character . He once said " I 've always known I haven 't a personality of my own , I have to be someone else to be happy . That 's why I became an actor , I suppose . " 
 Barker was a heavy smoker until 1972 when he gave up the habit after having a pre @-@ cancerous growth removed from his throat ; he took to drinking wine and using placebo cigarettes to maintain his concentration and help him sleep . He underwent a heart bypass in 1996 and survived a pulmonary embolism the following year . 
 = = Death = = 
 Barker opted not to have heart valve replacement surgery , and his health rapidly declined after the recording of The Two Ronnies Christmas Sketchbook . He died of heart failure at the Katherine House hospice in <unk> , Oxfordshire , on 3 October 2005 , aged 76 , with Joy by his side . News of his death made top billing on television news bulletins , and The Sun ran a front page with just the headline " It 's Goodnight From Him " and an image of Barker 's glasses . 
 Barker was cremated at a private humanist funeral at Banbury Crematorium , which was attended only by family and close friends . A public memorial service for Barker was held on 3 March 2006 at Westminster Abbey , with some 2 @,@ 000 people in attendance . Corbett , Richard Briers , Josephine Tewson , Michael Grade and Peter Kay all read at the service , while others in attendance included David Jason , Stephen Fry , Michael Palin , Leslie Phillips , Lenny Henry , Dawn French and June Whitfield . A recording of Barker 's rhyming slang sermon from The Two Ronnies was played , while the cross was in procession in the aisle of the abbey it was accompanied by four candles instead of the usual two , in reference to the Four Candles sketch . Barker was the third comedy professional to be given a memorial at Westminster Abbey , after Joyce Grenfell and Les Dawson . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Following his death the Writer of the Year Award at the British Comedy Awards was renamed in his honour . In 2005 he was voted as the 16th greatest comedy act ever by fellow comedians and comedy insiders in a poll to find The Comedian 's Comedian . 
 The BBC described him as " one of the leading figures of British television comedy " , and " much loved and admired " . The Independent called him " a master of television sitcom " . The Guardian said he was " much loved ... Both as an actor and a writer he was recognised as a master of pyrotechnic puns , surreal behaviour in public and private places , and crackling cross @-@ chat . " It concluded that " it says much about the decline of the British television industry that Ronnie Barker , one of its most creative comic talents , should have turned his back on it long before he died at the age of 76 " . In a eulogy for Barker the Reverend Robert Wright stated that he was " undoubtedly one of the very greatest television comedy actors " and that " as a performer he made comedy look effortlessly funny " . 
 In 2006 Barker 's stage play Mum was adapted and directed by Neil Cargill for BBC Radio 4 , and broadcast as an Afternoon Play , starring Maxine Peake and Sam Kelly . 
 In Barker 's home town of Oxford , a Wetherspoons pub on George Street is named after his Four Candles sketch . It is often used by Wikimedia for Oxford <unk> . 
 A bronze statue of Barker sculpted by Martin Jennings , and showing him in character as Norman Stanley Fletcher , was unveiled at the entrance of the Aylesbury Waterside Theatre in September 2010 by his widow Joy , David Jason and Ronnie Corbett . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Films = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = = = Radio = = = 
 = = = Self = = = 
 = = = Adverts = = = 
 = = = Productions Made to Honour Ronnie Barker and Archival Appearances = = = 
 = Mississippi Highway 454 = 
 Mississippi Highway 454 ( MS 454 ) is a state highway in western Mississippi . MS 454 starts at U.S. Highway 82 ( US 82 ) and US 278 . It travels eastward to its eastern terminus at MS 1 . The road that became MS 454 was constructed in 1940 and opened the next year . MS 454 was designated in 1953 , and has not changed significantly since . 
 = = Route description = = 
 MS 454 starts at the intersection of US 82 and US 278 and travels southeast . The road soon turns east , as it passes through vast farmland . MS 454 passes near its future alignment , and continues eastward . Less than one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) later , the road intersects Tanya Road and West Lake Lee Road , and passes by a small group of trees . About halfway through the route , the road crosses a creek , and travels through small forests . MS 454 ends at a T @-@ intersection with MS 1 . The whole highway is a paved , two @-@ lane road . MS 454 is legally defined in Mississippi Code § 65 @-@ 3 @-@ 3 . In 2012 , Mississippi Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) calculated as many as 4 @,@ 500 vehicles traveling west of MS 1 , and as few as 3 @,@ 100 vehicles traveling east of US 82 / US 278 . MS 454 is not included as a part of the National Highway System ( NHS ) , a network of highways identified as being most important for the economy , mobility and defense of the nation . 
 = = History = = 
 A road from US 82 to MS 1 was constructed during 1940 , and opened in 1941 . The road was unsigned , and was already paved in concrete . It was designated as MS 454 by 1953 . By 1999 , US 278 became concurrent with US 82 through MS 454 's western terminus . A bypass around Greenville has been planned in the 1990s , and construction began in 2008 . It was partially built before funding stopped . A bridge for MS 454 's future alignment has been built , with no roads connecting to it . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Washington County . 
 = Subtropical Storm Andrea ( 2007 ) = 
 Subtropical Storm Andrea was the first named storm and first subtropical cyclone of the 2007 Atlantic hurricane season . It developed out of a non @-@ tropical low on May 9 about 150 miles ( 240 km ) northeast of Daytona Beach , Florida , three weeks before the official start of the season . After encountering dry air and strong vertical wind shear , Andrea weakened to a subtropical depression on May 10 while remaining nearly stationary , and the National Hurricane Center discontinued advisories early on May 11 . Andrea was the first pre @-@ season storm to develop since Tropical Storm Ana in April 2003 . Additionally , the storm was the first Atlantic named storm in May since Tropical Storm Arlene in 1981 . 
 The storm produced rough surf along the coastline from Florida to North Carolina , causing beach erosion and some damage . In some areas , the waves eroded up to 20 feet ( 6 m ) of beach , leaving 70 homes in danger of collapse . Offshore North Carolina , high waves of 34 feet ( 10 m ) and tropical @-@ storm @-@ force winds damaged three boats ; their combined nine passengers were rescued by the Coast Guard , although all nine sustained injuries . Light rainfall was also reported in some coastal locations . Damage was minimal , but six people drowned as a result of the storm . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 In early May , an upper @-@ level trough dropped southward through the western Atlantic Ocean , forcing a back @-@ door cold front — a cold front that moves southwestward ahead of a building surface ridge to its north or northeast — southward . For several days , forecast models had anticipated for the trough to evolve into a closed low pressure area , and on May 6 , a frontal low with a large and well @-@ defined circulation developed about 90 miles ( 140 km ) east of Cape Hatteras . The low maintained scattered convection around its circulation center , and in conjunction with the strong high pressure to its north , a very tight pressure gradient produced gale force winds near the coastline . The extratropical storm tracked southeastward and later turned to the southwest while steadily deepening ; on May 7 , it attained hurricane @-@ force winds . With a lack of tropical moisture , its corresponding convection was minimal and scattered . 
 The National Hurricane Center first mentioned the possibility of tropical cyclogenesis on May 8 , while the storm was located about 230 miles ( 370 km ) east @-@ southeast of the South Carolina coastline . Its associated convection had steadily increased as it tracked slowly westward at 5 – 10 mph ( 8 – 16 km / h ) . The system changed little in organization throughout the day , though by the following morning , hurricane specialists indicated the low was acquiring subtropical characteristics as it tracked over progressively warmer waters . Early on May 9 , a Hurricane Hunters flight into the system revealed winds of 45 mph ( 70 km / h ) and a flat thermal core , which indicated the system was neither warm @-@ core nor cold @-@ core . In addition , satellite imagery indicated a consolidation of the convection near the center , as well as hints of upper @-@ level outflow and a contraction of the radius of maximum winds from more than 115 miles ( 185 km ) to about 70 miles ( 120 km ) . Based on the observations and the hybrid structure of the system , the National Hurricane Center classified the low as Subtropical Storm Andrea at 1500 UTC on May 9 about 150 miles ( 240 km ) northeast of Daytona Beach , Florida . During a subsequent analysis of the storm , researchers estimated that the storm had transitioned into a subtropical cyclone nine hours earlier . As Andrea developed before June 1 — the traditional start of hurricane seasons in the Atlantic Ocean — it became the first pre @-@ season storm since Tropical Storm Ana in April 2003 . Additionally , the storm was the first Atlantic named storm in May since Tropical Storm Arlene in 1981 . 
 Upon first becoming a subtropical cyclone , Andrea was embedded within a large , nearly stationary deep @-@ layer trough , resulting in a westward movement . Drifting over sea surface temperatures of no more than 77 ° F ( 25 ° C ) , the organization of the system deteriorated with a significant decrease in convection . By early on May 10 , much of the associated weather was located to the east of the cyclone within a band of moderate convection due to a brief spell of westerly vertical wind shear . The center of circulation had become disorganized , with several small cloud swirls within the larger circulation . This disorganization of the center , combined with increasing wind shear and dry air suppressing convective activity , caused it to begin weakening later that morning . By 1500 UTC on May 10 , only a few thunderstorms remained near the center , and thus the NHC downgraded Andrea to subtropical depression status . Though a few intermittent thunderstorms persisted over the eastern semicircle , the depression remained disorganized and weak ; the National Hurricane Center discontinued advisories early on May 11 , after it had been without significant deep convection for 18 hours about 80 miles ( 125 km ) northeast of Cape Canaveral , Florida . 
 Later on May 11 , convection re @-@ fired over the center as the system drifted south @-@ southeastward , though it lacked sufficient organization to qualify as a tropical cyclone . By May 12 , shower activity had organized greatly to the east of the center , and the National Hurricane Center remarked that a small increase in convection would result in the formation of a tropical depression . It accelerated east @-@ northeastward away from the continental United States without redeveloping , and after passing over cooler waters , the remnants of Andrea merged with an approaching cold front on May 14 . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Due to rough surf from the precursor low , local National Weather Service offices issued a High Surf Advisory for much of the coastline from Florida through North Carolina . Upon first becoming a subtropical cyclone , the National Hurricane Center issued a tropical storm watch from the mouth of the Altamaha River in Georgia southward to Flagler Beach , Florida . The watch was discontinued after Andrea weakened to a subtropical depression . Additionally , a gale warning was issued for much of the South Carolina coastline . 
 At Isle of Palms in South Carolina , workers and dozens of firefighters prepared sandbags in preparation for high tide after waves from the storm previously caused moderate beach erosion . As a precaution , officials there intentionally cut power and gas to multiple uninhabited buildings . Officials closed schools in Dare County , North Carolina due to the threat for high winds from the storm . The North Carolina Department of Transportation also canceled ferry transportation to and from Ocracoke and Knotts Island , North Carolina . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Prior to becoming a subtropical cyclone , the low produced gale @-@ force winds and dangerous surf near the coast from North Carolina through Georgia , and later along the coast of Florida . Significant swells were also reported in the Bahamas . The waves caused beach erosion and washed up against coastal houses along the southeast coast of the United States . 
 = = = Southeast U.S. = = = 
 Off the coast of North Carolina , the storm produced 34 @-@ foot ( 10 @-@ m ) waves and storm force winds which damaged three boats ; their combined nine passengers were rescued by the Coast Guard . All nine were injured to some degree ; three endured hypothermia , one received a broken rib , and one Coast Guardsman experienced back injuries from the surf . Another boat and its four occupants were reported missing , and after twelve days they remain missing . Rough waves from the precursor low left two kayakers missing near Seabrook Island , South Carolina . One was found the next day , and the other was found dead a week later . 
 Onshore , winds reached 52 mph ( 84 km / h ) in Norfolk , Virginia , with an unofficial report of 57 mph ( 92 km / h ) near Virginia Beach . Similar observations occurred along the Outer Banks , with the winds knocking some tree limbs onto power lines ; some isolated power outages were reported . Wind damage included some roofs losing shingles from the winds . In Elizabeth City , North Carolina , an outer rainband dropped 0 @.@ 5 inches ( 10 mm ) of precipitation in about two hours as well as several lightning strikes ; one bolt of lightning injured two firefighters . The winds covered portions of North Carolina Highway 12 with sand , and for a day the route was closed after waves from the storm washed out about 200 feet ( 60 m ) of roadway . In some locations , the waves eroded up to 20 feet ( 6 m ) of beach , leaving 70 homes in imminent danger . On St. Simons Island in Georgia , the storm produced a storm tide of 8 @.@ 09 feet ( 2 @.@ 43 m ) . Trace amounts of rainfall occurred in the southeastern portion of the state . 
 = = = Florida = = = 
 In Florida , waves of over 10 feet ( 3 m ) in height capsized a boat near Lantana ; the two occupants were rescued without injury . Additionally , the waves displaced a sailboat that had previously been washed ashore in Juno Beach . Large waves flooded a parking lot and destroyed several fences and tree branches at Jupiter Beach , which resulted in its temporary closure ; nearby a maintenance shed was destroyed . Eight Leatherback Sea Turtle nests in Boca Raton were destroyed after the surf reached the dunes . Due to high surf , the beach pier at Flagler Beach was closed for about a day . Minor to moderate beach erosion caused the Florida Department of Transportation to fill in areas near the seawall with sand . One death occurred when a surfer drowned in the rough waves off the coast at New Smyrna Beach in Volusia County . Outer rainbands produced light rainfall , with the highest report in the Jacksonville National Weather Service area of responsibility totaling 0 @.@ 77 inches ( 20 mm ) ; the bands also caused tropical storm force wind gusts in the northeastern portion of the state . The winds spread smoke from local brush fires through the Tampa Bay area to Miami . High winds from Andrea were reported as fueling severe wildfires in northern Florida and southern Georgia . 
 = October Rebellion = 
 October Rebellion was the collective name for the series of protest events surrounding the fall 2007 meetings of the World Bank and International Monetary Fund on October 19 – 20 , 2007 , in Washington , D.C. , United States . The events were organized by the October Coalition . According to the October Coalition 's call to action , the group demanded an end to all third world debt using the financial institutions ' own resources , the end to structural adjustment policies believed to prioritize profit over the lives of individuals , and an end to social and environmental issues caused by oil and gas production , mining , and certain kinds of infrastructure development . 
 = = Demonstration at Immigration and Customs Enforcement = = 
 Early in the day on October 19 , an estimated 100 activists demonstrated outside the Washington headquarters of the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement , an agency of the Department of Homeland Security . Demonstrators had assembled to express a critical view of the economic and immigration policies of the United States , while chanting , " No justice , no peace ! " According to The Washington Post , " They said that much immigration to the United States was the result of harsh overseas economic policies on the part of the government , the World Bank and the IMF . " 
 = = Georgetown march = = 
 The October Coalition called for " disruptive actions throughout Georgetown , " in a march starting at 9 : 00 PM on October 19 from Washington Circle in Foggy Bottom . In explaining their selection of Georgetown for a march , organizers stated on their Web site , " Georgetown , Washington 's seat of power , is a playground for the rich . Its residents possess enormous wealth at the expense of the poor majority who live so close to them . They live so close , yet a world away , hidden in plain sight . Georgetown embodies neoliberalism . Georgetown is neoliberalism . " A demonstrator at the event described the reason for going to Georgetown as being where the delegates were staying . Prior to the march , the organizers did not outline what specific actions would be taken , nor did they indicate whether or not the group would carry weapons , but encouraged participants to use " creativity " and a " diversity of tactics " . According to The Hoya , it was suggested that 30th and M Streets NW would be a preliminary destination . 
 The night before the march , officials at Georgetown University issued a safety alert , indicating that the demonstration was expected to occur between 6 PM and 11 PM , and was expected to end in Georgetown 's commercial district . The university advised its students to avoid the area , citing an expectation of traffic delays and road closures . 
 According to Josh <unk> , an officer in the Second District of the Metropolitan Police Department of the District of Columbia , there would be an increased police presence throughout the entire city , with no extra precautions taken in Georgetown beyond those being taken throughout the city , while recalling that in the past , protest activity surrounding the World Bank and IMF had been mostly peaceful . 
 At the appointed time , an estimated 200 to 300 demonstrators , many wearing the black clothing and masks characteristic of a black bloc , gathered at Washington Circle before departing with a heavy police escort for Georgetown , via Pennsylvania Avenue and M Street NW . The march turned north at Wisconsin Avenue , before reversing course and returning to M Street . Over the course of the march , newspaper boxes were overturned , objects were thrown , and trash cans were knocked over . Many storefronts were boarded in anticipation of the march . Two <unk> windows were broken at the intersection of Wisconsin Avenue and M Street . Two arrests were made , related to an incident where an officer was pushed from a scooter . 
 The event was marred by an accident involving a female bystander , who was walking with a group of friends when she was struck in the forehead by a brick thrown by a demonstrator . The woman was taken to a nearby hospital for treatment following the incident . The Georgetown march ended at approximately 10 : 30 PM , when , at 29th and M Streets , police ordered the demonstrators to disperse . Most complied with the order . 
 = = March to the World Bank = = 
 On October 20 , 2007 , approximately 500 demonstrators gathered at Franklin Square for a rally and march to the World Bank headquarters at 18th and H Streets . The group consisted of a mix of people , including students , community activists , as well as anarchists dressed for a black bloc . 
 The protest was peaceful , with the exception of an incident in Murrow Park , across the street from the World Bank , where several demonstrators charged the line of police as a group of finance ministers arrived and crossed the police lines for mid @-@ afternoon meetings . Police quickly came in carrying batons and shoving demonstrators , which sent some people running . However , according to Bob Exe , one of the demonstrators , the police line was never charged , but that " some pushing " may have occurred . 
