 Following the scuffle with police , the People 's Tribunal began , which consisted of a panel of six judges , and a line @-@ up of people from countries affected by the policies of the World Bank and the IMF speaking . 
 = Rings of Uranus = 
 The planet Uranus has a system of rings intermediate in complexity between the more extensive set around Saturn and the simpler systems around Jupiter and Neptune . The rings of Uranus were discovered on March 10 , 1977 , by James L. Elliot , Edward W. Dunham , and Jessica Mink . More than 200 years ago , in 1789 , William Herschel also reported observing rings ; some modern astronomers are skeptical that he could have actually seen them , as they are very dark and faint – others are not . 
 By 1978 , nine distinct rings were identified . Two additional rings were discovered in 1986 in images taken by the Voyager 2 spacecraft , and two outer rings were found in 2003 – 2005 in Hubble Space Telescope photos . In the order of increasing distance from the planet the 13 known rings are designated 1986U2R / ζ , 6 , 5 , 4 , α , β , η , γ , δ , λ , ε , ν and μ . Their radii range from about 38 @,@ 000 km for the 1986U2R / ζ ring to about 98 @,@ 000 km for the μ ring . Additional faint dust bands and incomplete arcs may exist between the main rings . The rings are extremely dark — the Bond albedo of the rings ' particles does not exceed 2 % . They are probably composed of water ice with the addition of some dark radiation @-@ processed organics . 
 The majority of Uranus 's rings are opaque and only a few kilometers wide . The ring system contains little dust overall ; it consists mostly of large bodies 0 @.@ 2 – 20 m in diameter . However , some rings are optically thin : the broad and faint 1986U2R / ζ , μ and ν rings are made of small dust particles , while the narrow and faint λ ring also contains larger bodies . The relative lack of dust in the ring system is due to aerodynamic drag from the extended Uranian exosphere — corona . 
 The rings of Uranus are thought to be relatively young , at not more than 600 million years old . The Uranian ring system probably originated from the collisional fragmentation of a number of moons that once existed around the planet . After colliding , the moons probably broke up into numerous particles , which survived as narrow and optically dense rings only in strictly confined zones of maximum stability . 
 The mechanism that confines the narrow rings is not well understood . Initially it was assumed that every narrow ring had a pair of nearby shepherd moons corralling them into shape . However , in 1986 Voyager 2 discovered only one such shepherd pair ( Cordelia and Ophelia ) around the brightest ring ( 11 rings ) . 
 = = Discovery = = 
 The first mention of a Uranian ring system comes from William Herschel 's notes detailing his observations of Uranus in the 18th century , which include the following passage : " February 22 , 1789 : A ring was suspected " . Herschel drew a small diagram of the ring and noted that it was " a little inclined to the red " . The Keck Telescope in Hawaii has since confirmed this to be the case , at least for the ν ring . Herschel 's notes were published in a Royal Society journal in 1797 . However , in the two centuries between 1797 and 1977 the rings are rarely mentioned , if at all . This casts serious doubt on whether Herschel could have seen anything of the sort while hundreds of other astronomers saw nothing . Still , it has been claimed by some that Herschel gave accurate descriptions of the ν ring 's size relative to Uranus , its changes as Uranus travelled around the Sun , and its color . 
 The definitive discovery of the Uranian Rings was made by astronomers James L. Elliot , Edward W. Dunham , and Jessica Mink on March 10 , 1977 , using the Kuiper Airborne Observatory , and was serendipitous . They planned to use the occultation of the star SAO <unk> by Uranus to study the planet 's atmosphere . However , when their observations were analyzed , they found that the star disappeared briefly from view five times both before and after it was eclipsed by the planet . They deduced that a system of narrow rings was present . The five occultation events they observed were denoted by the Greek letters α , β , γ , δ and ε in their papers . These designations have been used as the rings ' names since then . Later they found four additional rings : one between the β and γ rings and three inside the α ring . The former was named the η ring . The latter were dubbed rings 4 , 5 and 6 — according to the numbering of the occultation events in one paper . Uranus 's ring system was the second to be discovered in the Solar System , after that of Saturn . 
 The rings were directly imaged when the Voyager 2 spacecraft flew through the Uranian system in 1986 . Two more faint rings were revealed , bringing the total to eleven . The Hubble Space Telescope detected an additional pair of previously unseen rings in 2003 – 2005 , bringing the total number known to 13 . The discovery of these outer rings doubled the known radius of the ring system . Hubble also imaged two small satellites for the first time , one of which , Mab , shares its orbit with the outermost newly discovered ring . 
 = = General properties = = 
 As currently understood , the ring system of Uranus comprises thirteen distinct rings . In order of increasing distance from the planet they are : 1986U2R / ζ , 6 , 5 , 4 , α , β , η , γ , δ , λ , ε , ν , μ rings . They can be divided into three groups : nine narrow main rings ( 6 , 5 , 4 , α , β , η , γ , δ , ε ) , two dusty rings ( 1986U2R / ζ , λ ) and two outer rings ( μ , ν ) . The rings of Uranus consist mainly of macroscopic particles and little dust , although dust is known to be present in 1986U2R / ζ , η , δ , λ , ν and μ rings . In addition to these well @-@ known rings , there may be numerous optically thin dust bands and faint rings between them . These faint rings and dust bands may exist only temporarily or consist of a number of separate arcs , which are sometimes detected during occultations . Some of them became visible during a series of ring plane @-@ crossing events in 2007 . A number of dust bands between the rings were observed in forward @-@ scattering geometry by Voyager 2 . All rings of Uranus show azimuthal brightness variations . 
 The rings are made of an extremely dark material . The geometric albedo of the ring particles does not exceed 5 – 6 % , while the Bond albedo is even lower — about 2 % . The rings particles demonstrate a steep opposition surge — an increase of the albedo when the phase angle is close to zero . This means that their albedo is much lower when they are observed slightly off the opposition . The rings are slightly red in the ultraviolet and visible parts of the spectrum and grey in near @-@ infrared . They exhibit no identifiable spectral features . The chemical composition of the ring particles is not known . However , they cannot be made of pure water ice like the rings of Saturn because they are too dark , darker than the inner moons of Uranus . This indicates that they are probably composed of a mixture of the ice and a dark material . The nature of this material is not clear , but it may be organic compounds considerably darkened by the charged particle irradiation from the Uranian magnetosphere . The rings ' particles may consist of a heavily processed material which was initially similar to that of the inner moons . 
 As a whole , the ring system of Uranus is unlike either the faint dusty rings of Jupiter or the broad and complex rings of Saturn , some of which are composed of very bright material — water ice . However , there are similarities with some parts of the latter ring system ; the Saturnian F ring and the ε ring are both narrow , relatively dark and are shepherded by a pair of moons . The newly discovered outer rings of Uranus are similar to the outer G and E rings of Saturn . Narrow ringlets existing in the broad Saturnian rings also resemble the narrow rings of Uranus . In addition , dust bands observed between the main rings of Uranus may be similar to the rings of Jupiter . In contrast , the Neptunian ring system is quite similar to that of Uranus , although it is less complex , darker and contains more dust ; the Neptunian rings are also positioned further from the planet . 
 = = Narrow main rings = = 
 = = = ε ring = = = 
 The ε ring is the brightest and densest part of the Uranian ring system , and is responsible for about two @-@ thirds of the light reflected by the rings . While it is the most eccentric of the Uranian rings , it has negligible orbital inclination . The ring 's eccentricity causes its brightness to vary over the course of its orbit . The radially integrated brightness of the ε ring is highest near apoapsis and lowest near periapsis . The maximum / minimum brightness ratio is about 2 @.@ 5 – 3 @.@ 0 . These variations are connected with the variations of the ring width , which is 19 @.@ 7 km at the periapsis and 96 @.@ 4 km at the apoapsis . As the ring becomes wider , the amount of shadowing between particles decreases and more of them come into view , leading to higher integrated brightness . The width variations were measured directly from Voyager 2 images , as the ε ring was one of only two rings resolved by Voyager ’ s cameras . Such behavior indicates that the ring is not optically thin . Indeed , occultation observations conducted from the ground and the spacecraft showed that its normal optical depth varies between 0 @.@ 5 and 2 @.@ 5 , being highest near the periapsis . The equivalent depth of the ε ring is around 47 km and is invariant around the orbit . 
 The geometric thickness of the ε ring is not precisely known , although the ring is certainly very thin — by some estimates as thin as 150 m . Despite such infinitesimal thickness , it consists of several layers of particles . The ε ring is a rather crowded place with a filling factor near the apoapsis estimated by different sources at from 0 @.@ 008 to 0 @.@ 06 . The mean size of the ring particles is 0 @.@ 2 – 20 @.@ 0 m , and the mean separation is around 4 @.@ 5 times their radius . The ring is almost devoid of dust , possibly due to the aerodynamic drag from Uranus 's extended atmospheric corona . Due to its razor @-@ thin nature the ε ring disappears when viewed edge @-@ on . This happened in 2007 when a ring plane @-@ crossing was observed . 
 The Voyager 2 spacecraft observed a strange signal from the ε ring during the radio occultation experiment . The signal looked like a strong enhancement of the forward @-@ scattering at the wavelength 3 @.@ 6 cm near ring ’ s apoapsis . Such strong scattering requires the existence of a coherent structure . That the ε ring does have such a fine structure has been confirmed by many occultation observations . The ε ring seems to consist of a number of narrow and optically dense ringlets , some of which may have incomplete arcs . 
 The ε ring is known to have interior and exterior shepherd moons — Cordelia and Ophelia , respectively . The inner edge of the ring is in 24 : 25 resonance with Cordelia , and the outer edge is in 14 : 13 resonance with Ophelia . The masses of the moons need to be at least three times the mass of the ring to confine it effectively . The mass of the ε ring is estimated to be about 1016 kg . 
 = = = δ ring = = = 
 The δ ring is circular and slightly inclined . It shows significant unexplained azimuthal variations in normal optical depth and width . One possible explanation is that the ring has an azimuthal wave @-@ like structure , excited by a small moonlet just inside it . The sharp outer edge of the δ ring is in 23 : 22 resonance with Cordelia . The δ ring consists of two components : a narrow optically dense component and a broad inward shoulder with low optical depth . The width of the narrow component is 4 @.@ 1 – 6 @.@ 1 km and the equivalent depth is about 2 @.@ 2 km , which corresponds to a normal optical depth of about 0 @.@ 3 – 0 @.@ 6 . The ring 's broad component is about 10 – 12 km wide and its equivalent depth is close to 0 @.@ 3 km , indicating a low normal optical depth of 3 × 10 − 2 . This is known only from occultation data because Voyager 2 's imaging experiment failed to resolve the δ ring . When observed in forward @-@ scattering geometry by Voyager 2 , the δ ring appeared relatively bright , which is compatible with the presence of dust in its broad component . The broad component is geometrically thicker than the narrow component . This is supported by the observations of a ring plane @-@ crossing event in 2007 , when the δ ring remained visible , which is consistent with the behavior of a simultaneously geometrically thick and optically thin ring . 
 = = = γ ring = = = 
 The γ ring is narrow , optically dense and slightly eccentric . Its orbital inclination is almost zero . The width of the ring varies in the range 3 @.@ 6 – 4 @.@ 7 km , although equivalent optical depth is constant at 3 @.@ 3 km . The normal optical depth of the γ ring is 0 @.@ 7 – 0 @.@ 9 . During a ring plane @-@ crossing event in 2007 the γ ring disappeared , which means it is geometrically thin like the ε ring and devoid of dust . The width and normal optical depth of the γ ring show significant azimuthal variations . The mechanism of confinement of such a narrow ring is not known , but it has been noticed that the sharp inner edge of the γ ring is in a 6 : 5 resonance with Ophelia . 
 = = = η ring = = = 
 The η ring has zero orbital eccentricity and inclination . Like the δ ring , it consists of two components : a narrow optically dense component and a broad outward shoulder with low optical depth . The width of the narrow component is 1 @.@ 9 – 2 @.@ 7 km and the equivalent depth is about 0 @.@ 42 km , which corresponds to the normal optical depth of about 0 @.@ 16 – 0 @.@ 25 . The broad component is about 40 km wide and its equivalent depth is close to 0 @.@ 85 km , indicating a low normal optical depth of 2 × 10 − 2 . It was resolved in Voyager 2 images . In forward @-@ scattered light , the η ring looked bright , which indicated the presence of a considerable amount of dust in this ring , probably in the broad component . The broad component is much thicker ( geometrically ) than the narrow one . This conclusion is supported by the observations of a ring plane @-@ crossing event in 2007 , when the η ring demonstrated increased brightness , becoming the second brightest feature in the ring system . This is consistent with the behavior of a geometrically thick but simultaneously optically thin ring . Like the majority of other rings , the η ring shows significant azimuthal variations in the normal optical depth and width . The narrow component even vanishes in some places . 
 = = = α and β rings = = = 
 After the ε ring , the α and β rings are the brightest of Uranus 's rings . Like the ε ring , they exhibit regular variations in brightness and width . They are brightest and widest 30 ° from the apoapsis and dimmest and narrowest 30 ° from the periapsis . The α and β rings have sizable orbital eccentricity and non @-@ negligible inclination . The widths of these rings are 4 @.@ 8 – 10 km and 6 @.@ 1 – 11 @.@ 4 km , respectively . The equivalent optical depths are 3 @.@ 29 km and 2 @.@ 14 km , resulting in normal optical depths of 0 @.@ 3 – 0 @.@ 7 and 0 @.@ 2 – 0 @.@ 35 , respectively . During a ring plane @-@ crossing event in 2007 the rings disappeared , which means they are geometrically thin like the ε ring and devoid of dust . However , the same event revealed a thick and optically thin dust band just outside the β ring , which was also observed earlier by Voyager 2 . The masses of the α and β rings are estimated to be about 5 × 1015 kg ( each ) — half the mass of the ε ring . 
 = = = Rings 6 , 5 and 4 = = = 
 Rings 6 , 5 and 4 are the innermost and dimmest of Uranus 's narrow rings . They are the most inclined rings , and their orbital eccentricities are the largest excluding the ε ring . In fact , their inclinations ( 0 @.@ 06 ° , 0 @.@ 05 ° and 0 @.@ 03 ° ) were large enough for Voyager 2 to observe their elevations above the Uranian equatorial plane , which were 24 – 46 km . Rings 6 , 5 and 4 are also the narrowest rings of Uranus , measuring 1 @.@ 6 – 2 @.@ 2 km , 1 @.@ 9 – 4 @.@ 9 km and 2 @.@ 4 – 4 @.@ 4 km wide , respectively . Their equivalent depths are 0 @.@ 41 km , 0 @.@ 91 and 0 @.@ 71 km resulting in normal optical depth 0 @.@ 18 – 0 @.@ 25 , 0 @.@ 18 – 0 @.@ 48 and 0 @.@ 16 – 0 @.@ 3 . They were not visible during a ring plane @-@ crossing event in 2007 due to their narrowness and lack of dust . 
 = = Dusty rings = = 
 = = = λ ring = = = 
 The λ ring was one of two rings discovered by Voyager 2 in 1986 . It is a narrow , faint ring located just inside the ε ring , between it and the shepherd moon Cordelia . This moon clears a dark lane just inside the λ ring . When viewed in back @-@ scattered light , the λ ring is extremely narrow — about 1 – 2 km — and has the equivalent optical depth 0 @.@ 1 – 0 @.@ 2 km at the wavelength 2 @.@ 2 μm . The normal optical depth is 0 @.@ 1 – 0 @.@ 2 . The optical depth of the λ ring shows strong wavelength dependence , which is atypical for the Uranian ring system . The equivalent depth is as high as 0 @.@ 36 km in the ultraviolet part of the spectrum , which explains why λ ring was initially detected only in UV stellar occultations by Voyager 2 . The detection during a stellar occultation at the wavelength 2 @.@ 2 μm was only announced in 1996 . 
 The appearance of the λ ring changed dramatically when it was observed in forward @-@ scattered light in 1986 . In this geometry the ring became the brightest feature of the Uranian ring system , outshining the ε ring . This observation , together with the wavelength dependence of the optical depth , indicates that the λ ring contains significant amount of micrometer @-@ sized dust . The normal optical depth of this dust is 10 − 4 – 10 − 3 . Observations in 2007 by the Keck telescope during the ring plane @-@ crossing event confirmed this conclusion , because the λ ring became one of the brightest features in the Uranian ring system . 
 Detailed analysis of the Voyager 2 images revealed azimuthal variations in the brightness of the λ ring . The variations appear to be periodic , resembling a standing wave . The origin of this fine structure in the λ ring remains a mystery . 
 = = = 1986U2R / ζ ring = = = 
 In 1986 Voyager 2 detected a broad and faint sheet of material inward of ring 6 . This ring was given the temporary designation 1986U2R . It had a normal optical depth of 10 − 3 or less and was extremely faint . It was visible only in a single Voyager 2 image . The ring was located between 37 @,@ 000 and 39 @,@ 500 km from the centre of Uranus , or only about 12 @,@ 000 km above the clouds . It was not observed again until 2003 – 2004 , when the Keck telescope found a broad and faint sheet of material just inside ring 6 . This ring was dubbed the ζ ring . However the position of the recovered ζ ring differs significantly from that observed in 1986 . Now it is situated between 37 @,@ 850 and 41 @,@ 350 km from the centre of the planet . There is an inward gradually fading extension reaching to at least 32 @,@ 600 km , or possibly even to 27 @,@ 000 km — to the atmosphere of Uranus . 
 The ζ ring was observed again during the ring plane @-@ crossing event in 2007 when it became the brightest feature of the ring system , outshining all other rings combined . The equivalent optical depth of this ring is near 1 km ( 0 @.@ 6 km for the inward extension ) , while the normal optical depth is again less than 10 − 3 . Rather different appearances of the 1986U2R and ζ rings may be caused by different viewing geometries : back @-@ scattering geometry in 2003 – 2007 and side @-@ scattering geometry in 1986 . However , changes during the past 20 years in the distribution of dust , which is thought to predominate in the ring , cannot be ruled out . 
 = = = Other dust bands = = = 
 In addition to the 1986U2R / ζ and λ rings , there are other extremely faint dust bands in the Uranian ring system . They are invisible during occultations because they have negligible optical depth , though they are bright in forward @-@ scattered light . Voyager 2 's images of forward @-@ scattered light revealed the existence of bright dust bands between the λ and δ rings , between the η and β rings , and between the α ring and ring 4 . Many of these bands were detected again in 2003 – 2004 by the Keck Telescope and during the 2007 ring @-@ plane crossing event in <unk> light , but their precise locations and relative brightnesses were different from during the Voyager observations . The normal optical depth of the dust bands is about 10 − 5 or less . The dust particle size distribution is thought to obey a power law with the index p = 2 @.@ 5 ± 0 @.@ 5 . 
 In addition to separate dust bands the system of Uranian rings appears to be immersed into wide and faint sheet of dust with the normal optical depth not exceeding 10 − 3 . 
 = = Outer ring system = = 
 In 2003 – 2005 , the Hubble Space Telescope detected a pair of previously unknown rings , now called the outer ring system , which brought the number of known Uranian rings to 13 . These rings were subsequently named the μ and ν rings . The μ ring is the outermost of the pair , and is twice the distance from the planet as the bright η ring . The outer rings differ from the inner narrow rings in a number of respects . They are broad , 17 @,@ 000 and 3 @,@ 800 km wide , respectively , and very faint . Their peak normal optical depths are 8 @.@ 5 × 10 − 6 and 5 @.@ 4 × 10 − 6 , respectively . The resulting equivalent optical depths are 0 @.@ 14 km and 0 @.@ 012 km . The rings have triangular radial brightness profiles . 
 The peak brightness of the μ ring lies almost exactly on the orbit of the small Uranian moon Mab , which is probably the source of the ring ’ s particles . The ν ring is positioned between Portia and Rosalind and does not contain any moons inside it . A reanalysis of the Voyager 2 images of forward @-@ scattered light clearly reveals the μ and ν rings . In this geometry the rings are much brighter , which indicates that they contain much micrometer @-@ sized dust . The outer rings of Uranus may be similar to the G and E rings of Saturn as E ring is extremely broad and receives dust from Enceladus . 
 The μ ring may consist entirely of dust , without any large particles at all . This hypothesis is supported by observations performed by the Keck telescope , which failed to detect the μ ring in the near infrared at 2 @.@ 2 μm , but detected the ν ring . This failure means that the μ ring is blue in color , which in turn indicates that very small ( <unk> ) dust predominates within it . The dust may be made of water ice . In contrast , the ν ring is slightly red in color . 
 = = Dynamics and origin = = 
 An outstanding problem concerning the physics governing the narrow Uranian rings is their confinement . Without some mechanism to hold their particles together , the rings would quickly spread out radially . The lifetime of the Uranian rings without such a mechanism cannot be more than 1 million years . The most widely cited model for such confinement , proposed initially by <unk> and Tremaine , is that a pair of nearby moons , outer and inner shepherds , interact gravitationally with a ring and act like sinks and donors , respectively , for excessive and insufficient angular momentum ( or equivalently , energy ) . The shepherds thus keep ring particles in place , but gradually move away from the ring themselves . To be effective , the masses of the shepherds should exceed the mass of the ring by at least a factor of two to three . This mechanism is known to be at work in the case of the ε ring , where Cordelia and Ophelia serve as shepherds . Cordelia is also the outer shepherd of the δ ring , and Ophelia is the outer shepherd of the γ ring . However no moon larger than 10 km is known in the vicinity of other rings . The current distance of Cordelia and Ophelia from the ε ring can be used to estimate the ring ’ s age . The calculations show that the ε ring cannot be older than 600 million years . 
 Since the rings of Uranus appear to be young , they must be continuously renewed by the collisional fragmentation of larger bodies . The estimates show that the lifetime against collisional disruption of a moon with the size like that of Puck is a few billion years . The lifetime of a smaller satellite is much shorter . Therefore , all current inner moons and rings can be products of disruption of several Puck @-@ sized satellites during the last four and half billion years . Every such disruption would have started a collisional cascade that quickly ground almost all large bodies into much smaller particles , including dust . Eventually the majority of mass was lost , and particles survived only in positions that were stabilized by mutual resonances and shepherding . The end product of such a disruptive evolution would be a system of narrow rings . However , a few moonlets must still be embedded within the rings at present . The maximum size of such moonlets is probably around 10 km . 
 The origin of the dust bands is less problematic . The dust has a very short lifetime , 100 – 1000 years , and should be continuously replenished by collisions between larger ring particles , moonlets and meteoroids from outside the Uranian system . The belts of the parent moonlets and particles are themselves invisible due to their low optical depth , while the dust reveals itself in forward @-@ scattered light . The narrow main rings and the moonlet belts that create dust bands are expected to differ in particle size distribution . The main rings have more centimeter to meter @-@ sized bodies . Such a distribution increases the surface area of the material in the rings , leading to high optical density in back @-@ scattered light . In contrast , the dust bands have relatively few large particles , which results in low optical depth . 
 = = Exploration = = 
 The rings were thoroughly investigated during the Voyager 2 spacecraft 's flyby of Uranus in January 1986 . Two new faint rings — λ and 1986U2R — were discovered bringing the total number then known to eleven . Rings were studied by analysing results of radio , ultraviolet and optical occultations . Voyager 2 observed the rings in different geometries relative to the sun , producing images with back @-@ scattered , forward @-@ scattered and side @-@ scattered light . Analysis of these images allowed derivation of the complete phase function , geometrical and Bond albedo of ring particles . Two rings — ε and η — were resolved in the images revealing a complicated fine structure . Analysis of Voyager 's images also led to discovery of 10 inner moons of Uranus , including the two shepherd moons of the ε ring — Cordelia and Ophelia . 
 = = List of properties = = 
 This table summarizes the properties of the planetary ring system of Uranus . 
 = Marie Curie = 
 Marie Skłodowska Curie ( / <unk> , <unk> / ; French : [ <unk> ] ; Polish : [ <unk> ] ; 7 November 1867 – 4 July 1934 ) , born Maria Salomea Skłodowska [ <unk> <unk> <unk> ] , was a Polish and naturalized @-@ French physicist and chemist who conducted pioneering research on radioactivity . She was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize , the first person and only woman to win twice , the only person to win twice in multiple sciences , and was part of the Curie family legacy of five Nobel Prizes . She was also the first woman to become a professor at the University of Paris , and in 1995 became the first woman to be entombed on her own merits in the Panthéon in Paris . 
 She was born in Warsaw , in what was then the Kingdom of Poland , part of the Russian Empire . She studied at Warsaw 's clandestine Floating University and began her practical scientific training in Warsaw . In 1891 , aged 24 , she followed her older sister Bronisława to study in Paris , where she earned her higher degrees and conducted her subsequent scientific work . She shared the 1903 Nobel Prize in Physics with her husband Pierre Curie and with physicist Henri Becquerel . She won the 1911 Nobel Prize in Chemistry . 
 Her achievements included the development of the theory of radioactivity ( a term that she coined ) , techniques for isolating radioactive isotopes , and the discovery of two elements , polonium and radium . Under her direction , the world 's first studies were conducted into the treatment of neoplasms , using radioactive isotopes . She founded the Curie Institutes in Paris and in Warsaw , which remain major centres of medical research today . During World War I , she established the first military field radiological centres . 
 While a French citizen , Marie Skłodowska Curie ( she used both surnames ) never lost her sense of Polish identity . She taught her daughters the Polish language and took them on visits to Poland . She named the first chemical element that she discovered ‍ — ‌ polonium , which she isolated in 1898 ‍ — ‌ after her native country . 
 Curie died in 1934 , aged 66 , at a sanatorium in Sancellemoz ( Haute @-@ Savoie ) , France , due to aplastic anemia brought on by exposure to radiation while carrying test tubes of radium in her pockets during research , and in the course of her service in World War I mobile X @-@ ray units that she had set up . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Maria Skłodowska was born in Warsaw , in the Russian partition of Poland , on 7 November 1867 , the fifth and youngest child of well @-@ known teachers Bronisława , née <unk> , and Władysław Skłodowski . The elder siblings of Maria ( nickname : Mania ) were Zofia ( born 1862 , nickname : Zosia ) , Józef ( born 1863 , nickname : <unk> ) , Bronisława ( born 1865 , nickname : <unk> ) and Helena ( born 1866 , nickname : Hela ) . 
 On both the paternal and maternal sides , the family had lost their property and fortunes through patriotic involvements in Polish national uprisings aimed at restoring Poland 's independence ( the most recent had been the January Uprising of 1863 – 65 ) . This condemned the subsequent generation , including Maria , her elder sisters and her brother , to a difficult struggle to get ahead in life . 
 Maria 's paternal grandfather , Józef Skłodowski , had been a respected teacher in Lublin , where he taught the young Bolesław Prus , who would become a leading figure in Polish literature . Her father , Władysław Skłodowski , taught mathematics and physics , subjects that Maria was to pursue , and was also director of two Warsaw gymnasia for boys . After Russian authorities eliminated laboratory instruction from the Polish schools , he brought much of the laboratory equipment home , and instructed his children in its use . 
 The father was eventually fired by his Russian supervisors for pro @-@ Polish sentiments , and forced to take lower @-@ paying posts ; the family also lost money on a bad investment , and eventually chose to supplement their income by lodging boys in the house . Maria 's mother Bronisława operated a prestigious Warsaw boarding school for girls ; she resigned from the position after Maria was born . She died of tuberculosis in May 1878 , when Maria was ten years old . Less than three years earlier , Maria 's oldest sibling , Zofia , had died of typhus contracted from a boarder . Maria 's father was an atheist ; her mother a devout Catholic . The deaths of Maria 's mother and sister caused her to give up Catholicism and become agnostic . 
 When she was ten years old , Maria began attending the boarding school of J. <unk> ; next she attended a gymnasium for girls , from which she graduated on 12 June 1883 with a gold medal . After a collapse , possibly due to depression , she spent the following year in the countryside with relatives of her father , and the next year with her father in Warsaw , where she did some tutoring . Unable to enroll in a regular institution of higher education because she was a woman , she and her sister Bronisława became involved with the clandestine Flying University , a Polish patriotic institution of higher learning that admitted women students . 
 Maria made an agreement with her sister , Bronisława , that she would give her financial assistance during Bronisława 's medical studies in Paris , in exchange for similar assistance two years later . In connection with this , Maria took a position as governess : first as a home tutor in Warsaw ; then for two years as a governess in <unk> with a landed family , the <unk> , who were relatives of her father . While working for the latter family , she fell in love with their son , Kazimierz Żorawski , a future eminent mathematician . His parents rejected the idea of his marrying the penniless relative , and Kazimierz was unable to oppose them . Maria 's loss of the relationship with Żorawski was tragic for both . He soon earned a doctorate and pursued an academic career as a mathematician , becoming a professor and rector of Kraków University . Still , as an old man and a mathematics professor at the Warsaw Polytechnic , he would sit contemplatively before the statue of Maria Skłodowska which had been erected in 1935 before the Radium Institute that she had founded in 1932 . 
 At the beginning of 1890 , Bronisława — who a few months earlier had married Kazimierz <unk> , a Polish physician and social and political activist — invited Maria to join them in Paris . Maria declined because she could not afford the university tuition ; it would take her a year and a half longer to gather the necessary funds . She was helped by her father , who was able to secure a more lucrative position again . All that time she continued to educate herself , reading books , exchanging letters , and being tutored herself . In early 1889 she returned home to her father in Warsaw . She continued working as a governess , and remained there till late 1891 . She tutored , studied at the Flying University , and began her practical scientific training ( 1890 – 91 ) in a chemical laboratory at the Museum of Industry and Agriculture at Krakowskie Przedmieście 66 , near Warsaw 's Old Town . The laboratory was run by her cousin Józef <unk> , who had been an assistant in Saint Petersburg to the Russian chemist Dmitri Mendeleev . 
 = = = New life in Paris = = = 
 In late 1891 , she left Poland for France . In Paris , Maria ( or Marie , as she would be known in France ) briefly found shelter with her sister and brother @-@ in @-@ law before renting a garret closer to the university , in the Latin Quarter , and proceeding with her studies of physics , chemistry , and mathematics at the University of Paris , where she enrolled in late 1891 . She subsisted on her meager resources , suffering from cold winters and occasionally fainting from hunger . 
 Skłodowska studied during the day and tutored evenings , barely earning her keep . In 1893 , she was awarded a degree in physics and began work in an industrial laboratory of Professor Gabriel Lippmann . Meanwhile , she continued studying at the University of Paris , and with the aid of a fellowship she was able to earn a second degree in 1894 . 
 Marie had begun her scientific career in Paris with an investigation of the magnetic properties of various steels , commissioned by the Society for the Encouragement of National Industry ( Société d 'encouragement pour l 'industrie nationale [ 1 ] ) . That same year Pierre Curie entered her life ; it was their mutual interest in natural sciences that drew them together . Pierre was an instructor at the School of Physics and Chemistry , the École supérieure de physique et de chimie industrielles de la ville de Paris ( ESPCI ) . They were introduced by the Polish physicist , Professor Józef Wierusz @-@ Kowalski , who had learned that Marie was looking for a larger laboratory space , something that Wierusz @-@ Kowalski thought Pierre had access to . Though Pierre did not have a large laboratory , he was able to find some space for Marie where she was able to begin work . 
 Their mutual passion for science brought them increasingly closer , and they began to develop feelings for one another . Eventually Pierre proposed marriage , but at first Marie did not accept as she was still planning to go back to her native country . Pierre , however , declared that he was ready to move with her to Poland , even if it meant being reduced to teaching French . Meanwhile , for the 1894 summer break , Marie returned to Warsaw , where she visited her family . She was still laboring under the illusion that she would be able to work in her chosen field in Poland , but she was denied a place at Kraków University because she was a woman . A letter from Pierre convinced her to return to Paris to pursue a Ph.D. At Marie 's insistence , Pierre had written up his research on magnetism and received his own doctorate in March 1895 ; he was also promoted to professor at the School . A contemporary quip would call Marie , " Pierre 's biggest discovery . " On 26 July 1895 they were married in Sceaux ( Seine ) ; neither wanted a religious service . Marie 's dark blue outfit , worn instead of a bridal gown , would serve her for many years as a laboratory outfit . They shared two pastimes : long bicycle trips , and journeys abroad , which brought them even closer . In Pierre , Marie had found a new love , a partner , and a scientific collaborator on whom she could depend . 
 = = = New elements = = = 
 In 1895 , Wilhelm Roentgen discovered the existence of X @-@ rays , though the mechanism behind their production was not yet understood . In 1896 , Henri Becquerel discovered that uranium salts emitted rays that resembled X @-@ rays in their penetrating power . He demonstrated that this radiation , unlike phosphorescence , did not depend on an external source of energy but seemed to arise spontaneously from uranium itself . Influenced by these two important discoveries , Marie decided to look into uranium rays as a possible field of research for a thesis . 
 She used an innovative technique to investigate samples . Fifteen years earlier , her husband and his brother had developed a version of the electrometer , a sensitive device for measuring electric charge . Using Pierre 's electrometer , she discovered that uranium rays caused the air around a sample to conduct electricity . Using this technique , her first result was the finding that the activity of the uranium compounds depended only on the quantity of uranium present . She hypothesized that the radiation was not the outcome of some interaction of molecules but must come from the atom itself . This hypothesis was an important step in disproving the ancient assumption that atoms were indivisible . 
 In 1897 , her daughter Irène was born . To support her family , Curie began teaching at the École Normale Supérieure . The Curies did not have a dedicated laboratory ; most of their research was carried out in a converted shed next to the School of Physics and Chemistry . The shed , formerly a medical school dissecting room , was poorly ventilated and not even waterproof . They were unaware of the deleterious effects of radiation exposure attendant on their continued unprotected work with radioactive substances . The School did not sponsor her research , but she would receive subsidies from metallurgical and mining companies and from various organizations and governments . 
 Curie 's systematic studies included two uranium minerals , pitchblende and torbernite ( also known as chalcolite ) . Her electrometer showed that pitchblende was four times as active as uranium itself , and chalcolite twice as active . She concluded that , if her earlier results relating the quantity of uranium to its activity were correct , then these two minerals must contain small quantities of another substance that was far more active than uranium . She began a systematic search for additional substances that emit radiation , and by 1898 she discovered that the element thorium was also radioactive . 
 Pierre was increasingly intrigued by her work . By mid @-@ 1898 he was so invested in it that he decided to drop his work on crystals and to join her . 
 The [ research ] idea [ writes Reid ] was her own ; no one helped her formulate it , and although she took it to her husband for his opinion she clearly established her ownership of it . She later recorded the fact twice in her biography of her husband to ensure there was no chance whatever of any ambiguity . It [ is ] likely that already at this early stage of her career [ she ] realized that ... many scientists would find it difficult to believe that a woman could be capable of the original work in which she was involved . 
 She was acutely aware of the importance of promptly publishing her discoveries and thus establishing her priority . Had not Becquerel , two years earlier , presented his discovery to the Académie des Sciences the day after he made it , credit for the discovery of radioactivity , and even a Nobel Prize , would instead have gone to Silvanus Thompson . Curie chose the same rapid means of publication . Her paper , giving a brief and simple account of her work , was presented for her to the Académie on 12 April 1898 by her former professor , Gabriel Lippmann . Even so , just as Thompson had been beaten by Becquerel , so Curie was beaten in the race to tell of her discovery that thorium gives off rays in the same way as uranium ; two months earlier , Gerhard Carl Schmidt had published his own finding in Berlin . 
 At that time , no one else in the world of physics had noticed what Curie recorded in a sentence of her paper , describing how much greater were the activities of pitchblende and chalcolite than uranium itself : " The fact is very remarkable , and leads to the belief that these minerals may contain an element which is much more active than uranium . " She later would recall how she felt " a passionate desire to verify this hypothesis as rapidly as possible . " On 14 April 1898 , the Curies optimistically weighed out a 100 @-@ gram sample of pitchblende and ground it with a pestle and mortar . They did not realize at the time that what they were searching for was present in such minute quantities that they would eventually have to process tons of the ore . 
 In July 1898 , Curie and her husband published a joint paper announcing the existence of an element which they named " polonium " , in honour of her native Poland , which would for another twenty years remain partitioned among three empires . On 26 December 1898 , the Curies announced the existence of a second element , which they named " radium " , from the Latin word for " ray " . In the course of their research , they also coined the word " radioactivity " . 
 To prove their discoveries beyond any doubt , the Curies sought to isolate polonium and radium in pure form . Pitchblende is a complex mineral ; the chemical separation of its constituents was an arduous task . The discovery of polonium had been relatively easy ; chemically it resembles the element bismuth , and polonium was the only bismuth @-@ like substance in the ore . Radium , however , was more elusive ; it is closely related chemically to barium , and pitchblende contains both elements . By 1898 the Curies had obtained traces of radium , but appreciable quantities , uncontaminated with barium , were still beyond reach . The Curies undertook the arduous task of separating out radium salt by differential crystallization . From a ton of pitchblende , one @-@ tenth of a gram of radium chloride was separated in 1902 . In 1910 , Marie Curie isolated pure radium metal . She never succeeded in isolating polonium , which has a half @-@ life of only 138 days . 
 Between 1898 and 1902 , the Curies published , jointly or separately , a total of 32 scientific papers , including one that announced that , when exposed to radium , diseased , tumor @-@ forming cells were destroyed faster than healthy cells . 
 In 1900 , Curie became the first woman faculty member at the École Normale Supérieure , and her husband joined the faculty of the University of Paris . In 1902 she visited Poland on the occasion of her father 's death . 
 In June 1903 , supervised by Gabriel Lippmann , Curie was awarded her doctorate from the University of Paris . That month the couple were invited to the Royal Institution in London to give a speech on radioactivity ; being a woman , she was prevented from speaking , and Pierre alone was allowed to . Meanwhile , a new industry began developing , based on radium . The Curies did not patent their discovery and benefited little from this increasingly profitable business . 
 = = = Nobel Prizes = = = 
 In December 1903 , the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences awarded Pierre Curie , Marie Curie , and Henri Becquerel the Nobel Prize in Physics , " in recognition of the extraordinary services they have rendered by their joint researches on the radiation phenomena discovered by Professor Henri Becquerel . " At first , the Committee intended to honour only Pierre and Becquerel , but one of the committee members and an advocate of woman scientists , Swedish mathematician Magnus <unk> Mittag @-@ Leffler , alerted Pierre to the situation , and after his complaint , Marie 's name was added to the nomination . Marie was the first woman to be awarded a Nobel Prize . 
 Curie and her husband declined to go to Stockholm to receive the prize in person ; they were too busy with their work , and Pierre , who disliked public ceremonies , was feeling increasingly ill . As Nobel laureates were required to deliver a lecture , the Curies finally undertook the trip in 1905 . The award money allowed the Curies to hire their first laboratory assistant . Following the award of the Nobel Prize , and galvanized by an offer from the University of Geneva , which offered Pierre a position , the University of Paris gave Pierre a professorship and the chair of physics , although the Curies still did not have a proper laboratory . Upon Pierre 's complaint , the University of Paris relented and agreed to furnish a new laboratory , but it would not be ready until 1906 . 
 In December 1904 , Curie gave birth to their second daughter , Ève . She later hired Polish governesses to teach her daughters her native language , and sent or took them on visits to Poland . 
 On 19 April 1906 , Pierre was killed in a road accident . Walking across the Rue Dauphine in heavy rain , he was struck by a horse @-@ drawn vehicle and fell under its wheels , causing his skull to fracture . Curie was devastated by her husband 's death . On 13 May 1906 the physics department of the University of Paris decided to retain the chair that had been created for Pierre and to offer it to Marie . She accepted it hoping to create a world @-@ class laboratory as a tribute to Pierre . She was the first woman to become a professor at the University of Paris . 
 Curie 's quest to create a new laboratory did not end with the University of Paris , however . In her later years , she headed the Radium Institute ( Institut du radium , now Curie Institute , Institut Curie ) , a radioactivity laboratory created for her by the Pasteur Institute and the University of Paris . The initiative for creating the Radium Institute had come in 1909 from Pierre Paul Émile Roux , director of the Pasteur Institute , who had been disappointed that the University of Paris was not giving Curie a proper laboratory and had suggested that she move to the Pasteur Institute . Only then , with the threat of Curie leaving , did the University of Paris relent , and eventually the Curie Pavilion became a joint initiative of the University of Paris and the Pasteur Institute . 
 In 1910 Curie succeeded in isolating radium ; she also defined an international standard for radioactive emissions that was eventually named for her and Pierre : the curie . Nevertheless , in 1911 the French Academy of Sciences did not elect her to be a member by one or two votes . Elected instead was Édouard Branly , an inventor who had helped Guglielmo Marconi develop the wireless telegraph . A doctoral student of Curie , Marguerite Perey , became the first woman elected to membership in the Academy – over half a century later , in 1962 . Despite Curie 's fame as a scientist working for France , the public 's attitude tended toward xenophobia — the same that had led to the Dreyfus affair – which also fuelled false speculation that Curie was Jewish . During the French Academy of Sciences elections , she was vilified by the right wing press who criticised her for being a foreigner and an atheist . Her daughter later remarked on the public hypocrisy as the French press often portrayed Curie as an unworthy foreigner when she was nominated for a French honour , but would portray her as a French hero when she received a foreign one such as her Nobel Prizes . 
 In 1911 it was revealed that in 1910 – 11 Curie had conducted an affair of about a year 's duration with physicist Paul Langevin , a former student of Pierre 's — a married man who was estranged from his wife . This resulted in a press scandal that was exploited by her academic opponents . Curie ( then in her mid @-@ 40s ) was five years older than Langevin and was misrepresented in the tabloids as a foreign Jewish home @-@ wrecker . When the scandal broke , she was away at a conference in Belgium ; on her return , she found an angry mob in front of her house and had to seek refuge , with her daughters , in the home of a friend . 
 International recognition for her work had been growing to new heights , and the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences , overcoming opposition prompted by the Langevin scandal , honored her a second time , with the 1911 Nobel Prize in Chemistry . This award was " in recognition of her services to the advancement of chemistry by the discovery of the elements radium and polonium , by the isolation of radium and the study of the nature and compounds of this remarkable element . " She was the first person to win or share two Nobel Prizes , and remains alone with Linus Pauling as Nobel laureates in two fields each . A delegation of celebrated Polish men of learning , headed by novelist Henryk Sienkiewicz , encouraged her to return to Poland and continue her research in her native country . Curie 's second Nobel Prize enabled her to persuade the French government into supporting the Radium Institute , built in 1914 , where research was conducted in chemistry , physics , and medicine . A month after accepting her 1911 Nobel Prize , she was hospitalised with depression and a kidney ailment . For most of 1912 she avoided public life but did spend time in England with her friend and fellow physicist , Hertha Ayrton . She returned to her laboratory only in December , after a break of about 14 months . 
 In 1912 the Warsaw Scientific Society offered her the directorship of a new laboratory in Warsaw but she declined , focusing on the developing Radium Institute to be completed in August 1914 , and on a new street named Rue Pierre @-@ Curie . She visited Poland in 1913 and was welcomed in Warsaw but the visit was mostly ignored by the Russian authorities . The Institute 's development was interrupted by the coming war , as most researchers were drafted into the French Army , and it fully resumed its activities in 1919 . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 During World War I , Curie saw a need for field radiological centres near the front lines to assist battlefield surgeons . After a quick study of radiology , anatomy , and automotive mechanics she procured X @-@ ray equipment , vehicles , auxiliary generators , and developed mobile radiography units , which came to be popularly known as petites Curies ( " Little Curies " ) . She became the director of the Red Cross Radiology Service and set up France 's first military radiology centre , operational by late 1914 . Assisted at first by a military doctor and by her 17 @-@ year @-@ old daughter Irène , Curie directed the installation of 20 mobile radiological vehicles and another 200 radiological units at field hospitals in the first year of the war . Later , she began training other women as aides . 
 In 1915 Curie produced hollow needles containing ' radium emanation ' , a colorless , radioactive gas given off by radium , later identified as radon , to be used for sterilizing infected tissue . She provided the radium from her own one @-@ gram supply . It is estimated that over a million wounded soldiers were treated with her X @-@ ray units . Busy with this work , she carried out very little scientific research during that period . In spite of all her humanitarian contributions to the French war effort , Curie never received any formal recognition of it from the French government . 
 Also , promptly after the war started , she attempted to donate her gold Nobel Prize medals to the war effort but the French National Bank refused to accept them . She did buy war bonds , using her Nobel Prize money . She was also an active member in committees of Polonia in France dedicated to the Polish cause . After the war , she summarized her war time experiences in a book Radiology in War ( 1919 ) . 
 = = = Postwar years = = = 
 In 1920 , for the 25th anniversary of the discovery of radium , the French government established a stipend for her ; its previous recipient was Louis Pasteur ( 1822 – 95 ) . In 1921 , Marie was welcomed triumphantly when she toured the United States to raise funds for research on radium . Mrs. William Brown <unk> , after interviewing Marie , created a Marie Curie Radium Fund and raised money to buy radium , publicising her trip . In 1921 , US President Warren G. Harding received her at the White House to present her with the 1 gram of radium collected in the United States . Before the meeting , recognising her growing fame abroad , and embarrassed by the fact that she had no French official distinctions to wear in public , the French government offered her a Legion of Honour award , but she refused . In 1922 she became a fellow of the French Academy of Medicine . She also travelled to other countries , appearing publicly and giving lectures in Belgium , Brazil , Spain , and Czechoslovakia . 
 Led by Curie , the Institute produced four more Nobel Prize winners , including her daughter Irène Joliot @-@ Curie and her son @-@ in @-@ law , Frédéric Joliot @-@ Curie . Eventually , it became one of four major radioactivity research laboratories , the others being the Cavendish Laboratory , with Ernest Rutherford ; the Institute for Radium Research , Vienna , with Stefan Meyer ; and the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Chemistry , with Otto Hahn and Lise Meitner . 
 In August 1922 , Marie Curie became a member of the newly created International Commission for Intellectual Cooperation of the League of Nations . In 1923 , she wrote a biography of Pierre , entitled Pierre Curie . In 1925 , she visited Poland , to participate in the ceremony that laid foundations for the Radium Institute in Warsaw . Her second American tour , in 1929 , succeeded in equipping the Warsaw Radium Institute with radium ; it was opened in 1932 and her sister Bronisława became its director . These distractions from her scientific labours and the attendant publicity caused her much discomfort but provided resources needed for her work . In 1930 , she was elected a member of the International Atomic Weights Committee where she served until her death . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 Curie visited Poland for the last time in early 1934 . A few months later , on 4 July 1934 , she died at the Sancellemoz Sanatorium in Passy , in Haute @-@ Savoie , from aplastic anemia believed to have been contracted from her long @-@ term exposure to radiation . The damaging effects of ionising radiation were not known at the time of her work , which had been carried out without the safety measures later developed . She had carried test tubes containing radioactive isotopes in her pocket , and she stored them in her desk drawer , remarking on the faint light that the substances gave off in the dark . Curie was also exposed to X @-@ rays from unshielded equipment while serving as a radiologist in field hospitals during the war . Although her many decades of exposure to radiation caused chronic illnesses ( including near blindness due to cataracts ) and ultimately her death , she never really acknowledged the health risks of radiation exposure . 
 She was interred at the cemetery in Sceaux , alongside her husband Pierre . Sixty years later , in 1995 , in honour of their achievements , the remains of both were transferred to the Panthéon , Paris . She became the first woman to be honoured with interment in the Panthéon on her own merits . In 2015 , two other women were also interred on their own merits . 
 Because of their levels of radioactive contamination , her papers from the 1890s are considered too dangerous to handle . Even her cookbook is highly radioactive . Her papers are kept in lead @-@ lined boxes , and those who wish to consult them must wear protective clothing . 
 In her last year , she worked on a book , Radioactivity , which was published posthumously in 1935 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The physical and societal aspects of the Curies ' work contributed substantially to shaping the world of the twentieth and twenty @-@ first centuries . Cornell University professor L. Pearce Williams observes : 
 The result of the Curies ' work was epoch @-@ making . Radium 's radioactivity was so great that it could not be ignored . It seemed to contradict the principle of the conservation of energy and therefore forced a reconsideration of the foundations of physics . On the experimental level the discovery of radium provided men like Ernest Rutherford with sources of radioactivity with which they could probe the structure of the atom . As a result of Rutherford 's experiments with alpha radiation , the nuclear atom was first postulated . In medicine , the radioactivity of radium appeared to offer a means by which cancer could be successfully attacked . 
 If Curie 's work helped overturn established ideas in physics and chemistry , it has had an equally profound effect in the societal sphere . To attain her scientific achievements , she had to overcome barriers that were placed in her way because she was a woman , in both her native and her adoptive country . This aspect of her life and career is highlighted in Françoise Giroud 's Marie Curie : A Life , which emphasizes Marie 's role as a feminist precursor . 
 She was known for her honesty and moderate life style . Having received a small scholarship in 1893 , she returned it in 1897 as soon as she began earning her keep . She gave much of her first Nobel Prize money to friends , family , students , and research associates . In an unusual decision , Curie intentionally refrained from patenting the radium @-@ isolation process , so that the scientific community could do research unhindered . She insisted that monetary gifts and awards be given to the scientific institutions she was affiliated with rather than to her . She and her husband often refused awards and medals . Albert Einstein reportedly remarked that she was probably the only person who could not be corrupted by fame . 
 = = Awards , honours , and tributes = = 
 As one of the most famous women scientists to date , Marie Curie has become an icon in the scientific world and has received tributes from across the globe , even in the realm of pop culture . In a 2009 poll carried out by New Scientist , Marie Curie was voted the " most inspirational woman in science " . Curie received 25 @.@ 1 per cent of all votes cast , nearly twice as many as second @-@ place Rosalind Franklin ( 14 @.@ 2 per cent ) . 
 Poland and France declared 2011 the Year of Marie Curie , and the United Nations declared that this would be the International Year of Chemistry . An artistic installation celebrating " Madame Curie " filled the Jacobs Gallery at San Diego 's Museum of Contemporary Art . On 7 November , Google celebrated the anniversary of her birth with a special Google Doodle . On 10 December , the New York Academy of Sciences celebrated the centenary of Marie Curie 's second Nobel prize in the presence of Princess Madeleine of Sweden . 
 Marie Curie was the first woman to win a Nobel prize , the first person to win two Nobel Prizes , the only woman to win in two fields , and the only person to win in multiple sciences . Awards that she received include : 
 Nobel Prize in Physics ( 1903 , with Pierre ) 
 Davy Medal ( 1903 , with Pierre ) 
 Matteucci Medal ( 1904 , with Pierre ) 
 <unk> Prize ( 1907 ) 
 Elliott Cresson Medal ( 1909 ) 
 Nobel Prize in Chemistry ( 1911 ) 
 Franklin Medal of the American Philosophical Society ( 1921 ) 
 Marie Curie 's 1898 publication with her husband M. P. Curie and also with M. G. <unk> for their discovery of radium and polonium was honored by a Citation for Chemical Breakthrough Award from the Division of History of Chemistry of the American Chemical Society presented to the ESPCI Paris ( Ecole supérieure de physique et de chimie industrielles de la Ville de Paris ) in 2015 . 
 In 1995 , she became the first woman to be entombed on her own merits in the Panthéon , Paris . The curie ( symbol Ci ) , a unit of radioactivity , is named in honour of her and Pierre ( although the commission which agreed on the name never clearly stated whether the standard was named after Pierre , Marie or both of them ) . The element with atomic number 96 was named curium . Three radioactive minerals are also named after the Curies : <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . She received numerous honorary degrees from universities across the world . The Marie Curie Actions fellowship program of the European Union for young scientists wishing to work in a foreign country is named after her . In Poland , she had received honorary doctorates from the Lwów Polytechnic ( 1912 ) , Poznań University ( 1922 ) , Kraków 's Jagiellonian University ( 1924 ) , and the Warsaw Polytechnic ( 1926 ) . In 1921 , she was awarded the Iota Sigma Pi National Honorary Member for her significant contribution . 
 Numerous locations around the world are named after her . In 2007 , a metro station in Paris was renamed to honour both of the Curies . Polish nuclear research reactor Maria is named after her . The 7000 Curie asteroid is also named after her . A KLM McDonnell Douglas MD @-@ 11 ( registration PH @-@ KCC ) is named in her honour . 
 Several institutions bear her name , starting with the two Curie institutes – the Maria Skłodowska – Curie Institute of Oncology , in Warsaw ; and the Institut Curie in Paris . She is the patron of Maria Curie @-@ Skłodowska University , in Lublin , founded in 1944 ; and of Pierre and Marie Curie University ( Paris VI ) , France 's pre @-@ eminent science university . In Britain , Marie Curie Cancer Care was organized in 1948 to care for the terminally ill . 
 Two museums are devoted to Marie Curie . In 1967 , the Maria Skłodowska @-@ Curie Museum was established in Warsaw 's " New Town " , at her birthplace on ulica Freta ( Freta Street ) . Her Paris laboratory is preserved as the Musée Curie , open since 1992 . 
 Several works of art bear her likeness . In 1935 , <unk> <unk> , wife of Polish President Ignacy Mościcki , unveiled a statue of Marie Curie before Warsaw 's Radium Institute . During the 1944 Second World War Warsaw Uprising against the Nazi German occupation , the monument was damaged by gunfire ; after the war it was decided to leave the bullet marks on the statue and its pedestal . In 1955 Jozef Mazur created a stained glass panel of her , the Maria Skłodowska @-@ Curie Medallion , featured in the University at Buffalo Polish Room . 
 A number of biographies are devoted to her . In 1938 her daughter , Ève Curie , published Madame Curie . In 1987 Françoise Giroud wrote Marie Curie : A Life . In 2005 Barbara Goldsmith wrote Obsessive Genius : The Inner World of Marie Curie . In 2011 Lauren Redniss published Radioactive : Marie and Pierre Curie , a Tale of Love and Fallout . 
 Greer Garson and Walter Pidgeon starred in the 1943 U.S. Oscar @-@ nominated film , Madame Curie , based on her life . More recently , in 1997 , a French film about Pierre and Marie Curie was released , Les Palmes de M. Schutz . It was adapted from a play of the same name . In the film , Marie Curie was played by Isabelle Huppert . 
 Curie is the subject of the play False Assumptions by Lawrence <unk> , in which the ghosts of three other women scientists observe events in her life . Curie has also been portrayed by Susan Marie Frontczak in her play Manya : The Living History of Marie Curie , a one @-@ woman show performed in 30 US states and nine countries , by 2014 . 
 Curie 's likeness also has appeared on banknotes , stamps and coins around the world . She was featured on the Polish late @-@ 1980s 20 @,@ 000 @-@ złoty banknote as well as on the last French 500 @-@ franc note , before the franc was replaced by the euro . Marie Curie themed postage stamps from Mali , the Republic of Togo , Zambia , and the Republic of Guinea actually show a picture of Susan Marie Frontczak portraying Curie in a 2001 picture by Paul Schroeder . 
 On the 2011 centenary of Marie Curie 's second Nobel Prize ( 1911 ) , an allegorical mural was painted on the façade of her Warsaw birthplace . It depicts an infant Maria Skłodowska holding a test tube from which emanate the elements that she would discover as an adult : polonium and radium . 
 Also in 2011 , a new Warsaw bridge over the Vistula was named after her . 
 = = = Nonfiction = = = 
 Eva <unk> <unk> ( 2015 ) . Making Marie Curie : Intellectual Property and Celebrity Culture in an Age of Information . University of Chicago Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 226 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . Retrieved 15 March 2016 . 
 <unk> , Teresa ( 2011 ) . <unk> <unk> <unk> , czyli , Maria Skłodowska @-@ Curie z <unk> [ Daughter of the <unk> Plains : Maria Skłodowska – Curie of Mazowsze ] ( in Polish ) . Związek Literatów Polskich , <unk> w <unk> . ISBN <unk> . Retrieved 15 March 2016 . 
 Pasachoff , Naomi ( 1996 ) . Marie Curie and the Science of Radioactivity . Oxford University Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 Curie , Eve ( 2001 ) . Madame Curie : A Biography . Da Capo Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 306 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 Curie , Marie ( 1921 ) . The Discovery of Radium . Poughkeepsie : Vassar College . 
 Quinn , Susan ( 1996 ) . Marie Curie : A Life . Da Capo Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 201 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . 
 Giroud , Françoise ( 1986 ) . Marie Curie , a life . Holmes & Meier . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 8419 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . , translated by Lydia Davis 
 Redniss , Lauren ( 2010 ) . Radioactive : Marie & Pierre Curie : A Tale of Love and Fallout . HarperCollins . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 06 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . 
 <unk> , Olga S. ( 1978 ) . The Lady Laureates : Women Who Have Won the Nobel Prize . Metuchen , N.J. & London : Scarecrow Press. pp. 147 – 164 . ISBN 0 @-@ 8108 @-@ 1161 @-@ 8 . 
 = = = Fiction = = = 
 Olov Enquist , Per ( 2006 ) . The Book about Blanche and Marie . New York : Overlook . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 668 @-@ 3 . A 2004 novel by Per Olov Enquist featuring Maria Skłodowska @-@ Curie , neurologist Jean @-@ Martin Charcot , and his Salpêtrière patient " Blanche " ( Marie Wittman ) . The English translation was published in 2006 . 
 = Fast inverse square root = 
 Fast inverse square root ( sometimes referred to as Fast <unk> ( ) or by the hexadecimal constant 0x5f3759df ) is a method of calculating x − ½ , the reciprocal ( or multiplicative inverse ) of a square root for a 32 @-@ bit floating point number in IEEE 754 floating point format . The algorithm was probably developed at Silicon Graphics in the early 1990s , and an implementation appeared in 1999 in the Quake III Arena source code , but the method did not appear on public forums such as Usenet until 2002 or 2003 . ( There is a discussion on the Chinese developer forum <unk> back in 2000 . ) At the time , the primary advantage of the algorithm came from avoiding computationally expensive floating point operations in favor of integer operations . Inverse square roots are used to compute angles of incidence and reflection for lighting and shading in computer graphics . 
 The algorithm accepts a 32 @-@ bit floating point number as the input and stores a halved value for later use . Then , treating the bits representing the floating point number as a 32 @-@ bit integer , a logical shift right of one bit is performed and the result subtracted from the magic number 0x5f3759df . This is the first approximation of the inverse square root of the input . Treating the bits again as floating point it runs one iteration of Newton 's method to return a more precise approximation . This computes an approximation of the inverse square root of a floating point number approximately four times faster than floating point division . 
 The algorithm was originally attributed to John Carmack , but an investigation showed that the code had deeper roots in both the hardware and software side of computer graphics . Adjustments and alterations passed through both Silicon Graphics and 3dfx Interactive , with Gary <unk> 's implementation for the SGI Indigo as the earliest known use . It is not known how the constant was originally derived , though investigation has shed some light on possible methods . 
 = = Motivation = = 
 The inverse square root of a floating point number is used in calculating a normalized vector . Since a 3D graphics program uses these normalized vectors to determine lighting and reflection , millions of these calculations must be done per second . Before the creation of specialized hardware to handle transform and lighting , software computations could be slow . Specifically , when the code was developed in the early 1990s , most floating point processing power lagged behind the speed of integer processing . 
 To normalize a vector , the length of the vector is determined by calculating its Euclidean norm : the square root of the sum of squares of the vector components . When each component of the vector is divided by that length , the new vector will be a unit vector pointing in the same direction . 
 <formula> is the Euclidean norm of the vector , analogous to the calculation of the Euclidean distance between two points in Euclidean space . 
 <formula> is the normalized ( unit ) vector . Using <formula> to represent <formula> , 
 <formula> , which relates the unit vector to the inverse square root of the distance components . 
 Quake III Arena used the fast inverse square root algorithm to speed graphics processing unit computation , but the algorithm has since been implemented in some dedicated hardware vertex shaders using field @-@ programmable gate arrays ( FPGA ) . 
 = = Overview of the code = = 
 The following code is the fast inverse square root implementation from Quake III Arena , stripped of C <unk> directives , but including the exact original comment text : 
 In order to determine the inverse square root , an approximation for <formula> would be determined by the software , then some numerical method would revise that approximation until it came within an acceptable error range of the actual result . Common software methods in the early 1990s drew a first approximation from a lookup table . This bit of code proved faster than table lookups and approximately four times faster than regular floating point division . Some loss of precision occurred , but was offset by the significant gains in performance . The algorithm was designed with the IEEE 754 @-@ 1985 32 @-@ bit floating point specification in mind , but investigation from Chris Lomont and later Charles McEniry showed that it could be implemented in other floating point specifications . 
 The advantages in speed offered by the fast inverse square root kludge came from treating the longword containing the floating point number as an integer then subtracting it from a specific constant , 0x5f3759df . The purpose of the constant is not immediately clear to someone viewing the code , so , like other such constants found in code , it is often called a magic number . This integer subtraction and bit shift results in a longword which when treated as a floating point number is a rough approximation for the inverse square root of the input number . One iteration of Newton 's method is performed to gain some accuracy , and the code is finished . The algorithm generates reasonably accurate results using a unique first approximation for Newton 's method ; however , it is much slower and less accurate than using the SSE instruction <unk> on x86 processors also released in 1999 . 
 = = = A worked example = = = 
 As an example , consider the number x 
 = 0 @.@ <unk> , for which we want to calculate 1 / √ x ≈ 2 @.@ <unk> . The first steps of the algorithm are illustrated below : 
 0011 _ 1110 _ 0010 _ 0000 _ 0000 _ 0000 _ 0000 _ 0000 Bit pattern of both x and i 
 0001 _ 1111 _ 0001 _ 0000 _ 0000 _ 0000 _ 0000 _ 0000 Shift right one position : ( i > > 1 ) 
 0101 _ 1111 _ 0011 _ <unk> _ 0101 _ 1001 _ 1101 _ 1111 The magic number 0x5f3759df 
 0100 _ 0000 _ 0010 _ <unk> _ 0101 _ 1001 _ 1101 _ 1111 The result of 0x5f3759df - ( i > > 1 ) 
 Using IEEE 32 Bit representation : 
 0 _ <unk> _ <unk> 1 @.@ 25 * 2 ^ -3 
 0 _ <unk> _ <unk> 1 @.@ 125 * 2 ^ <unk> 
 0 _ <unk> _ <unk> 1 @.@ <unk> ... * 2 ^ + 63 
 0 _ <unk> _ <unk> 1 @.@ <unk> ... * 2 ^ + 1 
 <unk> this last bit pattern as a floating point number gives the approximation y = 
 2 @.@ <unk> , which has an error of about 3 @.@ 4 % . After the single iteration of Newton 's method , the final result is y = 2 @.@ <unk> , in error by only 0 @.@ 17 % . 
 = = Working of the algorithm = = 
 The algorithm computes 1 / √ x by performing the following steps : 
 Alias the argument x to an integer , as a way to compute an approximation of log2 ( x ) 
 Use this approximation to compute an approximation of log2 ( 1 / √ x ) 
 Alias back to a float , as a way to compute an approximation of the base @-@ 2 exponential 
 <unk> the approximation using a single iteration of the Newton 's method . 
 = = = Floating point representation = = = 
 Since this algorithm relies heavily on the bit @-@ level representation of single @-@ precision floating point numbers , a short overview of this representation is provided here . In order to encode a non @-@ zero real number x as a single precision float , the first step is to write x as a normalized binary number : 
 <formula> 
 where the exponent ex is an integer , mx ∈ [ 0 , 1 ) , and <unk> ... is the binary representation of the “ significand ” ( 1 + mx ) . It should be noted that , since the single bit before the point in the significand is always 1 , it need not be stored . From this form , three unsigned integers are computed : 
 <unk> , the “ sign bit ” , is 0 if x > 0 , and 1 if x < 0 ( 1 bit ) 
 Ex 
 = ex + B is the “ biased exponent ” , where B = 
 127 is the “ exponent bias ” ( 8 bits ) 
 <unk> 
 = mx × L , where L = 
 223 ( 23 bits ) 
 These fields are then packed , left to right , into a 32 bit container . 
 As an example , consider again the number x 
 = 0 @.@ <unk> = 
 0 @.@ <unk> . <unk> x yields : 
 <formula> 
 and thus , the three unsigned integer fields are : 
 S 
 = 0 
 E = 
 − 3 + 127 
 = 124 = 
 <unk> 
 M 
 = 0 @.@ 25 × 223 = 
 <unk> = <unk> 
 these fields are packed as shown in the figure below : 
 = = = <unk> to an integer as an approximate logarithm = = = 
 If one had to calculate 1 / √ x without a computer or a calculator , a table of logarithms would be useful , together with the identity logb ( 1 / √ x ) 
 = − ½ logb ( x ) , which is valid for every base b . The fast inverse square root is based on this identity , and on the fact that aliasing a <unk> to an integer gives a rough approximation of its logarithm . Here is how : 
 If x is a positive normal number : 
 <formula> 
 then we have 
 <formula> 
 but since mx ∈ [ 0 , 1 ) , the logarithm on the right hand side can be approximated by 
 <formula> 
 where σ is a free parameter used to tune the approximation . For example , σ = 
 0 yields exact results at both ends of the interval , while σ ≈ 0 @.@ <unk> yields the optimal approximation ( the best in the sense of the uniform norm of the error ) . 
 Thus we have the approximation 
 <formula> 
 On the other hand , interpreting the bit @-@ pattern of x as an integer yields 
 <formula> 
 It then appears that Ix is a scaled and shifted piecewise @-@ linear approximation of log2 ( x ) , as illustrated in the figure on the right . In other words , log2 ( x ) is approximated by 
 <formula> 
 = = = First approximation of the result = = = 
 The calculation of y = 1 / √ x is based on the identity 
 <formula> 
 Using the approximation of the logarithm above , applied to both x and y , the above equation gives : 
 <formula> 
 Thus , an approximation of <unk> is : 
 <formula> 
 which is written in the code as 
 The first term above is the magic number 
 <formula> 
 from which it can be inferred σ ≈ 0 @.@ <unk> . The second term , ½ Ix , is calculated by shifting the bits of Ix one position to the right . 
 = = = Newton 's method = = = 
 After performing those integer operations , the algorithm once again treats the longword as a floating point number ( y 
 = * ( float * ) & i ; ) and performs a floating point multiplication operation ( y = 
 y * ( <unk> - x2 * y * y ) ; ) . The floating point operation represents a single iteration of Newton 's method of finding roots for a given equation . For this example , 
 <formula> is the inverse square root , or , as a function of y , 
 <formula> . 
 As <formula> represents a general expression of Newton 's method with <formula> as the first approximation , 
 <formula> is the particularized expression where <formula> and <formula> . 
 Hence y = y * ( <unk> - x2 * y * y ) ; is the same as <formula> 
 The first approximation is generated above through the integer operations and input into the last two lines of the function . Repeated iterations of the algorithm , using the output of the function ( <formula> ) as the input of the next iteration , cause the algorithm to converge on the root with increasing precision . For the purposes of the Quake III engine , only one iteration was used . A second iteration remained in the code but was commented out . 
 = = = Accuracy = = = 
 As noted above , the approximation is surprisingly accurate . The graph on the right plots the error of the function ( that is , the error of the approximation after it has been improved by running one iteration of Newton 's method ) , for inputs starting at 0 @.@ 01 , where the standard library gives 10 @.@ 0 as a result , while <unk> ( ) gives 9 @.@ <unk> , making the difference 0 @.@ <unk> , or 0 @.@ 175 % . The absolute error only drops from then on , while the relative error stays within the same bounds across all orders of magnitude . 
 = = History and investigation = = 
 The source code for Quake III was not released until QuakeCon 2005 , but copies of the fast inverse square root code appeared on Usenet and other forums as early as 2002 or 2003 . Initial speculation pointed to John Carmack as the probable author of the code , but he demurred and suggested it was written by Terje <unk> , an accomplished assembly programmer who had previously helped id Software with Quake optimization . <unk> had written an implementation of a similar bit of code in the late 1990s , but the original authors proved to be much further back in the history of 3D computer graphics with Gary <unk> 's implementation for the SGI Indigo as a possible earliest known use . <unk> <unk> concluded that the original algorithm was devised by Greg Walsh at Ardent Computer in consultation with Cleve Moler , the creator of MATLAB . Cleve Moler learned about this trick from code written by William Kahan and K.C. Ng at Berkeley around 1986 ( see the comment section at the end of <unk> code for <unk> ) . Jim Blinn also demonstrated a simple approximation of the inverse square root in a 1997 column for IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications . 
 It is not known precisely how the exact value for the magic number was determined . Chris Lomont developed a function to minimize approximation error by choosing the magic number R over a range . He first computed the optimal constant for the linear approximation step as <unk> , close to 0x5f3759df , but this new constant gave slightly less accuracy after one iteration of Newton 's method . Lomont then searched for a constant optimal even after one and two Newton iterations and found <unk> , which is more accurate than the original at every iteration stage . He concluded by asking whether the exact value of the original constant was chosen through derivation or trial and error . Lomont pointed out that the magic number for 64 bit <unk> size type double is <unk> , but it was later shown by Matthew Robertson to be exactly <unk> . Charles McEniry performed a similar but more sophisticated optimization over likely values for R. His initial brute force search resulted in the same constant that Lomont determined . When he attempted to find the constant through weighted bisection , the specific value of R used in the function occurred , leading McEniry to believe that the constant may have originally been derived through " bisecting to a given tolerance " . 
 = = = Documents = = = 
 Blinn , Jim ( July 1997 ) . " Floating Point Tricks " . Computer Graphics & Applications , IEEE 17 ( 4 ) : 80 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1109 / 38 @.@ <unk> . 
 Blinn , Jim ( 2003 ) . Jim Blinn 's Corner : Notation , notation notation . Morgan Kaufmann . ISBN 1 @-@ 55860 @-@ 860 @-@ 5 . 
 Eberly , David ( 2001 ) . 3D Game Engine Design . Morgan Kaufmann . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 55860 @-@ 593 @-@ 0 . 
 Hennessey , John ; Patterson , David A. ( 1998 ) . Computer Organization and Design ( 2nd ed . ) . San Francisco , CA : Morgan Kaufmann Publishers . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 55860 @-@ 491 @-@ 9 . 
 Kushner , David ( August 2002 ) . " The wizardry of Id " . IEEE Spectrum 39 ( 8 ) : 42 – 47 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1109 / <unk> 
 Lomont , Chris ( February 2003 ) . " Fast Inverse Square Root " ( PDF ) . Retrieved 2009 @-@ 02 @-@ 13 . 
 McEniry , Charles ( August 2007 ) . " The Mathematics Behind the Fast Inverse Square Root Function Code " ( PDF ) . Retrieved 2009 @-@ 02 @-@ 13 . 
 Middendorf , Lars ; <unk> , Felix ; <unk> , George ; <unk> , Christophe ( June 1 , 2007 ) . " Embedded Vertex <unk> in FPGA " . In <unk> , <unk> . Embedded System Design : Topics , Techniques and Trends . <unk> <unk> Working Conference : International Embedded Systems Symposium ( <unk> ) . et al . Irvine , California : Springer . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 387 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 <unk> , Jason ( December 4 , 2008 ) . " Quake 's fast inverse square root " . <unk> . O 'Reilly Media . Archived from the original on 2009 @-@ 02 @-@ 15 . Retrieved 2013 @-@ 01 @-@ 07 . 
 = Illuminati ( Madonna song ) = 
 " Illuminati " is a song recorded by American singer and songwriter Madonna for her thirteenth studio album Rebel Heart ( 2015 ) . It was written by Madonna Ciccone , Toby Gad , Maureen McDonald , Larry Griffin Jr . , Mike Dean , Kanye West , Tommy Brown , Ernst Brown [ a ] and Jacques Webster [ a ] . The song was produced by Madonna , West , Dean and Symbolyc One , with co @-@ production by Charlie Heat and additional production by Travis Scott . The song 's demo was leaked to the internet in December 2014 , with twelve other tracks from the album . Its final version was released on December 20 , 2014 , with five other tracks on iTunes store as " an early Christmas gift " to avoid further leaks . The song 's demo version features dance synths and acoustic guitars ; after showing the song to West , he felt connected to the song and changed it to a darker sound . The song was conceived after Madonna was accused of being a member of the Illuminati ; she wanted to write a song about who they really are and what they are not . 
 " Illuminati " is a dance @-@ pop song with brittle hits , blips and a buzz @-@ saw break as its main instrumentation . Its sound was compared to that of West 's album Yeezus ( 2013 ) . The song 's lyrics discuss Illuminati conspiracy theories ; it names celebrities who had also been accused of being part of the group , and religious imagery . Madonna sings , " It 's like everybody in this party 's , shining like Illuminati " . The song received favorable reviews from music critics , who commended West involvement with the track , and its ambitious sound and lyrics , while some chose it as one of the album 's highlights . It charted in some European territories and on the Billboard 's Dance / Electronic Digital Songs . Madonna performed the song with dancers strapped to tall , flexible poles as part of her Rebel Heart Tour ( 2015 – 16 ) ; it was considered one of the show 's main highlights . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 While recording for her thirteenth studio album , Madonna enlisted several collaborators ; MoZella , Symbolyc One and Toby Gad were announced as new collaborators on the album in April 2014 . Madonna posted a photograph of the trio working with her in a recording studio on her Instagram account . She said on the photograph , " Having an Iconic Moment in the studio with Toby @-@ Mozilla and S1 . My throat hurts from singing , laughing and crying . " Gad worked with Madonna on fourteen songs , all of which appeared on the album . According to Gad , " The first week she was quite intimidating . It was like a test phase . You have to criticize , but you can 't really offend . But she also likes honest , harsh critics to say things as they are . It worked out really well and she got sweeter and sweeter . " 
 American recording artist Kanye West also contributed to three tracks on the album ; Madonna called him " the black Madonna " and said , " We 're comrades in the envelope @-@ pushing genre " . Madonna said , " It 's a little bit of a bullfight , but we take turns . He knows that he 's walking into a room with a person with a strong point of view , and I do , too . I listen to what he has to say , take it in , and he listens to what I say and takes it in . We didn 't agree on everything , but he has good ideas . " She told Rolling Stone that of the songs she played him , West connected the most with " Illuminati " and that , " [ h ] e loved the melody , and he was actually jumping up and down on the soundboard . He literally stood on top of the mixing board — we were worried he was going to hit his head on the ceiling , but he didn 't . He ended up being very excited about that track , and then he added his spin to it , musically , and I love it . To me , he elevated the lyrics with the music . It 's like a siren , alerting people . " In December 2014 , thirteen demos of tracks for the album , including " Illuminati " , were leaked to the Internet . To avoid further leaks , Madonna released six completed tracks , including the final version of " Illuminati " with the addition of West 's writing and production , with the pre @-@ order for the album on the iTunes Store on December 20 , 2014 , as an " early Christmas gift " . 
 = = Composition and lyrics = = 
 " Illuminati " was written by Madonna Ciccone , Toby Gad , Maureen McDonald , Larry Griffin Jr . , Mike Dean , Kanye West , Tommy Brown , Ernst Brown [ a ] and Jacques Webster [ a ] . The song was produced by Madonna , West , Dean and Symbolyc One , with co @-@ production by Charlie Heat and additional production by Travis Scott . Gad played guitar on the track and Dean laid keyboards and programmed the drums . The track was engineered and mixed by Demacio " Demo " Castellon and Noah Goldstein . " Illuminati " is a dance @-@ pop song ; its demo version , written around March – April 2014 , featured " staid dance synths and cheesy acoustic guitars " , according to Saeed Saaed from The National . The album version features " brittle hits , blips and a buzz @-@ saw break " , which many critics considered reminiscent to West 's " dark and claustrophobic sounds " of his sixth studio album Yeezus ( 2013 ) . 
 The song 's lyrics are about Illuminati conspiracy theories ; Madonna sings and raps about supposed <unk> luminaries including Jay Z , Beyoncé , Kanye West , Nicki Minaj , Bill Gates , Steve Jobs , Lady Gaga , Justin Bieber , Barack Obama , LeBron James and Oprah Winfrey . The song also mentions pentagrams and the " Google of the United States " . According to Amy Pettifer , Madonna " ... reckons it 's the beautiful freaks of the club that hold the power , not these celebrity cyphers ; she 's interested in the sweat @-@ slicked celestial bodies , ' shining like <unk> ' " . In an interview with Rolling Stone , Madonna said she was often accused of being a member of the Illuminati and she wanted to record a song about what she believed the Illuminati to be . She said : 
 People are always using the word Illuminati but they 're always referencing it in an incorrect way . People often accuse me of being a member of the Illuminati and I think in today 's pop culture the Illuminati is perceived as a group of powerful , successful people who are working behind the scenes to control the universe . Not people with consciousness , not people who are enlightened . So people were accusing me of being a member of the Illuminati , and I kept going , wait — so first I had to figure out what that meant ... I know who the real Illuminati are , and I know where that word comes from . The real Illuminati were a group of scientists , artists , philosophers , writers , who came about in what is referred to as the Age of Enlightenment , after the Dark Ages , when there was no writing and no art and no creativity and no spirituality , and life was really at a standstill . And right after that , everything flourished . So we had people like Shakespeare and Leonardo Da Vinci and Michaelangelo and Isaac Newton , and all these great minds and great thinkers , and they were called Illuminati ... It had nothing to do with money and power . Of course they were powerful , because they influenced people . But their goal was to inspire and enlighten . So when people refer to me as a member of the Illuminati , I always want to say thank you . Thank you for putting me in that category . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The song received generally favorable reviews from music critics . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic called it " a sleek , spooky collaboration with Kanye West " , while Caryn Ganz of Rolling Stone said the collaboration " gel [ s ] perfectly " . Ben Kelly of Attitude said , " West ’ s production makes a real moment " and " Her anti @-@ Vogue rap of suspected Illuminati members is probably the only time Rihanna and Queen Elizabeth will feature side by side " . Gavin Haynes of NME described it as " classy , ' Vogue ' <unk> " . Randall Roberts of Los Angeles Times called it " one of the record ’ s highlights , " saying , " [ s ] he raps during [ the song ] and doesn ’ t sound totally ridiculous " . He also said the track balances " club frenzy and revelatory lyricism " . Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine said , " West gives ' Illuminati ' the Yeezus treatment ... her rapped verses about the titular secret society are clean and tight enough to make you forget about ' American Life ' " . Kevin Ritchie of Now called it one of " the most ambitious and interesting lyrically " . Lindsay Zoladz of New York Daily News wrote that the song is " just goofy enough to work " . 
 Amy Pettifer of The Quietus said the song is " scuzzy and repetitive with a danceable hook — but her voice is at its thinnest and the dynamics a little lacking . Despite all this , it does contain the great lyric , ' It 's time to dance and turn this dark into something ' , which could be the album 's epigram . " Lee DeVito of Metro Times called it " a bit repetitive " but said it is probably his favorite track on the album . Saeed Saeed of The National said he favored the album 's version over its demo , and that , " [ t ] <unk> , Kanye West rescued it by throwing out the lameness and added the dark and claustrophobic sounds of his seminal 2013 album Yeezus " . Bernard Zuel from The Sydney Morning Herald said it is " colder and harder sounding , in the way of West 's own recent work . There 's some edge to it but not much menace that would really thrust it into compelling . " For Kitty Empire of The Guardian said " Rebel Heart 's key collaboration with Kanye West finds two of pop 's biggest <unk> starring in a wiggly club banger that doubles as a take @-@ down of the internet 's most <unk> meme " . Mark Lore of Paste called it " dark and creepy , and it 's one of the best tracks on Rebel Heart " . 
 Annie Zaleski of The A.V. Club said , " while her distortion @-@ smudged , guitar @-@ marred Kanye West collaboration ' Illuminati ' is pleasingly confrontational , the song ’ s lyrical progression is a distracted mess ... The result ? All of these shiny party people resemble the Illuminati . " Jim Farber of The New York Daily News said West " gave her a dark needling rhythm that sounds like something left over from his last album . Its industrial grind clashes badly with Madonna ’ s soft vocal . " Andrew Unterberger of Spin said the song " wastes a potentially explosive , <unk> Kanye beat on a muddled , <unk> lyric that isn ’ t even as conspiracy @-@ baiting as it thinks it is " . New Zealand Herald 's Lydia Jenkin was more critical , writing that it " sounds like a trying @-@ too @-@ hard version of Lady Gaga meets M.I.A. " . Similarly , Evan Sawdey of PopMatters said the song " reek [ s ] of desperation , wanting so badly to shock and offend listeners that [ it ] fail [ s ] to resolve as satisfying song first and foremost " . 
 = = Live performance = = 
 " Illuminati " is part of the setlist of Madonna 's Rebel Heart Tour ( 2015 – 16 ) . After the acoustic performance of " Rebel Heart " , Madonna leaves the stage for a costume change ; her dancers perform " Illuminati " while perched on rubber poles that bend with the wind . Jordan Zivitz of Montreal Gazette praised the performance , writing that the dancers " nearly stole the show in their employer ’ s absence during another costume change , set to Illuminati 's woozy thump " . George Varga of The San Diego Union Tribune said the audience " cheered with notably more enthusiasm " during the performance . 
 In the New York magazine review of the tour , Lindsay <unk> commended the dancers , especially during " Illuminati " , writing that it was the " most impressive " part of the show , with " some guys in top hats flying through the air on wobbly stilts that had the whole audience gasping " . Kitty Empire of The Guardian said , " Madonna ’ s interludes are as good as the main event " , and that the performance of " Illuminati " " finds seven dancers strapped to the top of tall , flexible poles , swaying precipitously " . The Hollywood Reporter 's Ashley Lee said , " Madonna 's dancers served impressive spectacles that left the crowd gasping in awe , as they leaned wildly into the audience from atop ten @-@ foot stilts . It 's arguable that her changeover dance sequences and stunts are more entertaining than other performers ' entire sets . " 
 = = Credits = = 
 Personnel adapted from Madonna 's official website . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Best Thing I Never Had = 
 " Best Thing I Never Had " is a song recorded by the American singer Beyoncé for her fourth studio album , 4 ( 2011 ) . It was released by Columbia Records on June 1 , 2011 , as the third single from the album . " Best Thing I Never Had " was composed by Patrick " J. Que " Smith , Kenneth " Babyface " Edmonds , Symbolyc One , Caleb <unk> , Antonio Dixon , Beyoncé , and Shea Taylor . The song was originally not written as a ballad , but was inspired by the drumming on Doug E. Fresh 's 1985 single " The Show " . Beyoncé said that anyone , regardless of gender , should be able to relate to the song . 
 A pop and R & B ballad , the subjects of " Best Thing I Never Had " are revenge and karma . Not wanting to feel broken @-@ hearted , the female protagonist sings that she feels happy to have left her lover , who did not recognize the potential for a happy life with her . The song was generally well received by contemporary music critics , who viewed it as a sequel to Beyoncé 's 2006 single " Irreplaceable " — the two songs are thematically similar . They praised Beyoncé 's vocal delivery as well as the openness of the song 's message ; " Best Thing I Never Had " was deemed to have strong radio appeal . However , some lyrics , including " showed your ass " and " sucks to be you right now " , were criticized . The ballad was also likened to Vanessa Carlton 's 2002 single " A Thousand Miles " ( 2002 ) . 
 " Best Thing I Never Had " peaked at number 16 on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart and at number four on the US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . It rose to number three on the UK Singles Chart and number two on the Irish Singles Chart among others . The song reached number one on the South Korea Gaon International Chart , the UK R & B Chart , and the US Hot Dance Club Play chart , and the top 30 in mainland Europe , Oceania , and Canada . It was certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) and the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , and gold by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) . 
 The accompanying music video for " Best Thing I Never Had " was directed by Diane Martel . It shows Beyoncé getting ready for her wedding while she recalls her ex @-@ lover , who never gave her the attention she deserved . Critics generally wrote that Beyoncé looked stunning in the bridal suite , and commended her ability to sing directly to the camera when telling the subject of the song that she was the best lover he ever had . " Best Thing I Never Had " was promoted with several live performances by Beyoncé , notably at the 2011 Glastonbury Festival and on the televised ABC show The View . The song was also included on the set list for her concert 4 Intimate Nights with Beyoncé and other shows . 
 = = Writing and recording = = 
 Beyoncé and Patrick " J. Que " Smith wrote " Best Thing I Never Had " in collaboration with its producers Kenneth " Babyface " Edmonds , Symbolyc One , Antonio Dixon , Shea Taylor , and Caleb <unk> . According to Smith , " Best Thing I Never Had " is a ballad but was not originally written so ; early demos sounded like late 1980s hip hop material . The main inspiration for the song was the drumming of Doug E. Fresh 's song " The Show " ( 1985 ) . Smith told <unk> of Black Entertainment Television ( BET ) that he was initially intimidated at the prospect of working with Beyoncé . He was in Los Angeles when Tony Dixon telephoned him to say he and Edmonds were going to write some songs with Beyoncé . Smith was asked to join them in the studio and the trio wrote part of " Best Thing I Never Had " . After a few days , Dixon and Smith went to the studio again and completed the writing . The song was modified by Edmonds after hearing a demo ; he tweaked the lyrics and added a few more melodies . 
 Beyoncé 's vocals were recorded at the KMA Studio in New York City . When the trio played Beyoncé the demo of " Best Thing I Never Had " , she immediately approved it after making slight modifications . Smith says that Beyoncé was literally jumping up and down after hearing the demo . One hour later Beyoncé recorded " Best Thing I Never Had " and two other songs . Smith recalled that Beyoncé focused solely on the recording , ignoring hunger as she worked into the night . Beyoncé has stated that every man and woman can relate to the song 's subject matter because at one point , almost everyone ends a relationship because of lack of commitment by his or her partner . 
 = = Artwork and release = = 
 A private listening party for Beyoncé 's fourth studio album , 4 , was held on May 12 , 2011 . Beyoncé offered a select group of fans a preview of five songs from 4 , including " Best Thing I Never Had " . On May 20 , 2011 , a song called " End of Time " , featuring Beyoncé professing everlasting love , was leaked online , watermarked with the tag " internal use only " . Several websites , including MTV News reported that it might be released as the second single from 4 . However , these speculations were soon overshadowed by the release of " 1 + 1 " on May 25 , 2011 , a promotional single in the United States exclusively . Nevertheless , Columbia Records reported that " 1 + 1 " would not be released for airplay and that " Best Thing I Never Had " was favored as the second single from 4 , following " Run the World ( Girls ) " . 
 On May 27 , 2011 , Pittsburgh radio station 96 @.@ 1 Kiss FM received an email from Beyoncé 's management , informing them that " Best Thing I Never Had " would premiere on radio on June 1 , 2011 . The single debuted on US radio at 8 a.m. ( EST ) that day . Its cover artwork was also unveiled on June 1 , 2011 , on Beyoncé 's official website . It was photographed by Ellen von Unwerth and shows Beyoncé posing in a bathroom in front of a mirror while wearing a tight @-@ fitting dress designed by <unk> Rae . She holds a tube of red lipstick , which has been used to write " King B " on the mirror . The song was digitally released in Australia , Canada , New Zealand , and the US on June 1 , 2011 , and in Europe on June 9 , 2011 . " Best Thing I Never Had " was released as a digital download in the UK on July 3 , 2011 , and as a CD single in Germany on July 29 , 2011 , and in the UK on August 2 , 2011 . A Digital EP containing four remixes of the song was released in Australia , New Zealand , Europe , and the UK on September 2 , 2011 . 
 = = Composition and lyrical interpretation = = 
 " Best Thing I Never Had " is a midtempo pop and R & B power ballad , which incorporates elements of gospel . The song is set in common time with a moderate tempo of 100 beats per minute , and is written in the key of G ♭ major . The introduction follows the chord progression of G ♭ – C ♭ – E ♭ m – D ♭ , while the verses follow E ♭ m – G ♭ sus4 – G ♭ – E ♭ m – D ♭ 6 – G ♭ sus4 – G ♭ . Beyoncé 's voice spans from the low note of E ♭ 3 to the high note of G ♭ 5 . Layered female vocals provide a backing to Beyoncé 's occasionally aggressive vocals . The instrumentation includes a piano , stadium @-@ sized bass drums , and strings . " Best Thing I Never Had " is thematically a kiss @-@ off song ; it is in this respect similar to Beyoncé 's own songs " Irreplaceable " ( 2006 ) and " If I Were a Boy " ( 2008 ) . 
 Kyle Anderson of Entertainment Weekly wrote that elements of the ballad have emanated from Celine Dion 's " That ’ s The Way It Is " ( 1999 ) , and Bruce Hornsby 's " The Way It Is " ( 1986 ) . Caryn Ganz of Yahoo ! Music wrote that " Best Thing I Never Had " resembles Vanessa Carlton 's 2002 song " A Thousand Miles " paired with Ryan Tedder 's thumping beat . Ryan Dombal of Pitchfork Media also noted that the song wouldn 't sound " out @-@ of @-@ place " on a Vanessa Carlton album . Priya Elan of NME noted that the ballad is reminiscent of Beyoncé 's own 2008 songs " Halo " and " Scared Of Lonely " , owing to its cascading piano work and drum beat . James Dinh of MTV News wrote that " Best Thing I Never Had " sounds like a song from a Broadway musical ; he attributed the comparison to Beyoncé 's collaboration with the band from Fela ! to gain inspiration from the play 's subject , Nigerian musician and composer Fela Kuti . 
 The song 's lyrics are about the breakdown of a relationship between Beyoncé and her lover , a situation that suits both of them . They also touch on revenge and karma , particularly the opening line , " What goes around comes back around " , the lines " Best thing I 've ever had " , " Best thing you 've never had " , and the closing line , " Sucks to be you right now " . Happy to have avoided heartbreak , Beyoncé continues to sing about her ex @-@ lover , who did not recognize the possibility of a happy relationship with Beyoncé until the relationship broke down . Beyoncé no longer desires her lover after discovering his deceit ; as shown in the pre @-@ chorus and chorus lines , " When I think of the time that I almost loved you / You showed your ass and I saw the real you / Thank God you blew it , I thank God I dodged a bullet / I ’ m so over you , so baby good looking out / I wanted you bad / I ’ m so through with that / Because honestly / You turned out to be the best thing I never had / And will always be the best thing you never had . " 
 In the second verse , Beyoncé continues to dismiss her former lover as she sings , " So sad , you 're hurt / boo hoo ... " , over a tinkling piano riff and bass drums . She then chants the ascendant chorus , which this time features soaring strings and an uplifting aggressive piano accompaniment . Nadine Cheung of AOL Radio noted that though Beyoncé rips through the verses , she sings the chorus and bridge with restraint ; on the latter , she affirms that she has moved on in life . The song ends as Beyoncé repeatedly sings , " What goes around comes back around / I bet it sucks to be you right now " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Best Thing I Never Had " has garnered largely positive reviews from music critics who complimented Beyoncé 's vocals , the honesty in the song 's message , and its radio appeal . Gerrick D. Kennedy of the Los Angeles Times noted similarities between " Best Thing I Never Had " and Beyoncé 's previous singles including " Irreplaceable " and " If I Were a Boy " , and concluded that Beyoncé " certainly knows how to dump a man in style " . Matthew Perpetua of Rolling Stone wrote that " Best Thing I Never Had " could be " Irreplaceable Part Two " and noted that Beyoncé 's vocal performance brings depth to the song . Rich Juzwiak of The Village Voice wrote that the song is not as iconic as its reference point " Irreplaceable " , but " nor is it as shady " . He commended the optimism in the song 's lyrics . Consequence of Sound writer Chris Coplan commented that the ballad is a powerful moment of self @-@ realization , which is enhanced by Beyoncé 's vocal performance " as [ a ] wounded bird turned resilient lioness " . Choosing " Best Thing I Never Had " as the highlight of 4 , Andy Kellman of Allmusic described it as " a bombastic kiss @-@ off saved by Beyoncé 's ability to plow through it " . Kyle Anderson of Entertainment Weekly noted the moderate chart performance of " Run the World ( Girls ) " , and wrote : 
 " Best Thing I Never Had " finds Beyoncé mining the same kind of girl @-@ power imagery as she did on ' Run the World ( Girls ) ' . But there is something more direct and honest about the lyrics on the new single ( perhaps it 's the instant greatness of the line , ' When I think of the time I almost loved you / You showed your ass and I saw the real you ' ) . ' Best Thing I Never Had ' feels like the kind of crossover hit that will help 4 join the rest of Beyoncé 's discography in multiplatinum land . 
 Jessica Sinclair of Long Island Press noted that " Best Thing I Never Had " is different from " Run the World ( Girls ) " and that it shows a side of Beyoncé that listeners rarely see . Similarly , Joanne Dorken of MTV UK wrote that the song reveals " a more ferocious side to Beyoncé with it 's [ sic ] faster pace and aggressive piano backing " . Robert Copsey of Digital Spy commented that the " [ ' Best Thing I Never Had ' ] is a classic Beyoncé track waiting to happen " . Chad Grischow of IGN wrote that " the lush backing music and [ the ] soaring vocals " on the song sound suitable for an updated take on the Waiting To Exhale soundtrack album as Beyoncé is ecstatic that she ended a poor relationship before it was too late . Jon Caramainca of The New York Times commented that the " Best Thing I Never Had " has " optimistic , coffee @-@ commercial " pianos , which place Beyoncé directly in Lilith Fair territory . James Montgomery of MTV News wrote that it is one of the best ballads on the album 4 . James Dinh of the same publication added that the song has a radio @-@ friendly appeal and a catchy chorus . Similarly , Adam Markovitz of Entertainment Weekly and Joey Guerra of the Houston Chronicle praised the song 's radio nature , with the latter calling it " a return to form " with a " regal sound of a radio smash " . Jim Farber of Daily News wrote that the melodies and the clever lyrics of " Best Thing I Never Had " are likely to inspire significant airplay . Ricky Schweitzer of One Thirty BPM commented that even though the ballad sounds like a place @-@ filler on 4 , it remains largely superior " to the majority of the trash being churned out by Beyoncé ’ s peers " . 
 " Best Thing I Never Had " also received a few mixed and negative reviews . Amos Barshad of New York magazine wrote that the ballad borrows more heavily from Beyoncé 's own 2006 single " Irreplaceable " , and that " [ this ] can 't be a bad thing " . However , he noted that " this time in language ( ' Sucks to be you right now ' ) agreeable to a nation of tweens and in a manner agreeable to anyone who likes yelping along in unison to ascendant pop choruses . " David Amidon of PopMatters wrote that lines like " showed your ass " and " it must suck to be you " exemplify lame lyrics . He concluded that , " [ listeners ] are wondering how such lame lyrics could be sung with such earnestness . " Alexis Petridis of The Guardian wrote that the most interesting thing about " Best Thing I Never Had " is the curious image evoked by the chorus ' lyric , noting that everything seemed fine until " the protagonist 's former <unk> ' showed your ass ' " . Music Week 's Ben Cardew commented that its 1980s sound is " not a highlight " . A negative review came from Al Shipley of The Village Voice who wrote that " Best Thing I Never Had " and " Party " were " among the album 's worst and most unrepresentative songs " . 
 = = = Recognition = = = 
 " Best Thing I Never Had " received a nomination for Record of the Year at the 2011 Soul Train Music Awards . At the 43rd NAACP Image Award presented on February 17 , 2012 , " Best Thing I Never Had " received a nomination in the category for Outstanding Song . At the 2012 ASCAP Rhythm & Soul Awards , " Best Thing I Never Had " won in the category for Award @-@ Winning R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs . The Guardian 's critic Dan Hancox placed the song at number four on his list of the 10 best songs of 2011 . On The Village Voice 's 2011 year @-@ end Pazz & Jop singles list , " Best Thing I Never Had " was ranked at number 604 . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 For the chart issue dated June 18 , 2011 , " Best Thing I Never Had " debuted at number 84 on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart . The following week , the song climbed to number 75 ; the week her album 4 was released , it further moved from number 58 to number 29 on the Hot 100 chart dated July 16 , 2011 . Four weeks later , the ballad entered the top 20 , moving from number 25 to number 19 on the Hot 100 chart . For the week ending August 13 , 2011 , " Best Thing I Never Had " peaked at number 16 on the Hot 100 chart . It was last seen on the chart issue dated October 29 , 2011 , at number 67 , having spent 19 consecutive weeks on it . " Best Thing I Never Had " debuted at number 53 on the US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart issue dated June 18 , 2011 , where it was the highest debut that week . For the week ending September 24 , 2011 , the song reached number one on the Nielsen Broadcast Data Systems ( BDS ) urban airplay chart with 3765 spins , which were heard by 22 @.@ 033 million listeners . It stayed at number one for one additional week . " Best Thing I Never Had " eventually peaked at number four on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . The song reached number one on the US Hot Dance Club Songs chart , on the issue dated September 10 , 2011 . As of October 2012 , it has sold over 1 million paid digital downloads in the US . 
 For the week ending June 18 , 2011 , " Best Thing I Never Had " debuted at number one on the South Korea Gaon International Chart with digital sales of 85 @,@ 742 copies . The following week , it remained at number one and sold twice as many copies , amassing 174 @,@ 773 digital sales . As of October 2012 , the single has sold over 1 @.@ 1 million copies in South Korea . 
 On June 13 , 2011 , the ballad debuted at number 29 on the Australian ARIA Singles Chart . " Best Thing I Never Had " kept fluctuating on the chart for the next five weeks until it entered the top 20 on July 25 , 2011 , at number 18 . On August 1 , 2011 , the song peaked at number 17 on the singles chart and at number six on ARIA 's urban singles chart . It was certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) , denoting shipment 70 @,@ 000 copies . " Best Thing I Never Had " debuted on the New Zealand Singles Chart on June 26 , 2011 . On its fifth week on the chart , it peaked at number five . On August 14 , 2011 , the song was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) , denoting shipment 7 @,@ 500 copies . 
 Before the song 's official release in the United Kingdom , " Best Thing I Never Had " debuted at number three on the UK Singles Chart and number two on the UK R & B Chart on July 4 , 2011 , selling 51 @,@ 365 copies that week . Music Week 's Alan Jones attributed the high sales to Beyoncé 's performance at the 2011 Glastonbury Festival . It became Beyoncé 's sixteenth top 10 UK single as a solo artist , and her highest charting UK single since " If I Were a Boy " peaked at number one in November 2008 . On July 17 , 2011 , " Best Thing I Never Had " reached number one on the UK R & B Chart , and the UK Airplay Chart the following week , amassing 71 @.@ 58 million listener impressions . It became Beyoncé 's fourth single as a solo artist , and seventh , including her singles with Destiny 's Child , to reach number one on that chart The song was last seen in the top 100 of the UK Singles Chart on January 8 , 2012 , having spent 28 weeks on the chart . " Best Thing I Never Had " debuted at number 35 in the Irish Singles Chart on June 16 , 2011 . Although the song fell to number 42 the following week , it began to continually climb the chart as from June 30 , 2011 , and entered the top 20 four weeks later . On July 14 , 2011 , " Best Thing I Never Had " entered the top 10 at number six , and peaked at number two the following week , becoming Beyoncé 's fourteenth single as a solo artist to peak inside the top 10 on the Irish Singles Chart . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background and concept = = = 
 The music video for " Best Thing I Never Had " was directed by Diane Martel , and filmed in Westchester County on June 15 , 2011 and in Fort Greene , Brooklyn , on June 16 , 2011 . On June 20 , 2011 , it was reported that Beyoncé would not play the prom queen in the video . Beyoncé said that not being prom queen in the video reminded her of how she never wore the coveted tiara at her own high school dance . She added that she felt strange because her father , Mathew Knowles , did not escort her down the aisle in the wedding scene , as he had when she married Jay @-@ Z in April 2008 . The wedding scene was filmed at Sleepy Hollow Country Club on June 15 , 2011 . In July 2011 , Beyoncé was interviewed by Access Hollywood , where she said of the video 's set : 
 It was a little strange . And definitely when I walked down the aisle I was like , ' This is kind of creepy — there ’ s some other man standing there ! ' It was really beautiful . People were all really excited like it was really my wedding . My mother was even like , ' <unk> ' , and I was like , ' Mom , it 's a video . This is not my dress . This is not the real wedding . ' But I think it ’ s just one of those moments that every woman kind of fantasizes and relives . 
 Beyoncé said that the wedding dress she wears in the video was a <unk> one , which she saw in a shop window a year ago when she was at the 52nd Grammy Awards . She added that the dress was " just like a beautiful fantasy , so we called and they still had the dress " . Beyoncé also wears a tiara designed by Lorraine Schwartz , who converted it from a necklace . Beyoncé said that the wedding outfit made her feel " like royalty ... like a queen " . She added that the music video wedding was more chaotic than her real wedding in 2008 , " This may have been a little more crazy , actually . I had to sing at the same time ! " The ivory draped V @-@ neck gown which Beyoncé wears in the video was designed by the Chinese @-@ American fashion designer Vera Wang . The video premiered online at 8 pm ( EST ) on July 7 , 2011 . It was available for digital download on June 9 , 2011 . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The music video begins with Beyoncé preparing herself for her wedding ceremony . She is in her boudoir wearing a lacy corset and a lingerie combo with garters . As the song begins , Beyoncé looks towards the camera , addressing the viewer while affirming the subject of the song that she was the best he ever had . The video moves from Beyoncé playing with a tiara , a veil and tulle netting on a bed , to various stages of getting dressed . Between scenes , flash back scenes of Beyoncé in high school are shown . Beyoncé is seen with a high school boyfriend at their senior @-@ prom night on May 16 , 1998 . As Beyoncé and her boyfriend dance , he becomes interested in another girl , leaving Beyoncé alone on the dance floor . The video then returns to the present , with Beyoncé in her final preparations before her marriage . She is shown wearing a white gown and singing at sunset atop a grassy hill , followed by a scene of her walking down the aisle and exchanging vows . Her former lover is shown at the prom , deep in thought , with his prom king crown askew on his head . Beyoncé and her new husband are seen celebrating at a happy and well @-@ attended reception . The groom removes the bride 's garter with his teeth and they start dancing with their younger family members . The final scene features Beyoncé looking into the camera looking happy and satisfied . She walks off confidently to rejoin her wedding party and new husband , and then the screen fades to black . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Entertainment Weekly 's Adam B. Vary wrote that Beyoncé was " at her peak — in voice , in looks , in taste in opulent wedding gowns " . A Rolling Stone 's critic commented Beyoncé was looking stunning in a bridal suite , adding that the most disarming thing about the clip is that she sings directly to the camera . The review concludes that , " the video hits all of its marks perfectly , conveying all of the nuances in the lyrics while providing a lovely , memorable visual . " The Washington Post 's Sarah Anne Hughes wrote Beyoncé is " extravagantly dressed " in the video adding that the only downside is that there is no dance in the tradition of " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " ( 2008 ) . Kara Warner of MTV News called " Run the World ( Girls ) " and " Best Thing I Never Had " , " as different as night and day " adding that the same thing happened with their music videos . Werner further praised Beyoncé ' " gorgeous " dress and added that it " will likely land on a few style blogs soon , given its embroidered and jeweled details , not to mention the silk bows and <unk> on the sides " . A writer of The Huffington Post described the video as a transition to the one for " Run the World " . Cristina Everett of Daily News noted that the look of satisfaction and <unk> on her face make the video the best revenge for her ex @-@ lover . Pitchfork Media 's Tom Breihan noted that Beyoncé was looking " makeup @-@ commercial @-@ flawless " . He also wrote that if country singer Kellie Pickler remade the video shot @-@ for @-@ shot , it would never leave CMT rotation for it is " a perfect CMT video " . 
 Andrea Magrath of Daily Mail compared Beyoncé with Maria von Trapp in the video . Erika Ramirez of Billboard magazine praised the video , " What better way to show your ex they 're the best thing you never had than with saying ' I Do ' to someone bigger and better in a <unk> Beverly Hills wedding gown . " Jason Lipshutz of the same publication described it as a " smile @-@ inducing clip with a dream wedding " . A writer of Rap @-@ Up praised the video 's " fairytale " ending . Gordon Smart of The Sun described the white corset that Beyoncé wore in the video as sexy and wrote that " her ex will be feeling a bit of a mug watching it when he remembers what he 's missing out on . " Ashleigh Rainbird of the Daily Mirror found Beyoncé , " looking sexy in white lacy undies and garter – and later in a Big Fat Gypsy Wedding @-@ style frock " . Amos Barshad of New York magazine commented , " To just full @-@ on hammer down the whole ' mature and settled down and happy ' thing , Mrs. Hova saunters around with the most irrepressible smile you 've ever seen , shimmying amazingly ( note the moves at 3 : 30 ) as home footage of that jerk she threw away like a parking ticket cuts in and out . " The music video peaked at number one on the UK TV Airplay Chart , logging 634 plays on July 24 , 2011 . 
 = = = Alternate video = = = 
 On July 26 , 2011 , Beyoncé announced plans to make an alternative music video for " Best Thing I Never Had " . She asked her fans to send pictures from their weddings or prom day experiences , which would be included in a re @-@ edited version of the video . This alternate video was scheduled for release in September 2011 . However , it premiered on October 11 , 2011 , on Celebuzz . Charli Penn of Essence magazine praised the alternate video for " Best Thing I Never Had " calling it a " must @-@ see " video and adding that " it has already become a huge hit with fans " . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Wearing a pink fringe dress , Beyoncé performed " Best Thing I Never Had " live for the first time during her concert at Palais Nikaia in Nice , France on June 20 , 2011 . She then sang the ballad on June 26 , 2011 , at the 2011 Glastonbury Festival , where she was the closing act , and the first major solo female headliner to appear on the Pyramid stage in over twenty years . She was wearing a low @-@ cut and sequined gold jacket while performing . Beyoncé 's performance of " Best Thing I Never Had " at the Glastonbury Festival was broadcast in the US during the 2011 BET Awards later the same day . On June 28 , 2011 , she performed the song during the finale of X Factor France , dressed in a Roman @-@ style dress . On July 1 , 2011 , Beyoncé gave a free concert , including on Good Morning America as part of its Summer Concert Series . Wearing a yellow fringe dress and gold stilettos , she sang " Best Thing I Never Had " . Dressed in a black gown , Beyoncé sang the ballad at Macy 's 35th Annual July 4 Fireworks Spectacular to an audience , which included serving members of the armed forces . 
 Beyoncé performed " Best Thing I Never Had " on The View and on Late Night with Jimmy Fallon . During the performance on Late Night with Jimmy Fallon , she was dressed in white dress and backed by house band The Roots . Brad Wete of Entertainment Weekly wrote that Beyoncé " flipped the track three ways — first " as she performed it in its piano @-@ driven as heard on the album , then adopted a funky style to chant the second verse , before ending in jazzy fashion on the bridge . Caroline Shin of New York magazine described Beyoncé 's performance as powerful . She performed " Best Thing I Never Had " on August 14 , 2011 during the 4 Intimate Nights with Beyoncé revue , held at the Roseland Ballroom , in New York City . Wearing a gold dress , Beyoncé sang it to an audience of 3 @,@ 500 , and was backed by her all @-@ female band as well as her backing singers , called the Mamas . Maura Johnston of The Village Voice wrote that the fans who attended the show , " were able to watch her bask in their singing the supremely confident ' Irreplaceable ' and ' Best Thing I Never Had ' as fearlessly as they might at home . " Jon Caramanica of The New York Times wrote that the performance " hums beautifully but not powerfully " , and added that Beyoncé was " practically in earth mother mode , a healer curing her minions " . During the ITV special A Night With Beyoncé which aired on December 4 in the United Kingdom , Beyoncé performed the ballad to a selected crowd of fans . She was dressed in a corseted gown with a long leather train . 
 = = Other versions and cover versions = = 
 Smith posted the original version of the song on his website , The Super Random , on July 28 , 2011 . On August 18 , 2011 , rappers and producers Lil Jon and Shawty Putt revealed their DJ <unk> Remix of " Best Thing I Never Had " . The song was remixed to incorporate elements of funk and hip hop genres , according to Rap @-@ Up . Lil Jon mixed Beyoncé 's vocals over a sample of The Gap Band ’ s 1982 single , " Outstanding " . This remix features percussive beats and a rap verse by Putt . 
 The Horrors , an English new wave band , performed a cover version of " Best Thing I Never Had " during an edition of the Live Lounge on BBC Radio 1 . Chris Coplan of Consequence of Sound wrote , " [ ... ] reworking the song from fierce anthem to a decidedly Smiths @-@ ian weep @-@ fest , the lads struck the perfect balance between the sass of the original and their own depressing sound . " Krissi Murison of NME commented that their cover was " undoubtedly the greatest song psychedelic shoegaze never had " . " Best Thing I Never Had " was also covered by The X Factor contestant , Craig Colton , during the second week of the competition , in accordance with the theme ' Love and Heartbreak ' . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 Digital download 
 " Best Thing I Never Had " – 4 : 12 
 German CD single 
 " Best Thing I Never Had " – 4 : 13 
 " Run the World ( Girls ) " ( Kaskade Club Remix ) – 5 : 03 
 Digital Remixes EP 
 " Best Thing I Never Had " ( Gareth Wyn Remix ) – 6 : 33 
 " Best Thing I Never Had " ( Olli Collins & Fred <unk> Remix ) – 6 : 23 
 " Best Thing I Never Had " ( Billionaire Remix ) – 4 : 40 
 " Best Thing I Never Had " ( Moguai Remix ) – 6 : 17 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from 4 liner notes . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Hemilepistus reaumuri = 
 Hemilepistus reaumuri is a species of woodlouse that lives in and around the deserts of North Africa and the Middle East , " the driest habitat conquered by any species of crustacean " . It reaches a length of 22 mm ( 0 @.@ 87 in ) and a width of up to 12 mm ( 0 @.@ 47 in ) , and has seven pairs of legs which hold its body unusually high off the ground . The species was described in the Description de l 'Égypte after the French Campaign in Egypt and Syria of 1798 – 1801 , but was first formally named by Henri Milne @-@ Edwards in 1840 as Porcellio reaumuri . It reached its current scientific name in 1930 after the former subgenus Hemilepistus was raised to the rank of genus . 
 H. reaumuri occurs at great population densities and fills an important niche in the desert ecosystem . It feeds on plant leaves , obtains most of its water from moisture in the air and sand , and is in turn an important prey item for the scorpion Scorpio maurus . H. reaumuri is only able to survive in such arid conditions because it has developed parental care of its offspring . Adults dig burrows which are inhabited by family groups , which are recognised using pheromones . The burrows are 40 – 50 cm ( 16 – 20 in ) deep , and the woodlice retreat to the relatively cool and moist conditions of the burrow when surface conditions are unfavourable . The territorial limit of each colony is marked with a faecal embankment . 
 = = Description = = 
 Hemilepistus reaumuri is approximately 22 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 87 in ) long , and 9 – 12 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 35 – 0 @.@ 47 in ) wide . In common with other woodlice , it has seven pairs of legs and a pair of conspicuous antennae . It is classified in the family <unk> ; within that family , it is placed in the genus Hemilepistus because of the presence of tubercles only on the head and the nearby parts of the thorax . 
 H. reaumuri differs from other desert woodlice in a number of respects . It is crepuscular , while other species are nocturnal . Apart from at the highest temperatures , it is also positively phototactic ( is attracted to sunlight ) , while other species are negatively phototactic ( move away from bright light ) . Compared to other woodlice , H. reaumuri walks in an unusual manner , with its body held high off the ground . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 Hemilepistus reaumuri is found in the steppes , semideserts and deserts of North Africa , and the Middle East , and occasionally on the margins of salt lakes . This has been described as " the driest habitat conquered by any species of crustacean " . H. reaumuri is most closely associated with loess soils in the Sahara Desert and Negev Desert , although its range extends from eastern Algeria to western Syria . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Hemilepistus reaumuri is an important part of the desert ecosystem . It has been found at population densities of up to 480 @,@ 000 individuals per hectare , which is equivalent to a biomass of 19 @.@ 2 kg / ha ; in comparison , desert mammals are estimated to have a combined biomass of 39 @.@ 9 kg / ha . The main predator of H. reaumuri is the scorpion Scorpio maurus , and it may compose up to 70 % of the scorpion 's diet . It appears to be vulnerable to attack only on the surface ; no predators are known to attack H. reaumuri in its underground burrows . 
 Hemilepistus reaumuri can only escape the heat of the desert by constructing a burrow , which is time @-@ consuming and energetically costly . One parent must therefore guard the burrow while the other forages for food . H. reaumuri can spend up to ten months of the year returning to the surface to forage , which is far longer than species which do not dig burrows , such as <unk> vulgare or Armadillo officinalis . Although they will forage at temperatures as high as 35 ° C ( 95 ° F ) , these woodlice retreat to their burrow when the temperature is too high . They are also unable to tolerate air with a relative humidity below 6 % , which often occurs at depths of up to 30 centimetres ( 12 in ) in the desert soil in the hottest months , and the burrows are therefore dug at least 40 – 50 cm ( 16 – 20 in ) deep . The burrows are vertical , with a single entrance 9 – 12 mm ( 0 @.@ 35 – 0 @.@ 47 in ) in diameter , and there may be up to 20 burrows per square metre ( nearly 2 per square foot ) in favourable areas . If a foraging woodlouse cannot find the burrow entrance on its return , it employs a complex and efficient strategy to find it again . It begins with a spirally widening search , and develops into a more meandering approach the longer it is unable to find the burrow . 
 Hemilepistus reaumuri has a significantly higher biomass than other herbivores in the Negev Desert , making it an important part of herbivore – omnivore food chains . They spend the day provisioning their burrows with leaf material from the surface of the desert , sometimes resting under stones or in crevices of rocks . Their faeces accumulates on the surface , and forms a " faecal embankment " , similar to a levee , which demarcates the extent of the home territory of the colony in the burrow . The plants Artemisia <unk> @-@ alba and <unk> scoparium are the most abundant bushes in the Negev desert , and seem to make up most of the diet of H. reaumuri . 
 The bulk of the water intake of Hemilepistus reaumuri is by taking up water vapour from saturated air and by eating damp sand . Water loss is minimised by the rectal epithelium , which absorbs water , ensuring that the faeces is drier than the food the animal consumed . Evaporation of water through the permeable exoskeleton may , however , provide a valuable cooling effect . 
 = = Life cycle = = 
 Hemilepistus reaumuri is the only species of Hemilepistus to have developed parental care of its offspring , and it is only because of this development that the species can survive in the desert . It is monogamous , and , unusually , both parents tend the young . 
 The colonies are quiescent during the winter , and young individuals emerge in February and March to establish new burrows . Sheltered sites below bushes are chosen , although larger males will often try to pair with a female who has already established a burrow , sometimes ousting her male partner . The anatomy of H. reaumuri is not specialised for digging , and the excavation is a slow process , taking place only in early spring . The first 3 – 5 centimetres ( 1 @.@ 2 – 2 @.@ 0 in ) are dug by a single woodlouse , which then stops to guard the new burrow . Eventually , it will allow one other woodlouse of the opposite sex to enter , and they then engage in a ritual which often lasts for hours , before copulating . 
 The female bears 50 – 100 live young , typically in May . The young remain in the burrow for 10 – 20 days , being provided with food by their parents . On leaving the burrow , they are wary of other families , and adults may catch other adults ' offspring and feed them to their own , but do not normally attack their own children . Members of each social group recognise each other using pheromones . Each pair only produces one brood , and the life of an individual of H. reaumuri is typically around 15 months long , considerably shorter than the 2 – 4 year lifespans of woodlice from more mesic habitats , such as <unk> vulgare , Porcellio scaber or <unk> muscorum . 
 = = Taxonomic history = = 
 Hemilepistus reaumuri was illustrated in volume 21 of the Description de l 'Égypte , researched during Napoleon 's campaign in Egypt and Syria of 1798 – 1801 , and dedicated to René Antoine Ferchault de Réaumur . The section on Crustacea was begun by Marie Jules César Savigny but finished by Jean Victoire Audouin after Savigny 's health deteriorated . The species was not given a formal scientific name , however , until Henri Milne @-@ Edwards did so in 1840 , calling it Porcellio reaumuri . Although initially placed in the genus Porcellio , it was later moved by G. H. A. Budde @-@ Lund in 1879 to his new subgenus Hemilepistus , which was raised from a subgenus of Porcellio to the rank of genus by Karl Wilhelm <unk> in 1930 . Several species names that were previously thought to be synonyms of H. reaumuri have been re @-@ examined , and found to refer to a species in a different family , now known as Porcellio <unk> . 
 = Pennsylvania Route 132 = 
 Pennsylvania Route 132 ( PA 132 ) is a state highway in southeast Pennsylvania . It runs northwest to southeast through Bucks County in suburban Philadelphia from PA 611 in Warrington Township to Interstate 95 ( I @-@ 95 ) in Bensalem Township . It is a commercial route lined with shopping centers throughout much of its 15 @-@ mile ( 24 km ) length . It is named Street Road and is five lanes wide for much of its length . It was also designated as the Armed Forces and Veterans Memorial Highway in 2005 . From west to east , it crosses PA 263 and PA 332 in Warminster Township , PA 232 in Upper Southampton Township , PA 532 in Lower Southampton Township , and U.S. Route 1 ( US 1 ) , the Pennsylvania Turnpike ( I @-@ 276 ) , PA 513 , and US 13 in Bensalem Township . Street Road was included in William Penn 's survey plans and completed by 1737 . The road was paved by 1911 and received the PA 132 designation by 1927 . The road was widened into a multi @-@ lane highway and extended to I @-@ 95 by 1970 . An E @-@ ZPass @-@ only interchange with the Pennsylvania Turnpike opened in 2010 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 PA 132 begins at an intersection with PA 611 ( Easton Road ) in Warrington Township , heading to the southeast on West Street Road , a four @-@ lane road that alternates between a divided highway and an undivided five @-@ lane road including a center left @-@ turn lane . West of PA 611 , Street Road continues as an unnumbered road to Lower State Road . It heads through commercial areas before crossing the Little Neshaminy Creek and entering residential areas . At the Valley Road intersection , the route crosses into Warminster Township and continues through suburban development . PA 132 enters commercial areas as it comes to an intersection with PA 263 ( York Road ) . After crossing the New Hope and Ivyland Railroad at @-@ grade about 300 feet ( 91 m ) north of that railroad meeting SEPTA 's Warminster Line , the route passes through industrial areas before intersecting PA 332 ( Jacksonville Road ) . 
 Past the PA 332 intersection , the road continues through a mix of homes and businesses as East Street Road . Upon crossing Davisville Road , PA 132 enters Upper Southampton Township and passes more businesses . The road crosses PA 232 ( Second Street Pike ) in the community of Southampton before crossing a bridge over SEPTA 's abandoned Fox Chase / Newtown Line . After passing through wooded residential areas , the road crosses into Lower Southampton Township at the Stump Road intersection and passes under Norfolk Southern 's Morrisville Line . 
 Street Road continues past a mix of residential and commercial development as it comes to an intersection with PA 532 ( Bustleton Pike ) in the community of Feasterville . After crossing PA 532 , the road heads past several businesses before turning south @-@ southeast into woodland . PA 132 turns southeast again and intersects Philmont Avenue prior to entering Bensalem Township . Upon entering Bensalem , the route passes over SEPTA 's West Trenton Line on a bridge as it enters commercial areas again . After a bridge over CSX 's Trenton Subdivision , PA 132 passes under the Pennsylvania Turnpike ( I @-@ 276 ) immediately before an intersection with Old Lincoln Highway , becoming a divided highway . 
 A short distance later , the road reaches a partial cloverleaf interchange with US 1 before turning south and coming to an E @-@ ZPass @-@ only ramp that provides access to and from the eastbound Pennsylvania Turnpike . PA 132 continues south @-@ southeast past more businesses , becoming an undivided road again and passing the entrance to Parx Casino and Racing . The road passes more development as it reaches the PA 513 ( <unk> Road ) intersection . Farther southeast , PA 132 reaches an interchange with US 13 before ending at the I @-@ 95 interchange . Past I @-@ 95 , Street Road continues as an unnumbered road to State Road . 
 In 2014 , PA 132 had an annual average daily traffic count ranging from a high of 42 @,@ 000 vehicles between Trevose Road / Old Street Road and Old Lincoln Highway to a low of 25 @,@ 000 vehicles between Maple Avenue and PA 232 . The entire length of PA 132 is part of the National Highway System . 
 = = History = = 
 Street Road was originally surveyed in the late 17th century , with the road being included in the original survey plans of William Penn for the Province of Pennsylvania . For much of its history it has been known as " the Street road " . It was called the Street road because , contrary to present usage where " street " is a synonym for road , the original use of the word " street " was a paved road . The entire length of the road was completed by 1737 . Street Road became a paved road by 1911 ; at the time , the route was not defined as a legislative route . By 1927 , PA 132 was designated onto part of Street Road , running from US 611 ( now PA 611 ) in Warrington Township southeast to US 13 in Bensalem Township . 
 In February 1950 , two traffic signals were installed along the road in Bensalem . Street lights were installed along the stretch of PA 132 in Bensalem in December 1952 . In August 1956 , Bensalem police chief William <unk> urged for the stretch of Street Road through the township to be completely reconstructed as it was one of the most dangerous roads in the state . The state widened the portion of PA 132 through Upper Southampton and Lower Southampton townships from 22 feet ( 6 @.@ 7 m ) to 24 feet ( 7 @.@ 3 m ) in 1956 ; this widening was called a " useless waste of public funds " by the Lower Southampton Township planning commission as the road was not anticipated to handle increasing traffic volumes . The portion of Street Road between US 1 and US 13 in Bensalem Township was repaved in summer 1957 ; however the shoulders were not repaved , resulting in a drop between the travel lanes and the shoulder . In August 1958 , the Pennsylvania State Highway Department ( PDH ) considered reducing the speed limit on the two @-@ lane stretch of PA 132 between Davisville Road and Gravel Hill Road in Upper Southampton Township in order to make the road safer . 
 On January 9 , 1960 , the PDH awarded a contract worth $ 1 @,@ 488 @,@ 493 to James D. Morrisey , Inc. to upgrade the section of PA 132 between Neshaminy and Warminster to a four @-@ lane divided highway . In November 1961 , the portion of Street Road southeast of US 13 was closed to allow for construction of I @-@ 95 ( Delaware Expressway ) , which would include an interchange with Street Road ; this interchange was planned to be completed in 1962 . In January 1962 , a proposal was made to split PA 132 onto separate roadways through Feasterville , with the westbound direction using Irving Place a block north of Street Road . In January 1963 , plans were made to widen the entire length of PA 132 to 80 feet ( 24 m ) with a median strip , with a portion in Feasterville to be widened to 71 feet ( 22 m ) . The widening was originally planned to be completed in 1965 . By March of that year , the widening project was shelved as the state felt they should receive federal funds to fund the project . With the widening shelved , businesses from <unk> and Southampton along with State Senator Marvin Keller led a push to get the portion of Street Road through the two communities paved , which was in disrepair and saw a lot of accidents . 
 In May 1965 , construction began to widen the portion of PA 132 between US 1 and US 13 in Bensalem to a four @-@ lane divided highway . On August 27 , 1965 , a 2 @-@ mile ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) stretch of new concrete pavement along PA 132 in Bensalem was completed , with work then to begin on rebuilding the original roadway to make it a divided highway . The widening of Street Road into a divided highway between US 1 and US 13 was completed in December 1965 . The proposed widening of PA 132 in Feasterville drew concerns from residents who feared they would lose their homes . In July 1967 , the state made plans to add left turn lanes at PA 132 's intersections with US 611 in Warrington and PA 263 in Warminster in order to reduce crashes . In 1969 , work was underway in widening Street Road between PA 263 and PA 332 in Warminster . The widening of PA 132 into a divided highway was completed in 1970 . As a result of this improvement , a portion of the road was relocated east of Feasterville , with the former alignment becoming Old Street Road . Also by this time , the route was extended southeast to an interchange with I @-@ 95 . 
 In May 1971 , plans were announced to install a traffic signal at PA 132 and Mechanicsville Road in Bensalem Township , an intersection that saw many accidents . Plans were discussed in September 1975 to <unk> PA 132 to handle increasing traffic volumes , with work projected to begin between 1977 and 1980 . On November 22 , 1976 , Warminster Township supervisors voted against building sidewalks and curbs on a portion of Street Road in the township in order to not burden taxpayers . In 2005 , a bill was passed designated the entire length of PA 132 as the Armed Forces and Veterans Memorial Highway . On May 28 , 2007 , PA 132 was officially named the Armed Forces and Veterans Memorial Highway in a ceremony held in Warminster , with State Representative Kathy Watson in attendance . On November 22 , 2010 , an E @-@ ZPass only ramp with access to and from the eastbound Pennsylvania Turnpike in Bensalem Township opened , intended to provide improved access to the Parx Casino and reduce congestion at the Pennsylvania Turnpike interchange with US 1 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Bucks County . 
 = Shame ( Robbie Williams and Gary Barlow song ) = 
 " Shame " is a song written and recorded by English singers Robbie Williams and Gary Barlow for Williams 's second greatest hits compilation album , In and Out of Consciousness : Greatest Hits 1990 – 2010 ( 2010 ) . Produced by Trevor Horn , it was released as the lead single from the album on 27 August 2010 in most countries worldwide and on 1 October in the United Kingdom . " Shame " marks the first time Williams and Barlow collaborated on a song together solely and the first time they worked together since Williams left Take That in 1995 . It is a pop song with country and electro music influences ; two reviewers noted that it contains an acoustic guitar part similar to the one of The Beatles ' 1968 song , " Blackbird " . The lyrical content of the single revolves around singers 's broken relationship and fixing things up . 
 " Shame " received generally favourable reviews from music critics who praised the song 's sound and the melodic and lyrical skills of the performers . It reached the top @-@ ten in seven countries worldwide including Hungary , Netherlands , Italy and Denmark . In the singers 's native United Kingdom , it peaked at number two on the singles chart and was certified silver by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) , denoting shipments of over 200 @,@ 000 copies in the country alone . The accompanying music video for the song was directed by Vaughan Arnell in Los Angeles and premiered on 26 August 2010 . It features Williams and Barlow dancing and singing the song in a bar and fishing on a pond . Multiple critics linked the storyline and the pair 's chemistry in the video to the 2005 film , Brokeback Mountain . To further promote " Shame " , the pair performed it on multiple occasions including on the Help for Heroes concert and Strictly Come Dancing . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 In July 1995 , Williams announced that he was leaving Take That , a boy band in which both he and Barlow took part . Following his departure , the group disbanded until 2005 when they made their reunion . After 13 years , in 2008 , during the band 's work on their fifth studio album , The Circus , Barlow and Williams met for the first time since the latter left the band . In 2010 , in an interview on BBC Radio 1 , Williams elaborated , " ' It is one of those situations in life that could be very explosive and could go completely wrong . We had that big chat and the most amazing thing happened at the end of it . We both said sorry to each other and we both meant it and that was all we needed . " Barlow added " I spent the last 15 years thinking about what I was going to say . " 
 " Shame " was written by Barlow and Williams for Williams 's second greatest hits album , In and Out of Consciousness : Greatest Hits 1990 – 2010 ( 2010 ) . The single was conceived in February 2010 and written in a time span of an hour , in an empty recording studio located in Los Angeles ; it was inspired by their past trouble relationship . English musician Trevor Horn produced " Shame " while Tim Weidner and Graham Archer did the engineering of the track , whilst Dave Miles served as an additional engineer . Weidner also provided the mixing of the song . All of its mastering was done at the Metropolis Studios in London and the Gateway Mastering in Portland , Maine . 
 " Shame " was released as the lead and only single from In and Out of Consciousness : Greatest Hits 1990 – 2010 . It was made available for digital download via the iTunes Store on 27 August 2010 in some countries , including Australia , Denmark , Germany and Italy . In singers 's native United Kingdom it was placed for digital purchase over a month later on 1 October . On 4 October , Virgin Records released a CD single of " Shame " in the UK ; apart from the title track , the single featured another song performed by Williams , titled " The Queen " . 
 = = Composition and lyrical interpretation = = 
 " Shame " is a pop song with a length of three minutes fifty @-@ nine seconds . According to Faber Music 's digital sheet music for the song , " Shame " is composed in the key of Bb major and set in common time signature , and has a moderately slow groove of 96 beats per minute . The singers 's vocals span from the low note of B3 to the high note of B5 . Michael Cragg of The Guardian noted that the single features country music influences and an " electro @-@ tinged " chorus , reminiscent of the works of British producer Stuart Price . Jody Thompson of The Daily Mail and Digital Spy 's Mayer Nissim noted that " Shame " contains an acoustic guitar part which is similar to the one of " Blackbird " , a 1968 song written by Paul McCartney and performed by The Beatles . 
 The lyrical content of " Shame " revolves around " the breakdown in the relationship " that Williams and Barlow experienced after the former left Take That . Williams starts the song with the line , " Well there 's three versions of this story / Mine and yours and then the truth " , whilst Barlow responds channeling his original attempt for reconciliation , " I read your mind and tried to call / My tears could fill the Albert Hall . " Stuff.co.nz described the lyrics as " happy ending " and " patch things up " , when specifically singing the lines , " I don 't recall the reasons why , I must have meant them at the time , is this the sound of sweet surrender ? " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Shame " received generally favourable reviews from contemporary music critics . Nissim gave the song three out of five stars and wrote that although it is not good as Take That 's previous singles , " Patience " , " Back for Good " and " Pray " , " it sounds awfully sweet and , more importantly , absolutely genuine . " Sean Egan of BBC Music stated that the single , " is as good as it sounds on paper , Barlow 's sumptuous melodic skills allied to a lyrical prowess we never suspected Williams had in the Take That days as the two engage in a sweetly regretful dialogue with each other about their past feuds . " A reviewer for CBBC described it as a " really sweet " and " meaningful " song that has " cheeky " sense of humour and words that can make the listener happy . USA Today 's Jerry Shriver noted that " Shame " confirms Williams as a " former boy wonder " who " is in no danger of losing his mojo " . Katie Boucher of The National called the single " a bouncy reconciliatory duet " with a sound more similar to Take That , rather than Williams 's solo material . 
 In a less enthusiastic review , Scott <unk> of Contactmusic.com stated , " the song is a cheesy paean to their past . To their credit they don 't pretend it 's anything other than that . " MusicOMH 's Nic Oliver called the collaboration " wooden musically " , but noted that Williams succeeds to " turn in wry , self @-@ deprecating lyric that bodes well for his mature years " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 On 10 October 2010 , " Shame " debuted and peaked at number two on the UK Singles Chart and the Scottish Singles Chart with over 107 @,@ 000 copies sold for the week . Two weeks prior it , the song peaked at number one on the UK Airplay Chart . It was certified silver by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) , denoting shipments of over 200 @,@ 000 copies in the country alone . On the Irish Singles Chart , the single debuted and peaked at number eight on 7 October . In Italy , the song debuted and peaked at number seven on singles chart ; the next week it fell to number eight . The Italian Music Industry Federation ( FIMI ) certified the song gold for sales of over 15 @,@ 000 copies in the country . " Shame " was most successful in Hungary where it peaked at number one on the Rádio Top 100 chart . In Netherlands , the song debuted at number 17 on the Dutch Singles 100 on 4 September ; after seven weeks fluctuating the chart it peaked at number four on 16 October . It debuted at number 15 on the Danish Singles Chart on 10 September , before peaking at number nine the next week . It also peaked at number nine in Israel . 
 On 15 October , " Shame " debuted and peaked at number 11 on the German Singles Chart . On the Belgian Charts the single peaked at number 19 on the Wallonia chart and number 21 on the Flanders chart . On the Swiss Singles Chart , the song debuted at number 23 on 19 September . After three weeks , it peaked at number 19 . The performance of the song was also similar in Austria , where it debuted and peaked at number 20 . It failed to make a significant impact on the Australian Singles Chart and only peaked at number 62 for one week . " Shame " was least successful in Slovakia and Japan where it peaked at number 65 and number 91 respectively . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Shame " was directed by Vaughan Arnell . It was shot on 21 and 22 February , 2010 in Los Angeles , whilst the scenes in the mountains were done in Malibu . It premiered on 26 August 2010 on Williams 's official website and on YouTube . On 1 October 2010 , it was made available for digital download via the iTunes Store . 
 The video begins with Williams waiting for his laundry to be done in a store , before getting out for a walk . Meanwhile , Barlow is standing on the other side of the street . As the song starts the two of them start walking towards their cars whilst looking at each other . When they get inside , the scenes are intercut with the two of them dancing with their female partners . Later in the video , they are shown sitting at the bar having a drink whilst singing the song 's words . As the second chorus starts , Williams and Barlow are at a pond , fishing and laughing . Scenes of them looking each other secretly are also shown . In the middle of " Shame " ' s bridge they start taking their shirts off . Shortly , they are shown climbing up a cliffs . After they get on the top they want to jump , however , they release it 's too high . Instead they hug each other and walk away as the video finishes . 
 Critics heavily compared the storyline of the music video to that of the 2005 film , Brokeback Mountain . Birmingham Mail 's Luke <unk> described it as a " lighthearted parody " of the film and according to him the visual depicts Williams and Barlow as young cowboys who are in love secretly . Cragg noted that the video features " the two men gaze lovingly into each other 's eyes , strip to the waist and fall in love all over again . " Thompson thought that it is " a tongue @-@ in cheek nod " to Brokeback Mountain , and wrote that " they are seen stealing admiring glances at each other " just like actors Jake Gyllenhaal and Heath Ledger in the film . According to The Sun the video likens the love @-@ hate relationship that Williams and Barlow experienced to the film 's " tormented " gay cowboys . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Williams and Barlow performed " Shame " for the first time on 12 September 2010 at the Help for Heroes concert held in London . On 2 October the pair sang the song at the series eight of the Strictly Come Dancing . A reviewer of newspaper Metro reviewed the performance and wrote , " the pair , wearing matching black suits , spent much of the early stages of their performance sitting on stools and gazing into each other ’ s eyes as they sung the duet . " On 7 October , Williams and Barlow were chatting at the BBC Radio 1 where they gave a performance of the song . The singers were guests at the Paul O 'Grady Live chat show and also performed the single on 8 October . Three days after , on 11 October , they gave a rendition of the track on the morning television programme , Daybreak . On 18 November the pair performed the song on the German reality TV programme , Popstars : Girls forever . Barlow included " Shame " on the set list of his 2014 tour , Since I Saw You Last , where he performed a solo acoustic version of the song . 
 = = Formats and track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of In and Out of Consciousness : Greatest Hits 1990 – 2010 . 
 Locations 
 Mastering at Metropolis Studios , London ; Gateway Mastering , Portland , Maine 
 Personnel 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Banksia oligantha = 
 Banksia oligantha , commonly known as Wagin Banksia , is an endangered species in the plant family Proteaceae endemic to south west Western Australia . It belongs to Banksia subg . Isostylis , a subgenus of three closely related Banksia species with dome @-@ shaped heads as inflorescences , rather than characteristic Banksia flower spikes . A shrub or small tree up to 4 m ( 13 ft ) high , it has prickly foliage and pink and cream flowerheads which appear in late Spring ( October to December ) . 
 First collected in 1984 near the wheatbelt town of Wagin , Banksia oligantha was officially described in 1987 by Australian botanist Alex George . Several scattered populations survive in fragments of remnant bushland in a region which has been mostly cleared for agriculture . It has been listed as Declared Rare Flora by the Western Australian Government . 
 = = Description = = 
 Banksia oligantha grows as a single @-@ trunked small tree or as an erect shrub with few main stems . Reports of its maximum height vary from 3 m ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) to 5 m ( 16 ft ) . When not in flower it is said to look somewhat like Banksia sessilis ( Parrot Bush ) . It has smooth grey bark for the most part , though bark near the base of the trunk may be lightly fissured in older trees . Young stems are covered in hairs , both short and soft , and long and coarse ; these are lost with age . 
 Leaves are deep green and glossy above , and a pale matte green below . They are roughly oval @-@ shaped , but concave rather than lying flat . There is a sharp point at the tip , and two to four more such points along each margin . They range in length from 1 @.@ 5 to 3 @.@ 7 cm ( 0 @.@ 59 to 1 @.@ 46 in ) , and in width from 0 @.@ 4 to 2 @.@ 0 cm ( 0 @.@ 16 to 0 @.@ 79 in ) , with a petiole 2 to 3 mm ( 0 @.@ 079 to 0 @.@ 118 in ) long . Young leaves have a coating of woolly hairs on both sides , but these are soon lost except in pits in the undersurface . 
 Appearing from October to December ( late spring ) , the flowers occur in dome @-@ shaped heads from 2 @.@ 5 to 3 cm ( 0 @.@ 98 to 1 @.@ 18 in ) in diameter , growing at the ends of branches . These comprise just 20 to 35 individual flowers , enclosed at the base by a whorl of furry involucral bracts 2 to 4 mm ( 0 @.@ 079 to 0 @.@ 157 in ) long . As with most other Proteaceae , each flower consists of a perianth comprising four united tepals , and a single pistil , the style of which is initially enclosed within the limb of the perianth , but breaks free at anthesis . In B. oligantha , the perianth is 21 to 22 mm ( 0 @.@ 83 to 0 @.@ 87 in ) long , with a limb of 3 to 3 @.@ 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 12 to 0 @.@ 14 in ) . <unk> colour grades from red at the base to pale yellow at the limb . The styles are straight , 19 to 24 mm ( 0 @.@ 75 to 0 @.@ 94 in ) long , and uniformly cream . 
 Old flowers soon fall from the flower heads , revealing a woody dome with 1 to 6 follicles embedded in it . These are a mottled grey colour , smooth , and shortly furry . They are oval @-@ shaped , measuring 14 to 19 mm ( 0 @.@ 55 to 0 @.@ 75 in ) long by 10 to 15 mm ( 0 @.@ 39 to 0 @.@ 59 in ) high by 8 to 9 mm ( 0 @.@ 31 to 0 @.@ 35 in ) wide . Each follicle contains up to two winged seeds , from 17 to 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 67 to 0 @.@ 79 in ) long . 
 Banksia oligantha is most easily distinguished from the other two species in B. subg . Isostylis by its smaller leaves , flowers and fruit . Its foliage is also not as prickly as that of B. cuneata . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 = = = Discovery and naming = = = 
 Banksia oligantha was discovered by Ken Wallace of the Government of Western Australia 's Department of Conservation and Land Management ( now the Department of Environment and Conservation ) in September 1984 , during a survey of <unk> Gully Nature Reserve ( Nature Reserve <unk> ) , about 28 km ( 17 mi ) northwest of Wagin . Two months later , on 18 November 1984 , Anne Taylor collected from the same location what would become the type specimen . It was recognised as a new species well before a name was published for it , and was referred to in the interim by the informal names " Banksia aff . <unk> " and " Banksia sp . Wagin " . Alex George included an entry for it under the name Banksia oligantha in the 1987 second edition of his The Banksia Book , but the formal publication of that name did not occur until the following year , when George 's " New taxa and notes on Banksia L.f. ( Proteaceae ) " appeared . The specific epithet oligantha derives from the Greek <unk> ( " few " ) and <unk> ( " flower " ) , in reference to the low number of flowers per flower head . 
 The species has an uneventful nomenclatural history : it has no synonyms , and no subspecies or varieties have been published . 
 = = = Infrageneric placement = = = 
 George placed B. oligantha in subgenus Isostylis because of its dome @-@ shaped flower heads . A 1996 cladistic analysis of the genus by botanists Kevin Thiele and Pauline Ladiges based on morphology yielded no information about the circumscription of B. subg . Isostylis or the relationships within it , so George 's placement of this species was retained . George largely discarded Thiele and Ladiges ' changes in his 1999 arrangement , but again B. oligantha 's placement was unaffected , and the placement of B. oligantha there can be summarised as follows : 
 Banksia 
 B. subg . Banksia ( 3 sections , 11 series , 73 species , 11 subspecies , 14 varieties ) 
 B. subg . Isostylis 
 B. ilicifolia 
 B. oligantha 
 B. cuneata 
 Since 1998 , American botanist Austin Mast and co @-@ authors have been publishing results of ongoing cladistic analyses of DNA sequence data for the subtribe Banksiinae , which then comprised genera Banksia and Dryandra . Their analyses suggest a phylogeny that differs greatly from George 's taxonomic arrangement . B. oligantha resolves as sister taxon ( that is , next closest relative ) to B. ilicifolia , and B. cuneata resolves as sister to these two . This suggests a monophyletic B. subg . Isostylis ; yet the clade appears fairly derived ( that it , it evolved relatively recently ) , implying that B. subgenus Isostylis may not merit subgeneric rank . 
 Early in 2007 , Mast and Thiele rearranged the genus Banksia by merging Dryandra into it , and publishing B. subg . Spathulatae for the taxa having spoon @-@ shaped cotyledons ; thus B. subg . Banksia was redefined as encompassing taxa lacking spoon @-@ shaped cotyledons . They foreshadowed publishing a full arrangement once DNA sampling of Dryandra was complete ; in the meantime , if Mast and Thiele 's nomenclatural changes are taken as an interim arrangement , then B. oligantha is placed in B. subg . Banksia . 
 = = = Phylogeny = = = 
 Relationships between B. oligantha and the other members of B. subg . Isostylis still remain unclear . Though Mast 's studies found B. cuneata to be the most basal of the three species , a 2004 study of genetic divergence within the subgenus yielded both other possibilities : some analyses suggested B. ilicifolia as basal , while others suggested B. oligantha . Further complicating the situation is the southernmost ( and closest ) population of B. cuneata , which has both genetic and phenetic affinities with B. oligantha . The origin of this population is unknown : it might have arisen through hybridisation , or it may be a transitional or even ancestral form . Finally , biogeographical factors suggest that B. ilicifolia would be the most basal of the three species : it occurs in the High Rainfall Zone where relictual species are most common , whereas the others are restricted to the Transitional Rainfall Zone , where more recently evolved species are most common . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Banksia oligantha occurs over a range of about 100 kilometres ( 62 miles ) in southern parts of the Avon Wheatbelt region of the Southwest Botanical Province of Western Australia . Four populations are known , containing about 1 @,@ 700 adult plants in total : 
 The first known population , at <unk> Gully Nature Reserve in <unk> . This population appears to be in decline : in 1988 it was estimated as containing from 500 to 800 plants , but a 2001 survey found only 198 adults , 1 seedling , and 286 dead plants ; and a 2004 survey found 135 adults , no seedlings , and 174 dead plants . 
 A healthy population at Katanning , spanning two Native Settlement reserves and some private property . This population appears to be increasing ; a 2004 survey found nearly 1400 adult plants and over 500 seedlings . 
 A small population at <unk> , spanning a nature reserve and private property . This population is apparently in decline . No seedlings have ever been reported at this location , and from 1997 to 2004 the number of reported adults fell from around 110 to 13 . 
 A recently discovered healthy population on private property at <unk> . A 2004 survey counted 188 adults , 35 seedlings , and 36 dead plants . 
 The species grows in sand dunes of white , white @-@ grey or yellow @-@ brown sand , amongst a system of ephemeral salt creeks . Populations occur both in low @-@ lying areas near creeks , and atop dunes . The vegetation has been described as low open woodland over heath , and as tall open shrubland with some scattered trees . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Little has been published on the ecology of B. oligantha . Its lifespan is probably around 10 to 30 years . 
 Six species of honeyeater have been observed feeding at its flowers , as have insects including honeybees , ants , butterflies , beetles and native bees . Both birds and insects function as pollinators , but honeybees are probably not very effective : in one study only about 4 % of honeybees collected pollen , and they tended to move from inflorescence to inflorescence on the same plant , rather than moving between plants . 
 Assessments of the mating system of this species have found that outcrossing rates vary between populations , with populations in disturbed environments tending to be more inbred than populations in relatively intact bushland . This has been attributed to a range of causes . Firstly , the higher density of disturbed populations leads to greater rates of mating between neighbouring plants , resulting in more genetic structure and thus more effective selfing . Secondly , disturbed populations usually lack an understorey , and so cannot support a resident population of honeyeaters ; instead , they rely upon sporadic visits for pollination . The greatly reduced pollination rates means fewer outcrossing fertilisations on average , leading to less selection against inbred fertilisations . 
 Like many plants in south @-@ west Western Australia , B. oligantha is adapted to an environment in which bushfire events are relatively frequent . Most Banksia species can be placed in one of two broad groups according to their response to fire : reseeders are killed by fire , but fire also triggers the release of their canopy seed bank , thus promoting recruitment of the next generation ; resprouters survive fire , resprouting from a lignotuber or , more rarely , epicormic buds protected by thick bark . B. oligantha is a reseeder ; it has thin bark , and lacks a lignotuber , so it is killed by fire . However , the species is weakly serotinous : fire triggers seed release , yet seed release still occurs in the absence of fire . 
 Seed germination rates are quite high . One study found germination rates better than 77 % in most batches tested . Seed is likely to remain viable for a long time , as seed of the closely related B. cuneata remains viable for around ten years . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 Banksia oligantha is listed as an endangered species under the federal Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 ( EPBC Act ) , and as rare under Western Australia 's Wildlife Conservation Act 1950 . These rankings are due to its small and severely fragmented distribution , and the ongoing degradation of its habitat . Threats include grazing by sheep and rabbits , drought , the drift of aerosol chemicals from surrounding farmland , invasion by weeds , and rising salinity . Studies have shown it to be moderately susceptible to Phytophthora cinnamomi dieback . 
 = = Cultivation = = 
 Banksia oligantha is rarely seen in cultivation , though it is said to merit more consideration than it receives . It is a fast @-@ growing plant that flowers prolifically , producing " lovely masses of matchstick @-@ like cream flowers " . However , its prickly foliage makes it unsuitable for growth near paths , it is prone to lose branches in strong wind , and it is often attacked by woodboring beetles . 
 Propagation is by seed , but these are hard to obtain . Seeds do not require any treatment before sowing , and take 37 to 40 days to germinate . Propagation by cutting has not been attempted , but might be possible , since the closely related B. cuneata has been propagated this way , albeit with unpredictable results . The plant should be grown in deep , acidic to neutral sand at a sheltered site . It is recommended to prune it when young , to encourage branching . 
 = Bizounce = 
 " Bizounce " is the debut single recorded by American singer Olivia , from her debut studio album Olivia ( 2001 ) . Producers Doug Allen and Joshua Thompson wrote the song in collaboration with Olivia and songwriters David L. Conley , Quincy Q. Patrick , and Juan Magic " Peters . It was released on March 20 , 2001 as the lead single from the album . It is an upbeat , R & B track with lyrics that revolve around dissatisfaction with a relationship and the desire to " <unk> " or leave the partner . In her autobiography , Release Me : My Life , My Words , Olivia revealed her disappointment that " Bizounce " was chosen and released as the lead single because of interference by label executives . 
 " Bizounce " received primarily mixed reviews from music critics ; some critics praised Olivia 's vocals , image , and its choice as her debut single while others questioned Olivia 's connection with the music . The single was a commercial success in the United States , peaking at number fifteen on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 and number four on the U.S. Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Singles & Tracks charts . It also peaked at number sixteen on the Canadian Singles Chart . " Bizounce " is Olivia 's most successful solo single , leaving her 2005 collaboration with rapper 50 Cent on " Candy Shop " as her most successful overall . To promote " Bizounce " , she performed it on various television and live shows . She also included the song as a part of the promotional tour leading up the album 's release . The song 's accompanying music video was directed by Marcus Raboy . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 After initially attempting to rap under the name " O @-@ Lovely " , Olivia chose to attend Hofstra University and Five Towns College to further her career in music . Olivia said that people would frequently compare her voice to R & B singer Brandy . During her audition for American record producer Clive Davis , she sang the gospel hymn " His Eye Is on the Sparrow " . Musician Joshua Thompson produced Olivia 's demo , and arranged her audition for Arista Records ' executives and Davis . In an interview with Billboard , Olivia said she was signed to the label immediately after the meeting . J Records senior vice president Ron <unk> described Olivia as " the real deal " , emphasizing her roles as " a songwriter , a singer , and a rapper " . At age 17 , Olivia was the first artist signed to J Records by Clive Davis . Executives from the record company referred to her as " the First Lady of J " . " Bizounce " was released through J Records as the lead single from Olivia 's debut album Olivia on March 20 , 2001 . The release included explicit and " PG @-@ 13 " versions of the single along with a twenty @-@ nine second snippet of the second single " Are U Capable " , and a minute and twenty @-@ two second snippet of the album track " It 's On Again " . The instrumental and " X @-@ rated " versions of the single were released on vinyl . It was written by Olivia , producers Doug Allen and Joshua P. Thompson , and songwriters David L. Conley , Quincy Q. Patrick , and Juan Magic " Peters . 
 Olivia later described the recording and promotion of " Bizounce " and the album as a learning experience for her future ventures ; she said her time at J Records was : " cut short by the politics of the industry and me not actually taking my career into my own hands " . She said record executives took away her control over the creation of the album because of her youth and inexperience . During the record 's promotion , Olivia described having a good working relationship with Davis , but she called him " extremely controlling " after leaving the label . Olivia claimed that she was forced to be the bad girl while label mate Alicia Keys was promoted as the good girl . In an official statement , J Records ' representatives pointed to Olivia 's credits as a co @-@ writer for a majority of the album as proof of her involvement with the project and maintained : " Clive doesn 't categorize artists as good or bad girls " . In her 2014 autobiography , Release Me : My Life , My Words , Olivia wrote that she disagreed with the record label 's decision to release " Bizounce " as her debut single . Despite saying the single was a perfect fit for the clubs , and one of her favorite tracks from the album , she believed it did not reflect her as an artist . She originally pushed for " It 's On Again " to be the single . 
 = = Composition and lyrics = = 
 According to digital information from Beatport , " Bizounce " is a R & B and funk song composed in the key of G minor . An overview from AllMusic described it as a rap and electronic song with elements of dance and Hi @-@ NRG music . The song 's instrumentation is composed of drums , keyboards , and a bass guitar . AllMusic 's Jon <unk> praised the contrast between the " brutally frank " lyrics about break @-@ ups and infidelity , and the " seductive " instrumentals , making the single one of the most memorable of 2001 . According to a review in Billboard , Olivia 's vocal performance reflects her hip hop influences and gives the single a " street edge " while its " orchestral tinges " are best @-@ suited for R & B radio . 
 In an interview with Billboard , Olivia called the single an " empowering women 's song " for inspiring women to leave unfulfilling relationships . She said she wrote it : " for all the people who don 't know how to tell the other person to ' bounce ' " . An article in Vibe magazine noted lyrics , like : " I can 't take this shit no more / Picture frame broken daddy ' cause I can 't trust you / I 'm ridin ' high now / So nigga fuck you " , as creating an impression of Olivia as a " potty @-@ mouth " . NME 's John Mulvey commented that Olivia 's " ruthlessness rather than her vocabulary " was the standout , especially in the lyric : " Shoulda known what you missed at home / Now you 're all alone with no @-@ one to bone " . Mulvey joked that the amount of censorship on the radio edit made Olivia sound " avant @-@ garde " . 
 = = Promotion and music video = = 
 Olivia made appearances on television and on live shows to promote " Bizounce " . Before the album 's release , she performed the single on Soul Train , BET , MTV 's hip @-@ hop video block Sucker Free ( known at the time as <unk> ) , and The Source Sound Lab . It was included on the set list for her promotional tour leading up to the album 's release on May 15 , 2001 . Director Marcus Raboy shot the accompanying music video for the single . A review from Billboard praised the video as something that would : " catch the eyes and ears of music fans " . Raboy would later work with Olivia on the music video for the follow @-@ up single " Are U Capable " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 " Bizounce " received mixed reviews from music critics . Mark Bautz of Entertainment Weekly described " Bizounce " as " a saucy hit single " and noted it as one of the album 's highlights . A review in Billboard praised Olivia 's vocals , saying she " has the mouth of a bad girl and the voice of an angel " , and described the single as making her : " a bona fide R & B singer " . <unk> ' Paulina Bozek wrote that " Bizounce " established Olivia as a " powerful R & B / rap debutante " . Shaheem Reid of MTV named the single an " anthem for women who are fed up wit their mates " while an article in Vibe magazine opined that it was a " hit heavy on attitude " . Mulvey of NME commended the single as giving a " steely boot to a crap lover " in the style of TLC , Kelis , and Eve as well as being a " vicious kiss @-@ off " and a " boudoir come @-@ on " . The Morning Call 's Len Righi criticized " Bizounce " for being indicative of a negative trend in R & B music , where " the plaintive human voice in the throes of transcendent ecstasy or bottomless hurt is not nearly as important as the right attitude , hip @-@ hop production and clothing " . Righi negatively compared the single to music by R & B singer Aaliyah , saying they both emphasized style over substance . 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 " Bizounce " was a commercial success in the United States . It peaked at number fifteen on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 chart and number four on the U.S. | Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Singles & Tracks chart . The single was Olivia 's highest charting entry on the Hot 100 chart until her 2005 collaboration with rapper 50 Cent on " Candy Shop " became her only number @-@ one single on the chart . Prior to the release and success of " Candy Shop " , Fred Bronson of Billboard viewed Olivia as a one @-@ hit wonder with " Bizounce " being her only previous success . In Canada , the single peaked at number sixteen on the Canadian Singles Chart . As of August 13 , 2003 , " Bizounce " has sold 415 @,@ 000 copies . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of " Olivia " , J Records , BMG Rights Management . 
 Management 
 Tallest True Music / DreamWorks ( ASCAP ) 
 Q @-@ Zik Music / Music Pieces ( BMI ) 
 Melodic Noise / Plaything Music ( ASCAP ) 
 O Lovely Music / Kingmaker Music ( ASCAP ) 
 Recording locations 
 Music recording – Tallest Tree Studios ( West Orange , New Jersey ) ; Right Track Studios ( New York City ) 
 Mixing – Tallest Tree Studios ( West Orange , New Jersey ) 
 Personnel 
 = = Charts = = 
 = James Macnamara = 
 James Macnamara ( 1768 – 15 January 1826 ) was an officer of the Royal Navy who served during the American War of Independence and the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars . 
 Born into a naval family , Macnamara served in the East Indies during the last years of the American War of Independence , seeing action with Hughes at the Battle of Cuddalore . He received the acting rank of lieutenant during this time , but reverted to midshipman afterwards . He returned to naval service during the Spanish and Russian armaments , and was serving with Lord Hood aboard HMS Victory on the outbreak of the French Revolutionary Wars . He saw action in the Mediterranean and was eventually promoted to his own commands . He achieved success as a daring frigate captain , serving with Nelson and making several hard @-@ fought captures . He finished his service in the Mediterranean with action at the Battle of Cape St Vincent , and later served in the West Indies before the Peace of Amiens . 
 Macnamara found himself in trouble with the law after killing a man in a duel , but summoned a bevy of naval officers to testify in his defence , and was acquitted . He commanded a number of ships of the line in the following years , in the Baltic , North Sea and off of the French coast . He was promoted to rear @-@ admiral in 1814 , but did not receive a seagoing command . He married in 1818 and died in 1826 , having served with prominent naval officers like Hood , Jervis and Nelson in a long and distinguished career . 
 = = Family and early life = = 
 Macnamara was born into a naval family in 1768 in County Clare , and entered the navy in 1782 aboard the 80 @-@ gun HMS Gibraltar . Gibraltar went out that year to the East Indies , flying the broad pennant of Commodore Sir Richard Bickerton . On his arrival he was transferred to the 74 @-@ gun HMS Superb , the flagship of the station commander , Sir Edward Hughes . Macnamara saw action at the Battle of Cuddalore on 20 June 1783 against M. de Suffren , in which battle Superb sustained losses of 12 men killed and 41 wounded . He was then given an acting rank of lieutenant aboard the 68 @-@ gun HMS Monarca and returned to England with her . He then reverted to the rank of midshipman and served aboard the 50 @-@ gun HMS Europa at Jamaica . Europa was at the time the flagship of Admiral Alexander Innes . After some years in this position , he received his lieutenant 's commission on 1 December 1788 and went on to serve during the Spanish armament in 1789 and the Russian armament in 1791 . He was first aboard the 74 @-@ gun HMS Excellent under Captain John Gell , later following him to the 100 @-@ gun HMS Victory , flying the flag of Admiral Lord Hood . 
 = = French Revolutionary Wars = = 
 Macnamara continued to serve with Hood aboard Victory after the outbreak of war with Revolutionary France in 1793 . He took part in the occupation of Toulon and was promoted by Hood to the rank of master and commander on 22 October 1793 , at about the time of the evacuation of the port . He was appointed acting captain of the 74 @-@ gun HMS Bombay Castle , followed by the 32 @-@ gun HMS Southampton . Despite these commands an official mistake meant that his commission as post captain was dated 6 October 1795 . Southampton was assigned to a squadron commanded by Commodore Horatio Nelson , supporting the Austrian army in Genoa . 
 = = = Command of Southampton = = = 
 Macnamara they spent 15 days in September 1795 blockading a French grain convoy in the port of Genoa . The convoy was protected by two frigates , the Vestale and the Brun . The French finally came out on the evening of the fifteenth day , and were engaged by Southampton , despite the French possessing considerably more firepower . After a sustained engagement Southampton forced Vestale to strike her colours while the Brun escaped with the convoy , leaving Vestale to her fate . But as Southampton prepared to lower her boats to take possession of the French ship , her fore @-@ mast , which had been damaged during the engagement , went by the board . Taking advantage of this , Vestale raised her colours and escaped from the scene . 
 Macnamara had another chance to distinguish himself , when on 9 June 1796 a French corvette was sighted entering Hyères bay , and Vice @-@ Admiral Sir John Jervis , commander of the Mediterranean Fleet , summoned Macnamara to his flagship , HMS Victory . He asked Macnamara to bring out the French ship if he could . Recognising the difficulty and risk that would be involved , he did not make it a formal written order , instead instructing Macnamara ' bring out the enemy 's ship if you can ; I 'll give you no written order ; but I direct you to take care of the king 's ship under your command . ' Macnamara promptly took his ship in under the guns of the batteries , and apparently having been mistaken for a French or neutral frigate , closed to within pistol shot of the French ship , and demanded her captain surrender . The captain replied with a broadside , and Macnamara brought Southampton alongside and sent his first lieutenant , Charles Lydiard , over in command of the boarders . After subduing fierce resistance Lydiard took possession of the French ship and together he and Macnamara escaped out to sea under heavy fire from the French shore batteries . Macnamara reported his triumph to Jervis 
 Sir , in obedience to the orders I received from you on the Victory 's quarter @-@ deck last evening , I pushed through the Grande Passe , and hauled up under the batteries on the N.E. of <unk> with an easy sail , in hopes that I should be taken for a French or neutral frigate , which I have great reason to believe succeeded , as I got within pistol @-@ shot of the enemy 's ship before I was discovered , and cautioned the Captain through a trumpet not to make a fruitless resistance , when he immediately snapped his pistol at me , and fired a broadside . At this period , being very near the heavy battery of Fort <unk> , I laid him instantly onboard , and Lieutenant Lydiard , at the head of the boarders , with an intrepidity that no words can describe entered and carried her in about ten minutes , although he met with a spirited resistance from the captain ( who fell ) and a hundred men under arms to receive him ... After lashing the two ships together , I found some difficulty in getting from under the battery , which kept up a very heavy fire , and was not able to return through the Grande Passe before half after one o 'clock this morning ... 
 The prize , a 24 @-@ gun corvette named Utile , was taken into service with the Royal Navy as HMS Utile and Lydiard was promoted and given command of her , a commission confirmed on 22 July 1796 . Macnamara 's later service with Nelson included the capture of Portoferraio , the evacuations of Caprera and Corsica , and expeditions against Piombino and Castiglione . Macnamara had already developed a reputation for intrepidity bordering on recklessness , and he displayed these qualities again in an attack on the 18 @-@ gun Spanish brig Corso in a strong gale under enemy shore batteries . The first attempt to capture her failed , with only one man , the coxswain , getting on board . Macnamara tried again , managing to place 30 men aboard the Spanish ship , at which she surrendered . Having done so the weather prevented any further attempt to make contact with the prize . One of Macnamara 's last acts in support of the Mediterranean Fleet was to take part in the Battle of Cape St Vincent on 14 February 1797 , in which Southampton formed part of the centre of the line as a repeating frigate . 
 = = = Captain of Cerberus = = = 
 Southampton returned to Britain within a few months of the battle , and Macnamara was appointed to command the 32 @-@ gun HMS Cerberus , initially on the Irish station . During his time there he captured the 10 @-@ gun French privateer <unk> , and on 20 October 1799 came across a convoy of Spanish merchantmen escorted by five frigates and two brigs . Despite the enemy 's numerical superiority Macnamara attacked and captured one of the frigates , but was forced to abandon his prize after the other Spanish frigates came to her defence . He also captured a merchant ship , and having taken her men off , burnt her . Cerberus sustained minor damage during the engagement , and had only four men wounded . The Admiralty showed their approval of Macnamara 's actions by promoting his first lieutenant . Macnamara was then sent out to the West Indies , where he cruised off Jamaica and San Domingo until the Peace of Amiens . Cerberus was then paid off in February 1803 , and Macnamara went ashore . 
 = = Duel = = 
 While ashore during the peace Macnamara contrived to become embroiled in a duel . While walking his Newfoundland dog in Hyde Park on 6 April 1803 he had an altercation with Colonel Robert Montgomery , when their dogs began fighting . Harsh words were exchanged , and the two parties fought a duel that evening at Chalk Farm . Both men were wounded , the colonel mortally . Macnamara was arrested on a charge of manslaughter and put on trial at the Old Bailey on 22 April . Macnamara defended himself from the charge on the grounds that he had received an affront and that it was necessary for him to challenge it in order to maintain his position as a naval officer . He summoned many of his naval friends , among whom Viscounts Hood and Nelson , Lord Hotham , Sir Hyde Parker , Sir Thomas Troubridge , Captains Martin , <unk> , Lydiard , Moore and Waller ; and General Churchill and Lord Minto , to testify in his defence . They supported his assertion that he was the ' reverse of quarrelsome ' and the jury took ten minutes to acquit him . 
 = = Napoleonic Wars = = 
 Macnamara returned to service with the resumption of the wars with France and took command of the 64 @-@ gun HMS Dictator in June 1805 for service in the North Sea . He commanded her for two years on this station before taking command of the 74 @-@ gun HMS Edgar . Macnamara served with the Baltic Fleet under Sir Richard Goodwin Keats in the Great Belt in 1808 . During this service he took command of a squadron of gunboats and attacked a Danish brig and cutter off Nyborg . In a fierce attack , in which seven Danes were killed and thirteen wounded to one British officer killed and two seamen wounded ; both Danish ships were captured . They were found to be the 18 @-@ gun Fama and the 12 @-@ gun <unk> . Macnamara was then appointed to the 74 @-@ gun HMS Berwick in 1809 . This service took him back to the North Sea and then the coast of France . While commanding a small squadron blockading Cherbourg on 24 March 1811 , he chased the French frigate Amazone off Barfleur , attacking the French ship and forcing her crew to abandon and burn her . 
 = = Flag rank and later life = = 
 Macnamara was promoted to rear @-@ admiral on 4 June 1814 , but never had an active command . He married Henrietta , the widow of Lieutenant @-@ Colonel the Hon. George Carleton , on 26 January 1818 . Rear @-@ Admiral James Macnamara died at Clifton , Bristol , on 15 January 1826 at the age of 57 . 
 = History of Fairbanks , Alaska = 
 The history of Fairbanks , the second @-@ largest city in Alaska , can be traced to the founding of a trading post by E.T. Barnette on the south bank of the Chena River on August 26 , 1901 . The area had seen human occupation since at least the last ice age , but a permanent settlement was not established at the site of Fairbanks until the 20th century . 
 The discovery of gold near Barnette 's trading post caused him to turn what had been a temporary stop into a permanent one . The gold caused a stampede of miners to the area , and buildings sprang up around Barnette 's trading post . In November 1903 , the area 's residents voted to incorporate the city of Fairbanks . Barnette became the city 's first mayor , and the city flourished as thousands of people came in search of gold during the Fairbanks Gold Rush . 
 By the time of World War I , the easy @-@ to @-@ reach gold was exhausted and Fairbanks ' population plunged as miners moved to promising finds at Ruby and Iditarod . Construction of the Alaska Railroad caused a surge of economic activity and allowed heavy equipment to be brought in for further exploitation of Fairbanks ' gold deposits . Enormous gold dredges were built north of Fairbanks , and the city grew throughout the 1930s as the price of gold rose during the Great Depression . A further boom came during the 1940s and 1950s as the city became a staging area for construction of military depots during World War II and the first decade of the Cold War . 
 In 1968 , the vast Prudhoe Bay Oil Field was discovered in Alaska 's North Slope . Fairbanks became a supply point for exploitation of the oil field and for construction of the Trans @-@ Alaska Pipeline System , which caused a boom unseen since the first years of Fairbanks ' founding and helped the town recover from the devastating 1967 Fairbanks Flood . Fairbanks became a government center in the late 1960s with the establishment of the Fairbanks North Star Borough , which took Fairbanks as its borough seat . A drop in oil prices during the 1980s caused a recession in the Fairbanks area , but the city gradually recovered as oil prices climbed during the 1990s . Tourism also became an important factor in Fairbanks ' economy , and the growth of the tourism industry and the city continues even as oil production declines . 
 = = Before Fairbanks = = 
 Though there was never a permanent Alaska Native settlement at the site of Fairbanks , <unk> Indians have used the area for thousands of years . An archaeological site excavated on the grounds of the University of Alaska Fairbanks uncovered a Native camp about 3 @,@ 500 years old . From evidence gathered at the site , archaeologists surmise that Native activities in the area were limited to seasonal hunting and fishing . In addition , archeological sites on the grounds of nearby Fort Wainwright date back 10 @,@ 000 years . Sites within Alaska but away from Fairbanks date to the time of the Bering Land Bridge more than 13 @,@ 000 years ago . Arrowheads excavated from the University of Alaska Fairbanks site matched similar items found in Asia , providing some of the first evidence that humans arrived in North America via the land bridge . 
 The first recorded exploration of the Tanana Valley and the Tanana River did not take place until 1885 , but historians believe Russian traders from <unk> and Hudson 's Bay Company traders ventured into the lower reaches of the Tanana and possibly the Chena River in the middle of the 19th century . In 1885 , Henry <unk> Allen of the U.S. Army led the first recorded expedition down the length of the Tanana River , charting the Chena River 's mouth along the way . 
 In July 1897 , the first news of the Klondike gold strike reached Seattle , Washington , triggering the Klondike Gold Rush . Thousands of people boarded steamships heading north to the gold fields . Some of these travelers sailed around the western tip of Alaska and up the Yukon River to Dawson City ( site of the gold fields ) rather than take an arduous overland trip across the Boundary Ranges . 
 One of these adventurers was E.T. Barnette , who intended to establish a trading post at Tanacross , Alaska , where the Valdez @-@ Eagle Trail crossed the Tanana River . He hired the steamer Lavelle Young to transport him and his supplies , and they began their trip upriver in August 1901 . After turning into the Tanana from the Yukon , the steamboat ran into low water . After venturing upstream several miles , the boat reached an impassable point . Barnette suggested the Chena River ( then called the Rock River ) might be a slough of the Tanana and a way around the low water . About 15 miles ( 24 km ) from the mouth of the Chena , the Lavelle Young again ran into an impassable stretch of river . The captain of the Young did not want to travel downstream with a heavy load because of the danger posed by the extra mass . He therefore unloaded Barnette 's cargo on August 26 , 1901 , with an irate Barnette assisting . 
 Barnette began building a cabin at a site he named " Chenoa City " , and he sold supplies to two prospectors , Felix Pedro and Tom Gilmore , who were in the area . Barnette traded for furs , then traveled to Valdez via dog team with his wife and three other men . The mountain pass they traveled through was later named Isabel Pass in honor of Barnette 's wife . From Valdez , he returned to St. Michael , where he built a steamboat , the Isabelle , and began sailing up the Yukon in August 1902 . He intended to move his supplies to Tanacross , but when he arrived at his trading post on the Chena River , he changed his mind . Felix Pedro had discovered gold . 
 = = Origins of Fairbanks = = 
 Before Barnette traveled upriver with the Isabelle , he met Judge James Wickersham in St. Michael . Wickersham was the judge for the federal Third Judicial District , which stretched from the North Slope to the Aleutian Islands . Wickersham was impressed with Barnette and his plan to establish a trading post at Tanacross . He suggested Barnette name his settlement Fairbanks , after Charles W. Fairbanks , the senior Senator from Indiana . Barnette liked the idea and later said , " If we should ever want aid at the national capital , we would have the friendship , at least , of someone who could help us . " When Barnette heard of Pedro 's gold strike , he transferred the name for his planned Tanacross store to the settlement on the Chena River and convinced the people with him to accept the name . 
 When Barnette and the Isabelle 's crew heard of Pedro 's discovery , they immediately fled the boat and the settlement to stake claims on creeks and likely gold @-@ bearing spots 12 miles ( 19 km ) north , near the mountain and creek Pedro named after himself . Marking a claim was simple . Each man could pick a set amount of space , which was marked with posts at each corner , hence " staking " the claim . Each claim had to be listed by a federal recorder . When Barnette and the crew of the Isabelle were staking claims , Barnette proclaimed himself the interim recorder until an official one could be brought to the area . Although they also recorded their claims with Barnette , most men also reported their claims at the official office in Circle . To maximize his gain , Barnette had power of attorney for several relatives in Ohio . He staked claims in their names , thus giving him authority over a large portion of what was believed to be the gold @-@ bearing terrain . 
 Word of Pedro 's discovery spread during the months that followed Barnette 's arrival in September 1902 . In December , he wrote to a friend in Seattle , " A message came yesterday that 1 @,@ 000 people had left Nome during the last three days for here . I look for half of Dawson here before spring . " In January 1903 , Barnette 's cook , <unk> Wada , arrived in Dawson City with word of the gold find . On January 17 , 1903 , the Yukon Sun newspaper ran the headline " <unk> STRIKE MADE IN THE <unk> " across most of its front page , spurring miners from the Yukon to stampede to Fairbanks in the first big rush of the settlement 's history . 
 = = Boom = = 
 When the miners from Nome , Dawson , Rampart , and other places arrived in the Tanana Valley , they were disappointed with what they found . Hundreds of claims were staked , but none were close to Pedro 's discovery claims , which had been taken by the crew of the Isabelle and other early arrivers . Adding to the pressure on claiming land were men who , like Barnette , had power of attorney rights for others , and could thus make multiple claims . The Dawson Daily News reported that one man claimed 144 portions of 20 acres ( 81 @,@ 000 m2 ) apiece . Around Barnette 's trading post , town lots were claimed for $ 2 @.@ 50 apiece , and there was fierce competition for the choicest spots . At the mouth of the Chena River , a competing settlement , named Chena , sprang up when two traders moved their store to the junction of the two rivers . Land speculation was fierce in Chena , where claims were frequently stolen and had to be enforced with firearms . 
 Accounts vary , but historians estimate that by spring 1903 , between 700 and 1 @,@ 000 men arrived in the Tanana Valley . This put an enormous strain on Barnette 's stock of food , which rapidly rose in price with demand . Miners objected to Barnette charging $ 12 per bag of flour and requiring them to buy cases of canned food . They gathered outside his store and demanded he lower his prices or they would burn it down . He responded that he had riflemen inside the building , and both groups reached a compromise . Shortly afterward , Barnette headed south with his wife on a dog team , intending to gather investors to purchase more supplies . 
 In April , Judge Wickersham arrived on a trip looking for a location for the courthouse , jail , and government offices for the Third District courts . He later described his first view of the settlement : " A half @-@ dozen new squat log structures , a few tents ... a small clearing in the primitive forest — that was Fairbanks as I first saw it on April 9 , 1903 . " Wickersham examined Chena as a potential site for the government offices , but he settled on Fairbanks , partially because Barnette 's partner and brother @-@ in @-@ law , Frank Cleary , gave Wickersham a choice piece of land valued at between $ 1 @,@ 500 and $ 2 @,@ 000 . Wickersham asked Cleary to name the two main streets in town Cushman and Lacey , after U.S. Representatives Francis W. Cushman of Washington and John F. Lacey of Iowa . 
 Wickersham estimated 500 people in town , and another count estimated 1 @,@ 000 , with 387 houses under construction , six saloons , and no churches . Before spring arrived , Wickersham published the first newspaper in the settlement — the Fairbanks Miner — on a typewriter . It sold seven copies at $ 5 per copy . But even as the walls of Wickersham 's courthouse were going up , dissatisfied miners were leaving the area . Hundreds left on rafts going downriver or steamers going to Dawson City . By June 1903 , cabins on city lots were selling for as little as $ 10 . Meanwhile , Barnette sold two @-@ thirds of his store to the Alaska Commercial Company and arranged for the establishment of a post office at his settlement . 
 In fall 1903 , the flood of miners leaving the Tanana Valley ended when major gold strikes were made north of Fairbanks . The gold was deeper than in the Klondike , and it had taken time to dig to it . At Cleary Creek , miner Jesse Noble discovered what became the richest vein of gold in Alaska . Gold extraction was slow , because almost no heavy machinery was available to remove the overburden above the layers of gold . The gold discoveries of 1903 reversed the trend of people away from the Tanana Valley . By Christmas 1903 , there were between 1 @,@ 500 and 1 @,@ 800 miners in the valley . Another food shortage arose during the winter of 1903 , alleviated only by the food Barnette had brought in after his trip to the Lower 48 . 
 Despite the food shortage , more buildings were constructed . The Northern Commercial Company built a store to replace Barnette 's cabin , and Wickersham recorded a wide range of businesses , including 500 houses and 1 @,@ 200 people . To manage the growing population , the settlement held a vote on November 10 , 1903 to decide whether to incorporate Fairbanks as a town or not . The vote passed , and Barnette was sworn in as the city 's first mayor on the next day . 
 = = City of Fairbanks = = 
 Barnette 's first action as mayor was to write a letter to Washington , D.C. , asking the federal government to sell its military food stores from posts near the town , thus alleviating the food shortage . This move was followed by others : licensing a telephone company , providing for garbage collection , fire protection , and a one @-@ room school ( which shut down later that winter for lack of funds ) . Barnette used his position to grant long @-@ term contracts for city utilities to members of his family . One of Barnette 's brothers @-@ in @-@ law , James W. Hill , was given a 25 @-@ year contract to provide electricity , drinking water , and steam heat to the city . In 1904 , Barnette arranged for regular shipments of supplies to Fairbanks , and the town continued to expand . In addition to the local telephone system , Fairbanks was connected to the outside world via the Washington @-@ Alaska Military Cable and Telegraph System , which was expanded from Eagle to Nome in 1903 and passed through Fairbanks . 
 Gold production increased from $ 40 @,@ 000 in 1903 to $ 600 @,@ 000 in 1904 and $ 6 million in 1905 . This expansion and the accompanying rise in population drove further productivity . Barnette opened the town 's first bank on September 9 , 1904 . One month earlier , two Catholic priests built the town 's first church , Immaculate Conception Church . Also in 1904 , construction of a railroad began in Fairbanks and Chena , its downstream neighbor . Low water on the Chena River prevented steamboats from reaching Fairbanks , so a railroad line was built from the Tanana River at Chena to Fairbanks and the mines north of town . Construction of the Tanana Mines Railroad ( later the Tanana Valley Railroad ) was finished to Fairbanks on July 17 , 1905 . Two new banks opened in 1905 , as did the city 's first greenhouse , and a new $ 10 @,@ 000 bridge across the Chena River . In June 1905 , the bridge caused the biggest flood in the young city 's history when a bridge upstream of it collapsed and the resulting wreckage caught in the bridge and blocked the river 's flow . The river rose , flooding the town , and the bridge had to be dynamited to halt the flood . The next year , a fire destroyed most of Fairbanks , and the damage was estimated at $ 1 @.@ 5 million . The town was quickly rebuilt , and the town 's first hospital , St. Joseph 's , was built on the north bank of the Chena . Because the hospital was run by a Catholic religious order , Immaculate Conception Church was later transported across the Chena River and placed next to the hospital . In 1907 , Barnette 's bank was forced to temporarily close due to the Panic of 1907 and legal troubles . A new school was built , which housed 150 students . Other schools were built on the north side of the Chena River , which was separate from town . 
 In 1908 , the U.S. Army Signal Corps built a radio telegraph tower in town , replacing the cable telegraph system to Valdez and Seattle . The 176 feet ( 54 m ) tower was the tallest structure in town for decades . In 1909 , Fairbanks gold production peaked at more than $ 9 @.@ 5 million . The town saw its first library open that year , and the Fairbanks Daily News @-@ Miner , the city 's longest @-@ lived newspaper , began publishing . 
 Poor investments caused the bank founded by Barnette to fail in January 1911 , at a time when it held more than $ 1 million in deposits from Fairbanks residents . In Fairbanks , the common belief was that Barnette had embezzled money from the bank . Although he was found guilty of only one of 11 charges against him , Barnette had a poor reputation in Fairbanks . For years afterward , Fairbanks newspapers referred to any robbery as " <unk> " the subject . 
 The accusations against Barnette were big news in a town that had little crime . Gambling and drinking were common throughout town . Prostitution was restricted to a district separated from the rest of town by a wooden fence . The " line , " as it was known , operated until the 1950s with the tacit approval of city authorities . Fights were common , but gunplay was not . As one miner recalled , not more than one man in 500 carried a gun , and while fisticuffs were common , gunfights were not . This was backed up by the experience of Northern Commercial Company stagecoach drivers , who carried more than $ 7 million overland during a 12 @-@ year period without a single incident . 
 = = Decline = = 
 In 1911 , the Fairbanks Commercial Club , a group of businesses , created the slogan " Fairbanks , Alaska 's Golden Heart . " The slogan remains the city 's motto today . In that year , Fairbanks boasted a population of more than 3 @,@ 500 people , making it the largest city in Alaska . Thousands more people lived in mining camps outside the city itself . But 1910 marked the beginning of a decline in Fairbanks ' fortunes . That year , less than $ 6 million in gold was produced — two @-@ thirds the total of the previous year . By 1911 , production was half what it had been in 1909 . In 1918 , it was ten percent of what it had been nine years before . The decline in production caused businesses to go out of business . Stores that sold to miners closed , as did those that supported the mines directly . World War I caused a further decline as the town 's young men were drafted and sent overseas . Economic effects also were felt . A local judge later stated that the war " set Fairbanks back by 10 years " because it dried up construction and sent men overseas . After the war , the 1918 flu pandemic was particularly virulent in Alaska ; it killed between 2 @,@ 000 and 3 @,@ 000 people in the territory . By 1923 , the Fairbanks Daily News @-@ Miner estimated there were fewer than 1 @,@ 000 people in the city , and almost none at the mining camps beyond town . 
 = = Slowing the decline = = 
 Although Fairbanks was in decline , two major projects mitigated the worst effects of the post @-@ gold rush slump : construction of the Alaska Railroad and the creation of the University of Alaska . 
 = = = Alaska Railroad = = = 
 In 1906 , L.A. Nadeau of the Northern Pacific Railroad predicted a railroad link to the ocean would allow gold miners to bring in heavy equipment and process large amounts of low @-@ grade ore . " Not only will the cost of living be cheaper to the miner , but he will be able to get his heavy machinery at a price low enough to enable him to work a vast quantity of low @-@ grade ground , which cannot be touched under present conditions . " Eight years after that remark , the U.S. Congress appropriated $ 35 million for construction of the Alaska Railroad system . News of the appropriation set off celebrations among Fairbanks residents who hoped its construction would prove a boon for the local economy . 
 In 1917 , the Alaska Railroad purchased the Tanana Valley Railroad , which had suffered from the wartime economic problems . The railroad line was extended westward , until it reached the town of Nenana and a construction party working north from Ship Creek , later renamed Anchorage . Until the railroad was finished and coal from Healy became available , Fairbanks burned wood as a heating source and to provide electricity . In 1913 , the town burned between 12 @,@ 000 and 14 @,@ 000 cords of wood , with the Northern Commercial Company ( owners of the power plant ) burning 8 @,@ 500 cords alone . 
 President Warren G. Harding visited Fairbanks in 1923 as part of a trip to hammer in the ceremonial final spike of the railroad at Nenana . The rail yards of the Tanana Valley Railroad were converted for use by the Alaska Railroad , and Fairbanks became the northern end of the line and its second @-@ largest depot . 
 = = = University of Alaska = = = 
 One year before Harding 's visit to Fairbanks , the Alaska Agricultural College and School of Mines ( today known as the University of Alaska Fairbanks ) , opened its doors to six students . The school was thought up by James Wickersham , who had risen to become Alaska 's delegate to Congress . In 1915 , Wickersham gained approval of a bill funding the college from the 63rd United States Congress . After the bill was approved , he traveled to Fairbanks and selected a site on a hill four miles west of Fairbanks , in what is today College , Alaska which is now often referred to as part of Fairbanks , and not as a separate entity . On July 4 , 1915 , acting " without the authority of law , " he laid the cornerstone for the school . 
 The site for the school was directly north of the U.S. Agricultural Experimental Station ( Tanana Valley ) , an experimental farm created by Charles Christian Georgeson in 1907 . The farm was a project by the U.S. Department of Agriculture to explore the agricultural potential of Interior Alaska . By 1916 , one year after the founding of the University of Alaska , the experimental farm employed 20 people . As mining declined in the Fairbanks area , some miners turned to homesteading . Under the Homestead Act , many miners applied for grants of land from the federal government and established farms around the city . A 1919 survey by the U.S. Geological Survey identified 94 homesteads within six miles of Fairbanks . Also listed were two tungsten mills and 16 gold mills . 
 Agriculture in the area was spurred by food and fodder shortages during the winters of 1913 , 1915 , and 1916 . Fairbanks businessmen also encouraged the growth of farming . Wickersham provided more funding for the experimental farm , the Tanana Valley Railroad provided free grain seed acquired from an experimental farm in Sweden , and William Fentress Thompson , editor of the Fairbanks Daily News @-@ Miner , wrote frequent editorials in favor of more farming . Prominent Fairbanks businessmen formed the Alaska Loyal League , a group that encouraged farming . Farmers also created the Tanana Valley State Fair in 1924 to demonstrate their agricultural success . It is Alaska 's oldest state fair and still operates today . Despite these moves , the agriculture movement in Fairbanks had only limited success . A farmers ' bank established in 1917 to provide loans for equipment purchases went out of business two years later , and although the Alaska Railroad allowed for cheaper shipment of tractors and other agricultural equipment , it also permitted a steady supply of food shipments to Fairbanks . In 1929 , Alaska farms met only about 10 percent of the state 's food demand . By 1931 , the University of Alaska had grown to the point that the experimental farm was annexed by the school . 
 = = Dredging era = = 
 After the completion of the Alaska Railroad , it became economically feasible to bring in heavy equipment and build gold dredges to work the large amount of low @-@ grade ore that remained after the Fairbanks Gold Rush . The best example of this is the construction of Davidson Ditch , a 90 @-@ mile ( 140 km ) aqueduct built between 1924 and 1929 to provide water for gold dredging . Fairbanks Exploration Company ( FE Co . ) , a division of the United States Smelting , Refining and Mining Company , built both the aqueduct and many of the dredges that used its water to process ore . Large @-@ scale dredging began in 1928 , and FE Co. became the town 's biggest employer . It built the biggest power plant in Alaska to provide electricity for the dredges , and it built pumping stations to provide them with water from the Chena and other rivers . 
 In 1933 , President Franklin Delano Roosevelt fixed the price of gold at $ 35 per ounce . This price increase encouraged mining and insulated Fairbanks from the Great Depression . When Roosevelt called for a bank holiday to alleviate the worst effects of the depression , Fairbanks banks declined , saying they didn 't need one . Large @-@ scale dredging peaked in 1940 , when 209 @,@ 000 ounces of gold were produced in the Fairbanks area . After the outbreak of World War II in the United States , the federal government closed most gold @-@ mining operations , deeming them unessential to the war effort . 
 In 1932 , Fairbanks ' two @-@ story school , built in 1907 , burned to the ground . A new , $ 150 @,@ 000 three @-@ story concrete art deco building was proposed as a replacement , and after heated debate , a $ 100 @,@ 000 bond measure was approved in 1933 . On January 22 , 1934 , the new school opened . It had space for about 500 students , but the town 's growth required renovation and expansion in 1939 and 1948 . 
 = = = Paving Fairbanks = = = 
 Until 1938 , Fairbanks lacked paved streets . The town 's dirt roads turned to dust in summer and thick mud in spring and fall , causing problems as Fairbanks ' population grew in the 1930s . In 1937 , the mayor of Fairbanks , E. B. Collins , proposed using a federal grant and city bonds to pave the roads , but he was turned down by voters . The next year , he tried again and was successful . By 1940 , the first 0 @.@ 25 miles ( 0 @.@ 40 km ) of paved road was complete . 
 = = = Aviation = = = 
 About the time of the completion of the Alaska Railroad and the beginning of the dredging era in Fairbanks , Alaska 's aviation industry began to take off . The first airplane flight in Alaska took place in Fairbanks on July 4 , 1913 , when a barnstormer flew from a field south of town . The aircraft had been crated and sent from Seattle via Skagway and Whitehorse . The pilot subsequently tried to sell the aircraft , but had no takers . Alaska 's first commercial aircraft didn 't arrive until June 1923 , when Noel Wien began flying a Curtiss JN @-@ 4 on mail routes between Fairbanks and isolated communities . From Fairbanks , Wien became the first person to fly to Anchorage and cross the Arctic Circle in an airplane . 
 Given Alaska 's limited road and rail infrastructure , the territorial government saw the advantages of aerial transport . In 1925 , the territorial legislature authorized the spending of up to $ 40 @,@ 000 per year on airfield construction . Between that year and 1927 , more than 20 airfields were built . By 1930 , Alaska had more than 100 . In Fairbanks , airplanes flew from a field that doubled as a baseball diamond until 1931 , when the city bought the field , installed infrastructure , and named it Weeks Field . By the late 1930s , there were more than four dozen airplanes in the town of about 3 @,@ 000 people , giving Fairbanks the reputation of having the most airplanes per capita in the world . Because of Fairbanks ' location halfway between New York City and Tokyo , it became a crucial stop on the first around @-@ the @-@ world flights . Wiley Post 's 1933 solo circumnavigation stopped in Fairbanks , as did Howard Hughes ' 1938 effort . 
 Military flights also used Fairbanks as a base . In 1920 , the first flight from the continental United States to Alaska used Fairbanks as a base . In 1934 , a flight of Martin B @-@ 10 bombers flew from Washington , D.C. to Fairbanks , ostensibly to demonstrate the feasibility of long @-@ range bomber deployments . In reality , the bombers flew photographic missions intended to scout locations for military airfields to be built in the territory . 
 = = Military era = = 
 In his final public appearance , U.S. Army General Billy Mitchell said , " I believe that , in the future , whoever holds Alaska will hold the world ... I think it is the most important strategic place in the world . " That year , Congress passed the Wilcox National Air Defense Act , which provided for a new airbase in Alaska for cold @-@ weather testing and training . A survey team visited Fairbanks in 1936 , and in 1937 , President Franklin Delano Roosevelt issued Executive Order <unk> , which set aside 6 square miles ( 16 km2 ) of public land east of Fairbanks for the new airbase , which was named Ladd Army Airfield after Army pilot Arthur Ladd . Preliminary construction began in summer 1939 , a few days before Germany invaded Poland to start World War II . The first runway was finished in September 1940 , and the base was dedicated then , before most of the buildings were complete . 
 In the first winter after the dedication , soldiers practiced flying and servicing aircraft in subzero weather conditions . More than 1 @,@ 000 workers , most of whom were hired from outside Alaska , worked on the project through 1941 . Despite these outside workers , the construction effort caused unemployment to almost vanish in Fairbanks , causing a large demand for labor . Fairbanks ' economy grew , and the city 's second < http : / / <unk> / articles / <unk> ? <unk> = 178 > radio station , <unk> , began broadcasting on October 1 , 1939 . Hangars and base buildings were completed in summer 1941 , but the second winter of cold @-@ weather testing was interrupted by the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 Fairbanks received word of the attack on Pearl Harbor via civilian shortwave radio operators who passed the news to the U.S. Army base . More than 200 civil defense volunteers immediately signed up for work that included orchestrating a town blackout , blocking town airfields , and making emergency plans to evacuate the town in the event of an attack . In June 1942 , the invasion of the Aleutian Islands and the bombing of Dutch Harbor intensified the war 's effect on Fairbanks . Ladd Field 's cold @-@ weather testing detachment was disbanded as its soldiers were used to bolster Alaska defenses at other locations . 
 During summer 1942 , more soldiers arrived in Fairbanks to replace those moved away from town . Fairbanks residents were drafted to work at Ladd Field because the U.S. Army believed Alaskans were best experienced in cold @-@ weather work . After gold mining was suspended during the war , the Army leased FE Co. offices and requisitioned supplies from Fairbanks businesses . Wartime demand and the draft caused a severe labor shortage in Fairbanks , and supplies of various food and commercial products were interrupted beyond the wartime rationing in the rest of the country . Crime also increased , and because the U.S. Army was placed in wartime control of the Alaska Territory , all newspapers and letters to and from Fairbanks were censored . 
 To alleviate shortages and supply the war effort , the U.S. Army and the Canadian government began construction of the Alaska Highway , which connected the Canadian road network to Alaska 's Richardson Highway and Fairbanks . The highway was completed in fall 1942 and regular traffic began in 1943 . As work on the highway took place , war supplies were already reaching Fairbanks through the air . The Northwest Staging Route , a chain of airfields , ended at Fairbanks . Starting in February 1942 , supply aircraft began landing in Fairbanks to supply the war effort in Alaska . In summer 1942 , negotiations between the United States and the Soviet Union resulted in an extension of the Lend @-@ Lease effort to Russia . Using the Northwest Staging Route , aircraft were flown from Great Falls , Montana , to Ladd Field . At Ladd Field , the aircraft were turned over to Soviet pilots , who flew them to Nome and on to the Soviet Union . Fairbanks was chosen as a transfer location because it was more protected from potential Japanese attack than Nome . 
 Starting in fall 1942 , large numbers of Soviet soldiers arrived in Fairbanks to work with the U.S. soldiers already in the town . The massive Lend @-@ Lease effort required additional facilities to be built in and near Fairbanks . Ladd Field expanded in size , and the grounds of the U.S. Army post expanded until it met the city limits of Fairbanks . The University of Alaska , which saw most of its students taken up by the draft , provided office and dormitory space for U.S. and Soviet soldiers . Its professors also contributed to the war effort with specially created Russian language classes . Russian airmen were regular customers of Fairbanks stores , and they bought large amounts of consumer goods unavailable at home . To meet demand when Ladd Field was unusable due to fog , an airfield now known as Eielson Air Force Base was built southeast of Fairbanks . Although there were some conflicts between Soviet and U.S. soldiers and civilians , Lend @-@ Lease operations in Fairbanks continued through the end of the war , and when Lend @-@ Lease ended in September 1945 , 7 @,@ 926 aircraft and tons of cargo had been transferred to Soviet officials in Fairbanks . 
 = = = Cold War = = = 
 By fall 1945 , Ladd Field had grown to encompass almost 5 @,@ 000 military personnel and acres of runways and buildings . While there was a brief lull in activity as the U.S. Army demobilized after World War II , activity in Fairbanks remained high as the Cold War began . The population of the Fairbanks area grew by 240 percent between 1940 and 1950 , then doubled between 1950 and 1953 . This growth strained the city 's infrastructure : schools , water , power , sewer , and telephone systems were all overstressed by new arrivals and expansion . Suburbs sprang up around Fairbanks , which began annexing them in turn . In 1952 , the city 's boundaries grew from 1 @.@ 3 square miles ( 3 @.@ 4 km2 ) to 2 @.@ 4 square miles ( 6 @.@ 2 km2 ) , with another 1 square mile ( 2 @.@ 6 km2 ) soon after . More than a dozen subdivisions and housing developments filled the area between Fairbanks city limits and College , and the city 's border advanced westward until it met the College city limit . The burgeoning town stopped to commemorate its roots with the Golden Days Festival , a weeklong celebration of Fairbanks history that started to mark the 50th anniversary of the discovery of gold . The annual festival continues today . 
 The University of Alaska also grew during this period . In 1946 , Congress appropriated money for construction of a Geophysical Institute to study Arctic phenomena such as the aurora borealis . The institute was established in 1949 and spurred the university 's growth as the GI Bill simultaneously boosted the student population . Elementary education also developed as the Fairbanks Independent School District ( the precursor to today 's Fairbanks North Star Borough School District ) was established in 1947 to collect school taxes from areas outside city limits that were sending students to Fairbanks ' school . The Golden Valley Electric Association , an electrical cooperative , was founded in the 1940s to provide electricity to areas outside Fairbanks city limits . In 1953 , it bought the FE Co. power plant that served Fairbanks and provided electricity to customers as varied as Fairbanks ' second radio station , <unk> , and the town 's largest farm , Creamer 's Dairy . 
 A new airport opened on Oct. 15 , 1951 to replace Weeks Field , which had been encroached upon by the town 's growth , including Denali Elementary School , the town 's first new school since the 1930s . The new Fairbanks International Airport began serving DC @-@ 6s , which cut the travel time from Seattle to six hours from eight . The new airport also attracted an over @-@ the @-@ pole test flight by Scandinavian Airlines System , but the airline eventually chose Anchorage as a refueling point for flights from Stockholm to Tokyo . Ground transportation also improved in Fairbanks , as a major program to pave downtown roads began in 1953 with the goal of coating 30 blocks . New military facilities sprang up around Fairbanks and further away . The Haines - Fairbanks 626 mile long 8 " petroleum products pipeline was constructed during the period 1953 @-@ 55 . The city was a staging area for construction of the Distant Early Warning Line , the Ballistic Missile Early Warning System at Clear Air Station , and several Nike Hercules air defense missile batteries . 
 The first skyscrapers were built in Fairbanks during this period : the eight @-@ story Northward Building and the 100 @-@ foot ( 30 m ) Hill ( later Polaris ) Building were built in the first half of the 1950s . The first traffic lights were installed during the same period . Fairbanks ' first television station , <unk> Channel 11 , began broadcasting on February 17 , 1955 . The city 's first dedicated high school , Lathrop High ( originally Fairbanks High ) , also began operating in 1955 . In the four years that followed , four new elementary schools opened , taking the burden off Main School , which became Main Junior High School . 
 = = Statehood = = 
 During the 1950s , agitation grew in Alaska for the territory to become a state . Alaskans could not vote in presidential elections and had a territorial legislature with limited powers . Efforts to lobby federal legislators for an Alaska statehood bill met with limited success , so prominent territorial officials decided to draft a state constitution to prove Alaska 's readiness to become a state . On November 8 , 1955 , 55 elected delegates gathered at the University of Alaska to begin drafting a state constitution . The resulting debates lasted more than two months and caused a sensation in Fairbanks . Debates of the constitutional convention were broadcast on Fairbanks radio , and the Fairbanks Daily News @-@ Miner dedicated daily reports to the progress of the convention . On February 5 , 1956 , the delegates signed the constitution in front of 1 @,@ 000 people who crowded into the University of Alaska gymnasium . The building where deliberations took place was subsequently named Constitution Hall . 
 On June 30 , 1958 , the U.S. Senate voted 64 – 20 to accept Alaska as a state . The news set off massive celebrations in Fairbanks . Residents set off fireworks , an impromptu parade took place down Cushman Street , the city 's main road , and an attempt to dye the Chena River gold in celebration instead turned it green . The celebration was capped when residents used weather balloons to lift a 30 @-@ foot ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) wide wooden star painted gold and emblazoned with " 49 " into the air . The balloons lifted it , then drifted into power lines , causing a 16 @-@ minute power outage across the city . 
 President Dwight Eisenhower officially signed the new state into the United States on January 3 , 1959 , putting the Alaska constitution into effect . The new state 's constitution called for the creation of borough governments to help manage the new state . Fairbanks and other areas were reluctant to impose an additional layer of government on themselves , and balked . In 1963 , the Alaska Legislature passed the Mandatory Borough Act , which required the eight most populous areas of the state to form organized boroughs by 1964 . Students from Fairbanks schools chose " North Star " as the Fairbanks ' borough 's name , and the Fairbanks North Star Borough came into existence on January 1 , 1964 . 
 The years after statehood saw the military boom continue to boost the Fairbanks economy and growth of the city . Fairbanks International Airport 's runway was lengthened to 11 @,@ 500 feet to accommodate jet aircraft . The George Parks Highway was built from Fairbanks to Anchorage and Denali National Park , encouraging tourism . Homes were built on the hills to the north of Fairbanks for the first time , roads were repaved and smoothed , and sidewalks replaced dirt paths . The growth had a price , however . Many of the structures built during Fairbanks ' founding were torn down in the name of urban renewal . The first home built in Fairbanks was demolished , as were the final homes remaining on " the line " , Fairbanks ' prostitution district . 
 In 1960 , the U.S. Air Force made plans to close Ladd Airfield and transfer its functions to nearby Eielson Air Force Base and Elmendorf Air Force Base near Anchorage . When the decision was publicly announced , it was met with almost unanimous opposition by Fairbanks residents and businesses in the area . Although the Air Force held firm in its decision to transfer out of the base , the U.S. Army took over the post on January 1 , 1961 and renamed it Fort Wainwright . 
 The arts scene in Fairbanks also grew during this time . The Fairbanks Symphony Orchestra was founded in 1959 , and the Fairbanks Drama Association was created in 1963 . The Alaska Goldpanners baseball team was founded in 1959 as the city 's first professional sports team . The next year , the Goldpanners hosted their first annual Midnight Sun Baseball Game , a tradition that had been conducted since 1905 and continues under the Goldpanners ' auspices today . Through the 1960s , Fairbanks became much more like small towns in the Lower 48 as communications , transportation , and utilities improved . 
 = = The Great Flood = = 
 In 1967 , Alaska celebrated 100 years since its purchase by the United States from Russia . To celebrate the event , <unk> built A @-@ 67 ( later <unk> and today Pioneer Park ) , a theme park celebrating the history of Fairbanks and Alaska . At a site away from downtown Fairbanks , it features pioneer cabins , historic exhibits , and the steamer SS Nenana , one of the steamboats that traveled Interior Alaska rivers during the gold rush era . The summer exposition that opened the park in July 1967 was attended by U.S. Vice President Hubert Humphrey but was plagued by rain , financial problems , and low attendance . 
 One month after the celebration of Alaska 's centennial , the worst disaster in Fairbanks history took place . In July 1967 , Fairbanks received 3 @.@ 34 inches ( 8 @.@ 5 cm ) of rain , almost double the July average of 1 @.@ 84 inches ( 4 @.@ 7 cm ) . Then between August 11 and August 13 , Fairbanks and the Tanana Valley received the heaviest rainfall in recorded history . In the 24 hours prior to noon on August 12 , 3 @.@ 42 inches ( 8 @.@ 7 cm ) of rain fell . Average rainfall for the entire month of August is 2 @.@ 20 inches ( 5 @.@ 6 cm ) . In August 1967 , 6 @.@ 20 inches ( 15 @.@ 7 cm ) fell on Fairbanks and the Tanana Valley . 
 The unprecedented rainfall turned the Chena River into a torrent . On August 14 , it passed flood stage and continued to rise . Because no hydrological equipment had been installed upstream of Fairbanks , residents were unaware of the flood 's scale . All day and night on August 14 , the water rose . It inundated the A @-@ 67 site and volunteers allowed water to fill the hold of the SS Nenana to keep it from floating on the rising waters and damaging buildings . In downtown Fairbanks , hundreds of volunteers built a sandbag dike around St. Joseph 's Hospital to no avail . As the water crested the emergency dike , doctors , nurses , and patients evacuated to the University of Alaska on College Hill . 
 The university , which is built on high ground , served as an evacuation point and emergency shelter for thousands of flood refugees . The civil defense director of the university expected between 700 and 800 people to take shelter at the university . Between 7 @,@ 000 and 8 @,@ 000 showed up as the water rose through August 14 and 15 and crammed into facilities designed to house just over 1 @,@ 000 students . A helipad was set up in a parking lot , and helicopters from Eielson Air Force Base ferried supplies to the refugees . Fairbanks ' power plant was flooded , so the university depended on its physical plant to provide electricity for the refugees . When the rising water threatened to flood the plant , hundreds of the refugees massed to build barricades and pump out the plant 's basement . 
 The flood had a massive effect on Fairbanks . Four people were killed , and the damage ran into the hundreds of millions of dollars . It helped push the city 's remaining farm , Creamer 's Dairy , into bankruptcy , and it forced the closure of St. Joseph 's Hospital . Fairbanks residents responded to the problems with aplomb . The annual Tanana Valley State Fair was postponed but not canceled . Seven thousand dollars were raised to buy Creamer 's Dairy and turn it into a bird sanctuary . <unk> , one of the few town businesses to have flood insurance , rebuilt its studio and became the first Fairbanks TV station to broadcast in color , four months after the flood . When two bond measures to build a government @-@ run hospital were turned down by Fairbanks voters , residents raised $ 2 @.@ 6 million from private contributions and $ 6 million from the state and federal government to build Fairbanks Memorial Hospital . 
 In the flood 's wake , the U.S. Congress passed the Flood Control Act of 1968 , which provided funding for construction of the Chena River Lakes Flood Control Project on the Chena River upstream of Fairbanks . The project was built between 1973 and 1979 and diverts the Chena River into the Tanana River when the former river rises above a certain level . A chain of dikes were built along the Tanana River to prevent high water from that river flooding Fairbanks from the south . Many businesses benefited from low @-@ interest federal loans to rebuild , which was done quickly . In 1969 , Fairbanks was one of 11 cities honored as an " All @-@ America City " by Look magazine and the National League of Cities in honor of its success in recovering from the flood . 
 = = Oil boom = = 
 On March 12 , 1968 , an Atlantic Richfield drilling crew struck oil near Prudhoe Bay , about 400 miles ( 640 km ) north of Fairbanks . The resulting discovery of the Prudhoe Bay Oil Field sparked a massive boom in Fairbanks , which was the nearest city to the field . After abortive attempts to transport oil from the field using seagoing tankers and airplanes , the oil companies developing the field decided to build a pipeline . Plans were set into motion and about to move forward when legal challenges halted the project in 1970 . One set of challenges , those levied by Alaska Native groups in the path of the pipeline , was settled by passage of the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act in 1971 . Thirteen major Alaska Native corporations and dozens of smaller ones were created to manage the cash payment and land grants distributed by the federal government under the act . In 1972 , Fairbanks became the headquarters of <unk> , Limited , the largest of these corporations . 
 The Fairbanks economy , which briefly boomed in the period between the discovery of oil and the legal challenge , stagnated as legal challenges dragged on . The challenges were ended by approval of the Trans @-@ Alaska Pipeline Authorization Act in late 1973 . When pipeline work began in early 1974 , it sparked a boom in Fairbanks unlike anything since the years immediately after the city 's founding . Alyeska Pipeline Service Company alone spent an estimated $ 800 @,@ 000 a day in Fairbanks , which housed the construction headquarters on Fort Wainwright . Tens of thousands of workers poured into the city , straining the economy , infrastructure , and public works . The population of the Fairbanks North Star Borough increased by 40 percent between 1973 and 1976 . The number of businesses in the area doubled during the same period . 
 This increase in population caused many adverse effects . Municipal Utilities Service , which operated telephone service , ran out of phone numbers and the waiting list for phone connections stretched to 1 @,@ 500 entries . Electric demand was so high that the power company advised homeowners to buy generators to cope with frequent brownouts . Home prices skyrocketed — a home that sold for $ 40 @,@ 000 in 1974 was purchased for $ 80 @,@ 000 in 1975 . Home and apartment rentals were correspondingly squeezed upward by the rising prices and the demand from pipeline workers . Two @-@ room log cabins with no plumbing rented for $ 500 per month . One two @-@ bedroom home housed 45 pipeline workers who shared beds on a rotating schedule for $ 40 per week . 
 The skyrocketing prices were driven by the high salaries paid to pipeline workers , who were eager to spend their money . The high salaries caused a corresponding demand for higher wages among non @-@ pipeline workers in Alaska . Non @-@ pipeline businesses often could not keep up with the demand for higher wages , and job turnover was high . Yellow Cab in Fairbanks had a turnover rate of 800 percent ; a nearby restaurant had a turnover rate of more than 1 @,@ 000 percent . Many positions were filled by high school students promoted above their experience level . To meet the demand , Lathrop High School ran in two shifts : one in the morning and the other in the afternoon to teach students who also worked eight hours a day . More wages and more people meant higher demand for goods and services . Waiting in line became a fact of life in Fairbanks , and the Fairbanks McDonalds became No. 2 in the world for sales — behind only the recently opened Stockholm store . Alyeska and its contractors bought in bulk from local stores , causing shortages of everything from cars to tractor parts , water softener salt , batteries and ladders . 
 The large sums of money being made and spent caused an upsurge in crime and illicit activity . This was exacerbated because police officers and state troopers resigned in large groups to become pipeline security guards at wages far in excess of those available in public @-@ sector jobs . Fairbanks ' Second Avenue became a notorious hangout for prostitutes , and dozens of bars operated throughout town . In 1975 , the Fairbanks Police Department estimated between 40 and 175 prostitutes were working in the city of 15 @,@ 000 people . In the frigid temperatures of the winter months throughout the 1970s it was common to see street @-@ walking prostitutes in downtown Fairbanks , clad fully from head @-@ to @-@ toe in luxuriant fur coats ( and leaving everything to the imagination ) . Prostitutes brought pimps , who then engaged in turf fights . In 1976 , police responded to a shootout between warring pimps who wielded automatic firearms . By and large , however , the biggest police issues were drunken brawls and fighting , resulting in a situation akin to the lawlessness associated with the " American Old <unk> West " of the American frontier of popular lore . 
 By 1976 , after the city 's residents had endured a spike in crime , overstressed public infrastructure , and an influx of people unfamiliar with Alaska customs , 56 percent said the pipeline had changed Fairbanks for the worse . In downtown Fairbanks , overcrowding , traffic problems , and drunken rambunctiousness caused by pipeline workers pushed businesses to move into malls built away from downtown . New commercial centers like <unk> Mall , Bentley Mall , and others away from the city center drove the construction of freeways that bypassed downtown Fairbanks . 
 = = Post @-@ boom = = 
 Pipeline construction ended in 1977 , beginning a gradual decline in Fairbanks ' economy . The loss of construction spending was mostly offset by state spending . Taxes on oil flowing through the pipeline were spent on low @-@ interest loans , grants , and business assistance that poured money into the city . To entice businesses to return to downtown Fairbanks , the city demolished many of the bars favored by pipeline workers and attempted to attract a hotel or major business to the location . This effort was unsuccessful , and the land remained vacant until the late 1990s . Redevelopment of the Fairbanks airport was more successful . A new terminal built in 1984 functioned until 2009 . 
 Bolstered by grants and subsidies , cultural events and institutions grew in Fairbanks . The Fairbanks Light Opera Theatre was created in 1970 , and groups such as the Fairbanks Concert Association and the Northstar Ballet were also created at about the same time . Fairbanks largest arts event , the Summer Arts Festival , began in 1980 and continues today . 
 Sports facilities also benefited from the influx of state funding . The Big Dipper Ice Arena , a converted airplane hangar moved from Tanacross in 1969 , went through a $ 5 million renovation in 1981 that allowed it to host the Arctic Winter Games the next year . In 1979 , the University of Alaska built the Patty Center , the first full indoor ice arena in Interior Alaska . The same year , the school started a NCAA Division I hockey team . 
 Wien Air Alaska , which had its headquarters in Fairbanks , was the state 's largest private employer until it declared bankruptcy in 1983 . The resulting shutdown cost hundreds of jobs in Fairbanks . This was a foretaste of more problems to come . In 1986 , Saudi Arabia boosted oil production and oil prices plummeted . Alaska banks failed , construction came to a halt , and bankruptcies and foreclosures were common . A common practice in Fairbanks was for workers to drop their house keys off at local banks before catching a flight out of Alaska , the better to speed the foreclosure process . Although an expansion of Fort Wainwright helped the construction industry during this time , Fairbanks lost about 3 @,@ 000 jobs between 1986 and 1989 . The U.S. Army 's 6th Infantry Division was stationed at Fort Wainwright in late 1987 , but it was reduced to a single brigade and renamed in 1993 . 
 This period in the city 's history also had some bright spots . To celebrate the 25th anniversary of Alaska statehood , the city commissioned a 25 @-@ foot sculpture of an Alaska Native family signifying " Alaska 's first family " . The statue is the centerpiece of Golden Heart Plaza , which was dedicated in 1986 on the south bank of the Chena River in the middle of downtown Fairbanks . In 1984 , President Ronald Reagan and Pope John Paul II briefly met in Fairbanks after it was realized that their two separate visits to Asia would cross over Alaska at the same time . Approximately 10 @,@ 000 people attended their meeting , which was the largest gathering of people in Fairbanks ' history . 
 = = Modern Fairbanks = = 
 As oil prices rose during the 1990s , Fairbanks ' economy improved . The city was also boosted by the regrowth of gold mining in the area . The Fort Knox Gold Mine north of Fairbanks opened in 1997 after several years of development , and another gold prospect is likely to be developed in the next decade . The same year that Fort Knox Mine opened , Alyeska moved 300 jobs from Anchorage to Fairbanks , making the city the base of its operations for the first time in several decades . 
 The U.S. military remains a large presence in Fairbanks . The U.S. 1st Stryker Brigade Combat Team of the 25th Infantry Division is based at Fort Wainwright , and Eielson Air Force Base remains a training and logistics hub for the U.S. Air Force . In 2009 , the U.S. Army announced that it is considering basing 1 @,@ 000 additional soldiers at Fort Wainwright because of its ample space . 
 Utilities and other services also have significantly changed since 1990 . Fairbanks Memorial Hospital was renovated and expanded in 1976 , 1985 , 1995 , and 2000 . In 2009 , the hospital opened a new heart care center during its latest expansion . Bassett Army Hospital on Fort Wainwright went through a $ 132 million renovation in 2005 . To meet the demand for a convention center and large sporting arena , the city paid for construction of the Carlson Center , a 5 @,@ 000 @-@ seat arena that opened in 1990 . In 1996 , the city of Fairbanks privatized its utilities when the Municipal Utilities Service was sold to a private company . About $ 74 million from the sale was deposited into a savings account called the Fairbanks Permanent Fund , which was invested and managed in a fashion similar to the Alaska Permanent Fund , though residents do not receive any income from the Fairbanks Permanent Fund . 
 = = Additional reading = = 
 = = = Books = = = 
 = = = Periodicals = = = 
 = Disi Water Conveyance Project = 
 The Disi Water Conveyance Project is a water supply project in Jordan . It is designed to pump 100 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 cubic metres ( 2 @.@ 2 × 1010 imp gal ) of water per year from the Disi aquifer , which lies beneath the desert in southern Jordan and northwestern Saudi Arabia . The water is piped to the capital , Amman , and other cities to meet increased demand . Construction began in 2009 and was mostly completed in July 2013 when the project was inaugurated by King Abdullah of Jordan . Its total cost was USD 1 @.@ 1 billion . An independent study revealed the water to be radioactive and potentially dangerous to drink , surrounding the project with controversy . Jordan 's Ministry of Water and Irrigation has stated that the radioactivity is not a problem because the water is to be diluted with an equal amount of water from other sources , although it remains disputed if this would be enough to bring the water up to standards . The Ministry said the independent study was inaccurate , as it did not test water from any of the wells that will be used in the project . The President of the Jordanian Geologists Association Bahjat Al Adwan stated that the radiation is present in the water in the form of Radon , and thus dissipates harmlessly when the water is exposed to air on the surface . 
 = = Background = = 
 The water in the Disi aquifer gathered 30 @,@ 000 years ago during the Pleistocene era . It is 320 kilometres ( 200 mi ) long and located 500 metres ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) below ground inside of porous sandstone . The aquifer is classified as a fossil aquifer , meaning that the water is not replenished if it is removed . In fact , the aquifer has a recharge rate of 50 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 m3 ( 1 @.@ 1 × 1010 imp gal ) of water per year . This recharge is dwarfed , however , by the current extraction rate of 90 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 m3 ( 2 @.@ 0 × 1010 imp gal ) for agricultural and domestic needs , including 15 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 m3 ( 3 @.@ 3 × 109 imp gal ) of water that is supplied to Aqaba , Jordan . The current extraction rate of 90 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 m3 ( 2 @.@ 0 × 1010 imp gal ) , coupled with the future extraction rate of 100 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 m3 ( 2 @.@ 2 × 1010 imp gal ) for the project , is expected to produce a total extraction rate of 190 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 m3 ( 4 @.@ 2 × 1010 imp gal ) . At that rate , the water in the aquifer will last a minimum of 50 years , according to the Disi Water Company . 
 Only a small portion of the Disi aquifer lies beneath Jordan , while the majority lies beneath Saudi Arabia . Saudi Arabia also extracts water from the aquifer ( called the <unk> aquifer in Saudi Arabia ) . The aquifer has created controversy between Saudi Arabia and Jordan , with each country demanding the other to use less of the shared water . There is no formal agreement between the countries regarding the water and the Disi Water Conveyance Project is being constructed without Saudi consultation or involvement . 
 Non @-@ revenue water is a serious problem in Amman . Currently , 40 % of water in Amman is lost as non @-@ revenue water . The city rations water , with individual residents averaging 36 hours of water access weekly . If the non @-@ revenue water problem remains , it is possible that a large portion of the water provided by the Disi Water Conveyance project will also be lost as it is piped through Amman . 
 The Disi Water Conveyance project was first proposed in the 1990s , but was initially regarded as too expensive . A feasibility study was completed in 1996 . But it was not until 2007 that the Jordanian Government was able to contract a firm to begin construction . 
 = = Design = = 
 The project proposed by the Jordanian government will pump 100 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 m3 ( 2 @.@ 2 × 1010 imp gal ) of water per year from 55 wells in the aquifer . However , a total of 64 wells will be drilled , the extra wells to be used as <unk> to measure the elevation of the water . Nine of the 55 water producing wells will be used in emergencies only . The wells producing water will be drilled 600 – 700 m ( 2 @,@ 000 – 2 @,@ 300 ft ) deep while the <unk> will be drilled to a depth of 400 m ( 1 @,@ 300 ft ) . The plan is to pump the <unk> wells for 25 years , according to the project leader . 
 After being pumped from the wells , water will then be transported to Amman , via a 325 km ( 202 mi ) pipeline , passing through a pumping station , then flowing by gravity and being pumped up again . The reservoirs near Amman are only 200 m ( 660 ft ) higher than the surface area where the pumping field is located . Nevertheless , the total elevation differential over which water needs to be lifted by both pumping stations is about 800 metres ( 2 @,@ 600 ft ) . To pump the water through the proposed pipeline will require 4 kilowatt @-@ hours per cubic meter of water . The entire project would require approximately 4 percent of Jordan 's current electrical production . The project is expected to be completed by January 2017 and to run for 25 years or until the Two Seas Canal is built . 
 The 100 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 m3 ( 2 @.@ 2 × 1010 imp gal ) of water will be divided between the Abu <unk> reservoir and the <unk> reservoir . Approximately 40 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 m3 ( 8 @.@ 8 × 109 imp gal ) of water will be sent to the Abu <unk> reservoir where it will be diluted with water from the Zara Ma ’ en desalination plant as well as water from Wala . The remaining 60 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 m3 ( 1 @.@ 3 × 1010 imp gal ) of water will be sent to the <unk> reservoir where it will be diluted with water from the Zai Treatment Plant as well as water from Wala . It is estimated that the cost of one cubic meter of water from the project will be 0 @.@ 74 <unk> ( $ 1 @.@ 05 USD ) . 
 = = Construction = = 
 In June 2009 , the Turkish firm GAMA began construction . By February 2011 , eight <unk> wells and two water producing wells have been completed . Twenty @-@ three other wells were to be drilled , and 85 km ( 53 mi ) of pipe were to be installed . By April 2011 , 99 % of the 340 km ( 210 mi ) of project 's piping had arrived from Turkey , an anonymous source told The Jordan Times . This source stated that the project was over 50 % completed and that it was ahead of schedule . 
 Construction was delayed by disgruntled members of a Bedouin tribe living in the area , who allegedly intimidated workers by shooting in the air and at construction equipment . All work was stopped for two weeks after two employees were killed in January 2011 — allegedly murdered by a member of the Bedouin tribe . The tribe had been upset because GAMA did not rent its water tankers , according to Adnan Zu 'b , Assistant Secretary Genera at the Ministry of Water and Irrigation . To satisfy the tribe , GAMA then announced plans to rent tankers from the tribe . However , near the site of the killings , the town of Ma 'an had protests against the government 's failure to punish the killers . During October and November , 2011 the construction works have been suspended at southern part of the project from Hasa to <unk> due to security problems created by tribes , therefore there is delay in this part which will affect the completion date of the project . 
 = = Structure and funding = = 
 The project is funded on a build @-@ operate @-@ transfer concession contract between the Jordanian government and the Disi Water Company ( Diwaco ) , a subsidiary of the Turkish construction company GAMA Energy . GAMA Energy is a joint venture between the Turkish GAMA Holding and the US firm General Electric Energy Financial Services . Diwaco is responsible to build the project over a 4 @-@ year period and to operate it for another 25 years . At the end of the concession period the ownership will transfer to the Jordanian government . Diwaco will retain any profits and will bear the risk of losing its equity . Construction is undertaken by GAMA Power Systems , another subsidiary of GAMA Holding , under a turnkey engineering , procurement and construction contract with Diwaco . Operation will be undertaken by Disi Amman Operation Maintenance LLC , a fully owned subsidiary of the French water company Suez Environnement , under a separate operating contract with Diwaco . 
 The project is funded through an equity contribution of about USD 200m from Diwaco , a USD 300m grant and a USD 100m stand @-@ by facility from the Jordanian government , as well as USD <unk> in foreign loans to Diwaco . The project 's total cost is expected to be $ 1 @.@ 1 billion USD . The U.S. Overseas Private Investment Corporation has lent USD 250m to Diwaco to support U.S. foreign investment on the basis that General Electric partially owns GAMA Energy . The state @-@ owned French bank <unk> , which is the part of the French Development Agency ( AFD ) that supports private sector development , and the European Investment Bank ( <unk> ) each lent about USD 100m to Diwaco . The loan package has been put together by the Arab Banking Corporation . Much of the government grant supporting the project comes from sovereign soft loans that the government of Jordan has borrowed from the <unk> and AFD and passes on as a grant to the project . AFD provided USD 50m for the state grant and USD <unk> for the stand @-@ by facility . 
 = = Radioactivity concerns = = 
 The project became controversial in 2009 when a study performed by Avner Vengosh of Duke University revealed the Disi water to be highly radioactive . Water was tested from 37 existing wells in the aquifer , and all but one had concentrations of radioactive radium @-@ 226 and radium @-@ 228 isotopes that exceeded international standards for drinking water . Some of the water tested exceeded standards by 2 @,@ 000 % . Drinking water with these isotopes has been linked to bone cancer and leukemia . Though expensive , the water could be purified of the radioactive isotopes through ion @-@ exchange purification . 
 Jordan 's Ministry of Water and Irrigation has stated that the radioactivity is not a problem because the water is to be diluted with an equal amount of water from other sources . This dilution would presumably halve the radioactivity of the water which , according to Vengosh 's data , would not be enough to bring the water up to standards . The Ministry of Water and Irrigation , however , has declared Vengosh 's data to be inaccurate , as his study did not test water from any of the wells that will be used in the project . As radiation varies from well to well , it is possible that the data Vengosh collected does not accurately reflect the water sources to be used in the project . 
 Although testing at the well sites that supply Aqaba reveals high radioactivity , testing performed using water from the tap in Aqaba shows the water to be safe . There is no confirmed explanation for this phenomenon , although it is hypothesized that the depth of the wells ( the ones that supply Aqaba are relatively shallow ) may play a role as the radiation varies greatly at shallow depths . In May , 2011 , the President of the Jordanian Geologists Association Bahjat Al Adwan stated that the radiation is present in the water in the form of Radon , and thus dissipates harmlessly when the water is exposed to air on the surface . This explanation has not been confirmed scientifically , however . 
 During the inauguration of the conveyor in July 2013 Minister of Water and Irrigation <unk> El @-@ Nasser said that after mixing Disi water radiation is less than 0 @.@ 5 millisievert per year . The worldwide average natural dose of human ’ s exposure to radiation is about 2 @.@ 5 @-@ 3 millisievert per year . " Disi water is purer than bottled water and I take full responsibility for what I ’ m saying , ” the Minister said during a press conference . 
 = <unk> = 
 The nuckelavee ( pronunciation : / <unk> / ) or <unk> is a horse @-@ like demon from Orcadian mythology that combines equine and human elements . It has its origins in Norse mythology , and is the most horrible of all the demons of the Scottish islands . The nuck component of its name may be cognate with Nick in Old Nick , a name for the Christian Devil . The nuckelavee 's breath was thought to wilt crops and sicken livestock , and the creature was held responsible for droughts and epidemics on land despite its being predominantly a sea @-@ dweller . 
 A graphic description of the nuckelavee as it appears on land was given by an islander who claimed to have had a confrontation with it , but accounts describing the details of the creature 's appearance are inconsistent . In common with many other sea monsters it is unable to tolerate fresh water , therefore those it is pursuing have only to cross a river or stream to be rid of it . The nuckelavee is kept in confinement during the summer months by the Mither o ' the Sea , an ancient Orcadian spirit , and the only one able to control it . 
 Orcadian folklore had a strong Scandinavian influence , and it may be that the nuckelavee is a composite of a water horse from Celtic mythology and a creature imported by the Norsemen . As with similar malevolent entities such as the kelpie , it possibly offered an explanation for incidents that islanders in ancient times could not otherwise understand . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The late 19th century saw an upsurge of interest in transcribing folklore , but the recorders used inconsistent spelling and frequently anglicised words , thus the same entity could be given different names . The term nuckelavee derives from Orcadian <unk> , and according to Orkney resident and 19th @-@ century folklorist Walter Traill Dennison means " Devil of the Sea " . The same demon is called a <unk> in Shetland , where it was considered a nasty sea trow or sea devil . Samuel Hibbert , an antiquarian of the early nineteenth century , considered the component nuck of the nuckelavee 's name to be cognate with both the Nick in Old Nick , a name sometimes given to the Devil of Christian belief , and with the Latin <unk> , to kill . 
 = = Folk beliefs = = 
 = = = Description and common attributes = = = 
 Stories of mythical Orcadian demons are recorded in the 16th @-@ century Latin manuscripts of Jo Ben , who may have been referring to the nuckelavee in his description of the Orkney island of Stronsay . Dennison transcribed much of the information available about traditional tales told on Orkney , but to an extent romanticised and systematically altered certain elements of the stories in the process of transforming them into prose . 
 The nuckelavee is a mythical sea creature that appears as a horse @-@ like demon when it ventures onto land . Writer and folklorist Ernest Marwick considered it very similar to the Norwegian <unk> , the nuggle of the Shetlands and the kelpie . A unique and solitary creature possessing extensive evil powers , its malevolent behaviour can influence events throughout the islands . Islanders were terrified of the creature and would not speak its name without immediately saying a prayer . It was often found in the vicinity of a beach , but would never come ashore if it was raining . 
 No tales describe what form the nuckelavee takes when in the sea , but its appearance on land has been recounted in graphic detail . An islander , Tammas , claimed to have survived a confrontation with the beast and , after much cajoling from Dennison , reluctantly gave his description of the monster , the only known first @-@ hand account . According to Tammas , the nuckelavee has a man 's torso attached to a horse 's back as if it were a rider . The male torso has no legs , but its arms can reach the ground from its position on top of the equine body , the legs of which have fin like appendages . The torso has a large head – possibly as much as 3 feet ( 90 centimetres ) in diameter – that rolls back and forth . The monster described by Tammas has two heads ; the equine head has an enormous gaping mouth that exudes a smelly toxic vapour , and a single giant eye like a burning red flame . A particularly gruesome detail is that the nuckelavee has no skin ; black blood courses through yellow veins , and the pale sinews and powerful muscles are visible as a pulsating mass . Other reports state that the creature resembles a centaur ; narratives are inconsistent in the finer details of the demon 's description however . Traill Dennison only describes a man 's head with a " mouth projected like that of a pig " . Marwick also only mentions one head with a single red eye , and he borrows some of Tammas 's characterisation by recording the creature 's mouth as " like a whale 's " . 
 The nuckelavee 's breath was thought to wilt crops and sicken livestock , and it was considered responsible for epidemics and drought . Seaweed burning to create what was known at the time as kelp began on Stronsay in 1722 . The product – soda ash – was an alkali mainly used to treat acidic soil , although as time went on its commercial importance in soap and glass manufacture increased . The pungent smoke emitted during the process was believed to enrage the nuckelavee , resulting in a wild rampage of plague , the deaths of cattle and the destruction of crops . The nuckelavee was said to have infected horses on Stronsay with the deadly disease known as <unk> , to demonstrate its fury and exact its revenge against the islanders for burning seaweed ; the infection subsequently spread to all the other islands involved in the industry . The creature was also blamed for prolonged periods of abnormally low rainfall , leading to water shortages and poor harvests . 
 = = Confinement = = 
 The nuckelavee is the most malevolent of the demons in and around the Scottish islands , without any redeeming characteristics . The only entity able to control it is the Mither o ' the Sea , an ancient spirit in Orcadian mythology who keeps the nuckelavee confined during the summer months . In common with other mythical sea monsters , with the possible exception of kelpies and the nuggle of Shetland , it is unable to wade through fresh flowing water , therefore those it is chasing have only to cross a stream to be rid of it . Tammas managed to escape from the nuckelavee after he inadvertently splashed it with water from the loch he was alongside ; this briefly distracted the monster , allowing Tammas to run over to a nearby channel of fresh water and jump to safety on the opposite bank . 
 = = Origins = = 
 Malevolent creatures possibly served to provide explanations for incidents that islanders from bygone times were otherwise unable to account for ; many ancient myths were based upon the natural elements of the turbulent and ever changing sea around Orkney . Established Orcadian tales were strongly influenced by Scandinavian mythology with a blending of traditional Celtic stories , so the nuckelavee may have its roots in a mythical creature imported by the Norsemen fused with a traditional Celtic water horse . 
 = Folgore @-@ class cruiser = 
 The Folgore class was a pair of torpedo cruisers built for the Italian Regia Marina ( Royal Navy ) in the 1880s . The two ships — Folgore and Saetta — were designed by Benedetto Brin during a period of experimentation with the theories of the Jeune École in the 1880s . The vessels were armed with three 14 in ( 356 mm ) torpedo tubes , and they had a top speed of 17 knots ( 31 km / h ; 20 mph ) . Both ships ' careers were uneventful , and they spent most of their time in service conducting training exercises . Folgore was seriously damaged in a collision in 1889 , and was thereafter reduced to reserve status , as the damage could not be completely repaired . She was eventually sold for scrapping in 1900 , while Saetta served as a gunnery training ship from 1897 to 1908 , when she too was dismantled . 
 = = Design = = 
 Folgore and Saetta were designed by Benedetto Brin ; Brin had previously designed several classes of very large ironclad battleships , including the Caio Duilio and Italia classes , but by the 1880s , he had begun to embrace the ideas of the Jeune École , which emphasized small , fast , torpedo @-@ armed vessels that could damage or destroy the much larger battleships at a fraction of the cost . After the two <unk> , which were rated as <unk> @-@ avisos ( torpedo @-@ avisos ) , the eight ships of the Partenope class were laid down , continuing Brin 's ideas at the time . 
 = = = Characteristics = = = 
 The ships of the Folgore class were 56 @.@ 7 meters ( 186 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 6 @.@ 31 m ( 20 @.@ 7 ft ) . Folgore displaced 364 metric tons ( 358 long tons ; 401 short tons ) normally , while Saetta displaced 394 metric tons ( 388 long tons ; 434 short tons ) . Folgore had an average draft of 2 @.@ 15 m ( 7 ft 1 in ) , while Saetta sat slightly lower in the water as a result of her greater displacement , with a draft of 2 @.@ 27 m ( 7 ft 5 in ) . Their hulls were constructed from steel and featured a pronounced ram bow . The ships had a crew of between 57 – 70 that varied in size over the course of their careers . 
 Her propulsion system consisted of a pair of horizontal double @-@ expansion steam engines manufactured by Hawthorn Leslie and Co . , each driving a single screw propeller . Steam for the engines was supplied by four coal @-@ fired locomotive boilers that were trunked into a single funnel amidships . In 1892 , Saetta was re @-@ boilered with oil @-@ fired models for experimentation purposes . Folgore could steam at a speed of 17 knots ( 31 km / h ; 20 mph ) from 2 @,@ 150 indicated horsepower ( 1 @,@ 600 kW ) , while Saetta reached the same speed from 2 @,@ 130 ihp ( 1 @,@ 590 kW ) . The ships had a coal storage capacity of 60 metric tons ( 59 long tons ; 66 short tons ) . 
 The primary armament for the Folgore class was three 14 in ( 356 mm ) torpedo tubes . They also carried a small gun armament , consisting of two 57 mm ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) 43 @-@ caliber ( cal . ) guns and four 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) 25 @-@ cal. guns , all mounted singly . The ships carried no armor protection . 
 = = Ships = = 
 = = Service history = = 
 After entering service , both vessels were assigned to the main Italian fleet . They were primarily occupied with annual training exercises , along with occasional fleet reviews for monarchs , including one for the King of Italy , Umberto I in 1887 and German Emperor Wilhelm II in 1888 . In 1889 , Folgore was badly damaged in a collision with the protected cruiser Giovanni Bausan and could not be repaired to her original condition . As a result , she spent most of the rest of her career in reserve . 
 For much of the 1890s , Saetta was frequently reduced to reserve , in part to reduce maintenance on the vessel . Folgore made a temporary return to active service in 1895 , when she joined Saetta for the annual maneuvers . In 1897 , she was withdrawn from front @-@ line service and employed with the gunnery school ; her gun armament was accordingly increased in 1902 to provide a variety of weapons for gunnery trainees to practice operating . In the meantime , Folgore was stricken from the naval register in 1900 and broken up for scrap . Saetta continued in her service with the gunnery school until 1908 , when she too was broken up . 
 = F @-@ 41 ( Michigan county highway ) = 
 F @-@ 41 is a county @-@ designated highway in the Lower Peninsula of Michigan . It was previously designated as M @-@ 171 , a former state trunkline highway , until 1960 , running from US Highway 23 ( US 23 ) just north of Oscoda , and coming back to US 23 about 20 miles ( 32 km ) south of Alpena . The road runs through rural , forested areas of Iosco and Alcona counties , inland from Lake Huron . 
 Although it has been a county road since 1960 , F @-@ 41 was a state highway in 1919 when the state trunkline highway system was formed . It was a segment of the original M @-@ 10 that was replaced by US 23 in 1926 . Later changes to US 23 shifted that road closer to Lake Huron , and the Michigan State Highway Department ( MSHD ) created two different routings for M @-@ 171 out of the former US 23 routings in the area . The second of these highways has been designated F @-@ 41 since 1970 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 F @-@ 41 begins at an intersection with US 23 on the north side of Oscoda . The route travels to the northwest away from town , passing between Van Etten Lake and what was previously Wurtsmith Air Force Base . The road continues north through a rural area of Alcona County on Somers and Mikado roads , running parallel , but inland , to the Lake Huron shoreline . It passes through the small communities of Mikado and Gustin before coming to a junction with M @-@ 72 . After crossing M @-@ 72 , F @-@ 41 turns east into the community of Lincoln along Traverse Bay State Road , 2nd Street and Main Street before leaving town to the north . The road continues on to the north on Barlow Road through Alcona County before terminating at a second junction with US 23 . The highway travels through wooded terrain along its routing . 
 = = History = = 
 The first highway designation to run from Oscoda toward Spruce to Alpena was the original M @-@ 10 on July 1 , 1919 . This segment of highway was later redesignated as a part of US 23 in 1926 when the United States Numbered Highway System was established . Realignments of US 23 created both versions of M @-@ 171 . 
 The initial incarnation of M @-@ 171 served as a loop route off US 23 which departed the main highway east of Spruce , traveled west through Spruce , then north past Hubbard Lake and through Wilson before returning to US 23 near Alpena . This roadway was part of US 23 before it was redesignated M @-@ 171 in 1932 . This routing is now occupied by the present day routings of Spruce , Hubbard Lake and Wilson roads . This version of M @-@ 171 was removed from the system in 1934 . 
 The second version of M @-@ 171 that ran between Oscoda and Caledonia Township in Alcona County was assumed into the state trunkline system in 1936 . This was another former segment of US 23 . Expansion of the Oscoda Army Air Field ( later Wurtsmith Air Force Base ) in the early 1940s shifted M @-@ 171 eastward , more closely following the west shore of Van <unk> Lake . Portions of the old route were taken up by the expansion , while the rest became part of present @-@ day <unk> Avenue . M @-@ 171 existed along the Oscoda to Caledonia Township route for 24 years before being decommissioned in late 1960 or early 1961 . The routing was then assigned County Road F @-@ 41 after October 5 , 1970 , and has retained that designation ever since . 
