 Therefore , for a while , the public were firmly on Canning 's side . An 18 @-@ year @-@ old servant girl threatened with prostitution and held captive by a remarkably ugly old gypsy woman , having escaped , emaciated , to return to her loving mother ; it was a story that the general public , and the gentry , found irresistible . 
 = = = = Virtue Hall 's confession = = = = 
 Although Fielding prided himself upon his fairness — no matter what the social standing of the witness — he subjected Hall to repeated questioning , and frustrated at her contradictory answers threatened her with imprisonment . This had the desired effect because on 14 February Hall stated that John Squires ( son of Mary ) and another man had brought Canning to Wells 's house early on the morning of 2 January . There , before the two kidnappers , Lucy Squires and Hall , the old gypsy had assaulted Canning and forced her upstairs , where she remained until her escape . Hall said that Fortune Natus and his wife Judith had been at the house for some weeks but were moved into the loft to make it appear as though they had stayed there throughout January . Hall 's and Canning 's evidence now tallied almost perfectly , and Fielding turned to Judith Natus . Although she corroborated Hall 's claim that she and her husband had slept in Wells 's loft throughout January , Fielding was unconvinced and urged her to reconsider her statement . Although not charged with any crime , Hall meanwhile was committed to the Gatehouse Prison in Westminster , her stay paid for by the Canningites . Fielding left London for a short while before returning to interview Squires , Wells and the others . Wells and Squires denied any knowledge of Canning or her travails , and strongly protested their innocence . 
 The story as it had appeared in the London Daily Advertiser had already aroused the public 's interest . Fielding had left London believing that he had " ended all the trouble which I thought it necessary for me to give myself in this affair " , but on his return he learnt that during his brief absence , amongst others , several " Noble Lords " had attempted to contact him . On 15 February a reward was offered for the capture and conviction of John Squires and his unnamed associate . Also listed were the locations at which donations could be left , " either applied to the carrying on of the Prosecution , or given to the poor Girl as a <unk> [ sic ] for her Virtue , and <unk> she has gone through " . A rather embellished account of the story was later sent to the press . George Squires could not be found . 
 = = = Trial of Squires and Wells = = = 
 Squires , charged with assault and theft , and Wells , with " well @-@ knowing " what her accomplice had done , were tried on 21 February at the Session House of the Old Bailey . The Lord Mayor of London Sir Crisp Gascoyne presided over the court with a panel of other justices , including Martin Wright ( Justice of the King 's Bench ) , Nathaniel <unk> ( Justice of the Common Pleas ) , Richard Adams ( Baron of the Exchequer since 1753 ; formerly Recorder of London ) , and William Moreton ( appointed Recorder of London in 1753 ) . The gallery was packed with interested spectators . The charge of theft was extremely serious ; the value of Canning 's stays ( about 10 shillings ) meant that if she was found guilty , Squires would almost certainly be hanged at the Tyburn Tree . 
 As she arrived at the court Canning was cheered by the large crowd gathered outside the building . Inside , she testified that she was taken by two men " to the prisoner Wells 's house " at about 4 am on the morning of 2 January . In the kitchen , the old woman ( Squires ) was sat in a chair and asked her " if I chose to go their way " . Canning 's refusal had prompted Squires to cut off her stays , slap her face , and push her up the stairs into a darkened room . She told the court she " saw nothing brought up [ , but w ] hen day @-@ light appeared , I could see about the room ; there was a fire @-@ place and a grate in it , no bed nor bedstead , nothing but hay to lie upon ; there was a black pitcher not quite full of water , and about twenty @-@ four pieces of bread ... about a quartern loaf " . She claimed to have escaped by removing a board from a window at the north end of the loft , climbing out , and jumping down to the soft clay below . She fled along a lane behind the house , through some fields , and on finding a road set out for London . When asked if she had seen or spoken to anyone on the way back , she replied that she had not , explaining that she had shied away from contact for fear of meeting somebody from the house she had escaped from . Canning was cross @-@ examined by William Davy , who questioned her recollection of events in the house . Asked why she had not attempted escape earlier she replied : " Because I thought they might let me out ; it never came into my head till that [ Monday ] morning . " Squires , who had been quietly muttering to herself in the dock , shouted " I never saw that witness in my lifetime till this day three weeks " . 
 Next to appear on the stand was Virtue Hall , who recounted much of her earlier statement to Fielding . Squires again interrupted , asking " What day was it that the young woman was robbed ? " The answer came back , from the court : " She says on the morning of the 2nd of January " , and Squires replied " I return thanks for telling me , for I am as innocent as the child unborn " . Susannah Wells used the opportunity to ask how long Squires and her family were supposed to have been at the house , and was answered by Hall " They were there six or seven weeks in all ; they had been there about a fortnight before the young woman was brought in " . Amongst others , Thomas Colley and Mrs Canning also gave testimony . Canning 's former employer , John Wintlebury , told the court how he had deduced that it was Wells 's house where Canning had been held . Mary Myers and James Lord also claimed to have heard Canning say " Wills or Wells " , as did Robert Scarrat , a <unk> @-@ <unk> and previously a servant in nearby Edmonton who had visited Wells 's house on previous occasions . 
 Although both were subpoenaed as witnesses neither Fortune nor Judith Natus were called to the stand , the attorney responsible later explaining that the mob outside may have intimidated several witnesses . Susannah Wells 's neighbours were turned away by the mob and her daughter and half @-@ brother were quickly recognised and stopped . However , three witnesses found in Dorset by George Squires , to testify for his mother , passed by unrecognised . The first , John Gibbons , said that the Squires had visited his house in Abbotsbury " with handkerchiefs , lawns , muslins , and checks , to sell about town " from 1 – 9 January . This was corroborated by his neighbour , William Clarke . Squires 's last witness , Thomas Greville , claimed that he had accommodated Mary and " her sister and her brother " under his roof in Coombe , on 14 January , where they sold " handkerchiefs , lawns , and such things " . This was contradicted by John <unk> , a fishmonger around Waltham Cross and Theobalds . <unk> claimed he knew Squires by sight and that in the three weeks before her arrest he had seen her telling fortunes in the neighbourhood of Wells 's house . Wells , whose witnesses had been unable to pass by the mob outside , was able to offer only two sentences in her defence . She told the court that she had not seen Canning before 1 February , and that " as to Squires , I never saw her above a week and a day before we were taken up . " According to a contemporary report in the London Daily Advertiser , as the three witnesses left the court the mob , waiting in the yard , " beat them , kicked them rolled them in the Kennel and otherwise misused them before they suffered them to get from them " . 
 = = = = Verdict = = = = 
 Character witnesses in 18th @-@ century English trials were , according to author Douglas Hay , " extremely important , and very frequently used ... in character testimony too , the word of a man of property had the greatest weight . Judges respected the evidence of employers , farmers and neighboring gentlemen , not mere neighbors and friends . " The jury were apparently unimpressed by the defence 's case and pronounced both defendants guilty . They were sentenced on 26 February ; Wells would be branded in her hand and spend six months in prison . For stealing Canning 's stays , Squires was to be hanged . By March 1753 pamphlets on Canning 's story were being read in the coffee @-@ houses of London . There was widespread outrage over Squires ' treatment of her , exacerbated when Little Jemmy , " a poor man who cries sticks about the streets " was supposedly robbed and then stamped on by five gypsies . Canning was celebrated by the mob and gentry , several of whom contributed to her purse , enabling her to move to better accommodation in the house of a Mr Marshall , a <unk> in Aldermanbury . 
 = = = = Gascoyne 's investigation = = = = 
 Not everybody was satisfied with the verdict . The trial judge Sir Crisp Gascoyne and some of his colleagues on the bench found Canning 's story extremely unlikely . Gascoyne had been disgusted by Canning 's supporters , who while outside the court had prevented witnesses from giving evidence , and he was particularly sympathetic to Mary Squires , whom he named " the poor creature " . Then 52 years old , Gascoyne had started life as a Houndsditch brewer before he married the daughter of a wealthy physician . He had progressed through the ranks to become Master of the Brewer 's Company , then served as Alderman of Vintry Ward , Sheriff of London , and been knighted after presenting an address to the king . He had argued on behalf of the city 's orphans and was known for his benevolence in Essex , where he owned large estates . 
 Gascoyne at once began a private enquiry and wrote to the Anglican minister at <unk> , James Harris . He thought it unlikely that the three witnesses found by George Squires would travel so far " to <unk> themselves on behalf of this miserable object " and Harris did not disappoint . The Reverend was able to corroborate Gibbons 's testimony and offer new witnesses who could claim to have seen Squires well away from Enfield Wash . Gascoyne also thought that some of the Canningites doubted the girl 's veracity and had colluded in her version of events to spite him ; this , he thought , was a political attack on a public official and he refused to let the matter rest . He justified his activities by comparing his apparent compassion for the victim , Mary Squires , with his outrage for the deceit of her accuser , Elizabeth Canning , but his fervour was influenced in part by the attitudes of the time . He considered the behaviour of the Canningites inappropriate for their low station and was more impressed by the assurances of people such as Alderman Chitty and Reverend Harris , who as gentlemen and public advocates were presumed more reliable . 
 Gascoyne 's colleague on the bench , Mr Justice <unk> , had written to the Undersheriff of Dorset , who knew John Gibbons and William Clarke . The Undersheriff wrote back claiming that they " would not have given evidence had it not been true " . Clarke may have been in a relationship with Lucy Squires , and claimed that he had stayed with the Squires in Ridgeway . Fifteen prominent residents of Abbotsbury , including churchwardens , Overseers of the Poor , a schoolmaster and a tithing man swore that the Squires were in Dorset in January and that their witnesses were trustworthy men . A further six Abbotsbury men walked 20 miles ( 32 km ) to sign an affidavit corroborating their neighbours ' evidence . 
 Fielding and Gascoyne had each issued contradictory pamphlets on the case , but it was Virtue Hall 's testimony , fundamental in the prosecution of Squires and Wells , which became central to Gascoyne 's investigation . Hall had given her testimony to Fielding under threat of imprisonment and when by chance the Grub Street writer John Hill heard from a Magistrate that she had showed signs of remorse , he was presented with a perfect opportunity to settle an old score . A prodigious writer and author of a renowned newspaper column , The Inspector , Hill had squabbled with several of his peers , notably so in Fielding 's case , as Fielding had closed that argument in his Covent Garden Journal by stating that " this hill was only a paltry dunghill , and had long before been levelled with the dirt . " 
 Supported by the Canningites , Hall was by then staying at the Gatehouse Prison , although still not charged with any crime . Hill immediately communicated his concerns to Gascoyne , who sent for the young woman . Accompanied by a contingent of Canningites , her answers were at first noncommittal , but once isolated from Canning 's friends she soon admitted to Gascoyne that she had perjured herself . She was committed to the Poultry <unk> , where the Canningites continued to support her until they learnt that " particular persons only " were allowed to visit . Hall was again questioned on 7 March , by both Gascoyne and Canning 's supporters . When asked why she had lied to the court , she said " when I was at Mr Fielding 's I at first spoke the truth , but was told it was not the truth . I was terrified and threatened to be sent to Newgate , and prosecuted as a felon , unless I should speak the truth . " She was asked by one of her supporters if she was still lying , but her replies were deemed inconclusive and having confessed to and denied most of the things about which she was questioned , each side began to see her as a liability . 
 = = = Perjury = = = 
 Reverend Harris had several of his witnesses sent to London , where they were interviewed by Gascoyne . In Newgate Prison on 9 March , Gascoyne also interviewed Susannah Wells , who confirmed Hall 's new version of events . He then performed several interviews from 12 – 13 March , including Fortune and Judith Natus , and a witness who could cast doubt on John <unk> 's testimony . Gascoyne also asked George and Lucy Squires about their travels early in 1753 ; George was unable to recall all the places they had visited , and so Gascoyne sent him to Dorset to help him remember . Gascoyne then met with Elizabeth Long ( Wells 's daughter ) , who had been prevented by the mob from testifying for her mother , and on 23 March three of Canning 's former witnesses expressed to Gascoyne their doubts about the young maid 's story . Another witness , who swore that Squires had been in Abbotsbury in January , was interviewed two days later . Gascoyne instructed him to visit Squires in Newgate , where the two recognised one another immediately . 
 Meanwhile , John Myles , who had replaced Salt and who now led the Canningites , had been gathering witnesses who could claim they had seen Mary Squires in the vicinity of Enfield Wash . One said he had seen two men dragging a woman towards Enfield early in January . Others told him they had on 29 January seen " a miserable poor wretch " travelling toward London . Myles found witnesses who claimed they had seen Squires at Enfield Wash in December and January . Myles unwittingly made Gascoyne aware of his investigation when he asked a John Cooper of Salisbury his opinion of seven of Gascoyne 's witnesses , who claimed they had seen Squires in Coombe . Cooper wrote back affirming the good character of Thomas Greville ( who had testified for Squires at her trial ) , but later sent the same information to Gascoyne , offering his support . 
 At this point it appeared certain to Gascoyne that Canning had not told the truth . Through January , he thought , the Squires had very likely been travelling through Dorset , Hampshire , and then London , and had not been in Enfield Wash to kidnap Canning . On 13 March , he therefore ordered Canning arrested , for perjury . 
 = = = = Public spats = = = = 
 Gascoyne 's investigation caused a press frenzy . The output of the writers and publishers of Grub Street emboldened opinions about the case , and in some instances reinforced long @-@ held stereotypes of " wicked Gypsies and a poor innocent girl refusing to yield her honour " . The Canningites stirred up anti @-@ gypsy sentiment with a range of pamphlets and advertisements , one of which named the now deeply unpopular Gascoyne " the King of the <unk> " . Reports began to emerge , of sinister goings @-@ on ; one such claimed that several men on horseback threatened that " they would burn all the people 's houses , barns and corn thereabouts " , should Squires be hanged . 
 Canning 's honesty ( or lack of it ) and Fielding 's handling of the case were raised in a deeply critical attack printed by The London Daily Advertiser . On the same day that Gascoyne ordered Canning 's arrest an advertisement appeared in the Public Advertiser , asking its readers " to suspend their judgement in the Case of the Gypsy Woman till a full State of the whole , which is now being prepared by Mr. Fielding , is published . " Fielding had learnt of Hall 's questioning by Gascoyne and had brought Canning to his house in Bow Street , to " sift the truth out of her , and to bring her to confession if she was guilty . " Satisfied with her account , and unconcerned with Hall , his critique of Squires ' supporters was published as A Clear Statement of the Case of Elizabeth Canning , in which he espoused the virtuous nature of the young maid and attacked those her detractors . Copies sold so quickly that a second print run was ordered two days later . John Hill saw A Clear Statement as a direct attack on Gascoyne , and blasted Fielding with The Story of Elizabeth Canning Considered , which ridiculed his enemy with such comments as : " Who Sir , are you , that are thus dictating unto the Government ? <unk> into yourself and know your station . " Fielding , however , played little part in the saga from thereon , believing that Canning 's supporters had begun to see him as an obstacle to their case . 
 About half of those condemned to death during the 18th century went not to the gallows , but to prison , or colonies abroad . Although pardons were not common , it was possible to bypass the Judge and petition the king directly , and although Gascoyne had some concerns about the character of the witnesses upon whom he was able to call , he nevertheless wrote to George II to request that Squires be pardoned . On 10 April 1753 therefore the king granted a stay of execution of six weeks , while new evidence on both sides of the case was sent to the Lord Chancellor Lord Hardwicke and the Attorney and Solicitor @-@ General . Squires would receive her pardon on 30 May 1753 , but Wells was less fortunate ; she served her sentence and was released from Newgate on 21 August . 
 = = = = Trial of the Abbotsbury men = = = = 
 While Squires 's eventual pardon was being deliberated upon , Myles was busy building Canning 's defence . He was far from complacent ; on 20 April he was in Dorchester with a warrant for the arrest of Gibbons , Clark and Greville , the three Abbotsbury men who had testified for Squires . With a small armed party he captured Gibbons and Clarke at the local inn and took them back to Dorchester , but his warrant was incorrectly worded and Gibbons was released by the justice . Clarke was taken to London and interrogated by Myles at his house , for two days , but the cordwainer refused to cooperate . He was granted bail and returned to Abbotsbury . 
 The three were charged with " wilful corrupt perjury " and tried on 6 September 1753 at the Old Bailey . As Lord Mayor , and fearing accusations of bias , Gascoyne excused himself from the case . The defendants were represented by William Davy , who had earlier defended Squires and Wells . Over 100 people were present to testify on their behalf , but the Canningites stayed away ; they were unaware of Gascoyne 's withdrawal and feared an embarrassing release of evidence to the public from an appearance by Canning . They also kept their witnesses away ; with the exception of one of Mrs Canning 's neighbours , none were present . Myles had not been paid by his employers , and to delay proceedings , his brother Thomas sent a clerk to deliver to the court a selection of writs , but nevertheless Gibbons , Clark , and Greville were found not guilty , and released . 
 At this point Canning had not been seen publicly for some time , and she was proclaimed an outlaw . When in November 1753 a new Lord Mayor was installed she remained out of sight , but at the February Sessions in 1754 she reappeared at the Old Bailey and presented herself to the authorities . 
 = = = = Canning 's trial = = = = 
 Canning 's trial began at the Old Bailey on Monday 29 April 1754 , continuing on Wednesday 1 May , 3 – 4 May , 6 – 7 May and ending on 8 May — an unusually long trial for the time . During jury selection the defence objected to three potential jurors ( much less than the Crown 's 17 objections ) but were too late to argue the choice of foreman , who , it was claimed , had publicly called Canning " a <unk> B — — H , a <unk> , or an <unk> " . Presiding over the courtroom was the new Lord Mayor , Thomas Rawlinson ( Crisp Gascoyne 's successor Edward Ironside having died in office in November 1753 ) , with Edward Clive ( Justice of the Common Pleas ) , Heneage Legge ( Baron of the Exchequer ) , William Moreton ( Recorder of London ) , and Samuel Fludyer , alderman . Canning was represented by three attorneys , George Nares , John Morton and a Mr Williams . Prosecuting was Gascoyne 's son Bamber , Edward Willes and William Davy . After her indictment was read by the Clerk of <unk> the story of Canning 's supposed abduction and imprisonment was retold by Bamber Gascoyne . Then Davy spoke at length . He attacked Canning 's story and told how Squires and her family had travelled through England with smuggled goods to sell . He offered new evidence to support Squires ' alibi and <unk> Canning 's description of her prison , before questioning her account of her escape . He concluded with Virtue Hall 's recantation of her earlier testimony . Willes was the next to speak , picking over the discrepancies between the various accounts offered by Canning of her disappearance . 
 Canning 's defence began with opening statements from Williams and Morton . The latter emphasised her misfortune at twice being subjected to such anguish , firstly for prosecuting her assailants and secondly for being punished for doing so . He complimented the jury and poured scorn on Davy 's allegations , and seized upon the prosecution 's unwillingness to call Virtue Hall to the stand . Morton highlighted how unlikely it was that Canning could so profoundly fool her supporters and countered the prosecution 's complaint about Canning 's description of the loft . The third attorney , George Nares , concentrated on the societal problems of prosecuting Canning for perjury , implying that other victims of crime would be less likely to pursue their assailants , for fear of being prosecuted themselves . 
 Morton questioned George Squires , who could not recall with absolute certainty the path he claimed his family took through the south of England while Canning was missing . His sister Lucy was not called to the stand , as she was considered " rather more stupid than her brother , and has not been on the road since their coming to Enfield Wash " . Robert Willis , who had accompanied Squires to retrace the gypsy family 's steps , was also called to testify ; his evidence was judged as hearsay and ruled inadmissible . As in the trial of Squires and Wells , the reliability of the prosecutor 's witnesses was considered dependent upon their character . Three men from Litton Cheney testified that they had seen the Squires family enter the village on 30 December . The three Abbotsbury men then stepped up and gave their evidence . 39 witnesses for the prosecution were heard on the first day alone ; most of them establishing briefly the Squires family 's alibi . 
 At the end of the first day 's proceedings the mob outside , expecting a short trial and a not guilty verdict , were presented not with the young maid but rather with Crisp Gascoyne . Infuriated , they threw dirt and stones at him , forcing him to retreat to a nearby inn , before returning to the court to escort Canning away from the building . On 1 May therefore the trial continued not with a resumption of the first day 's examination , but with concern over the attack on Gascoyne . A guard was found to protect him and the jury , a member of Canning 's defence was forced to apologise , and the Canningites later that day printed a notice appealing to the crowd to not interfere . Alderman Thomas Chitty was sworn in and , guided by Bamber Gascoyne , gave his account of his first meeting with Canning on 31 January 1753 . Davy questioned several witnesses , who described the discrepancies in Canning 's account of her prison . One of them told of his disgust at Virtue Hall 's testimony against Squires . Along with several other witnesses including Sarah Howit , Fortune and Judith Natus testified that Canning had never been in the loft before 1 February and that it was in fact Howit and Virtue Hall who had been in the loft in January . The end of the day 's proceedings was again overshadowed by the mob outside , and Gascoyne was accorded an escort of " a Body of Constables " . 
 Friday saw yet more witnesses for the prosecution , bringing the total brought by Davy to about 60 . The defence questioned several of those present at the original search of Wells 's house . Canning 's uncle , Thomas Colley , was cross @-@ examined about what his niece ate on her visit of New Year 's Day , the prosecution apparently seeking to establish whether or not she could have been sustained for a month by the bread she claimed to have been given . On the third day of the trial , Mrs Canning was brought to the stand . One possible line of defence for her daughter was simply that she was too stupid to have ever invented the tale , but under cross @-@ examination by Davy Mrs Canning demonstrated that her daughter was capable of writing " a little " . This , in Davy 's view , was sufficient to demonstrate that she was certainly no imbecile . Scarrat was questioned next , and admitted that he had been to Wells 's house before Canning had disappeared . Two of Canning 's neighbours testified to her " deplorable condition " . Her employer was questioned , as was her apothecary , who thought that Canning would have been quite able to survive on the pitcher of water and crusts of bread she claimed to have been given . The defence responded with three witnesses , who each believed that they had encountered a " poor , miserable wretch " at the end of January , when she claimed to have escaped . 
 On 6 May more witnesses for the prosecution were called . As Squires and her family watched , several of Wells 's neighbours insisted they had , about the beginning of 1753 , seen the old gypsy in the area . More witnesses claimed to have seen her in various places around Enfield Wash , including one woman who swore she had seen her on Old Christmas Day . Britain 's calendar had in September 1752 changed from the old @-@ style Julian calendar , to the Gregorian calendar , and the woman was unable to discern the exact day on which she claimed to have seen Squires . She was not alone ; several of the defence 's witnesses were also unable to manage the 11 @-@ day correction required by the calendar change . Others were illiterate , and struggled similarly . The court also heard from three witnesses present solely to discredit the testimony offered by the <unk> . 
 The final day 's proceedings were taken up by Davy , who produced more prosecution witnesses , and proceeded to pick apart the testimony of those who claimed to have seen Squires in Enfield Wash , in January . He summarised the prosecution 's case by telling the jury that Canning was guilty of " the most impious and detestable [ crime ] the human heart can conceive " . The recorder , William Moreton , stated the defence 's case , and asked the jury to consider if they thought that Canning had answered the charges against her to their satisfaction , and if it was possible she could have survived for almost a month on " no more than a quartern @-@ loaf , and a pitcher of water " . 
 = = = Verdict , repercussions , later life = = = 
 The jury took almost two hours to find Canning " Guilty of perjury , but not wilful and corrupt . " The recorder refused to accept the verdict as it was partial , and the jury then took a further 20 minutes to find her " Guilty of Wilful and Corrupt Perjury . " Crisp Gascoyne was not present when the verdict was delivered ; he had been advised to leave earlier , to avoid any trouble outside the court . The defence tried unsuccessfully for a retrial . Canning , held at Newgate prison , was sentenced on 30 May . By a majority of nine to eight , she was given a month 's imprisonment , to be followed by seven years ' transportation . According to the State Trials , Canning spoke , and " hoped they would be favourable to her ; that she had no intent of swearing the <unk> 's life away ; and that what had been done , was only defending herself ; and desired to be considered unfortunate " . 
 The verdict did nothing to assuage the ferocity of the debate . Transcripts of the trial were extremely popular , and portraits of the implacable young maid were offered for sale from shop windows . A reward was offered for information on anyone who had attacked Gascoyne , but mainly the Grub Street press concerned itself with the fallout from the affair . The <unk> was filled with satirical letters between such authors as Aristarchus , Tacitus , and T. Trueman , Esq . One such , a <unk> called <unk> , complained that without gypsies , " what would become of your young nobility and gentry , if there were no bawds to procure young girls of pleasure for them ? " Those on Squires 's side were not the only ones to come under such attacks ; John Hill wrote a short song celebrating his and Gascoyne 's role in the affair , and pictures of Canning in the loft , her bodice loosened to reveal her bosom , were readily available . Another showed Wells and Squires held aloft by a broomstick , an obvious allusion to witchcraft . 
 Gascoyne had stood for Parliament during Canning 's trial , but came bottom of the poll . To justify his pursuit of Canning , he wrote An Address to the <unk> of the City of London , from Sir Crisp Gascoyne , and suffered not only literary but physical attacks , as well as death threats . The Canningites published several responses to Gascoyne 's thoughts , including A liveryman 's reply to Sir Crisp Gascoyne 's address , and A refutation of Sir Crisp Gascoyne 's of his conduct in the cases of Elizabeth Canning and Mary Squires , the latter presenting the trial as the culmination of a Gascoyne vendetta against Canning . 
 Canning , held at Newgate , was reported to be in the presence of Methodists , an unfortunate accusation for her side . On the same day this report appeared , handbills were circulated asserting that the Rector of St Mary Magdalen had visited her and was satisfied that she was still a member of the Church of England . Among her visitors was Mr Justice <unk> , who had helped deliver Virtue Hall to Gascoyne . <unk> asked Canning to confess but was told by Canning that " I have said the whole truth in court , and nothing but the truth ; and I don 't choose to answer any questions , unless it be in court again . " Despite calls for clemency , she was taken to the convict ship Tryal for her voyage to British America . Several threats made by the ship 's crew , however , meant she eventually sailed on board the <unk> in August 1754 . Canning arrived in Wethersfield , Connecticut , and by arrangement with her supporters went to live with the Methodist Reverend Elisha Williams . She was not employed as a servant , but was taken in as a member of Williams ' family . Williams died in 1755 , and Canning married John Treat ( a distant relation of the former governor Robert Treat ) on 24 November 1756 , had a son ( Joseph Canning Treat ) in June 1758 , and a daughter ( Elizabeth ) in November 1761 . She had two more sons ( John and Salmon ) , but died suddenly in June 1773 . 
 = = Views and theories = = 
 For Georgian England , the story of Elizabeth Canning was fascinating . Little attention was paid in the trial to Squires 's request for Canning to " go their way " ; according to Moore ( 1994 ) , overtly the saga questioned Canning 's chastity , while covertly it questioned whether someone of her social standing had any right to be taken notice of . The author Kristina Straub compares the case with the more general debate over the sexuality of female servants ; Canning may have been either a " childlike innocent , victimized by brutally criminal outlaws " , or " a wily manipulator of the justice system who uses innocent bystanders to escape the consequences of her own sexual misdeeds " . The Case of Elizabeth Canning Fairly Stated posited that Canning either suffered imprisonment to protect her virtue , or lied to conceal " her own criminal Transactions in the Dark " . Straub considers that the debate was not merely about Canning 's guilt or innocence , but rather " the kinds of sexual identity that were attributable to women of her position in the social order . " 
 The partisan nature of the Canningites and the Egyptians ensured that the trial of Elizabeth Canning became one of the most notorious criminal mysteries in 18th @-@ century English law . For years the case was a regular feature in such publications as The Newgate Calendar and the Malefactor 's Registers . Artist Allan Ramsay wrote A Letter to the Right Honourable the Earl of — Concerning the Affair of Elizabeth Canning , which was the inspiration for Voltaire 's Histoire d <unk> Canning , et de Jean <unk> ( 1762 ) , who shared Ramsay 's opinion that Canning had gone missing to hide a pregnancy . The case was revisited in 1820 by James Caulfield , who retold the story but with several glaring mistakes . Throughout the 19th and 20th centuries several authors offered their own interpretations of the case . Caulfield 's essay was followed in 1852 by John Paget 's Elizabeth Canning . Paget 's apt summary of the case read : " in truth , perhaps , the most complete and most inexplicable Judicial Puzzle on record " . 
 Canning 's trial was marked by the prosecution 's inability to find any evidence whatsoever that she had been anywhere but in Wells 's home , and where Canning was in January 1753 remains unknown . Similarly , mystery surrounds the precise movements of the Squires family , when it was supposed they were travelling through Dorset early in 1753 . The writer F. J. Harvey Darton suspected that the family were smugglers , and that it was significant they had passed through <unk> , where Isaac Gulliver operated ( although Gulliver was , at the time , a child ) . The 18th @-@ century artist Allan Ramsay claimed that Canning 's initial story was " exceedingly stupid " , and false . He viewed the lack of detail in her testimony as unsurprising to a more analytical mind . The US author Lillian Bueno McCue theorised that she was an amnesiac , and that her former employer , John Wintlebury , was to blame for her imprisonment at the Wells house . <unk> ( 1989 ) considers this theory very unlikely however , and instead concludes that Canning was almost certainly at Enfield Wash , but was not kept prisoner at Wells 's home . He suggests that Robert <unk> implanted the suggestion that Canning had been held at the Wells 's house , as a useful decoy , and that he had somehow been involved in an unwanted pregnancy . <unk> also suggests that Canning was suffering from partial amnesia , and that she may not have lied intentionally at the trial of Squires and Wells . He calls Canning " the first media product . " Although some early authors adopted the same stance as Fielding or Hill , who actively took sides in the affair , most later writers believe that Canning did not tell the truth . Moore ( 1994 ) , however , believes that Canning was probably innocent , explaining the discrepancies between her and the Squires ' testimonies as understandable omissions and modifications , and placing much emphasis on the ability of those men in power to follow their own pursuits — often at the expense of others . 
 = Siege of Lal Masjid = 
 The Siege of Lal Masjid ( Urdu : <unk> مسجد <unk> , code @-@ named Operation Sunrise ) was a confrontation in July 2007 between Islamic fundamentalist militants and the Government of Pakistan , led by President Pervez Musharraf and Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz . The focal points of the operation were the Lal Masjid ( " Red Mosque " ) and the Jamia Hafsa madrasah complex in Islamabad , Pakistan . 
 Since January 2006 , Lal Masjid and the adjacent Jamia Hafsa madrasah had been operated by Islamic militants led by two brothers , Maulana Abdul Aziz and Abdul Rashid Ghazi . This organisation advocated the imposition of Sharia ( Islamic religious law ) in Pakistan and openly called for the overthrow of the Pakistani government . Lal Masjid was in constant conflict with authorities in Islamabad for 18 months prior to the military operation . They engaged in violent demonstrations , destruction of property , kidnapping , arson and armed clashes with the authorities . After Lal Masjid militants set fire to the Ministry of Environment building and attacked the Army Rangers who guarded it , the military responded , and the siege of the Lal Masjid complex began . 
 The complex was besieged from 3 to 11 July 2007 , while negotiations were attempted between the militants and the state 's Shujaat Hussain and Ijaz @-@ ul @-@ Haq . Once negotiations failed , the complex was stormed and captured by the Pakistan Army 's Special Service Group . The operation resulted in 154 deaths , and 50 militants were captured . It also prompted pro @-@ Taliban rebels along the Afghan border to nullify a 10 @-@ month @-@ old peace agreement with the Pakistani Government . This event triggered the Third Waziristan War , which marked another surge in militancy and violence in Pakistan and has resulted in more than 3 @,@ 000 casualties . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Prior to 2006 = = = 
 The Lal Masjid was founded by Maulana Qari Abdullah in 1965 . In English , Lal Masjid translates to the " Red Mosque " , and the name is derived from the red colour of the mosque 's walls and interiors . Abdullah taught radical Islam and preached Jihad during the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan . Since its founding , Lal Masjid was frequented by leaders of the Pakistani military and government . Muhammad Zia @-@ ul @-@ Haq , the Army Chief of Staff who later became president after seizing power in a coup d 'état in 1977 , was a close associate of Abdullah 's . The mosque is located near the headquarters of Pakistan 's Inter @-@ Services Intelligence ( ISI ) , and several staff members were known to go there for prayers . 
 After the Soviet war in Afghanistan ended in 1989 , the mosque continued to function as a centre for radical Islamic learning and housed several thousand male and female students in adjacent seminaries . 
 Maulana Qari Abdullah was assassinated at the mosque in 1998 . On his death , his sons , Abdul Aziz and Abdul Rashid , assumed responsibility for the entire complex . The brothers admitted to having regular communication with many of the wanted leaders of al @-@ Qaeda , including Osama bin Laden . 
 Jamia Hafsa was a <unk> for women located near Lal Masjid . It was the largest Islamic religious institution for women in the world , with more than 6 @,@ 000 students . It was constructed by Maulana Qari Abdullah in 1992 . After his assassination , supervision passed to his son Abdul Aziz . Students were taught general subjects , including mathematics and geography but were not tested on these subjects ; the only exams were on religious subjects . 
 Following the 11 September 2001 attacks on the United States , Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf announced his support for the US @-@ led War on Terror . This declaration sparked conflict with the Lal Masjid , whose leadership was openly pro @-@ Taliban . Abdul Aziz and Abdul Rashid denied having any links to banned terrorist organisations but were vehemently opposed to the War on Terror and the conflict in Afghanistan . They openly condemned Musharraf and opposed Pakistani security forces , including the Pakistan Rangers and Islamabad Capital Territory police . The mosque became a source for speeches calling for the assassination of Musharraf . One of these speeches was delivered by Masood Azhar , whose Jaish @-@ e @-@ Mohammed group members were later involved in failed attempts to kill the president . In July 2005 , Pakistani authorities attempted to raid the mosque in connection with their investigation into the July 7 , 2005 London bombings , but the police were blocked by baton @-@ wielding female students . After the raid , authorities apologised for the behaviour of the police . 
 = = = After 2006 = = = 
 During 2006 and the first half of 2007 , students and mosque leaders continued to challenge the Pakistani government 's authority by calling for Islamic law and to end co @-@ operation with the United States . They launched an anti @-@ vice campaign , kidnapping alleged prostitutes and burning films . Students at the Red Mosque 's two affiliated seminaries launched a campaign for Shari 'a , occupying a nearby children 's library and embarking on vigilante raids through the capital to stop what they called " un @-@ Islamic activities , " such as DVD vendors , barber shops and a Chinese @-@ run massage parlor that they accused of being a brothel . 
 Most students in the mosque were from the North @-@ West Frontier Province bordering Afghanistan . 
 A confrontation took place when the mosque launched a campaign against the demolition of mosques in Islamabad by the Capital Development Authority . After an illegally constructed mosque was destroyed , students of the seminaries launched an all @-@ out campaign against the government . They blocked authorities from reaching the site and then occupied a nearby children 's library building . This was carried out primarily by the female students . The students set up an around @-@ the @-@ clock vigil and promised a " fight to the death " when the government threatened to evict them . The situation was defused when the authorities opened negotiations . The government later reconstructed the demolished portions of the mosque compound . The Lal Masjid leadership demanded the reconstruction of six other demolished mosques in the capital city . 
 On 27 March 2007 , female students from Jamia Hafsa kidnapped three women , who they accused of running a brothel , and seized two policemen . All of the women were released after supposedly confessing to running the brothel and were shown on the television wearing burqas . Also due in part to an intercession from the Chinese Ambassador , Luo <unk> . In an interview on the talk show " Capital Talk , " Lal Masjid students claimed that the madam of the brothel had connections with influential government employees , specifically naming the Minister of Railways Shaikh Rasheed Ahmad . The neighbourhood police station allegedly had prior knowledge of or approved the kidnappings . On 6 April , Abdul Aziz established a sharia court in parallel with Pakistan 's federal judicial system and pledged thousands of suicide attacks if the government attempted to close it . 
 Students continued to occupy the library and challenge governmental control by raiding a brothel . They also kidnapped ten Chinese nationals , as well as several law enforcement officials , women , and children . The approach taken by the Pakistani government in dealing with mosque issues led to accusations of leniency on the part of Musharraf , who felt he was too soft . After exchanging fire with Pakistani troops , students set fire to a Ministry of Environment building near Lal Masjid . 
 The Minister for Environment , Faisal Saleh Hayat , stated that he had requested security for the building , but authorities had failed to provide it . Contrary to claims made earlier , Hayat said the ministry was never ordered to vacate the premises before Pakistan Rangers deployed . 
 = = Timeline = = 
 = = = Siege = = = 
 On 3 July 2007 , a battle erupted between Pakistani security forces and students of Lal Masjid when Law enforcement agencies extended the barbwire around the Masjid precinct . Riot police fired tear gas to disperse the <unk> continued , leaving nine people dead and approximately 150 injured . Among the dead were four mosque students , a TV news channel cameraman , a businessman , and a pedestrian . Within minutes , security forces closed off the area , and the capital 's hospitals declared an emergency . Sporadic clashes continued as Pakistan Army troops deployed into the area . 
 The next day , authorities announced an indefinite curfew in Sector G @-@ 6 of Islamabad , where Lal Masjid is located . The army received orders to shoot anyone leaving the mosque with weapons . The government offered Rs . 5 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to $ 50 <unk> or £ 41 GBP ) , plus a free education , to anyone exiting the mosque unarmed . Women inside the mosque were also offered safe passage to their homes . Successive deadlines were extended , as mosque leaders allowed some students to surrender , requiring security forces to renegotiate extensions . Government authorities announced the first deadline for the occupants of Lal Masjid to surrender unconditionally as 15 : 30 Pakistan Standard Time ( PST ) , and it was pushed back to 16 : 00 , 18 : 00 , 19 : 30 and then 21 : 30 . The government said that as many as 600 armed militants remained inside the mosque . 
 Before dawn on 5 July , Pakistani troops set off a series of explosions around the mosque . Gunfire was exchanged throughout the day , but open clashes apparently stopped . Deadline extensions continued on 5 July , with the government planning to evacuate the mosque and Jamia Hafsa before the final assault . Interior Minister Aftab Ahmad <unk> announced at a press conference that the government believed that between 300 and 400 students remained in the mosque , and only 50 to 60 were considered to be militants . 
 Following the fourth deadline , Abdul Aziz was captured trying to escape disguised as a woman wearing a burqa . Following the capture of this leader , about 800 male students and 400 female students of Jamia Hafsa surrendered to the authorities . 
 Abdul Aziz 's younger brother , Ghazi Abdul Rashid , had been negotiating with a government mediator . He claimed that the remaining students were willing to leave the mosque and lay down their arms , provided the government would grant them amnesty and not fire on them . Government officials were sceptical that Abdul Rashid would honour this agreement . In a telephone interview from a live transmission of Geo TV , Ghazi Abdul Rashid denied all the charges against him and reiterated his innocence . He further negotiated with the government for his safe passage and a guarantee that no harm would come to his followers inside the mosque . He also received a promise that his ailing mother would receive medical care . 
 The siege continued on 6 July . Negotiation talks continued between the besieged Lal Masjid administration and government authorities , without resolution . Twenty @-@ one additional students surrendered to authorities , and two students were killed in a shooting incident . The government decided to delay the assault , hoping for the safe evacuation of more students from the besieged mosque . President Pervez Musharraf issued an ultimatum on the evening of 7 July . The Pakistani army took over the operation and replaced the paramilitary troops deployed around the premises . A thirteen @-@ year @-@ old child escaped from the besieged mosque unharmed . 
 Pakistani commandos raided the outer perimeter of the compound , blasting holes through the walls of the mosque to allow trapped women and children to escape . The assaults began shortly after 1 : 00 am ( 20 : 00 GMT ) on 7 July and were met with heavy armed resistance . SSG Commander Lt. Col. Haroon @-@ ul @-@ Islam , who had been leading the operation , was wounded on 6 July and died in the hospital two days later . However , the commandos succeeded , and the boundary wall of Lal Masjid and Jamia Hafsa collapsed . Abdul Rashid Ghazi said they would not surrender and that they had sufficient ammunition and rations to last a month . 
 On 9 July , a group representing Pakistani madrasahs , headed by Maulana Salimullah Khan , called for an immediate cessation of the Lal Masjid operation . Finland also temporarily closed its embassy in Islamabad on 9 July due to the deteriorating security situation and the proximity of the embassy to the mosque compound . By 10 July , the Pakistani government reported that 100 militants and between 300 and 400 women and children remained inside the mosque . 
 = = = Attack on Musharraf 's aircraft = = = 
 On Friday , 6 July , President General Musharraf left for the flood @-@ affected areas of Balochistan . As the president 's aircraft took off from the Islamabad airport , militants fired anti @-@ aircraft weapons at it from the roof of a house in the Asghar Mall area of Rawalpindi . The militants ' relationship with Lal Masjid remains unknown . Security forces recovered two anti @-@ aircraft guns and a machine gun on the rooftop of a Rawalpindi high @-@ rise , one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) from the airport . The government asserted that shots were heard minutes after the president 's aircraft took off . Analysts suggest that it may have been retaliation for ongoing operations against Lal Masjid and the government 's continued efforts to combat terrorism and <unk> in northern Waziristan . 
 = = = Preparation for the assault = = = 
 Predator unmanned aerial vehicles ( UAVs ) flew over Lal Masjid and Jamia Hafsa on 8 and 9 July , capturing images of the deployment of people inside . Security forces had the images taken to study the claims of Ghazi Abdul Rashid regarding casualties and damage caused to Lal Masjid and Jamia Hafsa . The UAVs flew over Lal Masjid and Jamia Hafsa for more than an hour , from 2 : 40 to 4 : 00 am . Senior government officials and the Security Forces personnel examined the pictures and relayed the information directly to the command post on the ground . The UAV was given to Pakistan by the United States for use in the War on Terror . Strategic planning for the assault on the mosque was conducted based on information gathered by the drone . Pakistan deployed several security units to execute the attack on the mosque . These include the Army 's 78th Paratrooper Brigade and 111th Infantry Brigade ; its elite strike force , the Special Service Group ( SSG ) Division ; the Ninth Wing Company of the Pakistan Army Rangers paramilitary force ; and the Anti @-@ Terrorism Squad of the Punjab Police . 
 = = = The Assault = = = 
 = = = = Battle for the mosque = = = = 
 On the morning of 10 July , former Prime Minister Chaudhry Shujaat Hussain and Federal Religious Affairs Minister Muhammad Ijaz @-@ ul @-@ Haq declared that peace negotiations via loudspeaker and mobile phone had failed . Within minutes , the Special Service Group were issued orders to storm the mosque . Pakistan Army spokesman Waheed Arshad said troops began by attacking and breaching the mosque from the south and assaulted it from three directions at 4 : 00 am ( 23 : 00 GMT ) . The forces immediately came under gunfire from heavily armed militants hunkered down behind sandbagged positions on the roof and from holes in the walls of the mosque . The SSG quickly cleared the mosque 's ground floor , amid explosions coming from the mosque . About 30 women and children ran toward the advancing SSG operators and managed to escape unharmed . 
 While the SSG secured the ground floor of the mosque , they continually received fire from the mosque 's minarets . This slowed the operation 's progress . On the mosque roof , militants had piled sandbags at the base of the minarets , which they now used as steps to shoot at troops below . After the minarets were taken , the SSG progressed deeper into the complex , and the militants threw gasoline bombs in an unsuccessful attempt to set fire to the mosque and stop the assault . Once the ground floor was secured , the SSG attempted to enter the Jamia Hafsa madrasah adjoining the mosque but were delayed by booby traps , which had to be disabled before they could continue into the complex . 
 = = = = Battle for the Jamia Hafsa complex = = = = 
 The SSG entered the complex , which also served as Abdul <unk> Ghazi 's living quarters , and engaged in a firefight in the main courtyard . Militants fired on them from makeshift bunkers beneath the stairwell . Army spokesman Arshad later stated that the militants must have been fortifying the bunkers for several months . Once the courtyard was cleared , the SSG entered the labyrinth of the Jamia Hafsa building . Militants inside were armed with guns and rockets , and some areas were booby @-@ trapped . Some militants had <unk> and explosion @-@ proof vests and other sophisticated weapons . The SSG suffered most of their casualties during this phase of the operation . In close @-@ quarter combat , the SSG were attacked with smoke grenades , incendiary grenades , and fragmentation grenades . Twenty @-@ nine of the thirty @-@ three SSG commandos who were injured in the operation received injuries from fragmentation grenades . As the fight continued , the SSG came upon a room in which half a dozen militants were present . One of the militants detonated a suicide jacket , killing everyone in the room . It took several hours of intense fighting before the SSG gained control of Jamia Hafsa , with only the basement remaining to be secured . 
 = = = = Final stand = = = = 
 Arshad said troops had secured 80 percent of the complex and were moving slowly , as the resistance was intense in the remaining areas . The standoff continued , as heavily armed militants had retreated into the basement using women and children as human shields , according to the Pakistan Army spokesman . The militants in the basement resisted with machine guns , shoulder @-@ fired rockets , and Molotov cocktails . In a last interview with Geo TV during the operation , Abdul Rashid Ghazi , who was hunkered down in the basement , claimed that his mother had been wounded by gunfire and was quoted as saying , " The government is using full force . This is naked aggression ... my murder is certain now . " Ghazi also claimed that 30 rebels were still battling Pakistani troops , but they only had 14 AK @-@ 47s . 
 Militants continued to fire at the SSG commandos from ventilation grilles in the basement . During the firefight , Abdul Rashid Ghazi was shot in the leg and was asked to surrender . However , militants in the room fired back at the SSG , and Ghazi was killed in the crossfire . Other reports say that Ghazi came out of a bunker to surrender , only to be shot by his own forces . The fighting continued until all the personnel trapped in the basement either surrendered or were killed . 
 Behind an Army cordon , emergency workers waited for clearance to enter Lal Masjid . Female police officers were present to handle female survivors and casualties . Relatives of the militants inside the Lal Masjid were also outside the cordon . The Associated Press reported : " The siege has given the neighborhood the look of a war zone " , with troops manning machine guns behind sandbagged posts and from the top of armoured vehicles . 
 = = = Mosque secured = = = 
 On 11 July , officials reported that the Lal Masjid complex had been cleared of militants , and troops were combing the area for booby traps and explosives . The eight @-@ day Lal Masjid operation was the longest ever conducted by the SSG . 
 According to Inter @-@ Services Public Relations , weapons were recovered from the bullet @-@ riddled Lal Masjid and Jamia Hafsa complexes , including Russian and Chinese variant RPG rockets , anti @-@ tank and anti @-@ personnel landmines , suicide bombing belts , three to five .22 @-@ caliber rifles , RPD , RPK and RPK @-@ 74 light machine guns , <unk> Sniper Rifles , <unk> rifles , AK @-@ 47s , pistols , night vision equipment , and more than 50 @,@ 000 rounds of various calibre ammunition . Lesser sophisticated items and weaponry recovered from the complex included three crates of gasoline bombs prepared in green soft drink bottles , gas masks , recoilless rifles , two @-@ way radios , large plastic buckets containing homemade bombs the size of tennis balls , as well as knives . 
 Intelligence agencies expressed shock at the highly sophisticated weapons that the militants in the Lal Masjid and Jamia Hafsa compound had , and began an investigation into where the equipment came from . Pakistan Army spokesman Waheed Arshad said that a suicide bomber had detonated himself in the mosque located at the opposite side of the complex to the seminary . Arshad also said a second suicide bomber had detonated himself in the white @-@ domed mosque . In total , it took 36 hours to fully secure the complex and remove the booby traps . 
 = = = Casualties = = = 
 Officials in Islamabad considered the operation a success , citing that they were able to subdue all the fighters inside the mosque — a group that allegedly included foreign terrorists — without a heavy civilian toll . " The number of casualties was much lower than it could have been , " said Shaukat Aziz , Pakistan 's prime minister . Of the 164 SSG Army commandos that participated in the siege and later assault of the mosque , 10 died and 33 were wounded . 
 The Inspector General of Police ( IGP ) reported that from 3 July until 11 July , 1 @,@ 096 people , 628 men , 465 women , and 3 children left or were rescued from the complex . The IGP also confirmed that 102 people were killed during the operation : 91 militants , 10 SSG commandos , and 1 Ranger soldier . This includes the sixteen dead on 10 July . A total of 248 people were injured , including 204 civilians , 41 army soldiers , and 3 Rangers . Seventy @-@ five bodies were recovered from the premises after the operation . Securing Lal Masjid brought an end to nine days of high tension in Islamabad , normally a tranquil city that had been immune to the violence experienced in the tribal areas of Pakistan . 
 Army spokesman Arshad said that , during the operation , 85 people were rescued from the complex , of whom 56 were male . He also said 39 of those rescued were under the age of eighteen . " With militants in different rooms , firing from behind pillars , and then going into basements and clearing it , you can understand the difficulties , " Arshad told journalists . 
 Nineteen bodies were burned beyond recognition , but none of them appeared to be women or children , according to Pakistani officials . An article in The Nation , cited a grave digger at the cemetery where the bodies were being buried , who claimed there was the possibility that there may have been more than one body in each coffin . The article also stated that the government was digging more graves than previously established . The Muttahida Majlis @-@ e @-@ Amal , a coalition of hard @-@ line religious parties , claimed that between 400 and 1 @,@ 000 students had been killed , along with women and children . Spanish @-@ language news channels Univision , Antena 3 , and Telecinco claimed that the total number of deaths in the siege was greater than 286 and could be as high as 300 . 
 Pakistani investigators probing links between Lal Masjid and terrorists have discovered the enrolment registers listing the students who studied at the seminary . The investigators believe the information , found in the Jamia Hafsa complex , will help clarify the number of people killed or missing in the operation . Officials believe the list of registered students matches the number of students evacuated or captured from the mosque and Jamia Hafsa . 
 = = = Damage to mosque = = = 
 The damage to Lal Masjid was extensive . The entrance hall was completely burned out , the ceiling scorched , and the red walls above the oval doorway blackened . However , the mosque itself sustained less damage than the Jamia Hafsa seminary . Bullet casings were found all over the mosque roof , and the inside of Lal Masjid was turned coal black from the militants trying to set the mosque on fire using gasoline bombs . Militants used the mosque 's two white minarets as vantage points , resulting in damage to the minarets . One minaret was completely destroyed , and its speakers were hanging from their wires . The dome , however , was not damaged during the 36 @-@ hour battle . The director general of the Inter Services Public Relations said photographs of the bodies seem to indicate that there were foreigners among the dead . 
 In the Jamia Hafsa complex , damage was extensive , with thousands of bullet holes in the courtyard . The basement was blackened from rockets . The main buildings of the complex were structurally intact , but the boundary walls had been breached in several places . The building had bullet marks in its cement structure . The two courtyards inside the school were filled with shattered glass and spent rounds . Piles of the girls ' bed rolls and stacks of books were piled against walls . 
 On 15 July , the Capital Development Authority was asked by the government to complete the repair and rehabilitation of Lal Masjid in 15 days , and on 27 July , the mosque was reopened to the public . However , the Jamia Hafsa complex was demolished , as it was illegally constructed and in danger of collapsing . 
 = = Al @-@ Qaeda and foreign fighters = = 
 Pakistani intelligence officials said they found letters from Osama bin Laden 's deputy , Ayman al @-@ Zawahiri , after taking control of Lal Masjid . They were written to Abdul Rashid Ghazi and Abdul Aziz Ghazi , directing the brothers and militants to conduct an armed revolt . Government sources believe that as many as 18 foreign fighters from Uzbekistan , Egypt , and Afghanistan had arrived weeks before the final confrontation and established firing ranges to teach the students , including children , how to handle weapons properly . Diplomats were surprised by how quickly al @-@ Zawahiri condemned the attack on the mosque and called on Pakistanis to rise up against Musharraf 's government . Officials blamed the presence of foreign fighters for the breakdown of negotiations , as they seemed about to reach a deal to end the standoff peacefully . According to government sources and western diplomats , the Al @-@ Qaeda fighters in the mosque sought martyrdom instead . 
 Al @-@ Qaeda 's second @-@ in @-@ command , al @-@ Zawahiri , issued a videotape on 11 July 2007 , calling for Pakistanis to join jihad in revenge for the attack by the Pakistan 's Army on the mosque . Al @-@ <unk> 's four @-@ minute address was titled The Aggression against Lal Masjid and dedicated solely to the clash between the Lal Masjid militants and the Pakistan Army . The video was released by al @-@ Qaeda 's media wing , as @-@ <unk> and subtitled in English . 
 = = Reactions = = 
 = = = Pakistani public = = = 
 Although many Pakistanis were silent about the operation against Lal Masjid , most agreed with the government 's decision to use force to retake the complex . While hardliners have been able to stir up anger every time Musharraf moves against militants , most people have been tolerant and oppose the militant desire to impose their interpretation of Islamic law . Most residents of Islamabad agree that the raid restored local peace , despite fears of retaliation . 
 = = = Pakistani media = = = 
 In a televised address to the nation , Musharraf declared that he was determined to eradicate extremism and terrorism in Pakistan . Dawn supported the government 's actions against Lal Masjid but questioned " how the intelligence agencies failed to get wind of the goings @-@ on in the Lal Masjid and the stockpiling of arms and ammunition in such large quantities . " 
 The Daily Times also supported the government 's position and added , " Let us be clear . No government can violate the universal principle of ' no negotiation with terrorists ' and live to be praised . " The News was more critical , stating , " Once ' Operation Silence ' is over , the firing stops , the dust settles down and the bodies are counted , there are bound to be many questions raised . Why didn 't the government take action earlier against the clerics because had that been the case so many lives would not have been lost ? Why were the Lal Masjid elements allowed so much leeway that the complex became almost like a state within a state , complete with a moral policing force which acted with impunity enforcing a rigid interpretation of Islam on the city 's residents ? How did so many hardened militants , reportedly some foreigners among them , make their way inside the compound situated in the heart of Islamabad ? " . 
 The Post was worried about how the episode would affect Pakistan : " This is going to ratchet up religious sentiments , and could lead to increased polarization between the moderates and extremists in the country , the former including General Musharraf under the banner of ' enlightened moderation ' . " The Islam newspaper criticised the government , stating , " The government cannot absolve itself of the tragedy . If it wanted , the matter could have been resolved at the start . But this was not done and , for the first time in the history of Pakistan , our own security forces not only bombarded a mosque and religious seminary , but also brought in armored personnel carriers , tanks and helicopter gunships in numbers that made you wonder . This shows that all this activity was masterminded by some satanic minds . This incident is tragic , shameful and dangerous . How much it has harmed the country and the nation , and how worse an impact it will leave on the country on the future , can at this point only be imagined . " 
 Nawa @-@ i @-@ Waqt wrote in its editorial , " The entire nation is drowned in shock and grief today . They are mourning the brute use of force . Now we need a comprehensive inquiry over the operation against the Red Mosque . The report should be made public so that the people can know the actual facts . " The <unk> daily countered , " The entire nation is grieving ... only the USA wanted what happened and proof of that is that the storming operation was celebrated at the White House and Pentagon rather than at General Musharraf 's HQ . " 
 The Pakistan Observer praised the government : " The Government deserves credit for showing remarkable tolerance and patience and exhausted all possible avenues for peaceful settlement of the nerve @-@ shattering crisis " . 
 = = = International reaction = = = 
 China backed Musharraf in his stand against Lal Masjid . The Chinese Minister of Public Security , Zhou Yongkang , referred explicitly to the Lal Masjid militants as terrorists and demanded that Pakistan act more forcefully to protect Chinese nationals working in the country . 
 The European Union President , José Manuel Barroso , issued a statement that it " supports the Government of Pakistan in the defense of the rule of law and the writ of the State against the threat posed by such armed radical groups in the context of the fight against extremism . " The EU also praised the " restraint and moderation showed by the Pakistani authorities . " 
 United States President George W. Bush gave his support to Musharraf as " a strong ally in the war against these extremists . " State Department deputy spokesman Tom Casey noted that the militants had been given many warnings before the commandos moved on the Red Mosque . He said , " The government of Pakistan has proceeded in a responsible way . All governments have a responsibility to preserve order . " Bryan D. Hunt , of the United States ' consulate in Lahore , was quoted as saying that the American government supported the Pakistani government and that " the militants were given many warnings but instead of surrendering they decided to fight and challenge the writ of government . " Hunt also said that the US fully supports Pakistan in their War on Terror and considers Pakistan " their closest ally in South Asia . " Religious parties and figures criticised the support extended by the US consular official and demanded that the government expel him for interfering in Pakistan 's internal affairs . A Pakistani Foreign Office spokesperson <unk> Aslam characterised the US consulate official 's statement as contrary to diplomatic norms , and open interference in the country 's internal affairs . She said a protest would be lodged . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 On 16 August 2007 , acting on a suo motu notice , the Supreme Court of Pakistan took up the extrajudicial killings of the people at the Lal Masjid and Jamia Hafsa complex . Performance of the Islamabad administration attracted the reprimand of the court for its slow pace . The court was informed that 61 students were in custody , of whom 39 were on bailable offences . The Chief Justice of Pakistan ordered immediate release of 20 people considered innocent , as recommended by a joint investigation team . National Crisis Management Cell Director Javed Iqbal <unk> told the court that 28 DNA tests had not been confirmed . The Chief Justice also pointed out that Islamabad Deputy Commissioner Mohammad Ali had stated that 30 bodies remained unidentified . 
 Mohammed Ahsan <unk> , president of the Lahore High Court Bar Association , said , " This issue could have been resolved through negotiations but General Musharraf intentionally spilled the blood of innocent people to please his foreign masters . " Deputy Information Minister Tariq Azim said that the Lal Masjid assault had sent a strong message that the government " meant business . " Musharraf vowed in a nationally televised address that he would " crush extremists throughout Pakistan and move against religious schools like those at the Lal Masjid and those that breed them . " 
 The Lal Masjid siege gave hardliners in Pakistan a rallying point , as well as generating new martyrs and prompting al @-@ Qaeda and the Taliban to launch retaliation attacks in Pakistan . The first attack after the operation against the mosque was on 12 July 2007 ; two suicide attacks killed six people in northwest Pakistan . Another 28 soldiers were killed when a suicide attacker struck a military convoy in northwest Pakistan near the Afghan border on 14 July . 
 The bodies of seventy militants from the Lal Masjid operation were buried in a graveyard near Islamabad . To assist relatives in identifying and in claiming the bodies later , officials took photographs , fingerprints , and DNA samples from the bodies prior to their interment in temporary graves . There have been renewed attacks in Pakistan since the siege . 
 In October 2013 , Musharraf was arrested , days after being bailed on other charges , for being personally responsible for ordering the siege . It came two weeks after a case was filed over his responsibility . 
 = = = 2008 = = = 
 On 6 July 2008 , at 7 : 50 pm local time , a bomb exploded near Lal Masjid killing 18 policemen and a civilian . Pakistani officials claim that the bombing , which occurred on the first anniversary of the siege , was a revenge attack and the work of a 30 @-@ year @-@ old suicide bomber . 
 = HMS Perseus ( <unk> ) = 
 HMS Perseus was a Colossus @-@ class light fleet aircraft carrier built for the Royal Navy during World War II . The ship was initially named Edgar , but she was renamed in 1944 when the Admiralty decided to convert her into an aircraft maintenance carrier . She was completed in 1945 , after the end of World War II , and she made a trip to Australia late in the year . Upon her return to the UK in early 1946 , Perseus was placed in reserve . The ship was recommissioned in 1950 to serve as the trials ship for the steam catapult then under development . Over 1 @,@ 600 test launches were conducted before the catapult was removed in 1952 and she was converted for use as a ferry carrier to transport aircraft , troops and equipment overseas . She was reduced to reserve again in 1954 and sold for scrap in 1958 . 
 = = Design , description and construction = = 
 The Colossus @-@ class carriers were intended to meet a shortage of naval flight decks . Their design was based on that of the Illustrious class , but modified to permit rapid construction in commercial yards . Perseus was not completed to her original design ; the success of the maintenance aircraft carrier Unicorn prompted modification of the ship , whilst under construction , to an aircraft maintenance ship without aircraft catapults . 
 Perseus had an overall length of 695 feet ( 211 @.@ 8 m ) , a beam of 80 feet 4 inches ( 24 @.@ 5 m ) , and a draught of 23 feet ( 7 @.@ 0 m ) at deep load . She displaced 12 @,@ 265 long tons ( 12 @,@ 462 t ) at standard load . Each of the ship 's two sets of Parsons geared steam turbines drove one propeller shaft . Steam was supplied by four Admiralty three @-@ drum water @-@ tube boilers operating at a pressure of 400 psi ( 2 @,@ 758 kPa ; 28 kgf / cm2 ) . The turbines were designed for a total of 40 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 30 @,@ 000 kW ) and gave Perseus a speed of 25 knots ( 46 km / h ; 29 mph ) . The ship carried 3 @,@ 196 long tons ( 3 @,@ 247 t ) of fuel oil which gave her a range of 8 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 15 @,@ 700 km ; 9 @,@ 800 mi ) at 11 knots ( 20 km / h ; 13 mph ) . 
 In order maximize space for workshops and stores , the ship 's arresting gear and catapult were not fitted and all the facilities required for flying operations were removed . Two large deckhouses were added to port of the island and on the rear of the flight deck . The ship had a single hangar , 17 feet 6 inches ( 5 @.@ 33 m ) high . Aircraft were transported between the hangars and the flight deck by two aircraft lifts ( elevators ) ; each measured 34 by 45 feet ( 10 @.@ 4 m × 13 @.@ 7 m ) . Two large cranes were mounted on the flight deck to move aircraft and stores to and from the flight deck . The ship carried two small self @-@ propelled lighters to allow unflyable aircraft to be transferred between ships or to shore facilities . Bulk petrol storage consisted of 98 @,@ 600 imperial gallons ( 448 @,@ 000 l ; 118 @,@ 400 US gal ) . The ship 's crew totalled 854 , plus 222 in her aircraft repair department . 
 Aircraft could undergo maintenance , and most functional and equipment tests carried out aboard - either in the hangar or on the deck . Some components and could be repaired on board , but other work was to be carried out by the workshops on the engine repair and component repair ships that would accompany the maintenance carrier . 
 The ship was equipped with six quadruple mounts for the 40 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) QF 2 @-@ pounder Mk VIII gun ( " pom @-@ pom " ) . These gun mounts could depress to − 10 ° and elevate to a maximum of + 80 ° . The Mk VIII 2 @-@ pounder gun fired a 40 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) 0 @.@ 91 @-@ pound ( 0 @.@ 41 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 920 ft / s ( 590 m / s ) to a distance of 3 @,@ 800 yards ( 3 @,@ 500 m ) . The gun 's rate of fire was approximately 96 – 98 rounds per minute . She was also fitted with 19 Bofors 40 mm autocannon in single mounts . The Bofors fired a 0 @.@ 719 @-@ pound ( 0 @.@ 326 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 890 ft / s ( 880 m / s ) . It had a rate of fire of about 120 rounds per minute and a maximum range of 10 @,@ 750 yards ( 9 @,@ 830 m ) . All of the guns were mounted on the flight deck , not in sponsons on the side of the hull like her half @-@ sisters that were completed as aircraft carriers . Each " pom @-@ pom " mount was provided with a separate fire @-@ control director fitted with a Type 262 gunnery radar . 
 Perseus was ordered on 14 March 1942 under the name Edgar . She was laid down at Vickers @-@ Armstrong in Newcastle @-@ upon @-@ Tyne on 1 January 1943 and was launched on 26 March 1944 . The ship was renamed Perseus in July 1944 , after the decision had been made to convert her to an aircraft maintenance ship , and she was completed on 19 October 1945 . 
 = = Service = = 
 Perseus arrived in Portsmouth on 24 October 1945 , after the end of World War II , to begin working up and sailed on 17 November for Australia . She arrived in Sydney on 21 December , just in time to take charge of winding up the " Air Train " that had supported the British Pacific Fleet . The ship departed Melbourne on 26 March 1946 , carrying a load of aircraft to return to the United Kingdom , and arrived at Rosyth on 17 May where she was placed in reserve . 
 In 1950 , Perseus was fitted with an experimental steam catapult . The catapult was placed on top of the carrier 's existing flight deck and the deckhouse to port of the island was removed to accommodate it . Some 1 @,@ 560 launches were made by the catapult , beginning with over 1 @,@ 000 wheeled dead @-@ loads , of gradually increasing weight , and moving on to with unmanned aircraft with their wings truncated to reduce their ability to glide . The final tests were made by manned aircraft of every type flown by the Fleet Air Arm . After this , the ship arrived in Philadelphia on 14 January 1952 to demonstrate the catapult to the United States Navy . Between them , some 127 launches of manned aircraft were made by the British and the Americans . Perseus arrived back at Portsmouth on 21 March and had the catapult removed . All of her remaining maintenance equipment was removed and she was converted for use as a ferry carrier . 
 On 10 December , the ship carried the Westland Whirlwinds of 848 Squadron to Singapore , arriving on 8 January 1953 . She arrived back at Portsmouth on 11 February and then embarked part of the 100 Grumman Avengers transferred to the Royal Navy under the terms of the Mutual Defense Assistance Act in Norfolk , Virginia on 16 March . She arrived back in Norfolk to load the remaining aircraft on 29 April . Perseus was fitted with temporary grandstand seating ( " bleachers " ) in June for Very Important Persons and the press during Elizabeth II 's Coronation Fleet Review in Spithead . Later in the year she made a trip transporting troops and equipment to the Far East . 
 On 20 January 1954 , 706 Squadron , a second @-@ line unit , flew aboard to conduct trials of the anti @-@ submarine version of the Whirlwind helicopter . They were successful enough that the squadron was redesignated as 845 Squadron afterwards and Perseus ferried them to Malta in April . The ship continued on to deliver relief supplies to Singapore intended for Korea and was reduced to reserve again upon her return on 12 July . The Admiralty intended to convert her to a submarine depot ship and she was towed to Belfast to begin work in 1955 . The cutbacks from the 1957 Defence White Paper caused the conversion to be cancelled and the ship was towed to Gare Loch to await a decision on the ship 's disposition . Perseus sold for scrap in May 1958 and towed to Port Glasgow to begin demolition . 
 = A Handful of Dust = 
 A Handful of Dust is a novel by the British writer Evelyn Waugh . First published in 1934 , it is often grouped with the author 's early , satirical comic novels for which he became famous in the pre @-@ Second World War years . Commentators have , however , drawn attention to its serious undertones , and have regarded it as a transitional work pointing towards Waugh 's more substantial postwar fiction . 
 The story concerns the misfortunes of Tony Last , a contented but shallow English country squire who , having been betrayed by his wife and seen his illusions shattered one by one , seeks solace by joining an expedition to the Brazilian jungle , only to find himself trapped in a remote outpost as the prisoner and plaything of an insane settler . Waugh incorporated several autobiographical elements into the story , notably his own recent desertion by his young wife . In 1933 – 34 he had undertaken a journey into the South American interior , and a number of incidents and personalities from the voyage are incorporated into the novel . Tony 's singular fate in the jungle was first used by Waugh as the subject of an independent short story , published in 1933 under the title " The Man Who Liked Dickens " . 
 The book 's initial critical reception was modest , but it was popular with the public and has never been out of print . In the years since publication the book 's reputation has grown ; it is generally considered one of Waugh 's best works , and has more than once figured on unofficial lists of the 20th century 's best novels . 
 Waugh had converted to Roman Catholicism in 1930 , after which his satirical , secular writings drew hostility from some Catholic quarters . He did not introduce overt religious themes into A Handful of Dust , but later explained that he intended the book to demonstrate the futility of humanist , as distinct from religious , especially Catholic , values . The book has been dramatised for radio , stage and screen . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Tony Last is a country gentleman , living with his wife Brenda and his eight @-@ year @-@ old son John Andrew in his ancestral home , Hetton Abbey . The house is a Victorian reconstruction in ersatz Gothic style , described in local guide books as devoid of architectural interest but is nevertheless Tony 's pride and joy . Entirely content with the simple country life , he is seemingly unaware of Brenda 's increasing boredom and dissatisfaction , and of his son 's developing waywardness . When Brenda meets John Beaver , a social parasite controlled by his unscrupulous property @-@ developing mother , she is quickly captivated by his superficial metropolitan gloss , and the two begin an affair . Brenda starts spending her weeks in London , and persuades Tony to finance a small flat , which she rents from Mrs Beaver . Although the Brenda – Beaver liaison is well known among London 's society crowd , Tony remains oblivious ; attempts by Brenda 's friends to compromise him into a relationship with the glamorous and promiscuous Jenny Abdul Akhbar are unsuccessful . 
 Brenda is in London when John Andrew is killed in a riding accident . On being told that " John is dead " , Brenda at first thinks that Beaver has died ; on learning that it is her son John , she betrays her true feelings by uttering an involuntary " Thank God ! " . Thereafter she shows little emotion , and when the funeral is over tells Tony that she wants a divorce so that she can marry Beaver . On learning the extent of her deception Tony is shattered , but agrees to protect Brenda 's social reputation by allowing her to divorce him , and to provide her with £ 500 a year . After spending an awkward weekend in Brighton contriving divorce evidence , Tony learns that , pressed by Beaver and his mother , Brenda is now demanding £ 2 @,@ 000 a year — a sum that would require Tony to give up Hetton . This is too much for him , and his disillusionment with her is complete . He withdraws from the divorce negotiations , and announces that he intends to travel for six months . On his return , he says , Brenda may have her divorce , but without any financial settlement . 
 With no prospect of riches , Beaver loses interest in Brenda , who is thus left adrift and in poverty . Meanwhile , Tony has met an explorer , Dr. Messinger , and joins him on an expedition in search of a supposed lost city in the Brazilian forest . On the outward journey , Tony engages in a frustrated shipboard romance with Thérèse de Vitré , a young girl whose strict Roman Catholicism causes her to shun him when he tells her he has a wife . In Brazil , Messinger proves an incompetent organiser ; he cannot control the native guides , who abandon him and Tony in the depths of the jungle . Tony falls ill , and Messinger takes off in their canoe to find help , but is swept over a waterfall and killed . 
 Tony wanders in a delirium until he is rescued by Mr. Todd , an ancient settler who rules over a small community in an inaccessible part of the jungle . Todd is at first solicitous towards Tony , and nurses him back to health . Although illiterate , Todd owns copies of the complete novels of Charles Dickens , and Tony offers to read to him . However , when Tony is recovered in health and asks to be helped on his way , the old man repeatedly demurs . The readings continue , but the atmosphere becomes increasingly menacing as Tony realises he is being held against his will . When a search party finally reaches the settlement , Todd arranges that Tony be drugged and kept hidden ; he tells the party that Tony has died , and gives them his watch to take home . When Tony awakes he learns that his hopes of rescue are gone , and that he is condemned to read Dickens to his captor indefinitely . Back in England , Tony 's death is accepted ; Hetton passes to his cousins , who erect a memorial to his memory , while Brenda resolves her situation by marrying Tony 's friend Jock Grant @-@ Menzies . 
 = = Background = = 
 Evelyn Waugh , born in 1903 , was the younger son of Arthur Waugh , the managing director of the London publishing firm of Chapman & Hall . After attending Lancing College and Hertford College , Oxford , Waugh taught for three years in a series of private preparatory schools before beginning his career as a writer . His first commercially printed work was a short story , " The Balance " , which Chapman and Hall included in a 1926 anthology . He worked briefly as a Daily Express reporter , and wrote a short biography of the pre @-@ Raphaelite painter Dante Gabriel Rossetti before achieving success in 1928 with the publication of his comic novel , Decline and Fall . By the end of 1932 Waugh had written two further novels , Vile Bodies and Black Mischief , and two travel books . His professional successes were overshadowed by private upheavals ; in June 1928 he had married Evelyn Gardner , but just over a year later the marriage ended when she declared her love for the couple 's common friend John Heygate . Reconciliation proved impossible , and Waugh filed for divorce in September 1929 . At the same time , Waugh was undergoing instruction which led to his reception , in September 1930 , into the Roman Catholic Church . 
 Waugh 's adherence to Catholic teaching on divorce caused him personal and sexual frustration while awaiting the possible annulment of his marriage . He had fallen in love with Teresa Jungman , a lively socialite whose Catholicism precluded any intimacy in their relationship since in the eyes of the Church Waugh remained married . Waugh 's conversion did not greatly affect the acerbic and sharply satirical tone of his fiction — his principal characters were frequently amoral and their activities sometimes shocking . Waugh claimed " the right to write of man 's depravity in such a fashion as to make it unattractive " . When Black Mischief was published in 1932 , the editor of the Catholic journal The Tablet , Ernest Oldmeadow , launched a prolonged attack on the book and its author , stating that the novel was " a disgrace to anybody professing the Catholic name " . Waugh , wrote Oldmeadow , " was intent on elaborating a work outrageous not only to Catholic but to ordinary standards of modesty " . Waugh made no public rebuttal of these charges ; an open letter to the Cardinal Archbishop of Westminster was prepared , but on the advice of Waugh 's friends was not sent . 
 = = Creation = = 
 = = = South American journey = = = 
 In 1932 Waugh embarked on an extended voyage to South America . His decision to absent himself may have been a reaction to his increasingly complicated emotional life ; while his passion for Teresa Jungman remained unrequited , he was involved in various unsatisfactory casual sexual liaisons , and was himself being pursued by the much older Hazel Lavery . The choice of South America was probably influenced by Peter Fleming , the literary editor of The Spectator . Fleming had recently returned from an expedition to Brazil seeking traces of Colonel Percy Fawcett who , in 1925 , had disappeared in Brazil while searching for a fabled lost city . 
 Having seen Black Mischief launched to mixed but generally favourable critical comment ( Oldmeadow 's intervention was not immediate ) , Waugh sailed from Tilbury on 2 December 1932 . He arrived in British Guiana on 23 December , and after some days of indecision opted to accompany Mr Haynes , the district commissioner for <unk> , on a journey into the interior . He hoped that he might reach Manaus , a large city deep within the Brazilian jungle , but transport proved unreliable , and he got no further than the border town of Boa Vista . On the way , at one of his overnight stopping points , he encountered Mr Christie , an elderly mixed @-@ race settler who greeted him with : " I was expecting you . I was warned in a vision of your approach " . The two enjoyed an agreeable dinner together , where Christie talked of the " Fifth Kingdom " ( a biblical prophecy from the Book of Daniel ) . He told Waugh that he had seen the entire gathering of the saints in heaven — surprisingly few , he said — but could not count them because they were incorporeal . Waugh added Christie to his " treasury of eccentrics " , set aside for future literary use . 
 = = = " The Man Who Liked Dickens " = = = 
 Waugh arrived at Boa Vista on 4 February 1933 , to find no boats available to take him on to Manaus . Days of inactivity and boredom followed , with " nothing to read except some lives of the Saints in French and <unk> 's sermons " . Waugh passed some of the time by writing a short story ; although not identified in the diaries , this story has been generally accepted as " The Man Who Liked Dickens " . Apart from using different names and some minor details this story is the same as the episode that Waugh later used as the climax to A Handful of Dust : an elderly settler ( modelled in manner , speech and appearance on Christie ) , rescues and holds captive a lost explorer and requires him to read aloud the novels of Dickens , in perpetuity . The story was published in 1933 , in America in Hearst 's International – Cosmopolitan , and in Britain in Nash 's Pall Mall Magazine . In an article written many years later , Waugh explained how the story became the basis for his next novel : " The idea [ for the short story ] came quite naturally from the experience of visiting a lonely settler [ Christie ] ... and reflecting how easily he could hold me prisoner . Then , after the short story was written and published , the idea kept working in my mind . I wanted to discover how the prisoner got there , and eventually the thing grew into a study of other sorts of savage at home and the civilized man ’ s helpless plight among them . " 
 = = = Writing and title history = = = 
 On his return to England in May 1933 , Waugh , short of cash , had to complete numerous writing commitments before he could begin work on the projected novel . In October – November he wrote his account of the South American journey , which he called Ninety @-@ two Days . He then went to Fez in Morocco , to begin the novel in warmth and solitude . In January he wrote to Mary Lygon , reporting that he had written 18 @,@ 500 words of " my filthy novel " , and later he told Katharine Asquith : " I have just killed a little boy at a lawn meet and made his mother commit adultery ... so perhaps you won 't like it after all " . By 10 February he had reached the half @-@ way point — 45 @,@ 000 words — but was uncertain about how the story should proceed , and returned to England at the end of February with most of the second half unwritten . He finished the book at the Easton Court Hotel at Chagford , in Devon , a regular retreat that he used when completing writing projects . By mid @-@ April the book was with his publishers , Chapman & Hall , and Waugh was busy correcting the proofs . 
 Waugh 's agent A. D. Peters sold the pre @-@ publication serialisation rights to the American monthly magazine Harper 's Bazaar . Because the " Mr Todd " episode had been published as a short story the previous year , for the purposes of the serialisation Waugh provided an alternative ending . In this , the whole Brazilian adventure was replaced by a brief coda , in which Tony returns from a luxury cruise to be greeted by a chastened Brenda asking to be taken back . Tony agrees , but the balance of the relationship has shifted and , unknown to her , he decides to keep her London flat for his own purposes . Waugh 's biographer Selena Hastings describes this ending as " artistically far more complementary " than that used in the book version ; an earlier biographer , Christopher Sykes thought that had this alternative been retained in the book version , the novel would not have acquired its later distinction . 
 In March 1933 Waugh wrote to Peters from Chagford to say that he intended to call the novel A Handful of Ashes . This title was disliked by Harpers ; an alternative , Fourth Decade , was also considered and rejected . Finally , the story was serialised under the title A Flat in London , and the chosen book title was A Handful of Dust — taken from a line in T. S. Eliot 's poem The Waste Land : " I will show you fear in a handful of dust . " The line is within the section of the poem entitled " The Burial of the Dead " , which depicts a comfortless , lifeless land of desert and rubble , reflecting the empty moral ambience of the novel . The title phrase had been used earlier by Joseph Conrad in the story " Youth " ; by Tennyson in Maud ; and even earlier by John Donne in his Meditations . 
 = = Themes = = 
 = = = Autobiographical = = = 
 In his study of Waugh 's literary life , David Wykes describes A Handful of Dust as " a courageous and skilful act of fictional autobiography " , driven by the trauma of the writer 's divorce without which , Wykes maintains , the book would not have been written . Waugh , says his biographer Martin Stannard , was " dredging the memory of his personal agony " in documenting the breakdown of the Lasts ' marriage . The critic Cyril Connolly , whose first reaction to the work had been negative , later called it " the only book which understands the true horror of the withdrawal of affection in an affair from [ the point of view of ] the innocent party " . 
 Wykes believes that , of the novel 's three central characters , only Tony is representative of his real @-@ life equivalent — Waugh in his pre @-@ Catholic irreligious state . Brenda is portrayed in the novel as typical of many of the women in Waugh 's early stories — well @-@ bred , trivial and faithless — but Wykes argues that she is not a representation of Evelyn Gardner , " neither in inward nor outward qualities " . Nor , he asserts , is Beaver intended as an accurate portrayal of Evelyn Gardner 's lover , the " dreadful nullity " of Beaver being a form of literary revenge on the erudite Heygate . There is general agreement among commentators that other characters are drawn from life : Mr Todd is clearly based on the eccentric but rather less sinister Mr Christie ; Dr Messinger , the incompetent explorer , reflects W. E. Roth , the curator of the Georgetown museum whom Waugh considered accompanying into the jungle , only to be dissuaded by reports of Roth 's irresponsibility and disregard of danger . Thérèse de Vitré , the object of Tony 's forlorn attempt at a shipboard romance , was named " Bernadette " in the original manuscript ; the change was made as a reference to Waugh 's platonic friend Teresa Jungman . Thérèse announces her destiny to marry a rich Catholic , and in an echo of Jungman , recoils from Tony when she discovers that he still has a wife . The culmination of Tony 's misfortunes , his enslavement to Mr Todd and Dickens , is foreshadowed in Waugh 's life by his father 's habit of reading his favourite literature aloud to his family , three or four evenings a week : " ... most of Shakespeare , most of Dickens , most of Tennyson ... stepping about the room and portraying the characters ... he held us enthralled " . 
 = = = Satire and realism = = = 
 Critics and commentators have generally acknowledged that A Handful of Dust stands apart from Waugh 's other prewar fiction . Philip Toynbee describes it as a turning point in Waugh 's journey from outright satire to disillusioned realism : " Much of this book is in the old manner , funny @-@ preposterous laced with funny @-@ bitter , but the whole tone and atmosphere are violently changed when the little boy is killed " . Likewise Gerald Gould in The Observer , reviewing the book 's initial publication in 1934 : " Here was the old gorgeous , careless note of contempt and disillusionment . Gradually , implacably , the note changes and deepens " . A later critic , John Cunningham , recognises that stylistically , the book in a different category from Waugh 's other 1930s novels , both more ambitious and more ambiguous . Although , says Cunningham , " [ i ] t provokes as much knowing laughter as Waugh 's other satires of manners " , it is a significant step away from its predecessors , towards the Catholic " comedies of redemption " that would become the principal focus of his writing life . 
 In his introduction to the 1997 Penguin edition , Robert Murray Davis suggests that in part , the book reflected Waugh 's reconsideration of his position as a Catholic writer , in the light of the recent Oldmeadow furore over Black Mischief . He may have developed a more serious tone to pre @-@ empt further criticism from that quarter , although Stannard maintains that Waugh 's beginnings as a serious writer date back to 1929 , when he was completing Vile Bodies . Waugh 's own comment , in 1946 , was that he was not , according to his own understanding of the term , a " satirical " writer , and that in writing the book he was merely " trying to distil comedy and sometimes tragedy from the knockabout farce of people 's outward behaviour " . 
 William Plomer , writing in The Spectator after the book 's first publication , thought it mistaken " to regard Mr Waugh 's more surprising situations as farcical or far @-@ fetched ; they are on the whole extremely realistic " . However , the mixture of genres was not immediately understood or appreciated by some of Waugh 's admirers ; Connolly 's initial thought was that Waugh had been " destroyed as a writer " , by snobbery and association with country @-@ house living . In Sykes 's view , the fleeting appearances in the book of characters from Waugh 's farcical world , such as Lady Metroland , are awkward and intrusive — the world of A Handful of Dust is not outlandish : " Evelyn would have done better to have forgotten Lady Metroland and her world altogether " . 
 = = = Religion and humanism = = = 
 Cunningham sees A Handful of Dust as a pointer towards Waugh 's later , avowedly Catholic novels , although what religion is in it is either presented <unk> ( Mr <unk> the Anglican vicar 's sermons ) , or dismissively ( Tony 's admission that he had never really thought much about God ) . Instead , Christianity is evoked by presenting the awfulness of life without it ; according to the writer and critic Frank Kermode , " [ T ] he callousness of incident and the coldness of tone work by suggesting the positive and rational declaration of the Faith " . The reader , Stannard says , " is never allowed to forget man 's primal bestiality ... God is the key that has been thrown away in this purely secular world " . John Raymond in the New Statesman refers to Waugh 's " unique type of moral vision " , and calls the novel a " powerful twentieth century sermon on the breakdown of a Christian marriage " . 
 Tony 's doomed quest in the Brazilian jungle is framed in biblical terms ; the relevant chapter title , " In Search of a City " alludes to Hebrews 13 : 14 : " For here we have no continuing city , but we seek one to come " . However , Waugh remarked of the novel that it was " humanist , and said all I wanted to say about humanism " . He believed that the essential 20th century conflict was between Christianity and Chaos , and chose to present a chaotic world to demonstrate that civilisation did not have in itself the power to survive . Thus , in the Brazilian jungle , Tony encounters what Davis terms " power without grace ... secular feudalism unredeemed by the saving grace of Christianity " . Todd is the symbol of humanist , irreligious power . 
 = = = English Gothic = = = 
 The critic Bernard Bergonzi refers to Tony Last as " a doomed Gothic hero " , echoing Waugh 's explanation to his friend Henry Yorke that the theme of the book was " a Gothic man in the hands of savages — first Mrs Beaver etc , then the real ones " . According to Stannard , Waugh tended to judge a civilisation by its art , and especially by its architecture , his particular interest being English Gothic which is a major leitmotif of the novel . Tony 's recognition of the extent of Brenda 's betrayal is described as " a whole Gothic world ... come to grief " . Later , Tony finds purpose in his otherwise pointless voyage when he hears of the fabled lost city from Messinger ; he visualises it as Gothic in character , " a transfigured Hetton ... everything luminous and translucent ; a coral citadel crowning a green hill top sewn with daisies " . When at the end of his quest he first catches sight of Todd 's settlement , in his delirium he sees , instead of the reality of mud huts and desolation , " gilded cupolas and spires of alabaster " . 
 Although devoted to original English Gothic , Waugh had mixed views on Gothic Revival architecture , preferring what he called " pre @-@ Ruskin " to the " stodgy " late 19th @-@ century style in which he places Hetton . He instructed the artist responsible for the frontispiece in the first edition of the book to " design the worst possible 1860 " style to depict the house . The guidebook description of Hetton which opens the second chapter reveals that , " formerly one of the notable houses of the county , it was entirely rebuilt in 1864 in the Gothic style and is now devoid of interest " . Thus , Tony 's devotion is shown to be to a false ideal ; his deposition and replacement in his domain by middle @-@ class heirs represents what the writer Brigid Brophy terms " a bourgeois sack of a fake @-@ Gothic Rome " . 
 = = Publication and reception = = 
 = = = Publication history = = = 
 A Handful of Dust first appeared in Harper 's Bazaar , as a serial in five instalments during the summer of 1934 , using the alternative , non @-@ Brazilian ending . The complete novel was first published in book form in London , on 4 September 1934 , by Chapman and Hall . It was an immediate success with the British public , and within four weeks had reached its fifth impression . In the same month it was issued in New York by Farrar & Rinehart , who were initially unenthusiastic about the book and , according to Waugh 's agent , made little promotional effort on its behalf . It has since been published in the United States by ( among others ) Dell Publishing ( 1959 ) ; Little , Brown ( 1977 ) , and Barnes and Noble ( 2001 . 
 Since its first publication the book has remained in print , and has been reproduced in many editions and foreign languages . It was first published as a paperback in 1951 , by Penguin , who have reissued it regularly . In 1945 Bernard <unk> published a translation in French , after which the book was published in most European languages , and also in Chinese , Japanese , Korean and Arabic . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The initial critical response to the book , while largely complimentary in tone , was nevertheless muted and sparse . This relative paucity of attention , Stannard surmises , might have been a consequence of the earlier serialisation , which meant that the essence of the story was well known before the book appeared . The Times Literary Supplement 's anonymous reviewer deemed the novel " a study of futility " , whose hero is " so incapable of helping himself that he is not worth helping " . Peter Quennell in the New Statesman found the story both painful and amusing — " tragedy and comedy are interdependent " — but was not overcome by the bouts of hilarity that had interrupted his reading of earlier novels such as Decline and Fall . If not exhilarating , the book was " certainly the most mature and best written novel that Mr Waugh has yet produced " . Plomer 's Spectator review described the book as " another of [ Waugh 's ] cultivated pearls " , economically written , holding the reader 's attention throughout and capturing with precision the moods and rhythms of life as it was lived in certain quarters of society . 
 The only overtly hostile review was Oldmeadow 's in The Tablet , which asserted that , after the disquiet in Catholic circles following the publication of Waugh 's previous novel , his co @-@ religionists " reasonably hoped to find Mr Waugh turning over a completely new leaf . He has not done so " . The review mixed literary criticism with moral sermonising , to which Waugh felt bound to object publicly . His friend , the journalist Tom Driberg agreed to place a notice in his " William Hickey " column in the Daily Express , in which Waugh accepted fully Oldmeadow 's right to criticise the literary quality of the work " in any terms he thinks suitable " . However , he added , so far as his moral lecturing was concerned , Oldmeadow was " in the position of a valet masquerading in his master 's clothes . Long employment by a prince of the Church has tempted him to ape his superiors , and , naturally enough , he gives an uncouth and impudent performance " . 
 Many of Waugh 's friends and admirers gave the book unstinting praise , among them Rebecca West , Lady Diana Cooper , Desmond MacCarthy and Hilaire Belloc . Among those less enthusiastic were the novelist J.B. Priestley , who found the characters lightweight and uninvolving , and the devoutly Catholic Katharine Asquith who thought the writing was brilliant but the subject @-@ matter deeply depressing . The novel 's critical standing grew steadily in the years following its publication . In 1942 the American critic Alexander Woollcott chose it as the best English novel in 100 years , a verdict largely endorsed some years later by Frank Kermode . Sykes wrote in 1975 that " there are only five or six novels of this century that can seriously challenge it " . 
 In 2010 Time magazine placed A Handful of Dust in its listing of the hundred best English @-@ language novels published since 1923 ( the year the magazine began publication ) , stating : " If this is Waugh at his bleakest it ’ s also Waugh at his deepest , most <unk> funny " . In the Modern Library 's list of 100 best novels , A Handful of Dust is placed 34th in the " Board list " , although unplaced in the complementary " Readers ' List " . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 On 8 April 1968 BBC Radio 4 broadcast A Handful of Dust as a radio play , in an adaptation by Denis <unk> produced by Brian Miller . Jack Watling and Stephanie Beacham played Tony and Brenda Last , with Rex Holdsworth as Mr Todd . A new radio adaptation , with Jonathan Cullen and Tara Fitzgerald in the main roles , was broadcast as a two @-@ part serial in May 1996 . In November 1982 an ensemble cast performed the work as a stage play , directed by Mike <unk> , at the Lyric Theatre , Hammersmith . A film version , directed by Charles Sturridge , was released in 1988 , with James Wilby as Tony , Kristin Scott Thomas as Brenda , Judi Dench as Mrs Beaver and Alec Guinness as Mr Todd . 
 = Home Is the Sailor ( Cheers ) = 
 " Home is the Sailor " is the sixth season premiere of the American television sitcom Cheers . It originally aired on September 24 , 1987 on NBC . It is also the first episode including the fictional character Rebecca Howe , portrayed by Kirstie Alley , as the permanent female lead . It follows " I Do , Adieu " , which was Shelley Long 's last of her regular appearances as the female lead , Diane Chambers , who also left Boston on the show . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Six months after Sam sold the bar to a corporation , the place caters to a more up @-@ market clientele . Eddie Lebec turns up and is surprised when Carla Tortelli tells him she is pregnant ( incorporated by actress Rhea Perlman 's real @-@ life pregnancy ) . Sam Malone then returns to the bar after his attempt to sail around the world failed at the first hurdle when his sailboat ran ashore in the Caribbean . Though Cheers has new management , Woody Boyd and Carla are still employed at the bar , but instead they wear uniforms , much to their chagrin . Sam then also needs a job , but the bar already has two bartenders , Woody and a new employee , Wayne . Diane Chambers ' attempts at writing her novel are said to have failed , which led to her leaving Boston to write in Hollywood . 
 Sam then meets Rebecca Howe , who is the new manager of Cheers and almost immediately turned off by him based on the rumors of Sam 's " sexual prowess " . Rebecca uses Sam 's former office as her own and , although it has been completely renovated , Sam is able to use Carla 's tricks to overhear Rebecca talking to her boss Evan Drake , on whom she has a crush . Evan knows Sam as a baseball player and wants to hire him to be a bartender . Sam is then hired , but one of the two current bartenders must be sacked to make room for him . The bar regulars want Wayne to go , but Rebecca wants to fire Woody . A competition then ensues to see if Wayne actually knows how to make every drink known to man . If Wayne loses the bet , he agrees to leave , but if he wins the bet , then he gets Sam 's now @-@ damaged sailboat . The gang plays a prank to cause Wayne to lose over the then @-@ fictional cocktail " Screaming Viking " and he walks out , though Rebecca is wise to their game and tells Sam to leave . Sam then promises nothing of the sort will occur and is provisionally re @-@ hired on the understanding that this is his last chance as Rebecca uses a seductive baseball metaphor @-@ pun about having " no balls " . 
 = = Production = = 
 The producers intended Cheers to be a comedy about a comedy itself set in the Boston bar , but , as Burrows claimed , the " Sam and Diane " romance predominated the show for five years and , as he hypothesized , would have made the bar more of a minor role and more irrelevant if Shelley Long had not left the show as Diane Chambers in 1987 . With Diane written out in " I Do , Adieu " and Long departing the series , the producers planned to revamp the show 's format without losing the bar , which has been their choice of intent , and then was relieved that the series would survive without Shelley Long . As Les Charles observed , Sam was a " straight man " to Diane ; with Diane gone , they made him more " carefree " and a " goof @-@ off . " 
 In seeking a new female lead , James Burrows told People magazine that " we thought of the part as a martinet , a bitch . Then we met [ Alley ] and there was this vulnerability , so we made her the neurotic woman of the 1980s . " When Long decided to leave the show , the creators knew they wanted a new female lead who was unknown to television viewers , would not have blonde hair and resemble Long . Kirstie Alley was one of the first actresses to audition for the role of Rebecca Howe . Although she met all the criteria , the producers continued to audition actresses , but none improved on Alley 's portrayal of the character . Following which brunette @-@ haired Alley debuted as Rebecca Howe . 
 Al Rosen , Michael Tulin , Tim Cunningham , Steve Giannelli , Alan Koss are credited for their background appearances . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Home Is the Sailor " scored a 28 @.@ 4 rating and was third placed in the list of top ten shows that were tuned @-@ in by households on the week of September 21 – 27 , 1987 . This episode earned its writers Glen and Les Charles an Emmy Award nomination for an Outstanding Writing in a Comedy Series in 1988 but did not win . In 1997 , it was ranked No. 45 on TV Guide 's 100 Greatest Episodes of All Time . In 2014 , IGN ranked it as number two of the top ten Cheers episodes . 
 = = Screaming Viking = = 
 " Screaming Viking " , a fictional made @-@ up cocktail seen in this episode , became an actual cocktail . According to a recipe book The Boston Chef 's Table , this cocktail is sold in the Cheers Beacon Hill , the pub the show was modeled after . The recipe book itself also provides ingredients of this cocktail : " orange @-@ infused rum , dark rum , <unk> , cranberry juice , and pineapple juice " . Colleen Graham from About.com provides different ingredients for the " Screaming Viking " cocktail recipe : " vodka , dry vermouth , lime juice , celery stalk , and [ garnished ] cucumber spear " . A restaurant from Charleston , South Carolina , sells a cocktail variation with different ingredients : seedless cucumber , " garnish [ ed ] " cucumber slice , mint leaves , gin , and tonic water . 
 = Wallachian Revolution of 1848 = 
 The Wallachian Revolution of 1848 was a Romanian liberal and nationalist uprising in the Principality of Wallachia . Part of the Revolutions of 1848 , and closely connected with the unsuccessful revolt in the Principality of Moldavia , it sought to overturn the administration imposed by Imperial Russian authorities under the Regulamentul Organic regime , and , through many of its leaders , demanded the abolition of boyar privilege . Led by a group of young intellectuals and officers in the Wallachian Militia , the movement succeeded in toppling the ruling Prince Gheorghe Bibescu , whom it replaced with a Provisional Government and a Regency , and in passing a series of major progressive reforms , first announced in the Proclamation of Islaz . 
 Despite its rapid gains and popular backing , the new administration was marked by conflicts between the radical wing and more conservative forces , especially over the issue of land reform . Two successive abortive coups were able to weaken the Government , and its international status was always contested by Russia . After managing to rally a degree of sympathy from Ottoman political leaders , the Revolution was ultimately isolated by the intervention of Russian diplomats , and ultimately repressed by a common intervention of Ottoman and Russian armies , without any significant form of armed resistance . Nevertheless , over the following decade , the completion of its goals was made possible by the international context , and former revolutionaries became the original political class in united Romania . 
 = = Origins = = 
 The two Danubian Principalities , Wallachia and Moldavia , came under direct Russian supervision upon the close of the Russo @-@ Turkish War of 1828 – 1829 , being subsequently administered on the basis of common documents , known as Regulamentul Organic . After a period of Russian military occupation , Wallachia returned to Ottoman suzerainty while Russian oversight was preserved , and the throne was awarded to Alexandru II Ghica in 1834 — this measure was controversial from the onset , given that , despite the popular provisions of the Akkerman Convention , Ghica had been appointed by Russia and the Ottomans , instead of being elected by the Wallachian Assembly . As a consequence , the Prince was faced with opposition from both sides of the political spectrum , while also attempting to quell the peasantry 's discontent by legislating against the abuse of estate <unk> . The first liberal movement , taking inspiration from the French Revolution and having for its stated purpose the encouragement of culture , was Societatea Filarmonică ( the Philharmonic Society ) , established in 1833 . 
 Hostility towards Russian policies erupted later in 1834 , when Russia called for an " Additional Article " ( <unk> <unk> ) to be attached to the Regulament , as the latter document was being reviewed by the Porte . The proposed article sought to prevent the Principalities ' Assemblies from modifying the Regulament any further without the consent of both protecting powers . This move met with stiff opposition from a majority of deputies in Wallachia , among whom was the radical Ioan Câmpineanu ; in 1838 , the project was nonetheless passed , when it was explicitly endorsed by Sultan Abdülmecid I and by Prince Ghica . 
 Câmpineanu , who had proposed a reformist constitution to replace the Regulament entirely , was forced into exile , but remained an influence on a younger generation of activists , both Wallachian and Moldavian . The latter group , comprising many young boyars who had studied in France , also took direct inspiration from reformist or revolutionary @-@ minded societies such as the Carbonari ( and even , through Teodor Diamant , from Utopian socialism ) . It was this faction who would first explicitly publicize the demands for national independence and Moldo @-@ Wallachian unification , which it included in a wider agenda of political reforms and European solidarity . Societatea <unk> <unk> ( the Society of Romanian Students ) was founded in 1846 , having the French poet Alphonse de Lamartine for its honorary president . 
 = = Pre @-@ revolutionary events and outbreak = = 
 In October 1840 , the first specifically revolutionary secret society of the period was repressed by Prince Ghica . Among those arrested and taken into confinement were the high @-@ ranking boyar Mitică Filipescu , the young radical Nicolae Bălcescu , and the much older Dimitrie Macedonski , who had taken part in the uprising of 1821 . 
 The new ruler , Gheorghe Bibescu , released Bălcescu and other participants in the plot during 1843 ; soon afterwards , they became involved in founding a new Freemason @-@ inspired secret society , known as Frăția ( " The Brotherhood " ) , which was to serve as the central factor in the revolution . Early on , Frăția 's nucleus was formed by Bălcescu , Ion Ghica , Alexandru G. Golescu , and Major Christian Tell ; by spring 1848 , the leadership also included Dimitrie and Ion Brătianu , Constantin Bălcescu , Ștefan and Nicolae Golescu , Gheorghe Magheru , C. A. Rosetti , Ion Heliade Rădulescu , and Ioan Voinescu II . It was especially successful in Bucharest , where it also reached out to the middle class , and kept a legal facade as <unk> Literară ( the Literary Society ) , whose meetings were attended by the Moldavians Vasile Alecsandri , Mihail Kogălniceanu , and Costache Negruzzi , as well as by the Austrian subject Constantin Daniel Rosenthal . During the early months of 1848 , Romanian students at the University of Paris , including the Brătianu brothers , witnessed and , in some cases , took part in the French republican uprising . 
 Rebellion broke out in late June 1848 , after Frăția 's members came to adopt a single project regarding the promise of land reform . This resolution , which had initially caused dissension , was passed into the revolutionary program upon pressures from Nicolae Bălcescu and his supporters . The document itself , destined to be read as a proclamation , was most likely drafted by Heliade Rădulescu , and Bălcescu himself was possibly responsible for most of its ideas . It called for , among other issues , national independence , civil rights and equality , universal taxation , a larger Assembly , responsible government , a five @-@ year term of office for Princes and their election by the Assembly , freedom of the press , and decentralization . 
 Originally , the revolutionary grouping had intended to take over various military bases throughout Wallachia , and planned to simultaneously organize public gatherings in Bucharest , Râmnicu Vâlcea , Ploiești , <unk> County and Islaz . On June 21 , 1848 , Heliade Rădulescu and Tell were present in Islaz , where , with the Orthodox priest <unk> of <unk> , they revealed the revolutionary program to a cheering crowd ( see Proclamation of Islaz ) . A new government was formed on the spot , comprising Tell , Heliade Rădulescu , Ștefan Golescu , <unk> , and Nicolae <unk> — they wrote Prince Bibescu an appeal , which called on him to recognize the program as the embryo of a constitution and to " listen to the voice of the motherland and place himself at the head of this great accomplishment " . 
 The revolutionary executive left Islaz at the head of a gathering of soldiers and various others , and , after passing through Caracal , triumphantly entered Craiova without meeting resistance from local forces . According to one account , the gathering comprised as many as 150 @,@ 000 armed civilians . As these events were unfolding , Bibescu was shot at in Bucharest by Alexandru or Iancu <unk> ( the father of French diplomat Maurice Paléologue ) and his co @-@ conspirators , whose bullets only managed to tear one of the Prince 's epaulettes . Over the following hours , police forces clamped down of Frăția , arresting Rosetti and a few other members , but failing to capture most of them . 
 = = Provisional Government = = 
 = = = Creation = = = 
 Early on June 23 , Bibescu also attempted to regain the loyalty of his Militia forces by an order to take a renewed oath of allegiance — the officers agreed to do so , but added that under no circumstances did they agree to shed the blood of Romanians . In the afternoon , the Bucharest populace , feeling encouraged by this development , rallied in the streets ; around four o 'clock , the church bells on Dealul Mitropoliei began sounding the <unk> ( by banging their tongues on only one side of the drum ) . Public readings of the Islaz Proclamation took place , and the Romanian tricolor was paraded throughout the city . At ten o 'clock in the evening , Bibescu gave in to the pressures , signed the new constitution , and agreed to support a Provisional Government as imposed on him by Frăția . This effectively disestablished Regulamentul Organic , causing the Russian consul to Bucharest , Charles de Kotzebue , to leave the country for Austrian @-@ ruled Transylvania . Bibescu himself abdicated and left into self @-@ exile . 
 On June 25 , the two proposed cabinets were reunited into <unk> <unk> ( the Provisional Government ) , based on the Executive Commission of the Second French Republic ; headed by the conservative Neofit II , Neofit II , the Metropolitan of <unk> @-@ Wallachia , it consisted of Christian Tell , Ion Heliade Rădulescu , Ștefan Golescu , Gheorghe Magheru , and , for a short while , the Bucharest merchant Gheorghe <unk> . Its secretaries were C. A. Rosetti , Nicolae Bălcescu , Alexandru G. Golescu , and Ion Brătianu . The Government was doubled by <unk> <unk> ( the Provisional Ministry ) , which was dived into several offices : Ministrul <unk> ( the Minister of the Interior , a position held by Nicolae Golescu ) ; Ministrul <unk> ( Justice – Ion Câmpineanu ) ; Ministrul <unk> <unk> ( Public Education – Heliade Rădulescu ) ; Ministrul <unk> ( Finance – C. N. Filipescu ) ; Ministrul <unk> <unk> ( Foreign Affairs – Ioan Voinescu II ) ; Ministrul de <unk> ( War – Ioan Odobescu , later replaced by Tell ) ; <unk> <unk> ( the Public Controller – Gheorghe Nițescu ) . It also included Constantin <unk> as President of the City Council ( later replaced by Cezar Bolliac ) , <unk> <unk> as Commander of the National Guard , and <unk> <unk> as Police Chief . 
 The Wallachian revolutionaries maintained ambiguous relations with leaders of the Hungarian Revolution of 1848 , as well as with the latter 's ethnic Romanian adversaries in Transylvania . As early as April , Bălcescu , who maintained close contacts with many Romanian Transylvanian politicians , called on August Treboniu Laurian not to oppose the unification of Transylvania and revolutionary Hungary . In parallel , secretive negotiations were carried out between Lajos <unk> and Ion Brătianu , which were in connection to a project of creating a Wallachian – Hungarian confederation . Although it drew support from radicals , the proposal was ultimately rejected by the Hungarian side , who notably argued that this carried the danger of deteriorating relations with Russia . Progressively , Romanian Transylvanians distanced themselves from the rapprochement , and clarified that their goal was the preservation of Austrian rule , coming into open conflict with the Hungarian revolutionary authorities . 
 = = = Early reforms = = = 
 The following day , the new administrative bodies issued their first decrees . One of them instituted the horizontal tricolor with the inscription <unk> – <unk> ( " Justice – Brotherhood " in Romanian Cyrillic as used at the time ) . It proclaimed all traditional civil ranks to be destitute , indicating that the only acceptable distinctions were to be made on the basis of " virtues and services to the motherland " , and creating a national guard . The Government also abolished censorship , as well as capital and corporal punishment , while ordering all political prisoners to be set free . In line with earlier demands , a call for unification of all Romanian @-@ inhabited lands , as " one and indivisible [ nation ] " , was officially voiced during that period . However , this view was still only shared by a relatively small and highly factionalized section of the intelligentsia . 
 The official abolition of Roma slavery was sanctioned by a decree also issued on June 26 . This was the culmination of a process begun in 1843 , when all state @-@ owned slaves had been liberated , and continued in February 1847 , when the Orthodox Church had followed suit and set free its own Roma labor force . The decree notably read : " The Romanian people discards the lack of humanity and the shameful sin of owning slaves and declares the freedom of privately owned slaves . Those who have so far had the sinful shame of owning slaves are forgiven by the Romanian people ; and the motherland , as a good mother , shall compensate , out of its treasury , whosoever shall complain of detriment as a result of this Christian deed " . A three @-@ member Commission was left to decide on the matters of legal implementation and compensation for slave owners — it comprised Bolliac , <unk> <unk> , and <unk> <unk> . 
 The authorities publicized their reforms by making use of new press institutions , the most circulated of which were Poporul <unk> ( a magazine edited by Bălcescu , Bolliac , Grigore Alexandrescu , Dimitrie Bolintineanu and others ) and <unk> Român ( published by Rosetti and Eric <unk> ) . In parallel , the Bucharest populace could regularly hear public communiques read on the fields of Filaret ( known as the " Field of Liberty " ) . 
 = = Disputes and intrigue = = 
 Support for the Provisional Government began to be tested when the issue of land reform and corvées was again brought to the forefront . Aside from the important conservative forces , opponents of the measure were to be found inside the leadership body itself , and included the moderates Heliade Rădulescu and Ioan Odobescu . Revolutionaries who favored passing land into the property of peasants were divided over the amount that was to be ceded , as well as over the issue of compensation to be paid to boyars . A compromise was reached through postponing , with a decision taken to submit all proposals to the vote of the Assembly , which was yet to be convened , instead of drafting a decree . Nevertheless , a Proclamation to estate @-@ holders was issued ( June 28 , 1848 ) , indicating that the reform was to be eventually enforced in exchange for unspecified sums , and calling on peasants to fulfill their corvées until autumn of the same year . 
 This appeal caused a reaction from the opposition forces : Odobescu rallied to the cause of conservatives , and , on July 1 , 1848 , together with his fellow officers Ioan Solomon and <unk> <unk> , arrested the entire Government . The coup almost succeeded , being ultimately overturned by the reaction of Bucharesters , who organized street resistance against mutinied troops , mounted barricades , and , eventually , stormed into the executive 's headquarters . The latter assault , led by Ana <unk> , resulted in the arrest of all coup leaders . 
 Despite this move , disputes regarding the shape of land reform continued inside the Government . On July 21 , 1848 , Nicolae Bălcescu obtained the issuing of a decree to create <unk> <unk> ( the Commission on Property ) , comprising 34 delegates , two for each Wallachian county , representing respectively peasants and landlords . The new institution was presided over by the landowner Alexandru <unk> , and had the Moldavian @-@ born Ion Ionescu de la Brad for its vice president . 
 During the proceedings , a number of boyars had switched to supporting peasants : the liberal boyar Ceaușescu , a delegate to the Commission 's fourth session , made a celebrated speech in which he addressed laborers as " brothers " and deplored his own status as a landowner . An emotional audience applauded his gesture , and peasants proclaimed that God forgave Ceaușescu 's deeds . Other landowners , more circumspect , asked peasants what they planned to use for compensation , for which they were to be largely responsible ; according to Mihail Kogălniceanu , their answer was " With these two slave 's arms , we have been working for centuries and provided for all the landowners ' expenses ; once freed , our arms would work twice as much and rest assured that we will not leave you wanting of what the country 's judgment will decide we should pay you " . This reportedly caused an uproar inside the Commission . 
 Peasants and their supporters advocated the notion that each family was supposed to receive at least four hectares of land ; in their system , which made note of differences in local traditional , peasants living in wetlands were to be assigned 16 <unk> ( approx. eight hectares ) , those living in plains 14 ( approx. seven hectares ) , inhabitants of hilly areas 11 ( between five and six hectares ) , while people inhabiting the Southern Carpathian areas were supposed to receive eight <unk> ( approx. four hectares ) . This program was instantly rejected by many landowners , and the negotiations were ended through a decision taken by Heliade Rădulescu , when it was again decided that the ultimate resolution was a prerogative of the future Assembly . The failure to address this most significant of the problems faced by Wallachians contributed to weakening support for the revolutionary cause . 
 = = Diplomatic efforts and regency = = 
 Faced with the clear hostility of the Russian Emperor Nicholas I , Wallachian revolutionaries sought instead a rapprochement with the Ottoman leadership . Efforts were made to clarify that the movement did not seek to reject Ottoman suzerainty : for this purpose , Ion Ghica was sent to Istanbul as early as May 29 , 1848 ; his mission was initially successful , but later events led Sultan Abdülmecid I to reconsider his position , especially after being faced with Russian protests . Süleyman Pașa , Abdülmecid 's brother @-@ in @-@ law , was dispatched to Bucharest with orders to report on the situation and take appropriate measures . 
 <unk> received by the city 's inhabitants and authorities , Süleyman opted to impose a series of formal moves , which were intended to appease Russia . He replaced the Government with a regency , <unk> <unk> , and asked for some changes to be operated in the text of the constitution ( promising that these were to ensure Ottoman recognition ) . The new ruling body , a triumvirate , comprised Heliade Rădulescu , Nicolae Golescu , and Christian Tell . 
 On Süleyman 's explicit advice , a revolutionary delegation was dispatched to Istanbul , where it was to negotiate the movement 's official recognition — among the envoys were Bălcescu , Ștefan Golescu , and Dimitrie Bolintineanu . By that moment , Russian diplomats had persuaded the Porte to adopt a more reserved attitude , and to replace Süleyman with a rapporteur for the Divan , Fuat Pasha . In parallel , Russia ordered its troops in Bessarabia to prepare for an intervention over the Prut River and into Bucharest — the prospect of a Russo @-@ Turkish war was inconvenient for Abdülmecid , at a time when the French Second Republic and the United Kingdom failed to clarify their positions in respect to Ottoman policies . Stratford Canning , the British Ambassador to the Porte , even advised Ottoman officials to intervene against the Revolution , thus serving Prime Minister Palmerston 's policy regarding the preservation of Ottoman rule in the face of outside pressures . The Wallachian delegation was denied reception , and , after a prolonged stay , had to return to Bucharest . 
 = = Metropolitan Neofit 's coup = = 
 On July 11 , 1848 , the false rumor that the Imperial Russian Army had left Bessarabia and was moving southwards cause the regency to leave Bucharest and take refuge in <unk> . This occurred after Russia had occupied Moldavia in April , a result of the unsuccessful revolt in that country . The moment was seized by conservatives : headed by Metropolitan Neofit , the latter grouping took over , and announced that the revolution had ended . When a revolutionary courier returned from the Moldavian town of Focșani with news that Russian troops had not left their quarters , the population in the capital prepared for action — during the events , <unk> , a priest from the Buzău Bishopric , made himself the revolutionary hero of the hour and earned the nickname Popa Tun , the " Cannon Priest " , after ripping out the lit fuse of a gun aimed at the crowds . The outcome caused Neofit to invalidate his own proclamation , and to transfer his power back to the Provisional Government ( July 12 ) . 
 Over the following months , the population radicalized itself , and , on September 18 , 1848 , just one week before the Revolution was crushed , crowds entered the Interior Ministry , taking over the official copies of Regulamentul Organic and the register of boyar ranks ( <unk> ) . The documents were subsequently paraded through the city in a mock funeral cortege , and burned down , one sheet at a time , in the public square on Mitropoliei Hill . Neofit reluctantly agreed to preside over the ceremony and to issue a curse on both pieces of legislation . 
 = = Suppression = = 
 On September 25 [ O.S. September 13 ] 1848 , Ottoman troops headed by Omar Pasha and assisted by Fuat Pasha stormed into Bucharest , partly as an attempt to prevent the extension of Russian presence over the <unk> River . On the morning of that day , Fuat met with local public figures at his headquarters in Cotroceni , proclaiming the reestablishment of the Regulament and appointing Constantin Cantacuzino as <unk> of Wallachia . While all revolutionaries who attended the meeting were placed under arrest , Ion Heliade Rădulescu and Christian Tell sought refuge at the British consulate in Bucharest , where they were received by Robert Gilmour Colquhoun in exchange for a sum of Austrian florins . 
 The radical faction around Nicolae Bălcescu and Gheorghe Magheru had planned resistance on the Danube , but their opinion had failed to rally significant appeal . A group of several thousands soldiers , comprising Oltenian pandurs and volunteers from throughout the land , rallied in Râmnicu Vâlcea under Magheru 's command , without ever going into action . In Bucharest itself , as Fuat prepared to lead his 6000 troops into the garrison on Dealul <unk> , a 900 @-@ strong force led by a detachment of firemen met him with resistance , provoking a brief battle that only lasted two and a half hours during which 158 Turks and 48 Romanians died and 400 Turks and 57 Romanians were wounded . In the evening , the entire city had been pacified . On September 27 , a Russian force under Alexander von Lüders joined the occupation of Bucharest , taking over administration over one half of the city . Russia 's expedition into the two Danubian Principalities was the only independent military initiative of her foreign interventions against the Revolutions of 1848 . 
 Immediately after the events , 91 revolutionaries were sentenced to exile . Of these , a small group was transported by barges from Giurgiu , on their way to the Austrian @-@ ruled <unk> , near the Danube port of <unk> . The revolutionary artist Constantin Daniel Rosenthal and Maria Rosetti , both of whom had been allowed to go free and had subsequently followed the barges on shore , pointed out that the Ottomans had stepped out of their jurisdiction , and were able to persuade the mayor of <unk> to disarm the guards , which in turn allowed the prisoners to flee . The escapees then made their way to Paris . 
 Most other revolutionaries were detained in areas of present @-@ day Bulgaria until spring 1849 , and , passing through <unk> and Varna , were taken to the Anatolian city of <unk> , where they lived at the expense of the Ottoman state . They were allowed to return after 1856 . During their period of exile , rivalry between the various factions became obvious , a conflict which became the basis for political allegiances in later years . 
 In the meantime , Magheru , upon the advice of Colquhoun , ordered the demobilization of his troops ( October 10 ) , and , accompanied by a few of his officers , passed the Southern Carpathians into Hermannstadt — at the time , the Transylvanian city was nominally in the Austrian Empire , but gripped by the Hungarian Revolution . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Wallachian activities in Transylvania = = = 
 Starting in December 1848 , a number of Wallachian revolutionaries who had escaped or had been set free from arrest began mediating an understanding between Hungary 's Lajos Kossuth and those Romanian Transylvanian activists and peasants who , under the leadership of Avram Iancu , were mounting military resistance to the <unk> troops of Józef Bem . Nicolae Bălcescu emerged from his refuge in the Principality of Serbia , and , together with Alexandru G. Golescu and Ion Ionescu de la Brad , began talks with Iancu in Zlatna . The Wallachians presented Kossuth 's proposal that Iancu 's fighters should leave their base in the Apuseni and help rekindle revolution in Wallachia , leaving room for Hungary to resist Russian invention , but the offer was dismissed on the spot . In parallel , Magheru reached out to Hungarian authorities , asking them to consider <unk> Hungary proper and Transylvania ; this plan was also rejected . 
 On May 26 , 1849 , Nicolae Bălcescu met with Kossuth in Debrecen , and , despite his personal disappointment with the Hungarian discourse and his ideal of full political rights for Romanians in the region , agreed to mediate an understanding with Iancu , which resulted in a ceasefire and a series of political concessions . This came as Russian troops were entering Transylvania , a military operation culminating in Hungarian defeat at the Battle of <unk> in late July . 
 = = = Political outcome = = = 
 The Ottoman – Russian occupation prolonged itself until 1851 , while the 1849 Convention of Balta Liman awarded the Wallachian crown to Barbu Dimitrie Știrbei . In contrast to the 1848 – 1849 setbacks , the period inaugurated by the Crimean War disestablished both Russian domination and the Regulamentul Organic regime , and , within the space of one generation , brought about the fulfillment of virtually all revolutionary projects . The common actions of Moldavians and Wallachians , in pace with the presence of Wallachian activists in Transylvania , helped circulate the ideal of national unity , with the ultimate goal of reuniting all majority @-@ Romanian territories within one state . 
 In early 1859 , at the close of a turbulent period , Wallachia and Moldavia entered a personal union , later formalized as the Romanian United Principalities , under Moldavian @-@ born Domnitor Alexandru Ioan Cuza ( himself a former revolutionary ) . Having been allowed to return from exile after the Treaty of Paris , most of the surviving revolutionaries played a major part in the political developments , and organized themselves as Partida Națională , which promoted Cuza during simultaneous elections for the ad hoc Divans . The role of Paris @-@ based Wallachian émigrés in promoting sympathy for common Romanian goals was decisive . Partida succeeded in becoming the major factor in Romanian political life , before forming the basis of the liberal current . With Cuza 's rule , the pace of Westernization increased , and , during the 1860s , a moderate land reform was carried out , monastery estates were secularized , while corvées and boyar ranks were outlawed . 
 Following an 1866 conflict between the increasingly authoritarian Cuza and the political class , various trends organized a coup which brought Prince Carol , a Hohenzollern , to the Romanian throne — echoing a will expressed by some of the 1848 activists to have a foreign dynasty rule over a unified state . In 1877 , as a consequence of the Russo @-@ Turkish War , Romania proclaimed her independence . 
 = Monbar Hotel attack = 
 The Monbar Hotel attack was carried out by the GAL , a state @-@ sponsored death squad , on 25 September 1985 in Bayonne , France . The targets were four members of ETA military , whom the Spanish government believed to be senior figures in the organisation , itself proscribed as a terrorist group in Spain and France . All four people were killed , with a fifth person , apparently unconnected to ETA , injured in the shooting . This represented the deadliest attack carried out by the GAL . Although two of the participants were apprehended shortly after the shooting , controversy surrounded the possible involvement of senior figures in the Spanish police . 
 This attack , and similar attacks carried out by the GAL , became a major issue during the 1996 Spanish general election after a Supreme court trial established that the Spanish Interior Ministry had provided clandestine funding for the GAL . Spanish Interior Minister José Barrionuevo and his security chief , Rafael Vera , were jailed for ten years for sanctioning a kidnapping and misappropriation of public funds to finance the group , and the GAL scandal is seen as a key factor in the Spanish Socialist Workers ' Party ( PSOE ) losing the election , though more senior figures in the PSOE , such as Felipe Gonzalez , denied knowledge and involvement . 
 = = Background = = 
 The French Basque Country had been a favourite haven of ETA . Since mid @-@ 1968 most of ETA 's leadership had lived there and used it as a base for training , infrastructure and planning attacks . ETA commandos also operated from there , crossing the border into Spain to carry out attacks before fleeing back to France . This led to complaints in Spain that French authorities were not doing enough to tackle ETA activity , preferring to leave the Basque conflict to the Spanish to deal with . 
 As one of the larger towns in the French Basque Country , Bayonne had been one of the main bases of ETA organisation there . From 1975 onwards this had prompted a reaction from anti @-@ ETA groups . In April 1975 , <unk> , a Basque bookshop in the town , was bombed , though no one was injured . On 25 June 1979 , Enrique Gómez Álvarez , an alleged ETA member , was killed by the Batallón Vasco Español ( <unk> ) , a right @-@ wing paramilitary group active since 1975 . 
 The <unk> vanished after 1981 but , from 1983 onwards , the GAL began carrying out similar attacks and abductions . The first in Bayonne occurred on 17 October 1983 , when alleged ETA members <unk> Lasa <unk> and José Ignacio Zabala disappeared . Their mutilated bodies were found in Alicante in 1985 . An unsuccessful kidnapping attempt occurred the following day and , in December , Ramón <unk> , an alleged ETA member and Mikel <unk> , an alleged ETA leader , were assassinated by the GAL in separate incidents . Prior to the Monbar attack , two people had been killed and six injured in three separate attacks in the town in 1985 . 
 = = The targets = = 
 The targets of the attack were four members of ETA . According to the Spanish authorities , they had a long history within the organisation . 
 Ignacio <unk> ( <unk> ) had been arrested in 1973 in Loyola , but had been freed by other ETA militants at gunpoint . He was believed to have been part of a cell which had been particularly active in 1979 in attacks in the province of Álava . 
 José María <unk> ( <unk> ) had begun activity in 1973 . He had been arrested by Spanish police in 1975 , along with 21 others in connection with a large haul of guns and explosives discovered . He had been arrested again by French police in 1984 . He was the leader of ETA military in the Vitoria area , according to Spanish police sources . 
 Agustin <unk> ( <unk> ) belonged to the Sega cell of ETA military , according to Spanish police . He fled to France in 1982 and in 1984 he had been arrested by French police charged with possession of illegal weapons . His trial had still been pending at the time of his death . He was believed to be in charge of cross @-@ border operations for ETA . 
 José Sabino <unk> had belonged to an information gathering cell of ETA . He had fled to France in 1982 . 
 = = The attack = = 
 The attack occurred at 21 : 15 on a Wednesday evening , as a football game featuring Spain and Iceland was being shown . The four participants exited their car carrying shotguns and machine guns and opened fire on the bar . The bullets shattered the skull of three of the victims and hit the fourth in the heart . Three of the targets were killed instantly , with the fourth dying shortly afterwards in hospital . A fifth person was injured after being hit in the foot , but survived the attack . 
 Three of the four attackers fled on foot through the streets of Bayonne . Pursued by a group of Basque refugees who had witnessed the attack , two of them were caught and handed over to the French police , after having thrown their weapons into the river near the Monbar Hotel . Those apprehended were Pierre Frugoli and Lucien Mattei , both believed to be members of the Marseilles underworld by French police . Police later retrieved two 9mm calibre pistols from the river . Their two accomplices in the attack managed to escape by car . Their vehicle was later found abandoned in San Sebastián . 
 The GAL claimed responsibility in a telephone call the day after the attack . For their part , ETA military released a statement confirming that the four killed had belonged to their organisation . 
 = = Reactions = = 
 Basque president José Antonio <unk> <unk> condemned the attack : " attacks like this do not help us to consolidate democracy or overcome the problems of violence in our society . This attack could provoke a response and a further spiral of violence . " The Basque Nationalist Party voiced suspicion that the attacks were part of a dirty war being carried out by the Spanish state . Herri Batasuna , the political wing of ETA , also accused the Spanish secret services of complicity in such attacks and delivered a letter of protest to the French consulate in Bilbao , criticising the French for perceived inaction against the killers . The PSOE , at that time the governing party of Spain , condemned the incident as an attack on " the freedom of the Basque people " . Their chairman in the Basque Country , Juan Manuel <unk> , stated that he did not believe that the solution to ETA violence was to have similar terrorists trying to even the score . 
 <unk> <unk> , the Communist Party of Spain and the People 's Alliance also issued statements condemning the attack . Herri Batasuna organised numerous protests against the incident , which at times resulted in street violence and arrests . They also organised a general strike in the Basque Country , though observance of this was limited to San Sebastián and the home towns of those killed . 
 = = Trials = = 
 The trial of Pierre Frugoli and Lucien Mattei opened on 30 November 1987 in Pau , France . Mattei , who had been previously been released after serving one year of a 20 @-@ year sentence for armed assault , retracted his previous confession . Frugoli , however , acknowledged that he had set out to kill ETA members . He stated that he had been recruited by members of the Spanish secret services , codenamed Francis and Miguel , in La <unk> bar in Marseilles port . With Mattei , he made several trips to San Sebastián to receive instructions for the attack , the last in the city 's Orly Hotel three days before the attack . He claimed that Francis had offered him 100 @,@ 000 francs for carrying out the attack and 50 @,@ 000 more for each person killed . Francis then met them in Bayonne , supplying them with the weapons used in the attack and the identities of the desired targets . 
 Both Frugoli and Mattei identified Francis as José Amedo <unk> , a police sub @-@ commissioner in Bilbao . Hotel records showed that Amedo had stayed in the Orly hotel at the same time as Frugoli and Mattei . The French judges issued an international arrest warrant for Amedo , whose spokesman denied the charges . 
 On 2 December 1987 , both defendants were sentenced to life imprisonment , with a recommendation that Mattei should serve no less than 18 years in prison . Frugoli 's sentence was subsequently reduced to 20 years in prison . Their accomplices in the attack were never identified . 
 Lawyers for the prosecution suspected that the Miguel who had recruited the mercenaries was Michel Dominguez , a Spanish police officer of French origin who worked with Amedo . In April 1990 a waiter at Londres Hotel and a security employee at the <unk> casino in San Sebastián both stated that they had seen Amedo and Dominguez on various occasions in the company of Mattei and other GAL mercenaries . 
 In March 1991 , the case against Amedo and Dominguez in relation to the Monbar attack was dropped due to lack of evidence . However , in September 1991 , both Amedo and Dominguez were sentenced to 108 years in prison for organising other GAL attacks . In November 1994 , Spanish High Court judge Baltasar Garzón reopened the case against them for the Monbar attack . 
 Subsequently , three others , Julián <unk> , Juan Alberto Perote and Francisco Álvarez , were implicated in the case . <unk> had been the former director of state security , Perote the former head of the Spanish secret service , while Álvarez had been head of the anti @-@ terrorist squad . They all denied the accusations . The Monbar case was closed in October 2001 , with Garzón declaring that , although suspicions remained about involvement of some of those accused , there was insufficient evidence to prosecute . 
 = = Consequences = = 
 Author Paddy Woodworth argued that " the GAL campaign caused many French Basques to see the ( Spanish Basque ) refugees as causing a rapid decline in the local economy , especially the tourism business , as the news spread that the bars and boulevards of the region 's coastal resorts were now the targets of a terrorist group . " Consequently , the French authorities began to change their stance on the refugees , increasing cross @-@ border cooperation with their Spanish counterparts . This involved deporting ETA members to various other countries and putting greater restrictions on those who remained . 
 As the Monbar case and similar cases came to light , the GAL issue became increasingly controversial in the 1990s , with questions over whether members of the Spanish government and state security service had known about the group 's operations in places like Bayonne and , if so , to what extent they had supported and funded the attacks . This became a major issue during the 1996 Spanish general election with Spanish Interior Minister , José Barrionuevo , and his security chief , Rafael Vera , implicated in the GAL case . In 1998 , both were jailed for ten years for sanctioning a kidnapping and misappropriation of public funds to finance the GAL . Along with various corruption scandals and the poor state of the Spanish economy in the mid @-@ 1990s , the GAL scandal is seen as a key factor in the PSOE defeat . 
 = Pokémon Red and Blue = 
 Pokémon Red Version and Pokémon Blue Version , originally released in Japan as Pocket Monsters : Red & Green are role @-@ playing video games developed by Game Freak and published by Nintendo for the Game Boy . They are the first installments of the Pokémon series . They were first released in Japan in 1996 as Red and Green . " Blue " was released later in the year as a special edition . They were later released as Red and Blue in North America , Europe and Australia over the following three years . Pokémon Yellow , a special edition version , was released roughly a year later . Red and Green have subsequently been remade for the Game Boy Advance as Pokémon FireRed and LeafGreen , released in 2004 . 
 The player controls the protagonist from an overhead perspective and navigates him throughout the fictional region of Kanto in a quest to master Pokémon battling . The goal of the games is to become the champion of the Pokémon League by defeating the eight Gym Leaders and then the top four Pokémon trainers in the land , the Elite Four . Another objective is to complete the Pokédex , an in @-@ game encyclopedia , by obtaining the 150 available Pokémon . Red and Blue utilize the Game Link Cable , which connects two games together and allows Pokémon to be traded or battled between games . Both titles are independent of each other but feature the same plot , and while they can be played separately , it is necessary for players to trade among both games in order to obtain all of the first 150 Pokémon . 
 Red and Blue were well @-@ received with critics praising the multiplayer options , especially the concept of trading . They received an aggregated score of 89 % on GameRankings and are perennially ranked on top @-@ game lists including at least four years on IGN 's Top 100 Games of All Time . The games ' releases marked the beginning of what would become a multibillion @-@ dollar franchise , jointly selling millions of copies worldwide . In 2009 they appeared in the Guinness Book of World Records under " Best selling RPG on the Game Boy " and " Best selling RPG of all time " . The games were released on the Nintendo 3DS Virtual Console service on February 27 , 2016 , as a commemoration of the franchise 's 20th anniversary . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Red and Blue are in a third @-@ person view , overhead perspective and consist of three basic screens : an overworld , in which the player navigates the main character ; a side @-@ view battle screen ; and a menu interface , in which the player configures his or her Pokémon , items , or gameplay settings . 
 The player can use his or her Pokémon to battle other Pokémon . When the player encounters a wild Pokémon or is challenged by a trainer , the screen switches to a turn @-@ based battle screen that displays the engaged Pokémon . During battle , the player may select a maneuver for his or her Pokémon to fight using one of four moves , use an item , switch his or her active Pokémon , or attempt to flee . Pokémon have hit points ( HP ) ; when a Pokémon 's HP is reduced to zero , it faints and can no longer battle until it is revived . Once an enemy Pokémon faints , the player 's Pokémon involved in the battle receive a certain number of experience points ( EXP ) . After accumulating enough EXP , a Pokémon will level up . A Pokémon 's level controls its physical properties , such as the battle statistics acquired , and the moves learned . At certain levels , the Pokémon may also evolve . These evolutions affect the statistics and also the levels at which new moves are learnt ( higher levels of evolution gain more statistics per level , although they may not learn new moves as early , if at all , compared with the lower levels of evolution ) . 
 Catching Pokémon is another essential element of the gameplay . During battle with a wild Pokémon , the player may throw a Poké Ball at it . If the Pokémon is successfully caught , it will come under the ownership of the player . Factors in the success rate of capture include the HP of the target Pokémon and the type of Poké Ball used : the lower the target 's HP and the stronger the Poké Ball , the higher the success rate of capture . The ultimate goal of the games is to complete the entries in the Pokédex , a comprehensive Pokémon encyclopedia , by capturing , evolving , and trading to obtain all 151 creatures . 
 Pokémon Red and Blue allow players to trade Pokémon between two cartridges via a Game Link Cable . This method of trading must be done to fully complete the Pokédex , since certain Pokémon will only evolve upon being traded and each of the two games have version @-@ exclusive Pokémon . The Link Cable also makes it possible to battle another player 's Pokémon team . When playing Red or Blue on a Game Boy Advance or SP , the standard GBA / SP link cable will not work ; players must use the Nintendo Universal Game Link Cable instead . Moreover , the English versions of the games are not compatible with their Japanese counterparts , and such trades will result in corruption of the save files because the games use different languages and therefore character sets . 
 As well as trading with each other and Pokémon Yellow , Pokémon Red and Blue can trade Pokémon with the second generation of Pokémon games : Pokémon Gold , Silver , and Crystal . However , there are limitations : the games cannot link together if one player 's party contains Pokémon or moves introduced in the second generation games . Also , using the Transfer Pak for the Nintendo 64 , data such as Pokémon and items from Pokémon Red and Blue can be used in the Nintendo 64 games Pokémon Stadium and Pokémon Stadium 2 . Red and Blue are not compatible with the Pokémon games of the later " Advanced Generation " for the Game Boy Advance or GameCube . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Pokémon Red and Blue take place in the region of Kanto . This is one distinct region shown in later games , with different geographical habitats for the 151 existing Pokémon species , along with human @-@ populated towns and cities , and Routes connecting locations with one another . Some areas are only accessible once the player learns a special ability or gains a special item . Areas in which the player can catch Pokémon range from caves to the sea , where the kinds of Pokémon available to catch varies . For example , <unk> can only be caught either through fishing or when the player is in a body of water , while <unk> can only be caught in a cave . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 After venturing alone into tall grass , a voice warns the player to stop , which is revealed to be Professor Oak , a famous Pokémon researcher . Professor Oak explains to the player that wild Pokémon may be living there , and encountering them alone can be very dangerous . He takes the player to his laboratory where the player meets Oak 's grandson , a rival aspiring Pokémon Trainer . The player and the rival are both instructed to select a starter Pokémon for their travels out of Bulbasaur , Squirtle , and Charmander . Oak 's Grandson will always choose the Pokémon which is stronger against the player 's starting Pokémon . He will then challenge the player to a Pokémon battle with their newly obtained Pokémon , and will continue to battle the player at certain points throughout the games . 
 While visiting the region 's cities , the player will encounter special establishments called <unk> . Inside these buildings are Gym Leaders , each of whom the player must defeat in a Pokémon battle to obtain a total of eight Gym Badges . Once the badges are acquired , the player is given permission to enter the Pokémon League , which consists of the best Pokémon trainers in the region . There the player will battle the Elite Four and finally the new Champion : the player 's rival . Also , throughout the game the player will have to battle against the forces of Team Rocket , a criminal organization that abuses Pokémon . They devise numerous plans for stealing rare Pokémon , which the player must foil . 
 = = Development = = 
 The concept of the Pokémon saga stems from the hobby of insect collecting , a popular pastime which game designer Satoshi Tajiri enjoyed as a child . While growing up , however , he observed more urbanization taking place in the town where he lived and as a result , the insect population declined . Tajiri noticed that kids now played in their homes instead of outside and he came up with the idea of a video game , containing creatures that resembled insects , called Pokémon . He thought kids could relate with the Pokémon by individually naming them , and then controlling them to represent fear or anger as a good way of relieving stress . However , Pokémon never bleed or die in battle , only faint – this was a very touchy subject to Tajiri , as he did not want to further fill the gaming world with " pointless violence " . 
 When the Game Boy was released , Tajiri thought the system was perfect for his idea , especially because of the link cable , which he envisioned would allow players to trade Pokémon with each other . This concept of trading information was new to the video gaming industry , because previously connection cables were only being used for competition . " I imagined a chunk of information being transferred by connecting two Game Boys with special cables , and I went wow , that 's really going to be something ! " said Tajiri . Tajiri was also influenced by Square 's Game Boy game The Final Fantasy Legend , noting in an interview that the game gave him the idea that more than just action games could be developed for the handheld . 
 The main characters were named after Tajiri himself as Satoshi , who is described as Tajiri in his youth , and his long @-@ time friend , role model , mentor , and fellow Nintendo developer ; Shigeru Miyamoto as Shigeru . Ken Sugimori , artist and longtime friend of Tajiri , headed the development of drawings and designs of the Pokémon , working with a team of less than ten people who conceived the various designs for all 151 Pokémon . Sugimori in turn finalized each design , drawing the Pokémon from various angles in order to assist Game Freak 's graphics department in properly rendering the creature . Music for the game was composed by Junichi Masuda , who utilized the four sound channels of the Game Boy to create both the melodies and the sound effects and Pokémon " cries " heard upon encountering them . He noted the game 's opening theme , titled " Monster " , was produced with the image of battle scenes in mind , using white noise to sound like marching music and imitate a snare drum . 
 Originally called Capsule Monsters , the game 's title went through several transitions due to trademark difficulties , becoming <unk> and <unk> before eventually settling upon Pocket Monsters . Tajiri always thought that Nintendo would reject his game , as the company did not really understand the concept at first . However , the games turned out to be a complete success , something Tajiri and Nintendo never expected , especially because of the declining popularity of the Game Boy . Upon hearing of the Pokémon concept , Miyamoto suggested creating multiple cartridges with different Pokémon in each , noting it would assist the trading aspect . 
 In Japan , Pocket Monsters : Red and Green were the first versions released . They sold rapidly , due in part to Nintendo 's idea of producing the two versions of the game instead of a single title , prompting consumers to buy both . Several months later , the Blue version was released in Japan as a mail @-@ order @-@ only special edition , featuring updated in @-@ game artwork and new dialogue . To create more hype and challenge to the games , Tajiri revealed an extra Pokémon called Mew hidden within the games , which he believed " created a lot of rumors and myths about the game " and " kept the interest alive " . The creature was originally added by Shigeki Morimoto as an internal prank and wasn 't supposed to be exposed to consumers . It was not until later that Nintendo decided to distribute Mew through a Nintendo promotional event . However , in 2003 a glitch became widely known , and could be exploited so anyone could obtain the elusive Pokémon . 
 During the North American localization of Pokémon , a small team led by Hiro Nakamura went through the individual Pokémon , renaming them for western audiences based on their appearance and characteristics after approval from Nintendo Co . Ltd . In addition , during this process , Nintendo trademarked the 151 Pokémon names in order to ensure they would be unique to the franchise . During the translation process , it became apparent that simply altering the games ' text from Japanese to English was impossible ; the games had to be entirely reprogrammed from scratch due to the fragile state of their source code , a side effect of the unusually lengthy development time . Therefore , the games were based on the more @-@ modern Japanese version of Blue ; modeling its programming and artwork , but keeping the same distribution of Pokémon found in the Japanese Red and Green cartridges , respectively . 
 As the finished Red and Blue versions were being prepared for release , Nintendo allegedly spent over 50 million dollars to promote the games , fearing the series would not be appealing to American children . The western localization team warned that the " cute monsters " may not be accepted by American audiences , and instead recommended they be redesigned and " beefed @-@ up " . Then @-@ president of Nintendo Hiroshi Yamauchi refused and instead viewed the games ' possible reception in America as a challenge to face . Despite these setbacks , the reprogrammed Red and Blue versions with their original creature designs were eventually released in North America over two and a half years after Red and Green debuted in Japan . The games were received extremely well by the foreign audiences and Pokémon went on to become a lucrative franchise in America . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The music was composed by Junichi Masuda on a Commodore Amiga computer , which only features PCM sample playback , and converted to the Game Boy with a program he had written . 
 The audio of Red and Blue consists entirely of game music and sound effects ; all dialogue is on @-@ screen . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Pokémon Red and Blue set the precedent for what has become a blockbuster , multibillion @-@ dollar franchise . By 1997 , Red , Green , and Blue combined had sold 10 @.@ 4 million copies in Japan . By the end of its run , it had sold a total combined sale of 9 @.@ 85 million in the United States while an additional 3 @.@ 56 million have been sold in United Kingdom . In 2009 , IGN referred to Pokémon Red and Blue as the " Best selling RPG on the Game Boy " and " Best selling RPG of all time " . 
 The games received mostly positive reviews from critics , holding an aggregate score of 87 @.@ 86 % on GameRankings . Special praise was given to its multiplayer features : the ability to trade and battle Pokémon with one another . Craig Harris of IGN gave the games a " masterful " 10 out of 10 , noting that : " Even if you finish the quest , you still might not have all the Pokémon in the game . The challenge to catch ' em all is truly the game 's biggest draw " . He also commented on the popularity of the game , especially among children , describing it as a " craze " . GameSpot 's Peter Bartholow , who gave the games a " great " 8 @.@ 8 out of 10 , cited the graphics and audio as somewhat primitive but stated that these were the games ' only drawbacks . He praised the titles ' replay value due to their customization and variety , and commented upon their universal appeal : " Under its cuddly exterior , Pokémon is a serious and unique RPG with lots of depth and excellent multiplayer extensions . As an RPG , the game is accessible enough for newcomers to the genre to enjoy , but it will entertain hard @-@ core fans as well . It 's easily one of the best Game Boy games to date " . 
 The success of these games has been attributed to their innovative gaming experience rather than audiovisual effects . Papers published by the Columbia Business School indicate both American and Japanese children prefer the actual gameplay of a game over special audio or visual effects . In Pokémon games , the lack of these artificial effects has actually been said to promote the child 's imagination and creativity . " With all the talk of game engines and texture mapping and so on , there is something refreshing about this superlative gameplay which makes you ignore the cutesy 8 @-@ bit graphics " commented The Guardian . 
 The video gaming website 1UP.com composed a list of the " Top 5 ' Late to the Party ' Games " showing selected titles that " prove a gaming platform 's untapped potential " and were one of the last games released for their respective console . Red and Blue were ranked first , and called Nintendo 's " secret weapon " when the games were brought out for the Game Boy in the late 1990s . Nintendo Power listed the Red and Blue versions together as the third best video game for the Game Boy / Game Boy Color , stating that something about the game kept them playing until they caught every Pokémon . Game Informer 's Ben Reeves called them ( along with Pokémon Yellow , Gold , Silver , and Crystal ) the second best Game Boy games and stated that it had more depth than it appeared . Official Nintendo Magazine named the games one of the best Nintendo games of all time , placing 52nd on their list of the top 100 games . Red and Blue made number 72 on IGN 's Top 100 Games of All Time in 2003 , in which the reviewers noted that the pair of games " started a revolution " and praised the deep game design and complex strategy , as well the option to trade between other games . Two years later , it climbed the ranks to number 70 in the updated list , with the games ' legacy again noted to have inspired multiple video game sequels , movies , television shows , and other merchandise , strongly rooting it in popular culture . In 2007 Red and Blue were ranked at number 37 on the list , and the reviewers remarked at the games ' longevity : 
 For everything that has come in the decade since , it all started right here with Pokémon Red / Blue ' ' . Its unique blend of exploration , training , battling and trading created a game that was far more in @-@ depth than it first appeared and one that actually forced the player to socialize with others in order to truly experience all that it had to offer . The game is long , engrossing and sparkles with that intangible addictiveness that only the best titles are able to capture . Say what you will about the game , but few gaming franchises can claim to be this popular ten years after they first hit store shelves . 
 The games are widely credited with starting and helping pave the way for the successful multibillion @-@ dollar series . Five years after Red and Blue 's initial release , Nintendo celebrated its " <unk> " . George Harrison , the senior vice president of marketing and corporate communications of Nintendo of America , stated that " those precious gems [ Pokémon Red and Blue ] have evolved into Ruby and Sapphire . The release of Pokémon Pinball kicks off a line of great new Pokémon adventures that will be introduced in the coming months " . The series has since sold over 175 million games , all accredited to the enormous success of the original Red and Blue versions . 
 On February 12 , 2014 , an anonymous Australian programmer launched Twitch Plays Pokémon , a " social experiment " on the video streaming website Twitch . The project was a crowdsourced attempt to play a modified version of Pokémon Red by typing commands into the channel 's chat log , with an average of 50 @,@ 000 viewers participating at the same time . The result was compared to " watching a car crash in slow motion " . The game was completed on March 1 , 2014 , boasting 390 hours of multi @-@ user controlled non @-@ stop gameplay . 
 = = Other versions = = 
 = = = Pokémon Blue ( Japan ) = = = 
 Pokémon Blue ( ポケットモンスター 青 , Poketto Monsutā Ao , lit . " Pocket Monsters Blue " ) was released in Japan as a mail order @-@ only special edition to subscribers of CoroCoro Comic on October 15 , 1996 . It was later released to general retail on October 10 , 1999 . The game featured updated in @-@ game artwork and new dialogue . Using Blastoise as its mascot , the code , script , and artwork for Blue was used for the international releases of Red and Green , which were renamed to Red and Blue . The Japanese Blue edition of the game features all but a handful of Pokémon available in Red and Green , making certain Pokémon exclusive to these original editions . 
 = = = Pokémon Yellow = = = 
 Pokémon Yellow : Special Pikachu Edition ( ポケットモンスター <unk> , Poketto Monsutā <unk> , lit . " Pocket Monsters Pikachu " ) was a special edition of the Red and Blue versions , and was originally released on September 12 , 1998 , in Japan , with releases in North America and Europe on October 1 , 1999 , and June 16 , 2000 , respectively . The game was designed to resemble the Pokémon anime series , with the player receiving a Pikachu as his starter Pokémon , and their rival starting with an <unk> . Some non @-@ player characters resemble those from the anime , including Jessie , James , and Meowth . 
 = = = Pokémon FireRed and LeafGreen = = = 
 Pokémon FireRed Version and LeafGreen Version ( ポケットモンスター <unk> ・ <unk> , Poketto Monsutā <unk> <unk> , lit . " Pocket Monsters : FireRed & LeafGreen " ) are enhanced remakes of the 1996 original Pocket Monsters : Red & Green video games . The new titles were developed by Game Freak and published by Nintendo for the Game Boy Advance and have compatibility with the Game Boy Advance Wireless Adapter , which originally came bundled with the games . However , due to the new variables added to LeafGreen and FireRed ( such as changing the single , " Special " stat into two separate " Special Attack " and " Special Defense " stats ) , these titles are not compatible with older versions . FireRed and LeafGreen were first released in Japan on January 29 , 2004 , and released to North America and Europe on September 9 and October 1 , respectively . Nearly two years after their original release , Nintendo re @-@ marketed them as Player 's Choice titles . 
 The games received critical acclaim , obtaining an aggregate score of 81 percent on Metacritic . Most critics praised the fact that the games introduced new features while still maintaining the traditional gameplay of the series . Reception of the graphics and audio was more mixed , with some reviewers complaining that they were too simplistic and not much of an improvement over the previous games , Pokémon Ruby and Sapphire . FireRed and LeafGreen were commercial successes , selling a total of around 12 million copies worldwide . 
 = = = Virtual Console = = = 
 On November 12 , 2015 , Nintendo announced during a Nintendo Direct that the original generation of Pokémon games would be released on the Nintendo 3DS Virtual Console service on February 27 , 2016 , the 20th anniversary of the games ' original Japanese release . The games also include a first for the Virtual Console — simulated Link Cable functionality to allow trading and battling between games . Each region received the versions of the game as originally released ; as such , Green is exclusive to Japanese consumers . These versions will be able to transfer Pokémon to the upcoming Pokémon Sun and Moon via the Pokémon Bank application . 
 There is also a special bundle along with the Nintendo 2DS with each console matching the corresponding color of the game version which was released in Japan , Europe and Australia on February 27 , 2016 . And in North America a special New Nintendo 3DS bundle with cover plates of Red and Blue 's boxart . 
 By March 31 , 2016 , combined sales of the re @-@ releases reached 1 @.@ 5 million units with more than half being sold in the American market . 
 = Elisenberg Station = 
 Elisenberg Station ( Norwegian : Elisenberg stasjon ) is an unfinished railway station within the Oslo Tunnel on the Drammen Line in Oslo , Norway . The ghost station was partially built during the construction of the tunnel between 1971 and 1980 , but has never been put into use . It is located between Nationaltheatret Station and Skøyen Station , at Elisenberg in Frogner . A 220 @-@ meter ( 720 ft ) long center platform and part of the access way has been built , but never completed . While the station initially was not put into use because of lack of funds to complete it , it is now unlikely that it will ever be completed , as the need for a station has disappeared and an opening would need a large investment of funds . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 Elisenberg is located approximately halfway between Nationaltheatret Station and Skøyen Station in the Oslo Tunnel of the Drammen Line . It is located under <unk> gate , near the tram stop with the same name . All that has been built at Elisenberg Station is the centre platform , which is 220 meters ( 720 ft ) long and 11 meters ( 36 ft ) wide , and a passageway across the south track . The tracks lay 30 meters ( 98 ft ) below the surface . 
 The plans called for a two @-@ track station which would be connected to the surface via elevators . At ground level , there would have been a vestibule with traveller facilities and ticket sales . The main entrance was to be from <unk> , with a secondary entrance from the street junction <unk> – <unk> . 
 = = History = = 
 Planning of the Oslo Tunnel was officially initiated in 1938 , as a way to connect the Drammen Line to Oslo East Station ( Oslo Ø , now Oslo Central Station , Oslo S ) . The Station Committee of 1938 , led by Axel Grenholm , recommended a route that would branch off from the existing line close to the then terminal station of Oslo West Station ( Oslo V ) . Another committee , led by Oddvar Halvorsen , was established in 1960 to look at the matter again . It stated that the tunnel should be longer and intersect with the Drammen Line at a point between Skarpsno and Skøyen , and with a second station built at Frogner . The proposal was presented to Parliament on 4 November 1961 , along with several other matters related to rail transport investments . Construction of the Oslo Tunnel and Elisenberg Station was passed unanimously . 
 A planning office was established in 1962 , initially led by Erik Himle . The final plans for the route were passed by parliament in 1968 , and construction started in 1971 . The rationale for the building of the station was that Frogner was to be developed as a dense , commercial district . However , to cut costs with the Oslo Tunnel , it was decided that parts of Nationaltheatret would not be built yet , and that Elisenberg Station would not open until after the tunnel was completed . By 1978 , the platform area had been built , but the access way had not . The investments cost 30 million Norwegian krone ( NOK ) , 75 <unk> of 1998 standard . The Oslo Tunnel opened , without Elisenberg Station , on 1 June 1980 . 
 During the mid @-@ 1980s , the plans for Elisenberg were again considered , after an initiative by Prime Minister Kåre Willoch who had been stuck in traffic congestion at Frogner . At the time , the cost estimate to open the station was NOK 105 million . The rail administration planned instead to build an additional , western entrance to Nationaltheatret Station , located near the roundabout between <unk> and Henrik Ibsens gate ( then <unk> ) , which would only cost 40 million NOK . 
 This entrance was expected to replace the need for Elisenberg Station , and was located in the middle of the Oslo Tunnel , between Nationaltheatret and Skøyen . Oslo Byes Vel and the Conservative , Red and Centre parties opposed the construction of the entrance , arguing that it would ruin the south @-@ western corner of the Palace Park . The Conservative Party proposed building it further south , across Henrik Ibsens gate , either in <unk> gate or in <unk> near Oslo Commerce School , while the others wanted to open Elisenberg Station for traffic . 
 However , by then it had become clear that Frogner west of <unk> plass would remain dominantly a residential area . The estimates showed that the station would capture few new riders and instead simply give a shorter walk for a small minority of those who used Nationaltheatret Station and Skøyen Station . With the upgraded Nationaltheatret Station , which opened in 1999 , the capacity of the Oslo Tunnel increased from 16 to 24 trains per hour in each direction , because the station from then had four , rather than two , tracks . A similar upgrade would need to be done for Elisenberg Station , should it be taken into use , or the capacity of the tunnel would again be reduced . It is therefore highly unlikely that the station will ever be opened . In 1998 , the readers of the Norwegian newspaper Aftenposten proposed making Elisenberg an emergency exit . 
 In 2008 , one hundred million NOK were given from the state budget of Norway to make improvements to the Oslo Tunnel following a cable fire at Skøyen Station . The replacement of the overhead wires would be started close to Elisenberg Station . 
 = Triaenops goodmani = 
 Triaenops goodmani is an extinct bat from Madagascar in the genus Triaenops . It is known from three lower jaws collected in a cave at Anjohibe in 1996 , and described as a new species in 2007 . The material is at most 10 @,@ 000 years old . A bat humerus ( upper arm bone ) from the same site could not be identified as either T. goodmani or the living T. menamena . T. goodmani is identifiable as a member of Triaenops or the related genus Paratriaenops by a number of features of the teeth , such as the single @-@ cusped , canine @-@ like fourth premolar and the presence of a gap between the entoconid and hypoconulid cusps on the first two molars . T. goodmani is larger than the living species of Triaenops and Paratriaenops on Madagascar , and on the first molar the protoconid cusp is only slightly higher than the hypoconid , not much higher as in the other species . 
 = = Taxonomy and distribution = = 
 In 1996 , a team led by David Burney collected breccias containing remains of bats and other animals from the cave of Anjohibe in northwestern Madagascar . The bats in the sample were described by Karen Samonds ( previously Irwin ) in her 2006 Ph.D. dissertation and a 2007 paper . She found several living species in addition to two extinct ones that she described as new , Triaenops goodmani and Hipposideros besaoka . At the time , the genus Triaenops was thought to include three species on Madagascar – Triaenops auritus , Triaenops furculus , and Triaenops rufus . Since then , Steven Goodman and Julie Ranivo have discovered that the name rufus is not in fact applicable to the Madagascar species and proposed the name Triaenops menamena for the Madagascan bats previously known as Triaenops rufus . 
 In addition , Petr Benda and Peter Vallo have removed the other two Madagascan species to a separate genus Paratriaenops , so that they are now known as Paratriaenops auritus and Paratriaenops furculus . The specific name of the extinct species , goodmani , honors Steven Goodman for his research on Madagascan bats . The material of T. goodmani is from locality OLD SE within the cave and is about 10 @,@ 000 years old or younger . A cladistic analysis using morphological data could not resolve the relationships of Triaenops goodmani , but did not place it with the other species of Triaenops and Paratriaenops studied . In a 2008 paper , Amy Russell and colleagues commented that cranial ( skull ) characteristics of T. goodmani suggest it is a member of the " T. furculus / T. auritus group " , now placed in Paratriaenops . 
 = = Description = = 
 Triaenops goodmani is known from three mandibles ( lower jaws ) : one with the fourth premolar ( p4 ) and first and second molars ( m1 – 2 ) and two with the second and third molars ( m2 – 3 ) . The jaw is relatively robust . The p4 resembles a canine , having a single cusp that is about as high as the highest cusp on m1 and lacking accessory shelves or cusps . The molars are narrow @-@ crowned and longer than in T. menamena , P. auritus , and P. furculus . Length of m2 ranges from 1 @.@ 55 to 1 @.@ 57 mm and width from 0 @.@ 98 to 1 @.@ 02 mm . On m1 , the trigonid ( front group of cusps ) is narrower and slightly higher than the talonid at the back . The protoconid , one of the main cusps in the trigonid , is the highest cusp , but is only slightly higher than the hypoconid ( a cusp in the talonid ) ; in living Madagascan Triaenops and Paratriaenops , the protoconid is substantially higher than the hypoconid . The paraconid , metaconid ( both cusps in the trigonid ) , and entoconid ( a cusp in the talonid ) are lower than in Paratriaenops auritus . The hypoconulid ( part of the talonid ) is small but distinct and is the lowest cusp . It is separated from the entoconid by a gap . T. goodmani lacks a ridge , the <unk> , connecting the entoconid to the metaconid . There is a crest ( cingulum ) at the front and back of the tooth . The last two molars are similar to m1 , but in m2 the talonid is only slightly wider than the trigonid and in m3 the two are of equal width . In addition , a shelf is present between the protoconid and hypoconid on m2 and m3 is smaller , lacks the gap between the entoconid and hypoconulid , and has a weak ridge between the entoconid and metaconid . These characteristics are typical of Triaenops and Paratriaenops . 
 From the same site where T. goodmani was found , Samonds also recorded the distal ( far ) end of a Triaenops humerus ( upper arm bone ) , with a width of 3 @.@ 58 mm . This bone was similar to humeri of T. menamena , but she did not identify it as either species because of the small size difference between T. menamena and T. goodmani . In site NCC @-@ 1 ( estimated 69 @,@ 600 to 86 @,@ 800 years old ) , two Triaenops mandibles were recorded , one with p4 and m1 and another with m1 – 2 and part of m3 . Relative to living Triaenops and Paratriaenops , m1 in those jaws is longer and narrower . Although sample sizes are small , the measurements do not resemble those of T. goodmani . In addition , the ridge between the entoconid and metaconid is stronger than in T. goodmani . Samonds identified these jaws only as Triaenops . 
 = 2000 Austrian Grand Prix = 
 The 2000 Austrian Grand Prix ( formally the XXIV Großer A1 Preis von Österreich ) was a Formula One motor race held on 16 July 2000 at the A1 @-@ Ring near Spielberg , Styria , Austria . It was the tenth round of the 2000 Formula One season and the 24th Austrian Grand Prix . The 71 @-@ lap race was won by McLaren driver Mika Häkkinen after starting from pole position . His teammate David Coulthard finished second with Rubens Barrichello third for the Ferrari team . 
 Michael Schumacher , the eventual Drivers ' Champion , led the Championship going into the race and started from fourth position alongside Barrichello . At the first corner BAR 's Ricardo Zonta ran into the rear of Michael Schumacher . The incident forced the German to retire and caused a safety car deployment . After the safety car pulled in after one lap Häkkinen and Coulthard extended a comfortable lead over the rest of the field . When Häkkinen made his pit stop on lap 38 , he rejoined behind Coulthard , but ahead of Barrichello . Coulthard made a pit stop on lap 41 , allowing Häkkinen back into the lead which he held to clinch his second victory of the 2000 season . 
 As a consequence of the race , Coulthard 's second place narrowed the gap to Michael Schumacher in the Drivers ' Championship to six points , while Häkkinen 's win meant he closed to within two points of Coulthard . After the Grand Prix , McLaren were docked 10 points for a post @-@ race technical infringement , resulting in Ferrari maintaining their lead in the Constructors ' Championship with a four @-@ point gap over McLaren , with seven races of the season remaining . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The Grand Prix was contested by eleven teams with two drivers each . The teams ( also known as constructors ) were McLaren , Ferrari , Jordan , Jaguar , Williams , Benetton , Prost , Sauber , Arrows , Minardi and BAR . Tyre supplier Bridgestone brought two different tyre compounds to the race ; the Soft and the Medium dry compound tyres . The A1 @-@ Ring underwent minor safety changes in the run @-@ up to the race . The modifications were new kerbs placed across the track with flagstones inside the kerbs to prevent dust from accumulating on the circuit . An additional row of tyres were erected at all corners and were designed to increase absorption in the event of a collision . 
 Going into the race , Ferrari driver Michael Schumacher led the Drivers ' Championship with 56 points , ahead of David Coulthard on 44 points and his teammate Mika Häkkinen on 38 points . Rubens Barrichello was fourth on 32 points while Giancarlo Fisichella was fifth with 18 points . In the Constructors ' Championship , Ferrari were leading with 88 points , six points ahead of their rivals McLaren in second . Benetton on 18 points and Williams with 17 points contended for third place , while Jordan were fifth on eleven points . McLaren and Ferrari had so far dominated the championship , winning the previous nine races . Championship participants Barrichello and Fisichella had each gained second place podium finishes while Ralf Schumacher and Heinz @-@ Harald Frentzen had achieved third place podium finishes . 
 Following the French Grand Prix on 2 July , six teams conducted testing sessions at the Silverstone Circuit between 4 – 6 July to prepare for the Austrian Grand Prix at the A1 @-@ Ring . Frentzen was fastest on the first day of testing , ahead of Sauber 's Pedro Diniz . Alexander Wurz 's car was afflicted with an gearbox issue , resulting in repairs which limited his team 's testing time . Jaguar driver Eddie Irvine was fastest on the second day . Jos Verstappen for Arrows was quickest on the final day of testing , although his car 's front wing was damaged when his engine cover was shed from its chassis . Ferrari and McLaren opted to test at the Mugello Circuit where both teams concentrated their efforts on aerodynamic and suspension set @-@ ups between 4 – 7 July . Ferrari spent one further day performing shakedown runs of their cars at the Fiorano Circuit with their test driver Luca Badoer . Williams and BAR tested at the Autódromo do Estoril between July 5 – 7 where testing consisted of tyre , engine , aerodynamic and set @-@ up optimisation . 
 The Jordan team 's plan to introduce its new car , the EJ10B , at this race was postponed as its bodywork was required to undergo Fédération Internationale de l 'Automobile ( FIA ) safety tests . This was due to a decision made by the Jordan team to develop the car further and create more spare parts . However , this was the last race that the <unk> competed , as the EJ10B made its début at the next race . 
 = = = Practice and qualifying = = = 
 Four practice sessions were held before the Sunday race , two each on Friday and Saturday . The Friday morning and afternoon sessions each lasted an hour ; the third and fourth sessions , on Saturday morning , lasted 45 minutes each . Conditions were dry for the Friday practice sessions . Barrichello set the first session 's fastest time , a 1 : 13 @.@ 603 , two @-@ tenths of a second quicker than Jarno Trulli . Ricardo Zonta finished with the third fastest time . Verstappen , Michael Schumacher and Coulthard filled in the next three positions . Fisichella , Johnny Herbert , Jacques Villeneuve and Mika Salo rounded out the top ten positions . Häkkinen 's car was afflicted with an mechanical fuel pump issue ; this restricted him to one out lap and he was slowest overall . In the second practice session , Coulthard set the fastest lap of the day , a 1 : 12 @.@ 464 ; Häkkinen had a trouble free season and ended with the second fastest time . Salo ran quicker during the session and was third fastest . Michael Schumacher and Barrichello had the fourth and seventh fastest times respectively ; they were separated by Zonta and Trulli . Villeneuve , Diniz and Fisichella completed the top ten positions . After the second session , Irvine , who had only participated in the first practice session , withdrew from the Grand Prix . He had felt unwell upon arrival at the circuit and was diagnosed with appendicitis at the infield medical centre . He was replaced by Jaguar 's test driver Luciano Burti . 
 The Saturday morning sessions were held in dry conditions and later on a wet track , were grip was poor and some drivers were forced onto the grass after sliding off the track . Häkkinen was fastest in the third practice session , with a time of 1 : 11 @.@ 355 ; Coulthard had the second fastest time . The two Ferrari drivers were third and fourth ; Barrichello ahead of Michael Schumacher . Verstappen continued his quick form and set the fifth fastest time , ahead of Fisichella and Villeneuve . Zonta , Trulli and Herbert rounded out the top ten fastest drivers in the session . In the final practice session , Häkkinen again set the fastest time , a 1 : 11 @.@ 336 , despite spinning into the gravel late in the session ; his teammate Coulthard remained second quickest . Michael Schumacher was third fastest ahead of teammate Barrichello . Villeneuve was fifth fastest , ahead of Herbert and Frentzen . Salo , Fisichella and Arrows driver Pedro de la Rosa completed the top ten ahead of qualifying . 
 Saturday afternoon 's qualifying session lasted for an hour . Each driver was limited to twelve laps , with the grid order decided by the drivers ' fastest laps . During this session the 107 % rule was in effect , requiring each driver to remain within 107 % of the fastest lap time to qualify for the race . The session was held in overcast conditions ; the air temperature was 13 ° C ( 55 ° F ) and the track temperature 17 ° C ( 63 ° F ) . Häkkinen clinched his fourth pole position of the season , his first since the San Marino Grand Prix , with a time of 1 : 10 @.@ 410 . He was joined on the front row of the grid by teammate Coulthard who was three @-@ tenths of a second off Häkkinen 's pace . Coulthard felt he could have challenged for pole position but he clipped a kerb going into Castrol Kurve on his final run which cost him time . Both drivers were satisfied with their car 's balance . Barrichello qualified third and said that he changed his car 's set @-@ up to help him to achieve a better lap time . Michael Schumacher qualified fourth , six @-@ tenths of a second behind Häkkinen , and reported that his car 's handling was uneven throughout the circuit . He also had a high @-@ speed spin during the session and aborted his final run after he made a mistake at the exit of <unk> corner . Trulli qualified fifth having used the soft compound tyres to set his fastest lap time . Zonta and Villeneuve set the sixth and seventh fastest times respectively for BAR , both drivers spun during the session . Fisichella recorded the eighth quickest time although he lost a <unk> when he went off the circuit . He felt he could have secured fifth but a yellow @-@ flag caused him to reduce his pace . Salo and Verstappen completed the top ten positions . Diniz missed qualifying in the top ten by two @-@ thousands of a second and spun off while setting lap times , triggering a yellow @-@ <unk> de la Rosa managed twelfth , having struggled with the conditions during the session . He qualified ahead of Sauber driver Nick Heidfeld and Wurz . Frentzen , fifteenth , ran the hard compound tyres and his lap times were set early in the session before track conditions had improved . Frentzen said it was because he felt rain would hit the circuit towards the end of qualifying . Herbert started from sixteenth , after stopping on one run because to a broken left rear suspension caused by a loose suspension bracket at the Niki Lauda Kurve . A rear wishbone on his car had also been flexing . Alesi qualified seventeenth . Jenson Button used the spare Williams car set up for Ralf Schumacher because Button 's race car had engine issues and qualified eighteenth . Button additionally struggled with driving the spare car . His teammate Ralf Schumacher qualified nineteenth in the Williams team 's worst qualifying performance of the season . Burti and the two Minardi drivers qualified at the rear of the field , covering positions twenty to twenty @-@ two . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 The drivers took to the track at 09 : 30 CEST ( UTC + 2 ) for a 30 @-@ minute warm @-@ up session . It took place in dry weather conditions . Both Ferrari drivers maintained their consistent performance from qualifying , although Barrichello had the fastest time of 1 : 12 @.@ 480 . Michael Schumacher was fifth in the other Ferrari car ; Häkkinen split them in the McLaren for third position , ahead of Verstappen . Zonta completed the top six , 1 @.@ 1 seconds behind Barrichello . 
 The race started at 14 : 00 local time . The conditions on the grid were dry and cloudy before the race . The air temperature ranged from 17 – 18 ° C ( 63 – 64 ° F ) and the track temperature was between 18 – 19 ° C ( 64 – 66 ° F ) ; weather forecasts indicated a 30 % chance of rain . While on an reconnaissance lap , Burti 's car developed a water leak and was forced to start with his team 's spare car from the pit lane . Michael Schumacher also opted to use his team 's spare car . Häkkinen , from pole position on the grid , held onto the lead going into the first corner . Coulthard , who started alongside Häkkinen , maintained second position . Further down the order , Diniz swerved to avoid contact with Verstappen . The resulting manoeuvre resulted in Diniz colliding with Fisichella . Ahead of them , Trulli drove into the back of Barrichello , while Zonta made contact with Michael Schumacher . Diniz made further minor contact with teammate Salo . Both BAR and Prost drivers were forced wide in avoidance . These incidents resulted in the safety car being deployed . During the safety car period , Verstappen drove to his garage because of a gearbox problem . 
 The safety car was withdrawn at the end of the second lap and the race got underway again with Häkkinen in the lead . Button , meanwhile , was immediately overtaken by Barrichello and Frentzen for sixth position . At the completion of the third lap , the race order was Häkkinen , Coulthard , Salo , de la Rosa , Herbert , Barrichello , Frentzen , Button , Marc Gené , Wurz , Heidfeld , Alesi , Villeneuve , Burti , Zonta , Ralf Schumacher , Mazzacane , Diniz and Verstappen . Both McLaren drivers began to pull away from the rest of the field and exchanged fastest laps , as de la Rosa passed Salo for third at the start of lap four . Frentzen in the Jordan became the fourth retirement of the race with an engine failure on lap five and spun off on his car 's oil . Barrichello passed Herbert for fifth position on the same lap , while Zonta passed Burti for 13th . Verstappen set a new fastest lap of the race on lap six as he immediately closed on Diniz in 17th . Alesi overtook his teammate Heidfeld for tenth position on the following lap . Häkkinen continued to set fastest laps and opened the gap between Coulthard and de la Rosa to five seconds by lap eight . Barrichello claimed fourth position after passing Salo on the same lap and Ralf Schumacher made a pit stop for a new front wing . The first Williams driver made a pit stop for further repairs on the following lap . 
 By lap 13 , Häkkinen 's gap to Coulthard was two seconds , who in turn was a further ten seconds in front of de la Rosa . Barrichello , who had damage to his car , was a further six seconds behind the Arrows driver , but was drawing ahead of Salo in fifth . Verstappen suffered an gearbox failure and became the fifth retirement of the race on lap 14 . On lap 17 , Diniz and Zonta were given 10 second stop @-@ go penalties , both for their roles in the lap 1 accidents . They took their penalties immediately . Ralf Schumacher emerged from his garage to rejoin the race on the same lap . Häkkinen had extended his already comfortable lead over Coulthard to 10 seconds by lap 24 . Alesi , who was on a two @-@ stop strategy , became the first driver to make a scheduled pit stop on the same lap and exited in thirteenth place . On lap 25 , Zonta was involved in another collision when he attempted to overtake Minardi driver Gastón Mazzacane at turn 1 which allowed Diniz to move into fourteenth position . 
 de la Rosa made a pit stop from third position to retire from the race with mechanical issues on lap 32 . The result allowed Button to move into the points @-@ scoring positions . Wurz dropped to tenth after running eighth by lap 34 . Meanwhile , Häkkinen took his only pit stop on lap 38 , emerging behind Coulthard . Alesi , who was fourteenth , but yet to make his final pit stop , attempted to pass teammate Heidfeld but the two cars collided at the first corner . Both drivers retired from the race . Coulthard took his pit stop on the same lap , emerging behind Häkkinen . Salo , Herbert , Barrichello , Button and Villeneuve all made pit stops over the next five laps . At the conclusion of lap 50 , with the scheduled pit stops completed , the running order was Häkkinen , Coulthard , Barrichello , Villeneuve , Button , Salo , Herbert , Gené , Wurz , Diniz , Zonta , Burti , Mazzacane and Ralf Schumacher . 
 Ralf Schumacher spun off the track because of brake failure and retired on lap 50 . His teammate Button ran wide while challenging Villeneuve for fourth position on lap 51 but remained in front of Salo . Zonta became the final retirement of the race when his engine failed on lap 59 . On the same lap , Mazzacane was issued with a 10 @-@ second stop @-@ go penalty . He took his penalty on lap 61 . Coulthard set the fastest lap of the race a 1 : 11 @.@ 783 on lap 66 , as he closed a nine @-@ second gap to Häkkinen who was running slower on the same lap , although it appeared that the Finn would win the race comfortably . Diniz overtook Wurz to take ninth position four laps later . Häkkinen crossed the finish line on lap 71 to take his second win of the season in a time of 1 ' 28 : 15 @.@ 818 , at an average speed of 129 @.@ 737 miles per hour ( 208 @.@ 791 km / h ) . Coulthard finished second 12 @.@ 5 seconds behind , ahead of Barrichello in third , Villeneuve in fourth , Button in fifth and Salo rounded out the points scoring positions in sixth . Herbert , Gené , Diniz and Wurz filled the next four positions , abeit one lap behind the winner , with Burti and Mazzacane the last of the classified drivers . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 The top three drivers appeared on the podium to collect their trophies and in the subsequent press conference . Häkkinen said that he was happy with his race victory which he believed would help his confidence throughout the remainder of the season . Häkkinen added that his team showed him pit boards which instructed him not to over rev his engine during the first half of the race . Coulthard said that he was satisfied with the outcome of the first lap as it allowed him to drive a conservative race . He added that his strong finish would not mean that he would think about his potential to clinch the Drivers ' Championship . Barrichello explained that his car was loose from contact with Trulli during the race 's early stages which prevented him from challenging de la Rosa . 
 Villeneuve was pleased with his fourth @-@ place finish saying that despite making a bad start , his strategy allowed him to run quicker when no back markers were holding him up . After Button 's fifth position at the race , the Williams team principal Frank Williams said of his performance , " Jenson really excelled himself again driving in difficult circumstances at the end of the race and under a lot of pressure " . Mika Salo scored points for the third time in the season , having scored fifth in Monaco . He said that he was happy , and that he struggled with excessive oversteer in the high speed corners . 
 Michael Schumacher , who was involved in the first lap incident , believed that the race should have been stopped . However , he praised the work of the marshals who had assisted to recover the cars involved . He also believed that Zonta had " over @-@ estimated his ability " and said that he would have a " quiet word " with the BAR driver . Zonta believed that the incident was not his fault and that Michael Schumacher braked harder than him , but apologised for his retirement from the race . Fisichella also agreed that the race should have been stopped , saying , " Three of the protagonists are out and it was stupid not to red flag . " Benetton Technical Director Pat Symonds was highly critical of the driver 's actions as he believed Benetton lost valuable points towards the Constructors ' Championship . " The driving antics of some of our competitors at the first corner were appalling and ruined the race not only for many of the drivers but also for many of the spectators " he said . 
 After the race , it was announced that the FIA was investigating irregularities with an electronic box in <unk> 's car . This was due to Formula One 's governing body discovering that one mandatory seal was missing . Further samples from the electronic box were taken after the race ; this was software downloaded which did not discover any issues with the coding . A spokesman for the McLaren team said that : " No one changed the software , so there 's no reason for us to be worried . " At the hearing on 25 July , the FIA ruled that McLaren did not gain an advantage from the missing seal and that Häkkinen 's victory would stand . However , McLaren were docked 10 points from the Constructors ' Championship and were fined $ 50 @,@ 000 for contravening Article 7 of the 2000 Formula One Sporting Regulations , which stated that competitors had to maintain some conditions of safety and eligibility during the event . McLaren International Managing Director Martin Whitmarsh announced that the team would not appeal the penalty . The Vice @-@ President of Mercedes @-@ Benz Motorsport Norbert Haug later criticised the decision and believed that the seal was never put on Häkkinen 's car . Haug also said he would not take any further action regarding the matter . 
 As a consequence of the race , Michael Schumacher 's lead in the Drivers ' Championship was reduced to six points . Coulthard , who finished second , was second on 50 points , two points ahead of teammate Häkkinen and eight ahead of Barrichello . Despite not finishing , Fisichella maintained fifth place with 18 points . In the Constructors ' Championship , Ferrari maintained their lead with 92 points , McLaren 's 10 point penalty meant that they remained second on 88 points . Williams jumped to third on 19 points , pushing Benetton down into fourth on 18 points and BAR with 12 points moved ahead of Jordan into fifth , with seven rounds of the season remaining . 
 = = Classification = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 = = = Race = = = 
 = = Championship standings after the race = = 
 Note : Only the top five positions are included for both sets of standings . 
 = California State Route 55 = 
 State Route 55 ( SR 55 ) is an 18 @-@ mile ( 30 @-@ km ) long north – south highway in the U.S. state of California . The portion of the route built to freeway standards is known as the Costa Mesa Freeway ( formerly the Newport Freeway ) . SR 55 runs between Finley Avenue south of Pacific Coast Highway ( SR 1 ) in Newport Beach and the Riverside Freeway ( SR 91 ) in Anaheim to the north , intersecting other major Orange County freeways such as SR 22 , SR 73 , and Interstate 405 ( I @-@ 405 ) . The freeway passes through suburban Orange County . 
 SR 55 was first added to the state highway system in 1931 , known as part of Legislative Route 43 , and was routed on surface streets . It was renumbered SR 55 in 1959 , and the construction of the freeway portion began in the 1960s and continued until 1992 . Due to congestion , several alternatives are being discussed to expand the freeway portion past its current end in Newport Beach . SR 55 received the first carpool lane in Orange County in 1985 , and the first direct carpool ramp in 1995 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Starting at Finley Avenue on Newport Boulevard in Newport Beach , 0 @.@ 3 miles ( 0 @.@ 48 km ) south of SR 1 , SR 55 ( Newport Boulevard ) is a four @-@ lane expressway for approximately 0 @.@ 75 miles ( 1 @.@ 21 km ) to its intersection with 17th Street in Costa Mesa . It then follows a traditional street routing through a retail and commercial section of Costa Mesa until its intersection with 19th Street . The segment on Newport Boulevard includes a limited @-@ access interchange at SR 1 . Following the 19th Street intersection , SR 55 becomes an eight @-@ lane below @-@ grade freeway that bisects the northbound and southbound lanes of Newport Boulevard until the Mesa Drive <unk> . 
 North of Fair Drive , SR 55 is an at @-@ grade or above @-@ grade freeway , with the exception of a 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) stretch between the 1st Street / 4th Street exit and the 17th Street exit in Santa Ana , which is below @-@ grade . SR 55 intersects SR 73 and I @-@ 405 next to John Wayne Airport . The freeway continues north into Santa Ana and Tustin , where there is an interchange with I @-@ 5 . The southbound side of the Costa Mesa Freeway does not have a direct link to northbound I @-@ 5 . 
 SR 55 continues north into Orange , where it meets the eastern terminus of SR 22 . Following this , the freeway continues almost due north until turning northeast to merge with SR 91 eastbound , and intersecting ramps for SR 91 westbound near the Santa Ana River . 
 Today , SR 55 is a heavily @-@ travelled corridor linking southern Orange County with SR 91 , the main corridor between the Inland Empire and the Los Angeles Metropolitan Area , as well as I @-@ 5 , the main north – south corridor for California . A HOV lane has been built along the entire route , with its own off- and on @-@ ramps , including one for I @-@ 5 . However , congestion is still very prevalent throughout the day , as is the norm with many Orange County freeways ; Route 55 experiences a peak daily traffic volume of 262 @,@ 000 vehicles and 17 @,@ 292 trucks . 
 SR 55 is part of the California Freeway and Expressway System and the National Highway System , a network of roadways important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . SR 55 from SR 91 to Costa Mesa is known as the Costa Mesa Freeway , as named by Assembly Concurrent Resolution 177 , Chapter 86 in 1976 . 
 = = History = = 
 SR 55 was built in 1931 and originally numbered Route 43 . It was built from the southern terminus of SR 1 ( the Pacific Coast Highway , or " PCH " ) and continued northbound on roughly the same route it follows today , following Newport Road ( today Newport Boulevard ) northeast to Tustin , and then Tustin Avenue north to near its current terminus at SR 91 . From here , Route 43 continued east on what is now SR 91 towards Riverside . In 1959 , the highway was renumbered as Route 55 , and its route was shortened from Route 1 to the also @-@ renumbered Route 91 . The freeway portion from Chapman Avenue to SR 91 opened on January 18 , 1962 , at a cost of $ 4 @.@ 6 million ( about $ 79 @.@ 1 million today ) . The segment between SR 73 and Chapman Avenue opened in 1966 . 
 SR 55 was the first freeway in Orange County to receive carpool lanes , opened in October 1985 between I @-@ 405 and SR 91 . The stretch of SR 55 between Mesa Drive and 19th Street in Costa Mesa was opened in 1992 ; plans to extend SR 55 freeway south from 19th Street to State Route 1 were never realized due to community opposition , fueling an amendment to the city charter to prevent this extension . 
 In 1995 , the direct carpool lane ramps between I @-@ 5 and SR 55 were completed ; these were the first in Orange County . The year also saw further widening of SR 55 between SR 22 and McFadden Avenue . Between 1996 and 2002 , the fifth lane in both directions was constructed between I @-@ 5 and SR 91 , funded with a sales tax of half a cent approved by Measure M. In April 2007 , the Orange County Transportation Authority approved funds to study the feasibility of extending the Costa Mesa Freeway south to 17th Street via tunnels or flyover ramps . The segment of SR 55 from Finley Street to the Newport Channel bridge was legally authorized to be turned over to the city of Newport Beach in 2009 . 
 SR 55 was formerly called the Newport Freeway . In 2010 , the stretch between Chapman and <unk> avenues in the City of Orange was renamed the Paul Johnson Freeway for longtime local radio television traffic reporter Paul Johnson , who died the same year . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Orange County . 
 = Baltimore Urban Debate League = 
 The Baltimore Urban Debate League ( <unk> , pronounced " <unk> " ) , is an American , non profit , urban debate league that aims to educate and mentor inner city middle school and high school students in the Baltimore , Maryland area . The league was started in 1999 by a grant from the Fund for Educational Excellence in collaboration with George Soros ' Open Society Institute . Eight high schools and 90 students participated in the first year . 
 = = Debate format = = 
 = = = High school = = = 
 At the high school level , students debate according to policy debate guidelines . Each season one resolution is established by the National Forensic League and National Catholic Forensic League . There are three divisions on the high school level : novice , junior varsity ( JV ) , and varsity . The three divisions have the same timing conventions for debate rounds , the only exception being preparation time ( novice get ten minutes , JV and varsity get five minutes ) . 
 = Scheiße ( song ) = 
 " Scheiße " ( English : Shit ) is a song by American recording artist Lady Gaga from her second studio album , Born This Way ( 2011 ) . The song was written and produced by Lady Gaga and RedOne , and was recorded in Europe on the tour bus during the Monster Ball Tour . " Scheiße " was first introduced as a remix during a Thierry Mugler fashion show held in January 19 , 2011 . 
 It is a dance @-@ pop song with heavy , pounding synths . The song also has a fast techno beat with electroclash and Eurodisco influences . Gaga speaks the first verse and parts of the chorus of the song faux @-@ German , as the name of the song is German . The lyrics have a feminist tone , speaking of female empowerment . The song received positive reviews from contemporary critics , who complimented its heavy dance beat and catchy chorus , despite criticizing the faux @-@ German lyrics and Gaga 's accent . The song charted on the South Korean Gaon Music Chart and US Billboard dance charts , as well as entering the component charts in Canada , Germany , and the United States . 
 = = Background = = 
 The song was written and produced by Lady Gaga and RedOne . The song was originally recorded on the Tour Bus in Europe in 2010 , and was later remixed at Larrabee Sound Studios in North Hollywood , California by Trevor Muzzy . Gaga said that the song was inspired after a night of partying at the Laboratory nightclub in Berlin , Germany . The next day , she wrote " Scheiße " , stating that she " meant [ the song ] like ' shit , it 's good . ' But I also meant it the other way ; because this song is really about wanting to be a strong female without all the bullshit that comes along with . Anything that gets in your way from being brave . It 's not the only word I know , I just like that word . It 's sexy . " 
 " Scheiße " was first introduced in a Thierry Mugler fashion show held on January 19 , 2011 as a remix ; the fashion show also featured Gaga on the runway . It featured a thumping dance beat with snippets of German words . The remix ended with the lyrics , " I 'll take you out tonight / say whatever you like . " On January 20 , 2011 , Mugler 's creative director Nicola Formichetti premiered a short film featuring a remix of the song . Gaga commented on her website , <unk> , that she wanted to release " Scheiße " as a single but her label did not want her to put it out . " Scheiße " was released as part of Gaga 's second studio album , Born This Way , on May 23 , 2011 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Scheiße " is a dance @-@ pop song with techno , electroclash , Eurodisco , and Eurodance from the middle of 1990s influences . Andrew Unterberger of PopDust noted that the song was influenced by Madonna 's music , notably " Justify My Love , " which , like " Scheiße , " has sections in which the artist speaks rather than sings . " Scheiße " has been described as " a strange mash up of digestible , American shopping mecca music and the thud of German nightclub electronica . " The song features a " grimy " bass and so many " fizzing " synths that it produces a " keyboard assault on the senses . " The song 's lyrics are of female empowerment . Although the theme of " Scheiße " is similar to the inspirational theme of other songs on Born This Way , The Village Voice questioned the sincerity of the feminist lyrics , after Gaga had once said , " I ’ m not a feminist . I hail men , I love men , " but calls herself on the song a " blond high @-@ heeled feminist enlisting femmes for this . " " [ Is this ] someone who we ’ re watching evolve or someone who , at any given point , doesn ’ t really know what she ’ s talking about ? " the article wrote of Gaga . The German word " <unk> " , the title of the song and a word frequently used in the song , translates into " shit " into English . Gaga repeatedly speaks in German sounding gibberish during the song , although in a French accent . 
 The song starts with Gaga saying , " I don 't speak German , but I can if you like " , then immediately launches into a spoken verse in faux @-@ German . She then moves to the hook of the song , " I ’ ll take you out tonight , say whatever you like , <unk> be mine " . Following the hook is a pre @-@ chorus backed by syncopated synths , with influences of techno music . The chorus of the song , in which Gaga includes the word " Scheiße " , is backed by " dueling screechy " synths . It is broken up by Gaga repeatedly singing in @-@ between lines " oh oh oh oh oh " in an electronically altered voice . The next verses , containing lyrics of Gaga being a strong woman , are all backed by " growling , guttural " synths , and are mixed with German and English . According to the sheet music published by Hal Leonard Corporation , " Scheiße " is written in the time signature of common time , with a tempo of 131 beats per minute . It is composed on the key of C minor , with Gaga 's voice spanning from F3 to C ♯ 5 . The song follows in the sequence of Cm – Cm / Cm – Eb / Gm as its chord progression . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Scheiße " received positive reviews from critics , with some calling it a highlight of the album . NME 's Dan Martin also found " Scheiße " comparable to a Madonna song , saying it " channels Miss <unk> doing a rave take on Madonna ’ s ' Erotica ' , " making it a " commanding pop song " and a " triumph " . The Village Voice called " Scheiße " a " highlight " of the album , but questioned the sincerity of the feminist lyrics . BBC Music called the song a " monster tune begging for a sex dungeon @-@ themed video event " . Kerri Manson of Billboard found the song to be " dated " , but strongly praised the chorus . Tim Jonze of The Guardian also found the chorus of the song " ridiculously catchy " and felt it was the most important aspect of the song . He also noticed Berlin techno influences in the song , which were described as " decadent . " Rolling Stone 's Jody Rosen , however , felt the chorus was " a whisp " and called the song 's beat " generic Eurodisco thump " . Gaga 's faux @-@ German lyrics were criticized by the magazine , which called it " gibberish that sounds German but isn 't . " Caryn Ganz from Spin called the opening lines of the song ( " I don 't speak German , but I can if you like " ) " hilariously ludicrous . " 
 Tris McCall , in New Jersey On @-@ Line , rewarded " Scheiße " as the " song of the week " and recommended it as Gaga 's next single from Born This Way , noting it to be " no less absurd " than the previous singles . McCall also noted Gaga 's gibberish lyrics and compared them to what a high school student group 's version of Cabaret would sound like . He concluded by praising the song 's production . <unk> 's Craig Jenkins said the song " cuts the karaoke crap and kicks ass on the dance floor " and " eschew [ s ] Born This Way ’ s time traveling ethos in favor of a more modern approach . " Ed <unk> from <unk> gave a mixed review of the German in the song , saying " the singer is not so much speaking the language of the German people , but updating it for the new millennium , enjoining this nation to move beyond its tragic history into a new era of love and dancing ... [ ' Scheiße ' ] reveals a certain disregard for both fact and reality . " Nathan Heller from Slate compared the song to Mediterranean dance tracks , while declaring it as being " custom @-@ tailored to an international audience " . 
 Despite not having been released as a single , the song entered the charts in different countries . In Germany , " Scheiße " debuted at number 90 , after Gaga had included parts of it in her performance at the Germany 's Next Topmodel TV show . Following the release of Born This Way , " Scheiße " peaked at number 13 on the International Digital Download chart in South Korea , jumping 21 positions from the previous week . It also peaked at number 136 on the UK Singles Chart , for one week . In the United States , the song reached number 11 on the Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart of Billboard . It also charted at number four on the Hot Dance / Electronic Digital Songs , as well as at number 67 on the Canadian Hot Digital Songs chart . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Lady Gaga included the song 's first verse in her performance at the Germany 's Next Topmodel TV show on June 6 , 2011 . She emerged from a well @-@ lit doorway wearing a turquoise wig , a black hat , and a long black dress and walked towards a piano . Only the German lines and the first line of the song were performed , after which Gaga moved to a piano decorated with dollar bills and sang an acoustic version of " Born This Way " . Ray Rodriguez of <unk> , in a review of the performance , stated that " Gaga took over the stage . Gaga always provides material to talk about . And their presentation was no exception and this time she was seen dancing across a row of cutters labeled with the words ' money ' , ' sex ' and ' vanity ' while scantily clad dancers threw her around the stage notes " and Charlie <unk> of The Hollywood Reporter stated that " Gaga dazzled German fans " . Becky Bain of Idolator was dismissive , arguing that " She [ Gaga ] Uh , she does know she 's performing on a show featuring models , right ? " 
 The opening faux @-@ German lines , first verse and chorus opened Gaga 's set at the iHeart Radio music festival in Las Vegas . " Scheiße " is performed on the Born This Way Ball world tour after her 2009 single " Paparazzi " . Gaga , with long blonde pigtails , performs a complex dance routine wearing a black top and pants , described by Miguel <unk> of CBS News as containing " solid dance @-@ beats " . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Lady Gaga – vocals , songwriter and producer 
 RedOne – songwriter , producer , vocal editing , vocal arrangement , audio engineering , instrumentation , programming , and recording at Tour Bus in Europe 
 Trevor Muzzy – recording , vocal editing , audio engineering , and audio mixing at Larrabee , North Hollywood , Los Angeles , California 
 Gene Grimaldi – audio mastering at Oasis Mastering , Burbank , California 
 Credits adapted from Born This Way album liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Halo Wars = 
 Halo Wars is a real @-@ time strategy ( RTS ) video game developed by Ensemble Studios and published by Microsoft Game Studios for the Xbox 360 video game console . It was released in Japan and Australia on February 26 , 2009 ; in Europe on February 27 ; and in North America on March 3 . The game is set in the science fiction universe of the Halo series in the year 2531 , 21 years before the events of Halo : Combat Evolved . The player leads human soldiers aboard the warship Spirit of Fire in an effort to stop an ancient fleet of ships from falling into the hands of the genocidal alien Covenant . 
 Halo Wars was unveiled at the X06 Xbox show in 2006 . Ensemble designed the game specifically for the Xbox 360 controller , in an attempt to circumvent issues present in previous console RTS . Ensemble was closed by Microsoft before the game 's release , but soon after Robot Entertainment was founded by many of Ensemble 's former employees ; this new company continued to support Halo Wars with updates and downloadable content . 
 Halo Wars received generally positive reviews . Reviewers lauded the game 's pre @-@ rendered cinematics , attention to detail in replicating the Halo universe , and intuitive control scheme . Complaints against the game included the lack of an option to play as the Covenant faction in campaign mode as well as the lack of strategic options during play . Critics from GameSpot and USA Today wrote that experienced RTS players would find the strategic elements of the title shallow . The game sold one million units worldwide through March 2009 , making it the best @-@ selling console real @-@ time strategy game to date . Halo Wars 2 , a sequel under development by Creative Assembly will be released February 2017 . An enhanced version of the game — Halo Wars : Definitive Edition — will be released for Windows and Xbox One . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Halo Wars is a real @-@ time strategy ( RTS ) video game developed exclusively for the Xbox 360 console , in which players command armies from a bird 's @-@ eye view of the battlefield . The game focuses on military combat , but contains streamlined resource management and base construction elements . It was designed with the Xbox 360 controller in mind ; for example , the A button is used for selecting units . A single tap of the button selects one unit , while a double tap selects all units of the same type . The d @-@ pad navigates to current battles and cycles through bases , while the right analog stick adjusts the camera angle . A radial menu is used for base construction . 
 Halo Wars features a story @-@ based , military campaign game mode that can be played alone or cooperatively over the Xbox Live service . A plotless multiplayer option , called " skirmish mode " , lets players compete against human or computer @-@ controlled opponents . The game features two factions the players can control : the human United Nations Space Command ( UNSC ) as Captain Cutter , Sergeant Forge , or Professor Anders , and the alien Covenant as Prophet Of Regret , Arbiter , or Brute Chieftain . Each faction has different units , strengths , and special abilities . There are three selectable " Leaders " for each side ; the chosen leader allows the use of specific units and upgrades during play . While Covenant Leaders appear on the battlefield as units , human leaders do not . 
 Combat in Halo Wars is balanced by a " rock @-@ paper @-@ scissors " system . In general , ground vehicles are effective in combat against infantry , infantry are effective against aircraft , and aircraft are effective against vehicles . Most units have a unique special ability ; for example , human Marines throw grenades , while the " Warthog " vehicle can run over enemies . Humans have access to their ship , the Spirit of Fire , and its special abilities , such as a powerful coilgun called a M.A.C. ( Magnetic Accelerator Cannon ) . Covenant units are generally weaker than their UNSC counterparts , but can use inexpensive and powerful defensive shield generators to add protection to their bases . Players establish their armies by building and expanding bases ; these are used to train units and to allocate resources to the research of upgrades and technologies . There are a limited number of potential locations for bases on each scenario or map , making base fortification and defense a priority . A player is defeated if all his or her bases are destroyed , unless a new base is quickly established . The army of a player must also be destroyed to be defeated . 
 Units are trained , buildings upgraded , and special abilities activated using resources known as " supplies " . Players can find supplies on the battlefield , or generate them by building supply structures at bases . Greater numbers of these buildings produce more supplies . Some structures and upgrades become available only after the player achieves a certain " tech level " . The UNSC can achieve multiple tech levels through the construction of reactors , with some actions requiring up to level four ; the Covenant builds a single temple that allows three upgrades of tech level . The Covenant has one fewer tech level , and each upgrade is more expensive . Destruction of a temple results in the loss of all tech until the temple is rebuilt . Each base has a limited amount of space , so players must balance their resource buildings with other facilities , such as those used to create military units . The number of units a player can deploy is limited , but certain upgrades ease this limit . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Halo Wars takes place in the science fictional universe of the Halo series , during the 26th century . In 2525 , a collective of alien races known as the Covenant attacked humanity , declaring humans an affront to their gods , the Forerunners . The game takes place in 2531 , roughly 20 years before the events of Halo : Combat Evolved . Six years after the Covenant invaded the colony of Harvest , human UNSC forces are still locked in battle on the planet . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 The commander of the UNSC warship Spirit of Fire is Captain James Cutter ( Gregg Berger ) , a strong leader who has earned the admiration of his subordinates . Cutter 's lack of political ambition prevents him from climbing the ranks further . Serving under Cutter is Sergeant John Forge ( Nolan North ) , a gruff Marine whose devotion to men has caused him to be jailed twice for disobeying orders and engaging in disorderly conduct . Joining the Spirit of Fire 's military expedition is Professor Ellen Anders ( Kim Mai Guest ) , a scientist interested in ancient ruins of the mysterious Forerunners . The Spirit of Fire is operated with help from <unk> ( Courtenay Taylor ) , a super @-@ intelligent artificial intelligence ( AI ) with a sardonic sense of humor ; it has been noted that she demonstrates a level of contempt for the humans she assists . Leading the Covenant search for Forerunner technology is a holy warrior known as the Arbiter ( David Sobolov ) , who the Covenant leaders , the Prophet Hierarchs , have tasked with the oversight of humanity 's destruction . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 The Spirit of Fire is sent to the ruined planet Harvest to investigate Covenant activity , where Cutter learns that the Covenant has excavated something at the planet 's northern pole . When the UNSC 's main outpost on Harvest is captured , Cutter orders Forge to retake it . Soon after , Forge scouts the Covenant excavation and discovers that they , under the direction of the Arbiter , have discovered a Forerunner facility . Forge 's troops defeat the Covenant forces before they can destroy the installation , and Anders arrives . She determines that the facility is an interstellar map , and recognizes a set of coordinates that points to the human colony of Arcadia . 
 After repelling a Covenant counterattack on the Forerunner facility , the Spirit of Fire travels to Arcadia , where the Covenant has begun raiding local cities and slaughtering civilians . Forge contacts the local Spartan special forces and assists with the evacuation process . The Covenant builds a giant energy shield to hide the construction of a gigantic Scarab super @-@ weapon , but the UNSC forces use experimental equipment to break through . The Scarab is destroyed , but the Arbiter kidnaps Anders and escapes the planet . 
 Forge and the Spartans return to the Spirit of Fire and the crew follows Anders ' signal to an uncharted planet in another star system . The planet 's surface is infested by the parasitic Flood , who attack and assimilate any sentient life they encounter . The Spirit of Fire inadvertently activates a Forerunner docking station and enters the planet 's interior . Flood board the ship , and very soon Forerunner Sentinels appear to cleanse the Flood threat and also to destroy all UNSC forces in the process . The crew discovers the planet is actually hollow , with a habitable interior and a miniature sun . The Covenant 's plan is to activate a dormant fleet of highly advanced Forerunner starships inside the planet , and use them to obliterate humanity . 
 While the Forerunner ships are being activated , Anders escapes through a teleportation device and is rescued . Cutter decides to destroy the Forerunner fleet rather than allow the Covenant to use it . Anders formulates a plan to detonate the ship 's faster @-@ than @-@ light drive in the planet 's sun , as the explosion would cause a supernova . Before they can prepare the reactor , Forge and the Spartans are ambushed by the Arbiter and his Elites . The Spartans dispatch the aliens and Forge kills the Arbiter . The reactor is damaged during the fight , necessitating a manual detonation . Forge volunteers for the suicidal task , telling the Spartans that they will be needed in the coming fight . The Spirit of Fire escapes just as Forge overloads the reactor , destroying the Forerunner fleet . Without its faster @-@ than @-@ light drive , the Spirit of Fire is left drifting in space . The crew enters cryonic sleep for long @-@ term storage as Cutter takes a last look at Forge 's empty cryonic tube . If the game is completed on the " Legendary " difficulty mode , <unk> wakes Cutter and tells him that " something has happened " . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Design = = = 
 Computer game developer Bungie Studios conceived Halo : Combat Evolved as a real @-@ time strategy game in which players would tactically control units and vehicles in a three @-@ dimensional environment . Microsoft acquired Bungie in 2000 , and the game became a first @-@ person shooter and " killer app " for the Xbox console . Bungie produced two best @-@ selling sequels , Halo 2 in 2004 and Halo 3 in 2007 , before separating from Microsoft and becoming an independent company once more . Although Bungie is free to produce new intellectual property , the rights to Halo remain with Microsoft . Shane Kim , the head of Microsoft Game Studios , said during the split announcement that " our intent is to continue investing in [ Halo ] and growing it . " 
 In 2004 , the Microsoft @-@ owned Ensemble Studios — developers of the Age of Empires strategy series — began work on the game that would become Halo Wars . The studio confirmed in April 2006 that it was working on a console @-@ based RTS . CEO Tony Goodman said , " We 're giving RTS games on the console a shot . We actually spent a whole year just trying to reconstruct how the controls would work on an RTS game . " Without revealing the title , Goodman described the game as being shorter and more visceral than their previous projects . 
 Halo Wars was originally not a Halo series title . Ensemble spent 12 to 18 months working on the control scheme , using the Age of Mythology engine . The development team hacked an Age of Mythology expansion , The Titans , and used it as a prototype for control experiments . Ensemble found that managing Age of Mythology 's resources , units , and buildings was too difficult with the console 's controller . " The answer [ to making a PC @-@ style strategy game for a console ] is actually hidden in the question , " Jason Pace , Microsoft Game Studio 's lead producer , told The New Zealand Herald . " It 's something we believe has held strategy games back from succeeding on the console : you can 't effectively bring a PC @-@ style strategy game to the console because the fundamental game mechanic is tied to the mouse and keyboard input devices . It 's not a question of just changing the control scheme to be gamepad friendly — you need to adapt the underlying strategy mechanic to make sense with the new input device . " Senior designer Justin Rouse said that the team kept the controls from the research they had conducted , but scrapped the rest in favor of " build [ ing ] from the floor up what we need [ ed ] : the basics , the core of a strategy game . " With the goal of making " the first great strategy game on the console " , Ensemble streamlined gameplay mechanics ; the game 's single resource is produced at each base site , which allows players to quickly cycle through their bases instead of micromanaging multiple resources at many locations . 
 Once the developers were satisfied with the controls , they presented their project to Microsoft , who suggested that it be turned into a Halo game . Bungie was reportedly not happy about this development . Ensemble 's Founder , Tony Goodman , stated in a 2012 interview that Bungie saw the move as " the whoring out of our franchise " 
 Although Ensemble had to re @-@ create all of Bungie 's assets from scratch , Bungie had produced a large amount of reference material for the Halo film adaptation that the Halo Wars team used for inspiration . Another reference point was art from the Halo first @-@ person shooters ; however , as the art was from a forward perspective and Halo Wars takes place from a bird 's @-@ eye view , the team exaggerated shapes to make the units recognizable . Lead designer Graeme Devine noted that the Warthog Jeep is " actually jumping three times as high as it does in Halo , and it goes four times faster than it does in Halo , and all these things — but it looks the same . Very different , between look and accuracy . " To ensure artistic continuity between Halo Wars and previous games in the series , Ensemble created a set of guidelines for their artists to follow ; for example , the Covenant were to retain their curvy , organic look , while the Forerunner and UNSC were to keep the same geometry angles . UNSC structures and units were given a green tint , with gold specular highlights . The Covenant were textured with a repeating honeycomb pattern , with small blue lights against a purple base color . 
 Devine described the challenge of developing Halo Wars as " getting Halo fans to play a realtime strategy game , and getting realtime strategy fans to play a Halo game . " " Fans of the [ first @-@ person shooter ] series have very strong expectations for how a Halo games looks , feels and plays . Halo is all about heroic action to save humanity , mega @-@ battles across the galaxy , visceral , highly @-@ tuned combat and heart @-@ pounding tension , " Pace said . These themes were considered fundamental to the Halo experience , and so Ensemble tried to replicate them for Halo Wars . Early in play tests , the developers watched devoted Halo fans play the game ; their feedback led to the development of special abilities , which , according to Devine , enhanced the Halo feel . Ensemble initially considered making the Flood a playable race , but this idea did not progress beyond the concept stage . According to Devine , this was largely because the Flood would have needed to be similar to StarCraft 's Zerg , in order to maintain balance with the UNSC and Covenant . This did not match the Flood 's role as " the single scariest thing in the galaxy " . 
 Because of the Master Chief 's large role in previous games , significant effort was expended on the Spartan units . Lead designer Dave Pottinger said the design team " started out just accepting and embracing the fact that the Spartans have to be the coolest unit in the game . If they 're not , it 's not going to meet the Halo fans ' expectations . " To position the Spartans as " <unk> " in gameplay , the team gave them what it considered to be the " coolest " unit ability : hijacking enemy vehicles . The developers hoped players would become attached to individual Spartans in the campaign and gave each one an individual name ; skirmish units were left nameless . The character design of the Spartans was meant to emphasize their relative inexperience and the setting of the game , which takes place decades before the events of the main trilogy . Devine commented on the Spartans ' look : 
 ... We felt because it was 20 years earlier , these are much younger Spartans . They aren 't quite as experienced as Master Chief , and we looked a lot at combat infantry going into actual wars , and typically at the beginning of a war , especially the Vietnam War , if you look at the infantry , they 're all loaded up . They have all the backpacks on , they have all the belts on , every single bit of armor is there , and they 're carrying around lots of armor . At the end of the war , they 've lost it all and just carry what they need . This is all they have . So if you look at our Spartans , they have more pieces of armor on going into the war . They have more markings on there , more pieces of armor . They 've still got the belts on , they 're still carrying around everything . 
 Ensemble expanded the Halo universe during the game 's development , in order to create enough units to give players strategic options . Among the new units was the Gorgon , a biped mech that used weapons called <unk> to destroy light aircraft . However , Ensemble later realized that the Gorgon invalidated a rule they had established : " anything with two legs that walks " was an infantry unit . Instead , the team added a new aircraft called the Vampire . The UNSC , meanwhile , lacked a melee unit to match the Covenant 's hand @-@ to @-@ hand power . Ensemble considered using the original , less advanced Spartan Mark I suits of armor , in keeping with Halo lore , but once added these units were indistinguishable from Spartans in appearance . Instead , they created a lumbering , mechanized unit called the Cyclops , a nod to Age of Mythology . 
 Time constraints prevented many elements from appearing in the final game . One such missing feature was a fatality system by which Spartans or Covenant leaders could inflict massive damage on large groups of units . Pottinger said that the animations , while interesting , did not mesh with the fast @-@ paced combat of Halo Wars and raised balance concerns . Other elements based on Halo fiction did not work in a strategy game . Although more than 100 people worked on the project , which cost tens of millions of dollars , a Covenant campaign was never realized because of a lack of manpower and money . 
 = = = Announcements = = = 
 Halo Wars was officially announced at Microsoft 's X06 media briefing on September 27 , 2006 , with a pre @-@ rendered trailer created by Blur Studio . The trailer depicts a group of Warthog vehicles searching for missing soldiers . Covenant Elites ambush the patrol and a battle ensues involving human and Covenant vehicles and infantry . The trailer ends with the arrival of Spartan reinforcements . GameSpy listed the trailer in its top 25 video game cinematic moments , because it showed " the world of Halo on a much grander scale " . 
 Halo Wars was exhibited at the Electronic Entertainment Expo ( E3 ) in 2007 and 2008 . Devine narrated the soundtrack for a video shown at E3 2007 , which was later made available on the Xbox Live Marketplace . This video described the game 's controls , user interface , vehicles , special weapons , and new units . It also showed a UNSC base consisting of an airbase , vehicle depot , missile silo , and other buildings . IGN , Next Generation , and PC World ranked Halo Wars as one of the most anticipated showings at E3 . 
 On September 10 , 2008 , Ensemble Studios announced that it would close after Halo Wars ' completion . Ensemble founder Tony Goodman and other employees announced the formation of a new studio , Robot Entertainment , shortly before the game 's release ; another group of ex @-@ staff created Bonfire Studios . Robot announced that , while developing new intellectual property , it would support Halo Wars and Age of Empires through a partnership with Microsoft Game Studios . 
 = = = Audio = = = 
 Halo Wars ' music was composed by Stephen Rippy , the composer for all of the Age of Empires games . Rippy wanted to write new material while maintaining continuity by reusing iconic elements of the Halo trilogy 's music , written by Martin O 'Donnell and partner Michael Salvatori . Consultation with O 'Donnell and Salvatori finished before Rippy became involved in the project , but the composer sent a compact disc of his work to O 'Donnell halfway through the writing process . Before starting work on Halo Wars , Rippy listened to previous Halo soundtracks and searched for useful material in discarded Ensemble projects ; " I 'm a big fan of both cataloging that stuff and stealing from it without remorse , " Rippy said . " Sometimes you don 't know what you 've got until you really , really need it . " Rippy and audio lead Kevin McMullan examined O 'Donnell 's tracks to identify elements to reuse in Halo Wars . <unk> his usual method of writing melodies before determining the method of sound production , Rippy built melodies around synthesizer patches or drum loops . He felt that scoring for science fiction was a change of pace from his previous work , which was written for historical settings . 
 Rippy began writing music for the game in April 2007 . " Some of the plot points of Halo Wars revolve around discovery , and I think that was my favorite idea to write to — that sense of , ' no one 's seen this before , ' " he said . The first two tracks combined repurposed elements from past projects with his efforts to convey the Halo sound . " <unk> " contained musical ideas Rippy had experimented with since his last project , Age of Empires III : The WarChiefs . " Bad Here Day " was the first piece in which he tried to incorporate the " Halo sound " . Rippy felt it important to avoid repeating too many old themes because he wanted the game to have its own identity ; however , he wanted to continue to incorporate choir and piano , elements he believed to be integral to the sound of previous Halo games . In adherence to an Ensemble Studios tradition , the tracks are often named after coined phrases and inside jokes , rather than in @-@ game events . 
 By the end of 2007 , Rippy had completed all of the gameplay music , including end credits , battle themes , and ambient world tracks . In the game 's skirmish mode , the music reflects the environment rather than the warring factions . To ensure that the character of the music changed depending on the environment , he followed self @-@ imposed rules ; one environment could feature guitars , but not piano , for instance . To musically unify each world , he added a short introductory piece containing common elements . In contrast with the skirmish mode , the campaign mode contains different recurring melodies for each major character and the human ship Spirit of Fire . Rippy 's most intensive work period was January 2008 , when he began writing music for the game 's cinematics ; by this point , he had been working on the score for nine months . Rippy finished the score by February 2008 , and , after three months , all tracks were ready to be recorded . 
 Although the previous live orchestrations for Halo games were performed by the Northwest Sinfonia in Seattle , Washington , Rippy chose the FILMharmonic Orchestra of Prague to record Halo Wars ' music . Rippy had been in Prague attending recording sessions for Age of Empires III : The Asian Dynasties and loved both the city and the sound the orchestra produced . The lower cost of recording in Eastern Europe was an additional benefit . The March 10 – 15 recording sessions involved 24 vocalists and 45 instrumentalists ; choir and string sections were later overdubbed to enlarge the sound . In all , roughly 65 minutes of Halo Wars ' 75 @-@ minute score were recorded in Prague . The final touches and production took place in Seattle ; O 'Donnell attended one of the mixing sessions . 
 Rippy used the <unk> Wwise pipeline to create dynamic music that changes with the action in the game . Although Rippy used Wwise 's tools only for dynamic music , they made audio system setup much easier than in previous Ensemble games . For each battle sequence , the musical cue was divided into sections and mixed differently for each section . " When a cue is triggered , an intro plays and then the game randomly picks between all of those elements for as long as the battle continues , " Rippy explained . " Once it 's over , an outro plays and then it 's back to the regular " world " music . It was an interesting way to work , and I 'd like to push it further if there 's an opportunity in the future . " 
 Four tracks from Halo Wars were included as a preview on a bonus DVD bundled with Halo Trilogy — The Complete Original Soundtracks , a December 2008 compilation of previous Halo music . The tracks were mixed in Dolby Digital 5 @.@ 1 @-@ channel Surround Sound and packaged with video of recording sessions and the " Five Long Years " trailer . The soundtrack was released on February 17 as a standalone compact disc and as a digital download . AOL Radio secured the exclusive rights to premiere the soundtrack early , playing a new track at the beginning of every hour . 
 = = Release = = 
 The pre @-@ release playable demo for Halo Wars was first mentioned in the October 2007 issue of Official Xbox Magazine , and it became available for download on February 5 , 2009 ; redemption codes for early access were given starting January 29 . According to Microsoft , the game demo was downloaded by more than 2 million Xbox Live Gold members in the first five days , and set a record for most demo downloads on the service . 
 In addition to the standard retail version , a Limited Collector 's Edition of Halo Wars was made available . To attract Halo 3 's player base , Microsoft bundled early access to the Mythic Map Pack , a collection of three Halo 3 multiplayer maps , with the collector 's edition . A 48 @-@ page , half @-@ size hardcover graphic novel was also included ; titled Halo Wars : Genesis , it was created by Phil Noto , Graeme Devine , and Eric Nylund . It explores the background stories of Anders , the Arbiter , Forge and Cutter . Other bonuses included a unique in @-@ game vehicle , trading cards , and a Spirit of Fire patch . Players who pre @-@ ordered the game from certain retailers received a special in @-@ game Warthog vehicle with flame decals . GameStop announced that on February 28 , 2009 , one thousand stores in the United States would hold Halo Wars tournaments , and two thousand GameStop stores held midnight releases for the game . European markets sold a " Best of Halo " bundle of Halo Wars , Halo 3 and an Xbox 360 . 
 On release , Halo Wars reached second place on the United Kingdom weekly sales charts behind Killzone 2 . Halo Wars reached only 16 @.@ 7 % of Halo 3 's first @-@ week sales , but it outsold Command & Conquer 3 : Tiberium Wars threefold , making it the fastest @-@ selling console strategy game . The following week , Halo Wars 's sales were ranked fifth . In Australia , Halo Wars ' weekly sales ranked highest , ahead of Killzone 2 . By March 12 , the limited edition and standard version were ranked second and third , respectively , on the United States Xbox 360 sales charts , behind Call of Duty : World at War . Gamasutra attributed the surge in Halo 3 sales to the release of Halo Wars ; the former was fourth in the United States and second in Australia in sales of Xbox 360 games , and reappeared on the list of top 20 United States console games for February . 
 Before the game 's release , industry analyst Michael Pachter estimated that Halo Wars would sell 2 million units . On March 19 , 2009 , Microsoft announced that the game had sold 1 million units and that players had spent 118 total years of time in online skirmish matches . According to NPD Group 's March sales figures , Halo Wars sold 639 @,@ 000 copies in North America through March , making it the third best @-@ selling game in the market . 
 In June 2016 , Microsoft announced Halo Wars : Definitive Edition — an enhanced version of the game — for Windows and Xbox One . The Definitive Edition will be included with Ultimate Edition version of Halo Wars 2 . 
 = = Downloadable content = = 
 After Ensemble 's closing , Robot Entertainment announced that it was developing downloadable content ( DLC ) for Halo Wars . Pottinger described support as ongoing rather than a one @-@ time effort and compared it to Bungie 's post @-@ launch additions to Halo 3 . He stated that Robot would also work on balance issues , bug fixes , and other patches . 
 The first DLC package , Strategic Options , added three new multiplayer modes . " <unk> " is similar to capture the flag ; in it , players try to capture and hold Forerunner units . In " Tug @-@ of @-@ war " , players earn points by fielding large armies and destroying enemy units . In " Reinforcement " , players receive units as reinforcements , rather than training them at bases . The amount of available resources and reactors determines which types of units are deployed and the upgrades they can earn . Strategic Options was released on May 19 , 2009 , after a patch that addressed software bugs and game balance issues . The update garnered criticism for its small size ( 2 megabytes ) and high price ( 800 Microsoft Points ) . Pottinger responded on the Halo Wars forums that the game modes were small downloads " because they are rules . There is some new content , but it 's obviously a different type of content compared to a map . " Robot released a second DLC package on July 21 , 2009 . The DLC , dubbed " Historic Battles " , contains four additional maps and four new Xbox Live achievements . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Halo Wars garnered generally positive reviews . The game has an average of 82 / 100 on aggregate web site Metacritic . Critics were split on whether Halo Wars was a successful console translation of the RTS genre . GameSpy 's Allen Rausch argued that , as Halo : Combat Evolved showed that first @-@ person shooters could work on consoles , Halo Wars " is an RTS ... on a console ... and it works " . Tom Price of TeamXbox said that gamers have been waiting a long time for a console RTS " to get it right " , and Halo Wars did so ; reviewers for Official Xbox Magazine credited Ensemble with creating a strategy game that felt " absolutely at home on the console " , rather than a " poorly shoehorned ... port " of a PC game with clumsy controls . 1UP 's Thierry Nguyen was neutral about whether it was a good RTS game or Halo title , but called it a " solid beginning towards what could be a really good console RTS " . Digital Trends ' Scott Steinberg said that , while not perfect , Halo Wars made a strong case for the viability of RTS on consoles ; " There 's certainly the potential to have PC holdouts seriously reconsidering hoisting the controller . " Peter Hartlaub of the San Francisco Chronicle offered a dismissive summation of the game as " a remedial game — real @-@ time strategy for dummies " , and stated that the game offered relatively little innovation when compared to other Halo titles . 
 Reviewers generally praised Halo Wars 's controls . Critics who were less experienced RTS players , such as Darren Zenko of the Toronto Star , appreciated the streamlined RTS experience . In contrast , critics such as Luke Anderson of GameSpot said that the game lacked the depth necessary to attract more seasoned RTS players . Some critics were frustrated by the lack of control features — specifically , the ability to create and manage groups of units , the lack of hotkeys , the inability to set rally points for different units , and the need to return to the base to adjust production . Nguyen wrote that " finesse maneuvers [ ... ] are more difficult to pull off than they should be " . Brett Molina of USA Today said that experts would find the action oversimplified , but that the game " is an excellent choice for fans of the Halo universe and players new to real @-@ time strategy " . Reviewers for GameSpy , G4tv , and Eurogamer stated that the controls worked well mainly because the developers omitted features to make most options quickly available ; for example , limiting base construction to select areas made sure players could easily find their buildings . 
 Reviewers considered the factions balanced . Eurogamer 's Kieron Gillen commented that the Covenant was harder to master , especially because the campaign served as a tutorial for the UNSC , but no similar introduction was available for the Covenant . However , he said the two sides were " authentically different " , and each offered its own challenges to players . Some critics , such as Nick Cowen of The Daily Telegraph , wished that the Flood was a playable faction ; in contrast , Ryan Geddes of IGN disliked the Flood and appreciated their exclusion . Will Porter of IGN UK enjoyed the rock @-@ paper @-@ scissors RTS mechanics , but said that " since the game is singularly crap at indicating which units are rocks and which scissors , " players had to learn which units were best via trial and error , an issue that was more prevalent with the Covenant . 
 The game 's plot was well received . Reviewers praised the game 's cinematics and voice acting . Geddes said the story was good , but not on par with those of Bungie 's Halo games , and that most of the characters were stereotypical and somewhat unlikable . Critics noted that for a strategy game , the campaign was rather short , with only 15 missions ; Nate Ralph of Wired completed each in fewer than 40 minutes . Jon Wilcox of Total Video Games wrote " there 's an ebb and flow " to the gameplay , with " lengthy chapters cut with shorter punchy ones or time @-@ based missions , all together creating a surprisingly compelling experience " . Wilcox said the additions of performance @-@ based medals added replay value to the campaign . Price said that , although the story and mission structure of the game was fairly standard , levels that were " rote " in other RTS games seemed more substantial in Halo Wars . Reviewers such as Geddes , Wilcox , and Patrick Kolan of IGN UK said that the lack of a Covenant campaign was an unfortunate omission . 
 Publications judged the multiplayer aspect of the game well . Wilcox noted that , although the multiplayer mode " added [ nothing ] new [ to RTS games ] , at the very least it 's a solid experience that expands the longevity of Halo Wars . " Adam Biessener of Game Informer wrote that Halo Wars gameplay was better against human players , as campaign " gimmicks " and poor artificial intelligence were not an issue . The Mirror 's Kevin Lynch found fault with the " limited " variety of game modes . 
 Critics generally agreed that Ensemble re @-@ created the Halo universe 's aesthetic well . Gillen said knowledge of the game universe could alleviate some issues of player ignorance regarding units ' actions : " It 's not just the geek thrill of seeing a Scarab in action — it 's that you understand what the Scarab means on the battlefield ( trouble ) , " he wrote . " We know which characters are best against tanks , and which are probably best in special vehicles . " Nguyen said that , although the core units meshed well , the inclusion of Ensemble @-@ developed units gave Halo Wars the feeling of a generic science @-@ fiction title . While giving the game a mixed review , Anderson said that the authentic @-@ looking units and environments went a long way to integrating the game with the rest of the series . Wilcox commented that with the Halo @-@ inspired menu system and Rippy 's score , " before the campaign even begins , the message is clear : this is still very much a Halo game . " Overall , Halo Wars was judged a fitting final game for Ensemble . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 On August 4 , 2015 , Microsoft announced Halo Wars 2 , developed by Creative Assembly with assistance from 343 Industries . The game is set for release in February 2017 for the Xbox One and Windows 10 . 
 = Jonathan Sánchez = 
 Jonathan Omar Sánchez ( born November 19 , 1982 ) , nicknamed " The Kid , " or " The Comeback Kid , " is a Puerto Rican professional baseball pitcher who is a free agent . A left @-@ handed starter , Sánchez 's pitching repertoire consists of a low @-@ to @-@ mid 90s mph fastball , a change @-@ up , and a slurve in the 80s . 
 After being drafted by the San Francisco Giants in 2004 , Sánchez quickly worked his way through the Giants ' minor league system . In 2006 , he was called up to the major leagues and was used mostly in a long relief role . In 2007 , he made the team out of spring training and was again used mostly in long relief , though he spent part of his season in the minors . In 2008 , he made the Giants ' starting rotation and remained in it for the entire year , except for a stint on the disabled list . 
 Sánchez began 2009 as a starter but was moved to the bullpen during the season . He was returned to the rotation on July 10 because of an injury to fellow starter Randy Johnson , however , and he threw a no @-@ hitter against the San Diego Padres that day . In 2010 , Sánchez struck out 200 batters for the first time and was a member of the Giants team that won the World Series . He was traded to the Kansas City Royals in 2012 , who traded him to the Colorado Rockies after he struggled in the first half of the season . He began 2013 with the Pittsburgh Pirates . 
 = = High school and college = = 
 Sánchez attended Blanca <unk> High School in Sabana Grande , Puerto Rico . After graduating in 2000 , Sánchez pitched for four seasons at Ohio Dominican University in Columbus , Ohio . While at the university , Sánchez threw four no @-@ hitters and set school records for most strikeouts in a single game ( sixteen ) , most strikeouts in a single season ( 105 ) , most strikeouts in a career ( 311 ) , and most shutouts in a career ( ten ) . However , his final collegiate appearance was arguably his worst , as he was saddled with the loss in the Panthers ' NAIA regional playoff defeat to Saint Vincent College , going five innings and allowing six runs on six hits . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Draft and minor leagues = = = 
 Sánchez was selected by the San Francisco Giants in the twenty @-@ seventh round ( 820th overall ) of the 2004 MLB draft . In his first year of professional ball , he went 7 – 1 with a 3 @.@ 72 ERA in fifteen games ( nine were starts ) with the Rookie league Arizona League Giants and the Single @-@ A ( short @-@ season ) Salem @-@ Keizer Volcanoes . While pitching in the Arizona League , he tied for third in the league in wins , with five . 
 Sánchez was promoted to the Single @-@ A Augusta GreenJackets of the South Atlantic League in 2005 . He went 5 – 7 with a 4 @.@ 08 ERA in twenty @-@ five starts , but he led the South Atlantic League in strikeouts with 166 , averaged 11 @.@ 9 in nine innings pitched , and was selected to the league 's All @-@ star team . During the offseason , Sánchez pitched for the Carolina club of the Puerto Rican Professional Baseball League , posting a 2 – 2 record with a 2 @.@ 91 ERA in 19 relief appearances . 
 Coming into 2006 , Sánchez was ranked as the sixth best prospect in the Giants ' organization by Baseball America . He began the 2006 season with the Double @-@ A Connecticut Defenders , where in thirteen appearances ( three starts ) he went 2 – 1 with a 1 @.@ 15 ERA and forty @-@ six strikeouts . 
 = = = San Francisco Giants ( 2006 – 2011 ) = = = 
 = = = = 2006 = = = = 
 Sánchez was called up to the Giants on May 26 , 2006 , as a reliever . He made his MLB debut two days later on May 28 against the Colorado Rockies . He pitched one inning in relief and retired all three batters he faced ( Todd Helton , Matt Holliday , and Garrett Atkins ) . His performance was overshadowed , however , because Barry Bonds hit his 715th home run in the same game to surpass Babe Ruth for second place on the all @-@ time home run list . 
 On June 4 , Sánchez picked up his first major league win . With the score tied at six in the eleventh inning against the New York Mets , Sánchez entered the game and pitched a scoreless inning . The Giants won the game 7 – 6 in the twelfth on an RBI single by Pedro Feliz . 
 Sánchez posted a 2 – 0 record with a 1 @.@ 37 ERA in twenty @-@ two games in his first stint with the team . On July 29 , the Giants sent him to their AAA affiliate , the Fresno Grizzlies , to improve his abilities as a starter . While at Fresno , he went 2 – 2 with a 3 @.@ 80 ERA in six starts . With the expansion of the MLB rosters on September 1 , Sánchez was recalled from Fresno . 
 Sánchez won his first major league start on September 6 ( in place of Noah Lowry , who was injured ) , giving up one run in 5 ⅔ innings pitched in a 3 – 2 victory over the Cincinnati Reds . After that , Sánchez replaced Brad Hennessey in the rotation . However , Sánchez did not pitch well in his last four appearances of the season ( one came in relief ) , as he had an 11 @.@ 36 ERA in them . 
 = = = = 2007 = = = = 
 Entering the 2007 season , Sánchez was ranked as the second best prospect in the Giants ' organization ( behind only Tim Lincecum ) by Baseball America . Sánchez made the Giants ' roster out of spring training . He struggled in his first fourteen games , however , and was sent down to Fresno on May 21 when Russ Ortiz came off the disabled list . Sánchez returned to the majors on June 6 when , coincidentally , Ortiz got hurt again . On June 13 , he picked up his first major league hit ( an RBI double ) in a 7 – 4 loss to the Toronto Blue Jays . On July 4 , he was placed on the disabled list with a strained rib cage , but he was reactivated on July 18 . 
 Sánchez was sent back to Fresno on August 11 to make room for Brian Wilson on the roster . He returned in September , and he replaced Lowry ( who was injured ) in the rotation . He made four starts , but he lost three of them and had a 7 @.@ 16 ERA in all four of them . After straining his left oblique muscle in his fourth start , he was shut down for the rest of the season and replaced in the rotation by Travis Blackley . He finished the year 1 – 5 with a 5 @.@ 88 ERA in thirty @-@ three games ( four starts ) . 
 = = = = 2008 = = = = 
 In 2008 , Sánchez made the Giants ' starting rotation out of spring training as the fifth starter . In only his second start of the season , he struck out a career high ten batters against the San Diego Padres in a game the Giants eventually won 1 – 0 . Sánchez struck out ten batters again in a 3 – 1 victory against the Cincinnati Reds on April 25 , becoming the first Giants left @-@ handed pitcher since Shawn Estes to strike out at least ten batters in a game more than once in a season . From May 28 through June 12 , Sánchez won a career best four straight starts . On June 12 , in a 10 – 7 victory over the Colorado Rockies , he became the first Giants ' starter to allow seven runs and win a game since Russ Ortiz did it in 2000 . In his next start , on June 17 against the Detroit Tigers , Sánchez took a no @-@ hitter into the sixth inning , but he was ultimately the losing pitcher in a 5 – 1 loss . Sánchez finished the first half with an 8 – 5 record and 115 strikeouts , which were the most ever in the first half of a season by a Giants ' left @-@ hander during the Giants ' tenure in San Francisco . 
 The second half did not go well for Sánchez . He lost five straight decisions starting on July 9 before getting placed on the disabled list on August 16 . In his last start before going on the disabled list , he no @-@ hit the Houston Astros through five innings . However , he was the losing pitcher in a 3 – 1 loss . Sánchez returned on September 1 , but lost his sixth straight game as the Colorado Rockies prevailed by a score of 4 – 0 . He finally ended his losing streak on September 12 , when he was the winning pitcher in a 5 – 2 win over the San Diego Padres . Sánchez did not win another game all year , though , and he finished the second half of the season with a 1 – 7 record . Sánchez still finished with a 9 – 12 record , and he struck out 157 batters in 158 innings . 
 = = = = 2009 = = = = 
 Sánchez was again the fifth starter in the Giants ' rotation in 2009 . The season did not start well for him , though , as he had a 2 – 8 record in the first part of the year . On June 28 , Ryan Sadowski replaced him in the rotation . 
 Sánchez did not stay in the bullpen very long though . After Randy Johnson strained his shoulder , Sánchez was chosen to start against the San Diego Padres on July 10 . In that game , Sánchez not only threw the first complete game and the first shutout of his career ; he threw a no @-@ hitter , becoming the first Giants ' pitcher to do so since John Montefusco no @-@ hit the Atlanta Braves in 1976 . In the process , Sánchez struck out a new career high of eleven batters . Sánchez had a perfect game going into the eighth inning , but an error by Juan Uribe allowed the only baserunner of the night . Sánchez almost lost the no @-@ hitter during the ninth inning when Edgar Gonzalez hit a ball deep to centerfield . However , Aaron Rowand made a spectacular catch , and Sánchez got his no @-@ hitter . Sánchez 's no @-@ hitter was also special because his father <unk> , who had never seen his son start a major league game , was in attendance . 
 The no @-@ hitter proved to be a turning point in Sánchez 's season , as he went 6 – 4 the rest of the way to finish with an 8 – 12 record . He remained in the rotation for the entire time . Sánchez also struck out 177 batters in 163 @.@ 1 innings for a 9 @.@ 75 average per nine innings . This was good for fourth in the National League , behind only Tim Lincecum , Yovani Gallardo , and Javier Vázquez . 
 = = = = 2010 = = = = 
 Sánchez was arbitration eligible to begin 2010 , but he avoided arbitration by signing a one @-@ year contract with the Giants . He was named the fourth starter out of spring training this time . Sánchez began started strong in 2010 , as he was 7 – 6 by the All @-@ Star break . Because of injuries to the Giants ' left @-@ handed relief pitchers , Sánchez made his only relief appearance of the year on July 30 in a 6 – 5 win over the Los Angeles Dodgers . On August 3 , Sánchez tied Juan Marichal 's record when he struck out seven straight batters in a 10 – 0 win over the Colorado Rockies . Two months later , on the last day of the season , Sánchez started against the San Diego Padres . Sánchez pitched five shutout innings , scored the first run after hitting a triple in the third inning , and was the winning pitcher in a 3 – 0 win . The win sent the Giants to the playoffs for the first time since 2003 . 
 In Game three of the 2010 NLDS against the Atlanta Braves , Sánchez struck out eleven batters in a game the Giants won 3 – 2 . Sánchez gave up three runs over six innings in Game two of the 2010 NLCS , but he was the losing pitcher in a 6 – 1 loss . Sánchez also started Game six . He only lasted two innings , giving up two runs and getting pulled from the game after an argument with Chase Utley . However , the Giants won the game 3 – 2 and returned to the World Series . Sánchez 's only World Series game was unsuccessful , as he gave up all four runs in 4 @.@ 2 innings in the Giants ' 4 – 2 loss to the Texas Rangers in Game three . However , the Giants ultimately won the World Series for the first time in fifty @-@ six years . 
 Sánchez was arbitration @-@ eligible following the season , but the Giants avoided arbitration with him by signing him to a one @-@ year contract . 
 = = = = 2011 = = = = 
 Sánchez started the season 2nd in the Giants ' rotation , as to split the righties Lincecum and Cain , as well as to split the <unk> Sánchez , Zito , and Bumgarner . He did not fare well early in the season , and was placed on the DL shortly before Barry Zito was activated in June . When Sánchez returned from the DL , he was still experiencing the control problems that had plagued him before he was injured . Sánchez sprained his foot in August while on the road in Atlanta , and remained on the DL until the end of the season , ending with a line of 4 – 7 W / L ; 4 @.@ 26 ERA ; 101 @.@ 1 IP ; 102 Ks ; 66 <unk> ; .220 Opp AVG ; and a WHIP of 1 @.@ 44 . 
 = = = Kansas City Royals ( 2012 ) = = = 
 On November 7 , 2011 , Sánchez was traded to the Kansas City Royals with prospect Ryan Verdugo for outfielder Melky Cabrera . He struggled with the Royals , pitching to a 1 @-@ 6 record and 7 @.@ 76 ERA in 53 1 ⁄ 3 innings , while allowing 65 hits , including eight home runs , and 44 walks . After allowing seven runs on seven hits and one walk in 1 1 ⁄ 3 innings in a start against the Seattle Mariners , the Royals designated Sánchez for assignment on July 17 , 2012 . 
 = = = Colorado Rockies ( 2012 ) = = = 
 The Royals traded Sánchez to the Colorado Rockies for Jeremy Guthrie on July 20 . He only made 3 starts for the Rockies and was 0 @-@ 3 with a 9 @.@ 53 ERA . 
 = = = Pittsburgh Pirates ( 2013 ) = = = 
 The Pirates signed Sánchez to a minor @-@ league deal on February 6 , 2013 . The deal included an invitation to spring training . Sanchez made the team and was in the starting rotation to begin the season . On April 26 , 2013 , he was ejected for the first time in his MLB career by umpire Tim Timmons after intentionally pitching at St. Louis Cardinals batter Allen Craig following back @-@ to @-@ back home runs by Matt Carpenter and Carlos Beltrán and a single by Matt Holliday . After posting an 11 @.@ 85 ERA with the Pirates , he was designated for assignment on April 30 , and was later released on May 8 . 
 = = = Los Angeles Dodgers = = = 
 On May 13 , 2013 , Sánchez signed a minor league contract with the Los Angeles Dodgers . After spending a month at the Dodgers extended spring training location in Arizona , Sánchez joined the AAA Albuquerque Isotopes on June 24 . He made 14 starts and was 7 @-@ 3 with a 5 @.@ 13 ERA . 
 = = = Chicago Cubs = = = 
 On December 18 , 2013 , Sánchez signed a minor league deal with the Chicago Cubs . He was released on July 2 , 2014 . 
 = = = Cincinnati Reds = = = 
 On January 29 , 2016 , Sánchez signed a minor league deal with the Cincinnati Reds . He was released on March 18 . 
 = = International play = = 
 Sánchez was chosen to pitch for Puerto Rico in the 2009 World Baseball Classic . He made two starts in the Classic . He won the first one on March 11 by pitching four scoreless innings in a 5 – 0 victory over the Netherlands . Although he only pitched 22 ⁄ 3 innings and gave up three runs in his next start against the United States , he was in line for the win going into the ninth inning . However , J. C. Romero and Fernando Cabrera blew the lead , and the United States knocked Puerto Rico out of the Classic with a 6 – 5 victory . 
 = = Pitch repertoire = = 
 Sánchez throws a fastball that travels about ninety @-@ one mph for his main pitch , though it sometimes can go up to ninety @-@ five mph . His other pitches ( slurve and change @-@ up ) travel in the low eighties . Wildness has been a problem for Sánchez ; he has walked 10 % – 15 % of major @-@ league batters faced each season . However , he also strikes out a lot of batters ; he struck out two hundred for the first time in his career in 2010 . That year , he led all qualifying MLB starting pitchers in limiting hits per innings pitched ( 6 @.@ 61 H / 9 ) , and his career swinging @-@ strike percentage is among the best in the majors . 
 = Devil May Care ( Faulks novel ) = 
 Devil May Care is a James Bond continuation novel written by Sebastian Faulks . It was published in the UK by Penguin Books on 28 May 2008 , the 100th anniversary of the birth of Ian Fleming , the creator of Bond . The story centres on Bond 's investigation into Dr Julius Gorner , a megalomaniac chemist with a deep @-@ seated hatred of England . 
 Faulks wrote the book in the style of Fleming , and the novel carried the credit " Sebastian Faulks writing as Ian Fleming " ; he also took the same timeframe as Fleming , setting the novel in 1967 , following the events in Fleming 's last novel The Man with the Golden Gun . He ignored the influences of the other Bond continuation authors and the films , producing a characterisation of Bond in the style of Fleming 's . 
 The novel was broadly well received by critics and went into the best @-@ seller lists by the end of the first week of sales , selling 44 @,@ 093 copies in four days to become the fastest @-@ selling fiction book after the Harry Potter titles . Faulks stated that although he enjoyed writing the book , he would write no more Bond novels . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The story is set in the 1960s . Bond is instructed by his superior , M , to investigate a man named Dr Julius Gorner , and his bodyguard , Chagrin . Bond is warned that his performance will be monitored and that a new 00 agent is waiting in the wings if his actions go awry . 
 Bond flies to Imperial Iran ( Persia ) to investigate . Gorner owns factories and produces legitimate pharmaceuticals , however MI6 suspects he has other motives . During Bond 's investigation he identifies Gorner due to a deformity of his hand , and establishes Gorner 's complicity in a scheme to not only flood Europe with cheap drugs but also to launch a two @-@ pronged terrorist attack on the Soviet Union , whose retaliation will subsequently devastate the UK . The attack is to be made using a stolen British airliner , earlier hijacked over Iraqi airspace , and an <unk> . Bond is assisted in his investigation by Scarlett Papava ( whose twin sister Poppy is under Gorner 's emotional spell ) , Darius <unk> ( the local head of station ) , JD Silver ( an in @-@ situ agent ) , and Felix Leiter . 
 Bond is eventually captured by Gorner in the heroin plant , who explains that Bond is to be used as bait during a drugs delivery across the Afghan desert , and should he survive an expected ambush , is to fly the captured airliner into the Russian heartland . Bond would be identified as British upon its destruction , increasing the evidence against the British Government . Bond survives the predicted Afghan attack and plots an escape attempt , which sees Scarlett get away due to Bond surrendering himself as a diversion . In the morning he is taken aboard the aeroplane . Before the airliner can bomb the Soviets , with the aid of the airliner 's pilot and Scarlett ( who had been hiding on board ) , Bond regains control of the aeroplane and crashes it into a mountainside after parachuting to safety . 
 Meanwhile , Felix Leiter and Darius inform agent Silver of the second method of attack . Silver shows himself to be a double agent by failing to call in an airstrike against the <unk> and by attempting to kill Leiter and Darius . In the shoot @-@ out Darius successfully calls in the airstrike at the cost of his own life and Leiter survives only thanks to the timely arrival of Hamid , his taxi driver . The <unk> is destroyed by RAF Vulcan bombers before it reaches its target . Bond and Scarlett escape through Russia but are pursued by Chagrin , who Bond finally kills on a train . Later Gorner meets him on a boat and tries to shoot him , but Bond pushes him off , where he is torn to pieces by a propeller . With the subsequent elimination of both Chagrin and Gorner , Bond considers his mission a success , and on condition that the agent M has waiting in the wings will not take his place Bond is sent to assess the new agent , designated 004 . She turns out to be Scarlett Papava . Scarlett discloses that the story of her twin sister was a ploy to convince Bond to enable her to join the mission . Papava feared that if Bond knew she was a potential 00 agent , he would not have worked with her . With Bond returning to active duty , Scarlett moves off to her own operations as a full 00 agent . 
 = = Characters and themes = = 
 The central character of the novel is James Bond , the fictional MI6 agent created by Ian Fleming . Faulks modelled his version of the character on Fleming 's version , ignoring the other continuation authors and the films ; when interviewed , Faulks said that " My Bond is Fleming 's Bond — not Connery , or Moore or Craig , for all their charms " , going on to say that " my Bond drinks and smokes as much as ever " . Faulks saw Bond as a man in constant peril : " This Bond , this solitary hero with his soft shoes and single under @-@ powered weapon , was a man in dreadful danger . You feared for him . " On another occasion he returned to the theme , describing the character as " a very vulnerable man , with his nice suit and soft shoes and ludicrously underpowered gun . He finds himself in terrible situations , and he 's all on his own — you just worry for his safety . " 
 With the novel following the fictional timeframe of The Man with the Golden Gun , Bond is still in a state of decline following the death of his wife , and has been forced to take a sabbatical on medical grounds . His mind and body were feeling the effects of his previous missions and lifestyle and he was considering M 's offer of a desk job ; before he can make the decision , M sends him out on another mission . 
 For the main female character in the book , Faulks created Scarlett Papava , a fellow MI6 agent who is promoted to the 00 section at the end of the novel . Academic Tony Garland draws a similarity between Papava and the John Gardner character <unk> von <unk> , as they both create " a tension between mission and desire . " Faulks himself considered that : " My female lead — the ' Bond girl ' — has a little more depth than Fleming 's women , but not at the expense of glamour " , although Christopher Hitchens complained that " there is almost no sex until the very last pages . " 
 The primary antagonist of the novel is Dr Julius Gorner , a chemist with main de singe , monkey 's paw : a left hand resembling that of a monkey , covered with hair and without an opposed thumb . Writer Ian Thomson sees Gorner as being " a villain to rival the half @-@ Chinese Dr Julius No " , describing him as " a megalomaniac in the cruel lineage of <unk> " . When mocked as a student at Oxford because of his hand , he became obsessed with destroying England . Gorner was Lithuanian by birth , which was a nod by Faulks to Auric Goldfinger 's Baltic background , whilst his cheating in a game of tennis against Bond was " a deliberate twin to golf with Auric Goldfinger ; there is even a sinister Asian manservant — Chagrin , nodding across literary time to Oddjob — who helps his boss to cheat . " Academic Marc DiPaolo also noted a similarity between Gorner 's plans to take over the media and destroy British culture from within and the actions of Rupert Murdoch . 
 The main theme of the novel is drugs , which Faulks said came partly from the timeframe of the novel and partly from Fleming not using it as a major theme : " 1967 , the summer of love ... Drugs were first coming to public notice . The Stones were busted , and there was that famous leader in The Times . And , you know , what are we talking about now all the time ? Drugs . It 's still very resonant . And there 's little about drug @-@ dealing in Fleming . It 's not something he did in any depth . " Faulks also wanted to broaden the aspect of the story compared to Fleming : " The book is set during the Cold War and I wanted it to not just be a crime story but to also have a political background . I was also determined that although the book is set in 1967 , I wanted the issues that it touches on to still be alive to us today " . 
 = = Background = = 
 During May 2006 Sebastian Faulks was approached by Ian Fleming Publications and asked to write a Bond book for Ian Fleming 's centenary . Although he initially refused , he was persuaded after he re @-@ read Fleming 's novels and the company gave him an article by Fleming in 1962 — How to Write a Thriller — which revealed that he wrote each Bond book in only six weeks . Faulks copied elements of Fleming 's routine , joking that " In his house in Jamaica , Ian Fleming used to write 1000 words in the morning , then go snorkelling , have a cocktail , lunch on the terrace , more diving , another 1000 words in the late afternoon , then more martinis and glamorous women . In my house in London , I followed this routine exactly , apart from the cocktails , the lunch and the snorkelling . " 
 The novel carried the unusual credit of " Sebastian Faulks writing as Ian Fleming " and Faulks described how — using Fleming 's article — he had employed the same style as Fleming did in his novels : " it 's standard journalistic : no semicolons , few adverbs , few adjectives , short sentences , a lot of verbs , a lot of concrete nouns . These are the tools , and that 's literally the style . " Faulks also commented that " some people find it perplexing but I think the way that the book has been presented ... is a clever way of showing that it is not my book , although , of course , it is my book . " A large part of Devil May Care is set in Persia ( now Iran ) ; it was an area Fleming had not previously dealt with in his Bond novels , describing it as " full of thieves and crooks " . Faulks said of his choice of location that Fleming " didn 't set any of his books there , which is surprising in some ways because Lebanon in the 60s would have made a great setting for a Bond story . But his loss is my gain . " . 
 Faulks was known for his previous best @-@ selling works Charlotte Gray , Birdsong and On Green Dolphin Street . He was the fifth author to produce an original Bond novel for Ian Fleming Publications ( formerly Glidrose ) , after Fleming himself . Kingsley Amis ( writing as " Robert Markham " ) produced Colonel Sun , John Gardner wrote fourteen original novels and two novelizations , and Raymond Benson produced six original novels and three novelizations . Additionally , Christopher Wood had produced two novelizations of the Eon films , while Charlie Higson and Samantha Weinberg ( as " Kate Westbrook " ) had also published Bond @-@ related novels . 
 Faulks stated that Devil May Care would be his only Bond book , saying : " One tribute , one centenary , one book " , adding " My contract did offer me a second go , but definitely not ... ' Once funny , twice silly , three times a slap ' , as the nanny saying goes . But I think it would be a good gig for someone to do . " He saw his novel as a continuation of the Fleming books , saying " I tried to put the films out of mind " , adding that " I prepared in a rather pedantic way by reading all of the books in chronological order and when I got to the end I wrote mine . " 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Devil May Care was published in the UK on Wednesday , 28 May 2008 , to mark the centenary of Ian Fleming 's birth . The hardcover published by Penguin Books was 295 pages long and cost £ 18 @.@ 99 . It was released through Doubleday in the United States . 400 @,@ 000 hardcover copies were printed for the launch for the UK and US markets . The jacket artwork featured the model <unk> Shipster , muse of the British photographer , Rankin . Shipster said : " I was thrilled that Penguin chose me to be their Bond girl . It ’ s fantastic to be involved with something so iconic . " The cover picture was taken by British photographer and commercials director , Kevin Summers . The jacket was created by the design agency The Partners . 
 In the UK , Devil May Care went to the top of the best @-@ seller lists by the end of the first week 's sales , having sold 44 @,@ 093 copies in four days ; this made it the fastest @-@ selling fiction book after the Harry Potter titles . Waterstones reported selling 19 @,@ 000 in the first four days of sales . The book was released in paperback version in the UK on 28 May 2009 . 
 On 27 May 2008 , the day before Devil May Care was launched , the press party to publicise the launch of the book included <unk> Shipster bringing copies up the Thames on a speedboat for a party on HMS Exeter , while two Lynx helicopters circled the ship . The ship , together with its 205 @-@ strong crew , had been loaned by the Royal Navy for the occasion . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Writing in The Times , Peter Millar thought that " This is vintage Bond , in a very real sense " ; he went on to observe that the central figure was " Bond as Fleming abandoned him , shortly before his own death " . Millar summarised his critique by saying that the novel was a " ripping yarn , but don 't take it seriously " . Sam Leith , reviewing the novel for The Daily Telegraph thought that Faulks managed to avoid pastiche in his writing of the book , but had some fun , with " crass stuff ... being played , of course , for laughs " . Leith noted that aside from the more camp elements to the book — of which he approved — " when [ Faulks ] throttles down and lets the Bond schtick do its own work he soon hits a comfortable cruising speed . Plot Bristol fashion : violent pre @-@ credit sequence ; flirtatious exchange with Moneypenny ; apprehension mid @-@ snoop ; transportation to secret base ; villain confessing plans ; thwarting of plans ; coitus . " 
 Reviewing the novel for The Guardian , Mark Lawson wrote that Faulks had made a good job of imitating Fleming , as the plot " persistently picks up whispers from the books Fleming left behind " , and using a style and turn of phrase that " read as if they were directly borrowed from Fleming . " The main difference Lawson identified between Fleming and Faulks was that Faulks " misses the chilling indifference of tone which Bond 's creator brought to both kissing and killing " . Overall , Lawson considered that Devil May Care " is a smart and enjoyable act of literary resurrection . Among the now 33 post @-@ Fleming Bonds , this must surely compete only with Kingsley Amis 's for the title of the best . " Nicola Barr , writing for The Guardian 's Saturday edition , was broadly supportive of Faulks , commenting that " No one expects or wants subtlety from Bond , and Faulks delivers a thriller that manages to feel reassuringly familiar rather than predictable . " 
 Euan Ferguson , writing in The Guardian 's sister paper , The Observer , stated that " It 's good . Which is to say it 's better than it could have been . It is not , however , that good . " He noted that Faulks " evokes scenes with deft skill : recreates a time and a world with great brio , and manages it with the block script of Fleming 's journalistic nature rather than his own more cursive style . " Ferguson remained unsatisfied by the book , although he absolves the author of the blame , saying " the problem isn 't Faulks , it 's Bond . With Fleming 's untimely death , the link was broken " . Ferguson is pessimistic about Bond 's future and predicted that " Bond 's tux now flaps in the wind and despite Faulks having made such a well @-@ finessed fist of this , it is , I suspect , a last hurrah for 007 , destined to die on the page , if not the screen " . 
 The critic for the London Evening Standard observed that " for once , the claim on the cover , Sebastian Faulks writing as Ian Fleming is more than just publishers effrontery , it 's a genuine strategy " . The critic went on to note that Faulks had " not attempted to modernise Bond one whit " and that he had " delivered in convincing fashion too , in plain prose . " Writing in the Financial Times , Christopher Hitchens complained that although Faulks claimed to be writing ' as Fleming ' , it fell short of doing so : " This pot @-@ boiler takes several times as long as most Bond classics . There is almost no sex until the very last pages . There is almost no torture – an absolute staple of a Bond narrative – until the very last pages . " Hitchens admitted that Faulks had referred to elements of Fleming 's novels , so that " those who have a canonical attitude to Fleming will be able to collect their share of in @-@ jokes and cross @-@ references " ; similarly , " wispy fragments of Vesper Lynd and Honey Ryder drift in and out of shot and memory in much the same way " . Hitchens concluded his review of the novel by considering that Bond had been " cheapened " in the novel . 
 Janet Maslin , reviewing Devil May Care for the International Herald Tribune , remarked that Faulks did not " tinker with the series ' surefire recipe for success " , which resulted in " a serviceable <unk> for Bond <unk> and a decent replica of past Bond escapades " . Patrick Anderson , writing in The Washington Post , admitted that he " was never a great fan of the Bond books " and considered that " Devil May Care has its amusing and entertaining moments , but there were other moments when I thought it would never end " . 
 The New York Times critic , Charles McGrath , felt that Faulks " improbably injects new life into the formula " , which meant that Devil May Care was " a stronger novel than any that Fleming wrote " . Fritz Lanham , writing for the Houston Chronicle declared that " so satisfying was Sebastian Faulks ' new James Bond novel that I felt obliged to celebrate by making myself a vodka martini , very dry , shaken , not stirred . " Lanham considered that Faulks had " produced a book true to the spirit of the originals " , whilst also producing a novel that " works as a thriller " . 
 = Jerome , Arizona = 
 Jerome is a town in the Black Hills of Yavapai County in the State of Arizona . Founded in the late 19th century on Cleopatra Hill overlooking the Verde Valley , it is more than 5 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 500 m ) above sea level . It is about 100 miles ( 160 km ) north of Phoenix along State Route 89A between Sedona and Prescott . Supported in its heyday by rich copper mines , it was home to more than 10 @,@ 000 people in the 1920s . As of the 2010 census , its population was 444 . 
 The town owes its existence mainly to two ore bodies that formed about 1 @.@ 75 billion years ago along a ring fault in the caldera of an undersea volcano . Tectonic plate movements , plate collisions , uplift , deposition , erosion , and other geologic processes eventually exposed the tip of one of the ore bodies and pushed the other close to the surface , both near Jerome . In the late 19th century , the United Verde Mine , developed by William A. Clark , extracted ore bearing copper , gold , silver , and other metals from the larger of the two . The United Verde Extension ( UVX ) Mine , owned by James Douglas , Jr . , depended on the other huge deposit . In total , the copper deposits discovered in the vicinity of Jerome were among the richest ever found in any time or place . 
 Jerome made news in 1917 , when strikes involving the Industrial Workers of the World ( IWW ) led to the expulsion at gunpoint of about 60 IWW members , who were loaded on a cattle car and shipped west . Production at the mines , always subject to fluctuations for various reasons , boomed during World War I , fell thereafter , rose again , then fell again during and after the Great Depression . As the ore deposits became exhausted , the mines closed , and the population dwindled to fewer than 100 by the mid @-@ 1950s . Efforts to save the town from oblivion succeeded when residents turned to tourism and retail sales . Jerome became a National Historic Landmark in 1967 . In the early 21st century , Jerome has art galleries , coffee houses , restaurants , wineries , and a state park and local museum devoted to mining history . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Jerome is about 100 miles ( 160 km ) north of Phoenix and 45 miles ( 72 km ) southwest of Flagstaff along Arizona State Route 89A between Sedona and Prescott . Other nearby communities include Clarkdale , Cottonwood , and Prescott Valley , all along Route 89A . 
 Jerome is in Arizona 's Black Hills and within the Prescott National Forest at an elevation of more than 5 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 500 m ) . <unk> Wilderness is about 3 miles ( 5 km ) west of Jerome , and Mingus Mountain , at 7 @,@ 726 feet ( 2 @,@ 355 m ) above sea level , is about 4 miles ( 6 km ) south of town . Jerome State Historic Park is in the town itself . Bitter Creek , a tributary of the Verde River , flows intermittently through Jerome . 
 = = Geology = = 
 Most of Cleopatra Hill , the rock formation upon which Jerome was built , is 1 @.@ 75 billion ( 1 @,@ 750 million ) years old . Created by a massive caldera eruption in Precambrian seas south of what later became northern Arizona , the Cleopatra tuff was then part of a small tectonic plate that was moving toward the proto @-@ North American continent . After the eruption , cold sea water entered Earth 's crust through cracks caused by the eruption . Heated by rising magma to perhaps 660 ° F ( 349 ° C ) , the water was forced upward again , chemically altering the rocks it encountered and becoming rich in dissolved minerals . When the hot solution emerged from a hydrothermal vent at the bottom of the ocean , its dissolved minerals solidified and fell to the sea floor . The accumulating sulfide deposits from two such vents formed the ore bodies , the United Verde and the UVX , most important to Jerome 1 @.@ 75 billion years later . 
 These ore bodies formed in different places along a ring fault in the caldera . About 50 million years after they were deposited , the tectonic plate of which they were a part collided with another small plate and then with the proto @-@ North American continent . The collisions , which welded the plates to the continent , folded the Cleopatra tuff in such a way that the two ore bodies ended up on opposite sides of a fold called the Jerome anticline . 
 No record exists for the next 1 @,@ 200 million years of Jerome 's geologic history . Evidence from the Grand Canyon , further north in Arizona , suggests that thick layers of sediment may have been laid down atop the ore bodies and later eroded away . The gap in the rock record has been called The Great Unconformity . 
 About 525 million years ago , when northern Arizona was at the bottom of a shallow sea , a thin layer of sediment called the Tapeats Sandstone was deposited over the Cleopatra formation . <unk> and other sediments accumulated above the sandstone until about 70 million years ago when the Laramide Orogeny created new mountains and new faults in the region . One of these faults , the Verde Fault , runs directly under Jerome along the Jerome anticline . Crustal stretching beginning about 15 million years ago created Basin and Range topography in central and southern Arizona , caused volcanic activity near Jerome , and induced movement along the Verde Fault . This movement exposed the tip of the United Verde ore body at one place on Cleopatra Hill and moved the UVX ore body to 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 300 m ) below the surface . Hickey Formation basalts , laid down between 15 and 10 million years ago , cover the surface beneath the UVX <unk> and Jerome State Historic Park . 
 In the 21st century , the natural rock features in and around Jerome have been greatly altered by mining . The town is underlain by 88 miles ( 142 km ) of mine shafts , which may have contributed to the subsidence that destroyed the downtown Jerome structures that slid slowly downhill during decades of active mining . The United Verde open pit , about 300 feet ( 91 m ) deep , is on the edge of town next to Cleopatra Hill , which is marked with a large " J " . The side of the pit consists of Precambrian gabbro . Mine shafts beneath the pit extend to 4 @,@ 200 feet ( 1 @,@ 300 m ) below the surface . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 Since the United Verde ore body at Jerome was partly visible on the surface , it is likely that native peoples had long mined it for the colorful copper @-@ bearing minerals malachite and azurite . Later , in 1585 , a Spanish exploring expedition made note of the ore . In 1598 , Captain Marcos Farfán de los <unk> , hired by Juan de Oñate to explore the land , staked out claims of copper mines in modern @-@ day Jerome . 
 = = = 19th century = = = 
 The first mining claims in the Verde District were filed in 1876 . In 1880 , Frederick Augustus <unk> , a governor of the Arizona Territory , and Frederick F. Thomas , a mining engineer from San Francisco , bought these claims from the original owners . In 1883 , with the aid of eastern financiers including James A. MacDonald and Eugene Jerome of New York City , they created the United Verde Copper Company . The small adjacent mining camp on Cleopatra Hill was named Jerome in honor of Eugene Jerome , who became the company secretary . United Verde built a small smelter at Jerome and constructed wagon roads from it to Prescott , the Verde Valley , and the Atlantic and Pacific Railroad depot at Ash Fork . However , transport by wagon was expensive , and in late 1884 after the price of copper had fallen by 50 percent , the company ceased operations . 
 William A. Clark , who had made a fortune in mining and commercial ventures in Montana , bought the United Verde properties and , among other improvements , enlarged the smelter . He also ordered construction of a narrow gauge railway , the United Verde & Pacific , to Jerome Junction , a railway transfer point 27 miles ( 43 km ) to the west . As mining of the ore expanded , Jerome 's population grew from 250 in 1890 to more than 2 @,@ 500 by 1900 . By then the United Verde Mine had become the leading copper producer in the Arizona Territory , employing about 800 men . Over its 77 @-@ year life ( 1876 to 1953 ) , this mine produced nearly 33 million tons of copper , gold , silver , lead and zinc ore . The metals produced by United Verde and UVX , the other big mine in Jerome , were said to be worth more than $ 1 billion . Taken together , the copper deposits of Jerome amounted to " some of the richest ever found on Earth " . 
 Jerome had a post office by 1883 . It added a schoolhouse in 1884 and a public library in 1889 . After four major fires between 1894 and 1898 destroyed much of the business district and , in 1898 , half of the community 's homes , Jerome was incorporated as a town in 1899 . Incorporation made it possible to collect taxes to build a formal fire @-@ fighting system and to establish building codes that prohibited tents and other fire hazards within the town limits . Local merchant and rancher William Munds was the first mayor . 
 By 1900 , Jerome had churches , fraternal organizations , and a downtown with brick buildings , telephone service , and electric lights . In addition to banks , hotels , and stores , among the thriving businesses were many associated with alcohol , gambling , and prostitution , serving a population that was 78 percent male in 1900 . In 1903 , the New York Sun proclaimed Jerome to be " the wickedest town in the West " . 
 = = = Early 20th century = = = 
 Jerome , which was legally separate from United Verde and supported many independent businesses , did not meet the definition of a company town even though it depended for decades largely on this one company . In 1914 , a separate company , the United Verde Extension Mining Company ( UVX ) , led by James S. Douglas , Jr . ( Rawhide Jimmy ) , discovered a second ore body near Jerome that produced a bonanza . The UVX Mine , also known as the Little Daisy Mine , became spectacularly profitable : during 1916 alone , it produced $ 10 million worth of copper , silver and gold , of which $ 7 @.@ 4 million was profit . This mine eventually produced more than $ 125 million worth of ore and paid more than $ 50 million in dividends . Total production amounted to four million tons , much less than the United Verde total , but uncommonly rich , averaging more than 10 percent copper and in places rising to 45 percent . 
 Starting in 1914 , World War I greatly increased the demand for copper , and by 1916 the number of companies involved in mining near Jerome reached 22 . These companies employed about 3 @,@ 000 miners in the district , and Jerome 's population rose to an estimated 10 @,@ 000 by 1917 . Meanwhile , United Verde was building a large smelter complex and company town , Clarkdale , and a standard gauge railway , the Verde Tunnel and Smelter Railroad , to haul ore from its mine to the new smelter . After the new railway opened in 1915 , the company dismantled the Jerome smelter and converted the mine to an open @-@ pit operation . The switch from underground to open @-@ pit mining stemmed from a series of fires , some burning for decades , in the mine 's high @-@ sulfur ores . Removing the overburden and pouring a mixture of water , waste ore , and sand into rock fissures helped control the fires . By 1918 , UVX also had its own smelter in its own company town , Clemenceau , a part of Cottonwood . 
 = = = Jerome Deportation = = = 
 In 1917 , two miners ' strikes involving the Industrial Workers of the World ( IWW ) , which had been organizing strikes elsewhere in Arizona and other states , took place in Jerome . Seen as a threat by business interests as well as other labor unions , the Wobblies , as they were called , were subject nationally to sometimes violent harassment . The labor situation in Jerome was complicated at the time by the existence of three separate labor unions — the International Union of Mine , Mill , and Smelter Workers ( MMSW ) ; the Liga <unk> Latina , which represented about 500 Mexican miners in Jerome ; and the IWW . The MMSW , which in May called a strike against United Verde , regarded the rival IWW with animosity and would not recognize it as legitimate . In response , the IWW members threatened to break the strike . Under pressure , the MMSW voted 467 to 431 to settle for less than they wanted . 
 In July , the IWW called for a strike against all the mines in the district . In this case , the MMSW voted 470 to 194 against striking . Three days later , about 250 armed vigilantes rounded up at least 60 suspected IWW members , loaded them onto a railroad cattle car , and shipped them out of town . Nine were arrested and jailed temporarily in Prescott though never charged with a crime ; others were taken to Needles , California , then to Kingman , Arizona , where they were released after promising to desist from labor agitation . 
 = = = 1920 – 53 = = = 
 Following a brief post @-@ war downturn , boom times returned to Jerome in the 1920s . Copper prices rose to 24 cents a pound in 1929 , and United Verde and UVX operated at near capacity . Wages rose , consumers spent , and the town 's businesses — including five automobile dealerships — prospered . United Verde , seeking stable labor relations , added disability and life insurance benefits for its workers and built a baseball field , tennis courts , swimming pools , and a public park in Jerome . Both companies donated to the Jerome Public Library and helped finance projects for the town 's schools , churches , and hospitals . 
 In 1930 , after the start of the Great Depression , the price of copper fell to 14 cents a pound . In response , United Verde began reducing its work force ; UVX operated at a loss , and a third big mine , Verde Central , closed completely . The price of copper fell further in 1932 to 5 cents a pound , leading to layoffs , temporary shut @-@ downs , and wage reductions in the Verde District . In 1935 , the Clark family sold United Verde to Phelps Dodge , and in 1938 UVX went out of business . 
 Meanwhile , a subsidence problem that had irreparably damaged at least 10 downtown buildings by 1928 worsened through the 1930s . Dozens of buildings , including the post office and jail , were lost as the earth beneath them sank away . Contributing causes were geologic faulting in the area , blast vibrations from the mines , and erosion that may have been exacerbated by vegetation @-@ killing smelter smoke . 
 Mining continued at a reduced level in the Verde District until 1953 , when Phelps Dodge shut down the United Verde Mine and related operations . Jerome 's population subsequently fell below 100 . To prevent the town from disappearing completely , its remaining residents turned to tourism and retail sales . They organized the Jerome Historical Society in 1953 and opened a museum and gift shop . 
 = = = After 1953 = = = 
 To encourage tourism , the town 's leaders sought National Historic Landmark status for Jerome ; it was granted by the federal government in 1967 . In 1962 , the heirs of Jimmy Douglas donated the Douglas mansion , above the UVX mine site , to the State of Arizona , which used it to create Jerome State Historic Park . By sponsoring music festivals , historic @-@ homes tours , celebrations , and races , the community succeeded in attracting visitors and new businesses , which in the 21st century include art galleries , craft stores , wineries , coffee houses , and restaurants . 
 = = Climate = = 
 July is typically the warmest month in Jerome , when highs average 90 ° F ( 32 ° C ) and lows average 67 ° F ( 19 ° C ) . January is coldest , when the high temperatures average 49 ° F ( 9 ° C ) and the lows average 33 ° F ( 1 ° C ) . The highest recorded temperature was 108 ° F ( 42 ° C ) in 2003 , and the lowest was 5 ° F ( − 15 ° C ) in 1963 . August , averaging 3 @.@ 03 inches ( 77 mm ) of rain , is the wettest month , while as is typical for Arizona the spring months of April to June generally do not have significant rainfall . 
 Although most precipitation arrives as rain in Jerome , snow and fog sometimes occur . On average , about 2 @.@ 5 inches ( 6 @.@ 4 cm ) of snow falls in Jerome in January and lesser amounts in February , March , April , November , and December . Even so , the average depth of snow on the ground in Jerome between 1897 and 2005 was so close to zero that it is reported as zero . Jerome is often windy , especially in spring and fall . Summer thunderstorms can be violent . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 The makeup of early Jerome differed greatly from the 21st @-@ century version of the town . The original mining claims were filed by Whites , but as the mines were developed , workers of many nationalities arrived . Among these were people of Irish , Chinese , Italian , and Slavic origin who came to Jerome in the late 19th century . By the time of World War I , Mexican nationals were arriving in large numbers , and census figures suggest that in 1930 about 60 percent of the town 's residents were Latino . This statistic is supported by mining company records showing that about 57 percent of the UVX workers were Mexican nationals in 1931 and that foreign @-@ born and Spanish @-@ surnamed workers accounted for about 77 percent of the UVX work force . 
 The ratio of females to males also varied greatly over time in Jerome . Census data from 1900 through 1950 show a gradual rise in the percentage of female residents , who accounted for only 22 percent of the population at the turn of the century but about 50 percent by mid @-@ century . 
 As of the census of 2000 , there were 329 people , 182 households , and 84 families residing in the town . The population density was 462 people per square mile ( 179 / km2 ) . There were 215 housing units at an average density of about 302 per square mile ( 117 / km2 ) . The racial makeup of the town was about 92 % White , 0 @.@ 30 % Black or African American , about 2 @.@ 5 % Native American , 0 @.@ 30 % Asian , about 2 % from other races , and 3 % from two or more races . About 8 % of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race . At the 2010 census , the population of the town was 444 . 
 In 2000 , there were 182 households out of which 17 % had children under the age of 18 living with them , 29 % were married couples living together , 10 % had a female householder with no husband present , and 54 % were non @-@ families . About 42 % of all households were made up of individuals and 8 % had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 1 @.@ 81 and the average family size was 2 @.@ 37 . 
 In the town the population was spread out with about 13 % under the age of 18 , 7 % from 18 to 24 , 27 % from 25 to 44 , 41 % from 45 to 64 , and 12 @.@ 5 % who were 65 years of age or older . The median age was 46 years . For every 100 females there were 103 males . For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 98 males . 
 As of 2014 , the median income for a household in the town was about $ 32 @,@ 000 . About 10 % of families in Jerome were below the poverty line in 2014 . 
 = = Education and government = = 
 Children from Jerome in kindergarten through eighth grade attend the Clarkdale – Jerome School in Clarkdale . Older students from Jerome are enrolled at Mingus Union High School in Cottonwood . Each of these communities had its own schools during the first half of the 20th century , but declining populations and shrinking tax revenues led to consolidation . 
 Jerome has a mayor @-@ council government . The five seats on the council are filled by public election once every two years . Traditionally , the council member receiving the most votes in that election becomes the mayor . Nikki Check , who got the most votes in the 2012 election , is the mayor through 2014 . 
 The town is in the Verde Valley Precinct of the Yavapai County Justice Court system . Along with Clarkdale and Cottonwood , it is in Sector Two of the Eastern Area Command of the Yavapai County Sheriff 's Office . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Jerome is referred to in the Barenaked Ladies album , All In Good Time , released in 2010 . It is the title of Track 9 with references to Mingus Mountain , from which Jerome can be seen . <unk> Kate Wolf wrote and recorded a song , " Old Jerome " , first released on a posthumous album , The Wind Blows Wild , in 1988 . 
 John Olson 's model railroad , the Jerome & Southwestern , was originally developed as a series of articles in Model <unk> magazine and later released in book form . The railroad was set in and around Jerome , and referred to other local sites such as Clarkdale , Cleopatra Hill , and Mingus Mountain . 
 The novel <unk> ( 2013 ) by Sandra Neil Wallace , a former sportscaster for ESPN , is a historical novel for young adults that is based on the Jerome High School football team of 1950 . The team went undefeated that year , shortly before the copper mine closed and Jerome 's population dwindled . 
 = = Notable residents = = 
 Maynard James Keenan , lead singer of the band Tool , A Perfect Circle , and Puscifer . 
 Katie Lee , folk singer 
 Fred Rico , major league baseball player 
 = = = Fiction = = = 
 Molloy , Terry ( 2008 ) " Jerome Times : Ghosts Upon The Page " . Jerome Times Publishing Co . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 615 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 
 <unk> , Roberto ( 2011 ) . Rich Town Poor Town : Ghosts of Copper 's Past . Jerome , Arizona : <unk> Educational Publishing Company . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 @-@ 2 . 
 = = = Non @-@ fiction = = = 
 Alenius , E. M. J. ( 1968 ) . United Verde Copper Company : A Brief History of the United Verde Open Pit , Jerome , Arizona . Tucson , Arizona : The Arizona Bureau of Mines ( Bulletin 178 ) . OCLC <unk> 
 Brewer , Jr . , James W. ( 1993 ) . Jerome : Story of Mines , Men , and Money ( pamphlet ) . Tucson , Arizona : Western National Parks Association . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 31 @-@ 0 . 
 Rodda , Jeanette , and Nancy R. Smith ( 1990 ) . Experience Jerome : The <unk> , Miners and Mistresses of Cleopatra Hill . Sedona , Arizona : Thorne Enterprises . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 77 @-@ 6 . 
 = The Boat Race 1906 = 
 The 63rd Boat Race took place on 7 April 1906 . Held annually , the Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . Oxford went into the race as reigning champions , having won the previous year 's race , and their crew was slightly heavier than their opponents . In a race umpired by Frederick I. Pitman , Cambridge won by three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths in a time of 19 minutes 25 seconds , the fastest winning time for four years . The win took the overall record to 34 – 28 in Oxford 's favour . 
 = = Background = = 
