 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities ; it is followed throughout the United Kingdom and , as of 2015 , broadcast worldwide . Oxford went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 1905 race by three lengths , and led overall with 34 victories to Cambridge 's 27 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . 
 Cambridge were coached by Francis Escombe ( for the third consecutive year ) , Stanley Muttlebury , five @-@ time Blue between 1886 and 1890 , and David Alexander Wauchope ( who had rowed in the 1895 race ) . Oxford 's coaches were William Fletcher , who rowed for them in the 1890 , 1891 , 1892 and 1893 races and Harcourt Gilbey Gold ( Dark Blue president for the 1900 race and four @-@ time Blue ) . The umpire for the fourth year was old Etonian and former Cambridge rower Frederick I. Pitman who rowed in the 1884 , 1885 and 1886 races . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Oxford crew weighed an average of 12 st 3 @.@ 5 lb ( 77 @.@ 6 kg ) , 4 @.@ 125 pounds ( 1 @.@ 9 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . The Cambridge crew included two rowers with Boat Race experience , in Banner Johnstone and Ronald Powell , both of whom were rowing in their third consecutive event . Powell was rowing alongside his brother Eric . Oxford 's crew contained four who had represented their university in the event , including E. P. Evans who was making his third appearance . All of the participants in the race were registered as British . 
 = = Race = = 
 Oxford won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station , handing the Middlesex side of the river to Cambridge . According to former Oxford rower and author George Drinkwater , the Light Blues went into the race as " firm favourites " . Conditions were described as " very fast , a strong tide and no wind " . Umpire Pitman started the race at noon , and Cambridge led from the first stroke . 
 Going clear within two minutes , the Light Blues held an advantage of at least four lengths by the time they passed below Barnes Bridge . The victory secured , they paddled to the finish , winning by three and a half lengths in a time of 19 minutes 25 seconds . It was their fourth win in five years in the fastest winning time since the 1902 race , and took the overall record in the event to 34 – 28 in Oxford 's favour . 
 = Villanelle = 
 A villanelle ( also known as <unk> ) is a nineteen @-@ line poetic form consisting of five tercets followed by a quatrain . There are two refrains and two repeating rhymes , with the first and third line of the first tercet repeated alternately until the last stanza , which includes both repeated lines . The villanelle is an example of a fixed verse form . The word derives from Latin , then Italian , and is related to the initial subject of the form being the pastoral . 
 The form started as a simple ballad @-@ like song with no fixed form ; this fixed quality would only come much later , from the poem " Villanelle ( J 'ay perdu ma Tourterelle ) " ( 1606 ) by Jean Passerat . From this point , its evolution into the " fixed form " used in the present day is debated . Despite its French origins , the majority of villanelles have been written in English , a trend which began in the late nineteenth century . The villanelle has been noted as a form that frequently treats the subject of obsessions , and one which appeals to outsiders ; its defining feature of repetition prevents it from having a conventional tone . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The word villanelle derives from the Italian <unk> , referring to a rustic song or dance , and which comes from <unk> , meaning peasant or <unk> . Villano derives from the Medieval Latin <unk> , meaning a " farmhand " . The etymology of the word relates to the fact that the form 's initial distinguishing feature was the pastoral subject . 
 = = History = = 
 The villanelle originated as a simple ballad @-@ like song — in imitation of peasant songs of an oral tradition — with no fixed poetic form . These poems were often of a rustic or pastoral subject matter and contained refrains . Prior to the nineteenth century , the term would have simply meant country song , with no particular form implied — a meaning it retains in the vocabulary of early music . According to Julie Kane , the refrain in each stanza indicates that the form descended from a " choral dance song " wherein a vocal soloist — frequently female — semi @-@ improvised the " unique " lyrics of each stanza , while a ring of dancers — all female , or male and female mixed — chimed in with the repetitive words of the refrain as they danced around her in a circle . " 
 The fixed @-@ form villanelle , containing the nineteen @-@ line dual @-@ refrain , derives from Jean Passerat 's poem " Villanelle ( J 'ay perdu ma Tourterelle ) " , published in 1606 . The New Princeton Encyclopedia of Poetry and Poetics ( 1993 ) suggests that this became the standard " villanelle " when <unk> such as César @-@ Pierre <unk> based their definitions of the form on that poem . This conclusion is refuted by Kane , however , who argues that it was instead Pierre @-@ Charles <unk> 's additions to <unk> 's Dictionnaire de <unk> that first fixed the form , followed a century later by the poet Théodore de Banville ; his creation of a parody to Passerat 's " J 'ay perdu ... " would lead Wilhelm <unk> and others to think that the villanelle was an antique form . 
 Despite its classification and origin as a French poetic form , by far the majority of villanelles have been written in English . Subsequent to the publication of Théodore de Banville 's treatise on prosody " Petit <unk> de <unk> française " ( 1872 ) , the form became popularised in England through Edmund Gosse and Austin Dobson . Gosse , Dobson , Oscar Wilde , Andrew Lang and John Payne were among the first English practitioners — theirs and other works were published in Gleeson White 's <unk> and <unk> , Chants Royal , <unk> , <unk> , & c . Selected ( 1887 ) , which contained thirty @-@ two English @-@ language villanelles composed by nineteen poets . 
 Most modernists disdained the villanelle , which became associated with the overwrought formal aestheticism of the 1890s , i.e. , the decadent movement in England . In his 1914 novel A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man , James Joyce includes a villanelle written by his protagonist Stephen Dedalus . William Empson revived the villanelle more seriously in the 1930s , and his contemporaries and friends W. H. Auden and Dylan Thomas also picked up the form . Dylan Thomas 's " Do not go gentle into that good night " is perhaps the most renowned villanelle of all . Theodore Roethke and Sylvia Plath wrote villanelles in the 1950s and 1960s , and Elizabeth Bishop wrote a particularly famous and influential villanelle , " One Art , " in 1976 . The villanelle reached an unprecedented level of popularity in the 1980s and 1990s with the rise of the New Formalism . Since then , many contemporary poets have written villanelles , and they have often varied the form in innovative ways ; in their anthology of villanelles ( <unk> ) , Annie Finch and Marie @-@ Elizabeth Mali devote a section entitled " Variations on the Villanelle " to such innovations . 
 = = Form = = 
 The villanelle consists of five stanzas of three lines ( tercets ) followed by a single stanza of four lines ( a quatrain ) for a total of nineteen lines . It is structured by two repeating rhymes and two refrains : the first line of the first stanza serves as the last line of the second and fourth stanzas , and the third line of the first stanza serves as the last line of the third and fifth stanzas . The rhyme @-@ and @-@ refrain pattern of the villanelle can be <unk> as <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> where letters ( " a " and " b " ) indicate the two rhyme sounds , upper case indicates a refrain ( " A " ) , and superscript numerals ( 1 and 2 ) indicate Refrain 1 and Refrain 2 . 
 The pattern is below set against " Do not go gentle into that good night " by Dylan Thomas : 
 The villanelle has no established meter , although most 19th @-@ century villanelles have used trimeter or tetrameter and most 20th @-@ century villanelles have used pentameter . Slight alteration of the refrain line is permissible . 
 = = Effect = = 
 With reference to the form 's repetition of lines , Philip K. Jason suggests that the " villanelle is often used , and properly used , to deal with one or another degree of obsession " citing Sylvia Plath 's " Mad Girl 's Love Song " amongst other examples . He notes the possibility for the form to evoke , through the relationship between the repeated lines , a feeling of dislocation and a " paradigm for schizophrenia " . This repetition of lines has been considered to prevent villanelles from possessing a " conventional tone " and that instead they are closer in form to a song or lyric poetry . Stephen Fry opines that the villanelle " is a form that seems to appeal to outsiders , or those who might have cause to consider themselves as such " , having a " playful artifice " which suits " rueful , ironic reiteration of pain or fatalism " . ( In spite of this , the villanelle has also often been used for light verse , as for instance Louis Untermeyer 's " <unk> Villanelle of <unk> " . ) 
 On the relationship between form and content , Anne Ridler notes in an introduction to her own poem " Villanelle for the Middle of the Way " a point made by T. S. Eliot , that " to use very strict form is a help , because you concentrate on the technical difficulties of mastering the form , and allow the content of the poem a more unconscious and freer release " . In an introduction to his own take on the form , entitled " Missing Dates " , William Empson suggests that while the villanelle is a " very rigid form " , nonetheless W. H. Auden — in his long poem The Sea and the Mirror — had " made it sound absolutely natural like the innocent girl talking " . 
 = = Examples = = 
 " Do not go gentle into that good night " by Dylan Thomas . Probably the best @-@ known villanelle in English . 
 " The Waking " by Theodore Roethke . 
 " Mad Girl 's Love Song " by Sylvia Plath . 
 " One Art " by Elizabeth Bishop . 
 " If I Could Tell You ( poem ) " by W.H. Auden 
 Edwin Arlington Robinson 's villanelle " The House on the Hill " was first published in The Globe in September 1894 . 
 The villanelle written by Stephen Dedalus , the protagonist of James Joyce 's novel A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man . It has been the subject of several critical analyses . 
 " Hate the Villanelle , " a song by They Might Be Giants , first performed at the Brooklyn Academy of Music Howard Gilman Opera House in June 2014 . 
 = Hurricane Bertha ( 2014 ) = 
 Hurricane Bertha was an unusual tropical cyclone in early August 2014 that attained minimal hurricane status , despite having a disheveled appearance and a relatively high atmospheric pressure . On July 26 , a tropical wave south of the Cape Verde Islands was monitored for possible tropical cyclogenesis . Over the following days , it slowly developed and acquired gale @-@ force winds and enough convection to be designated as Tropical Storm Bertha early on August 1 . A mostly disorganized cyclone , Bertha quickly moved across the Lesser Antilles , clipping the northern end of Martinique , later that day . During its trek across the eastern Caribbean Sea , its circulation became severely disrupted and it may have degenerated into a tropical wave . On August 3 , it traversed the Mona Passage and moved over the Southeastern Bahamas where conditions favored development . Despite an overall ragged appearance on satellite imagery , data from Hurricane Hunters indicated it intensified to a hurricane on August 4 ; it acquired peak winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) that day . Turning north , and later northeast , Bertha soon weakened as it began to merge with an approaching trough to the west . This merger ultimately took place on August 6 , at which time Bertha was declared extratropical well to the south of Nova Scotia . The remnant system raced eastward across the Atlantic and later struck the United Kingdom on August 10 . Once over the North Sea , the storm stalled for a few days before resuming its eastward track . It was last noted around the Baltic Sea on August 16 . 
 As a tropical cyclone , Bertha 's impact was relatively minor . Widespread power outages occurred along its path but no major damage or loss of life took place . Enhanced swells and rip currents associated with the hurricane resulted in three fatalities and dozens of rescues along the East Coast of the United States . After becoming an extratropical system , it had significant effects in Western Europe . Particularly hard hit was the United Kingdom , where wind gusts reached 108 mph ( 174 km / h ) . Unseasonably heavy rains triggered widespread flooding which shut down roads and prompted evacuations . One fatality took place offshore . On mainland Europe , a small tornado outbreak resulted in scattered structural damage in Belgium , France , and Germany . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On July 24 , 2014 , a westward moving tropical wave emerged off the west coast of Africa near the Cape Verde Islands . Following the development of convective activity — showers and thunderstorms — on July 26 , National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) began monitoring the system for potential tropical cyclogenesis . A disorganized system , development was forecast to be slow due to unfavorable environmental conditions . Organization and coverage of convection began improving by July 28 , due in part to the passage of a Kelvin wave . An area of low pressure subsequently consolidated within the disturbance on July 29 and the NHC assessed the system as having imminent potential of becoming a tropical depression . Convection soon diminished over the system , though its circulation remained well @-@ defined . Moving west @-@ northwest around the periphery of a strong subtropical ridge , the low acquired tropical storm @-@ force winds early on July 31 but continued to lack convection . A hurricane hunter aircraft investigated the system that afternoon and found winds of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) north and northeast of the center . In the hours following the weather reconnaissance mission , a band of deep convection blossomed near the center , prompting the NHC to designate the system as Tropical Storm Bertha at 00 : 00 UTC on August 1 . Upon its classification , Bertha was situated roughly 345 mi ( 555 km ) east @-@ southeast of Barbados in the Lesser Antilles . 
 Within hours of Bertha 's designation on August 1 , wind shear stemming from a trough over the central Atlantic displaced convection from the circulation center . Satellite imagery depicted a well @-@ defined and vigorous circulation ; however , observations from the hurricane hunters indicated a wind field more akin to a tropical wave . Around 21 : 00 UTC , Bertha clipped the northern end of Martinique with sustained winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) . Persistent shear continued to take its toll on the cyclone as it entered the Caribbean Sea with aircraft data indicating no closed circulation at 5 @,@ 000 ft ( 1 @,@ 500 m ) elevation . Despite this , observations from Martinique and Dominica indicated that there was some semblance of a surface circulation , and the NHC continued to monitor Bertha as a tropical storm . Throughout August 2 , convection steadily increased in coverage and organization though the center of Bertha remained displaced from the strongest thunderstorms to the southwest . NEXRAD weather radar imagery from San Juan , Puerto Rico depicted a disorganized , possibly open circulation throughout the day . In light of this , NHC forecaster John Beven noted that the system could degenerate into an open wave around the time in reached Hispaniola later on August 2 . 
 Continued effects of dry air entrainment , shear , and land interaction further degraded Bertha 's structure and late on August 2 , " the system barely [ qualified ] as a tropical cyclone " . Various data sources indicated no closed circulation by 21 : 00 UTC and it was noted that advisories could be discontinued , at least temporarily . Early on August 3 , the disheveled storm moved through the Mona Passage and brushed the eastern coast of the Dominican Republic before emerging over the Atlantic Ocean . As the storm moved away from Hispaniola its movement became more northwesterly , following the edge of the subtropical ridge . Moving near the Turks and Caicos Islands , Bertha 's circulation finally became better organized and banding features developing over its eastern periphery . Subsequent strengthening of upper @-@ level outflow , decreased shear , increased mid @-@ level humidity , and high sea surface temperatures enabled rapid intensification . Deep convection wrapped cyclonically into the storm and winds reached 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) by 03 : 00 UTC on August 4 . During the early part of August 4 , structural organization began to degrade with convection becoming more limited in extent and banding features dissipating . The only factor aiding the storm was its well @-@ defined outflow . However , despite the storm 's ragged and weak appearance observations from hurricane hunters indicated that it had intensified into a hurricane by 12 : 00 UTC . Bertha is estimated to have reached its peak intensity around this time with winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) and a barometric pressure of 998 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 47 inHg ) . Additionally , by this time its movement had shifted to due north and with increased forward momentum . 
 Through the remainder of August 4 and into the early hours of August 5 , Bertha maintained hurricane status with its atypical structure . At times , its circulation became exposed due to increasing shear . Acceleration to the north @-@ northeast ahead of a trough off the East Coast of the United States ensued as the system weakened below hurricane intensity during the overnight of August 4 – 5 . Steadily increasing shear kept the circulation center mostly devoid of thunderstorms , with periodic bursts of convection being quickly pushed away . The storm 's motion became more northeasterly early on August 6 as it began to undergo an extratropical transition . An upper @-@ level jet streak coupled with the system that morning , prompting convection to develop away from the storm 's center . Bertha soon merged with the trough steering it northeast as it moved into the cold sector of the front , which extended from Nova Scotia to The Bahamas . The merger of these systems marked Bertha 's transition into an extratropical system , at which time it was located 290 mi ( 470 km ) south @-@ southeast of Halifax , Nova Scotia . Slight intensification took place shortly thereafter with winds increasing to 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) before weakening resumed . The system raced eastward across the Atlantic and ultimately degraded into a trough several hundred miles southwest of Ireland on August 9 . Bertha 's remnants struck the United Kingdom the following day and later moved over the North Sea . There , the storm stalled for a few days before resuming its eastward track . The decaying cyclone moved over Scandinavia on August 14 and was last noted on August 16 near the Baltic Sea . 
 = = Warnings and watches = = 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 = = = Caribbean = = = 
 Late on August 1 , Bertha crossed the Lesser Antilles , bringing strong winds and heavy rain to many islands . Across Martinique , the storm produced sustained winds of 46 mph ( 74 km / h ) with gusts to 54 mph ( 87 km / h ) . Numerous lightning strikes caused widespread surges in the electrical grid and left 150 @,@ 000 residences without electricity . Power was restored to all customers by the evening of August 2 . Rainfall was relatively light and less than anticipated with 1 @.@ 2 to 2 @.@ 4 in ( 30 to 60 mm ) falling across northern areas of the island and 0 @.@ 39 to 0 @.@ 79 in ( 10 to 20 mm ) over southern areas . Similar effects were felt in Guadeloupe where gusts reached 57 mph ( 92 km / h ) on La Désirade . A general 3 @.@ 9 to 5 @.@ 9 in ( 100 to 150 mm ) fell across Basse @-@ Terre Island . Few reports of downed trees and power lines were received and overall damage was negligible . Some rain and wind also affected Barbados . 
 Dominica Prime Minister Roosevelt Skerrit declared a public holiday for the afternoon of August 1 in order for all workers to return home in advance of the storm . Several <unk> flights for the island and St. Lucia were canceled . Wind gusts on Dominica reached 43 mph ( 69 km / h ) and hundreds of people lost power . 
 Coincidentally , Bertha threatened the United States Virgin Islands 18 years after a hurricane in 1996 of the same name , with both affecting the primary elections . Turnout was low as expected due to the storm , with 9 @,@ 217 people ( 26 @.@ 05 percent ) of voters showing up to polls . In response to the storm , the Virgin Islands Territorial Emergency Management Agency was activated , leave for all police officers was suspended , and officers began operating on 12 ‑ hour shifts on August 1 . The Public Works Department appropriated sandbags and cleared storm drains in anticipation of heavy rain . The outer edges of Bertha produced near @-@ hurricane @-@ force around the United States Virgin Islands , with an offshore buoy near St. Thomas measuring a gust of 72 mph ( 116 km / h ) . Gale @-@ force winds on St. Croix snapped many tree limbs . 
 Across Puerto Rico , the outer bands of Bertha dropped a general 3 to 5 in ( 76 to 127 mm ) of rain , with isolated areas reaching 10 in ( 250 mm ) , over areas suffering from a drought . Accumulations peaked at 11 @.@ 11 in ( 282 mm ) in Adjuntas . Some flooding occurred on the island , resulting in the partial collapse of two roads . The Río Grande de Arecibo topped its banks between highways 10 and 123 within the Utuado Municipality . Landslides blocked a few roads around <unk> . Tropical storm @-@ force wind gusts , peaking at 52 mph ( 84 km / h ) , downed some trees and power lines . Prolific lightning accompanied the storm and resulted in 29 @,@ 000 residences losing power . In Arroyo , 239 people , mostly athletes , sought refuge in public shelters . 
 Following the designation of Tropical Storm Bertha on August 1 , the Ministry of Public Works and Communications in the Dominican Republic activated emergency operations to prepare for the storm . Several flights to and from Las Américas International Airport near Santo Domingo were canceled on August 2 . Heavy rains in the country , peaking at 4 @.@ 7 in ( 120 mm ) in <unk> , caused significant flooding , especially along the <unk> River which overflowed its banks . The communities of Atilano , Cabeza de Toro , <unk> , Concho Primo , and Lima , were temporarily isolated by the rising waters . Less substantial flooding occurred elsewhere in the country , with seven homes inundated in Moscú . Additionally , strong winds downed many trees in the region . 
 Across the Southeastern Bahamas , residents were warned of the approaching storm ; however , many were preoccupied with a local regatta and ignored warnings . In the Turks and Caicos , locals brought their boats closer to shore and anchored them . Hotels were reportedly " taking seriously the threat of the storm . " Increased surf and sporadic heavy rains associated with Bertha affected portions of Cuba . 
 = = = United States East Coast = = = 
 Though Bertha remained hundreds of miles offshore , long @-@ period swells resulted in dangerous rip currents across the East Coast of the United States . Two people required rescue off the coast of Jacksonville , Florida due to rip currents . Lingering swells resulted in the drowning of a man at <unk> 's Landing in Ponte <unk> Beach . Further north near Cape Hatteras , North Carolina , a man was pulled out to sea by rip currents and rescued by the Hatteras Island Rescue Squad ; however , after being hospitalized he later succumbed to his injuries and died . Tropical storm warnings were raised for offshore zones ; waves of 15 to 25 ft ( 4 @.@ 6 to 7 @.@ 6 m ) were forecast for areas off the Delmarva Peninsula and New Jersey . Several people were injured in rough seas at Rehoboth Beach , Delaware while lifeguards performed multiple rescues . In Ocean City , New Jersey , 25 rescues took place on August 5 . That same day , a woman nearly drowned near Atlantic City after being pulled out by rip currents . 
 = = = Western Europe = = = 
 Heavy rains from the remnant of Bertha caused widespread flooding across the United Kingdom . Flood warnings were issued for 6 regions across the nation while alerts were raised for a further 47 areas during the storm 's passage . In London , a water main burst and inundated surrounding streets . Thirty shops were affected and nearby stations of the London Underground were swamped . The Prudential <unk> race was shortened by 14 mi ( 23 km ) due to the storm . The River Dee rose to its highest level since 1990 and flooded surrounding areas . Footbridges and paths along its banks were washed away , though no structures were affected . Lossiemouth , Scotland , received a month 's worth of rain in roughly 12 hours . Flooding in Elgin prompted the evacuation of 200 homes . Numerous roads were washed out across Scotland and First ScotRail reported widespread service disruption . High winds and flooding also damaged crops across the region , namely in Scotland . 
 Offshore , a man suffered a fatal head injury on his yacht amid rough seas and high winds . The Solent Coastguards flew out to rescue the man , but he was declared dead on the scene . Twenty vessels competing in the 2014 EXE Sails <unk> World Championships were caught in high winds produced by the storm and capsized in the Strangford Lough . A nearby hospital declared a major incident and the coast guard rushed to rescue the 97 sailors stranded in the water . Only one person suffered injuries , but all were treated for hypothermia . 
 The outer bands of Bertha 's remnants produced a prolonged period of severe weather over mainland Europe , extending from France to Sweden . In southwest Germany , gusts reached 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) . On August 10 , a small tornado outbreak occurred with touchdowns taking place in Belgium , France , and Germany . The strongest of these , rated F2 on the Fujita Scale , affected Bad Schwalbach , Germany ; 50 homes were damaged in the area and a swath of forest was heavily damaged . An F1 tornado struck an outdoor event in Luxembourg , Belgium , resulting in four serious injuries . Additionally , an EF1 storm traveled for 25 mi ( 41 km ) through the Nord @-@ Pas @-@ de @-@ Calais region of France . Another tornado , rated F0 , touched down in Kingston upon Hull , United Kingdom , on the same day . 
 Alerts were raised across Norway for the potential of flooding and damaging winds . 
 = Free as a Bird = 
 " Free as a Bird " is a song originally composed and recorded in 1977 as a home demo by John Lennon . In 1995 a studio version of the recording , incorporating contributions from Paul McCartney , George Harrison and Ringo Starr , was released as a single by The Beatles . It was released 25 years after the break @-@ up of the band and 15 years after the death of Lennon . 
 The single was released as part of the promotion for The Beatles Anthology video documentary and the band 's Anthology 1 compilation album . For the Anthology project , McCartney asked Lennon 's widow Yoko Ono for unreleased material by Lennon to which the three remaining ex @-@ Beatles could contribute . " Free as a Bird " was one of two such songs ( along with " Real Love " ) for which McCartney , Harrison , and Starr contributed additional instrumentation , vocals , and arrangements . Jeff Lynne of Electric Light Orchestra , who had worked with Harrison on Harrison 's album Cloud Nine and as part of the Traveling Wilburys , was asked to co @-@ produce the record . 
 The music video for " Free as a Bird " was produced by Vincent Joliet and directed by Joe Pytka ; from the point of view of a bird in flight , it depicts many references to Beatles songs , such as " Strawberry Fields Forever , " " Penny Lane " , " Paperback Writer " , " A Day in the Life " , " Eleanor Rigby " , " Revolution " , and " Helter Skelter " . " Free as a Bird " won the 1997 Grammy Award for Best Pop Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocal and was The Beatles ' 34th Top 10 single in the United States . The song secured the group at least one Top 40 hit in four different decades ( 1960s , 1970s , 1980s and 1990s ) . 
 = = Origins = = 
 McCartney , Harrison and Starr originally intended to record some incidental background music , as a trio , for the Anthology project , but later realised , according to Starr , that they wanted to record " new music " . According to Harrison , they had always agreed that if one of them was not in the band , the others would never replace them and , " ... go out as the Beatles " , and that the " only other person that could be in it was John . " 
 McCartney then asked Ono if she had any unreleased recordings by Lennon , so she sent him cassette tapes of four songs . " Free as a Bird " was recorded by Lennon in 1977 , in his and Ono 's Dakota building apartment in New York City , but was not complete . Lennon introduced the song on the cassette by imitating a New York accent and saying , " Free — as a <unk> " ( bird ) . The other songs were " Grow Old With Me " , " Real Love " , and " Now and Then " . Ono says that it was Harrison and former Beatles road manager Neil Aspinall who initially asked her about the concept of adding vocals and instrumentation to Lennon 's demo tapes . Ono stated : " People have said it was all agreed when Paul came over to New York to induct John into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame , but it was all settled before then . I just used that occasion to hand over the tapes personally to Paul . " 
 McCartney went to Ono 's home after the induction ceremony at the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame to listen to , and receive , the Lennon demo tapes ; he recalls the meeting with Ono : 
 She was there with Sean ... and she played us a couple of tracks . There were two <unk> on mono cassettes which he did at home ... [ s ] o I checked it out with Sean , because I didn 't want him to have a problem with it . He said , " Well , it 'll be weird hearing a dead guy on lead vocal . But give it a try . " I said to them both , " If it doesn 't work out , you can veto it . " When I told George and Ringo I 'd agreed to that they were going , " What ? What if we love it ? " It didn 't come to that , luckily . I said to Yoko , " Don 't impose too many conditions on us , it 's really difficult to do this , spiritually . We don 't know , we may hate each other after two hours in the studio and just walk out . So don 't put any conditions , it 's tough enough . " 
 During an interview for the Anthology project , McCartney revealed that he was surprised to learn that Lennon 's demos of " Free as a Bird " and " Real Love " had already been released and were well known by Lennon fans . Starr admitted that when he first listened to the recording he found it very emotional . 
 = = = Recording = = = 
 George Martin , who had produced most of the Beatles ' 1960s recordings , turned down an invitation to produce " Free as a Bird " due to hearing problems ( though he subsequently managed to produce and direct the Anthology series ) . Harrison , in turn , suggested Lynne as producer , and work commenced at McCartney 's studio in February 1994 . Geoff Emerick and Jon Jacobs were chosen to engineer the new tracks . 
 The original tape of Lennon singing the song was recorded on a mono cassette , with vocals and piano on the same track . They were impossible to separate , so Lynne had to produce the track with voice and piano together , but commented that it was good for the integrity of the project , as Lennon was not only singing occasional lines , but also playing on the song . 
 Although Lennon had died in 1980 , Starr said that the three remaining Beatles agreed they would pretend that Lennon had " gone for lunch " , or had gone for a " cup of tea " . The remaining Beatles recorded a track around Lennon 's basic song idea , but which had gaps they had to fill in musically . Some chords were changed , and the arrangement was expanded to include breaks for McCartney and Harrison to sing extra lines . Harrison played slide guitar in the solo . 
 The Beatles ' overdubs and production were recorded between February and March 1994 in Sussex , England , at McCartney 's home studio . It ends with a slight coda including a strummed ukulele by Harrison ( an instrument he was known to have played often ) and the voice of John Lennon played backwards . The message , when played in reverse , is " Turned out nice again " , which was the catchphrase of George Formby . The final result sounds like " made by John Lennon " , which , according to McCartney , was unintentional and was only discovered after the surviving Beatles reviewed the final mix . When Starr heard McCartney and Harrison singing the harmonies , and later the finished song , he said that it sounded just like them [ The Beatles ] . He explained his comment by saying that he looked at the project as " an outsider " . Lynne fully expected the finished track to sound like The Beatles , as that was his premise for the project , but Harrison added : " It 's gonna sound like them [ The Beatles ] if it is them ... It sounds like them now " [ in the present ] . 
 McCartney , Harrison and Starr all agreed that the recording process was more pleasurable than when they later recorded " Real Love " ( the second song chosen for release ) ; as it was almost finished , they had very little input , and felt like sidemen for Lennon . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Free as a Bird " was produced by Vincent Joliet and directed by Joe Pytka and depicts , from the point of view of a bird in flight , many references to Beatles songs , such as " Penny Lane " , " Paperback Writer " , " A Day in the Life " , " Eleanor Rigby " , " Helter Skelter " , " Piggies " , " The Continuing Story of Bungalow Bill " , " Strawberry Fields Forever " , " Doctor Robert " , and " The Fool on The Hill " . Between 80 and 100 allusions to the Beatles ' story , music and lyrics in the video have been estimated . Although the bird can be heard at the beginning of the video , it is never seen . Neil Aspinall ( Apple Records executive at the time ) said that this was because no @-@ one could agree on what kind of bird it should be . Pytka had to send his ideas to McCartney , Harrison and Starr , as well as Ono , to make sure they all agreed before he could proceed with the filming of the video . Derek Taylor ( ex @-@ Apple Records executive ) sent a two @-@ page letter to Pytka confirming that he could proceed , and personally encouraged and supported Pytka 's ideas . The video was filmed in as many authentic locations as possible : Penny Lane was made by Pytka 's art department to look as it was in the 1950s , and other locations filmed were The Liver Building , and Liverpool Docks ( as a reference to Lennon 's father Alfred Lennon ) . 
 Although Pytka fixed the ideas on a storyboard , he abandoned it as soon as filming began , and followed ideas based on what angles and perspectives the steadycam camera produced . One instance was the filming of the car crash , which Pytka filmed for hours from above , but realised that a steadycam shot on the ground was a much better idea . Archive footage was used by imposing it on scenes shot by Pytka , who utilised a greenscreen stage to digitally blend it into the finished film , such as Paul 's Old English Sheepdog in the graveyard , and the elephant in the ballroom procession scene . The elephant was put in last , as Aspinall phoned Pytka and said that Starr liked the scene , but insisted an elephant be put in it , which Pytka later did , as he had already put a sitar in at the request of Harrison . Apart from the steadycam shots , Pytka used a Russian @-@ made Akil @-@ crane for sweeping overhead shots , such as the Abbey Road zebra crossing shot at the end , as well as a remote @-@ controlled toy helicopter with a camera added to it for intricate aerial shots . To make it more interesting , two Blue Meanies make cameos . 
 Harrison played the ukulele in the studio for the song , and asked to appear as the ukulele player seen only from behind at the very end of the video . Pytka resisted this , as he felt it would be wrong for any contemporary members of the Beatles to appear on screen . Pytka later stated that it was " heartbreaking " that Harrison had not played the role , particularly after Harrison 's death in 2001 and upon discovering that the ukulele was not a sample of an old song as Pytka had assumed . The video won the Grammy Award for Best Short Form Music Video in 1997 . 
 On 6 November 2015 , Apple Records released a new deluxe version of the 1 album in different editions and variations ( known as 1 + ) . Most of the tracks on 1 have been remixed from the original multi @-@ track masters by Giles Martin . Giles Martin , with Jeff Lynne also remixed " Free as a Bird " to accompany the music video for the DVD and Blu @-@ ray releases . The remix of " Free as a Bird " cleans up Lennon 's vocal further , and uses a different take of Harrison 's vocal phrase , replacing the lyric " whatever happened to the life that we once knew " with " whatever happened to the love that we once knew " . Towards the end of the track , this version also contains a clip of Lennon stating the phrase " turned out nice again " played forward - which was played backwards in the original mix of the song . McCartney 's lead vocal , buried in the original mix to serve as a double track for Lennon 's own vocal , can now be heard more prominently in the second verse . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Free as a Bird " was premiered on BBC Radio 1 in the early hours of 20 November 1995 . It was released as a single in the UK on 4 December 1995 , two weeks after its appearance on the Anthology 1 album . The single sold 120 @,@ 000 copies in its first week , entering the UK Singles Chart at No. 2 . It remained on the chart for eight weeks . In the US , the song reached No. 6 on the Billboard Hot 100 , becoming The Beatles ' 34th Top 10 single in America . It was the group 's first Top 10 song in the U.S. in nineteen and a half years , the longest span for the group between Top 10 hits since first charting in America in 1964 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Free as a Bird " marked the first time a single containing new material had been released under The Beatles ' name since " The Long and Winding Road " in the United States in 1970 . The promotional video was broadcast during episode one of The Beatles Anthology that aired on ITV in the UK and ABC in the US . 
 " Free as a Bird " was greeted with mixed reviews . Its release was criticised by Caroline Sullivan in The Guardian as a publicity gimmick , exploiting the Beatles brand , and owing less to the Beatles than to Lynne . Andy Gill in The Independent called the song " disappointingly low @-@ key . ... George 's guitar weeps gently enough when required , but the overall effect is of a dirge . " Chris Carter , now the host of Breakfast with the Beatles , commented : " I would value any song ( especially if it was great ) performed by John , Paul , George and Ringo , no matter how ( or when ) it was recorded . " " Free as a Bird " later won the 1997 Grammy Award for Best Pop Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocal . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 According to Ian MacDonald : 
 John Lennon – lead vocal , piano 
 Paul McCartney – lead vocal , harmony vocal , bass , acoustic guitar , piano , synthesizer 
 George Harrison – lead vocal , harmony vocal , electric slide guitar , acoustic guitar , ukulele 
 Ringo Starr – drums , harmony vocal 
 = = Track listings = = 
 All songs written by John Lennon , Paul McCartney , George Harrison and Ringo Starr , except where noted . 
 7 " UK : <unk> / USA : NR @-@ <unk> 
 " Free as a Bird " – 2 : 42 
 " Christmas Time ( Is Here Again ) " – 3 : 02 
 Music recorded 28 November 1967 at EMI Studios , London ; Christmas greetings recorded 6 December 1967 at EMI Studios , London 
 CD UK : <unk> / USA : CDP <unk> 
 " Free as a Bird " – 4 : 26 
 " I Saw Her Standing There " ( Lennon – McCartney ) – 2 : 51 
 Recorded 11 February 1963 at EMI Studios , London 
 Produced by George Martin 
 This version ( take 9 ) was recorded after the version released on the album Please Please Me ( take 1 ) . The introductory count @-@ in from take 9 was edited onto the start of take 1 for the album . 
 " This Boy " ( Lennon – McCartney ) – 3 : 17 
 Recorded 17 October 1963 at EMI Studios , London 
 Produced by George Martin 
 Two incomplete versions ( takes 12 and 13 ) , which both break down into laughter . 
 " Christmas Time ( Is Here Again ) " – 3 : 02 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = Aboriginal title in the Taney Court = 
 The Supreme Court of the United States , under Chief Justice Roger B. Taney ( 1836 – 1864 ) , issued several important decisions on the status of aboriginal title in the United States , building on the opinions of aboriginal title in the Marshall Court . 
 The Taney Court heard Fellows v. Blacksmith ( 1857 ) and New York ex rel . Cutler v. Dibble ( 1858 ) , the first two aboriginal title cases involving indigenous plaintiffs to reach the Supreme Court since Cherokee Nation v. Georgia ( 1830 ) , and the first two cases won by indigenous parties in the Supreme Court . In Marsh v. Brooks ( 1850 ) , in dicta , the Court declared : " That an action of ejectment could be maintained on an Indian right to occupancy and use , is not open to question . " 
 The remaining cases involved no indigenous parties . In United States v. Brooks ( 1850 ) , the Court refused to inquire into allegations of fraud on the part of Commissioner Jehiel Brooks in negotiating a treaty with the Caddo . Following the Marshall Court 's precedent , the Taney Court continued to uphold the validity of state land grants issued before the extinguishment of aboriginal title . Depending on the applicable law , the Taney Court held that aboriginal title could sometimes be asserted as a defense in trespass , ejectment , and writ of right actions , even by those with no claim to title themselves . 
 = = United States v. Brooks ( 1850 ) = = 
 In 1835 , a treaty negotiated by Commissioner Jehiel Brooks provided for the Caddos to cede certain lands to <unk> <unk> and his three sons , Jacques , Dominique , and Balthazar <unk> . The <unk> sold the land to Col. Brooks . On February 24 , 1846 , the United States attorney for the District of Louisiana filed suit against Col. Brooks , alleging that he had fraudulently included the lands within those ceded by the Caddos to the United States . At trial , the judge refused to allow the federal government to read various documents into evidence ; the jury returned a verdict for Brooks . 
 The Court affirmed , holding that " Brooks being the <unk> of the <unk> for the entire reservation , he may hold it against any claim of the United States , as his <unk> would have done . " The court refused to consider " conjectural intimations , which were made in the argument of it , concerning the influences which were used to secure the reservation , or the designs of the commissioner in having it done . " 
 = = The Seneca cases ( 1857 – 1858 ) = = 
 The two aboriginal title cases involving indigenous litigants to reach the Taney Court both involved the Tonawanda Band of Seneca Indians and the Tonawanda Reservation , both argued by John H. Martindale ( first as the district attorney of Genesee County , New York , then in private practice ) , and both originated in the New York state courts . 
 = = = Fellows v. Blacksmith ( 1857 ) = = = 
 Fellows v. Blacksmith ( 1857 ) was the first litigation of aboriginal title in the U.S. Supreme Court by an indigenous plaintiff since Cherokee Nation v. Georgia ( 1831 ) , and the first Supreme Court case won by an indigenous plaintiff . According to a contemporary New York Times article : " The questions involved are of great magnitude , and affect more or less the title to a large portion of the State of New York . " 
 The Court affirmed a judgement for the plaintiff on a cause of action of trespass . Moreover , the Court held that Indian removal treaties could not be enforced by private parties , either through self @-@ help or through the courts . Fellows also underscored the importance of the trust relationship between the federal government and the tribes in holding that the federal government retained the sole discretion to enforce , or not enforce , such treaties against the tribes . 
 = = = New York ex rel . Cutler v. Dibble ( 1858 ) = = = 
 New York ex rel . Cutler v. Dibble ( 1858 ) was a companion case to Fellows . An individual Seneca party of interest , prevailed in a suit brought under a New York statute authorizing state district attorneys to remove non @-@ Indian trespassers from Indian lands in county courts . At the time Fellows was decided , this case had reached the U.S. Supreme Court but had not yet been argued . The defendant @-@ appellants , before the Court , unsuccessfully challenged the state statute under the Indian Commerce Clause of the United States Constitution , the federal Nonintercourse Act and the Treaty of Buffalo Creek between the federal government and the Senecas . Because the Senecas relied on state law , and the defendants relied on federal law , the case is essentially the inverse of Nonintercourse Act litigation of over the next 150 years . 
 = = Dicta in disputes between non @-@ Indians = = 
 Several decisions note the extinguishment of aboriginal title as a condition of land grants . More than once , in dicta , the Court cited the purchase of aboriginal title in New Jersey . 
 = = = Sac and Fox Half @-@ Breed Tract cases ( 1850 – 1854 ) = = = 
 An 1824 federal treaty with the Sac and Fox tribes set aside a 119 @,@ 000 acre Half @-@ Breed Tract in Iowa between the Mississippi River and the Des Moines River . The treaty declared the lands inalienable . In 1834 , Congress transferred the fee title to the lands to the Half @-@ Breeds , rendering the land transferable . By 1841 , the Tract was owned in fee almost entirely by non @-@ Indians . The Taney Court heard for land disputes involving the Iowa Half @-@ Breed Tract : the first two from the Supreme Court of the Iowa Territory ; the second two from the United States District Court for the District of Iowa . 
 Marsh v. Brooks I ( 1850 ) 
 Marsh v. Brooks ( 1850 ) , a writ of right action , involved a plaintiff holding an 1839 federal land patent ( issued under an 1836 statute ) and a trespasser defendant asserting that the plaintiff 's title was invalid because of the Half @-@ Breed Tract treaty and legislation . The Iowa Supreme Court refused to let the defendants raise this defense ; Justice John Catron , for a unanimous Court , reversed and remanded . The Court provided the following dicta on aboriginal title : 
 This Indian title consisted of the <unk> and right of occupancy and enjoyment ; and , so long as it continued , was superior to and excluded those claiming the reserved lands by patents made subsequent to the ratification of the treaty ; they could not disturb the occupants under the Indian title . That an action of ejectment could be maintained on an Indian right to occupancy and use , is not open to question . This is the result of the decision in [ Johnson v. McIntosh and Cornet v. Winton , written by Justice Catron while he was on the Tennessee high court ] . . . . 
 The Supreme Court held that an ejectment defendant could assert the defense of aboriginal title , even if the defendant did not even claim to hold the aboriginal title : 
 It was also insisted on the argument here , that , as it did not appear that any half @-@ breeds , or their heirs or assigns , were in existence when the trial below took place , the outstanding title relied on could not be set up by the defendants . To which it may be answered , that it was necessary for the plaintiffs to show themselves to be owners of the land . . . ; and if the land had been previously granted , nothing was left to pass by the second patent . . . . The general rule is , that , where the same land has been twice granted , the elder patent may be set up in defence by a trespasser , when sued by a claimant under the younger grant , without inquiring as to who is the actual owner of the land at the time of the trial . 
 Webster v. Reid ( 1850 ) 
 In Webster v. Reid ( 1850 ) , the Court declared unconstitutional an Iowa territorial statute that authorized bench trials against " ‘ the Owners of the Half @-@ breed Lands lying in Lee County , " with notice by publication . 
 Marsh v. Brooks II ( 1852 ) 
 Marsh v. Brooks ( 1852 ) involved the same parties that had been before the Court in 1850 . Having re @-@ filed in federal court , the plaintiffs again prevailed , and this time , the Court ( again , the opinion authored by Justice Catron ) affirmed . In dicta , the Court offered the following interpretation of the status of aboriginal title in the Spanish Louisiana territory : 
 That the <unk> and Foxes did claim the country generally , where this land lies , is not controverted ; nor was their claim ceded to the United States till 1824 . And this raises the question whether , according to Spanish usage , whilst that power governed Louisiana , an existing Indian claim to territory precluded inhabitation and cultivation under a permit to inhabit and cultivate a particular place designated in the permit , and which was in the Indian country . Spain had no treaties with any of the Indian tribes in Louisiana , fixing limits to their claims , so far as we are informed . The Indians were kept quiet , and at peace with Spanish subjects , by kind treatment and due precautions , which did not allow <unk> on lands claimed by them , without written permits from the Governor ; but that such permits were usual , cannot be doubted . 
 Again in dicta , the Court seemed to apply the concept of adverse possession to aboriginal lands : 
 [ The plaintiff 's tract ] was held and improved by authority of the Spanish government , and claimed as individual property , to which the Indian right of possession did not extend ; of this the Indians never complained , nor do they now complain ; no half @-@ breed owner and Indian descendant is defending this suit ; it is defended by trespassers , showing no color of claim under the half @-@ breeds , or any one else ; shelter is sought under the assumption that Honoré 's permit and inhabitation were neither known or recognized by the <unk> and Foxes , and that therefore , the additional article of the treaty of 1804 , cannot protect the title of Reddick . . . . [ I ] t must be presumed that the Indians both had knowledge and assented to <unk> 's claim ; and we are furthermore of opinion , that the Indian tribes , and the half @-@ breeds , who claim under them , must be held to knowledge , and to consent , that Honoré took and held , rightful possessions , from the fact of his open and notorious actual occupancy , and holding for himself , in their midst . 
 Coy v. Mason ( 1854 ) 
 Coy v. Mason ( 1854 ) , another dispute between non @-@ Indians , remarked in dicta that the Half @-@ Breed Tract had been held " by the same title , and in the same manner , that other Indian titles are held . " 
 = = = Dred Scott v. Sandford ( 1857 ) = = = 
 In dicta , Dred Scott v. Sandford made several comments regarding aboriginal title . Chief Justice Taney was not present at the opinion announcement for Fellows because he was at home working on the Dred Scott opinion , which was announced the next day . Dred Scott , in dicta , opined the following on aboriginal title : 
 The situation of [ blacks ] was altogether unlike that of the Indian race . The latter . . . were situated in territories to which the white race claimed the ultimate right of dominion . But that claim was acknowledged to be subject to the right of the Indians to occupy it as long as they thought proper , and neither the English nor colonial Governments claimed or exercised any dominion over the tribe or nation by whom it was occupied , nor claimed the right to the possession of the territory , until the tribe or nation consented to cede it . 
 Justice John Catron , concurring in Dred Scott , also noted in dicta that : 
 [ B ] ecause Congress has express power to regulate commerce among the Indian tribes and to prohibit intercourse with the Indians , that therefore Dr. Emerson 's title might be defeated within the country ceded by the Indians to the United States as early as 1805 . . . . 
 = = = State land grants = = = 
 Lattimer 's Lessee v. Poteet ( 1840 ) 
 Lattimer 's Lessee v. Poteet ( 1840 ) was an appeal from a judgment for the defendant in an ejectment action in the United States circuit court of North Carolina . It was undisputed that the plaintiff 's title arose from a North Carolina state land grant to Cherokee lands within the boundaries demarcated by the federal Cherokee treaties . The sole defense was that the state grant was void because of the federal Cherokee treaties . 
 Before the Supreme Court , the plaintiffs argued that it was " not in the power of the United States and the Cherokee nation , by the treaty of Tellico in 1798 , to vary in any degree the treaty line of Holston ; so as to affect private rights , or the rights of North Carolina . " The Court responded that , as a matter of fact , the Tellico treaty had merely confirmed the Holston treaty boundaries , both of which were to be interpreted by the parties to the treaty . 
 The Court held that , as a matter of federal law , the state grants were not void merely because they were granted before the Cherokee 's title was extinguished : " The Indian title being only a right of occupancy , the state of North Carolina had the power to grant the fee in the lands , subject to this right . " But , under the North Carolina surveying statute as interpreted by the North Carolina courts , such grants were invalid . Thus , the Court affirmed . 
 Chief Justice Taney concurred in the judgment , but disagreed that the political branches had interpreted the Tellico treaty to demarcate the relevant boundary . Justice Catron also concurred . He " admit [ ted ] . . . that the contracting parties had the power afterwards to settle its position " but argued that " they never saw proper to do [ so ] . " Catron argued that " [ t ] he land in controversy was granted before this line was run " and thus that the treaty of Holston " will manifestly tend to disturb titles made in reference to another line . " Catron concurred only because " the bill of exceptions sets forth not a single fact ; and the correctness of the instructions of the Court below cannot therefore be tested by the evidence given on the trial ; whether they are right or wrong , it is impossible for me to say " ; thus , he defaulted to a " presumption that the instructions were proper . " 
 Justice Wayne dissented without opinion . 
 Kinney v. Clark ( 1844 ) 
 Kinney v. Clark ( 1844 ) involved a Virginia land grant given before the Cherokee aboriginal title to the lands had been extinguished . The Court opined that : " If Clark 's entry was made , however , on lands reserved [ for the Cherokees ] from location by the act of 1779 , then it is void , because the act did not open the land office for such purpose , nor extend to the excepted lands . " The Court quoted at length from the Long Island treaty ( 1777 ) and noted : " This treaty fully explains why the Cherokee country was excepted from the land @-@ law of 1779 , and locations on it prohibited ; no reasons could add force to its stipulations . " 
 However , the Court determined that : " The opinion of the [ Virginia ] Court of Appeals in 1791 is conclusive to the point @-@ that if the land in dispute was not Cherokee country , it was not within the exception of the land @-@ law of 1779 ; and that Clark 's title is good , as all the lands in the commonwealth not excepted , were subject to appropriation on Treasury warrants , although claimed by Indians whose lands were not protected from location by statute . " Finally , the decision of the United State circuit court of Kentucky was affirmed on the basis of Kentucky 's statute of limitations . 
 = = = Spanish Florida and Louisiana = = = 
 Mitchel v. United States ( 1841 ) 
 The plaintiff in Mitchel v. United States ( 1841 ) sued the federal government in the Florida state courts , basing his claim on a grant from the Creek and Seminole Indians , ratified by the Spanish during their rule of Florida . The plaintiff 's claim was allowed only in part , and he appealed . 
 Justice Wayne , noted that the case involved the same plaintiff as in Mitchel v. United States ( 1835 ) , a decision of the Marshall Court . Therefore , Wayne opined , " [ t ] he case before us does not require any discussion upon the nature and extent of the property held by the Florida Indians in these lands , under Spain . That was satisfactorily done in the decision given by this court in the original case . " The Court further noted : " We will not enter into the question , how far the appropriation of the land for a fortress , by order of the government , extinguished the Indian title . It might be done successfully , upon the positions taken by this court in respect to the rights of European monarchs to Indian lands in North America , in Johnson v. McIntosh . 
 Chouteau v. Molony ( 1853 ) 
 In Chouteau v. Molony ( 1853 ) , Justice Wayne , for a unanimous Court , interpreted a grant from the Fox tribe to be a mere right to mine lead , rather than a grant of land because it was not confirmed by the Spanish authorities as required by Spanish law and because it included a Fox village which the tribe would have been unlikely to cede . 
 = = = Others = = = 
 Maney v. Porter ( 1846 ) 
 Chief Justice Taney held in Maney v. Porter ( 1846 ) that the Court had no jurisdiction to review state court actions claiming money damages from fraudulent land sales where : 
 [ T ] he suit was not brought to uphold any title or right which the complainant claimed under the Choctaw treaty , or under the law of Congress which he states to have been passed upon the subject . For he does not ask for a conveyance of the reservations , nor of the Indian title to them . And he does not even <unk> that these claims are valid , or that he has any title to them ; but , on the contrary , charges that none of the claims had been secured , and states that he did not think it probable that they would be obtained by the assignees of the Indians . And as the case has been removed here from the decision of a state court , we have no right to review it unless the complainant claimed some right under the treaty with the Choctaws or the act of Congress . . . . In the case before us , no such title , right , or privilege was claimed by the bill , and of course no decision was made against it in the state court . We therefore can exercise no jurisdiction . . . and are not authorized to examine any questions of fraud or failure of consideration , or breach of contract . . . . 
 Gaines v. Nicholson ( 1850 ) 
 In Gaines v. Nicholson ( 1850 ) , Justice Nelson wrote the following in dicta : 
 There is no doubt but that all persons in whose behalf reservations were made under [ an Indian ] treaty . . . and had made improvements thereon . . . were entitled to the section , including their improvements , in preference to any other right that could have been previously acquired under the government ; because the land embraced within the section was so much excepted from the cession . No previous grant of Congress could be paramount , according to the right of occupancy which this government has always conceded to the Indian tribes within her jurisdiction . 
 It was so much carved out of the Territory ceded , and remained to the Indian occupant , as he had never parted with it . He holds , strictly speaking , not under the treaty of cession , but under his original title , confirmed by the government in the act of agreeing to the reservation . 
 Doe v. Wilson ( 1859 ) 
 In Doe v. Wilson ( 1859 ) , Justice Catron , for the Court , held that a treaty with the Pottawatomie created individual , alienable allotments ; thus , the grantee of an individual <unk> had good title . 
 = Early Founders Memorial Stone = 
 The Foundation Stone of the Monument to the Early Founders of Singapore , usually called the Early Founders Memorial Stone is a national memorial that is dedicated to the early founders ( " Unknown Immigrants " ) of Singapore . The original idea was raised by a graduates ' association and an open design competition was held for the memorial project . The foundation stone was initially erected along Collyer Quay Street outside the Fullerton Hotel in 1970 . After a series of setbacks and delays , the project was finally scrapped after no worthy design was accepted , which resulted the foundation stone becoming the memorial afterwards . In 2000 , the memorial was relocated to the National Archives of Singapore at Canning Rise before moving back to the grounds of The Fullerton Hotel in 2010 . 
 = = History = = 
 The original idea of erecting a keynote memorial at the Singapore waterfront as a dedication to Singapore 's early founders was mooted in 1969 by the Alumni International Singapore ( AIS ) , a body set up to represent Singaporean graduates from 11 countries who had gathered locally for Singapore 's 150th anniversary . AIS announced that a proposed memorial on Queen Elizabeth Walk by the Padang would required some S $ 250 @,@ 000 ( US $ 163 @,@ 000 ) to be raised . An open design competition was held and sculptors were asked to come up with a design to celebrate the Singaporean for " his courage , his adventurous and enterprising spirit and his indomitable will , not only to survive but to make good . " 
 = = = Foundation stone = = = 
 On 18 January 1970 , President Yusof bin Ishak laid the memorial 's foundation stone along Collyer Quay Street , on what was supposed to be a temporary site . Before an audience of some 500 people , including members of the diplomatic corps , President Yusof gave a speech : 
 It carries no great names . In fact it has no names at all . It is for all men . It is not for the Chinese , the Indian , the Eurasian or any other single race . It is for all who in one way or another helped to create a modern multiracial , multicultural and multilingual Singapore . 
 The foundation stone consists of a rectangular granite stone topping off a pyramid @-@ shaped brick pedestal with inscriptions in the four official languages ( English , Malay , Mandarin , and Tamil ) : 
 This foundation stone of the monument in tribute to the early founders of Singapore was laid by <unk> Yusof Bin Ishak , the President of the Republic of Singapore on the 18th day of January 1970 . 
 = = = Competition = = = 
 In July 1973 , designs for the memorial had been received from 38 sculptors but the top two prizes were not awarded ; it was found that no entry being deemed worthy of the honour by AIS panel of judges earlier . Instead , five sculptors received merit awards from AIS , together with a token S $ 250 . 
 One of the merit awards recipients , Ng Eng Teng , who was to receive Singapore 's Cultural Medallion in 1981 and who now has his critically acclaimed works all over Singapore , commented unhappily : " We have never been so embarrassed or insulted in all our professional lives . No professional artist of our standing would condescend to receive such an amount . We felt we had been taken for a ride . " 
 In response , AIS expressed regret that the aggrieved sculptors had publicly stated their dissatisfaction . The alumni further rejected a complaint that the results were 10 months overdue , and repeated that no suitable entry had been received . Subsequently , three of the five sculptors banded together to produce a design they described as " four pieces of cuboid leaning towards each other and pivoted on four corners " which was referred by AIS as resembling " four chopsticks " . Ironically , this was the nickname and roughly the design concept of the Civilian War Memorial , which was adopted in another separate open competition in 1966 . 
 In September 1975 , the alumni announced in public again that the Early Founders Project was at " a very advanced stage and will be launched as soon as Government approval has been obtained . The site of the monument has already been earmarked on the reclaimed land off the Esplanade . " 
 Despite the announcement , the ambitious project became inactive and was finally scrapped after no worthy design was accepted and not nearly enough of the S $ 250 @,@ 000 funds had been raised . In 1985 , the alumni announced that the funds collected earlier would be <unk> to other projects , such as providing scholarships . 
 = = = Roles switched = = = 
 As a result , the memorial stone became the memorial itself . The monument was later moved by the authorities to make way for the gentrification of the Fullerton Building , and was relocated to the National Archives of Singapore , where it stands almost forgotten today . The authorities hope that when Singapore 's community of values had evolved to the point that a common language of art could be used to complete the task of building such a monument again . 
 On 9 July 2010 , the foundation stone was moved back to the corner of Fullerton Building where it now sits overlooking the Singapore River following a ceremony and speech by The Minister for Information , Communication and the Arts . 
 = Operation Sandstone = 
 Operation Sandstone was a series of nuclear weapon tests in 1948 . It was the third series of American tests , following Trinity in 1945 and Crossroads in 1946 , and preceding Ranger . Like the Crossroads tests , the Sandstone tests were carried out at the Pacific Proving Grounds , although at Enewetak Atoll rather than Bikini Atoll . They differed from Crossroads in that they were conducted by the Atomic Energy Commission , with the armed forces having only a supporting role . The purpose of the Sandstone tests was also different : they were primarily tests of new bomb designs rather than of the effects of nuclear weapons . Three tests were carried out in April and May 1948 by Joint Task Force 7 , with a work force of 10 @,@ 366 personnel , of whom 9 @,@ 890 were military . 
 The successful testing of the new cores in the Operation Sandstone tests rendered every component of the old weapons obsolete . Even before the third test had been carried out , production of the old cores was halted , and all effort concentrated on the new Mark 4 nuclear bomb , which would become the first mass @-@ produced nuclear weapon . More efficient use of fissionable material as a result of Operation Sandstone would increase the U.S. nuclear stockpile from 56 bombs in June 1948 to 169 in June 1949 . 
 = = Origins = = 
 Nuclear weapons were developed during World War II by the Manhattan Project , which created a network of production facilities , and the weapons research and design laboratory at the Los Alamos National Laboratory . Two types of bombs were developed : the Mark 1 Little Boy , a gun @-@ type fission weapon using uranium @-@ 235 , and the Mark 3 Fat Man , an implosion @-@ type nuclear weapon using plutonium . 
 These weapons were not far removed from their laboratory origins . A great deal of work remained to improve ease of assembly , safety , reliability and storage before they were ready for production . There were also many improvements to their performance that had been suggested or recommended during the war that had not been possible under the pressure of wartime development . Norris Bradbury , who replaced Robert Oppenheimer as director at Los Alamos , felt that " we had , to put it bluntly , lousy bombs . " 
 Plutonium was produced by irradiating uranium @-@ 238 in three 250 MW nuclear reactors at the Hanford site . In theory they could produce 0 @.@ 91 grams ( 0 @.@ 032 oz ) of plutonium per megawatt @-@ day , or about 20 kilograms ( 44 lb ) per month . In practice , production never approached such a level in 1945 , when only between 4 and 6 kilograms ( 8 @.@ 8 and 13 @.@ 2 lb ) was produced per month . A Fat Man core required about 6 @.@ 2 kilograms ( 14 lb ) of plutonium , of which 21 % fissioned . Plutonium production fell off during 1946 due to swelling of the reactors ' graphite neutron moderators . This is known as the Wigner effect , after its discoverer , the Manhattan Project scientist Eugene Wigner . 
 These reactors were also required for the production ( by irradiation of bismuth @-@ 209 ) of polonium @-@ 210 , which was used in the initiators , a critical component of the nuclear weapons . Some 62 kilograms ( 137 lb ) of bismuth @-@ 209 had to be irradiated for 100 days to produce 600 curies of polonium @-@ 210 , a little over 132 milligrams ( 2 @.@ 04 gr ) . Because polonium @-@ 210 has a half @-@ life of only 138 days , at least one reactor had to be kept running . The oldest unit , B pile , was therefore closed down so that it would be available in the future . Investigation of the problem would take most of 1946 before a fix was found . 
 Uranium @-@ 235 was derived from enrichment of natural uranium at the Y @-@ 12 plant and K @-@ 25 site in Oak Ridge , Tennessee . Improvements in the processes and procedures of the electromagnetic and gaseous isotope separation between October 1945 and June 1946 led to an increase in production to around 69 kilograms ( 152 lb ) of uranium @-@ 235 per month , which was only enough for one of the very wasteful Little Boys . A Fat Man was 17 @.@ 5 times as efficient as a Little Boy , but a ton of uranium ore could yield eight times as much uranium @-@ 235 as plutonium , and on a per @-@ gram basis , plutonium cost somewhere between four and eight times as much to produce as uranium @-@ 235 , which at this time cost around $ 26 per gram . 
 = = Weapon development 1945 – 48 = = 
 The objectives of the Sandstone series of tests were to : 
 test nuclear cores and initiators ; 
 improve the theory and knowledge of implosion type weapons ; 
 test levitated cores ; 
 test composite cores ; and 
 determine the most economic designs in terms of efficient use of fissionable material . 
 Levitation meant that instead of being immediately inside the tamper , there would be an air gap between the tamper and the core , which would be suspended inside on wires . This would allow the tamper to gain more momentum before striking the core . The principle was similar to swinging a hammer at a nail . In order for this to work outside the laboratory , the wires had to be strong enough to withstand being dropped from an aircraft , but thin enough to not disturb the spherical symmetry of the implosion . The Theoretical Division at Los Alamos , known as T Division , had run computer calculations on the levitated core as early March 1945 . The use of the levitated core had been proposed during the planning for Operation Crossroads , but it had been decided instead to use the existing solid core " Christy " design . This was named after its designer , Robert Christy . For Sandstone , however , it was decided that at least two of the three tests would use levitated cores . 
 The motivation behind the composite core was to make better use of the available fissionable material . The use of uranium @-@ 235 in an implosion weapon instead of the inefficient gun type Little Boy was an obvious development . However , while plutonium was more expensive and harder to produce than uranium @-@ 235 , it fissions faster , because it makes better use of the neutrons its fission produces . On the other hand , the slower reaction of uranium @-@ 235 permits the assembly of super @-@ critical masses , making it theoretically possible to produce weapons with high yields . By July 1945 , Oppenheimer and Groves were considering using both materials in a composite core containing 3 @.@ 25 kilograms ( 7 @.@ 2 lb ) of plutonium and 6 @.@ 5 kilograms ( 14 lb ) of uranium @-@ 235 . The composite cores became available in 1946 . Los Alamos ' priority then became the development of an all @-@ uranium @-@ 235 core . By January 1948 the national stockpile contained 50 cores , of which 36 were composite Christy cores , nine were plutonium Christy cores , and five were composite levitated cores . Testing the new levitated , composite and uranium @-@ 235 cores would require at least three test firings . 
 More efficient weapons would require less efficient initiators . This meant that less polonium would be required . At the time of Sandstone , the national stockpile of polonium @-@ beryllium initiators consisted of 50 A @-@ Class initiators , with more than 25 curies of polonium , and 13 B @-@ Class initiators with 12 to 25 curies . During Sandstone , at least one test would be conducted with a B @-@ Class initiator . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 = = = Organization = = = 
 The tests were authorized by President Harry S. Truman on 27 June 1947 . The Atomic Energy Commission 's Director of Military Applications , Brigadier General James McCormack and his deputy , Captain James S. Russell , met with Bradbury and John Manley at Los Alamos on 9 July to make arrangements for the tests . They readily agreed that they would be scientific in nature , with Los Alamos supplying the technical direction and the armed forces providing supplies and logistical support . The cost of the tests , around $ 20 million , was divided between the Department of Defense and the Atomic Energy Commission . Lieutenant General John E. Hull was designated as test commander . Rear Admiral William S. Parsons and Major General William E. Kepner reprised their Operation Crossroads roles as deputy commanders . Joint Task Force 7 was formally activated on 18 October 1947 . As its commander , Hull was answerable to both the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Atomic Energy Commission . 
 Joint Task Force 7 consisted of 10 @,@ 366 personnel , 9 @,@ 890 of them military . Its headquarters consisted of about 175 men , of whom 96 were on board the USS Mount McKinley . The rest were accommodated on the USS Albemarle , Curtiss and Bairoko . A special division of the Los Alamos National Laboratory , known as J Division , was created specifically to manage nuclear testing . An Atomic Energy Commission group ( Task Group 7 @.@ 1 ) was responsible for preparing and detonating the nuclear weapons , and conducting the experiments . It consisted of some 283 scientists and technicians responsible for nuclear tests from J Division , the Armed Forces Special Weapons Project , the Naval Research Laboratory , the Naval Ordnance Laboratory , Argonne National Laboratory , the Aberdeen Proving Ground , the Atomic Energy Commission , Edgerton , <unk> & Grier , and other agencies . 
 Each dealt with a different aspect of the tests . The Naval Ordnance Laboratory handled the blast measurement tests , while the Naval Research Laboratory conducted the radiation measurement experiments , and Argonne National Laboratory did gamma ray measurements . Edgerton , <unk> , and Grier were contractors hired to design and install the timing and firing systems . Seven experimental weapon assemblies and six cores were delivered to San Pedro , California , and loaded on the weapon assembly ship USS Curtiss , in February 1948 , but the Atomic Energy Commission only gave permission for the expenditure of three cores in the tests . 
 = = = Ships = = = 
 The naval forces were organized as Task Group 7 @.@ 3 . It consisted of : 
 = = = Civil affairs = = = 
 In September 1947 , Hull , Russell , who was designated test director on 14 October , and Joint Task Force 7 's scientific director , Darol K. Froman from the Los Alamos Laboratories , set out with a group of scientists and military officers to examine various proposed test sites in the Pacific . Enewetak Atoll was chosen as the test site on 11 October . The island was remote , but with a good harbor and an airstrip . It also had ocean currents and trade winds that would carry fallout out to sea , an important consideration in view of what had happened at Bikini Atoll during Operation Crossroads . 
 As the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands was a United Nations trust territory administered by the United States , the United Nations Security Council was notified of the upcoming tests on 2 December . The atoll was inhabited by the <unk> @-@ Enewetak , who lived on Aomon , and the <unk> @-@ Enjebi , who lived on Bijire . Their original homes had been on Enewetak and Enjebi , but they had been moved during the war to make way for military bases . The population , about 140 in number , had been temporarily relocated to Meck Island during Operation Crossroads . This time , <unk> Atoll , an uninhabited atoll 124 nautical miles ( 230 km ; 143 mi ) southwest of Enewetak , was selected as a relocation site . A Naval Construction Battalion group arrived there on 22 November to build accommodation and amenities . The military authorities met with the local chiefs on 3 December , and they agreed to the relocation , which was carried out by USS King County by 20 December . An LST and four Douglas C @-@ 54 Skymaster aircraft were placed on standby to evacuate <unk> in case it was affected by fallout , but were not required . 
 Unlike the Crossroads tests , which were conducted in the media spotlight , the Sandstone tests were carried out with minimal publicity . On 15 April , there was still discussion in Washington about whether or not there should be any public announcement of the tests at all . Hull opposed making any announcement until after the series was completed , but the AEC commissioners felt that the news would leak out , and the United States would look secretive . It was therefore decided to make a last minute announcement . There was no announcement of the purpose of the tests , and only cursory press releases . On 18 May , after the series was over , Hull held a press conference in Hawaii , but only permitted the media to quote from written statements . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 Enjebi , Aomon , and <unk> Islands were cleared of vegetation and graded level to make it easier to install the required instrumentation , and a causeway was built between Aomon and Bijire so the instrument cables could be run from the test tower on Aomon to the control station on Bijire . The detonations were ordered so that later test areas would suffer minimal fallout from the earlier shots . The Army component , Task Group 7 @.@ 2 , was responsible for construction work . It consisted of the <unk> Provisional Engineer Battalion , with the <unk> and <unk> Composite Service Platoons , the 18th Engineer Construction Company and <unk> Signal Service Platoon ; Companies D and E of the 2nd Engineer Special Brigade 's 532nd Engineer Boat and Shore Regiment ; the <unk> Transportation Amphibious Truck Company ; <unk> Transportation Port Company ; <unk> CIC Detachment ; and the Naval Shore Base Detachment . 
 = = Operations = = 
 As in Operation Crossroads , each detonation was given its own code name , taken from the Joint Army / Navy Phonetic Alphabet . All used modified Mark III assemblies , and were detonated from 200 @-@ foot ( 61 m ) towers . The timing of the detonations was a matter of compromise . The gamma ray measurement experiments required darkness , but the Boeing B @-@ 17 Flying Fortress drones that would sample the clouds needed daylight to control them . As a compromise , the Sandstone detonations all took place shortly before dawn . 
 The detonations in the United States ' Sandstone series are listed below : 
 = = = X @-@ Ray = = = 
 The X @-@ Ray nuclear device used a levitated composite core . It was detonated on Enjebi just before sunrise at 06 : 17 on 15 April 1948 , with a yield of 37 kilotons . The efficiency of utilization of the plutonium was about 35 % ; that of the uranium @-@ 235 was 25 % or more . This was somewhat higher than Los Alamos ' prediction . Observers watching from ships in the lagoon saw a brilliant flash and felt the radiant heat . A condensation cloud 5 nautical miles ( 9 @.@ 3 km ; 5 @.@ 8 mi ) in diameter quickly enveloped the fireball , which glowed within the cloud . It took 45 to 50 seconds for the thunderous roar of the explosion to reach the observers . 
 About 20 minutes later , <unk> launched a helicopter to check on the cable winch which was to collect samples . It also lowered boats to test radioactivity levels in the lagoon . B @-@ 17 pilotless drone aircraft were flown through the clouds , and a drone light tank was used to recover soil samples from the crater . Unfortunately , it became bogged and had to be towed out ten days later . 
 = = = Yoke = = = 
 The Yoke nuclear device used a levitated all @-@ uranium @-@ 235 core . It was detonated on Aomon just before sunrise on 1 May 1948 at 06 : 09 , a day late due to unfavorable winds . The observers saw a similar flash and felt the same heat as the X @-@ Ray blast , but the 6 @-@ nautical @-@ mile ( 11 km ; 6 @.@ 9 mi ) wide condensation cloud was larger , and the sound of the explosion more forceful . One observer likened it to the sound of " a paper bag which is forcefully burst in a small room " . They were correct : its yield of 49 kilotons made it the largest nuclear detonation up to that time , but it was considered inefficient and wasteful of the fissile material . 
 = = = Zebra = = = 
 Zebra , the third test , and the last of the Sandstone series , was detonated on <unk> just before sunrise at 06 : 04 on 15 May 1948 . This test was characterized by AEC Chairman David Lilienthal as the " hardest and most important " test of the three . By using one of the B @-@ class initiators , it demonstrated that these could still be used with confidence . The observers perceived the flash and blast as similar to the previous two tests , but this time the base of the condensation cloud was at 2 @,@ 000 feet ( 610 m ) , which gave the observers an unobstructed view of the fireball , which therefore appeared to be brighter and last longer than the other two . Looks were deceiving : its levitated uranium @-@ 235 core produced a yield of 18 kilotons . 
 The procedures used in the previous tests were repeated , but this time the winch cable snagged , and the test samples had to be retrieved by a jeep , exposing its crew to more radiation . The Los Alamos personnel assigned to remove the filters from the B @-@ 17 drones had apparently carried out the procedure on X @-@ Ray and Yoke without problems , but this time three of them suffered radiation burns on their hands serious enough to be hospitalized and need skin grafting . One of the men who had carried out the procedure for Yoke was then also found to have burns on his hands and was hospitalized too , but was discharged on 28 May . Once again the drone tank gave trouble , and bogged in the crater , but the soil samples were retrieved by the backup drone tank . Both tanks were subsequently dumped in the ocean . 
 = = Outcome = = 
 The successful testing of the new cores in the Sandstone tests had a profound effect . Practically every component of the old weapons was rendered obsolete . Even before the third test had been carried out , Bradbury had halted production of the old cores , and ordered that all effort was to be concentrated on the Mark 4 nuclear bomb , which would become the first mass @-@ produced nuclear weapon . The more efficient use of fissionable material would increase the nuclear stockpile from 56 bombs in June 1948 to 169 in June 1949 . The Mark III bombs were withdrawn from service in 1950 . At the same time , new production plants were coming online and the Wigner effect problem had been solved . By May 1951 , plutonium production was twelve times that of 1947 , while uranium @-@ 235 production had increased eight @-@ fold . The Chief of the Armed Forces Special Weapons Project , Major General Kenneth D. Nichols , saw clearly that the era of scarcity was over . He now " recommended that we should be thinking in terms of thousands of weapons rather than hundreds . " 
 = Targeted Killings : Law and Morality in an Asymmetrical World = 
 Targeted Killings : Law and Morality in an Asymmetrical World is a non @-@ fiction compilation book about targeted killing edited by Claire Finkelstein , Jens David Ohlin , and Andrew Altman . It was published by Oxford University Press in 2012 . The book grew out of contributions by the authors to a conference in April 2011 at the University of Pennsylvania Law School . Targeted Killings features eighteen essays in five sections arranged by topic . The work argues that after the 11 September attacks by Al @-@ Qaeda in 2001 , the United States and other countries began to see the tactic of targeted killing differently . The practice of targeted killing had previously been accepted in situations of self @-@ defence in military settings ; after 11 September 2001 it was used to kill non @-@ combatants and those not directly involved in a particular armed force . 
 The book begins with a discussion of targeted killing of non @-@ combatants , followed by discussions of legalities , the rationale of self @-@ defence , the choice of targets , and when and whether the ends can be used to justify the means . Several contributors defend targeting of non @-@ combatants , while Jeremy Waldron discusses the morality associated with the tactic and argues against its use . Jeff McMahan identifies the problematic nature of targeted killing and emphasizes regulations for law enforcement to avoid abuse of process . Richard V. Meyer writes that any entity wishing to carry out targeted killing should first have to declare war on the targeted parties . Kevin H. Govern examines the elimination of Osama Bin Laden and identifies this killing as justified and the product of a rational decision @-@ making process . In the final portion of the book , Fernando <unk> says that targeted killing is particularly justified against terrorists because they use tactics specifically designed to kill civilians . 
 The book was well received in law reviews and by academics across multiple disciplines . Robin Geiß and Steven J. Barela praised its coverage of the legal , moral , political , and strategic aspects of targeted killings . Steven R. Ratner welcomed its addition to the academic literature , and Madeline E. Cohen wrote that it would be a useful reference for additional research . Abraham David Sofaer praised its treatment of the subject and tables , though he argued the book could have given more weight to the law enforcement model of the use of deadly force against individuals . 
 = = Background = = 
 Targeted Killings : Law and Morality in an Asymmetrical World developed as an outgrowth from a conference in April 2011 that focused on philosophy and law . The conference took place at the Institute for Law and Philosophy of the University of Pennsylvania . Experts in the fields of public policy , politics , military regulations , battlefield knowledge , law , ethics , and philosophy discussed contemporaneous issues surrounding targeted killing in society . The conference was titled " Using Targeted Killing to Fight the War on Terror : Philosophical , Moral , and Legal Challenges " and was organized by the University of Pennsylvania Law School . 
 At the time of the book 's initial print publication date , its editor Andrew Altman worked as Professor of Philosophy at Georgia State University and concurrently as Director of Research at the Jean Beer Blumenfeld Center for Ethics . Claire Finkelstein was the Algernon Biddle Professor of Law and Professor of Philosophy at the University of Pennsylvania and concurrently as co @-@ director of the University of Pennsylvania Institute of Law and Philosophy . Jens David Ohlin was employed as an Associate Professor of Law at Cornell Law School . Ohlin 's work had been published in academic journals , including the American Journal of International Law , the Columbia Law Review , and the Harvard International Law Journal . He wrote the 2008 book Defending Humanity : When Force is Justified and Why with George Fletcher , which was also published by Oxford University Press . 
 Targeted Killings : Law and Morality in an Asymmetrical World was published in hardcover format by Oxford University Press on 30 April 2012 . A paperback version was published at the same time . It was also published as an e @-@ book for the Amazon Kindle by Amazon.com on 1 March 2012 . In September 2012 , the work was published at Oxford Scholarship Online . 
 = = Content summary = = 
 Targeted Killings : Law and Morality in an Asymmetrical World begins with an introduction by Andrew Altman . This is followed by eighteen essays broken into five sections arranged by topic . The work says that after the Al @-@ Qaeda attacks in the United States on 11 September 2001 , the US and other countries began to see the tactic of targeted killing differently . The practice of targeted killing had previously been accepted in situations of self @-@ defense in military settings ; after the attacks it was used to kill non @-@ combatants and those not directly involved in a particular armed force . 
 The first section of the book is a discussion of targeted killing of non @-@ combatants . In an essay titled " <unk> the Civilian <unk> : Playing Whack @-@ a @-@ Mole Without a Mallet ? " , Colonel Mark Maxwell criticizes the opposition of the International Committee of the Red Cross ( ICRC ) to targeted killing . Maxwell writes that individuals may indeed serve a combat task without being a member of a particular state force . He argues for an extension of the definition of combatant to include those who arm themselves and engage in combat roles . " Targeting Co @-@ <unk> " by professor Jens David Ohlin supports Maxwell 's opinion and describes an analytical viewpoint called " linkage " in which he states armed terrorists and members of organizations can be killed . Ohlin interprets the guidelines of the ICRC to include reliance upon a military system of identification of combatants . " Can Just War Theory Justify Targeted Killing " by professor Daniel <unk> is an analysis of three thought processes used to discuss targeted killing rules : " <unk> " , " collectivist " , and " individualist " . <unk> writes that the tactic of targeted killing is a just form of combat in each of these analyses . New York University and Oxford University professor Jeremy Waldron deconstructs the morality associated with the tactic and argues against its use . He says that similar rationalizations could be used by the enemy against those conducting the targeted killings , there may be an inherent selection bias of targets , and warns of a slippery slope when defending an actor that uses the methodology . 
 In the second portion of the book , a group of articles discuss which sets of laws should be used to regulate targeted killing . Philosophy professor Jeff McMahan of Rutgers University asks , " Targeted Killing : Murder , Combat or Law Enforcement ? " . He says that eliminating enemies for purposes of self @-@ defense is justified . McMahan writes about the problematic nature of targeted killing and emphasizes regulations for law enforcement to avoid abuses of process . University of Pennsylvania law and philosophy professor Claire Finkelstein writes in " Targeted Killing as Preemptive Action " about the difficulties of rationalizing targeted killing outside of the realm of typical combat between state actors . Finkelstein characterizes people as noncombatants unless they are a member of a group that includes identification through standardized attire and criminal behaviour patterns . Mississippi College School of Law professor Richard V. Meyer writes that current regulations and standards for targeted killing are inadequate . He says that any entity wishing to carry out targeted killing should first have to declare war on the targeted parties involved . 
 The book 's third group of essays analyzes the rationale of self @-@ defence as a justification for targeted killing . Washburn University School of Law professor Craig Martin writes in " Going Medieval : Targeted Killing , Self @-@ Defense and the Jus ad Bellum Regime " that self @-@ defence is not an appropriate rationale for targeted killing because such a justification is restricted to conflicts between state actors . University of Tulsa School of Law professor Russell Christopher writes in " <unk> in Justified Targeted Killing " that self @-@ defence should be ruled out as a suitable position in several examples of potential conflict . He critiques arguments by governments including the United Kingdom and the United States that self @-@ defense can be used as a rationalization of action against imminent danger . Western Washington University emeritus philosophy professor Phillip Montague says in an essay titled " Defending Defensive Targeted Killings " that use of this tactic against combatants can be seen as defensible and justified acts against terrorism or those who assist terrorist organizations . 
 The fourth portion of the book discusses how to make specific choices in targeted killing situations prior to state actors carrying out actions against individuals . University of Utah S.J. <unk> College of Law professor Amos N. <unk> discusses " The Importance of Criteria @-@ Based Reasoning in Targeted Killing Decisions " and concludes that instead of combatant commanders in the field , lawyers in consultation with decision algorithms must make decisions on targets . Pepperdine University School of Law professor Gregory S. McNeal critiques the arguments of those against targeted killing in his essay , " Are Targeted Killings Unlawful ? A Case Study in Empirical Claims Without Empirical Evidence " . He differentiates between decision @-@ making processes of the United States military and those of the Central Intelligence Agency , emphasizing the U.S. military tactic of attempting to avoid collateral damage . Ave Maria School of Law associate professor Kevin H. Govern examines the killing of Osama Bin Laden in his piece " Operation Neptune Spear : Was Killing Bin Laden a Legitimate Military Objective ? " . He says this particular killing was justified and borne out of a rational decision @-@ making process . American University Washington College of Law professor Kenneth Anderson distinguishes the use of military drones from targeted killing in his article " Efficiency in Bello and ad Bellum : Making the Use of Force Too Easy ? " . He says targeted killing as response to threats and to prevent potential terrorist attacks is justified . 
 The final portion of the book analyzes consequentialism within the scope of normative ethics and deontological ethics . Florida State University Tobias Simon Eminent Scholar Fernando <unk> writes in his essay " Targeted Killing in War and Peace : A Philosophical Analysis " that targeted killing is particularly justified against terrorists because they use tactics specifically designed to kill civilians . University of Illinois law and philosophy professor Michael Moore says in " Targeted Killings and the Morality of Hard Choices " that targeted killing can be seen as justified through both deontological and consequentialist models . University of Pennsylvania School of Law professor Leo Katz writes in " Targeted Killing and the Strategic Use of Self @-@ Defense " that there is a danger of a state government artificially generating instances in which it asserts it must use targeted killing in self @-@ defense . He warns against situations in which governments find it easier to kill terrorists than to put them through due process of law . Katz concludes that current regulations support targeted killing because existing law does not consider his argument and justifies the tactical elimination of terrorists . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Targeted Killings : Law and Morality in an Asymmetrical World was reviewed in the European Journal of International Law by University of Potsdam international and European law professor Robin Geiß . The reviewer wrote that the book " is a thought @-@ provoking contribution that takes a refreshingly broad and timely approach in addressing the legal , ethical , and strategic @-@ political dimension of the contemporary debate over targeted killings " . Geiß concluded , " There is some overlap between the chapters , their relationship is not always evident , and as much as the interdisciplinary approach of this volume is to be appreciated , assembling and interlinking the different legal , ethical , and political findings in an overarching , concluding chapter would have been particularly useful . Nevertheless , the book reflects the entire spectrum of diverging views on the matter , and adds an important impetus to move the current debate forward . " 
 Assistant Professor and Head of Reference at Leonard Lief Library , Lehman College , City University of New York , Madeline E. Cohen wrote in an article for the International Journal of Legal Information , " Within the context of moral and legal principles , and military strategy , the subject of targeted killings is analyzed in great detail . These essays are interdisciplinary in their approach , and give various sides of arguments on this rich subject . " She concluded , " An excellent introduction by Andrew Altman provides an overview of ' Our Asymmetric World ' and models used to combat terrorism . References , tables of cases and legal instruments are included making this an excellent reference for further research . " 
 Abraham David Sofaer reviewed the book for the Texas Law Review . Sofaer wrote , " It is a beautiful book : large , with print size that is easy on the eyes , and with sufficient space between lines of text to make the complex material at least visually digestible . It has useful tables of cases , instruments , legislation , and abbreviations , as well as an index . " He commented , " it should be clear that a reader seeking a single , <unk> and objective account of targeted killing should find another book . On the other hand , this collection of essays provides several original and useful treatments of various aspects of the subject . " Sofaer said that the book could have given more weight to the law enforcement model of how and when to use deadly force against individuals . 
 The collection also received a review from University of Geneva postdoctoral research fellow in the faculty of law , Steven J. Barela , in the Journal of International Criminal Justice . Barela described the book as " a constructive work with a wide purview onto one of the most pressing and difficult policy questions of our time " . He stated , " this volume provides a valuable entry point for investigating this kaleidoscope of legal and moral issues " . Steven R. Ratner of the University of Michigan Law School reviewed the book for the American Journal of International Law , writing , " In light of the complexity of the legal and moral issues , Targeted Killings is a welcome addition to the academic literature . It aims to combine in one volume perspectives from legal experts , moral philosophers , and military planners . " University of Reading law lecturer Robert P. <unk> , Jr. wrote in the Boston University International Law Journal , " Targeted Killings also provides some clarity as to the threshold between armed conflict and situations falling short of armed conflict " . He concluded , " [ the book 's ] main contribution to the discussion lies in its focus on the willing use of violence on a significant scale by an organized group " . 
 = 2007 Toyota / Save Mart 350 = 
 The 2007 Toyota / Save Mart 350 was the sixteenth stock car race of the 2007 NASCAR Nextel Cup Series and the first of the season 's two road course events . It was held on June 24 , 2007 at Infineon Raceway in Sonoma , California before a crowd of 102 @,@ 000 . The 90 @-@ lap race was won by Juan Pablo Montoya of the Chip Ganassi Racing team who started from thirty @-@ second position . Kevin Harvick finished second and his Richard Childress Racing teammate Jeff Burton came in third . 
 Although Jamie McMurray won the pole position , he was passed by Robby Gordon on the first lap . Gordon held the position until the first round of green @-@ flag pit stops , and Carl Edwards took over the first position . He held it for twelve laps until Gordon got ahead of Edwards . At the race 's final restart on lap 70 , Tony Stewart took over the lead when he passed Gordon , but ceded it to McMurray after Stewart made a pit stop . McMurray slowed on lap 97 as he attempted to conserve fuel which allowed Montoya to close the gap . Montoya got ahead of McMurray for the lead after a seven @-@ lap battle and held it to win the race . There were seven cautions and eleven lead changes by eight drivers . 
 It was Montoya 's first win in the Nextel Cup Series , and became the first foreign driver since 1974 to win in the series . After the race Jeff Gordon 's lead in the Drivers ' Championship was reduced because he , along with his teammate Jimmie Johnson , were penalized for a car infringement . Chevrolet maintained its lead in the Manufacturers ' Championship , 49 points ahead of their nearest rival Ford with twenty races remaining in the season . The race attracted 6 @.@ 5 million television viewers . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The course , Infineon Raceway , now called Sonoma Raceway , is one of two road courses to hold NASCAR races , the other is Watkins Glen International . The standard road course at Infineon Raceway is a twelve @-@ turn course that is 2 @.@ 52 miles ( 4 @.@ 06 km ) long ; the track was modified in 1998 , adding the Chute , which bypassed turns five and six , shortening the course to 1 @.@ 95 miles ( 3 @.@ 14 km ) . The Chute was only used for NASCAR events such as this race , and was criticized by many drivers , who preferred the full layout . In 2001 , it was replaced with a 70 @-@ degree turn , 4A , bringing the track to its current dimensions of 1 @.@ 99 miles ( 3 @.@ 20 km ) . 
 Before the race , Jeff Gordon led the Drivers ' Championship with 2 @,@ 392 points , with Denny Hamlin in second and Jimmie Johnson third . Matt Kenseth and Jeff Burton were fourth and fifth , and Carl Edwards , Tony Stewart , Kevin Harvick , Clint Bowyer , Martin Truex , Jr . , Kyle Busch and Dale Earnhardt , Jr. rounded out the top twelve . Chevrolet led the Manufacturers ' Championship with 129 points , 47 ahead of their nearest rival Ford in second . Dodge was third on 73 points , and Toyota was fourth on 47 . Jeff Gordon was the race 's defending champion . 
 Several teams chose to temporarily replace their regular drivers with road course ringers . Michael Waltrip Racing replaced Michael Waltrip and David Reutimann with two @-@ time NASCAR Nextel Cup Series champion Terry Labonte and the 1993 24 Hours of Daytona winner P. J. Jones . BAM Racing chose to replace Mike Bliss ( who was competing at The Milwaukee Mile ) with the 2005 Trans @-@ Am Series champion Klaus Graf , while Hall of Fame Racing replaced Tony Raines with endurance driver Ron Fellows . Former SCCA Trans @-@ Am champion Brian Simo was selected by Front Row Motorsports to drive the No. 37 Dodge , while American Le Mans Series and Busch Series East race winner Butch <unk> was selected to replace Bill Davis Racing driver Jeremy Mayfield . Brandon Ash attempted to qualify in his self @-@ owned No. 02 car , and endurance racing driver Marc Goossens was entered in the No. 91 Riley @-@ D 'Hondt Motorsports Toyota . Scott Pruett announced he would not participate for the Chip Ganassi Racing team due to a scheduling conflict ; Former V8 Supercars champion Marcos Ambrose , who was scheduled to drive the No. 47 JTG Daugherty Racing car withdrew . 
 Rookie of the Year competitor Juan Pablo Montoya made his NASCAR début on a road course after leaving Formula One in 2006 , and was considered by several drivers to be a contender to win the race despite no previous experience of Infineon Raceway . Montoya said he hoped to have a chance of winning , and expected his main rival to be Jeff Gordon . After he finished with a top @-@ ten at the previous round ( the Citizen Bank 400 ) Jamie McMurray hoped to continue his momentum into <unk> , and move up in the Drivers ' Championship standings . 
 = = = Practice and qualifying = = = 
 Three practice sessions were held before the Sunday race : one on Friday and two on Saturday . The first session lasted 90 minutes , the second 50 minutes and the third 60 minutes . Gordon and Johnson were prohibited from competing in the first practice session and Friday 's qualifier because their right @-@ front fenders were deemed too wide by race officials during an pre @-@ event inspection , and both drivers were required to start at the rear of the field for the race . Bobby Labonte was fastest in the first practice session with a time of 77 @.@ 539 seconds ; Robby Gordon was second and Kurt Busch third . Stewart took fourth position , and McMurray placed fifth . Fellows , Edwards , Ryan Newman , Harvick and Kasey Kahne rounded out the session 's top @-@ ten fastest drivers . Said , Dave Blaney and Stewart went off the track but continued . 
 Although fifty @-@ two drivers were entered in the qualifier ; according to NASCAR 's qualifying procedure only forty @-@ three could race . McMurray clinched the third pole position of his career , and his first since the 2005 Pennsylvania 500 , with a time of 77 @.@ 521 seconds . He had an advantage because he recorded his lap when weather conditions were cooler . McMurray was joined on the grid 's front row by Robby Gordon and had the pole position until McMurray 's lap . Earnhardt qualified third , Said fourth and Stewart started fifth . Burton , Bill Elliott , Kahne , Newman and Bowyer rounded out the top ten qualifiers . The nine drivers who failed to qualify were Ward Burton , Scott Riggs , Ash , Paul Menard , Brian Vickers , A. J. Allmendinger , Simo , Kenny Wallace and Graf . After the qualifier McMurray said that he was slightly nervous and felt another driver could record a faster lap time , " I definitely felt with Juan and Ryan going out later , I would definitely get beat . I kept telling everybody that . My heart was definitely beating faster this morning when I got up , looking forward to this . " 
 On Saturday afternoon in cool weather conditions Montoya was fastest in the second practice session with a lap of 77 @.@ 591 seconds , ahead of Harvick and Jeff Gordon . Stewart was fourth @-@ fastest ; Fellows was fifth and Kyle Busch sixth . Kahne , Elliott Sadler , Bobby Labonte and Edwards followed in the top ten . David Ragan stalled after he spun . Afterward , Edwards and Ragan left the track and flew to Milwaukee Mile to participate in the AT & T 250 Busch Series race ; both drivers returned to Sonoma after the race 's completion . Later that day , Hamlin paced the final practice session with a time of 78 @.@ 219 ; Stewart was second and Robby Gordon third . Harvick was fourth @-@ fastest , ahead of Sadler and Newman . Fellows was seventh @-@ fastest , McMurray eighth , Johnson ninth and Jeff Gordon tenth . Hamlin was afflicted with an electrical issue which was corrected after his team installed an new distributor . J. J. Yeley damaged his car 's sheet metal structure in an accident at turn ten , while Jeff Gordon spun and hit the turn eleven tire barrier and sustained minor damage . Dale Jarrett and Kyle Busch both went off track but did not damage their cars . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 Live television coverage of the race , the sixteenth of thirty @-@ six of the 2007 season , began at 3 : 30 p.m. Eastern Daylight Time live in the United States on TNT . Around the start of the race , weather conditions were sunny , clear , and breezy . Tina Coleman began pre @-@ race ceremonies with an invocation . Actress and singer @-@ songwriter Emmy Rossum performed the national anthem , and retired football wide receiver Jerry Rice along with Mike Wells of the Northern California Toyota Dealers commanded the drivers to start their engines . No drivers moved to the rear of the field . 
 The race started at 5 : 22 p.m. McMurray maintained his pole position advantage heading into the first corner , while Stewart fell down the field after he ran wide at the second turn but did not damage his car . Robby Gordon and <unk> moved into the first and second positions , as McMurray dropped to third . The race 's first caution was prompted on lap two when Goossens , Kenseth and Kyle Petty made contact in the eleventh turn ; Goossens was unable to restart his car . Some drivers made pit stops for fuel and tires under caution . Kenseth and Petty had damage to their cars repaired . Robby Gordon maintained his lead at the lap @-@ five restart , ahead of Earnhardt and McMurray . Three laps later , Earnhardt attempted to pass Robby Gordon at the <unk> but was unable to complete the manoeuvre . After starting from 32nd , Montoya had moved up into 20th by the 13th lap . Sterling Marlin 's engine failed on lap 14 , and the race 's second caution was issued one lap later because he stopped in turn eight . Some drivers elected to make pit stops during the caution . 
 Robby Gordon remained the leader for the lap @-@ 17 restart , followed by Earnhardt and McMurray . Kyle Busch attempted to pass Montoya in turn eleven but locked his brakes and spun ; he avoided contacting the wall but fell to the rear of the field . McMurray passed Earnhardt for second on the following lap . Eight laps later , a brake duct was located in turn four , which triggered the third caution . Robby Gordon led the field back up to speed at the lap @-@ 30 restart . Montoya and Johnson made contact on the 32nd lap . Green @-@ flag pit stops began on the next lap when Earnhardt made a pit stop for tires and fuel . McMurray reclaimed the first position when Robby Gordon made his pit stop on lap 35 ; McMurray held it for the next lap and succeeded it to Johnson as other lead lap drivers made similar pit stops . Hamlin took over the lead when he out @-@ braked Johnson in turn eleven on lap 37 . Stewart took over the lead on the 41st lap when Hamlin made his pit stop . Fellows took over the position on the next lap , before the fourth caution was displayed on lap 44 when a large piece of metal was located at the start @-@ finish line . 
 Fellows chose to pit under caution , and Edwards led the field at the lap @-@ 46 restart ; he was followed by Kyle Busch , Reed Sorenson , Jones and David Stremme . On lap 49 , Kahne and Bobby Labonte made contact which resulted in Labonte spinning ; similarly , Joe Nemechek spun at turn eleven and his rear @-@ end hit the tire barriers , all three drivers continued . Robby Gordon moved back up into second when he passed Kyle Busch three laps later . Jarrett battled with Johnny Sauter for position on lap 53 , and both drivers made contact ; Jarrett spun in turn four and subsequently stalled . The incident prompted the race 's fifth caution . Edwards led the field at the lap @-@ 56 restart , followed by Robby Gordon . On the same lap , Robby Gordon passed Edwards to retake the lead . The sixth caution was triggered on the next lap when Ragan spun on the chute before entering turn ten ; he went through the grass , and was unable to restart his engine . Robby Gordon led the field back to racing speed on the lap @-@ 59 restart , followed by Edwards , Kyle Busch , McMurray and Said . McMurray moved up into second position by lap 62 after he passed Kyle Busch and Edwards . 
 <unk> spun into the grass on lap 61 , but rejoined the track . On the following lap , Kurt Busch spun sideways in turn eleven after Montoya got into his rear @-@ end and managed to restart his engine despite falling down the order . Sorenson spun off the track , and hit the wall . He continued but spun a second time in turn seven after he clipped a curb which caused the race 's seventh ( and final ) caution . Several drivers chose to pit under caution . McMurray and Edwards made pit stops for fuel and tires , while Said stalled which required his pit crew to push @-@ start his car . Jeff Green collided with teammate Sauter on pit road and damaged his right @-@ front fender . Green was observed speeding , but his race ended after his right @-@ front tire caught fire . Robby Gordon elected not to make a pit stop and remained the leader at the lap @-@ 70 restart . Stewart out @-@ braked Robby Gordon to take over the lead on the same lap , while Gordon lost a further position to Earnhardt when he was passed in turn eleven . Earnhardt ceded second position when he made a scheduled pit stop for four tires and fuel two laps later . Robby Gordon made a similar stop on the 75th lap , and Stewart did the same which allowed McMurray to reclaim the lead . 
 Kenseth spun off into the grass on lap 75 ; he recovered after correcting his car and continued . Nemechek spun a second time at turn eleven but restarted his car on the following lap . By the 86th lap , McMurray led Harvick , Montoya , Kyle Busch and Burton , and the gap between the top three drivers was at 1 @.@ 3 seconds five laps later . Harvick was passed by Montoya around the inside at turn eleven on lap 92 . Five laps later , McMurray reported his car 's engine was cutting out at several points around the track . Montoya made contact with McMurray while attempting to pass him , but McMurray held the first position . Montoya tried again on lap 102 by taking the inside line into turn eleven and momentarily moved in front of McMurray , but ran deep into the corner which allowed McMurray to retain the lead . Two laps later , Montoya passed McMurray around the inside entering turn four to take over the lead . Stewart moved ahead of Jeff Gordon but slid and made contact with Gordon on the 106th lap . Fourth @-@ place runner Edwards ran out of fuel two laps later and drove to pit road ; McMurray slowed after running low on fuel . Montoya conserved fuel for the remaining two laps to win his first career victory in the Nextel Cup Series . He became the first foreign @-@ born driver to win in the series since Earl Ross won the 1974 Old Dominion 500 , as well as the first Hispanic , and was Chip Ganassi Racing 's first victory since October 2002 . Harvick finished second , ahead of Richard Childress Racing teammate Jeff Burton in third , Bowyer in fourth and Greg Biffle fifth . Stewart , Jeff Gordon , Kyle Busch , Said and Hamlin rounded out the top ten finishers . The race had seven cautions and eleven lead changes by eight different drivers during the race . 
 = = = Post @-@ race comments = = = 
 Montoya appeared in victory lane to celebrate his first career victory in the Nextel Cup Series in front of the crowd ; earning $ 310 @,@ 600 for the victory . He said that he was " more relieved than excited " as he was given high expectations that he would perform well in NASCAR . He also stated : " It 's huge . I would say right now it 's the biggest thing I 've done . In open @-@ wheel , that 's what I was meant to be winning in . In stock cars , I wasn 't . To get our first win in our first year is huge . We know we 're a little bit behind on some of the ovals , but I think this is a big boost for everybody working in the shop . " Harvick , who finished in second , felt Montoya did not have sufficient fuel to reach the race 's conclusion : " I 've been a big fan of Montoya 's since he came over . He 's a great road racer , but he wasn 't the fastest . The strategy won it for him today . " Third @-@ place finisher Burton was happy with his finishing position : " Obviously we worked really hard all last year and this year on fuel mileage and it paid off for us today . It was a good run for us . We ran competitive all race long . " 
 Jeff Gordon was happy with the way his race was run : " I thought ( crew chief ) Steve Letarte and everyone on our team just called this race perfectly to come from that far back to a top 10 . We played the ( pit ) strategy the best way we possibly could and we had some cautions fall our way , which was some good fortune for us to gain some spots . " Fourth @-@ place finisher Biffle said his car felt good but felt it was difficult to overtake other drivers . Robby Gordon , who led 48 laps ( the most laps of any driver ) was disappointed by finishing in 16th position : " Not to make excuses , but we were gonna run out of fuel . It ’ s disappointing that we had a car as fast as we had , started on the front row , and not just get beat but finish 16th . " He said he hoped any problems with his fuel mileage would be resolved by the season 's second road course event at Watkins Glen . 
 Two days after the race , Hendrick Motorsports were given penalties for Jeff Gordon 's and Johnson 's cars . The penalties , for actions <unk> to stock car racing , car , car parts , components and / or equipment used that did not conform to NASCAR rules , parts or car components not previously approved by NASCAR that were installed or modified to enhance aerodynamic performance , and unauthorized alterations to the car 's fender , included a $ 100 @,@ 000 fine for crew chiefs Steve Letarte and Chad Knaus who were placed on probation until December 31 , 2007 , and were suspended from the next six races , and the loss of 100 drivers and owners points for Rick Hendrick , Gordon and Johnson . Nextel Cup Series director John Darby said there was flaring on Johnson 's and Gordon 's front fenders that increased their width by one inch longer than the regulations allowed . On June 28 , Hendrick Motorsports announced they would not appeal the penalties , and Johnson and Gordon later stated that they accepted the decision although they felt the penalties were harsh . 
 The result kept Gordon in the lead of the Drivers ' Championship with 2 @,@ 438 points , ahead of Hamlin in second . Kenseth and Burton moved up one positions into third and fourth , while Johnson fell to fifth position . Stewart moved in front of Edwards for sixth , while Harvick and Bowyer remained in eighth and ninth positions . Kyle Busch , Truex and Earnhardt rounded out the top twelve . Chevrolet maintained its lead in the Manufacturers ' Championship 135 points ; Ford remained in second with 86 points . Dodge maintained third position , and Toyota remained in fourth . The race attracted a television audience of 6 @.@ 5 million people . It took two hours , fifty @-@ six minutes , and eleven seconds to complete the event , and the margin of victory was 4 @.@ 097 seconds . 
 = = Results = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 = = = Race results = = = 
 = = Standings after the race = = 
 = Sega Channel = 
 Sega Channel was an online game service developed by Sega for the Genesis video game console , serving as a content delivery system . Launching in December 1994 , Sega Channel was provided to the public by TCI and Time Warner Cable through cable television services by way of coaxial cable . It was a pay to play service , through which customers could access Genesis games online , play game demos , and get cheat codes . Lasting until July 31 , 1998 , Sega Channel operated three years after the release of Sega 's next generation console , the Sega Saturn . Though criticized for its poorly timed launch and high subscription fee , Sega Channel has been praised for its innovations in downloadable content and impact on online services for video games . 
 = = History = = 
 Released in Japan as the Mega Drive in 1988 , North America in 1989 , and Europe and other regions as the Mega Drive in 1990 , the Sega Genesis was Sega 's entry into the 16 @-@ bit era of video game consoles . In 1990 , Sega started their first Internet @-@ based service for the console , Sega Meganet , in Japan . Operating through a cartridge and a peripheral called the " Mega Modem " , this system allowed Mega Drive owners to play seventeen games online . A North American version of this system , dubbed " Tele @-@ Genesis " , was announced but never released . Another phone @-@ based system , the Mega Anser , turned the Japanese Mega Drive into an online banking terminal . Due to Meganet 's low number of titles , prohibitively high price , and the Mega Drive 's lack of success in Japan , the system proved to be a commercial failure . By 1992 , the Mega Modem peripheral could be found in bargain bins at a reduced price , and a remodeled version of the console released in 1993 removed the EXT 9 @-@ pin port altogether , preventing the newer model from being connected to the Meganet service . 
 In April 1993 , Sega announced the Sega Channel service , which would utilize cable television services to deliver content . National testing in the United States for the service began in June , and deployment across the United States began in December , with a complete release in North America in 1994 . By June 1994 , Sega Channel had gained a total of 21 cable companies signed up to carry the service . Fees in the United States for the service varied depending on location , but were approximately US $ 15 monthly , plus a $ 25 activation fee , which included the adapter . During the planning stages of the service , Sega looked to capitalize on the rental market , which had seen some success with the Sega CD being rented through Blockbuster , Inc . , and was looking to base the service 's offering of games and demos to help sell more cartridges . 
 In early 1995 , Sega CEO Hayao Nakayama decided to end development on the Sega Genesis and its add @-@ ons , the Sega CD and Sega 32X . This decision was made to support the Sega Saturn , which had been released in Japan already . This placed the release of the Sega Channel right at the height of the Genesis ' decline from the market . At its peak , Sega Channel had over 250 @,@ 000 subscribers , but by 1997 , the number of subscribers had dropped to 230 @,@ 000 , two years after Nakayama made the decision to shift focus from the Genesis to the Saturn . Though Sega looked at options to bring the service to PCs , the service was eventually discontinued by July 31 , 1998 . 
 = = Technical aspects and specifications = = 
 After making the initial purchase and paying the activation fee , Genesis owners would receive an adapter that would be inserted into the cartridge slot of the console . The adapter connected the console to a cable television wire , doing so by the use of a coaxial cable output in the rear of the cartridge . Starting up a Genesis console with an active Sega Channel adapter installed would prompt for the service 's main menu to be loaded , which was a process that took approximately 30 seconds . From there , gamers could access the content they wished to play and download it into their system , which could take up to a few minutes per game . This data would be downloaded into the adaptor 's on @-@ board 4 MB RAM , and would be erased when the system was powered off . 
 Programming and transmission of the Sega Channel 's monthly services started with a production team at Sega , which would put together content every month and load it onto a CD @-@ ROM . It was then sent to a satellite station , located in Denver , Colorado . From the station , the signal was transmitted via a Galaxy 7 satellite , which uploaded at 1 @.@ 435 GHz and downloaded at 1 @.@ 1 GHz , to the local cable providers . In Canada and across South America and Europe , however , the satellite transmission stage was bypassed altogether in favor of direct uploads of the Sega Channel CD @-@ ROM via a cable television <unk> . In order for the signal to function properly , it had to be clear of noise in order to prevent download interruptions . To ensure no issues , cable providers had to " clean " their broadcast signal . 
 = = Game library = = 
 The Sega Channel service ( also known as " Sega On The Line " ) hosted up to 50 Genesis games at any one time . Titles would rotate monthly ; however , some updates happened on a weekly basis . Games for the service included titles developed by Sega , such as Sonic & Knuckles , Eternal Champions , and Space Harrier II ; as well as titles developed by licensees of Sega , such as <unk> 2 and Aladdin . Some of these games had reduced content compared to their cartridge release so that they could fit the adapter 's memory , such as Super Street Fighter II . Sega Channel also hosted games in some regions that would not receive a cartridge release , such as <unk> , Mega Man : The Wily Wars , and Alien Soldier , which were hosted on the service in North America . The service also offered demos of upcoming games , such as Primal Rage . Though games and demos rotated on a regular basis , categories into which games were placed remained static and did not change . With parental controls in mind , all games for the service received a rating from the Videogame Rating Council . The service also contained a lockout system which would allow parents to set a <unk> in order to access mature rated content . 
 In addition to games and demos , Sega Channel also hosted other features . Cheat codes were directly accessible from the network , as well as game hints . The service also hosted contests , such as a promotion with Electronic Arts ' Triple Play ' 96 , and a 1995 event where players who completed Primal Rage during a brief 24 @-@ hour period where the full game was accessible were given a phone number to call , making them eligible to win prizes . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 During its lifetime , Sega Channel won one of Popular Science 's " Best of What 's New " award for the year 1994 . Likewise , in August 1995 , a survey conducted by Sports Illustrated found that children between 9 and 13 years old were five times more likely to subscribe to Sega Channel than to purchase a Sega Saturn or the upcoming Nintendo 64 or PlayStation . The service would go on to garner as many as 250 @,@ 000 subscribers ; however , Sega had anticipated having over one million subscribers by the end of its first year , and had made the service available to over 20 million households . 
 Retrospective reception of Sega Channel praises its innovation and role in the development of online gaming , but criticizes its high subscription fees and timing into the market . IGN writer Adam Redsell notes how Sega Channel caused many cable companies to clean their broadcast signal and its role in the development of high @-@ speed internet , stating " ... the very fact that you ’ re enjoying broadband internet right now could well be thanks to SEGA . " Levi Buchanan , also writing for IGN , credits Sega Channel with its role in the development of modern gaming and content delivery services , such as Xbox Live Arcade and PlayStation Network , stating " SEGA and the entire industry learned important lessons from the SEGA Channel . SEGA was still committed to the idea of downloads and online , as evidenced by the Dreamcast 's SegaNet ... You can also see the DNA of early services like the SEGA Channel in modern portals like XBLA and PSN , where demos are now a staple . " The staff of UGO Networks also credits Sega Channel with being an important step in the development of both services . 
 Ken Horowitz of Sega @-@ 16 criticizes Sega 's poor timing of the launch of Sega Channel and the subscription 's high price . According to Horowitz , " Who would spend $ 13 a month to play games for a dying system ? This horrendous blunder ( one of many by [ Sega Enterprises ] ) caused retailers to dump their inventory of systems , thereby sealing the fate of the Sega Channel once and for all . " Buchanan echoes the same sentiments , stating , " Perhaps if the SEGA Channel had been released earlier in the console 's lifecycle — the Genesis launched in 1989 in America — things might have turned out differently . After all , the service did gain notice for its advancement of gaming and technology . " UGO also notes the potential Sega Channel could have had with some more development time in the field of competitive multiplayer , stating , " If the Sega Channel had come a little earlier in the life of the Genesis it would have seen much more exposure , and maybe online play would have been feasible for games that could have been developed directly for the service . " 
 = Half @-@ Life 2 : Lost Coast = 
 Half @-@ Life 2 : Lost Coast is an additional level for the 2004 first @-@ person shooter video game Half @-@ Life 2 . Developed by Valve Corporation , it was released on October 27 , 2005 , through the Steam content delivery service as a free download to owners of the Microsoft Windows version of Half @-@ Life 2 . Lost Coast serves as a technology demonstration , specifically showcasing the high @-@ dynamic @-@ range rendering implemented in the Source engine . The level was designed with a variety of appropriate environments to emphasize these effects . In addition , Lost Coast was the first video game developed by Valve to allow developers to explain various elements of design as the player progresses through the level . 
 Lost Coast follows Half @-@ Life protagonist Gordon Freeman as he travels up a coastal cliff to destroy a Combine artillery launcher in a monastery , which is firing on a nearby town . The Lost Coast level was originally created for Half @-@ Life 2 , but was ultimately removed from the game . As a result , it has several minor story details that were not included in Half @-@ Life 2 . The level received a generally positive reception , and there was consensus among reviewers that the new features included in Lost Coast should be integrated into future games released by Valve . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Lost Coast uses the same first @-@ person shooter gameplay mechanics as Half @-@ Life 2 . The game is viewed from the perspective of the player character , and plot information is imparted through scripted sequences rather than cutscenes . A heads @-@ up display at the bottom of the screen shows the player 's health , energy gauge , and ammunition status , while available weapons are shown at the top . Health and armor energy can be replenished by picking up medical supplies and energy cells respectively , or by using wall @-@ mounted charging devices . The player character is equipped with a small armory of weapons from Half @-@ Life 2 at the beginning of the level , including a pistol , shotgun , crossbow , and gravity gun . The gravity gun allows the player to manipulate physical objects in the world ; it can be used to pick up nearby objects and throw them at enemies or create cover from enemy fire . The gravity gun can also be used to perform several non @-@ combat functions , such as grabbing out @-@ of @-@ reach supply crates . 
 = = Story = = 
 Half @-@ Life 2 : Lost Coast opens with the protagonist , Gordon Freeman , finding himself near a group of decaying piers , underneath a monastery set up on rocks and overlooking the small town of St. Olga . A fisherman recognizes Gordon and directs him to the monastery , which the enemy Combine are using as a platform to launch artillery shells filled with headcrabs into the town . The fisherman opens a gate , allowing the player to proceed , and awaits Gordon 's return . 
 As Gordon proceeds up the cliffside to the Byzantine Christian monastery , he encounters heavy resistance from Combine soldiers who rappel down the cliff to try to stop him . Gordon fights his way up , enters the church 's nave , and disables the artillery launcher . This alerts nearby soldiers , who assault the sanctuary in force , while a Combine attack helicopter arrives to support the soldiers . After defeating the soldiers in the courtyard , Gordon moves to scaffolding over the side of the cliff and destroys the helicopter with RPGs . The helicopter crashes into the scaffolding , freeing up a path to a crude elevator which lowers Gordon back down to the pier . The fisherman congratulates Freeman on his success , invites him to a feast in St. Olga , and the screen fades out . As the level ends , the fisherman exclaims that Gordon is " getting all fuzzy ' round the edges " . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Level design = = = 
 Lost Coast was originally conceived as a part of the Highway 17 chapter in Half @-@ Life 2 ( Highway 17 's development name was " Coast " , hence the name " Lost Coast " ) , but was later discarded during development . As a result , Lost Coast features minor storyline details that were removed from Half @-@ Life 2 , such as the headcrab artillery launchers . Each area of the level was designed with a specific purpose . An Eastern Orthodox architectural style was deliberately chosen for the monastery , as buildings of this type " are very colorful and have a large variety of materials " and are " often lit naturally , with extremes of darkness and brightness , " providing an ideal showcase for the HDR lighting effects . Valve also thought that the use of a monastery would help provide a starker contrast between old human architecture and futuristic Combine technology found within it . The cliffside that leads to the monastery had a gameplay @-@ oriented purpose , and was meant to emulate a similar cliffside combat scene in Half @-@ Life . The cliffside also forces the player to be observant of threats from above and below , breaking from normal horizontal combat . The monastery 's courtyard was designed as an area where the player recovers from the cliffside combat , while also presenting a contained combat arena later in the level in which the player must hold their ground while they are attacked from multiple directions . 
 = = = High @-@ dynamic @-@ range rendering = = = 
 The goal of Lost Coast was to demonstrate the new high @-@ dynamic @-@ range rendering implemented into the Source game engine . Valve first attempted to implement high @-@ dynamic @-@ range rendering in Source in late 2003 . The first method stored textures in <unk> color space , allowing for multisample anti @-@ aliasing and pixel shaders to be used , but this prevented alpha mapping and fog effects from working properly , as well as making textures appear sharp and jagged . The second method involved saving two versions of a texture : one with regular data , and the other with <unk> data . However , this technique did not allow for multisample anti @-@ aliasing and consumed twice as much video card memory , making it infeasible . The third method , shown at the E3 convention in 2005 , used floating point data to define the RGB color space , allowing for reasonably efficient storage of the high @-@ dynamic @-@ range data . However , this method also did not allow for multisample anti @-@ aliasing , and was only compatible with Nvidia video cards , leaving ATI cards unable to run high dynamic range . The fourth and final method compromised between the second and third methods , using <unk> textures sparingly and allowing ATI cards to render HDR in a different way to the Nvidia ones while nearly producing the same end result . 
 The final version of Valve 's high @-@ dynamic @-@ range technology adds a significant number of lighting effects to the engine , aimed at making the game appear more realistic . Bloom shading was introduced , blurring bright edges in the game world and emulating a camera 's overexposure to light . This is combined with exposure control to tailor the effect to represent the human eye . For example , as the player exits a dark area into a light area , the new area is initially glaringly bright , but quickly darkens , representing the adjustment of the player character 's eyes to the light . New cube mapping techniques allow the reflection cast by an object to correspond with the brightness of the light source , and lightmaps enable light bouncing and global illumination to be taken into account in the rendering . Refraction effects were added to make light account for the physical attributes of an object and to emulate the way light is reflected by water . The Lost Coast level is specifically designed to showcase these effects . It uses the sea and beach as opportunities to demonstrate water @-@ based effects , the monastery to demonstrate bloom from its whitewash walls , and the sanctuary to provide the means to show refraction through stained glass windows and cube maps on golden urns and candlesticks . 
 As a technology showcase , Valve considered Lost Coast to have very demanding system requirements . The game runs on computers with specifications lower than what is recommended , albeit without some key features such as high dynamic range . If a non @-@ high @-@ dynamic @-@ range @-@ capable card is used , the developer commentary is changed slightly to reflect this . For example , Gabe Newell would describe the effects that are seen in a different manner . 
 = = = Commentary system = = = 
 In addition to a showcase for visual improvements , Lost Coast acted as a testbed for Valve 's commentary system . When the feature is enabled , additional items appear in the game that can be interacted with to play an audio commentary . Each audio piece ranges from ten seconds to a minute of commentary . Players hear the developers talk about what the player is seeing , what is happening , why they made certain decisions , and what kinds of challenges they faced . Commentary tracks are represented by floating speech bubbles called commentary nodes . Valve intended for players to first play the level with commentary disabled , and after completing the level , play it again with commentary enabled , learning about each new stage as they progress . The company has since made the commentary system standard in all of its later video games . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Lost Coast was released on October 27 , 2005 , as a free download from Valve 's Steam content delivery service to anyone who purchased Half @-@ Life 2 . People who received Half @-@ Life 2 as a gift from Valve 's online store were not eligible to download the level . Valve announced on May 30 , 2007 that Lost Coast , along with Half @-@ Life 2 : Deathmatch , would be made available for free to owners of ATI Radeon cards . It was later released without charge to Nvidia graphics card owners along with Half @-@ Life 2 : Deathmatch , Peggle Extreme , and the first eleven levels of Portal . 
 Lost Coast was generally well received by video game critics . 1UP.com enjoyed the amount of detail , including the graphics , puzzles , and intelligent enemies , saying , " Valve just packed more atmosphere into a tiny snippet than most shooters muster , period . " The review also praised the level 's commentary system , calling it an informative addition , and enjoyed the interesting and insightful comments made by some of its creators . The level satisfied UGO because " it would be harder not to enjoy this level in all its beautifully rendered glory — even after you 've broken all the windows and spattered the walls with Combine blood , " and GameSpot commented that " the textures in Lost Coast are noticeably more detailed and numerous than in the retail game . " The review concluded hoping that the features introduced in Lost Coast would be included in Valve 's future releases . 
 Negative reaction to the game focused on its length and gameplay . 1UP.com and UGO both considered it short ; Shawn Elliott of 1UP.com described it as " a lickety @-@ split run through postcard @-@ pretty tide pools , up cliffs , and into a church turned Combine outpost " . UGO 's Nigel Grammer stated that Lost Coast 's gameplay seemed to be secondary to the level 's graphics . Lost Coast 's gameplay disappointed Brad Shoemaker of GameSpot , who compared it to that of Half @-@ Life 2 and considered them to be very similar , saying that it " isn 't going to set the world on fire " . 
 = Accelerated Evolution = 
 Accelerated Evolution is the sixth studio album by Canadian musician Devin Townsend , released in 2003 . The album , written and produced by Townsend , was a mix of musical styles from alternative and hard rock to progressive metal . Townsend , the lead vocalist and guitarist , assembled a group of Vancouver musicians to perform with him on the album : guitarist Brian Waddell , drummer Ryan Van Poederooyen , bassist Mike Young , and keyboardist Dave Young . This lineup , the Devin Townsend Band , was Townsend 's first dedicated lineup for his solo material , and was created as a counterpart to Townsend 's extreme metal project Strapping Young Lad . 
 Accelerated Evolution was written and recorded at the same time as Strapping Young Lad 's self @-@ titled album , with Townsend dividing his energy between the two . Accelerated Evolution was recorded in Vancouver , British Columbia from September to November 2002 , and was released on Townsend 's independent label , HevyDevy Records , in March 2003 . The album was well received by critics for its blend of genres and influences , its musical accessibility , and its large @-@ scale rock production style . 
 = = Background = = 
 During the creation of his early solo albums Infinity ( 1998 ) and Physicist ( 2000 ) , Devin Townsend went through personal struggles that affected his writing ability . These struggles were resolved on Terria ( 2001 ) , which Townsend described as " a really healing record " . After Terria , Townsend felt a newfound enthusiasm for his music , saying , " Bring it on . I 'm going to be so fucking sensitive but so intense , and be unafraid to be either . " In 2002 , Townsend began work on his next two albums . He reunited his extreme metal project Strapping Young Lad , which had been on hiatus for four years , and began writing the band 's new release , Strapping Young Lad ( SYL ) . 
 At the same time , Townsend formed a new , permanent band " on par with Strapping " to record and tour for his solo releases . The Devin Townsend Band consisted of Brian Waddell on guitar , Ryan Van Poederooyen on drums , and brothers Mike Young and Dave Young on bass and keyboards , respectively . Townsend performed guitar , vocals , and production , as he did in Strapping Young Lad . Townsend chose members of local bands who " hadn 't had the same experiences " and could give a fresh perspective on " all those emotions " that were present in his solo material . He found it " refreshing " to play with people who appreciated his solo material more than Strapping Young Lad 's . Notable was the absence of drummer Gene Hoglan of Strapping Young Lad , who had played on Townsend 's previous three solo albums . 
 Townsend wrote and produced the band 's first album at the same time he was working on SYL , spending half the week on one and half on the other . The album was engineered and mixed by Townsend and Shaun <unk> , who has worked on many of Townsend 's and Strapping Young Lad 's albums . It had the working title Relationships , but was renamed Accelerated Evolution , a nod to the frantic pace of putting a new band together in under a year . 
 = = Music = = 
 Accelerated Evolution was written as " the polar opposite " of SYL . The album blended aspects of different genres , including alternative rock , hard rock , and progressive metal , with elements of " heaviness , ambience , humor , and experimentalism " . The album has been described as more melodic and more rock @-@ based than SYL or Physicist , yet " more song @-@ oriented " than Terria , with influences by John Lennon , Jimi Hendrix , and Rush . Songs such as " Storm " , " Suicide " , and " Sunday Afternoon " were compared to Townsend 's Infinity , but were noted as " less frantic and more mature " . Townsend wrote the album to be " commercially viable " , making his existing style more concise and accessible but without going so far as to write " pop songs " . Townsend utilized clean vocals much more than in his previous albums , and produced and mixed the album in his trademark " wall of sound " style , blending " layers upon layers of guitars , keyboards , and vocals " . 
 All tracks written by Devin Townsend , with additional arrangements by Brian Waddell , Ryan Van Poederooyen , Dave Young , and Mike Young . 
 The end of " Traveller " samples " Sister " from Ocean Machine . " Depth Charge " would later be referenced in " <unk> " from SYL 's The New Black . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Devin Townsend . 
 Inside Out Music 's special edition of Accelerated Evolution included Project <unk> , an electronica EP by Townsend . 
 = = Release = = 
 Accelerated Evolution was released in March 2003 on Townsend 's independent label , HevyDevy Records . It is distributed in Canada by HevyDevy , in Japan by Sony , and in Europe and North America by InsideOut . The album art was created by Travis Smith , who also did the art for Terria and SYL . InsideOut also released a special edition of the album which contained a 3 @-@ track EP called Project <unk> , Townsend 's first foray into electronica . The album reached number 135 on the French albums chart and number 249 on the Japanese albums chart . 
 Prior to the formation of the Devin Townsend Band , Townsend had represented his solo releases live with the Strapping Young Lad lineup ; the band would play one set of Strapping Young Lad songs and one set of Devin Townsend songs . After the release of Accelerated Evolution , Townsend began touring with The Devin Townsend Band , at times separately from Strapping Young Lad and at times sharing the bill . After playing two release shows in Vancouver in July 2003 , The Devin Townsend Band toured Canada with Strapping Young Lad and Zimmers Hole in October 2003 . This was followed by a North American tour with progressive metal band Symphony X through November and December 2003 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Accelerated Evolution was well received by critics . Mike G. of Metal Maniacs called Accelerated Evolution " the album of the year " , praising it for " the hard @-@ to @-@ accomplish trick of being extreme yet accessible , simultaneously heavy ' n ' rockin ' yet majestic and beautiful . " William Hughes of Sputnikmusic called it " amazing " , saying the album " has elements that will appeal to fans of all different genres , from progressive to metal . " Alex Henderson of Allmusic called the album " excellent " , and praised Townsend 's ability to blend genres and influences : " The Canadian rocker provides enough downtuned guitars to put this CD in the alt rock category . And yet Accelerated Evolution has a big sound that suggests the pop @-@ metal , arena rock and hard rock of the ' 70s and ' 80s – big melodies , big harmonies , big guitars , big vocals , big production . " Chris Hawkins of KNAC.com said , " Like always , what Devin manages to do is take the most infectious rhythm , place his stamp upon it , and thus create something completely original . " Xander Hoose of Chronicles of Chaos compared the album favorably to SYL , noting that " there is more variation , and the songs are more memorable and layered than their one @-@ dimensional SYL counterparts . " Hoose added , " For those who thought Terria was going too much in the wrong direction , Accelerated Evolution will probably come as a relief . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Devin Townsend – guitar , vocals , ambience 
 Ryan Van Poederooyen – drums 
 Mike Young – bass 
 Brian Waddell – guitar 
 Dave Young – keyboards 
 = = = Production = = = 
 Devin Townsend – production , audio engineering , mixing 
 Shaun <unk> – engineering , mixing 
 Goran <unk> – mastering 
 Misha Rajaratnam , Dan <unk> , Carla Levis , Scott Cooke , Jay Van Poederooyen , Lori Bridger , Chris Guy – assistance 
 = = = Artwork = = = 
 Omer Cordell – photography ( credited as Omer <unk> ) 
 Travis Smith – graphics , layout 
 = History of Solidarity = 
 The history of Solidarity ( Polish : Solidarność , pronounced [ <unk> ͡ ɕ ] ) , a Polish non @-@ governmental trade union , began on 14 August 1980 , at the Lenin Shipyards ( now Gdańsk Shipyards ) at its founding by Lech Wałęsa and others . In the early 1980s , it became the first independent labor union in a Soviet @-@ bloc country . Solidarity gave rise to a broad , non @-@ violent , anti @-@ communist social movement that , at its height , claimed some 9 @.@ 4 million members . It is considered to have contributed greatly to the fall of communism . 
 Poland 's communist government attempted to destroy the union by instituting martial law in 1981 , followed by several years of political repression , but in the end was forced into negotiation . The Roundtable Talks between the government and the Solidarity @-@ led opposition resulted in semi @-@ free elections in 1989 . By the end of August 1989 , a Solidarity @-@ led coalition government had been formed , and , in December 1990 , Wałęsa was elected president . This was soon followed by the dismantling of the communist governmental system and by Poland 's transformation into a modern democratic state . Solidarity 's early survival represented a break in the hard @-@ line stance of the communist Polish United Workers ' Party ( PZPR ) , and was an unprecedented event ; not only for the People 's Republic of Poland — a satellite of the USSR ruled by a one @-@ party communist regime — but for the whole of the Eastern bloc . Solidarity 's example led to the spread of anti @-@ communist ideas and movements throughout the Eastern Bloc , weakening communist governments . This process later culminated in the Revolutions of 1989 . 
 In the 1990s , Solidarity 's influence on Poland 's political scene waned . A political arm of the " Solidarity " movement , Solidarity Electoral Action ( AWS ) , was founded in 1996 and would win the Polish parliamentary elections in 1997 , only to lose the subsequent 2001 elections . Thereafter , Solidarity had little influence as a political party , though it did become the largest trade union in Poland . 
 = = Pre – 1980 roots = = 
 In the 1970s and 1980s , the initial success of Solidarity in particular , and of dissident movements in general , was fed by a deepening crisis within Soviet @-@ influenced societies . There was declining morale , worsening economic conditions ( a shortage economy ) , and growing stress from the Cold War . After a brief boom period , from 1975 the policies of the Polish government , led by Party First Secretary Edward Gierek , precipitated a slide into increasing depression , as foreign debt mounted . In June 1976 , the first workers ' strikes took place , involving violent incidents at factories in Płock , Radom and Ursus . When these incidents were quelled by the government , the worker 's movement received support from intellectual dissidents , many of them associated with the Committee for Defense of the Workers ( Polish : Komitet Obrony Robotników , abbreviated KOR ) , formed in 1976 . The following year , KOR was renamed the Committee for Social Self @-@ defence ( KSS @-@ KOR ) . 
 On October 16 , 1978 , the Bishop of Kraków , Karol Wojtyła , was elected Pope John Paul II . A year later , during his first pilgrimage to Poland , his masses were attended by hundreds of thousands of his countrymen . The Pope called for the respecting of national and religious traditions and advocated for freedom and human rights , while denouncing violence . To many Poles , he represented a spiritual and moral force that could be set against brute material forces , he was a bellwether of change , and became an important symbol — and supporter — of changes to come . 
 = = Early strikes ( 1980 ) = = 
 Strikes did not occur merely due to problems that had emerged shortly before the labor unrest , but due to governmental and economic difficulties spanning more than a decade . In July 1980 , Edward Gierek 's government , facing economic crisis , decided to raise prices while slowing the growth of wages . At once there ensued a wave of strikes and factory occupations , with the biggest strikes taking place in the area of Lublin . The first strike started on July 8 , 1980 in the State Aviation Works in <unk> . Although the strike movement had no coordinating center , the workers had developed an information network to spread news of their struggle . A " dissident " group , the Workers ' Defence Committee ( KOR ) , which had originally been set up in 1976 to organize aid for victimized workers , attracted small groups of working @-@ class militants in major industrial centers . At the Lenin Shipyard in Gdańsk , the firing of Anna Walentynowicz , a popular crane operator and activist , galvanized the outraged workers into action . 
 On August 14 , the shipyard workers began their strike , organized by the Free Trade Unions of the Coast ( Wolne <unk> <unk> <unk> ) . The workers were led by electrician Lech Wałęsa , a former shipyard worker who had been dismissed in 1976 , and who arrived at the shipyard late in the morning of August 14 . The strike committee demanded the rehiring of Walentynowicz and Wałęsa , as well as the according of respect to workers ' rights and other social concerns . In addition , they called for the raising of a monument to the shipyard workers who had been killed in 1970 and for the legalization of independent trade unions . 
 The Polish government enforced censorship , and official media said little about the " sporadic labor disturbances in Gdańsk " ; as a further precaution , all phone connections between the coast and the rest of Poland were soon cut . Nonetheless , the government failed to contain the information : a spreading wave of <unk> ( Polish : bibuła ) , including Robotnik ( The Worker ) , and grapevine gossip , along with Radio Free Europe broadcasts that penetrated the Iron Curtain , ensured that the ideas of the emerging Solidarity movement quickly spread . 
 On August 16 , delegations from other strike committees arrived at the shipyard . Delegates ( Bogdan Lis , Andrzej <unk> and others ) together with shipyard strikers agreed to create an Inter @-@ Enterprise Strike Committee ( <unk> Komitet <unk> , or MKS ) . On August 17 a priest , Henryk Jankowski , performed a mass outside the shipyard 's gate , at which 21 demands of the MKS were put forward . The list went beyond purely local matters , beginning with a demand for new , independent trade unions and going on to call for a relaxation of the censorship , a right to strike , new rights for the Church , the freeing of political prisoners , and improvements in the national health service . 
 Next day , a delegation of KOR intelligentsia , including Tadeusz Mazowiecki , arrived to offer their assistance with negotiations . A bibuła news @-@ sheet , Solidarność , produced on the shipyard 's printing press with KOR assistance , reached a daily print run of 30 @,@ 000 copies . Meanwhile , Jacek Kaczmarski 's protest song , <unk> ( Walls ) , gained popularity with the workers . 
 On August 18 , the Szczecin Shipyard joined the strike , under the leadership of Marian <unk> . A tidal wave of strikes swept the coast , closing ports and bringing the economy to a halt . With KOR assistance and support from many intellectuals , workers occupying factories , mines and shipyards across Poland joined forces . Within days , over 200 factories and enterprises had joined the strike committee . By August 21 , most of Poland was affected by the strikes , from coastal shipyards to the mines of the Upper Silesian Industrial Area ( in Upper Silesia , the city of Jastrzębie @-@ Zdrój became center of the strikes , with a separate committee organized there , see Jastrzębie @-@ Zdrój 1980 strikes ) . More and more new unions were formed , and joined the federation . 
 Thanks to popular support within Poland , as well as to international support and media coverage , the Gdańsk workers held out until the government gave in to their demands . On August 21 a Governmental Commission ( Komisja <unk> ) including Mieczysław Jagielski arrived in Gdańsk , and another one with Kazimierz <unk> was dispatched to Szczecin . On August 30 and 31 , and on September 3 , representatives of the workers and the government signed an agreement ratifying many of the workers ' demands , including the right to strike . This agreement came to be known as the August or Gdańsk agreement ( <unk> <unk> ) . Other agreements were signed in Szczecin ( the Szczecin Agreement of August 30 ) , and Jastrzębie @-@ Zdrój on September 3 . It was called the Jastrzębie Agreement ( <unk> <unk> ) and as such is regarded as part of the Gdańsk agreement . Though concerned with labor @-@ union matters , the agreement enabled citizens to introduce democratic changes within the communist political structure and was regarded as a first step toward dismantling the Party 's monopoly of power . The workers ' main concerns were the establishment of a labor union independent of communist @-@ party control , and recognition of a legal right to strike . Workers ' needs would now receive clear representation . Another consequence of the Gdańsk Agreement was the replacement , in September 1980 , of Edward Gierek by Stanisław Kania as Party First Secretary . 
 = = First Solidarity ( 1980 – 1981 ) = = 
 Encouraged by the success of the August strikes , on September 17 workers ' representatives , including Lech Wałęsa , formed a nationwide labor union , Solidarity ( <unk> <unk> Związek <unk> ( NSZZ ) " Solidarność " ) . It was the first independent labor union in a Soviet @-@ bloc country . Its name was suggested by Karol Modzelewski , and its famous logo was conceived by Jerzy <unk> , designer of many Solidarity @-@ related posters . The new union 's supreme powers were vested in a legislative body , the Convention of Delegates ( <unk> <unk> ) . The executive branch was the National Coordinating Commission ( Krajowa Komisja <unk> ) , later renamed the National Commission ( Komisja Krajowa ) . The Union had a regional structure , comprising 38 regions ( region ) and two districts ( <unk> ) . On December 16 , 1980 , the Monument to Fallen Shipyard Workers was unveiled in Gdansk , and on June 28 , 1981 , another monument was unveiled in Poznan , which commemorated the Poznań 1956 protests . On January 15 , 1981 , a Solidarity delegation , including Lech Wałęsa , met in Rome with Pope John Paul II . From September 5 to 10 , and from September 26 to October 7 , Solidarity 's first national congress was held , and Lech Wałęsa was elected its president . Last accord of the congress was adoption of republican program " Self @-@ governing Republic " . 
 Meanwhile , Solidarity had been transforming itself from a trade union into a social movement or more specifically , a revolutionary movement . Over the 500 days following the Gdańsk Agreement , 9 – 10 million workers , intellectuals and students joined it or its <unk> , such as the Independent Student Union ( <unk> <unk> <unk> , created in September 1980 ) , the Independent Farmers ' Trade Union ( NSZZ <unk> <unk> " Solidarność " or Rural Solidarity , created in May 1981 ) and the Independent Craftsmen 's Trade Union . It was the only time in recorded history that a quarter of a country 's population ( some 80 % of the total Polish work force ) had voluntarily joined a single organization . " History has taught us that there is no bread without freedom , " the Solidarity program stated a year later . " What we had in mind was not only bread , butter and sausages , but also justice , democracy , truth , legality , human dignity , freedom of convictions , and the repair of the republic . " Tygodnik Solidarność , a Solidarity @-@ published newspaper , was started in April 1981 . 
 Using strikes and other protest actions , Solidarity sought to force a change in government policies . In some cases , as in Bielsko @-@ Biała , Solidarity managed to force corrupt officials of the government to lose their jobs . At the same time , it was careful never to use force or violence , so as to avoid giving the government any excuse to bring security forces into play . After 27 Bydgoszcz Solidarity members , including Jan <unk> , were beaten up on March 19 , a four @-@ hour warning strike on March 27 , involving around twelve million people , paralyzed the country . This was the largest strike in the history of the Eastern bloc , and it forced the government to promise an investigation into the beatings . This concession , and Wałęsa 's agreement to defer further strikes , proved a setback to the movement , as the euphoria that had swept Polish society subsided . Nonetheless the Polish communist party — the Polish United Workers ' Party ( PZPR ) — had lost its total control over society . 
 Yet while Solidarity was ready to take up negotiations with the government , the Polish communists were unsure what to do , as they issued empty declarations and <unk> their time . Against the background of a deteriorating communist shortage economy and unwillingness to negotiate seriously with Solidarity , it became increasingly clear that the Communist government would eventually have to suppress the Solidarity movement as the only way out of the impasse , or face a truly revolutionary situation . The atmosphere was increasingly tense , with various local chapters conducting a growing number of uncoordinated strikes as well as street protests , such as the Summer 1981 hunger demonstrations in Poland , in response to the worsening economic situation . On December 3 , 1981 , Solidarity announced that a 24 @-@ hour strike would be held if the government were granted additional powers to suppress dissent , and that a general strike would be declared if those powers were used . 
 = = Martial law ( 1981 – 83 ) = = 
 After the Gdańsk Agreement , the Polish government was under increasing pressure from the Soviet Union to take action and strengthen its position . Stanisław Kania was viewed by Moscow as too independent , and on October 18 , 1981 , the Party Central Committee put him in the minority . Kania lost his post as First Secretary , and was replaced by Prime Minister ( and Minister of Defence ) Gen. Wojciech Jaruzelski , who adopted a strong @-@ arm policy . 
 On December 13 , 1981 , Jaruzelski began a crack @-@ down on Solidarity , declaring martial law and creating a Military Council of National Salvation ( Wojskowa Rada <unk> Narodowego , or <unk> ) . Solidarity 's leaders , gathered at Gdańsk , were arrested and isolated in facilities guarded by the Security Service ( Służba Bezpieczeństwa or SB ) , and some 5 @,@ 000 Solidarity supporters were arrested in the middle of the night . Censorship was expanded , and military forces appeared on the streets . A couple of hundred strikes and occupations occurred , chiefly at the largest plants and at several Silesian coal mines , but were broken by <unk> paramilitary riot police . One of the largest demonstrations , on December 16 , 1981 , took place at the Wujek Coal Mine , where government forces opened fire on demonstrators , killing 9 and seriously injuring 22 . The next day , during protests at Gdańsk , government forces again fired at demonstrators , killing 1 and injuring 2 . By December 28 , 1981 , strikes had ceased , and Solidarity appeared crippled . The last strike in the 1981 Poland , which ended on December 28 , took place in the Piast Coal Mine in the Upper Silesian town of <unk> . It was the longest underground strike in the history of Poland , lasting 14 days . Some 2000 miners began it on December 14 , going 650 meters underground . Out of the initial 2000 , half remained until the last day . Starving , they gave up after military authorities promised they would not be prosecuted . On October 8 , 1982 , Solidarity was banned . 
 The range of support for the Solidarity was unique : no other movement in the world was supported by Ronald Reagan and Santiago Carrillo , Enrico <unk> and the Pope , Margaret Thatcher and Tony Benn , peace campaigners and NATO spokesman , Christians and Western communists , conservatives , liberals and socialists . The international community outside the Iron Curtain condemned Jaruzelski 's actions and declared support for Solidarity ; dedicated organizations were formed for that purpose ( like Polish Solidarity Campaign in Great Britain ) . US President Ronald Reagan imposed economic sanctions on Poland , which eventually would force the Polish government into liberalizing its policies . Meanwhile , the CIA together with the Catholic Church and various Western trade unions such as the AFL @-@ CIO provided funds , equipment and advice to the Solidarity underground . The political alliance of Reagan and the Pope would prove important to the future of Solidarity . The Polish public also supported what was left of Solidarity ; a major medium for demonstrating support of Solidarity became masses held by priests such as Jerzy <unk> . 
 Besides the communist authorities , Solidarity was also opposed by some of the Polish ( émigré ) radical right , believing Solidarity or KOR to be disguised communist groups , dominated by Jewish Trotskyite Zionists . 
 In July 1983 , martial law was formally lifted , though many heightened controls on civil liberties and political life , as well as food rationing , remained in place through the mid @-@ to @-@ late 1980s . 
 = = Underground Solidarity ( 1982 – 88 ) = = 
 Almost immediately after the legal Solidarity leadership had been arrested , underground structures began to arise . On April 12 , 1982 , Radio Solidarity began broadcasting . On April 22 , Zbigniew Bujak , Bogdan Lis , Władysław Frasyniuk and Władysław <unk> created an Interim Coordinating Commission ( Tymczasowa Komisja <unk> ) to serve as an underground leadership for Solidarity . On May 6 another underground Solidarity organization , an <unk> " S " Regional Coordinating Commission ( <unk> Komisja <unk> NSZZ " S " ) , was created by Bogdan <unk> , Aleksander Hall , Stanisław <unk> , Bogdan Lis and Marian <unk> . June 1982 saw the creation of a Fighting Solidarity ( Solidarność <unk> ) organization . 
 Throughout the mid @-@ 1980s , Solidarity persevered as an exclusively underground organization . Its activists were dogged by the Security Service ( SB ) , but managed to strike back : on May 1 , 1982 , a series of anti @-@ government protests brought out thousands of participants — several dozen thousand in Kraków , Warsaw and Gdańsk . On May 3 more protests took place , during celebrations of the Constitution of May 3 , 1791 . On that day , communist secret services killed four demonstrators – three in Warsaw and one in Wrocław . Another wave of demonstrations occurred on August 31 , 1982 , on the first anniversary of the Gdańsk Agreement ( see August 31 , 1982 demonstrations in Poland ) . Altogether , on that day six demonstrators were killed – three in Lubin , one in Kielce , one in Wrocław and one in Gdańsk . Another person was killed on the next day , during a demonstration in Częstochowa . Further strikes occurred at Gdańsk and Nowa Huta between October 11 and 13 . In Nowa Huta , a 20 @-@ year @-@ old student Bogdan <unk> was shot by a secret service officer . 
 On November 14 , 1982 , Wałęsa was released . However , on December 9 the SB carried out a large anti @-@ Solidarity operation , arresting over 10 @,@ 000 activists . On December 27 Solidarity 's assets were transferred by the authorities to a pro @-@ government trade union , the All @-@ Poland Alliance of Trade Unions ( <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> , or OPZZ ) . Yet Solidarity was far from broken : by early 1983 the underground had over 70 @,@ 000 members , whose activities included publishing over 500 underground newspapers . In the first half of 1983 street protests were frequent ; on May 1 , two persons were killed in Kraków and one in Wrocław . Two days later , two additional demonstrators were killed in Warsaw . 
 On July 22 , 1983 , martial law was lifted , and amnesty was granted to many imprisoned Solidarity members , who were released . On October 5 , Wałęsa was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize . The Polish government , however , refused to issue him a passport to travel to Oslo ; Wałęsa 's prize was accepted on his behalf by his wife . It later transpired that the SB had prepared bogus documents , accusing Wałęsa of immoral and illegal activities that had been given to the Nobel committee in an attempt to derail his nomination . 
 On October 19 , 1984 , three agents of the Ministry of Internal Security murdered a popular pro @-@ Solidarity priest , Jerzy <unk> . As the facts emerged , thousands of people declared their solidarity with the murdered priest by attending his funeral , held on November 3 , 1984 . The government attempted to smooth over the situation by releasing thousands of political prisoners ; a year later , however , there followed a new wave of arrests . Frasyniuk , Lis and Adam Michnik , members of the " S " underground , were arrested on February 13 , 1985 , placed on a show trial , and sentenced to several years ' imprisonment . 
 = = Second Solidarity ( 1988 – 89 ) = = 
 On March 11 , 1985 , power in the Soviet Union was assumed by Mikhail Gorbachev . The worsening economic situation in the entire Eastern Bloc , including the Soviet Union , together with other factors , forced Gorbachev to carry out a number of reforms , not only in the field of economics ( <unk> ) but in the political and social realms ( glasnost and perestroika ) . Gorbachev 's policies soon caused a corresponding shift in the policies of Soviet satellites , including the People 's Republic of Poland . 
 On September 11 , 1986 , 225 Polish political prisoners were released — the last of those connected with Solidarity , and arrested during the previous years . Following amnesty on September 30 , Wałęsa created the first public , legal Solidarity entity since the declaration of martial law — the Temporary Council of NSZZ Solidarność ( Tymczasowa Rada NSZZ Solidarność ) — with Bogdan <unk> , Zbigniew Bujak , Władysław Frasyniuk , Tadeusz Janusz <unk> , Bogdan Lis , Janusz <unk> and Józef <unk> . Soon afterwards , the new Council was admitted to the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions . Many local Solidarity chapters now broke their cover throughout Poland , and on October 25 , 1987 , the National Executive Committee ( Solidarity ) | National Executive Committee of NSZZ Solidarność ( Krajowa Komisja <unk> NSZZ Solidarność ) was created . Nonetheless , Solidarity members and activists continued to be persecuted and discriminated , if less so than during the early 1980s . In the late 1980s , a rift between Wałęsa 's faction and a more radical Fighting Solidarity grew as the former wanted to negotiate with the government , while the latter planned for an anti @-@ communist revolution . 
 By 1988 , Poland 's economy was in worse condition than it had been eight years earlier . International sanctions , combined with the government 's unwillingness to introduce reforms , intensified the old problems . Inefficient government @-@ run planned @-@ economy enterprises wasted labor and resources , producing substandard goods for which there was little demand . Polish exports were low , both because of the sanctions and because the goods were as unattractive abroad as they were at home . Foreign debt and inflation mounted . There were no funds to modernize factories , and the promised " market socialism " materialized as a shortage economy characterized by long queues and empty shelves . Reforms introduced by Jaruzelski and Mieczysław Rakowski came too little and too late , especially as changes in the Soviet Union had bolstered the public 's expectation that change must come , and the Soviets ceased their efforts to prop up Poland 's failing regime . 
 In February 1988 , the government hiked food prices by 40 % . On April 21 , a new wave of strikes hit the country . On May 2 , workers at the Gdańsk Shipyard went on strike . That strike was broken by the government between May 5 and May 10 , but only temporarily : on August 15 , a new strike took place at the " July Manifesto " mine in Jastrzębie Zdrój . By August 20 the strike had spread to many other mines , and on August 22 the Gdańsk Shipyard joined the strike . Poland 's communist government then decided to negotiate . 
 On August 26 , Czesław Kiszczak , the Minister of Internal Affairs , declared on television that the government was willing to negotiate , and five days later he met with Wałęsa . The strikes ended the following day , and on November 30 , during a televised debate between Wałęsa and Alfred <unk> ( leader of the pro @-@ government trade union , the All @-@ Poland Alliance of Trade Unions ) , Wałęsa scored a public @-@ relations victory . 
 On December 18 , a hundred @-@ member Citizens ' Committee ( Komitet Obywatelski ) was formed within Solidarity . It comprised several sections , each responsible for presenting a specific aspect of opposition demands to the government . Wałęsa and the majority of Solidarity leaders supported negotiation , while a minority wanted an anticommunist revolution . Under Wałęsa 's leadership , Solidarity decided to pursue a peaceful solution , and the pro @-@ violence faction never attained any substantial power , nor did it take any action . 
 On January 27 , 1989 , in a meeting between Wałęsa and Kiszczak , a list was drawn up of members of the main negotiating teams . The conference that began on February 6 would be known as the Polish Round Table Talks . The 56 participants included 20 from " S " , 6 from OPZZ , 14 from the PZPR , 14 " independent authorities " , and two priests . The Polish Round Table Talks took place in Warsaw from February 6 to April 4 , 1989 . The Communists , led by Gen. Jaruzelski , hoped to co @-@ opt prominent opposition leaders into the ruling group without making major changes in the structure of political power . Solidarity , while hopeful , did not anticipate major changes . In fact , the talks would radically alter the shape of the Polish government and society . 
 On April 17 , 1989 , Solidarity was legalized , and its membership soon reached 1 @.@ 5 million . The Solidarity Citizens ' Committee ( Komitet Obywatelski " Solidarność " ) was given permission to field candidates in the upcoming elections . Election law allowed Solidarity to put forward candidates for only 35 % of the seats in the Sejm , but there were no restrictions in regard to Senat candidates . Agitation and propaganda continued legally up to election day . Despite its shortage of resources , Solidarity managed to carry on an electoral campaign . On May 8 , the first issue of a new pro @-@ Solidarity newspaper , Gazeta Wyborcza ( The Election Gazette ) , was published . Posters of Wałęsa supporting various candidates , appeared throughout the country . 
 Pre @-@ election public @-@ opinion polls had promised victory to the communists . Thus the total defeat of the PZPR and its satellite parties came as a surprise to all involved : after the first round of elections , it became evident that Solidarity had fared extremely well , capturing 160 of 161 contested Sejm seats , and 92 of 100 Senate seats . After the second round , it had won virtually every seat — all 161 in the Sejm , and 99 in the Senate . 
 These elections , in which anti @-@ communist candidates won a striking victory , inaugurated a series of peaceful anti @-@ communist revolutions in Central and Eastern Europe that eventually culminated in the fall of communism . 
 The new Contract Sejm , named for the agreement that had been reached by the communist party and the Solidarity movement during the Polish Round Table Talks , would be dominated by Solidarity . As agreed beforehand , Wojciech Jaruzelski was elected president . However , the communist candidate for Prime Minister , Czesław Kiszczak , who replaced Mieczysław Rakowski , failed to gain enough support to form a government . 
 On June 23 , a Solidarity Citizens ' Parliamentary Club ( Obywatelski Klub <unk> " Solidarność " ) was formed , led by Bronisław <unk> . It formed a coalition with two ex @-@ satellite parties of the PZPR — United People 's Party and Democratic Party — which had now chosen to " rebel " against the PZPR , which found itself in the minority . On August 24 , the Sejm elected Tadeusz Mazowiecki , a Solidarity representative , to be Prime Minister of Poland . Not only was he a first non @-@ communist Polish Prime Minister since 1945 , he became the first non @-@ Communist prime minister in Eastern Europe for nearly 40 years . In his speech he talked about the " thick line " ( <unk> <unk> ) which would separate his government from the communist past By the end of August 1989 , a Solidarity @-@ led coalition government had been formed . 
 = = Party and trade union ( 1989 to the present ) = = 
 The fall of the communist regime marked a new chapter in the history of Poland and in the history of Solidarity . Having defeated the communist government , Solidarity found itself in a role it was much less prepared for — that of a political party — and soon began to lose popularity . Conflicts among Solidarity factions intensified . Wałęsa was elected Solidarity chairman , but support for him could be seen to be crumbling . One of his main opponents , Władysław Frasyniuk , withdrew from elections altogether . In September 1990 , Wałęsa declared that Gazeta Wyborcza had no right to use the Solidarity logo . 
 Later that month , Wałęsa announced his intent to run for president of Poland . In December 1990 , he was elected president . He resigned his Solidarity post and became the first president of Poland ever to be elected by popular vote . 
 Next year , in February 1991 , Marian Krzaklewski was elected the leader of Solidarity . President Wałęsa 's vision and that of the new Solidarity leadership were diverging . Far from supporting Wałęsa , Solidarity was becoming increasingly critical of the government , and decided to create its own political party for action in the upcoming 1991 parliamentary elections . 
 The 1991 elections were characterized by a large number of competing parties , many claiming the legacy of anti @-@ communism , and the Solidarity party garnered only 5 % of the votes . 
 On January 13 , 1992 , Solidarity declared its first strike against the democratically elected government : a one @-@ hour strike against a proposal to raise energy prices . Another , two @-@ hour strike took place on December 14 . On May 19 , 1993 , Solidarity deputies proposed a no @-@ confidence motion — which passed — against the government of Prime Minister Hanna <unk> . President Wałęsa declined to accept the prime minister 's resignation , and dismissed the parliament . 
 It was in the ensuing 1993 parliamentary elections that it became evident how much Solidarity 's support had eroded in the previous three years . Even though some Solidarity deputies sought to assume a more left @-@ wing stance and to distance themselves from the right @-@ wing government , Solidarity remained identified in the public mind with that government . Hence it suffered from the growing disillusionment of the populace , as the transition from a communist to a capitalist system failed to generate instant wealth and raise Poland 's living standards to those in the West , and the government 's financial " shock therapy " ( the Balcerowicz Plan ) generated much opposition . 
 In the elections , Solidarity received only 4 @.@ 9 % of the votes , 0 @.@ 1 % less than the 5 % required in order to enter parliament ( Solidarity still had 9 senators , 2 fewer than in the previous Senate ) . The victorious party was the Democratic Left Alliance ( <unk> <unk> <unk> or SLD ) , a post @-@ communist left @-@ wing party . 
 Solidarity now joined forces with its erstwhile enemy , the All @-@ Poland Alliance of Trade Unions ( OPZZ ) , and some protests were organized by both trade unions . The following year , Solidarity organized many strikes over the state of the Polish mining industry . In 1995 , a demonstration before the Polish parliament was broken up by the police ( now again known as <unk> ) using batons and water cannons . Nonetheless , Solidarity decided to support Wałęsa in the 1995 presidential elections . 
 In a second major defeat for the Polish right wing , the elections were won by an SLD candidate , Aleksander Kwaśniewski , who received 51 @.@ 72 % of votes . A Solidarity call for new elections went unheeded , but the Sejm still managed to pass a resolution condemning the 1981 martial law ( despite the SLD voting against ) . Meanwhile , the left @-@ wing OPZZ trade union had acquired 2 @.@ 5 million members , twice as many as the contemporary Solidarity ( with 1 @.@ 3 million ) . 
 In June 1996 , Solidarity Electoral Action ( <unk> Wyborcza Solidarność ) was founded as a coalition of over 30 parties , uniting liberal , conservative and Christian @-@ democratic forces . As the public became disillusioned with the SLD and its allies , AWS was victorious in the 1997 parliamentary elections . Jerzy Buzek became the new prime minister . 
 However , controversies over domestic reforms , Poland 's 1999 entry into NATO , and the accession process to the European Union , combined with AWS ' fights with its political allies ( the Freedom Union — Unia <unk> ) and infighting within AWS itself , as well as corruption , eventually resulted in the loss of much public support . AWS leader Marian Krzaklewski lost the 2000 presidential election , and in the 2001 parliamentary elections AWS failed to elect a single deputy to the parliament . After this debacle , Krzaklewski was replaced by Janusz <unk> ( in 2002 ) but the union decided to distance itself from politics . 
 In 2006 , Solidarity had some 1 @.@ 5 million members making it the largest trade union in Poland . Its mission statement declares that Solidarity , " basing its activities on Christian ethics and Catholic social teachings , works to protect workers ' interests and to fulfill their material , social and cultural aspirations . " 
 The European Solidarity Centre , a museum and library devoted to the history of Solidarity and other opposition movements of the Eastern Bloc , opened in Gdańsk on 31 August 2014 . 
 = Cherry Springs State Park = 
 Cherry Springs State Park is a 82 @-@ acre ( 33 ha ) Pennsylvania state park in Potter County , Pennsylvania , in the United States . The park was created from land within the Susquehannock State Forest , and is on Pennsylvania Route 44 in West Branch Township . Cherry Springs , named for a large stand of Black Cherry trees in the park , is atop the dissected Allegheny Plateau at an elevation of 2 @,@ 300 feet ( 701 m ) . It is popular with astronomers and stargazers for having " some of the darkest night skies on the east coast " of the United States , and was chosen by the Pennsylvania Department of Conservation and Natural Resources ( DCNR ) and its Bureau of Parks as one of " 25 Must @-@ See Pennsylvania State Parks " . 
 The earliest recorded inhabitants of the area were the Susquehannocks , followed by the Seneca nation , who hunted there . The first settlement within the park was a log tavern built in 1818 along a trail ; the trail became a turnpike by 1834 and a hotel replaced the tavern in 1874 , then burned in 1897 . In the late 19th and early 20th centuries the old @-@ growth forests were clearcut ; the state forest was established in 1901 and contains second growth woodlands . " Cherry Springs Scenic Drive " was established in 1922 , and the Civilian Conservation Corps built much of Cherry Springs State Park during the Great Depression , including a picnic pavilion listed on the National Register of Historic Places ( NRHP ) . An annual " Woodsmen 's Show " has been held in the park each August since 1952 . 
 Cherry Springs State Park was named Pennsylvania 's first dark sky park by the DCNR in 2000 . The adjoining Cherry Springs Airport , built in 1935 , was closed and its land was added to the park in 2006 , to expand its stargazing area . On June 11 , 2007 , the International Dark @-@ Sky Association named it the second " International Dark Sky Park " ; under optimum conditions the Milky Way casts a discernible shadow . Cherry Springs has received national press coverage and hosts two star parties a year , which attract hundreds of astronomers . There are regular stargazing and educational programs for the public at the park , and the Woodsmen 's Show attracts thousands each summer . Cherry Springs also offers rustic camping , picnic facilities , and trails for mountain biking , hiking , and snowmobiling . The surrounding state forest and park are home to a variety of flora and fauna . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Native Americans = = = 
 Archeological evidence shows that humans have lived in what is now Pennsylvania since at least 10 @,@ 000 BC . The first settlers were Paleo @-@ Indian nomadic hunters known from their stone tools . The hunter @-@ gatherers of the Archaic period , which lasted locally from 7000 to 1000 BC , used a greater variety of more sophisticated stone artifacts . The Woodland period marked the gradual transition to semi @-@ permanent villages and horticulture , between 1000 BC and 1500 AD . Archeological evidence found in the state from this time includes a range of pottery types and styles , burial mounds , pipes , bows and arrows , and ornaments . 
 Historical records show that the earliest known inhabitants of the West Branch Susquehanna River drainage basin , which includes Cherry Springs State Park , were the Iroquoian @-@ speaking Susquehannocks . They were a matriarchal society that lived in large long houses in stockaded villages . Decimated by disease and warfare with the Five Nations of the Iroquois , by 1675 they had died out , moved away , or been assimilated into other tribes . Another name for the tribe is " Susquehanna " , and both the river and the Susquehannock State Forest which almost completely surrounds the park are named for them . 
 After the departure of the Susquehannocks , the lands of the West Branch Susquehanna River valley were under the nominal control of the Iroquois , who lived in long houses , primarily in what is now upstate New York , and had a strong confederacy which gave them power beyond their numbers . The Seneca , members of the Iroquois Confederacy , hunted in the area of what is now Cherry Springs State Park . Their nearest villages were 51 miles ( 82 km ) to the northeast at modern Painted Post , New York , and 43 miles ( 69 km ) to the southeast at what is now Lock Haven , Pennsylvania . The Seneca had temporary hunting camps to the east in the area of Pine Creek Gorge . To fill the void left by the demise of the Susquehannocks , the Iroquois also encouraged displaced tribes from the east to settle in the West Branch watershed , including the Lenape ( or Delaware ) and Shawnee . 
 The Seneca allowed very few travelers to pass through the area and kept non @-@ native settlement to a minimum . The French and Indian War ( 1754 – 1763 ) led to the migration of many Native Americans westward to the Ohio River basin , and more departed after the American Revolutionary War ( 1775 – 1783 ) . The United States acquired the Last Purchase , including what is now Cherry Springs State Park , from the Iroquois in the second Treaty of Fort Stanwix in October 1784 . In the years that followed , Native Americans almost entirely left Pennsylvania . 
 = = = Pioneers and lumber = = = 
 Potter County was formed from part of Lycoming County on March 26 , 1804 , but the difficult terrain and thick old @-@ growth forest prevented the new county from being settled by European @-@ Americans until 1808 . Prior to the arrival of William Penn and his Quaker colonists in 1682 , up to 90 percent of what is now Pennsylvania was covered with woods : more than 31 @,@ 000 square miles ( 80 @,@ 000 km2 ) of eastern white pine , eastern hemlock , and a mix of hardwoods . The forests in and near the three original counties , Philadelphia , Bucks , and Chester , were the first to be harvested , as the early settlers used the readily available timber and cleared land for agriculture . By the time of the American Revolution , logging had reached the interior and mountainous regions , and became a leading industry in Pennsylvania . Trees furnished fuel to heat homes , tannin for the state 's many tanneries , and wood for construction , furniture , and barrel making . Large areas of forest were harvested by colliers to fire iron furnaces . Rifle stocks and shingles were made from Pennsylvania timber , as were a wide variety of household utensils , and the first Conestoga wagons . 
 The area surrounding Cherry Springs State Park has been a wilderness for much of its history . A bridle path was cut through the woods in 1806 – 1807 , and was widened to accommodate wagons in 1812 . ( Modern Pennsylvania Route 44 , which passes through the park , follows the course of this path between Jersey Shore and Coudersport . ) In 1818 the Ceres Land Company , which owned much of the land in Potter County and sought to open the area to settlement , hired an early settler , Jonathan Edgcomb , to build a tavern or hotel for travelers at the site of the park . The hotel was in a very remote location 16 miles ( 26 km ) south of Coudersport , and its visitors were few , occasional wandering travelers or Native Americans . 
 Edgcomb and his wife received 100 acres ( 40 ha ) of land in exchange for building the hotel and running it for three years . When the contract expired in 1821 , they sold their land and left the area , but the hotel and land that Edgcomb had cleared became known as " Edgcomb 's Clearing " . The Jersey Shore and Coudersport Turnpike was constructed along the wagon path between 1825 and 1834 , and tolls were collected for travel on the road until 1860 . The park is in West Branch Township , which was incorporated from Eulalia Township in 1856 . A post office was opened at Edgcomb 's Clearing in 1873 ; the locals petitioned the United States Post Office to change the name to " <unk> " , for a nearby group of Black Cherry trees . However , since there was already a <unk> , Pennsylvania , post office in Lehigh Township in Northampton County , the name " Cherry Spring " was chosen as a compromise . In time an " s " was added , hence the name " Cherry Springs " . There are also at least two springs in the park . 
 In 1874 a new , larger hotel was built on the other side of the road from the original tavern . It provided accommodations for wealthy summer visitors from Coudersport . This part of Potter County became known for an abundance of game and fish , and attracted hunters and anglers who also stayed at the Cherry Springs Hotel . This era as a " sportsmen 's paradise " was not to last , as the more profitable lumber industry came to West Branch and surrounding townships , which were home to " some of the tallest , straightest timber left standing " along the East Coast of the United States . 
 When lumbermen reached the Cherry Springs area in the late 1880s , eastern white pine and eastern hemlock covered the surrounding mountains . Lumberjacks harvested the trees and sent them down the creeks to the West Branch Susquehanna River to the Susquehanna Boom and sawmills at Williamsport . Clearcutting allowed silt to choke the streams , and nothing was left except the dried @-@ out tree tops , which became a fire hazard . As a result , large swaths of land burned and were left barren , and much of the central part of the state became known as the " Pennsylvania Desert " . The Cherry Springs Hotel itself burned in 1897 and the property was abandoned . 
 = = = Civilian Conservation Corps = = = 
 As the timber was exhausted and the land burned , many companies simply abandoned their holdings . In 1897 the Pennsylvania General Assembly passed legislation which authorized the purchase of " unseated lands for forest reservations " and the first Pennsylvania state forest lands were acquired the following year . The first land for the Susquehannock State Forest was acquired in 1901 ; the cost for the major acquisitions was an average of $ 2 @.@ 50 per acre ( $ 6 @.@ 18 per ha ) . This is roughly equivalent to $ 48 per acre ( $ 120 per ha ) in 2016 terms . As of 2003 , the Susquehannock State Forest , which almost entirely surrounds the park , covered 265 @,@ 000 acres ( 107 @,@ 000 ha ) , chiefly in Potter County with small tracts in Clinton and McKean counties . 
 The park traces its existence back to 1922 , when the Pennsylvania Department of Forestry established three scenic areas in state forests as part of a " plan for retaining their natural beauty " . One of these was the 6 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 10 @.@ 5 km ) " Cherry Springs Scenic Drive " on the old Coudersport @-@ Jersey Shore Turnpike . That same year , one of 16 " Class B " public campgrounds in the state forests was located on Cherry Springs Drive . These campgrounds were free for the public to use and all had potable water , picnic tables , a fireplace , garbage can , and a latrine . The land where the hotel sat was purchased by the state in 1932 . 
 Like many state parks in north central Pennsylvania , development of the facilities at Cherry Springs was the work of the Civilian Conservation Corps ( CCC ) , a work relief program for young men from unemployed families . Established in 1933 as part of President Franklin D. Roosevelt 's New Deal legislation , the CCC was designed to combat unemployment during the Great Depression . It operated in every U.S. state , and established ten CCC camps in the Susquehannock State Forest , of which eight were in Potter County . 
 Cherry Springs was home to CCC Camp S @-@ 136 @-@ Pa , which was established on May 27 , 1933 . According to the camp 's 1936 History : " Through the efforts of the [ CCC ] enrollees Cherry Springs Park , formerly a clearing , has been transformed into a park of which the people of Potter County can be proud of . " [ sic ] A historic recreation of the original tavern was built , as were a rifle range , picnic tables and shelters , roads , and hiking trails . The young men of the CCC camps worked to clear brush from the woods as a fire prevention measure . After clearing the woods , they planted stands of Norway Spruce and white pine , as well as an apple orchard . Camp @-@ 136 @-@ Pa closed on July 10 , 1937 . 
 Men from CCC Camp S @-@ 88 @-@ Pa , based at nearby Lyman Run in Potter County , were also active in the park . In 1939 , they built a structure at Cherry Springs which is " the largest and most unique of the CCC @-@ built picnic pavilions " in the state , and is listed on the National Register of Historic Places . The pavilion overlooks PA Route 44 and is shaped like an H , with two partially enclosed structures ( the vertical lines of the H ) connected by a breezeway ( the horizontal bar ) . The breezeway is a roof supported by eight log columns with log railings . The ends of the pavilion are built from log walls with white chinking , like log cabins . Each end has a large opening to the breezeway in one wall , while the other three sides are fully enclosed with a large window in the wall facing the highway , a stone fireplace and chimney on the opposite wall , and a door flanked by windows on the wall opposite the breezeway . 
 A 1984 survey of Pennsylvania state parks found the " three picnic pavilions , and their associated latrines " at Cherry Springs " typical of the smallest day use areas constructed by the CCC " . These pavilions are examples of the rustic style built by the CCC in state parks throughout the Great Depression . Local materials were used in a way that minimized impact on the natural surroundings , and in a manner that resembled the building style of the pioneer settlements of the Appalachian Mountains . 
 In addition to the two CCC camps active at the park , Cherry Springs also was home to Camp Elliott , which was run by the Pennsylvania Department of Forests and Waters ( precursor to the Department of Conservation and Natural Resources ( DCNR ) ) for college students and other unemployed men . In 1935 they built an airfield , Cherry Springs Intermediate Field , just north of the park . The 40 @-@ acre ( 16 ha ) airfield was originally built for emergency landings and later became a small airport . In 1936 it had a sod runway of dimensions 2 @,@ 400 by 500 feet ( 730 by 150 m ) , and a hangar . The United States ' entry into the Second World War led to the end of the CCC and all its camps were closed by the summer of 1942 . 
 = = = Modern era = = = 
 The park has had several names through the years , starting with its 1922 establishment as " Cherry Springs Scenic Drive " and the associated " Cherry Springs ' Class B ' public campground " . The 1941 Pennsylvania Department of Highways official map of Potter County shows it as " Cherry Springs State Park " . On November 11 , 1954 , the Pennsylvania Geographic Board officially named it " Cherry Springs State Forest Picnic Area " . Forrey 's 1984 History of Pennsylvania 's State Parks and the 1986 NRHP nomination form still used this name , but Forrey clarified that it was " under the jurisdiction of the Bureau of State Parks " . <unk> 's 1993 Our Priceless Heritage : Pennsylvania 's State Parks 1893 – 1993 refers to it as " Cherry Springs State Park " , and this remains the official name as of 2009 . 
 In the post @-@ war era , the park was long known chiefly for its isolated location and primitive camping facilities . In August 1952 it played host to the first Woodsmen 's Carnival , an annual celebration of the lumbering industry , which was again active in the second growth forests in the area . The festival , originally sponsored by the Penn @-@ York Lumbermen 's Club , features lumberjack competitions as a reminder of the past , as well as displays of new equipment . In 1987 the Galeton Rotary Club took over sponsorship , and renamed the event the Woodsmen 's Show in 1990 . 
 In the 1980s , the CCC and its work in the park were honored . Cherry Springs State Park was one of several to celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of the founding of the Civilian Conservation Corps with a CCC reunion in the summer of 1983 . On May 11 , 1987 , the Cherry Springs Picnic Pavilion was listed on the NRHP . None of the other remaining CCC structures in the park had retained its historic integrity sufficiently to be included on the NRHP . 
 Cherry Springs began attracting stargazers in the early 1990s . In 1999 the " Dark Sky Fund " was established and continues " to enhance the stargazing and astronomy experience " by funding improvements at the park . In 2000 Cherry Springs was officially named a " Dark Sky Park " by the DCNR , and that same year it became part of the Hills Creek State Park complex , an administrative grouping of eight state parks in Potter and Tioga counties . The headquarters for Cherry Springs are at nearby Lyman Run State Park . The National Public Observatory picked it " as the pilot for the Stars @-@ n @-@ Parks program " in April 2001 . The DCNR acquired the Cherry Springs Airport in 2006 " to expand the overall Dark Sky observation area and allow for increased programming opportunities " at the park , and closed it in 2007 . On June 11 , 2008 , the International Dark @-@ Sky Association named Cherry Springs State Park the second " International Dark Sky Park " . ( The first was Natural Bridges National Monument in Utah . ) 
 = = Geology and climate = = 
 Cherry Springs State Park is at an elevation of 2 @,@ 300 feet ( 701 m ) above sea level , atop the Allegheny Plateau and " near the glaciated boundary " . The plateau and the Appalachian Mountains were all formed in the Alleghenian orogeny some 300 million years ago , when Gondwana ( specifically what became Africa ) and what became North America collided , forming Pangaea . Although the region appears mountainous , these are not true mountains : instead millions of years of erosion have made this a dissected plateau , causing the " mountainous " terrain seen today . The hardest of the ancient rocks are on top of the ridges , while the softer rocks eroded away forming the valleys . 
 The park is in the West Branch Pine Creek drainage basin , where the underlying rocks are primarily conglomerate , sandstone , and shale . Two major rock formations are present in Cherry Springs State Park , both at least partly from the Carboniferous period . The youngest of these , which forms the highest points in the park , is the early Pennsylvanian Pottsville Formation , a gray conglomerate that may contain sandstone , siltstone , and shale , as well as anthracite coal . The lower formation is the late Devonian and early Mississippian Huntley Mountain Formation , which is made of relatively soft grayish @-@ red shale and olive @-@ gray sandstone . Outside the park the creek has cut down into the Devonian Catskill Formation , a reddish sandstone . 
 The Allegheny Plateau has a continental climate , with occasional severe low temperatures in winter and average daily temperature ranges of 20 ° F ( 11 ° C ) in winter and 26 ° F ( 14 ° C ) in summer . The mean annual precipitation for the West Branch Pine Creek watershed is 40 to 42 inches ( 1 @,@ 016 to 1 @,@ 067 mm ) . January is the coldest month at Cherry Springs , July the warmest , and June the wettest . The highest recorded temperature at the park was 94 ° F ( 34 ° C ) in 1966 , and the record low was − 28 ° F ( − 33 ° C ) in 1963 . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Cherry Springs State Park and the surrounding Susquehannock State Forest have recovered from the clearcutting of the lumber era . However , the composition of the forests has changed , so that there are now more hardwoods , including sugar maple and black cherry , and fewer eastern white pine and eastern hemlock . The park also has apple trees from the CCC orchard . Over 400 species of birds have been found in Pennsylvania , including 186 that breed in the state . Birds such as ospreys , hawks , owls , nightjars , and bald eagles have returned to the park and state forest , and saw @-@ whet owls have been studied in the park . 
 Some animals which had been locally extinct have also returned or been reintroduced to the area , including white @-@ tailed deer , elk , fishers ( a type of weasel ) , and otters . Although banned in the park , hunting is allowed in the surrounding state forest , which regained its title as a " sportsmen 's paradise " in the 20th century . Game species include black bears , white @-@ tailed deer , ducks , ruffed grouse , rabbits , gray and red squirrels , and wild turkeys . Other animals present in the park and forest include chipmunks , minks , raccoons , porcupines , groundhogs , and the occasional bobcat , as well as frogs , beetles , and moths . 
 A branch of Hopper House Run rises within the park , and flows east and then north into the West Branch Pine Creek . West Branch Road ( or Branch Road ) follows the valleys of the run and creek from Pennsylvania Route 44 east 10 miles ( 16 km ) to Galeton . PA 44 roughly follows the line dividing the Pine Creek watershed to the north and the Sinnemahoning Creek watershed to the south . East Fork Road leaves PA 44 in the park and follows the East Fork Sinnemahoning Creek valley southwest 12 miles ( 19 km ) to the village of Conrad . Both creeks are approved trout streams for fishing , which means they are stocked with trout in season . 
 = = Recreation = = 
 = = = Dark skies = = = 
 Astronomers and stargazers appreciate Cherry Springs State Park for the darkness and clarity of its skies , which make it " perhaps the last best refuge of the natural night sky " in the eastern half of the United States . The sky at Cherry Springs has been classified as a 2 on the <unk> Dark @-@ Sky Scale , meaning it has almost no light pollution . Such " truly dark , starry skies are unavailable to two @-@ thirds of the world 's population , including 99 percent of people in the continental U.S. and Western Europe " . With optimum conditions , 10 @,@ 000 stars are visible with the naked eye at the park , clouds appear only as black holes in the starry sky , and the Milky Way is so bright that it casts a discernible shadow . In contrast , big city residents can see a few dozen stars at best , and even those in rural areas can typically only see 2 @,@ 000 – 3 @,@ 000 stars . The Milky Way cannot be seen by most in the eastern US , even when there is no moonlight to obscure it . 
 The quality of the night skies at the park and its growing popularity for stargazing are the result of several factors . Cherry Springs is in the midst of the largely undeveloped 262 @,@ 000 @-@ acre ( 106 @,@ 000 ha ) Susquehannock State Forest , and is on a summit 2 @,@ 300 feet ( 701 m ) above sea level . Because it is on the Allegheny Plateau , there are no mountain peaks to block the sky , and the Astronomy Field offers a 360 degree unobstructed view . The closest city is Williamsport , 60 miles ( 97 km ) to the southeast . Surrounding communities sit in deep valleys , so the intervening terrain screens much of the light they produce ; the park has no artificial <unk> in any direction . Cherry Springs is generally fog @-@ free and its latitude puts it in excellent position to observe the Galactic Center of the Milky Way . The remote location also means there is little commercial air traffic to interfere with astrophotography , while PA Route 44 still offers relatively easy access to the park from Interstate 80 . 
 In addition to these natural factors , much has been done intentionally to make the skies at the park clear and dark and help keep them that way . Within the park , former overhead electrical lines have been buried so they do not obstruct views , all lighting is shielded , and all white lights have been converted to red , which has the least effect on night vision and astrophotography . Light from passing vehicles is blocked by earthen berms covered with grass , or shrubbery and spruce trees ; the Astronomy Field gate has a special light @-@ blocking tarp . The park 's Dark Sky Fund has paid for many of these improvements since 1999 . 
 Since the 2006 acquisition of the Cherry Springs airport , a new Public Programming field has been established on the former airstrip . This field is northeast of PA Route 44 and is intended for educational programs or stargazing , but not for those who spend the night . Overnight observers and those with large telescopes use the Astronomy Field southwest of the highway . Nighttime visitors may only use flashlights with red filters , and may only point them at the ground . The Astronomy Field has further restrictions on lights , and parts of the park are light @-@ free zones . 
 To help preserve the dark skies at Cherry Springs State Park , Tri @-@ County Rural Electric company installs light @-@ shielding caps on outdoor lights at local homes for free . In 2001 the Pennsylvania General Assembly passed the " Outdoor Lighting Control Act " , which both established the park as a " Dark Sky Preserve " and required minimal and shielded lighting at all new state facilities to reduce light pollution . A design guide for the Pennsylvania Wilds region , which includes the park , emphasizes the importance of maintaining dark skies . The DCNR spent $ 396 @,@ 000 in June 2007 to buy mineral rights under 1 @,@ 980 acres ( 800 ha ) of the park and state forest to prevent natural gas drilling and associated development there . 
 A wind farm has been proposed on a site 13 @.@ 7 miles ( 22 @.@ 0 km ) from the park . In 2008 Potter County passed an ordinance that wind turbine lights shall not " interfere with the state @-@ designated Dark Skies Preserve at Cherry Springs State Park " . That same year the DCNR commissioned a study on the wind farm 's impact , which concluded the red warning lights on the wind turbines would not impact the darkness of the sky and would only be directly visible from the Astronomy Field under rare conditions . Others in the astronomy community challenged these conclusions and feared that new lights on " several dozen wind turbines near the park " will degrade observations and astrophotography . The study also recommended that the DCNR shield and redirect lights at the nearby Denton Hill State Park downhill ski area to make the sky even darker at Cherry Springs . 
 = = = Astronomical observing = = = 
 The staff at Cherry Springs State Park did not intend for it to become an attraction for amateur astronomers ; the astronomers came to them instead . In 1997 or 1998 Chip Harrison , the park supervisor , noticed a man looking through a telescope at the park at about 1 AM . When Harrison asked why the man had come there , the astronomer said he had noticed an isolated black patch over north central Pennsylvania on nighttime satellite photos . Cherry Springs State Park is in that patch , one of the best locations east of the Mississippi River for stargazing . 
 An increasing number of astronomers began to come to Cherry Springs , most in the 14 @-@ day dark sky period around the new moon , between the last quarter and first quarter phases . The park is open year @-@ round and between 60 and 85 nights each year have ideal conditions , when the apparent magnitudes of the faintest stars visible can range from 7 @.@ 1 to 7 @.@ 5 . The park 's Astronomy Field has been upgraded to accommodate these astronomers . In 2005 a rotating 15 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) slotted observatory dome , two 12 @-@ foot ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) clamshell domes , and a 10 @-@ by @-@ 12 @-@ foot ( 3 @.@ 0 by 3 @.@ 7 m ) sky shed were added , as well as a small amphitheater for programs . The four structures protect telescopes from the wind and thermal currents . The next year concrete pads 4 and 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 and 1 @.@ 8 m ) in diameter were placed at random in the field , and electrical pedestals , each with six outlets , were added to power telescopes and computers . In 2009 , Wi @-@ Fi internet access was added to the Astronomy Field . 
 While a typical clear night might have 50 to 100 observers , each year the park hosts two major star parties which both attract several hundred astronomers for several nights . The Black Forest Star Party , sponsored by the Central Pennsylvania Observers of State College , has been held each fall since 1999 . The Cherry Springs Star Party , sponsored by the Astronomical Society of Harrisburg , has been held each June since 2005 . There are also free public programs at the amphitheater on the former airport site , some of which are part of the National Public Observatory 's Stars @-@ n @-@ Parks program . Meteor showers will also attract a crowd and the Aurora Borealis can be seen from the park . A stargazing business , " Crystal Spheres " , has been established and presents Music and Stars programs , with an hour @-@ long concert followed by an hour of stargazing . Such " nature tourism " has a positive economic impact for the area . 
 Awards and press recognition have come to Cherry Springs and its staff . Thom Bemus , who initiated and coordinates the Stars @-@ n @-@ Parks program , was named DCNR 's 2002 Volunteer of the Year . In 2007 the park 's Dark Sky Programming and staff received the Environmental Education Excellence in Programming award from the Pennsylvania Recreation and Parks Society . Operations manager Chip Harrison and his wife Maxine , who directs the Dark Sky Fund , received a 2008 award from the Pennsylvania Outdoor Lighting Council for " steadfast adherence and active promotion of the principles of responsible outdoor lighting at Cherry Springs State Park " . The DCNR has named Cherry Springs one of " 25 Must @-@ See Pennsylvania State Parks " , specifically for having the " darkest night skies on the east coast " . Cherry Springs State Park was featured in the national press in 2003 when USA Today named it one of " 10 Great Places to get some stars in your eyes " , in 2006 when National Geographic Adventure featured it in " Pennsylvania : The Wild , Wild East " , and in The New York Times in 2007 . All these were before it was named an International Dark Sky Park by the International Dark @-@ Sky Association in 2008 . 
 = = = Woodsmen 's Show = = = 
 The Woodsmen 's Show attracts thousands of visitors to Cherry Springs State Park on the first weekend in August . It has been held every year since 1952 , and has been sponsored by the Galeton Rotary Club since 1987 . In 2008 events at the three @-@ day show included tree @-@ felling , cross @-@ cutting , log rolling , axe @-@ throwing , horse pulling , spring board chopping , the standing block chop , and chainsaw competitions and demonstrations . The 2008 show also featured historic recreations of life in a logging camp , musical performances , and vendors selling food , crafts , and equipment related to the lumber industry . 
 The show and its events , which celebrate Potter County 's lumbering history , have changed with time . In the early years , up to three working sawmills were set up just for the carnival , and there was an associated Woodsmen 's Ball on Saturday evening , after the carnival ended . The Woodsmen 's Show had its first female competitor in 1979 . Some events have been tried and discontinued ; in 1987 one @-@ hour seminars on topics such as " Outdoor Adventures on Mules " and the first " Woodsmen 's Carnival Queen " were introduced , and in 1993 there was tractor pulling with lawn tractors . In 1990 the name was changed from the " Woodsmen 's Carnival " to the " Woodsmen 's Show " , a third day was added , and an ecumenical church service was held Sunday morning in the large picnic pavilion . The next year the show was part of the <unk> <unk> Series and some of the competition was televised on ESPN . Although it is no longer part of the <unk> series , as of 2008 many of the same athletes competed at the show . 
 Attendance was 4 @,@ 000 the first year and grew to 12 @,@ 000 three years later in 1955 , then peaked at 33 @,@ 000 in 1962 , with nearly as many in 1965 ( 32 @,@ 000 ) and 1981 ( 30 @,@ 000 ) . In 1983 , 20 @,@ 000 visitors came to the show , 15 @,@ 000 came in 1985 , and by the early 21st century attendance was about 14 @,@ 000 . Admission is charged and cash prizes are awarded in the competitions . Proceeds from the show under the Penn @-@ York Lumbermen 's Club went to promote the lumber industry and support the Pennsylvania Lumber Museum . The Galeton Rotary Club has used the funds to improve the standard of living in and around Galeton , including college scholarships , a new roof for the Community building , support for the local public library , and clean @-@ up and maintenance of the downtown . 
 = = = Camping , picnicking , and trails = = = 
 The park has 30 camping sites which can each accommodate a tent , or a recreational vehicle ( RV ) up to 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) long . The sites all have a fire ring , lantern hanger , and picnic table , and are classified as rustic because they have no running water . The camping area , which is southeast of Pennsylvania Route 44 , is open from April to December and does not accept reservations . The park has two modern latrines , one in the camping area and the other at the Astronomy Field . There is also a holding tank dump station for RVs . Although the Astronomy Field is not an official camping area , overnight observers may set up tents and vehicles there in which to camp . In addition to the picnic tables and small pavilion in the camping area , the main picnic area at Cherry Springs is on the southwest side of Route 44 , in and around the large historic , CCC @-@ built pavilion . The area surrounding the pavilion has many picnic tables situated in an old apple orchard and a stand of huge white pine and Norway spruce trees . 
 Cherry Springs State Park is at the southern end of a 15 @-@ mile ( 24 km ) long , single @-@ track mountain bike trail , which begins at Denton Hill State Park and passes through Patterson State Park . In 2005 the snowmobile trailhead at Cherry Springs was moved to the southern end of the park to avoid the Astronomy Field . The snowmobile trail is one of many trails available for cross @-@ country skiing , backpacking , hiking , and all @-@ terrain vehicle and horseback riding in the surrounding Susquehannock State Forest . The 85 @-@ mile ( 137 km ) long Susquehannock Trail System passes close to the park and loops around it . South of the park the trail passes through the Hammersley Wild Area , which at 30 @,@ 253 acres ( 12 @,@ 243 ha ) without roads is the second largest wild area in Pennsylvania . 
 = = Nearby state parks = = 
 Cherry Springs State Park is on Pennsylvania Route 44 in West Branch Township , 10 miles ( 16 km ) southwest of Galeton . The following state parks are within 30 miles ( 48 km ) of Cherry Springs State Park : 
 = Ricardo Arjona = 
 Edgar R. Arjona Morales ( born 19 January 1964 ) , known as Ricardo Arjona ( Spanish pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> ] ) , is a Guatemalan singer @-@ songwriter and former basketball player and school teacher . Arjona is one of the most successful Latin American artists of all time , with more than 20 million albums sold . He is often called El Animal Nocturno ( The Nocturnal Animal ) , thanks to his breakthrough success with his fourth studio album which bears the same name . His music ranges from ballads to Latin pop , rock , pop rock , Cuban music , and more recently a cappella performances and a mixture of Tejano music and Norteño music , and other Afro @-@ American and Latin sounds . Arjona is noted for his lyrical style , and often addresses topics such as love , sexuality , violence , racism and immigration . 
 As of 2014 , Arjona had released fourteen studio albums , one live album , nine compilation albums and forty @-@ three singles . Four Arjona albums reached number one on the Billboard Top Latin Albums , and ten reached number one in Argentina . Four albums had charted on the Billboard 200 . Four singles had reached number one on the Billboard Latin Songs chart and seven had done the same on Latin Pop Songs . His work earned him numerous awards and accolades , including one Grammy Award , one Latin Grammy Award , the " Latin Heritage " Award as well as awards from the American Society of Composers , Authors and Publishers ; a silver and golden torch and two silver seagulls from the 2010 Viña del Mar International Song Festival , two Billboard Latin Music Awards , and a " Latin Trajectory of the Year " Award at the <unk> Latino Awards of 2010 . 
 = = Early years and personal life = = 
 Edgar Ricardo Arjona Morales was born on 19 January 1964 in <unk> , Guatemala , to parents Ricardo Arjona Moscoso and Mimi Morales de Arjona . He spent most of his childhood in Guatemala City , where he began his musical instruction . At age twelve , he participated in the contest " Festival Infantil Juventud 74 " with " Gracias al Mundo " , a song composed by his father , finally winning the event . Although he initially enrolled in architecture and engineering at the Universidad de San Carlos de Guatemala ( USAC ) , he graduated with a degree from the School of Communication Sciences . In the city of Buenos Aires , Argentina , he met Puerto Rican Leslie Torres and had two children with her : Adria and Ricardo . They separated in 2005 . As of 2010 , Arjona was dating Venezuelan model Daisy <unk> , with whom he has a child . 
 = = Sports career = = 
 Arjona was a talented basketball player who played for Leones de Marte and <unk> . He toured Central America as a member of the Guatemala national basketball team . Until recently , he held the record for the most points scored ( 78 ) in a single game by a Guatemalan . He also taught at a primary school ( called Santa Elena III ) , where he claimed to have spent six hours giving lessons and the rest of the day playing soccer . This earned him a visit from a Ministry of Education representative , who was sent to evaluate his pupils . The representative found that the students ' education was actually above average . In 1988 , he became the basketball coach of a boys ' school ( called Instituto Don Bosco ) . 
 = = Music career = = 
 = = = 1980s : Beginnings and early breakthrough = = = 
 Arjona began his musical career at age 21 , when he signed with the now defunct , Guatemalan record label , Discos de <unk> S.A. and distributed by < PolyGram and released his debut album Déjame Decir Que Te Amo in 1985 . The label attempted to portray Arjona as a stereotypical Latin lover . The title track was released as a single , " Déjame Decir Que Te Amo " . This album failed to chart , but received moderate praise from critics , with Allmusic awarding it three stars out of five . Because of his negative experience recording the album and its commercial failure , he decided to abandon music to teach school . At age 24 , Arjona reversed course and sought the opportunity to represent his country in the <unk> Festival with the song " Con Una Estrella En El <unk> " . The sessions immediately following this decision produced the song " S.O.S <unk> " . His second studio album , Jesús , Verbo No <unk> brought him commercial and critical success across Latin America and the U.S. and became a best @-@ seller in many Central American territories . 
 = = = 1990s : International breakthrough , Si El Norte Fuera El Sur and Sin Daños a Terceros = = = 
 Arjona started the new decade as a regular in the Mexican telenovela ( soap opera ) " <unk> una Estrella " ( English translation : Reaching a Star ) , which assisted him in becoming a known singer throughout Latin America . After joining Sony Music in 1990 he released Del Otro Lado del Sol , one of his least successful albums . That year , he started composing songs for other artists , such as Yuri 's " Detrás de Mi Ventana " , for her album Nueva era ( 1993 ) . The song became a hit , reaching No.1 on the US Hot Latin Songs chart for three weeks in 1994 . He later covered the song in his compilation album , <unk> ( 2009 ) , alongside Melina León . Animal Nocturno , Arjona 's fourth studio album , was released in 1993 . The album contained the hit singles " Mujeres " ( No. 6 on Latin Songs ) and " Primera Vez " ( No. 6 on Latin Songs ) and received thirteen platinum and one diamond certifications . Animal Nocturno sold 500 @,@ 000 copies in 1994 , and carried Arjona to fame along with his work on the Mexican telenovela <unk> Una Estrella , which allowed him to showcase his songwriting and singing skills . 
 He confirmed his reputation with the release of his fifth studio album , Historias . The album sold 2 million copies throughout Latin America and received twenty @-@ seven platinum and two diamond certifications , including quadruple Platinum in Argentina . Historias reached No. 43 on Top Latin Albums and included the hit singles " Te Conozco " ( No. 3 on Billboard Latin Songs ) and " Señora De Las Cuatro Décadas " ( No. 7 on Latin Songs ) . The Allmusic review by Jason Birchmeier awarded the album 4 @.@ 5 stars stating that " If you were to pick only one Arjona album for your collection that wasn 't a greatest @-@ hits compilation , this should be the one . Historias was a career @-@ defining success for Arjona . " His fourth and fifth studio albums were the best @-@ selling of his career . 
 In 1996 , he released his sixth studio album , Si El Norte Fuera El Sur . This was the first album in which Arjona ventured beyond the theme of love to explore nationalism and globalization , among other sociopolitical topics . Its four singles were " Si El Norte Fuera El Sur " ( No. 9 on Latin Pop Songs ) , whose main theme is the relationship between the United States and Latin America , " Tu <unk> " ( No. 18 on Latin Songs , No. 2 on Latin Pop Songs ) , " Me <unk> " ( No. 18 on Latin Pop Songs ) , and " Ella y Él " ( No. 24 on Latin Songs , No. 8 on Latin Pop Songs ) . Birchmeier awarded the album 4 @.@ 5 stars stating " All in all , it 's Arjona 's third classic album in a row , each distinct from its predecessor . " Billboard named it the Rock Album of the Year in 1997 . Si El Norte Fuera El Sur received multiple Platinum certifications in the United States and Argentina . 
 In 1998 , he released his seventh studio album , Sin Daños a Terceros . Terry Jenkins from Allmusic , on his review of the album , awarded it 4 stars , writing that " Sin Daños a Terceros continues Ricardo Arjona 's streak of accomplished , affecting albums that spotlights both his melodic skills and his sharp social consciousness . " His fourth consecutive album to receive critical success , Sin Daños a Terceros also enjoyed commercial success , debuting at No. 6 on Top Latin Albums , the first to reach the top 10 , and reaching No. 3 on the Billboard Latin Pop Albums chart . It contained the hit singles " Dime Que No " ( No. 6 on Latin Songs , No. 3 on Latin Pop Songs ) , and " <unk> " ( No. 22 on Latin Songs , No. 5 on Latin Pop Songs ) . The album received multiple Platinum certifications from the United States and Argentina . More than 700 @,@ 000 copies were sold . 
 On 5 December 1998 and in front of a live audience of more than 100 @,@ 000 people at the Hippodrome of Guatemala City , Arjona recorded his first live album , the 1999 release Vivo . The album was moderately successful , certified Gold in Mexico and Platinum in the United States and Argentina . It produced the hit " Desnuda " , which became his first No. 1 on the Billboard Top Latin Songs chart . As of December 2005 , Vivo had sold 243 @,@ 000 copies in the United States , his best @-@ selling album there as of that date . 
 = = = 2000 – 2005 : Galería Caribe , world tour , Santo Pecado , hiatus and Adentro = = = 
 Arjona 's eighth studio album , Galería Caribe was preceded by the single " <unk> " , which became a commercial success and reached No. 1 on both Top Latin Songs and Latin Pop Songs . The singer commented that the album consumed twelve months and that before starting , he " had more friends . " He also mentioned he had " lived in love with Caribbean culture and music since my childhood . " Birchmeier awarded the album 3 stars stating " All in all , Galería Caribe is a curious entry in Arjona 's catalog that most fans can overlook without missing much . " The album became his first to chart on the Billboard 200 , peaking at No. 136 , while charting at No. 1 on Top Latin Albums and Latin Pop Albums . It was awarded Platinum certification in Mexico , Argentina and the US . Its three singles were " Lo Poco Que Queda De Mi " ; " Mesías " , which reached No. 19 on Top Latin Songs and No. 11 on the Latin Pop Songs chart ; and " A Cara O Cruz " , which reached No. 28 on Latin Pop Songs . To promote the album , which sold more than one million copies , Arjona embarked on his Galería Caribe Tour , which began in Mexico in 2000 and finished in 2001 . 
 On " Mesias " Arjona talks about a character who appears " in the form of a wealthy , well @-@ armed magnate with [ ... ] some sinister plan for the world . " Some critics argued that it was a " metaphorical attack " on capitalism and imperialism , named as " classic Arjona targets . " The song became a subject of some controversy when fans and critics noted connections between its theme and the attacks of September 2001 , months after the song 's release , which resulted in the FBI investigating Arjona . The singer later commented that " Mesías " had no relationship to the attacks , and that the lyrics were pure coincidence . He further stated the FBI had never spoken directly to him , but instead to somebody on his team . 
 On 19 November 2002 , Arjona released his ninth studio album , Santo Pecado , preceded by singles " El Problema " , which reached No. 1 on both the Billboard Top Latin Songs and Latin Pop Songs charts ; and " Minutos " which reached No. 5 on the Top Latin Songs and No. 3 on the Latin Pop Songs charts . Santo Pecado became a commercial success , selling more than 300 @,@ 000 copies just in Mexico ( double Platinum ) , 160 @,@ 000 in Argentina ( quadruple Platinum ) and 200 @,@ 000 in the United States ( double Platinum ) . In 2003 Arjona released <unk> B , his second compilation album , including songs that were " not so commercial " , and that he wanted to give a second chance at radio airplay . The album contained songs from all his past studio albums . Critical reception for the album was mixed . Birchmeier noted that it was " a misleading entry point into Arjona 's catalog . " Despite this , the album received a Gold certification in Mexico . 
 On 6 December 2005 , Arjona released his tenth studio album , Adentro . This was Arjona 's first collaboration with Tommy Torres . In an interview , the singer commented that he first " tested " Torres by sending him the " hookiest and darkest tracks " on the album , " Acompañame A Estar Solo " and " <unk> " . Torres said that he " went all out on the first demo , hiring a full band that included a string orchestra " , which grabbed Arjona 's attention . The album was critically acclaimed , with Evan C. Gutierrez from Allmusic giving it four stars out of five and commenting that " Be it for the stripped , natural production value , the confident performance of Ricardo Arjona , or his relevant @-@ as @-@ ever lyricism , he 's got both his loyal fans and the execs at Norte smiling . While the instrumentation , performance , and overall sonic palette of this project are minimalist and unassuming , there is a depth and brilliance to them . The listener 's ear does not tire or want for more , humble as Adentro is . " Arjona further commented that Adentro was " a very representative and tremendously complete album , " adding that " having different producers made it rich in possibilities . " 
 Adentro became Arjona 's second studio album to chart on the Billboard 200 , reaching No. 126 . It reached No. 3 on the Top Latin Albums and No. 2 on the Lain Pop Albums charts . Five singles were released from Adentro : the lead single , " Acompañame A Estar Solo " ( No. 7 on Latin Songs , No. 1 on Latin Pop Songs ) , " Pingüinos En La Cama " featuring Spanish singer Chenoa ( No. 44 on Latin Songs , No. 19 on Latin Pop Songs ) ; " Mojado " , featuring American Tejano / Norteño band Intocable ( No. 34 on Latin Songs , No. 30 on Latin Pop Songs ) , " A Ti " ( No. 14 on Latin Songs , No. 3 on Latin Pop Songs ) and " De Vez En Mes " ( No. 49 on Latin Songs , No. 16 on Latin Pop Songs ) . The album sold more than a million copies worldwide . 
 = = = 2006 – 2007 : Adentro Tour and Quién Dijo Ayer = = = 
 In 2006 , Arjona started the first leg of his world tour , named the Adentro Tour . The tour resumed in 2007 for a second leg , in which he visited more countries . Approximately two million people attended the performances . The tour was officially closed on 14 September 2007 on the mainland city of <unk> , Venezuela , during the International Fair , in front of more than 100 @,@ 000 people . On 21 August 2007 , Arjona released his fifth compilation album , Quién Dijo Ayer . The album is a two @-@ disc set which contains , on the first disc , new versions of past hits , some of them including featured artists such as Marta Sánchez on " Tarde ( Sin Daños a Terceros ) " from Sin Daños a Terceros ; Panteón Rococó on " Si El Norte Fuera el Sur " , from the album of the same name ; Marc Anthony on " Historia de Taxi " , from Historias ; Eros Ramazzotti on " A Ti " , from Adentro and Sandro on " Realmente No Estoy Tan Solo " from Historias , and which was the last song recorded by the singer , who died on 4 January 2010 . Arjona 's manager told Argentinian newspaper Clarín that " [ the singer ] had the idea of inviting Roberto [ Sandro ] for his album , he [ Sandro ] showed enthusiasm and manifested the same degree of appreciation to Arjona . It seemed to him that he [ Arjona ] was an artist who proclaims the same values he proclaimed . " The second disc contained remastered versions of the hits on the first disc , but in their original versions . It was the second time Arjona collaborated with Torres . 
 The album became a critical and commercial success . Jason Birchmeier commented that " while only a couple of the new versions depart stylistically from the originals , the contemporary productions breathe new life into these songs , which should be well known by longtime fans " ; and reaching double Platinum in Argentina and the United States , and Platinum in Mexico . The record was additionally certified Gold in Colombia , Chile and Venezuela . Two singles were released from the album . The first , " Quién " , a previously unreleased song produced by Torres , failed to reach the top 20 on Latin Songs , standing at No. 21 , but reached No. 4 on the Latin Pop Songs chart . Arjona commented that " ' Quién ' is a story with the hurry of the desperate , is the flashback of those who end up loving alone . " " Quiero " , the second single , reached No.12 on the Latin Songs chart , and No.8 on the Latin Pop Songs chart . 
 = = = 2008 – 2010 : New label , Quinto Piso , world tour and Poquita Ropa = = = 
 After spending the majority of his career with Sony , and Sony BMG , Arjona signed a long @-@ term deal with Warner Music Latina in September 2008 . Iñigo Zabala , chairman of Warner Music Latin America , said " He 's an artist that fits perfectly with our company , " and that " We are a label that has a major catalog of songwriters and quality pop and rock from the likes of Maná , Alejandro Sanz , Laura Pausini , and now , Arjona . " Arjona announced his eleventh studio album , 5to Piso , on 18 November 2008 . The album was preceded by the first single , " Como Duele " on September , which reached No. 2 on Top Latin Songs and No. 1 on Latin Pop Songs . He moved approximately 200 @,@ 000 copies of the album in the first month at retail , and it went Platinum in Mexico , the United States , Spain , Argentina , Venezuela , Colombia , Guatemala , and several other countries . It debuted at No. 1 on Top Latin Albums , becoming his second chart @-@ topper on that list , and sold more than one million copies worldwide . The album received a Grammy Award nomination for Best Latin Pop Album and a Latin Grammy Award nomination for Best Singer @-@ Songwriter Album . The album received positive critical response . Birchmeier gave it three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five , saying that " More typical than exceptional for Arjona at this point in his career , 5to Piso isn 't as grand an album as his past few ... Yet it 's a great album all the same , particularly the opening run of songs that culminates with ' Cómo Duele ' , and it finds Arjona still at the top of his craft . " 
 While Warner Music released his new studio album , Sony Music released a compilation album , Simplemente Lo Mejor . This led to speculation that the labels were in a fight to win Arjona 's fanbase and sales . Simplemente Lo Mejor contained hits from past albums , namely Sin Daños a Terceros , Si El Norte Fuera El Sur , among others . This compilation went Gold in Mexico , and Platinum in Argentina . " Sin Ti ... Sin Mi " was released as 5to Piso 's second single , and reached No. 4 on both Top Latin Songs and Latin Pop Songs charts . On 24 April 2009 , Arjona started the Quinto Piso Tour . The tour included 123 shows in the United States , Spain , Argentina , Guatemala , Colombia , Venezuela and Mexico , among many other countries in Latin America , and ended on 18 June 2010 . 
 The Quinto Piso Tour was one of the most successful tours made by a Latin artist , with more than one million attendees from 19 countries . He received in 2010 the " Latin Tour of the Year " Billboard Latin Music Award for the tour . On 26 February 2010 , he participated in the 2010 Viña del Mar International Song Festival as one of the top performers . His performance was followed by Colombian singer Fanny Lu . One hour after Lu 's performance , a 8 @.@ 8 magnitude massive earthquake affected the south @-@ central regions of Chile . On social networks , Arjona was jokingly blamed , with remarks such as " earthquakes go where he goes " , making reference also to the earthquake felt in Mexico after the singer arrived . After the tour , Arjona announced his twelfth studio album , Poquita Ropa , which was released on 24 August 2010 . It was preceded by the genre @-@ mixing track " Puente " , an ode to Havana , Cuba 's largest and capital city . The song failed to break in the upper tier of Billboard charts , and was reportedly prohibited in Cuba . The album became his third to debut or reach No. 1 on the Top Latin Albums chart . Within two weeks of release , the album received a Gold certification in Chile , United States , Colombia and Puerto Rico ; and Platinum certification in Mexico and Argentina . 
 The album marked a change in Arjona 's sound , which he called a " stripped @-@ down version " of his music . Birchmeier gave the album a somewhat positive review , saying that it was a " stripped @-@ down acoustic effort " yet considered it " impressive " . Two more singles were released from Poquita Ropa , " Vida " , a song the singer dedicated to his recently deceased father ; and " Marta " , an autobiographical song whose music video stars Edith González . Both , like the lead single , failed to gain much airplay in the U.S. , and charted poorly . 
 = = = 2011 – 13 : Independiente , Metamorfosis and world tour = = = 
 Arjona released his thirteenth studio album , Independiente , on 4 October 2011 . It became his fourth number @-@ one on the Top Latin Albums chart the week ending 22 October 2011 ; and within a week went Gold in Chile , United States and Mexico ; and Platinum in Venezuela and Argentina . Independiente was his first release as an independent artist , appearing on his Metamorfosis label , a company he created to refocus his career . The album was distributed by Warner . Billboard noted that although other groups have decided to go independent after working with major record labels , Arjona was by far the most important artist in Latin pop to do so . By the end of 2012 , the album sold more than 75 @,@ 000 copies in the United States and 400 @,@ 000 copies worldwide . 
 " El Amor " was released in August 2011 as the lead single from Independiente ; it managed to top both the US Latin Songs and Latin Pop Songs charts . It also became a hit in the rest of Latin America , reaching number one in several countries . " Fuiste Tú " , a collaboration with Guatemalan singer Gaby Moreno , followed as second single in February 2013 ; it reached number two on the Latin Songs chart , and topped the Latin Pop Songs chart . On May , Arjona released the music video for " Mi Novia Se Me Está Poniendo Vieja . " However , " Te Quiero " was released as third single in July 2012 , and became the second song off the album to top the Latin Songs chart . This made Independiente Arjona 's first album to ever have two number @-@ one hits on that chart . The song also topped the Latin Pop Songs chart , becoming the third song off the album to do so . " Si Tu No <unk> " was released in November 2012 , and managed to peak at number 14 in Mexico . 
 To promote the album , Arjona embarked on the Metamorfosis World Tour . The show , his first since 2009 's Quinto Piso Tour , comprised five legs across North and Latin America . It ran from January 2012 until March 2013 and included 102 shows in 18 different countries , with an estimated attendance of over one million people . The tour opened in Toluca , where he had started all of his concert tours , and grossed more than $ 13 @.@ 4 million in the United States . 
 = = Music and style = = 
 Arjona 's primary musical style is Latin pop . He usually sings without the help of featured or additional singers . His style varied over the years , as Arjona took risks to keep his music from becoming stale . In contrast to the ballad @-@ laden Déjame Decir Que Te Amo , on the following two albums Arjona experimented with a range of pop / rock styles . Animal Nocturno intersperses energetic rock songs among heartfelt ballads , and the instrumentation is heavy on guitar , synthesizer , and drums . On Historias , each song is stylistically distinct and the instrumentation is varied . Around two dozen instruments were used on the album , including horns , piano and Hammond B @-@ 3 , and strings . On Si El Norte Fuera El Sur , he crafted a relatively low @-@ key effort characterized by intimate songs about love , culture , and politics . Most of the songs were written in 1995 while Arjona was touring and are performed acoustically with Caribbean touches . Besides a couple of rockers , the songs are fairly even in tone and tempo . 
 In Galería Caribe , Arjona explored Afro @-@ Caribbean sounds , employing traditional rhythms such as <unk> , bachata , merengue , and salsa . On Santo Pecado , Arjona explored the use of symphonic sounds on his ballads , amidst a couple of rock songs stylistically similar to those on Sin Daños a Terceros . This album included the song " La Nena ( <unk> de un <unk> ) " , in which Arjona relates the story of a girl who is kidnapped by her uncle . Then , in 2005 , Arjona adopted new sounds in Adentro . Gutierrez considered the instrumentation , performance , and overall sonic palette to be " minimalist " and " unassuming " . On this album , Arjona included more Latin sounds , Mexican and Tejano music on " Mojado " , a song about immigration ; merengue and Colombian tones on " Adiós Melancolía " , and some on " No Te Cambio Por Nada " . 
 On 2007 's Quién Dijo Ayer , Arjona reworked past songs to fit a new style . For example , he gave " Si El Norte Fuera El Sur " a ska beat , and performed with the aid of Panteón Rococó . He transformed " Historia de Taxi " into a salsa song , with the help of American singer Marc Anthony and pianist Sergio George , who commented that " It 's been interesting to work with two figures from different music worlds on the interest of making good music . " He further stated that " every time a reunion of this kind happens , it 's a reason to celebrate . " Birchmeier commented , " While only a couple of the new versions depart stylistically from the originals , the contemporary productions breathe new life into these songs . " " Realmente No Estoy Tan Solo " was re @-@ recorded with singer Sandro . This turned out to be the last song recorded by the latter , who died 4 January 2010 . This album included three new songs . The lead single , " Quién " was written by Arjona and produced by himself and Torres . " Quiero " and " Espantapájaros " are the other two new songs on the album . 
 5to Piso is mainly driven by piano and strings . Exceptions are " La <unk> <unk> " , crafted with pure orchestral arrangements ; and " Ni Tú Ni Yo " , a ranchera style song featuring Paquita la del Barrio . The album also includes a song called " Que Nadie Vea " , in which the artist sings about homosexuality . On 5to Piso , Arjona commented that he tried to recoup the freshness of his first albums , saying that he " tried to reconcile a little with the Ricardo Arjona from the first albums to let out some of that freshness that makes so good to the songs . " Poquita Ropa offered a drastic change in which Arjona minimized the number of instruments . The result was a set of a capella performances . Arjona commented about this album that " music and women look better with little clothes . " Production was handled by Arjona and Dan Warner , who also worked with Shakira , Celine Dion and Christina Aguilera . Birchmeier gave the album a somewhat positive review , saying that it was a " stripped @-@ down acoustic effort " , considering it " impressive " . He also commented that Poquita Ropa " finds Arjona at his most naked , backed by spare arrangements of acoustic guitar , piano , and Hammond B @-@ 3 along with occasional touches of strings , woodwinds , and chorus vocals . " 
 " Puente " , the lead single , is the only notable exception . It lasts eight and a half minutes and is divided in three parts . The first is sung mainly with a piano . The second part is a ballad with Caribbean and Latin sounds , with some salsa and Cuban influences . The third mixes salsa and merengue , with Cuban influences . " Puente " resembles Arjona 's work on Galería Caribe . This album was the first since Adentro , that Arjona worked without Torres . In Independiente , Arjona returned to his trademark sound , which Torres helped craft . David Jeffries of Allmusic gave the album a somewhat positive review . He compared the production values and musical style of Independiente with those of past albums Animal Nocturno and Historias , stating , " Returning fans will revel in this combination of freedom and growth , and appreciate the return of producer Tommy Torres , the man who has been behind the boards for quite a few of Arjona 's most popular releases " , referring precisely to the absence of Torres in the production of Poquita Ropa . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 In 1993 , he received the Rafael Álvarez Ovalle Order from the then President of Guatemala , Ramiro de León Carpio , for his international accomplishments . At USAC a library hall bears his name . His birthplace , <unk> , named a street after him . 
 = Uncle Tom 's Cabin = 
 Uncle Tom 's Cabin ; or , Life Among the <unk> , is an anti @-@ slavery novel by American author Harriet Beecher Stowe . Published in 1852 , the novel " helped lay the groundwork for the Civil War " , according to Will Kaufman . 
 Stowe , a Connecticut @-@ born teacher at the Hartford Female Seminary and an active abolitionist , featured the character of Uncle Tom , a long @-@ suffering black slave around whom the stories of other characters revolve . The sentimental novel depicts the reality of slavery while also asserting that Christian love can overcome something as destructive as enslavement of fellow human beings . 
 Uncle Tom 's Cabin was the best @-@ selling novel of the 19th century and the second best @-@ selling book of that century , following the Bible . It is credited with helping fuel the abolitionist cause in the 1850s . In the first year after it was published , 300 @,@ 000 copies of the book were sold in the United States ; one million copies in Great Britain . In 1855 , three years after it was published , it was called " the most popular novel of our day . " The impact attributed to the book is great , reinforced by a story that when Abraham Lincoln met Stowe at the start of the Civil War , Lincoln declared , " So this is the little lady who started this great war . " The quote is apocryphal ; it did not appear in print until 1896 , and it has been argued that " The long @-@ term durability of Lincoln 's greeting as an anecdote in literary studies and Stowe scholarship can perhaps be explained in part by the desire among many contemporary intellectuals ... to affirm the role of literature as an agent of social change . " 
 The book and the plays it inspired helped popularize a number of stereotypes about black people . These include the affectionate , dark @-@ skinned " mammy " ; the " pickaninny " stereotype of black children ; and the " Uncle Tom " , or dutiful , long @-@ suffering servant faithful to his white master or mistress . In recent years , the negative associations with Uncle Tom 's Cabin have , to an extent , overshadowed the historical impact of the book as a " vital antislavery tool . " 
 = = Publication = = 
 Uncle Tom 's Cabin first appeared as a 40 @-@ week serial in The National Era , an abolitionist periodical , starting with the June 5 , 1851 , issue . It was originally intended as a shorter narrative that would run for only a few weeks . Stowe expanded the story significantly , however , and it was instantly popular , such that several protests were sent to the Era office when she missed an issue . Because of the story 's popularity , the publisher John P. Jewett contacted Stowe about turning the serial into a book . While Stowe questioned if anyone would read Uncle Tom 's Cabin in book form , she eventually consented to the request . 
 Convinced the book would be popular , Jewett made the unusual decision ( for that time ) to have six full @-@ page illustrations by <unk> Billings engraved for the first printing . Published in book form on March 20 , 1852 , the novel sold 3 @,@ 000 copies on that day <unk> and soon sold out its complete print run . A number of other editions were soon printed ( including a deluxe edition in 1853 , featuring 117 illustrations by Billings ) . 
 In the first year of publication , 300 @,@ 000 copies of Uncle Tom 's Cabin were sold . At that point , however , " demand came to an unexpected halt .... No more copies were produced for many years , and if , as is claimed , Abraham Lincoln greeted Stowe in 1862 as ' the little woman who wrote the book that made this great war , ' the work had effectively been out of print for many years . " Jewett went out of business , and it was not until Ticknor and Fields put the work back in print in November 1862 that demand began again to increase . 
 The book was translated into all major languages , and in the United States it became the second best @-@ selling book after the Bible . A number of the early editions carried an introduction by Rev James Sherman , a Congregational minister in London noted for his abolitionist views . Uncle Tom 's Cabin sold equally well in Britain , with the first London edition appearing in May 1852 and selling 200 @,@ 000 copies . In a few years over 1 @.@ 5 million copies of the book were in circulation in Britain , although most of these were infringing copies ( a similar situation occurred in the United States ) . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Eliza escapes with her son , Tom sold " down the river " = = = 
 The book opens with a Kentucky farmer named Arthur Shelby facing the loss of his farm because of debts . Even though he and his wife Emily Shelby believe that they have a benevolent relationship with their slaves , Shelby decides to raise the needed funds by selling two of them — Uncle Tom , a middle @-@ aged man with a wife and children , and Harry , the son of Emily Shelby 's maid Eliza — to a slave trader . Emily Shelby is averse to this idea because she had promised her maid that her child would never be sold ; Emily 's son , George Shelby , hates to see Tom go because he sees the man as his friend and mentor . 
 When Eliza overhears Mr. and Mrs. Shelby discussing plans to sell Tom and Harry , Eliza determines to run away with her son . The novel states that Eliza made this decision because she fears losing her only surviving child ( she had already miscarried two children ) . Eliza departs that night , leaving a note of apology to her mistress . 
 Tom is sold and placed on a riverboat which sets sail down the Mississippi River . While on board , Tom meets and befriends a young white girl named Eva . Eva 's father Augustine St. Clare buys Tom from the slave trader and takes him with the family to their home in New Orleans . Tom and Eva begin to relate to one another because of the deep Christian faith they both share . 
 = = = Eliza 's family hunted , Tom 's life with St. Clare = = = 
 During Eliza 's escape , she meets up with her husband George Harris , who had run away previously . They decide to attempt to reach Canada . However , they are tracked by a slave hunter named Tom Loker . Eventually Loker and his men trap Eliza and her family , causing Phineas to push Loker down a cliff after George had shot him in the side . Worried that Loker may die , Eliza convinces George to bring the slave hunter to a nearby Quaker settlement for medical treatment . 
 Back in New Orleans , St. Clare debates slavery with his Northern cousin Ophelia who , while opposing slavery , is prejudiced against black people . St. Clare , however , believes he is not biased , even though he is a slave owner . In an attempt to show Ophelia that her views on blacks are wrong , St. Clare purchases Topsy , a young black slave . St. Clare then asks Ophelia to educate her . 
 After Tom has lived with the St. Clares for two years , Eva grows very ill . Before she dies she experiences a vision of heaven , which she shares with the people around her . As a result of her death and vision , the other characters resolve to change their lives , with Ophelia promising to throw off her personal prejudices against blacks , Topsy saying she will better herself , and St. Clare pledging to free Tom . 
 = = = Tom sold to Simon Legree = = = 
 Before St. Clare can follow through on his pledge , however , he dies after being stabbed outside of a tavern . His wife reneges on her late husband 's vow and sells Tom at auction to a vicious plantation owner named Simon Legree . Legree ( a transplanted northerner ) takes Tom and Emmeline ( whom Legree purchased at the same time ) to rural Louisiana , where they meet Legree 's other slaves . 
 Legree begins to hate Tom when Tom refuses Legree 's order to whip his fellow slave . Legree beats Tom viciously and resolves to crush his new slave 's faith in God . Despite Legree 's cruelty , however , Tom refuses to stop reading his Bible and comforting the other slaves as best he can . While at the plantation , Tom meets Cassy , another of Legree 's slaves . Cassy was previously separated from her son and daughter when they were sold ; unable to endure the pain of seeing another child sold , she killed her third child . 
 At this point Tom Loker returns to the story . Loker has changed as the result of being healed by the Quakers . George , Eliza , and Harry have also obtained their freedom after crossing into Canada . In Louisiana , Uncle Tom almost succumbs to hopelessness as his faith in God is tested by the hardships of the plantation . However , he has two visions , one of Jesus and one of Eva , which renew his resolve to remain a faithful Christian , even unto death . He encourages Cassy to escape , which she does , taking Emmeline with her . When Tom refuses to tell Legree where Cassy and Emmeline have gone , Legree orders his overseers to kill Tom . As Tom is dying , he forgives the overseers who savagely beat him . <unk> by the character of the man they have killed , both men become Christians . Very shortly before Tom 's death , George Shelby ( Arthur Shelby 's son ) arrives to buy Tom 's freedom but finds he is too late . 
 = = = Final section = = = 
 On their boat ride to freedom , Cassy and Emmeline meet George Harris 's sister and accompany her to Canada . Cassy discovers that Eliza is her long @-@ lost daughter who was sold as a child . Now that their family is together again , they travel to France and eventually Liberia , the African nation created for former American slaves . George Shelby returns to the Kentucky farm and frees all his slaves . George tells them to remember Tom 's sacrifice and his belief in the true meaning of Christianity . 
 = = Major characters = = 
 = = = Uncle Tom = = = 
 Uncle Tom , the title character , was initially seen as a noble , long @-@ suffering Christian slave . In more recent years , however , his name has become an epithet directed towards African @-@ Americans who are accused of selling out to whites . Stowe intended Tom to be a " noble hero " and praiseworthy person . Throughout the book , far from allowing himself to be exploited , Tom stands up for his beliefs and is grudgingly admired even by his enemies . 
 = = = Eliza = = = 
 Eliza is a slave and personal maid to Mrs. Shelby who escapes to the North with her five @-@ year @-@ old son Harry after he is sold to Mr. Haley . Her husband , George , eventually finds Eliza and Harry in Ohio and emigrates with them to Canada , then France and finally Liberia . 
 The character Eliza was inspired by an account given at Lane Theological Seminary in Cincinnati by John Rankin to Stowe 's husband Calvin , a professor at the school . According to Rankin , in February 1838 a young slave woman , Eliza Harris , had escaped across the frozen Ohio River to the town of Ripley with her child in her arms and stayed at his house on her way further north . 
 = = = Eva = = = 
 Evangeline St. Clare is the daughter of Augustine St. Clare . Eva enters the narrative when Uncle Tom is traveling via steamship to New Orleans to be sold , and he rescues the five- or six @-@ year @-@ old girl from drowning . Eva begs her father to buy Tom , and he becomes the head coachman at the St. Clare house . He spends most of his time with the angelic Eva . Eva often talks about love and forgiveness , even convincing the dour slave girl Topsy that she deserves love . She even touches the heart of her Aunt Ophelia . 
 Eventually Eva falls terminally ill . Before dying , she gives a lock of her hair to each of the slaves , telling them that they must become Christians so that they may see each other in Heaven . On her deathbed , she convinces her father to free Tom , but because of circumstances the promise never materializes . 
 A similar character , also named Little Eva , later appeared in the children 's novel Little Eva : The Flower of the South by Philip J. <unk> ( although this ironically was an anti @-@ Tom novel ) . 
 = = = Simon Legree = = = 
 Simon Legree is a cruel slave owner — a Northerner by birth — whose name has become synonymous with greed . He is arguably the novel 's main antagonist . His goal is to demoralize Tom and break him of his religious faith ; he eventually orders Tom whipped to death out of frustration for his slave 's unbreakable belief in God . The novel reveals that , as a young man , he had abandoned his sickly mother for a life at sea and ignored her letter to see her one last time at her deathbed . He sexually exploits Cassy , who despises him , and later sets his designs on Emmeline . 
 It is unclear if Legree is based on any actual individuals . Reports surfaced after the 1870s that Stowe had in mind a wealthy cotton and sugar plantation owner named Meredith Calhoun , who settled on the Red River north of Alexandria , Louisiana . Generally , however , the personal characteristics of Calhoun ( " highly educated and refined " ) do not match the <unk> and brutality of Legree . Calhoun even edited his own newspaper , published in Colfax ( originally " Calhoun 's Landing " ) , which was renamed The National Democrat after Calhoun 's death . However , Calhoun 's overseers may have been in line with the hated Legree 's methods and motivations . 
 = = Other characters = = 
 The more notable of the secondary and minor characters in Uncle Tom 's Cabin are : 
 Arthur Shelby – Tom 's master in Kentucky . Shelby is characterized as a " kind " slaveowner and a stereotypical Southern gentleman . 
 Emily Shelby – Arthur Shelby 's wife . She is a deeply religious woman who strives to be a kind and moral influence upon her slaves and is appalled when her husband sells his slaves with a slave trader . As a woman , she has no legal way to stop this , as all property belongs to her husband . 
 George Shelby – Arthur and Emily 's son , who sees Tom as a friend and as the perfect Christian . 
 Chloe – Tom 's wife and mother of his children . 
 Augustine St. Clare – Tom 's third owner and father of Eva . St. Clare is complex , often sarcastic , with a ready wit . After a rocky courtship he marries a woman he grows to hold in contempt , though he is too polite to let it show . St. Clare recognizes the evil in chattel slavery but is not willing to relinquish the wealth it brings him . After his daughter 's death he becomes more sincere in his religious thoughts and starts to read the Bible to Tom . He plans on finally taking action against slavery by freeing his slaves , but his good intentions ultimately come to nothing . 
 Marie St. Clare – Wife of Augustine , she is a self @-@ absorbed woman without a hint of compassion for those around her , including her own family . Given to an unending list of ( apparently imaginary ) physical maladies , she continually complains about the lack of sympathy she is receiving . She has separated her personal maid , Mammy , from her own two children because they would interfere with her duties . As Marie drives Mammy to exhaustion , she criticizes her for selfishly seeking to attend her own family . Upon the unexpected death of Augustine , Marie <unk> the legal process that would have given Tom his freedom . 
 George Harris – Eliza 's husband . An intelligent and clever half @-@ white slave who is fiercely loyal to his family . 
 Topsy – A young slave girl . When asked if she knows who made her , she professes ignorance of both God and a mother , saying " I s <unk> I <unk> . Don 't think nobody never made me . " She is transformed by Eva 's love . During the early @-@ to @-@ mid 20th century , several doll manufacturers created Topsy and Topsy @-@ type dolls . The phrase " <unk> like Topsy " ( later " grew like Topsy " ) passed into the English language , originally with the specific meaning of unplanned growth , later sometimes just meaning enormous growth . 
 Miss Ophelia – Augustine St. Clare 's pious , hard @-@ working , abolitionist cousin from Vermont . She displays the ambiguities towards African @-@ Americans felt by many Northerners at the time . She argues against the institution of slavery yet , at least initially , feels repulsed by the slaves as individuals . 
 Prue – A depressed slave who was forced to let her child starve to death . She takes up drinking in her misery , and is ultimately beaten and killed for it . 
 <unk> and Sambo – slaves of Simon Legree who act as overseers of the plantation . On orders from Legree , they savagely whip Tom but afterward tearfully repent of their deeds to Tom , who forgives them as he lies dying . 
 = = Major themes = = 
 Uncle Tom 's Cabin is dominated by a single theme : the evil and immorality of slavery . While Stowe weaves other subthemes throughout her text , such as the moral authority of motherhood and the redeeming possibilities offered by Christianity , she emphasizes the connections between these and the horrors of slavery . Stowe sometimes changed the story 's voice so she could give a " homily " on the destructive nature of slavery ( such as when a white woman on the steamboat carrying Tom further south states , " The most dreadful part of slavery , to my mind , is its outrages of feelings and affections — the separating of families , for example . " ) . One way Stowe showed the evil of slavery was how this " peculiar institution " forcibly separated families from each other . One of the subthemes presented in the novel is temperance . Stowe made it somewhat subtle and in some cases she weaved it into events that would also support the dominant theme . One example of this is when Augustine St. Clare is killed , he attempted to stop a brawl between two inebriated men in a cafe and was stabbed . One other example is the death of the slave woman Prue who was whipped to death for being drunk on a consistent basis ; however , her reasons for doing so is due to the loss of her baby . In the opening of the novel , the fates of Eliza and her son are being discussed between slave owners over wine . Considering that Stowe intended this to be a <unk> , then this scene could foreshadow future events that puts alcohol in a bad light . 
 Because Stowe saw motherhood as the " ethical and structural model for all of American life " and also believed that only women had the moral authority to save the United States from the demon of slavery , another major theme of Uncle Tom 's Cabin is the moral power and sanctity of women . Through characters like Eliza , who escapes from slavery to save her young son ( and eventually reunites her entire family ) , or Eva , who is seen as the " ideal Christian " , Stowe shows how she believed women could save those around them from even the worst injustices . While later critics have noted that Stowe 's female characters are often domestic clichés instead of realistic women , Stowe 's novel " reaffirmed the importance of women 's influence " and helped pave the way for the women 's rights movement in the following decades . 
 Stowe 's puritanical religious beliefs show up in the novel 's final , overarching theme — the exploration of the nature of Christianity and how she feels Christian theology is fundamentally incompatible with slavery . This theme is most evident when Tom urges St. Clare to " look away to Jesus " after the death of St. Clare 's beloved daughter Eva . After Tom dies , George Shelby eulogizes Tom by saying , " What a thing it is to be a Christian . " Because Christian themes play such a large role in Uncle Tom 's Cabin — and because of Stowe 's frequent use of direct authorial interjections on religion and faith — the novel often takes the " form of a sermon . " 
 = = Style = = 
 Uncle Tom 's Cabin is written in the sentimental and melodramatic style common to 19th century sentimental novels and domestic fiction ( also called women 's fiction ) . These genres were the most popular novels of Stowe 's time and tended to feature female main characters and a writing style which evoked a reader 's sympathy and emotion . Even though Stowe 's novel differs from other sentimental novels by focusing on a large theme like slavery and by having a man as the main character , she still set out to elicit certain strong feelings from her readers . The power in this type of writing can be seen in the reaction of contemporary readers . Georgiana May , a friend of Stowe 's , wrote a letter to the author , saying : " I was up last night long after one o 'clock , reading and finishing Uncle Tom 's Cabin . I could not leave it any more than I could have left a dying child . " Another reader is described as obsessing on the book at all hours and having considered renaming her daughter Eva . Evidently the death of Little Eva affected a lot of people at that time , because in 1852 , 300 baby girls in Boston alone were given that name . 
 Despite this positive reaction from readers , for decades literary critics dismissed the style found in Uncle Tom 's Cabin and other sentimental novels because these books were written by women and so prominently featured " women 's sloppy emotions . " One literary critic said that had the novel not been about slavery , " it would be just another sentimental novel , " while another described the book as " primarily a derivative piece of hack work . " In The Literary History of the United States , George F. Whicher called Uncle Tom 's Cabin " Sunday @-@ school fiction " , full of " broadly conceived melodrama , humor , and pathos . " 
 However , in 1985 Jane Tompkins expressed a different view of Uncle Tom 's Cabin with her book In Sensational Designs : The Cultural Work of American Fiction . Tompkins praised the style so many other critics had dismissed , writing that sentimental novels showed how women 's emotions had the power to change the world for the better . She also said that the popular domestic novels of the 19th century , including Uncle Tom 's Cabin , were remarkable for their " intellectual complexity , ambition , and resourcefulness " ; and that Uncle Tom 's Cabin offers a " critique of American society far more devastating than any delivered by better @-@ known critics such as Hawthorne and Melville . " 
 This view remains the subject of dispute . Writing in 2001 , legal scholar Richard Posner described Uncle Tom 's Cabin as part of the mediocre list of canonical works that emerges when political criteria are imposed on literature . 
 = = Reactions to the novel = = 
 Uncle Tom 's Cabin has exerted an influence equaled by few other novels in history . Upon publication , Uncle Tom 's Cabin ignited a firestorm of protest from defenders of slavery ( who created a number of books in response to the novel ) while the book elicited praise from abolitionists . As a best @-@ seller , the novel heavily influenced later protest literature . 
 = = = Contemporary and world reaction = = = 
 Uncle Tom 's Cabin outraged people in the American South . The novel was also roundly criticized by slavery supporters . 
 Acclaimed Southern novelist William Gilmore Simms declared the work utterly false , while others called the novel criminal and slanderous . Reactions ranged from a bookseller in Mobile , Alabama , being forced to leave town for selling the novel to threatening letters sent to Stowe ( including a package containing a slave 's severed ear ) . Many Southern writers , like Simms , soon wrote their own books in opposition to Stowe 's novel . 
 Some critics highlighted Stowe 's paucity of life @-@ experience relating to Southern life , saying that it led her to create inaccurate descriptions of the region . For instance , she had never been to a Southern plantation . However , Stowe always said she based the characters of her book on stories she was told by runaway slaves in Cincinnati . It is reported that " She observed firsthand several incidents which galvanized her to write [ the ] famous anti @-@ slavery novel . Scenes she observed on the Ohio River , including seeing a husband and wife being sold apart , as well as newspaper and magazine accounts and interviews , contributed material to the emerging plot . " 
 In response to these criticisms , in 1853 Stowe published A Key to Uncle Tom 's Cabin , an attempt to document the veracity of the novel 's depiction of slavery . In the book , Stowe discusses each of the major characters in Uncle Tom 's Cabin and cites " real life equivalents " to them while also mounting a more " aggressive attack on slavery in the South than the novel itself had . " Like the novel , A Key to Uncle Tom 's Cabin was also a best @-@ seller . However , while Stowe claimed A Key to Uncle Tom 's Cabin documented her previously consulted sources , she actually read many of the cited works only after the publication of her novel . A major part of the Key was Stowe 's critique of how the legal system supported slavery and licensed owners ' mistreatment of slaves . Thus , Stowe put more than slavery on trial ; she put the law on trial . This continued an important theme of Uncle Tom 's Cabin — that the shadow of law brooded over the institution of slavery and allowed owners to mistreat slaves and then avoid punishment for their mistreatment . In some cases , as Stowe pointed out , it even prevented kind owners from freeing their slaves . 
 Despite these criticisms , the novel still captured the imagination of many Americans . According to Stowe 's son , when Abraham Lincoln met her in 1862 Lincoln commented , " So this is the little lady who started this great war . " Historians are undecided if Lincoln actually said this line , and in a letter that Stowe wrote to her husband a few hours after meeting with Lincoln no mention of this comment was made . Since then , many writers have credited this novel with focusing Northern anger at the injustices of slavery and the Fugitive Slave Law and helping to fuel the abolitionist movement . Union general and politician James Baird Weaver said that the book convinced him to become active in the abolitionist movement . 
 Uncle Tom 's Cabin also created great interest in the United Kingdom . The first London edition appeared in May 1852 and sold 200 @,@ 000 copies . Some of this interest was because of British antipathy to America . As one prominent writer explained , " The evil passions which Uncle Tom gratified in England were not hatred or vengeance [ of slavery ] , but national jealousy and national vanity . We have long been smarting under the conceit of America — we are tired of hearing her boast that she is the freest and the most enlightened country that the world has ever seen . Our clergy hate her voluntary system — our Tories hate her democrats — our Whigs hate her <unk> — our Radicals hate her litigiousness , her insolence , and her ambition . All parties hailed Mrs. Stowe as a <unk> from the enemy . " Charles Francis Adams , the American minister to Britain during the war , argued later that " Uncle Tom 's Cabin ; or Life among the <unk> , published in 1852 , exercised , largely from fortuitous circumstances , a more immediate , considerable and dramatic world @-@ influence than any other book ever printed . " 
 A French edition , translated by M. L. <unk> ( or by [ <unk> ] Louise Swanton @-@ Belloc ? ( 1796 – 1881 ) ) , appeared by 1853 published in Cambrai and in Paris . By 1857 , the novel had been translated into 20 languages , including two independent translations into Slovene just one year after its original publication , which started the since @-@ then uninterrupted dialogue between American authors and Slovene translators and readers . Later , it was translated into almost every major language , including Chinese ( with translator Lin Shu creating the first Chinese translation of an American novel in 1901 ) and Amharic ( with the 1930 translation created in support of Ethiopian efforts to end the suffering of blacks in that nation ) . The book was so widely read that Sigmund Freud reported a number of patients with sado @-@ masochistic tendencies who he believed had been influenced by reading about the whipping of slaves in Uncle Tom 's Cabin . 
 = = = Literary significance and criticism = = = 
 As the first widely read political novel in the United States , Uncle Tom 's Cabin greatly influenced development of not only American literature but also protest literature in general . Later books which owe a large debt to Uncle Tom 's Cabin include The Jungle by Upton Sinclair and Silent Spring by Rachel Carson . 
 Despite this undisputed significance , Uncle Tom 's Cabin has been called " a blend of children 's fable and propaganda . " The novel has also been dismissed by a number of literary critics as " merely a sentimental novel , " while critic George Whicher stated in his Literary History of the United States that " Nothing attributable to Mrs. Stowe or her handiwork can account for the novel 's enormous vogue ; its author 's resources as a purveyor of Sunday @-@ school fiction were not remarkable . She had at most a ready command of broadly conceived melodrama , humor , and pathos , and of these popular sentiments she compounded her book . " 
 Other critics , though , have praised the novel . Edmund Wilson stated that " To expose oneself in maturity to Uncle Tom 's Cabin may ... prove a startling experience . " Jane Tompkins states that the novel is one of the classics of American literature and wonders if many literary critics aren 't dismissing the book because it was simply too popular during its day . 
 Over the years scholars have postulated a number of theories about what Stowe was trying to say with the novel ( aside from the obvious themes , such as condemning slavery ) . For example , as an ardent Christian and active abolitionist , Stowe placed many of her religious beliefs into the novel . Some scholars have stated that Stowe saw her novel as offering a solution to the moral and political dilemma that troubled many slavery opponents : whether engaging in prohibited behavior was justified in opposing evil . Was the use of violence to oppose the violence of slavery and the breaking of proslavery laws morally defensible ? Which of Stowe 's characters should be emulated , the passive Uncle Tom or the defiant George Harris ? Stowe 's solution was similar to Ralph Waldo Emerson 's : God 's will would be followed if each person sincerely examined his principles and acted on them . 
 Scholars have also seen the novel as expressing the values and ideas of the Free Will Movement . In this view , the character of George Harris embodies the principles of free labor , while the complex character of Ophelia represents those Northerners who condoned compromise with slavery . In contrast to Ophelia is Dinah , who operates on passion . During the course of the novel Ophelia is transformed , just as the Republican Party ( three years later ) proclaimed that the North must transform itself and stand up for its antislavery principles . 
 Feminist theory can also be seen at play in Stowe 's book , with the novel as a critique of the patriarchal nature of slavery . For Stowe , blood relations rather than paternalistic relations between masters and slaves formed the basis of families . Moreover , Stowe viewed national solidarity as an extension of a person 's family , thus feelings of nationality stemmed from possessing a shared race . Consequently , she advocated African colonization for freed slaves and not amalgamation into American society . 
 The book has also been seen as an attempt to redefine masculinity as a necessary step toward the abolition of slavery . In this view , abolitionists had begun to resist the vision of aggressive and dominant men that the conquest and colonization of the early 19th century had fostered . In order to change the notion of manhood so that men could oppose slavery without jeopardizing their self @-@ image or their standing in society , some abolitionists drew on principles of women 's suffrage and Christianity as well as <unk> , and praised men for cooperation , compassion , and civic spirit . Others within the abolitionist movement argued for conventional , aggressive masculine action . All the men in Stowe 's novel are representations of either one kind of man or the other . 
 = = Creation and popularization of stereotypes = = 
 Modern scholars and readers have criticized the book for what are seen as condescending racist descriptions of the book 's black characters , especially with regard to the characters ' appearances , speech , and behavior , as well as the passive nature of Uncle Tom in accepting his fate . The novel 's creation and use of common stereotypes about African Americans is significant because Uncle Tom 's Cabin was the best @-@ selling novel in the world during the 19th century . As a result , the book ( along with illustrations from the book and associated stage productions ) played a major role in permanently <unk> these stereotypes into the American psyche . 
 Among the stereotypes of blacks in Uncle Tom 's Cabin are the " happy darky " ( in the lazy , carefree character of Sam ) ; the light @-@ skinned tragic mulatto as a sex object ( in the characters of Eliza , Cassy , and Emmeline ) ; the affectionate , dark @-@ skinned female mammy ( through several characters , including Mammy , a cook at the St. Clare plantation ) ; the pickaninny stereotype of black children ( in the character of Topsy ) ; the Uncle Tom , an African American who is too eager to please white people . Stowe intended Tom to be a " noble hero " . The stereotype of him as a " subservient fool who bows down to the white man " evidently resulted from staged " Tom Shows " , over which Stowe had no control . 
 These negative associations have to a large degree overshadowed the historical impact of Uncle Tom 's Cabin as a " vital antislavery tool " . The beginning of this change in the novel 's perception had its roots in an essay by James Baldwin titled " Everybody 's Protest Novel " . In the essay , Baldwin called Uncle Tom 's Cabin a " very bad novel " which was also racially obtuse and aesthetically crude . In the 1960s and 1970s , the Black Power and Black Arts Movements attacked the novel , saying that the character of Uncle Tom engaged in " race betrayal " , and that Tom made slaves out to be worse than slave owners . Criticisms of the other stereotypes in the book also increased during this time . In recent years , however , scholars such as Henry Louis Gates Jr. have begun to re @-@ examine Uncle Tom 's Cabin , stating that the book is a " central document in American race relations and a significant moral and political exploration of the character of those relations " . 
 = = Anti @-@ Tom literature = = 
 In response to Uncle Tom 's Cabin , writers in the Southern United States produced a number of books to rebut Stowe 's novel . This so @-@ called Anti @-@ Tom literature generally took a pro @-@ slavery viewpoint , arguing that the issues of slavery as depicted in Stowe 's book were overblown and incorrect . The novels in this genre tended to feature a benign white patriarchal master and a pure wife , both of whom presided over childlike slaves in a benevolent extended family style plantation . The novels either implied or directly stated that African Americans were a childlike people unable to live their lives without being directly overseen by white people . 
 Among the most famous anti @-@ Tom books are The Sword and the Distaff by William Gilmore Simms , Aunt Phillis 's Cabin by Mary Henderson Eastman , and The Planter 's Northern Bride by Caroline Lee Hentz , with the last author having been a close personal friend of Stowe 's when the two lived in Cincinnati . Simms ' book was published a few months after Stowe 's novel , and it contains a number of sections and discussions disputing Stowe 's book and her view of slavery . Hentz 's 1854 novel , widely read at the time but now largely forgotten , offers a defense of slavery as seen through the eyes of a northern woman — the daughter of an abolitionist , no less — who marries a southern slave owner . 
 In the decade between the publication of Uncle Tom 's Cabin and the start of the American Civil War , between twenty and thirty anti @-@ Tom books were published . Among these novels are two books titled Uncle Tom 's Cabin As It Is ( one by W. L. Smith and the other by C. H. Wiley ) and a book by John Pendleton Kennedy . More than half of these anti @-@ Tom books were written by white women , with Simms commenting at one point about the " Seemingly poetic justice of having the Northern woman ( Stowe ) answered by a Southern woman . " 
 = = Dramatic adaptations = = 
 = = = Tom shows = = = 
 Even though Uncle Tom 's Cabin was the best @-@ selling novel of the 19th century , far more Americans of that time saw the story as a stage play or musical than read the book . Eric Lott , in his book Uncle <unk> : Racial Melodrama and Modes of Production , estimates that at least three million people saw these plays , ten times the book 's first @-@ year sales . 
 Given the lax copyright laws of the time , stage plays based on Uncle Tom 's Cabin — " Tom shows " — began to appear while the novel was still being serialized . Stowe refused to authorize dramatization of her work because of her distrust of drama ( although she did eventually go to see George L. Aiken 's version and , according to Francis Underwood , was " delighted " by Caroline Howard 's portrayal of Topsy ) . Aiken 's stage production continued as " the most popular play in England and America for seventy @-@ five years . " Stowe 's refusal to authorize a particular dramatic version left the field clear for any number of adaptations , some launched for ( various ) political reasons and others as simply commercial theatrical ventures . 
 No international copyright laws existed at the time . The book and plays were translated into several languages ; Stowe received no money , which could have meant as much as " three fourths of her just and legitimate wages . " 
 = = = On the plays = = = 
 All Tom shows appear to have incorporated elements of melodrama and blackface minstrelsy . These plays varied tremendously in their politics — some faithfully reflected Stowe 's sentimentalized antislavery politics , while others were more moderate , or even pro @-@ slavery . Many of the productions featured demeaning racial caricatures of Black people , while a number of productions also featured songs by Stephen Foster ( including " My Old Kentucky Home " , " Old Folks at Home " , and " Massa 's in the Cold Ground " ) . The best @-@ known Tom Shows were those of George Aiken and H.J. Conway . 
 The version by Aiken is perhaps the best known stage adaptation , released just a few months after the novel was published . This six @-@ act behemoth also set an important precedent by being the first show on Broadway to stand on its own , without the performance of other entertainments or any afterpiece . Most of Aiken 's dialogue is lifted verbatim from Stowe 's novel and it included four full musical numbers written by the producer , George C. Howard . Another legacy of this adaptation is its reliance upon very different locations all portrayed on the same stage . This reliance led to large sets and set a precedent for the future days of film . By focusing on the stark and desperate situations of his characters , Aiken appealed to the emotions of his audiences . By combining this melodramatic approach with the content of Stowe 's novel , Aiken helped to create a powerful visual indictment against the institution of slavery . 
 The many stage variants of Uncle Tom 's Cabin " dominated northern popular culture ... for several years " during the 19th century , and the plays were still being performed in the early 20th century . 
 One of the unique and controversial variants of the Tom Shows was Walt Disney 's 1933 Mickey 's <unk> . Mickey 's <unk> is a United Artists film released in 1933 . The title is a corruption of " melodrama " , thought to harken back to the earliest minstrel shows , as a film short based on a production of Uncle Tom 's Cabin by the Disney characters . In that film , Mickey Mouse and friends stage their own production of Uncle Tom 's Cabin . Mickey Mouse was already black @-@ colored , but the advertising poster for the film shows Mickey dressed in blackface with exaggerated , orange lips ; bushy , white <unk> made out of cotton ; and his trademark white gloves . 
 = = = Film adaptations = = = 
 Uncle Tom 's Cabin has been adapted several times as a film . Most of these movies were created during the silent film era ( Uncle Tom 's Cabin was the most @-@ filmed book of that time period ) . Because of the continuing popularity of both the book and " Tom " shows , audiences were already familiar with the characters and the plot , making it easier for the film to be understood without spoken words . There has been no Hollywood treatment since the end of the silent era . 
 The first film version of Uncle Tom 's Cabin was one of the earliest full @-@ length movies ( although full @-@ length at that time meant between 10 and 14 minutes ) . This 1903 film , directed by Edwin S. Porter , used white actors in blackface in the major roles and black performers only as extras . This version was evidently similar to many of the " Tom Shows " of earlier decades and featured numerous stereotypes about blacks ( such as having the slaves dance in almost any context , including at a slave auction ) . 
 In 1910 , a three @-@ reel Vitagraph Company of America production was directed by J. Stuart Blackton and adapted by Eugene Mullin . According to The Dramatic Mirror , this film was " a decided innovation " in motion pictures and " the first time an American company " released a dramatic film in three reels . Until then , full @-@ length movies of the time were 15 minutes long and contained only one reel of film . The movie starred Florence Turner , Mary Fuller , Edwin R. Phillips , Flora Finch , Genevieve Tobin and Carlyle Blackwell , Sr. 
 At least four more movie adaptations were created in the next two decades . The last silent film version was released in 1927 . Directed by Harry A. Pollard ( who played Uncle Tom in a 1913 release of Uncle Tom 's Cabin ) , this two @-@ hour movie was more than a year in production and was the third most expensive picture of the silent era ( at a cost of $ 1 @.@ 8 million ) . The black actor Charles Gilpin was originally cast in the title role , but he was fired after the studio decided his " portrayal was too aggressive . " James B. Lowe took over the character of Tom . The screenplay takes many liberties with the original book , including altering the Eliza and George subplot , introducing the Civil War and Emancipation , and combining the characters of Eliza and Emmeline . Another difference occurs after Tom dies : Simon Legree is haunted by an <unk> vision of the late Tom and falls to his death in a futile effort to attack the ghostly image . 
 Black media outlets of the time praised the film , but the studio — fearful of a backlash from Southern and white film audiences — ended up cutting out controversial scenes , including the film 's opening sequence at a slave auction ( in which a mother is torn away from her baby ) . The story was adapted by Harvey F. Pollard , Thew and A. P. Younger , with titles by Walter Anthony . It starred James B. Lowe , Virginia Grey , George Siegmann , Margarita Fischer , Mona Ray and Madame Sul @-@ Te @-@ Wan . 
 For several decades after the end of the silent film era , the subject matter of Stowe 's novel was judged too sensitive for further film interpretation . In 1946 , Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer considered filming the story but ceased production after protests led by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People . 
 A German @-@ language version , <unk> Toms Hütte , directed by Géza von <unk> , was released in 1965 and was presented in the United States by exploitation film presenter Kroger Babb . 
 The most recent film version was a television broadcast in 1987 , directed by Stan Lathan and adapted by John Gay . It starred Avery Brooks , Phylicia Rashad , Edward Woodward , Jenny Lewis , Samuel L. Jackson and <unk> Kinney . 
 In addition to film adaptations , versions of Uncle Tom 's Cabin have been produced in other formats . In Brazil , the adapted version A Cabana do Pai Tomás was produced as a TV soap opera by Rede Globo ; with 205 episodes , it was aired from July 1969 to March 1970 . 
 A number of animated cartoons were produced , including the Bugs Bunny cartoon Southern Fried Rabbit ( 1953 ) , in which Bugs disguises himself as Uncle Tom and sings My Old Kentucky Home in order to cross the Mason @-@ Dixon line ; Uncle Tom 's Bungalow ( 1937 ) , a Warner Brothers cartoon supervised by Tex Avery ; Eliza on Ice ( 1944 ) , one of the earliest Mighty Mouse cartoons produced by Paul Terry ; and Uncle Tom 's Cabaña ( 1947 ) , an eight @-@ minute cartoon directed by Tex Avery . 
 Uncle Tom 's Cabin has influenced numerous movies , including Birth of a Nation . This controversial 1915 film set the dramatic climax in a slave cabin similar to that of Uncle Tom , where several white Southerners unite with their former enemy ( Yankee soldiers ) to defend , according to the film 's caption , their " Aryan birthright . " According to scholars , this reuse of such a familiar image of a slave cabin would have resonated with , and been understood by , audiences of the time . 
 Other movies influenced by or making use of Uncle Tom 's Cabin include Dimples ( a 1936 Shirley Temple film ) , Uncle Tom 's Uncle , ( a 1926 Our Gang episode ) , its 1932 remake Spanky , the Rodgers and Hammerstein musical The King and I ( in which a ballet called " Small House of Uncle Thomas " is performed in traditional Siamese style ) , and Gangs of New York ( in which Leonardo DiCaprio and Daniel Day @-@ Lewis 's characters attend an imagined wartime adaptation of Uncle Tom 's Cabin ) . 
 = = Collections = = 
 Major collections of Uncle Tom 's Cabin books , ephemera , and artifacts reside at the Albert and Shirley Small Special Collections Library at the University of Virginia and the Harry Ransom Center at the University of Texas at Austin . 
 = Avonmouth ( BPRP ) railway station = 
 Avonmouth railway station was the terminus of the Bristol Port Railway and Pier , a self @-@ contained railway which ran along the River Avon in Bristol , England . The station , which opened in 1865 , was adjacent to a pier on the River Severn at Avonmouth . It had two platforms and an adjacent hotel , as well as an engine shed and water tank . The station was closed in 1902 as the land was required for the expansion of Avonmouth Docks , although it remained in use for workers ' trains until 1903 . The hotel continued in operation until 1926 , when it too was demolished to make way for the docks . The station site is now in the middle of Avonmouth Docks . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 The station was opened on 6 March 1865 when services began on the Bristol Port Railway and Pier ( BPRP ) , a self @-@ contained railway owned by the Bristol Corporation . The line ran along the north bank of the River Avon in Bristol , England , to a deep water pier on the Severn Estuary at Avonmouth . The route was 4 ft 8 1 ⁄ 2 in ( 1 @,@ 435 mm ) standard gauge and mostly single track , with Avonmouth being the line 's northern terminus , 6 miles 74 chains ( 11 @.@ 1 km ) from the southern terminus at Hotwells . Avonmouth had two tracks , aligned roughly north / south , with a platform on either side . The western platform was 265 feet ( 81 m ) long , the eastern one 200 feet ( 61 m ) . The eastern platform had a booking office , and was connected by a path to the neighbouring Avonmouth Hotel . A gate led to a pontoon and floating bridge across to a 300 feet ( 91 m ) -long pier , which opened on 3 June 1865 . The western platform fell out of use early in the station 's operation . The station also had an engine shed and water tank . 
 = = = Operation and closure = = = 
 The BPRP ran in to trouble by 1871 when the terminal pier at Avonmouth became difficult to use due to a build @-@ up of silt . With no prospect of a proper dock being funded without a connection to the national rail network , the Clifton Extension Railway ( CER ) was approved . This was a joint venture by the BPRP , Great Western Railway and Midland Railway . It ran from Sneyd Park Junction , south of Sea Mills , via Clifton Down , to join up with the national network at Narroways Hill Junction . The new line opened in 1877 , but passenger trains from the national network terminated at Clifton Down as the link from Clifton to Sneyd Park Junction was not cleared for passenger use until 3 August 1878 . Even after services were allowed to run , the Midland and Great Western Railways did not think the BPRP track was in a suitable condition and so refused to run any passenger trains beyond Clifton Down . When through services finally began operation in 1885 , they did not reach the original Avonmouth terminus , instead running to Avonmouth Dock ( the modern day Avonmouth station ) , 1 mile 62 chains ( 2 @.@ 9 km ) back down the line towards Bristol . Despite the increased traffic the BPRP suffered financially , and was taken over by the CER in 1890 . A single @-@ track , freight @-@ only line was built past the Avonmouth railway station in 1900 , linking to the Bristol and South Wales Union Railway at Pilning . 
 The expansion of Avonmouth Docks , and particularly the construction of Royal Edward Dock , led to the closure of Avonmouth station , as the land was required for construction . Services for the general public were withdrawn on 1 October 1902 , but the station was used for unadvertised workers ' trains until 15 May 1903 , with the official closure the following day . After the closure of the station , all trains terminated at Avonmouth Dock . The station site is now in the middle of Avonmouth Docks . 
 = = = The Avonmouth Hotel = = = 
 When the station opened , the surrounding area was almost entirely rural , and would remain so throughout the station 's existence . Indeed , in 1902 , John L Dunk wrote in The Railway Magazine that he could not think why trains ran only to an inn and a few cottages . The area did however see some development , as the Avonmouth Hotel was built adjacent to the station , as well as 10 acres ( 40 @,@ 000 m2 ) of pleasure gardens . The gardens boasted a concert hall , as well as an ornamental lake , and hosted fêtes at Easter and Whitsun . Despite excursion trains to the gardens , they were not viable financially . 
 The hotel remained in business after the station 's closure , albeit isolated from public transport . It provided accommodation for many Europeans emigrating to the Americas via Avonmouth , and during the First World War it housed the Women 's Army Auxiliary Corps . It was finally demolished in 1926 when the Royal Edward Dock was expanded . 
 = Fucking Machines = 
 Fucking Machines ( also known as <unk> and fuckingmachines ) is a pornographic website founded in 2000 that features video and photographs of women engaged in autoerotic sexual stimulation with penetrative sex @-@ machines and sex toys . Based in San Francisco , California , the site is operated by <unk> Web entrepreneur Peter Acworth launched Fucking Machines on September 25 , 2000 , as his company 's second website after <unk> Devices shown on the site were created with the intent to bring women authentic orgasms . Performers were instructed to allow themselves to be recorded experiencing pleasure . 
 After the site applied in 2005 to trademark the phrase " fuckingmachines " , the United States Patent and Trademark Office ( USPTO ) denied the application and ruled that the mark was obscene . Free speech lawyer Marc Randazza represented the site and appealed the decision . Orlando Weekly called his legal brief , " one of the most entertaining legal documents you 're likely to come across . " The appeal was denied in April 2008 and the case was terminated . Randazza 's argument in the case became known as The Fuck Brief . 
 The website has been the subject of attention from journalists and academics studying sexuality . Writer Regina Lynn highlighted the site 's emphasis on communication , and Annalee Newitz of AlterNet classed it as part of Porn 2 @.@ 0 . Violet Blue wrote in The Adventurous Couple 's Guide to Sex Toys that it helped popularize the idea of machines aiding in sex acts . The 2008 edition of The Oxford Encyclopedia of Women in World History described the aesthetic of the devices as disturbing . Jessica Roy wrote for The New York Observer that Fucking Machines ' examples of orgasms were a form of transhumanism . Sarah Schaschek devoted a chapter to the phenomenon in Screening the Dark Side of Love : From Euro @-@ Horror to American Cinema , titled " Fucking Machines : High @-@ Tech Bodies in Pornography " . She observed , " Strictly speaking , the women in these videos are both the controllers and the controlled . " 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Film production = = = 
 Peter Acworth founded Fucking Machines as the second website within his company Cybernet Entertainment , Inc . , and it launched on September 25 , 2000 . Cybernet Entertainment subsequently began to use the name Kink.com for business purposes . The director and webmaster of the site , who uses the professional name Tomcat , received a university degree in film and media , and had experience with filmmaking and operating the sex @-@ machines . He began work at Kink.com as a production assistant . He focused his direction style on filming the female participants experiencing sincere pleasure from the machines . 
 The site features machines designed to bring women orgasms . Sarah Schaschek noted in Screening the Dark Side of Love that the majority of the film production crew members were female . Across its websites , Kink.com formed a values statement and set of guidelines for directors and performers , taking preventative measures against victimization . The site production staff developed a practice of interviewing performers both before and after the film sessions . Models appearing on Fucking Machines film shoots are instructed to be authentic and experience pleasure from the machines without acting . 
 In 2007 , Fucking Machines relocated with the other Kink.com sites to the San Francisco Armory . Film shoots take place in the basement of the Armory . Fucking Machines was featured at the 2007 AVN Adult Entertainment Expo in Las Vegas , Nevada , with a marketing tagline , " Sex at 350 rpm " . They published a book that demonstrated inventions including " The <unk> " and " The Double Crane " . A device called the " <unk> Machine " , which incorporated rubber tongues on a moving chain apparatus , was featured in 2007 as part of the Adult Treasure Expo in Japan at the Makuhari Messe convention center . The Arse <unk> sex and technology seminar , held in October 2007 in San Francisco , California , featured a robot from Fucking Machines called " <unk> " in a live performance with one of the expo attendees . Kink.com signed a deal in 2007 with Pulse Distribution to sell material from Fucking Machines and its other sites to consumers in a DVD format . The first DVD distributed by the site in 2008 was titled Fucking Machines Volume 1 and featured 211 minutes of material with performers <unk> Love , <unk> Moore , Lexi Love , and Sasha Grey . 
 By 2009 the website included 50 devices in its films . A 2009 article in SF Weekly was critical of the California state government for directing tax revenue towards classes on film production which were attended by Fucking Machines video editors . This article , in turn , was criticized by <unk> and characterized as " prudishness " by <unk> and the San Francisco Bay Guardian . 
 The website asserts to its visitors that all performers engaged in sexual activities depicted in the videos appear of their own volition and feel bliss and gratification from the experience . The majority of new entrants to the adult film industry enjoyed their work with Fucking Machines because they discovered it was more socially acceptable to perform with a sexual device , rather than a human partner . Public relations manager for Kink.com Thomas Roche observed in a 2009 interview that Fucking Machines did not have a focus on BDSM material . In September 2010 the site had a live filming with an audience of 40 spectators , followed by the introduction in November 2010 of an interactive format in which viewers could watch shoots and recommend devices for the participants . By 2012 the site had 500 hours of archival footage with adult film performers , including Alexis Texas , Flower Tucci , and Sasha Grey . 
 = = = Trademark appeal = = = 
 Fucking Machines filed a request in July 2005 to the United States Patent and Trademark Office ( USPTO ) to secure its intellectual property rights for the mark " fuckingmachines " , having met the first standard that the word was not in use by any other entity . The site became involved in a trademark dispute when the USPTO refused to grant a trademark for the name of the site , asserting that it was obscene . The case for Fucking Machines ' use of the mark was handled by free speech attorney Marc Randazza . 
 The decision of the U.S. government was determined by lawyer Michael Engel , who ruled : " Registration is refused because the proposed mark consists of or comprises immoral or scandalous matter . The term ' fucking ' is an offensive and vulgar reference to the act of sex . ... A mark that is deemed scandalous ... is not registrable . " The USPTO based its rejection on a 1905 statute . It had previously refused the applications of 39 marks for using the word " fuck " and five marks for using the word " fucking " . Requests to trademark terms including " shit " had been turned down by the USPTO 50 times , and a mark using " cunt " was rejected . Trademarks including the word " ass " had been accepted 135 times , and the word " bitch " was approved in several trademarks as well . 
 In response to the USPTO decision in the case , Randazza stated , " The trademark office has gone off the deep end with 2 ( a ) rejections . " Section 2 ( a ) , 15 USC § 1052 ( a ) disallows requests for marks that have " immoral , deceptive , or scandalous matter " . 
 Cybernet Entertainment , LLC , filed an " amendment and response to office action " of the USPTO decision in August 2006 . Randazza introduced his brief with : " The Applicant respectfully challenges this characterization of the word ' fucking ' and its allegedly ' offensive and vulgar ' root : ' fuck ' . " Orlando Weekly commented on Randazza 's brief in the case : " Randazza ... is frequently involved in free @-@ speech cases – is fighting the federal government for your right to trademark any dirty word you please . And his filing in the case is one of the most entertaining legal documents you 're likely to come across . " Randazza 's argument in the case came to be known as The Fuck Brief . 
 Randazza argued : 
 [ T ] his much maligned four @-@ letter word has no intrinsic meaning . Fuck [ can ] play a role as a figurative term , for example , " to fuck " can also mean " to deceive . " It is a word of force that can assist us in our expressions of joy when used as an infix , as in " <unk> @-@ fucking @-@ <unk> " . " Fuck " helps us express rage when we scream " fuck you " at a football referee , or at a motorist who has just cut us off in traffic . " Fuck " can help us express pain , as it is quite frequently the first thing out of most men 's mouths when they strike their thumb ( accidentally ) with a hammer . " Fuck " is a vehicle for our disappointment , when we see that our report card is not as good as we had hoped , or when our significant other is late for dinner , or leaves us altogether . " Fuck " is an old friend , who can always make us laugh . 
 Randazza explained to Orlando Weekly that he used the word " fuck " routinely throughout his brief as part of his argument that the term is used in a variety of ways . He cited related terms , including " fuck @-@ me boots " , and frequent use of the word " fuck " in films including Wedding Crashers , Casino , and Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back . 
 The reply by Engel for the USPTO acknowledged the routine use of the word , and simultaneously asserted its scandalous nature : " Although the word is frequently used , it still is considered shocking in most formal or polite situations . For example , the word is bleeped out on basic cable , and broadcasters can be fined by the FCC for letting the word go out on the airwaves . " He argued that the word was restricted in the workplace and by government regulations . 
 Randazza filed an appeal on June 5 , 2007 , and the matter was scheduled for a hearing before the Trademark Trial and Appeal Board . Acworth told Orlando Weekly he considered ceasing appeals when the mark had initially been rejected by the USPTO . He said he was not intending to be the adult industry 's representative for First Amendment rights . Acworth stated to Orlando Weekly , " Marc talked me into it . I 'm not normally this sort of person . Marc thought he had a pretty good shot at it . I 'm really going on his advice . ... I have no real agenda with it . " 
 Adult entertainment attorney Robert <unk> stated he agreed with the actions of Acworth and Randazza . <unk> pointed out he had observed a significant increase in applications to the USPTO that were rejected because their potential trademarks were deemed " scandalous " by the government . He stated , " It 's really quite unfortunate that the executive branch is now reaching deep into the machinations of government to further its ' legislation of morality ' agenda . It is truly encouraging to see the likes of Acworth and Randazza take up this sorely needed fight . " The appeal was denied in April 2008 and the case was terminated . The application status was last listed as " abandoned " for failure to respond by the appealing party . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 Advice columnist Dan Savage recommended the site in 2004 for readers interested in learning more about sex @-@ machines . In the 2005 book edited by Carly Milne Naked Ambition , writer Regina Lynn commented on the site 's emphasis on communication . Author Timothy Archibald consulted the operators behind Fucking Machines for research on his book Sex Machines : Photographs and Interviews . 
 Annalee Newitz of AlterNet visited the set of Fucking Machines in 2006 and classed the production as part of the phenomenon of Porn 2 @.@ 0 . Author Violet Blue wrote in her 2006 book The Adventurous Couple 's Guide to Sex Toys , " Fucking Machines put machine sex on the map and into the popular consciousness , paving the way for a few individual companies to mass produce somewhat affordable sex @-@ machines that couples and individuals can purchase and use at home . " 
