 In her 2007 book Naked on the Internet , author <unk> Ray wrote of the fucking machines : " In the fusion of female sexuality and technology , the curious and enthralling thing about these toys is the way in which they cast sexuality and technology together in a near miasma of <unk> and <unk> . " Jon Mooallem of The New York Times Magazine described the website as " dedicated entirely to women having sex with large and distressingly elaborate machines . " In an article for Wired News , Regina Lynn noted that the presence of Fucking Machines at the 2007 AVN Adult Entertainment Expo was a move to the mainstream for the website : " The website has been around for years , in that grey area of ' indie internet kink ' the Industry doesn 't quite understand . Yet this year it is smack dab in the middle of the mainstream porn . " 
 Bonnie Ruberg of The Village Voice wrote in a 2008 article that Fucking Machines replaces the insecurity men feel about vibrators and transform it into a turn @-@ on . The 2008 edition of The Oxford Encyclopedia of Women in World History described the aesthetic of the devices on the site as harrowing . In his 2009 book From <unk> to Ecstasy , author Arnold P. Abbott commented of the devices used by the site : " Fucking Machines are mechanical marvels which had to be invented by the Marquis De Sade himself . " He observed that some of the machines , " would seem to be replicas to those used during the Inquisition to extract false confessions " . 
 In a 2012 article for The New York Observer , journalist Jessica Roy characterized Fucking Machines ' examples of orgasms as a form of transhumanism . In the book Screening the Dark Side of Love : From Euro @-@ Horror to American Cinema ( 2012 ) , Sarah Schaschek devoted a chapter to the phenomenon , titled " Fucking Machines : High @-@ Tech Bodies in Pornography " . Schaschek concluded , " While antipornography feminists usually criticize that female performers are visually and practically degraded by men in heterosexual pornography , it is hard to uphold such an impression in the <unk> videos . Given that all pornography <unk> difference , and given that sexual fantasies usually require clearly drawn roles of dominance and submission , the women of <unk> seem to resist at least a few of these categories . ... Strictly speaking , the women in these videos are both the controllers and the controlled . " 
 = Krulak Mendenhall mission = 
 The Krulak Mendenhall mission was a fact @-@ finding expedition dispatched by the Kennedy administration to South Vietnam in early September 1963 . The stated purpose of the expedition was to investigate the progress of the war by the South Vietnamese regime and their US military advisers against the Viet Cong insurgency . The mission was led by Victor Krulak and Joseph Mendenhall . Krulak was a major general in the United States Marine Corps , while Mendenhall was a senior Foreign Service Officer experienced in dealing with Vietnamese affairs . 
 The four @-@ day whirlwind trip was launched on September 6 , 1963 , the same day as a National Security Council ( NSC ) meeting , and came in the wake of increasingly strained relations between the United States and South Vietnam . Civil unrest gripped South Vietnam as Buddhist demonstrations against the religious discrimination of President Ngô Đình Diệm 's Catholic regime escalated . Following the raids on Buddhist pagodas on August 21 that left a death toll ranging up to a few hundred , the US authorized investigations into a possible coup through a cable to US Ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge , Jr .. 
 In their submissions to the NSC , Krulak presented an extremely optimistic report on the progress of the war , while Mendenhall presented an extremely bleak picture of military failure and public discontent . Krulak disregarded the effects of popular support for the Viet Cong . The general felt that the Vietnamese soldiers ' efforts in the field would not be affected by the public 's unease with Diệm 's policies . Mendenhall focused on gauging the sentiment of urban @-@ based Vietnamese and concluded that Diệm 's policies increased the possibility of religious civil war . Mendenhall said that Diệm 's policies were causing the South Vietnamese to believe that life under the Viet Cong would improve the quality of their lives . 
 The divergent reports led US President John F. Kennedy to famously ask his two advisers : 
 The two of you did visit the same country , didn 't you ? 
 The inconclusive report was the subject of bitter and personal debate among Kennedy 's senior advisers . Various courses of action towards Vietnam were discussed , such as fostering a regime change or taking a series of selective measures designed to cripple the influence of Ngô Đình Nhu , Diệm 's brother and chief political adviser . Nhu and his wife Madame Ngô Đình Nhu were seen as the major causes of the political problems in South Vietnam . The inconclusive result of Krulak and Mendenhall 's expedition resulted in a follow @-@ up mission , the McNamara Taylor mission . 
 = = Background = = 
 After the Huế Phật Đản shootings on May 8 , civil unrest broke out in South Vietnam . Nine Buddhists were gunned down by the Roman Catholic regime of President Ngô Đình Diệm after defying a government ban on the flying of Buddhist flags on Vesak , the birthday of Gautama Buddha , and marching in an anti @-@ government protest . Following the shootings , Buddhist leaders began to lobby Diệm for religious equality and compensation and justice for the families of the victims . With Diệm remaining recalcitrant , the protests escalated . The self @-@ immolation of Buddhist monk Thích Quảng Đức at a busy Saigon intersection became a public relations disaster for the Diệm regime , as photos of the event made front @-@ page headlines worldwide and became a symbol of Diệm 's policies . As protests continued , the Army of the Republic of Vietnam ( ARVN ) Special Forces loyal to Diệm 's brother Ngô Đình Nhu raided pagodas across the country on August 21 , leaving a death toll estimated to be up to a few hundred , and causing extensive damage under the declaration of martial law . Universities and high schools were closed amid mass pro @-@ Buddhist protests . In the meantime , the fight against the Viet Cong insurgency had begun to lose intensity amid rumours of sectarian infighting amongst ARVN troops . This was compounded by the plotting of a coup by various ARVN officers , which distracted attention from the fight against the Viet Cong insurgency . In the aftermath of the pagoda raids , the Kennedy administration sent Cable 243 to the US Embassy , Saigon , ordering an exploration of alternative leadership possibilities . 
 = = Initiation and expedition = = 
 At the end of the National Security Council ( NSC ) meeting on September 6 , it was agreed that the first priority was to obtain more information on the ground situation in Vietnam . US Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara proposed sending Marine Corps Major General Victor Krulak on an immediate fact @-@ finding trip . The NSC agreed that Joseph Mendenhall — a Foreign Service Officer with Vietnam experience — would accompany him . The pair began the mission later the same day . 
 On their return trip to Washington , D.C. , Krulak and Mendenhall were to bring John Mecklin and Rufus Phillips back from Saigon to report . Mecklin was the United States Information Service ( USIS ) director , while Phillips served as the director of rural programs for United States Operations Mission ( USOM ) and as an advisor for the Strategic Hamlet Program . The State Department sent the Saigon embassy a detailed cable containing questions about Vietnamese public opinion across all strata of society . In Krulak 's own words , the objective was to observe " the effect of recent events upon the attitudes of the Vietnamese in general , and upon the war effort against the Viet Cong " . 
 In a fast paced four @-@ day trip , the two men traveled throughout Vietnam before returning to Washington to file their reports . Krulak visited 10 locations in all four Corps zones of the ARVN and spoke with US Ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge , Jr . , the head of US forces in Vietnam General Paul Harkins and his staff , 87 US advisors , and 22 ARVN officers . Mendenhall went to Saigon , Huế , Da Nang , and several other provincial cities , talking primarily to Vietnamese friends . Their estimates of the situation were almost completely opposite . Mecklin wrote afterwards that it " was a remarkable assignment , to travel twenty @-@ four thousand miles and assess a situation as complex as Vietnam and return in just four days . It was a symptom of the state the US Government was in . " The mission was marked by the tension between its leaders . Mendenhall and Krulak intensely disliked one another , speaking to each other only when necessary . Mecklin and Krulak became embroiled in a dispute during the return flight . Krulak disapproved of Mecklin 's decision to bring television footage that had been censored by the Diệm regime back to the US , believing the action was a violation of sovereignty . After a long and bitter argument aboard the aircraft , Krulak called upon Mecklin to leave the film in Alaska during a refueling stop at Elmendorf Air Force Base , further suggesting that the USIS director remain with the film in Alaska . 
 = = Report and debriefing = = 
 The NSC reconvened on the morning of September 10 to hear the delegation 's reports immediately after its return from Vietnam . Mendenhall had previous experience in Vietnamese affairs , having served under the previous US Ambassador Elbridge Durbrow . Durbrow had urged Diệm on a number of occasions to implement political reform . Krulak was a marine known for his belief in using military action to achieve foreign affairs objectives . His temperament earned him the nickname " Brute " , which originated from his wrestling career at the Naval Academy . The Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell <unk> noted that Mendenhall was regarded " with great suspicion on the Virginia side of the river [ the Pentagon , headquarters of the Defense Department ] " , whereas Krulak was " universally liked and trusted in the Pentagon , both on the civilian and military side " . 
 The backgrounds of Krulak and Mendenhall were reflected in their diametrically opposite analyses of the war . Krulak gave a highly optimistic analysis of the military progress and discounted the effect of the Buddhist crisis on the ARVN 's fight against the Viet Cong . His general conclusion was that " [ t ] he shooting war is still going ahead at an impressive pace . It has been affected adversely by the political crisis , but the impact is not great . " 
 Krulak asserted that a substantial amount of fighting was still required , particularly in the Mekong Delta , which was regarded as the Viet Cong 's strongest region . Krulak asserted that all levels of the ARVN officer corps were very conscious of the Buddhist crisis , but he believed that most had not allowed religious beliefs to negatively affect their internal military relationships to a substantial degree . He believed that the ARVN officers at all levels were obedient and could be expected to carry out any order they regarded as being lawful . Krulak further asserted that the political crisis had not significantly damaged bilateral military ties . Moving along to the Vietnamese view of their leaders , Krulak predicted that there was dissatisfaction among the officers , which he believed was mainly directed at Ngô Đình Nhu , the younger brother of Diệm who was widely seen as the power behind the regime . Krulak believed that most officers wanted to see the back of Nhu , but that few were willing to resort to a coup . Krulak reported that three US advisers strongly criticized the Nhus and advocated the pair 's departure from South Vietnam in order to avoid a public relations disaster at the United Nations . However , Krulak felt that these problems were outweighed by what he believed to be a successful military effort . Krulak felt that the war would be won irrespective of the political leadership . He predicted that the ARVN had little ability to facilitate an improvement in governance and felt that they would not flex whatever muscle they had . Krulak optimistically concluded : 
 Excluding the very serious political and military factors external to Vietnam , the Viet Cong war will be won if the current US military and sociological programs are pursued , irrespective of the grave defects in the ruling regime . 
 Mendenhall strongly disputed Krulak 's assessments . He argued that the anti @-@ Diệm sentiment had reached a level where the collapse of civilian rule was possible . He reported a " reign of terror " in Saigon , Huế and Da Nang , observing that the popular hatred usually reserved for the Nhus had spread to the generally respected Diệm . Mendenhall asserted that many Vietnamese had come to believe that life under Diệm worse than being ruled by the Viet Cong . Mendenhall thought that a civil war on religious grounds was possible . He predicted that the war could only be won with a regime change , otherwise South Vietnam would collapse under sectarian infighting or a massive communist offensive . The diametrically opposite nature of the two reports prompted Kennedy 's famous query , " You two did visit the same country , didn 't you ? " 
 = = = Debate = = = 
 Krulak attempted to explain the contrasting assessments by pointing out that Mendenhall had surveyed urban areas , while he ventured into the countryside " where the war is " . Krulak asserted that political issues in Saigon would not hamper military progress , stating " We can stagger through to win the war with Nhu remaining in control . " Assistant Secretary of State Roger Hilsman asserted that the contrasting reports " was the difference between a military and a political view " . During the debate over the differences in outlook , Mendenhall asserted that Saigon had suffered " a virtually complete breakdown " following the pagoda raids . Mendenhall reported that Vietnamese public servants feared being seen with Americans . He recalled one visit when he had to remain quiet while his Vietnamese host crept around the room , searching for hidden microphones . Mendenhall asserted that " Saigon was heavy with an atmosphere of fear and hate " and that the people feared Diệm more than the Viet Cong . He reported many public servants no longer slept at home due to a fear of midnight arrests by Nhu 's secret police . Many officials had recently spent the bulk of their day negotiating the release of their children , who had been incarcerated for participating in pro @-@ Buddhist protests . Mendenhall asserted that internal turmoil was now a higher priority than the war against the communists . 
 Mendenhall denounced Saigon 's reconciliation and goodwill gestures towards the Buddhists as a public relations stunt . He reported that monks from provincial areas who had been arrested in Saigon for demonstrating were not returned to their places of origin as promised . Mendenhall noted that when the monks were released , Diệm 's officials retained their identification papers . This resulted in their re @-@ arrest upon attempting to leave the capital . The monks were then branded as Viet Cong because they did not have government identification papers . As news of such tactics spread across the capital , some monks sought refuge in the Saigon homes of ARVN officers . Mendenhall insisted that the United States was responsible for the situation because it had helped the Ngo family gain power , armed and funded it . He reasoned that as Diệm used the arms against his own people , Washington also shared responsibility . He stated that " a refusal to act would be just as much interference in Vietnam 's affairs as acting " . 
 According to the Pentagon Papers , " the critical failure of both reports was to understand the fundamental political role that the army was coming to play in Vietnam " . The papers concluded the ARVN was the only institution capable of deposing and replacing Diệm . Diệm and Nhu fully realized the potential threat , responding with the divide and conquer paradigm . They usurped the prerogative of senior officer promotion and appointed generals based on loyalty to the palace , giving orders directly to officers . This action caused deep distrust among the senior officers and fragmented their power . Krulak failed to realize that if the situation deteriorated to the point where discontent with Diệm posed the possibility of a communist victory , the generals would intervene in politics because of what would happen to them under communist rule . Neither Krulak nor Mendenhall seemed to anticipate that if a military junta came to power , the divisive effect of Diệm 's promotion politics would manifest itself as the generals vied for power . Neither of the pair put any emphasis on the detrimental effects that would have been caused by political infighting among the generals . 
 During the NSC meeting , Frederick Nolting – who preceded Lodge as US Ambassador to South Vietnam – took issue with Mendenhall 's analysis . Regarded as a Diệm apologist , Nolting pointed out that Mendenhall had been pessimistic about South Vietnam for several years . Mecklin , reinforced and pushed Mendenhall 's view further , calling on the administration to apply direct pressure on Saigon by suspending non @-@ military aid , in an attempt to cause a regime change . In Mecklin 's words : 
 This would unavoidably be dangerous . There was no way to be sure how events would develop . It was possible , for example , that the Vietnamese forces might fragment into warring factions , or that the new government would be so incompetent and / or unstable that the effort against the Viet Cong would collapse . The US should therefore resolve now to introduce American combat forces if necessary to prevent a Communist triumph midst the debris of the Diệm regime . 
 The Pentagon Papers opined that Mecklin understood the pitfalls of a military junta that Krulak and Mendenhall had overlooked . Regardless , Mecklin concluded that the US should proceed in fostering a regime change , accept the consequences , and contemplate the introduction of US combat troops to stop a possible Viet Cong victory . 
 The NSC meeting then heard Phillips ' bleak prognosis of the situation in the Mekong Delta . He claimed that the Strategic Hamlet Program was a shambles in the delta , stating that they were " being chewed to pieces by the Viet Cong " . When it was noted that Phillips had recently witnessed a battle in the delta , Kennedy asked Phillips for his assessment . Phillips replied : " Well , I don 't like to contradict General Krulak , but I have to tell you , Mr. President , that we 're not winning the war , particularly in the delta . The troops are paralysed , they 're in the barracks , and this is what is actually going on in one province that 's right next to Saigon . " Phillips asserted that removing Nhu was the only way to improve the situation . Phillips asserted that the only means of removing Nhu was to bring in Colonel Edward Lansdale , the CIA operative who had consolidated Diệm 's position a decade earlier , a proposal that Kennedy dismissed . Phillips recommended three measures : 
 <unk> aid to the ARVN Special Forces of Colonel Le Quang Tung , who took his orders directly from the palace and not the army command . Tung had led the raids on Buddhist pagodas on August 21 in which hundreds were killed and widespread physical destruction occurred . The Special Forces were used mainly for repressing dissidents rather than fighting communists . 
 Cut funds to the Motion Picture Center , which produced hagiographic films about the Nhus . 
 <unk> covert actions aimed at diving and discrediting Tung and Major General Tôn Thất Đính . Dinh was the military governor of Saigon and the Commander of the ARVN III Corps . Dinh was the youngest general in the history of the ARVN , primarily due to his loyalty to the Ngo family . 
 In the ensuing debate , Kennedy asked Phillips what would happen if Nhu responded to the cuts by diverting money away from the army to prop up his personal schemes . When Kennedy asked if Nhu would blame the US for any resulting military deterioration , Phillips replied that the ARVN would revolt , because the ARVN officers were on Viet Cong hit lists would not allow the communists to run loose . Phillips said that if Nhu tried to divert military aid away from the troops to prop up his personal schemes , the Americans could deliver the money straight to the countryside in suitcases . 
 = = = Robust disagreement = = = 
 The meeting became confrontational when Krulak interrupted Phillips , asserting that American military advisers on the ground rejected the USOM officer 's assessments . Phillips conceded that although the overall military situation had improved , this was not the case in the crucial delta areas . Phillips noted that the provincial military adviser in Long An Province adjacent to Saigon , had reported that the Viet Cong had overrun 200 Strategic Hamlets in the previous week , forcing the villagers to dismantle the settlement . McNamara shook his head at the radically divergent reports . When Krulak derided Phillips , Assistant Secretary of State W. Averell Harriman could no longer restrain himself and called the general " a damn fool " . Phillips diplomatically took over from Harriman and asserted that it was a battle for hearts and minds rather than pure military metrics . 
 Mecklin generated more disquiet by advocating the use of American combat troops to unseat the Diệm regime and win the war . He asserted that " the time had come for the US to apply direct pressure to bring about a change of government , however distasteful " . Mecklin asserted that there would be a backlash if aid was simply cut , so US troops would have to directly fix the problem . Mecklin later wrote to USIS head Edward R. Murrow to insist that US troops would welcome combat in the case of a communist escalation . On the journey back to the United States , he had asserted that the use of American combat forces would encourage the coup and lift morale against the Viet Cong . He also called for the engineering of a coup . He called for the US to show more intent . 
 The pessimism expressed by Phillips and Mecklin surprised Frederick Nolting , who preceded Lodge as the US ambassador in Saigon . Nolting said that Phillips ' account " surprised the hell out of me . I couldn 't believe my ears . " Nolting asserted that Mecklin was psychologically vulnerable to being brainwashed because he had recently split with his wife . At the time , Mecklin was living with journalists David Halberstam and Neil Sheehan of The New York Times and UPI respectively . Halberstam and Sheehan both won Pulitzer Prizes and were strident critics of Diệm . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 One strategy that received increasing consideration in NSC meetings — as well as at the US Embassy , Saigon and in Congress — was a suspension of non @-@ military aid to Diệm . After the erroneous Voice of America broadcast on August 26 , which announced an aid suspension , Lodge was given the discretion on August 29 to suspend aid if it would facilitate a coup . In the meantime , the US Senate began to pressure the administration to take action against Diệm . Hilsman was lobbied by the Senate Subcommittee on the Far East . Senator Frank Church informed the administration of his intention to introduce a resolution condemning Diệm 's anti @-@ Buddhist repression and calling for the termination of aid unless religious equality was instituted . This resulted in Church agreeing to temporarily delay the introduction of the bill to avoid embarrassing the administration . 
 While the delegation was in Vietnam , the strategy of using a selective aid suspension to pressure Diệm into ending religious discrimination was actively discussed at the State Department . In a television interview on September 8 , AID Director David Bell warned that Congress might cut aid to South Vietnam if Diệm did not change his policies . On September 9 , Kennedy backed away from Bell 's comments , stating " I don 't think we think that [ a reduction in aid to Saigon ] would be helpful at this time . " On September 11 , the day after Krulak and Mendenhall tabled their reports , Lodge reversed his position . In a long cable to Washington , he advocated the consideration of using non @-@ military aid suspension to spark the toppling of Diệm . Lodge concluded that the US could not get what it wanted from Diệm , and had to force events to come to a head . After another White House meeting on the same day , Senator Church was informed that his bill was acceptable , so he introduced the legislation into the Senate . 
 The National Security Council re @-@ convened on September 17 to consider two of Hilsman 's proposals for dealing with Diệm . The plan favored by Hilsman and his State Department colleagues was the " pressures and persuasion track " . This involved an escalating series of measures at both public and private level , including selective aid suspension and pressuring Diệm to remove Nhu from power . The alternative was the " reconciliation with a rehabilitated <unk> track " , which involved the public appearance of acquiescence to Diệm 's recent actions and an attempt to salvage as much as possible from the situation . Both proposals assumed that an ARVN coup was not forthcoming . The inconclusive report saw a follow @-@ up mission sent to Vietnam , the McNamara Taylor mission , led by Defense Secretary Robert McNamara and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Maxwell D. Taylor . 
 = Living in the Material World = 
 Living in the Material World is the fourth studio album by English musician George Harrison , released in 1973 on Apple Records . As the follow @-@ up to 1970 's critically acclaimed All Things Must Pass and his pioneering charity project , the Concert for Bangladesh , it was among the most highly anticipated releases of that year . The album was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America two days after release , on its way to becoming Harrison 's second number 1 album in the United States , and produced the international hit " Give Me Love ( Give Me Peace on Earth ) " . It also topped albums charts in Canada and Australia , and reached number 2 in Britain . 
 Living in the Material World is notable for the uncompromising lyrical content of its songs , reflecting Harrison 's struggle for spiritual enlightenment against his status as a superstar , as well as for what many commentators consider to be the finest guitar and vocal performances of his career . In contrast with All Things Must Pass , Harrison scaled down the production for Material World , using a core group of musicians comprising Nicky Hopkins , Gary Wright , Klaus Voormann and Jim Keltner . Ringo Starr , John Barham and Indian musician Zakir Hussain were among the album 's other contributors . 
 Upon release , Rolling Stone described it as a " pop classic " , a work that " stands alone as an article of faith , miraculous in its radiance " . Most contemporary reviewers consider Living in the Material World to be a worthy successor to All Things Must Pass , even if it inevitably falls short of Harrison 's grand opus . Author Simon Leng refers to the album as a " forgotten blockbuster " , representing " the close of an age , the last offering of the Beatles ' London era " . EMI reissued the album in 2006 , in remastered form with bonus tracks , and released a deluxe @-@ edition CD / DVD set that included film clips of four songs . 
 = = Background = = 
 George Harrison 's 1971 – 72 humanitarian aid project for the new nation of Bangladesh had left him an international hero , but also exhausted and frustrated in his efforts to ensure that the money raised would find its way to those in need . Rather than record a follow @-@ up to his acclaimed 1970 triple album , All Things Must Pass , Harrison put his solo career on hold for over a year following the two Concert for Bangladesh shows , held at Madison Square Garden , New York , in August 1971 . In an interview with Disc and Music Echo magazine in December that year , pianist Nicky Hopkins spoke of having just attended the New York sessions for John Lennon 's " Happy Xmas ( War Is Over ) " single , where Harrison had played them " about two or three hours " worth of new songs , adding : " They were really incredible . " Hopkins suggested that work on Harrison 's next solo album was to begin in January or February at his new home studio at Friar Park , but any such plan was undone by Harrison 's commitment to the Bangladesh relief project . While he found time during the last few months of 1971 to produce singles for Ringo Starr and Apple Records protégés Lon & Derrek Van Eaton , and to help promote the Ravi Shankar documentary Raga , Harrison 's next project in the role of music producer was not until August 1972 , when Cilla Black recorded his composition " When Every Song Is Sung " . 
 Throughout this period , Harrison 's devotion to Hindu spirituality – particularly to Krishna consciousness via his friendship with A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada – reached new heights . As Harrison admitted , his adherence to his spiritual path was not necessarily consistent . His wife , Pattie Boyd , and their friend Chris O 'Dell would joke that it was hard to tell whether he was dipping into his ever @-@ present Japa Yoga prayer bag or " the coke bag " . This duality has been noted by Harrison biographers Simon Leng and Alan Clayson : on one hand , Harrison earned himself the nickname " His Lectureship " during his prolonged periods of fervid devotion ; on the other , he participated in bawdy London sessions for the likes of Bobby Keys ' eponymous solo album and what Leng terms Harry Nilsson 's " thoroughly nasty " " You 're Breakin ' My Heart " , both recorded in the first half of 1972 . Similarly , Harrison 's passion for high @-@ performance cars saw him lose his driver 's licence for the second time in a year after crashing his Mercedes into a roundabout at 90 miles an hour , on 28 February , with Boyd in the passenger seat . 
 In August 1972 , with the Concert for Bangladesh documentary film having finally been released worldwide , Harrison set off alone for a driving holiday in Europe , during which he chanted the Hare Krishna mantra nonstop for a whole day , he later claimed . Religious academic Joshua Greene , a Hare Krishna devotee , has described this trip as Harrison 's " preparation " for recording the Living in the Material World album . 
 = = Songs = = 
 Rather than revisit compositions left over from the All Things Must Pass sessions , Harrison 's material for Living in the Material World was drawn from the 1971 – 72 period , with the exception of " Try Some , Buy Some " , which he wrote in 1970 and recorded with former Ronette Ronnie Spector in February 1971 . The songs reflected his spiritual devotion – in the case of " The Lord Loves the One ( That Loves the Lord ) " , " Living in the Material World " , " Give Me Love ( Give Me Peace on Earth ) " and " Try Some , Buy Some " – as well as his feelings before and after the Bangladesh benefit concerts , with " Miss O 'Dell " and " The Day the World Gets ' Round " . 
 Both " The Lord Loves the One " and the album 's title track were directly inspired by Prabhupada 's teachings . Greene writes of Harrison adapting a passage from the Bhagavad Gita into his lyrics for " Living in the Material World " and adds : " Some of the songs distilled spiritual concepts into phrases so elegant they resembled Vedic sutras : short codes that contain volumes of meaning . " On " Give Me Love " , Harrison blended the Hindu bhajan style ( or devotional song ) with Western gospel music , repeating the formula of his 1970 – 71 international hit " My Sweet Lord " . In his 1980 autobiography , I Me Mine , he describes the song as " a prayer and personal statement between me , the Lord , and whoever likes it " . 
 Whereas Harrison 's Krishna <unk> on All Things Must Pass had been uplifting celebrations of faith , his latest compositions betrayed a more austere quality , partly as a result of the Bangladesh experience . His musical arranger , John Barham , would later suggest that a spiritual " crisis " might have been the cause ; other observers have pointed to Harrison 's failing marriage to Boyd . Leng writes of his frame of mind at this time : " while George Harrison was bursting with musical confidence , Living in the Material World found him in roughly the same place that John Lennon was when he wrote ' Help ! ' – shocked by the rush of overwhelming success and desperately wondering where it left him . " 
 Other song themes addressed the Beatles ' legacy , either in direct references to the band 's history – in the case of " Living in the Material World " and " Sue Me , Sue You Blues " – or in Harrison 's stated desire to live in the present , free of his former identity , in the case of " The Light That Has Lighted the World " , " Who Can See It " and " Be Here Now " . The lyrics to " Who Can See It " reflect Harrison 's disenchantment with his previous , junior status to former bandmates Lennon and Paul McCartney , while " Sue Me , Sue You Blues " was his comment on McCartney 's 1971 High Court action to dissolve the band as a business entity . In line with Prabhupada 's teachings , all such pursuits of fame , wealth or position meant nothing in Harrison 's 1972 world @-@ view . Author Gary Tillery writes of Material World 's lyrical content : " The album expresses his impressions of the mundane and the spiritual worlds and the importance of ignoring the lures of the everyday world and remaining focused on the eternal <unk> . " Even in seemingly conventional love songs such as " That Is All " and " Don 't Let Me Wait Too Long " , Harrison appeared to be addressing his deity as much as any human partner . Musically , the latter composition reflects the influence of Brill Building songwriters of the early 1960s , while Harrison sings of a love delivered " like it came from above " . 
 Harrison donated his copyright for nine of the eleven songs on Living in the Material World , together with the non @-@ album B @-@ side " Miss O 'Dell " , to his Material World Charitable Foundation . The latter initiative was set up in reaction to the tax issues that had hindered his relief effort for the Bangladeshi refugees , and ensured a perpetual stream of income , through ongoing publishing royalties , for dispersal to the charities of his choice . 
 = = Production = = 
 After the grand , Wall of Sound production of All Things Must Pass , Harrison wanted a more understated sound this time around , to " liberate " the songs , as he later put it . He had intended to co @-@ produce with Phil Spector as before , although the latter 's erratic behaviour and alcohol consumption ensured that , once sessions were under way in October 1972 , Harrison was the project 's sole producer . Spector received a credit for " Try Some , Buy Some " , however , since Harrison used the same 1971 recording , featuring musicians such as Leon Russell , Jim Gordon , Pete Ham and Barham , that they had made for Ronnie Spector 's abandoned solo album . 
 A release date was planned for January or February 1973 , with the album title rumoured to be The Light That Has Lighted the World . Within a month , the title was announced as The Magic Is Here Again , with an erroneous report in Rolling Stone magazine claiming that Eric Clapton was co @-@ producing and that the album was set for release on 20 December 1972 . 
 = = = Recording = = = 
 In another contrast with his 1970 triple album , Harrison engaged a small core group of musicians to support him on Living in the Material World . Gary Wright and Klaus Voormann returned , on keyboards and bass , respectively , and John Barham again provided orchestral arrangements . They were joined by Jim Keltner , who had impressed at the 1971 Bangladesh concerts , and Nicky Hopkins , whose musical link to Harrison went back to the 1968 Jackie Lomax single " Sour Milk Sea " . Ringo Starr also contributed to the album , when his burgeoning film career allowed , and Jim Horn , another musician from the Concert for Bangladesh band , supplied horns and flutes . The recording engineer was Phil McDonald , who had worked in the same role on All Things Must Pass . 
 All the rhythm and lead guitar parts were performed by Harrison alone – the ex @-@ Beatle stepping out from the " looming shadow " of Clapton for the first time , Leng has noted . Most of the basic tracks were recorded with Harrison on acoustic guitar ; only " Living in the Material World " , " Who Can See It " and " That Is All " featured electric rhythm parts , those for the latter two songs adopting the same Leslie @-@ toned sound found on much of the Beatles ' Abbey Road ( 1969 ) . Ham and his Badfinger bandmate Tom Evans augmented the line @-@ up on 4 and 11 October , although their playing would not find its way onto the released album . 
 The sessions took place partly at Apple Studio in London , but mostly at Harrison 's home studio , FPSHOT , according to Voormann . Apple Studio , together with its Savile Row , London W1 address , would receive a prominent credit on the Living in the Material World record sleeve , as a further sign of Harrison 's championing of the Beatles @-@ owned recording facility . At the weekends during these autumn months , Hopkins recorded his own solo album , The Tin Man Was a Dreamer ( 1973 ) , at Apple , with contributions from Harrison , Voormann and Horn . Voormann has described the mood at the Friar Park sessions as " intimate , quiet , friendly " and in stark contrast to the sessions he , Harrison and Hopkins had attended at Lennon 's home in 1971 , for the Imagine album . Keltner recalls Harrison as having been focused and " at his peak physically " throughout the recording of Living in the Material World , having given up smoking and taken to using Hindu prayer beads . 
 The sessions continued until the end of November , when Hopkins left for Jamaica to work on the Rolling Stones ' new album . During this period , Harrison co @-@ produced a new live album for Shankar and Ali Akbar Khan for a January release on Apple Records , the highly regarded In Concert 1972 . 
 = = = Overdubbing and mixing = = = 
 After hosting a visit by Bob Dylan and his wife Sara at Friar Park , Harrison resumed work on the album in January 1973 , at Apple . " Sue Me , Sue You Blues " , which he had originally given to Jesse Ed Davis to record in 1971 , was taped at this point . The lyrics ' courtroom theme had a new relevance in early 1973 , as he , Lennon and Starr looked to sever all legal ties with manager Allen Klein , who had been the prime cause for McCartney 's earlier litigation . 
 For the rest of January and through February , extensive overdubs were carried out on the album 's basic tracks – comprising vocals , percussion , Harrison 's slide guitar parts and Horn 's contributions . " Living in the Material World " received significant attention during this last phase of the album production , with sitar , flute and Zakir Hussain 's tabla being added to fill the song 's two " spiritual sky " sections . The resulting contrast between the main , Western rock portion and the Indian @-@ style middle eights emphasised Harrison 's struggle between physical @-@ world temptations and his spiritual goals . The Indian instrumentation overdubbed on this track and " Be Here Now " also marked a rare return to the genre for Harrison , recalling his work with the Beatles over 1966 – 68 and his first solo album , Wonderwall Music ( 1968 ) . 
 Barham 's orchestra and choir were the final items to be recorded , on " The Day the World Gets ' Round " , " Who Can See It " and " That Is All " , in early March . With production on the album completed , Harrison flew to Los Angeles for Beatles @-@ related business meetings and to begin work on Shankar and Starr 's respective albums , Shankar Family & Friends ( 1974 ) and Ringo ( 1973 ) . 
 = = Album artwork = = 
 As he had done with All Things Must Pass and The Concert for Bangladesh , Harrison entrusted the album 's art design to Tom Wilkes , and the latter 's new business partner , Craig Baun . The gatefold and lyric insert sleeves for Living in the Material World were much commented @-@ on at the time of release , Stephen Holden of Rolling Stone describing the record as " beautifully @-@ packaged with symbolic hand @-@ print covers and the dedication , ' All Glories to Sri Krsna ' " , while author Nicholas Schaffner likewise admired the " color representations of the Hindu scriptures " , in the form of a painting from a Prabhupada @-@ published edition of the Bhagavad Gita . Reproduced on the lyric insert sheet ( on the back of which was a red Om symbol with yellow surround , on a black background ) , this painting features Krishna with Arjuna , the legendary archer and warrior , in a chariot , being pulled by the enchanted seven @-@ headed horse <unk> . With the album arriving at the height of the glam or glitter rock musical trend , Clayson writes of this image : " a British teenager might have still dug the gear worn by Krishna in his chariot … Androgynous in beaded kaftan , jewelled fez and peacock feather , and strikingly pretty , the Supreme Personality of Godhead was not unlike some of the new breed of theatrical British <unk> . " 
 For the album 's striking front @-@ cover image , Wilkes used a Kirlian photograph of Harrison 's hand holding a Hindu medallion . The photo was taken at UCLA 's parapsychology department , as was the shot used on the back cover , where Harrison instead holds three US coins : a couple of quarters and a silver dollar . 
 The gatefold 's inner left panel , opposite the album 's production credits , showed Harrison and his fellow musicians – Starr , Horn , Voormann , Hopkins , Keltner and Wright – at a long table , laden with food and wine . A deliberate parody of da Vinci 's The Last Supper , the picture was taken in California at the mock @-@ Tudor home of entertainment lawyer Abe Somers , by Hollywood glamour photographer Ken Marcus . As with the US coinage used on the back cover , various details in the photo represent what Harrison termed the " gross " aspects of life in the material world . Clayson has speculated about the symbolism and hidden messages within the photo : whether the nurse with a pram , set back from and to the left of the table , was a reference to Boyd 's inability to conceive a child ; and the empty , distant wheelchair in memory of Harrison 's late mother . Theologian Dale Allison observes the anti @-@ Catholic sentiment within this inner @-@ gatefold photo , following on from Harrison 's lyrics to his 1970 song " Awaiting on You All " . Harrison is dressed as a priest , all in black , sporting an Old West six @-@ shooter – " a slam at the perceived materialism and violence of the Roman church " , Allison writes . 
 On the back cover , underneath the second hand @-@ print design , text provides details of the fictitious Jim Keltner Fan Club , information on which was available by sending a " stamped undressed elephant " – for : self @-@ addressed envelope – to a Los Angeles postal address . This detail was an affectionate thank @-@ you to the popular drummer ( Starr would repeat the gesture on his album later in the year ) , as well as a light @-@ hearted dig – in its use of " wing " symbols , like those in Wings ' logo – at McCartney , who had recently launched a fan club for his new band . 
 = = Release = = 
 Due to the extended recording period , Living in the Material World was issued at the end of a busy Apple release schedule , with April and May 1973 having already been set aside for the Beatles compilations 1962 – 1966 and 1967 – 1970 and for Paul McCartney & Wings ' second album , Red Rose Speedway . Schaffner recorded in his book The Beatles Forever : " For a while there ... album charts were reminiscent of the golden age of Beatlemania . " Preceding Harrison 's long @-@ awaited release was the acoustic single " Give Me Love ( Give Me Peace on Earth ) " , which became his second number 1 hit in the United States . This was accompanied by a billboard and print advertising campaign , including a three @-@ panel poster combining the album 's front and back covers , and an Apple publicity photo showing Harrison , now free of the heavy beard familiar from the All Things Must Pass – Concert for Bangladesh era , with his hand outstretched , mirroring Wilkes ' album cover image . 
 Living in the Material World was issued on 30 May 1973 in America ( with Apple catalogue number <unk> <unk> ) and on 22 June in Britain ( as Apple PAS 10006 ) . It enjoyed immediate commercial success , entering the Billboard 200 at number 11 and hitting number 1 in its second week , on 23 June , demoting Wings ' album in the process . Material World spent five weeks atop the US charts , having been awarded a gold disc by the RIAA within two days of release , for advance orders . In the UK , the album peaked at number 2 , held from the top position by the soundtrack to Starr 's movie That 'll Be the Day . Despite high sales initially , its follow @-@ on success was limited by what Leng terms the " anomalous " decision to cancel the release of a second US single , " Don 't Let Me Wait Too Long " . 
 With Living in the Material World , Harrison achieved the Billboard double for a second time when " Give Me Love " hit the top position during the album 's stay at number 1 – the only one of his former bandmates to have done it even once being McCartney , with the recent " My Love " and Red Rose Speedway . Harrison carried out no supporting promotion for Material World ; " pre @-@ recorded tapes " were issued to BBC Radio 1 and played repeatedly on the show Radio One Club , but his only public appearance in Britain was to accompany Prabhupada on a religious procession through central London , on 8 July . According to author Bill Harry , the album sold over 3 million copies worldwide . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 = = = Contemporary reviews = = = 
 Leng describes Living the Material World as " one of the most keenly anticipated discs of the decade " and its unveiling " a major event " . Among expectant music critics , Stephen Holden began his highly favourable review in Rolling Stone with the words " At last it 's here " , before hailing the new Harrison album as a " pop classic " and a " profoundly seductive record " . " Happily , the album is not just a commercial event , " he wrote , " it is the most concise , universally conceived work by a former Beatle since John Lennon / Plastic Ono Band . " Billboard magazine noted the twin themes found throughout the album – " the Beatles and their mish @-@ mash " versus a " spiritual undercoat " – and described Harrison 's vocals as " first @-@ rate " . 
 Two weeks ahead of the UK release date , Melody Maker published a full @-@ page " exclusive preview " of Material World by its New York correspondent , Michael Watts . The latter wrote that " the most strikingly immediate impression left by the album " concerned its lyrics , which , although " solemn and pious " at times , were " more interesting " thematically than those on All Things Must Pass , such that Material World was " as personal , in its own way , as anything that Lennon has done " . While describing the pared @-@ down production as " good artistic judgement in view of the nature of the lyrics " , Watts concluded : " Harrison has always struck me before as simply a writer of very classy pop songs ; now he stands as something more than an entertainer . Now he 's being honest . " 
 While Holden had opined that , of all the four Beatles , Harrison had inherited " the most precious " legacy – namely , " the spiritual aura that the group accumulated , beginning with the White Album " – other reviewers objected to the overt religiosity of Living in the Material World . This was particularly so in Britain , where by summer 1973 , author Bob Woffinden later wrote , " the Beatle bubble had undoubtedly burst " and for each of the former bandmates , his individual " pedestal " was now " an exposed , rather than a comfortable , place to be " . 
 In the NME , Tony Tyler began his review by stating that he had long idolised Harrison as " the finest packaged object since frozen pizza " , but he had changed his opinion dramatically in recent years ; after the " dire , ennui @-@ making " All Things Must Pass , Tyler continued , " the unworthiness of my heretical thoughts smote home around the time of the Bangla Desh concerts . " Tyler dismissed Material World with the description : " [ It 's ] pleasant , competent , vaguely dull and inoffensive . It ’ s also breathtakingly unoriginal and – lyrically at least – turgid , repetitive and so damn holy I could scream . " The reviewer concluded : " I have no doubt whatever it 'll sell like hot tracts and that George 'll donate all the profits to starving Bengalis and make me feel like the cynical heel I undoubtedly am . " In their 1975 book The Beatles : An Illustrated Record , Tyler and co @-@ author Roy Carr bemoaned Harrison 's " <unk> imposing [ of ] said Holy Memoirs upon innocent record @-@ collectors " and declared the album 's spiritual theme " almost as offensive in its own way " as Lennon and Yoko Ono 's political radicalism on Some Time in New York City ( 1972 ) . 
 According to New Zealand music critic Graham Reid , a contemporary Australian review remarked on the album 's religiosity : " oftentimes the music is a more truthful guide to the sense of the lyrics than the words themselves . Harrison is not a great wordsmith but he is a superb musician . Everything flows , everything interweaves . His melodies are so superb they take care of everything … " Like Holden , Nicholas Schaffner approved of the singer 's gesture in donating his publishing royalties to the Material World Charitable Foundation and praised the album 's " exquisite musical underpinnings " . Although the " transcendent dogma " was not always to his taste , Schaffner recognised that in Living in the Material World , Harrison had " devised a luxuriant rock devotional designed to transform his fans ' stereo equipment into a temple " . 
 Aside from the album 's lyrical themes , its production and musicianship were widely praised , Schaffner noting : " Surely Phil Spector never had a more attentive pupil . " Carr and Tyler lauded Harrison 's " superb and accomplished slide @-@ guitar breaks " , and the solos on " Give Me Love " , " The Lord Loves the One " , " The Light That Has Lighted the World " and " Living in the Material World " have each been identified as exemplary and among the finest of Harrison 's career . In his book The Beatles Apart ( 1981 ) , Woffinden wrote : " Those who <unk> at the lyrics , or at Harrison himself , missed a great deal of the music , much of which was exceptionally fine . " Woffinden described the album as " a very good one " , Harrison 's " only mistake " being that he had waited so long before following up his successes over 1970 – 71 . 
 = = = Retrospective assessment = = = 
 In the decades following its release , Living in the Material World gained a reputation as " a forgotten blockbuster " – a term used by Simon Leng and echoed by commentators such as Robert Rodriguez and AllMusic 's Bruce Eder . The latter describes Harrison 's 1973 album as " an underrated minor masterpiece " that " represent [ s ] his solo playing and songwriting at something of a peak " . John Metzger of The Music Box refers to Material World as " the most underrated and overlooked album of [ Harrison ] ' s career " , adding that it " coalesces around its songs … and the Zen @-@ like beauty that emanates from Harrison 's hymns to a higher power inevitably becomes subtly affecting . " 
 Writing in Rolling Stone in 2002 , Greg Kot found the album " drearily monochromatic " compared to its predecessor , and to PopMatters ' Zeth Lundy , it suffers from " a more anonymous tract " next to the " cathedral @-@ grade significance " of All Things Must Pass . Reviewing Harrison 's solo career for Goldmine magazine in 2002 , Dave Thompson considered the 1973 album to be the equal of All Things Must Pass , reasoning : " While history insists that Living in the Material World could not help but be eclipsed by its gargantuan forebear , with the two albums in the CD player and the ' shuffle ' function mixing them up , it 's difficult to play favourites . " 
 In his review of the 2006 remastered release , for Q magazine , Tom Doyle praised the album 's ballads , such as " The Light That Has Lighted the World " and " Be Here Now " , and suggested that " the distance of time helps to reveal its varied charms " . Mojo 's Mat Snow wrote of " this long overdue reissue " being " worth it alone for four wonderful songs " , including " Don 't Let Me Wait Too Long " and " The Day the World Gets ' Round " , and concluded : " The rest is Hari Georgeson at his most preachy , but it 's never less than musical and often light on its feet . " In another 2006 review , for the Vintage Rock website , Shawn Perry wrote of Material World being " more restrained and immediate without the wall of sound whitewash of its predecessor , but its flow and elegance are unmistakable " . Perry admired Harrison 's slide guitar playing and rated the album an " underrated , classic record " . Writing for Uncut in 2008 , David Cavanagh described Material World as " a bit full @-@ on , religion @-@ wise " but " the album to play if you want musicianship at its best " . 
 = = = 2014 appraisal and legacy = = = 
 Reviewing the 2014 reissue , Blogcritics ' Chaz Lipp writes that " this chart @-@ topping classic is , in terms of production , arguably preferable to its predecessor " , adding : " The sinewy ' Sue Me , Sue You Blues , ' galloping title track , and soaring ' Don 't Let Me Wait Too Long ' rank right alongside Harrison 's best work . " Alex <unk> of PopMatters refers to it as " a worthy successor " to All Things Must Pass and an album that " raises the bar of social awareness that had only been touched on lightly in the previous release " . <unk> concludes : " It is a work that enjoys a more elaborate dynamic development , where layers are kept together by Harrison ’ s clever work behind the mixing desk . " In another 2014 review , for Classic Rock , Paul Trynka writes : " All these years on , it 's his most overtly spiritual album that sparkles today … The well @-@ known songs , such as ' Sue Me , Sue You Blues ' ( dedicated to the rapacious Allen Klein ) , stand up well , but it 's the more restrained tracks – ' Don 't Let Me Wait Too Long ' , ' Who Can See It ' – that entrance : gorgeous pop songs , all the more forceful for their restraint . " Trynka goes on to describe " Be Here Now " as the album 's " towering achievement " and " a masterpiece " . 
 Among Beatles biographers , Alan Clayson approves of Material World 's " self @-@ production criterion closer to the style of George Martin " , after the " looser abundance " of All Things Must Pass . Within the more restrained surroundings , Clayson adds , Harrison laid claim to the title " king of rock ' n ' roll slide guitar " , in addition to giving perhaps his " most magnificent [ vocal ] performance on record " on " Who Can See It " . Rodriguez also approves of a production aesthetic that allows instruments to " sparkle " and " breathing space " for his melodies , and rates Harrison 's guitar playing as " stellar " throughout . Peter Lavezzoli describes the album as " a soulful collection of songs that feature some of Harrison 's finest singing , particularly the gorgeous Roy Orbison @-@ esque ballad ' Who Can See It ' " . 
 Leng has named Living in the Material World as his personal favourite of all of Harrison 's solo albums . According to Leng , with its combination of a defiant " protest " song in " The Day the World Gets ' Round " , the anti @-@ stardom " The Lord Loves the One " , and " perfect pop confections " in " Give Me Love " and " Don 't Let Me Wait Too Long " , Living in the Material World was the last album to capture the same clear @-@ sighted , utopian spirit that characterised the 1960s . Eder likewise welcomes Material World 's bold idealism , saying : " Even in the summer of 1973 , after years of war and strife and disillusionment , some of us were still sort of looking – to borrow a phrase from a Lennon – McCartney song – or hoping to get from them something like ' the word ' that would make us free . And George , God love him , had the temerity to actually oblige ... " 
 = = Reissues = = 
 = = = 2006 = = = 
 While solo works by Lennon , McCartney and Starr had all been remastered as part of repackaging campaigns during the 1990s and early 21st century , Harrison 's Living in the Material World was " neglected over the years " , author Bruce Spizer wrote in 2005 , an " unfortunate " situation considering the quality of its songs . On 25 September 2006 , EMI reissued the album in the UK , on CD and in a deluxe CD / DVD package , with Capitol Records ' US release following the next day . The remastered Material World featured two additional tracks , neither of which had previously been available on an album : " Deep Blue " and " Miss O 'Dell " , popular B @-@ sides , respectively , to the 1971 non @-@ album single " Bangla Desh " and " Give Me Love ( Give Me Peace on Earth ) " . The CD / DVD edition contained a 40 @-@ page full colour booklet that included extra photos from the inner @-@ gatefold shoot ( taken by Mal Evans and Barry Feinstein ) , liner notes by Kevin Howlett , and Harrison 's handwritten lyrics and comments on the songs , reproduced from I Me Mine . 
 The DVD featured a concert performance of " Give Me Love " , recorded during Harrison 's 1991 Japanese tour with Eric Clapton , and previously unreleased versions of " Miss O 'Dell " and " Sue Me , Sue You Blues " set to a slideshow of archival film . The final selection consisted of the album 's title track playing over 1973 footage of the LP being audio @-@ tested and packaged prior to shipment . While Zeth Lundy found that the deluxe edition " bestows lavish attention upon a record that may not exactly deserve it " , with the DVD " an unnecessary bonus " , Shawn Perry considered the supplementary disc to be possibly the " pièce de résistance " of the 2006 reissue , and concluded : " this package is a beautiful tribute to the late and great guitarist any Beatles and Harrison fan will cherish . " 
 = = = 2014 = = = 
 Living in the Material World was remastered again for inclusion in the Harrison box set The Apple Years 1968 – 75 , issued in September 2014 . Also available as a separate CD , the reissue reproduces Howlett 's 2006 essay and adds " Bangla Desh " as a third bonus track , after " Deep Blue " and " Miss O 'Dell " . In his preview of the 2014 reissues , for Rolling Stone , David Fricke pairs Material World with All Things Must Pass as representing " the heart of the [ box ] set " . Disc eight of The Apple Years includes the four items featured on the 2006 deluxe edition DVD . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written by George Harrison . 
 = = = Original release = = = 
 Side one 
 " Give Me Love ( Give Me Peace on Earth ) " – 3 : 36 
 " Sue Me , Sue You Blues " – 4 : 48 
 " The Light That Has Lighted the World " – 3 : 31 
 " Don 't Let Me Wait Too Long " – 2 : 57 
 " Who Can See It " – 3 : 52 
 " Living in the Material World " – 5 : 31 
 Side two 
 " The Lord Loves the One ( That Loves the Lord ) " – 4 : 34 
 " Be Here Now " – 4 : 09 
 " Try Some , Buy Some " – 4 : 08 
 " The Day the World Gets ' Round " – 2 : 53 
 " That Is All " – 3 : 43 
 = = = 2006 remaster = = = 
 Bonus tracks 
 " Deep Blue " – 3 : 47 
 " Miss O 'Dell " – 2 : 33 
 Deluxe edition DVD 
 " Give Me Love ( Give Me Peace on Earth ) " ( recorded live at Tokyo Dome on 15 December 1991 ) 
 " Miss O 'Dell " ( alternative version ) 
 " Sue Me , Sue You Blues " ( acoustic demo version ) 
 " Living in the Material World " 
 = = = 2014 remaster = = = 
 Bonus tracks 
 " Deep Blue " – 3 : 47 
 " Miss O 'Dell " – 2 : 33 
 " Bangla Desh " – 3 : 57 
 = = Personnel = = 
 George Harrison – vocals , electric and acoustic guitars , dobro , sitar , backing vocals 
 Nicky Hopkins – piano , electric piano 
 Gary Wright – organ , harmonium , electric piano , harpsichord 
 Klaus Voormann – bass , standup bass , tenor saxophone 
 Jim Keltner – drums , percussion 
 Ringo Starr – drums , percussion 
 Jim Horn – saxophones , flute , horn arrangement 
 Zakir Hussain – tabla 
 John Barham – orchestral and choral arrangements 
 Leon Russell – piano ( on " Try Some , Buy Some " ) 
 Jim Gordon – drums , tambourine ( on " Try Some , Buy Some " ) 
 Pete Ham – acoustic guitar ( on " Try Some , Buy Some " ) 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Weekly charts = = = 
 = Nature fakers controversy = 
 The nature fakers controversy was an early 20th @-@ century American literary debate highlighting the conflict between science and sentiment in popular nature writing . The debate involved important American literary , environmental and political figures . Dubbed the " War of the Naturalists " by The New York Times , it revealed seemingly irreconcilable contemporary views of the natural world : while some nature writers of the day argued as to the veracity of their examples of anthropomorphic wild animals , others questioned an animal 's ability to adapt , learn , teach , and reason . 
 The controversy arose from a new literary movement , which followed a growth of interest in the natural world beginning in the late 19th century , and in which the natural world was depicted in a compassionate rather than realistic light . Works such as Ernest Thompson Seton 's Wild Animals I Have Known ( 1898 ) and William J. Long 's School of the Woods ( 1902 ) popularized this new genre and emphasized sympathetic and individualistic animal characters . In March 1903 , naturalist and writer John Burroughs published an article entitled " Real and Sham Natural History " in the Atlantic Monthly . <unk> writers such as Seton , Long , and Charles G. D. Roberts for their seemingly fantastical representations of wildlife , he also denounced the booming genre of realistic animal fiction as " yellow journalism of the woods " . Burroughs ' targets responded in defense of their work in various publications , as did their supporters , and the resulting controversy raged in the public press for nearly six years . 
 The constant publicity given to the debate contributed to a growing distrust of the truthfulness of popular nature writing of the day , and often pitted scientist against writer . The controversy effectively ended when President Theodore Roosevelt publicly sided with Burroughs , publishing his article " Nature Fakers " in the September 1907 issue of Everybody 's Magazine . Roosevelt popularized the negative colloquialism by which the controversy would later be known to describe one who purposefully fabricates details about the natural world . The definition of the term later expanded to include those who depicted nature with excessive sentimentality . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Nature boom = = = 
 A renewed public interest in nature and its promise of aesthetic and recreational enjoyment began in the United States during the late 19th century . The country 's first national park , Yellowstone , was established in 1872 , and by 1900 it had been followed by half a dozen more . Railroads made it easy to get to the parks , and their advertising promoted the wonders of nature that could be seen courtesy of their trains . Tourists frequented the parks regularly , but there were also numerous opportunities for people to enjoy nature and outdoor recreation closer to home . City parks , such as New York City 's Central Park , became popular destinations because of their accessibility , and camps like the ones owned by the YMCA were frequented by boys and girls of all ages . 
 Wilderness protection and the conservation movement , led by figures such as John Muir , founder of the Sierra Club , also began to appear at this time . By the turn of the century , those in favor of recreational ideals of nature began to clash with conservationists such as Muir . Likewise , critics and natural scientists became skeptical of what they saw as a growing cult of nature , which was thought to wrongly champion sentimentality and aesthetics rather than scientific facts . Sympathy for animals and their survival also became a developing thought in the 19th century , due in part to wide acceptance of theories pertaining to organic evolution . In 1837 , Charles Darwin wrote in his diary that " If we choose to let conjecture run wild , then animals , our fellow brethren in pain , disease , death , suffering and famine — our slaves in the most laborious works , our companions in our amusements — they may partake of our origin in one common ancestor — we may be all melted together . " 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 As the popularity and marketability of the natural world rose during the late 19th century , books dedicated to nature came to be in great demand . One reviewer noted in 1901 that " It is a part of the progress of the day that the Nature study is coming into prominence in our schemes of education , and , beyond these , is entering into our plans for coveted diversion , yet it is a real surprise that so large and increasing a number of each season 's publications are devoted to the purpose . " Such literature was regularly published in a wide variety of subjects : children 's animal books , wilderness novels , nature guides , and travelogues were all immensely popular . The study of nature quickly became part of the public school curriculum , making nature writing increasingly profitable . As the public 's hunger for such imaginative works grew , a new genre in which nature was depicted in a compassionate , rather than realistic , light began to take form . 
 The tendency to portray animals as having human traits was not new ; Aesop 's moralistic animal tales were still popular with readers of the day , and inspired such works as Rudyard Kipling 's The Jungle Book ( 1894 ) . However , one of the features separating the turn @-@ of @-@ the @-@ century animal writers from those before them was the desire to have their animals set an example through their noble , sympathetic characteristics . Anna Sewell 's Black Beauty , for example , told the story of a gentle horse seemingly from the animal 's own point of view ; after being published in the United States by the American Humane Education Society in 1890 , Sewell 's book helped further the cause against animal cruelty . The budding animal welfare movement helped establish a climate for wider public support of wildlife conservation , and soon nature writers similarly sought to gain sympathy for wild animals — specifically those who seemingly displayed honorable human traits — by depicting them in a positive light . One popular nature writer of the day , Mabel Osgood Wright , told of wolves nobly taking their own lives after losing their mates . 
 Author and illustrator Ernest Thompson Seton published his first book , the bestselling Wild Animals I Have Known , in 1898 . The first entry in a new genre of realistic wild @-@ animal stories , Seton 's collection of short stories quickly became one of the most popular books of its day . Although he had considered himself " a naturalist of the usual type , trying merely to accumulate specimens and facts " during his early career , he later began to write factual material " in the form of romantic stories — fiction in the form of presentation , but solid in fact in their basis and their message . " The first story in the collection , " Lobo , The King of <unk> " was based upon Seton 's experience hunting wolves in the Southwest . It became a classic , setting the tone for his future works that would similarly depict animals — especially predators who were often demonized in literature — as compassionate , individualistic beings . Seton was reportedly denounced by readers for having killed Lobo , only to write about the experience ; however , as biographer Brian Morris stated , the readers ' sympathies " are directed , as Seton meant them to be , toward the wild animal , rather than against the teller of the tale " . 
 Seton 's intention in writing his stories was to " freely translate " the animals ' language into English , as they " have no speech as we understand it " . The stories were typically prefaced by the author 's strong assertion of their accuracy , and Wild Animals I Have Known marked the nature writer 's first emphasis on the perspective of a wild animal . As Canadian poet and author Charles G.D. Roberts described it , the genre focused on " the personality , individuality , mentality , of an animal , as well as its purely physical characteristics . " 
 = = Beginning of controversy ( 1903 ) = = 
 = = = " Real and Sham Natural History " = = = 
 Naturalist and writer John Burroughs ( 1837 – 1921 ) was respected for his numerous nature essays . Known as an outspoken advocate for the conservation movement in the United States , he was later described by his biographer Edward <unk> as " a literary naturalist with a duty to record his own unique perceptions of the natural world " . Burroughs believed that the nature writer must remain faithful to nature as well as the personal responses to what they witness ; he wrote in the introduction to his 1895 book Wake @-@ Robin that the " literary naturalist does not take liberties with facts ; facts are the flora upon which he lives . The more and the fresher the facts the better . " 
 When the Atlantic Monthly published a glowing review of the Reverend William J. Long 's 1902 work School of the Woods : Some Life Studies of Animal Instinct and Animal Training , Burroughs became incensed . Long had previously published six books , and while Burroughs was not pleased with the clergyman 's previous efforts , he believed this particular work was an unacceptable example of nature writing . Long insisted not only that animals demonstrated unique and individualistic behavior , unpredictable to science , but he also wrote that there was " absolutely no limit to the variety and <unk> of Nature , even in a single species . " Burroughs was not the first to take issue with the growing genre that blurred the line between fact and fiction , or the liberties it often took with the natural world ; Ernest Ingersoll also found fault with School of the Woods , stating it " would be an epoch @-@ making book in both zoology and psychology could its statements be established . " Believing that authors such as Long were deliberately misleading the public for financial gain , Burroughs decided to prove that their fantastical depictions of wild animals were not only impossible , but ultimately damaging to the general public 's understanding of nature . 
 In March 1903 , Burroughs submitted a scathing essay to the Atlantic Monthly entitled " Real and Sham Natural History " ; the editor , Bliss Perry , reportedly found the piece so " ill @-@ natured " and " peevish " that he sent it back to Burroughs for revisions . Burroughs began his article with praise for authors such as Ingersoll , Frank M. Chapman and Florence Merriam Bailey , all of whom he believed exemplified good nature writing . <unk> his own strict adherence to observed fact , Burroughs singled out four books for criticism : Seton 's Wild Animals I have Known , Roberts ' The Kindred of the Wild , William Davenport Hulbert 's Forest Neighbours , and Long 's School of the Woods . In particular he blamed Seton 's collection of stories for founding the sentimental animal story genre ; he even amended the title of the collection to Wild Animals I Alone Have Known . Further denouncing Seton 's claims that his stories featured events and behaviors he had personally witnessed , Burroughs wrote : 
 Mr. Thompson Seton says in capital letters that his stories are true , and it is this emphatic assertion that makes the judicious grieve . True as romance , true in their artistic effects , true in their power to entertain the young reader , they certainly are but true as natural history they as certainly are not ... There are no stories of animal intelligence and cunning on record , that I am aware of , that match his . 
 Chief among Burroughs ' complaints was Long 's questioning of the role of instinct in animal learning , something that Burroughs and many scientists of the day accepted without doubt . Long had written that after many years of studying wild animals , he was " convinced that instinct plays a much smaller part than we have supposed ; that an animal 's success or failure in the ceaseless struggle for life depends , not upon instinct , but upon the kind of training which the animal learns from its mother . " In reply to this assertion , Burroughs wrote in " Real and Sham Natural History " : " The crows do not train their young . They have no fortresses , or schools , or colleges , or examining boards , or diplomas , or medals of honor , or hospitals , or churches , or telephones , or postal deliveries , or anything of the sort . Indeed , the poorest backwoods hamlet has more of the appurtenances of civilization than the best organized crow or other wild animal community in the land ! " Burroughs summed up by deeming Long a fraud , stating that his " book reads like that of a man who has really never been to the woods , but who sits in his study and cooks up these yarns from things he has read in Forest and Stream , or in other sporting journals . Of real observation there is hardly a vestige in his book ; of deliberate trifling with natural history there is no end " . 
 Soon after the publication of Burroughs ' article , the Atlantic Monthly began receiving responses from readers . Among the many letters written in support for Burroughs ' assertions was an article published in the Boston Evening Transcript in defense of Long 's reputation as both a writer and a respected man of the cloth . Written by fellow clergyman Charles Prescott Daniels , the article , which was titled " Discord in the Forest : John Burroughs vs. William J. Long " , suggested that Burroughs left " the reader with a kinder feeling for Mr. Long than for Mr. Burroughs , and [ left ] him , too , with a suspicion that , after all , the beasts and birds will forgive Mr. Long for having so amiably misrepresented them . " 
 = = = Long 's response = = = 
 Many of the authors Burroughs criticized in his essays chose not to issue direct rebuttals . As Jack London would later write , they chose to simply " climb a tree and let the cataclysm go by " . Seton , who had previously met Burroughs and had a great deal of respect for the elder naturalist , was confident enough in his own reputation so as not to stage a public reply . Other authors wrote to both him and Burroughs in Seton 's defense , however ; author and editor Hamlin Garland both wrote to Burroughs and spoke to him personally in this regard , saying that Seton 's " stories are based on careful observation . " Three weeks after Burroughs ' article appeared in the Atlantic Monthly he and Seton met at a literary dinner given by Andrew Carnegie ; while accounts of the meeting vary , the two men seemed to make amends . 
 William J. Long , on the other hand , readily became a publicly vocal enemy of the naturalist after receiving much of Burroughs ' initial criticism . A Congregationalist minister from Massachusetts , Long was an amateur naturalist and avid camper who spent summers hiking in Canada . Shortly after Burroughs published his initial essay , Long was reported to have previously resigned from his parish so as to devote himself to writing and lecturing on nature full @-@ time . Rather than be discouraged by Burroughs ' criticism — which included the other man calling Long " the worst of these nature @-@ writing offenders " — within weeks of the publication of " Real and Sham Natural History " , Long submitted a stern reply to the Boston Evening Transcript . Two months later , he published a longer article titled " The Modern School of Nature @-@ Study and its Critics " in the North American Review . 
 In the latter essay , Long insisted that there was a difference between the study of nature and the study of science ; whereas science concerned itself with laws and generalizations , the study of nature was far more complex as it allowed for the recognition of individual life forms . He wrote , " The difference between Nature and Science is the difference between a man who loves animals , and so understands them , and the man who studies Zoology ; it is the difference between the woman who cherishes her old @-@ fashioned flower @-@ garden and the professor who lectures on Botany in a college class @-@ room . " Long 's intention was to divide the old school naturalists ( which included Burroughs among its members ) from what he saw as the newly formed school , of which he was part , whose members were capable of seeing animals as individuals . Because he wrote personal nature essays , and not scientific reports , Long believed that his readers required from him " not simply eyes and ears and a note @-@ book ; but insight , imagination , and , above all , an intense human sympathy , by which alone the inner life of an animal becomes luminous , and without which the living creatures are little better than stuffed specimens " . 
 While his explanation was found to be credible by some readers , Long 's critics faulted an example he gave of two orioles he had seen building a nest outside his window . Intended to prove his thesis about the unpredictable and adaptive nature of wild animals , he wrote of how the pair " plainly deliberated " their elaborate swinging nest that had been made out of three sticks fastened together ; when finished , the birds then " tied a single knot at the extreme end " of a dangling string so it would not unravel over time . Burroughs and his allies were again incensed at Long 's insistence that what he wrote was based entirely upon fact , and quickly responded with criticism ; Burroughs ' written reply reportedly proved to be almost too harsh for publication . Atlantic Monthly did not wish to escalate the debate , so it was ultimately published by Century Magazine . Evoking Long 's story of the orioles , Burroughs wrote , " After such an example as this , how long will it be before the water @-@ birds will be building little rush cradles for their young or rush boats driven about the ponds and lakes by means of leafy sails , or before Jenny Wren will be living in a log cabin of her own construction ? " 
 = = Escalation ( 1903 – 1904 ) = = 
 = = = Animal surgery = = = 
 Threatened financially by Burroughs ' condemnation , Long 's publishers came to their client 's defense by distributing a pamphlet defending his positions . In late 1903 , Long published a new book titled A Little Brother to the Bear . In the preface , he wrote : " Except where it is plainly stated otherwise , all the incidents and observations have passed under my own eyes and have been confirmed later by other observers ... I have simply tried to make all these animals as interesting to the reader as they were to me when I discovered them . " While The New York Times reviewed it favorably , pointing out its " close observation and loving attention to the details of wood life " , Long 's critics were quick to note a number of propositions regarding wildlife . An essay in the book titled " Animal Surgery " , in which Long wrote of various animals ' ability to treat and mend their own injuries , particularly riled his critics . He told of how animals such as muskrat , beaver and bear were capable of intentionally bandaging their wounds and stumps of amputated limbs by coating them with materials such as tree resin or clay to keep the injury clean . The example that received the greatest attention was the story about a " woodcock genius " who set his own broken leg and applied a cast to the injury : 
 At first he took soft clay in his bill from the edge of the water and seemed to be smearing it on one leg near the knee . Then he fluttered away on one foot for a short distance and seemed to be pulling tiny roots and fibers of grass , which he worked into the clay that he had already smeared on his leg . Again he took some clay and plastered it over the fibers , putting on more and more till I could plainly see the enlargement , working away with strange , silent <unk> for fully fifteen minutes , while I watched and wondered , scarce believing my eyes . Then he stood perfectly still for a full hour under an overhanging sod , where the eye could with difficulty find him , his only motion meanwhile being an occasional rubbing and smoothing of the clay bandage with his bill , until it hardened enough to suit him , whereupon he fluttered away from the brook and disappeared in the thick woods . 
 Long 's theories about animal surgery garnered negative attention from the scientific community as well as the literary ; biologist William Morton Wheeler wrote to Science in February 1904 that Long 's story was " a series of anecdotes which for rank and impossible humanization of the animal can hardly be surpassed . " Other scientists agreed about the <unk> of Long 's claims , and publicly rebuked him for not providing evidence as to his observations in a scientifically @-@ accepted format . Long responded in turn , insisting that " If scientists and comparative @-@ psychologists are honestly looking for new facts in the animal world , I have enough to fill several regular editions of Science , every one of which is supported not only by my own personal observation , but by the testimony of other honest men whose word can be taken without hesitation . " As to the woodcock story , Long provided several accounts from other men who had witnessed as much ; an Ohio man , for example , reportedly found upon shooting a similar bird that it " had evidently broken its leg above the knee joint . There was a bandage around it , composed of a hard clay @-@ like substance , interwoven with grass or a woody fiber of some kind . The bone seemed to have been set properly and had knit perfectly . " None of Long 's witnesses were able to provide specimens for study , however , and Science followed Long 's essay with the note , " We Hope that this discussion will not be carried further . " 
 = = = Animal psychology = = = 
 <unk> on his previous clashes with Long in regard to an animal 's ability to learn behaviors , Burroughs began to focus the ire of his essay @-@ writing on those who upheld the idea of animal psychology . In a series of articles published in Century Magazine , he steadfastly argued that animals functioned on little more than instinct and a very limited ability to learn from experience . He wrote that creatures , unlike humans , are " rational without reason , and wise without understanding . " Although mainly repeating his earlier points , one of Burroughs ' essays was accompanied by a cartoon parodying Long 's School of the Woods ; dubbed " A Lesson in Wisdom " , it showed Mother Nature sitting in a field surrounded by five foxes who look on as she reads from a book titled The Fox Who Lost His Tail in the Trap . 
 The belief that animals were intelligent enough to learn and reason , much like a human , was largely born from Darwin 's assertion of the evolutionary link between humans and animals . Beginning in the late 19th century and into the early 20th century , the progression from the cause of animal welfare — due to the budding belief that animals could feel pain and suffering — to that of an animal 's mental capacity was readily made in popular nature writing . Therefore , Long was not the first to write of the learned intelligence of animals . Seton often stressed in his stories the wit of the animals he witnessed , as well as the fact that most of them had been " taught " survival skills by either their mothers or their pack leaders . Other writers supported the idea of animal education : Ernest Ingersoll wrote of " morning lessons " in hunting for nuts , and respected bird watcher Olive Thorne Miller described several different teaching endeavors , such as a music lesson taught from one mother bird to her chicks . Miller would also suggest , although part in jest , that even some of the flowers were intelligent . 
 = = Controversy dies down ( 1904 – 1905 ) = = 
 Largely silent until then , in 1904 both Seton and Roberts made small efforts to defend their brand of nature writing from its critics , mainly Burroughs . In the preface to his new book The Watchers of the Trails , Roberts specifically responded to Burroughs ' criticism by carefully pointing out that his stories were " avowedly fiction " . However , he continued : " They are , at the same time , true , in that the material of which they are moulded consists of facts " . Later that year , Century Magazine published Seton 's only public response to Burroughs ' criticisms , especially those made in the previous year 's Atlantic Monthly article in which the naturalist branded Seton the originator of the faulty genre . Seton 's response was in the form of a lighthearted tale about a critic named Little Mucky — obviously meant to parody Burroughs himself — who climbs a hill called Big Periodic , only to throw mud at a newcomer who attracts attention away from him . The moral of the story , Seton wrote , was that " <unk> is a poisonous substitute for fame . " 
 Despite the best efforts of the press , the debate began to die down in late 1904 . In December that year , after suffering from ailing eyesight for several years , Long went temporarily blind at the age of 47 . Despite this setback , he continued to write ; in early 1905 he began publishing a series of essays in Harper 's Monthly under the pseudonym Peter Rabbit ; told from the point of view of the " author " , the essays commented upon the human condition , animal intelligence , and the controversy first begun by Burroughs two years prior . The essays were published a year later in a collection titled Brier @-@ Patch Philosophy . This book included the dedication : " To those who have found Their Own World to be something of a Brier @-@ Patch the Rabbit <unk> his little book of Cheerful Philosophy . " 
 Burroughs continued to publicly disagree with Long and his allies , and a number of his essays dedicated to " sham nature history " were collected in the volume Ways of Nature , published in late 1905 . Admitting that his authorial tone had changed since 1903 , he wrote in the preface that " My readers will find this volume quite a departure in certain ways from the tone and spirit of my previous books , especially in regard to the subject of animal intelligence . Heretofore I have made the most of every gleam of intelligence of bird or four @-@ footed beast that came under my observation , often , I fancy , making too much of it , and giving the wild creatures credit for more ' sense ' than they really possessed . " Mabel Osgood Wright weighed in on the debate in a 1905 essay titled " Nature as a Field for Fiction " , in which she criticized both sides . Believing that nature writing could imbue animal characters with human qualities in order to better connect with the reader on an emotional level , Wright argued that nature writing should nonetheless strive to be factual and not fantastical . 
 Although Roberts had largely escaped criticism for his previous work , his novel Red Fox attracted attention from Burroughs and his allies after its publication in 1906 . The work contains stories relating to a single animal , the eponymous Red Fox who was described by the author as " fairly typical , both in his characteristics and in the experiences that befall him , in spite of the fact that he is stronger and cleverer than the average run of foxes . " Burroughs ' critique of the book began by expressing his admiration for Roberts ' " genius " , but again stressed his belief that animals were governed by instinct , rather than instruction or intuition . He pointed to particular passages , such as when the fox escaped a group of hounds by running across the backs of sheep on a field , as disingenuous and misleading . 
 = = Roosevelt 's involvement = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ 1907 = = = 
 President Theodore Roosevelt was a well @-@ publicized nature @-@ enthusiast , known for his grand hunting expeditions . While he admired the natural world , and the animals who inhabited it , he believed that animals served a singular purpose : to satisfy human needs , especially in the name of progress . Roosevelt had been following the debate in newspaper articles and magazines with great interest , and as a result he became a friend and confidant of John Burroughs ; shortly after Burroughs ' first article condemning popular nature writers as sham naturalists , Roosevelt sent him a letter of support as well as an invitation to travel west in each other 's company . In April 1903 , Roosevelt and Burroughs explored Yellowstone National Park and its surrounding areas together . 
 In late 1905 , Roosevelt received a copy of Long 's book Northern Trails from the publisher . Based upon the author 's travels in Canada , most of the stories involved a noble , white wolf named Wayeeses . As in other works , Long asserted that " every incident in this wolf 's life , from his grasshopper hunting to the cunning caribou chase , and from the den in the rocks to the meeting of wolf and children on the storm @-@ swept barrens , is minutely true in fact , and is based squarely upon my own observations and that of my Indians . " While Roosevelt reportedly enjoyed a majority of the book — he even read it aloud to his children — he found fault with Long 's dramatic description of how a wolf killed caribou by piercing the animal 's heart with its teeth . " A terrific rush , " Long wrote in Northern Trails , " a quick snap under the stag 's chest just behind the fore legs , where the heart lay " . Drawing upon his own extensive hunting experience , Roosevelt wrote confidentially to the book 's publisher about Long 's description being " sheer nonsense " , concluding that it " is so very unusual " and anatomically impossible that it could not be true . In his letter , of which he also sent a copy to Burroughs , Roosevelt pointed out the physical difficulty a wolf would have if attempting to kill its prey in such a manner , while also commenting upon the unlikeliness of other wolf stories written by Long . 
 Burroughs agreed with the President 's assertions , and urged him to comment publicly on the subject , although the other man demurred . When Roosevelt published Outdoor Pastimes of an American Hunter in October 1905 , however , he not only dedicated it to the elder naturalist , but he also made his first public foray in what would become known as the nature fakers controversy : " I wish to express my hearty appreciation of your warfare against the sham nature @-@ writers — those whom you have called ' the yellow journalists of the woods ' ... You in your own person have illustrated what can be done by the lover of nature who has trained himself to keen observation , who describes accurately what is thus observed , and who , finally , possesses the additional gift of writing with charm and interest . " 
 = = = " Nature Fakers " = = = 
 After four years of privately denouncing the popular nature writers in letters and conversation , Roosevelt decided to weigh in publicly ; while alerting Burroughs that he had finally broken his silence , he wrote : " I know that as President I ought not to do this " . He had given an interview to journalist Edward B. Clark , who quoted Roosevelt in the article " Roosevelt on the Nature <unk> " in the June 1907 issue of Everybody 's Magazine . Roosevelt not only spoke out against Long , but other authors like Jack London and Roberts , who wrote what he called " ' unnatural ' history " . Roosevelt popularized the term " nature faker " over Clark 's original spelling , and defined it in his essay as " an object of derision to every scientist worthy of the name , to every real lover of the wilderness , to every faunal naturalist , to every true hunter or nature lover . But it is evident that [ the nature faker ] completely deceives many good people who are wholly ignorant of wild life . Sometimes he draws on his own imagination for his fictions ; sometimes he gets them second @-@ hand from irresponsible guides or trappers or Indians . " He voiced displeasure with and disbelief of London 's descriptions of dog fighting in White Fang , as well as Long 's stories about Wayeeses the wolf taking down prey ; Roosevelt was so specific as to debate the depicted outcome of the fights based on the size of the animals involved . Long 's books in particular were deemed a " genuine crime " , especially against the country 's children . Fearing that a curriculum including sentimental nature stories would corrupt young children , Roosevelt wrote : " As for the matter of giving these books to children for the purpose of teaching them the facts of natural history — why , it 's an outrage . " 
 Not long after Roosevelt 's views were made public , Long responded with vigor , and the resulting publicity started the controversy anew . He began by sending a private letter to the President , which he later released to the press , informing Roosevelt that he would soon regret his " foolish words ... With all my soul I regret this necessity and shrink from it , but you have brought it upon yourself . " In an interview with The New York Times , Long called Roosevelt " cowardly " and the article " venomous " , but his main criticism stemmed from the President 's status as a " <unk> " ; Roosevelt , Long claimed , " has no sympathy with any brand of nature study except his own . " While a number of scientists wrote in support of Roosevelt and his position , Long produced several witnesses to prove his claims ; to combat one of Roosevelt 's specific complaints , Long provided a statement from " a full @-@ blooded Sioux Indian " who declared that wolves in the area where Wayeeses was said to live were known to attack prey in the chest . Long also insisted that he himself had come upon the remains of a deer slain in a similar way . 
 Long 's most effective tactic against Roosevelt , however , was not to argue biological matters , but to attack the President 's motives in becoming involved in such a debate . In reference to Roosevelt 's published works describing his hunting expeditions , Long wrote : " I find after carefully reading two of his big books that every time he gets near the heart of a wild thing he invariably puts a bullet through it . " The Boston Globe published an article titled " President a Slayer Not Lover of Animals " , while the same missive was called " Long Will Combat Roosevelt Until Latter is <unk> " in Philadelphia 's Public Ledger ; in it , Long wrote : " Roosevelt is a man who takes savage delight in whooping through the woods killing everything in sight . " He continued , " The idea of Mr. Roosevelt assuming the part of a naturalist is absurd . He is a hunter " . 
 Not everyone took the President 's involvement in the controversy seriously ; he was often included in satirical cartoons of the day , pointing to the superficial and tedious disagreements for which the writers lambasted one another . Writing in the June 8 , 1907 issue of the Outlook , editor Lyman Abbot stated that Roosevelt 's desire to become embroiled in such a debate stemmed from his " extraordinary vitality , coupled with his unusual interest in all that concerns human welfare " making " it very difficult for him to keep silence in the presence of anything which he thinks injurious to his fellow @-@ men . " The President 's participation in the controversy attested to its magnitude , however ; as one observer wrote , " From an insignificant smudge [ the issue ] has become a roaring blaze and its sparks are kindling throughout the land . " 
 Roosevelt did not at first respond to Long 's claims , allegedly considering the author " too small game to shoot twice . " He did , however , write to Burroughs that he had " no quarrel with Mr. Long for the conclusions he draws from the facts . Our quarrel with him is because he invents the facts . " Burroughs proceeded to publicly defend the President against Long 's attacks , condemning him and the expert witnesses Long produced to support his claims about the events and behaviors he depicted in his works . Newspapers around the country continuously published interviews with the two naturalists , while comedic depictions of the controversy and its participants were becoming popular with readers . One such parody referred to a non @-@ existent book called How to Tell the Animals from the Wild Flowers , including an illustration which depicted an anthropomorphic " Dandy Lion " with a cane , top hat and monocle . This joke inspired a similarly satirical book , which was published under the title How to Tell the Birds from the Flowers ; a collection of humorous illustrations and poems by physicist and children 's author Robert Williams Wood , the work included pairings of birds and their corresponding flowers , emphasizing their visual similarities . Making a thinly veiled reference to the much publicized controversy surrounding those authors who were now called " nature fakers " , the book concludes : " I have freely drawn upon / The works of Gray and Audubon , / Avoiding though the frequent blunders / Of those who study Nature 's wonders . " 
 = = End of controversy and aftermath = = 
 Seeing that his initial pronouncement did nothing to quell the controversy surrounding the faults of popular nature writing , Roosevelt finally responded to Long 's ongoing criticism in the fall of 1907 . His article , which was written under his own name and simply titled " Nature Fakers " , was published in the September issue of Everybody 's Magazine . Beginning with a list of nature writers that the President admired and felt best represented the genre ( Burroughs , Muir , and Olive Thorne Miller , among others ) , he soon fell into criticizing the " yellow journalists of the woods " who " can easily believe three impossible things before breakfast ; and they do not mind in the least if the impossibilities are mutually contradictory " . While he focused on the " nature fakers " , especially Long , he shifted the focus of his attack to place responsibility not on the authors , but on their publishers and the school boards who regularly accepted their works for reading material . He wrote : 
 Our quarrel is not with these men , but with those who give them their chance . We who believe in the study of nature feel that a real knowledge and appreciation of wild things , of trees , flowers , birds , and of the grim and crafty creatures of the wilderness , give an added beauty and health to life . Therefore we abhor deliberate or reckless untruth in this study as much as in any other ; and therefore we feel that a grave wrong is committed by all who , holding a position that entitles them to respect , yet condone and encourage such untruth . 
 With Roosevelt 's final public word on the matter , the controversy began to die down in earnest , although its key players continued to comment on the debate 's major points for the next few years . The New York Times favored the President 's position in an editorial titled " The War of the Naturalists " , while some still supported Long and his literary efforts . Long was traveling in Maine when Roosevelt 's " Nature Fakers " article was published , and did not respond to the criticisms against him with his past vigor . He later wrote that " the only fakir in the whole controversy , in my judgment , is the big fakir at Washington " . Long 's literary reputation steadily declined , although he continued to write and publish well into the early 1950s . For his remaining life , Burroughs continued to write disparagingly about the effect of sentimental animal stories . In his 1908 book Leaf And <unk> , he wrote : 
 A great many intelligent persons tolerate or encourage our fake natural history on the ground that they find it entertaining , and that it interests the school @-@ children in the wild life about them . Is the truth , then , without value for its own sake ? What would these good people think of a United States school history that took the same liberties with facts that some of our nature writers do : that , for instance , made Washington take his army over the Delaware in balloons , or in sleighs on the solid ice with bands playing ; or that made Lincoln a victim of the Evil Eye ; or that portrayed his slayer as a self @-@ sacrificing hero ; or that represented the little Monitor that eventful day on Hampton Roads as diving under the Merrimac and tossing it ashore on its beak ? 
 The nature fakers take just this kind of liberties with the facts of our natural history . The young reader finds it entertaining , no doubt , but is this sufficient justification ? 
 Also in 1908 , Jack London broke his silence on his condemnation during the controversy by publishing an essay in Collier 's Weekly entitled " The Other Animals " . Directly addressing Roosevelt 's past criticism of his novels , London called the President " <unk> " and " amateur " . He further wrote : " I have been guilty of writing two animal — two books about dogs . The writing of these two stories , on my part , was in truth a protest against the ' humanizing ' of animals , of which it seemed to me several ' animal writers ' had been profoundly guilty . Time and again , and many times , in my narratives , I wrote , speaking of my dog @-@ heroes : ' He did not think these things ; he merely did them , ' etc . And I did this repeatedly , to the clogging of my narrative and in violation of my artistic canons ; and I did it in order to hammer into the average human understanding that these dog @-@ heroes of mine were not directed by abstract reasoning , but by instinct , sensation , and emotion , and by simple reasoning . Also , I endeavored to make my stories in line with the facts of evolution ; I hewed them to the mark set by scientific research , and awoke , one day , to find myself bundled neck and crop into the camp of the nature @-@ fakers . " 
 Hoping to establish his credentials once and for all as an expert field naturalist , Ernest Thompson Seton spent several years of the controversy working diligently on his two @-@ volume work Life @-@ Histories of Northern Animals , which was published in 1909 . After an enlarged edition of the book was published as Lives of Game Animals , Seton was ironically awarded the Burroughs Medal in 1927 , a prize named after the venerable naturalist who had once so criticized Seton 's work . 
 Over time , the term " nature faker " began to take on a new meaning ; rather than describing someone who purposefully told false stories about animals , it became synonymous with those who overly sentimentalized the natural world . In 1910 , journalist and writer Richard Harding Davis published a short story titled " The Nature <unk> " in Collier 's Weekly , which used the negative colloquialism to refer to the lead character , Herrick , a hapless nature sentimentalist . Animation pioneer John R. Bray also showcased this new definition of " nature faker " while satirizing Roosevelt in two silent cartoons called " Colonel <unk> Liar , Nature <unk> " ( 1915 and 1924 ) . 
 The controversy had far @-@ reaching effects in literary and scientific circles , and marked the only time that a President of the United States weighed in as a " literary and cultural critic — specifically , as an <unk> . " Though blind naturalist and author Clarence Hawkes deemed the literary debate " a veritable tempest in the teapot " , after the controversy had died down , he came to believe " if I ever make a bad break in regard to my natural history statements that I was doomed . " The author Ralph H. <unk> wrote in his 1990 work The Nature Fakers : Wildlife , Science & Sentiment , the nature fakers controversy " was far more than a clash over the accuracy of animal stories or the question of whether animals can reason " ; rather , the debate signified the changing sensibilities of writers and readers at the turn of the 20th century . 
 = We Can 't Stop = 
 " We Can 't Stop " is a song by American recording artist Miley Cyrus , taken from her fourth studio album Bangerz ( 2013 ) . It was released on June 3 , 2013 by RCA Records as the lead single from the album . The song was written and produced by Mike Will Made It , P @-@ Nasty , and Rock City , with additional songwriting provided by Cyrus , Doug E. Fresh , and Slick Rick . " We Can 't Stop " is a pop and R & B song that talks of a house party and recreational drug use . 
 " We Can 't Stop " received mixed reviews from music critics , who appreciated its overall production but were scathing towards its lyrical content . It peaked at number two on the Billboard Hot 100 , and tied her earlier track " Party in the U.S.A. " ( 2009 ) as her highest @-@ peaking single in the country at the time . As of January 2014 , it had sold over two million copies in the United States . The song experienced varying success internationally ; it reached the peak position in countries including New Zealand and the United Kingdom , and peaked moderately in several national record charts in Europe . 
 An accompanying music video for " We Can 't Stop " was released on June 19 , 2013 . It received generally mixed reviews from critics , who were divided in their opinions regarding Cyrus ' increasingly provocative image . With 10 @.@ 7 million views in the first twenty @-@ four hours of its release , the clip held the record for having the most views in that time @-@ frame across Vevo platforms ; after reaching 100 million views within thirty @-@ seven days , it also set the record for being the fastest music video to attain a Vevo certification . ( Both records were eventually broken by the music video for Cyrus ' follow @-@ up single " Wrecking Ball " in September 2013 . ) " We Can 't Stop " was additionally promoted with a highly controversial performance during the 2013 MTV Video Music Awards . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 2012 , Cyrus announced plans to focus on her film career , effectively putting her musical endeavors on hiatus . That year , she appeared in the films LOL and So Undercover . She was also confirmed as a primary voice actress in the feature film Hotel Transylvania , but dropped out of the project to coordinate a musical comeback . In January 2013 , Cyrus ended her recording contract with Hollywood Records , under which she released the studio albums Meet Miley Cyrus ( 2007 ) , Breakout ( 2008 ) , Can 't Be Tamed ( 2010 ) , and the extended play ( EP ) The Time of Our Lives ( 2009 ) . Later that month , she signed a recording contract with RCA Records . In March , she confirmed that her fourth studio album would be released by the end of 2013 . 
 Production duo Rock City stated that " We Can 't Stop " was originally written with recording artist Rihanna in mind before offering it to record producer Mike Will Made It , who ultimately offered it to Cyrus . They felt that " this could be somebody ’ s first single " , and decided against Rihanna because of the commercial success of her track " Diamonds " in 2012 . Cyrus commented that " it really just turned out to be perfect and exactly what I wanted , and exactly what I wanted my first sound to be , and my first look to be " . 
 During the 2013 Billboard Music Awards on May 19 , 2013 , Cyrus announced that the track would be released on June 3 . The cover artwork for " We Can 't Stop " was unveiled in a billboard in Times Square on May 28 . It shows the arms of two people holding Solo Cups , with several people in the background ; Cyrus is notably absent from the image . Cyrus herself appeared on On Air with Ryan Seacrest on June 3 to premiere the track on the radio program , hosted by Ryan Seacrest . 
 Lena Horowitz 's novel Dancing with Molly , about a girl 's experiences with MDMA and the short @-@ term and long @-@ term effects it has on her life , takes its title from a lyric of Cyrus 's song . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " We Can 't Stop " is a mid @-@ tempo pop and R & B song . It is written in the key of E major and Cyrus ' vocals span two octaves , from the low note of B2 to a high F # 5 , and follows the chord progression E — G # m — C # m — A. The track also includes a sample of the track " La Di Da Di " by Doug E. Fresh and MC Ricky D. John Kennedy of Vibe compared the track to the works of Rihanna . 
 Cyrus has stated that " We Can 't Stop " represents " where I 'm at in my life now " . Lyrically , the track describes a house party , as mentioned in the opening lines " It 's our party , we can do what we want / It 's our party , we can say what we want / It 's our party , we can love who we want / We can kiss who we want / We can live how we want " . It also makes several references to recreational drug use , including " dancing with molly " , using a slang term for ecstasy , and " trying to get a line [ of cocaine ] in the bathroom " . After initial confusion whether the former lyric was " dancing with molly " or " dancing with Miley " , Cyrus clarified that she was referring to ecstasy , commenting that " if you ’ re aged ten it ’ s ' Miley ' , if you know what I 'm talking about then you know . I just wanted it to be played on the radio and they ’ ve already had to edit it so much . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " We Can 't Stop " received mixed reviews from music critics , who appreciated its overall production but were negative towards its lyrical content . Adam Carlson of Entertainment Weekly provided a favorable review , writing that the lyrics were questionable but " infectious " , adding that it reminded him of " Kesha on <unk> . " Sam Lansky from Idolator noted that stands apart from other songs recently played on mainstream radio , adding that it " just feels strange , and kind of wonderful " , while Los Angeles Times ' Mikael Woods labeled it " the calmest , most clear @-@ eyed rebel yell since Janet Jackson 's " Control . " Sean Daly of Tampa Bay Times and Wall Street Journal staff both appreciated the catchy melody , while Lyndsey Parker from Yahoo ! Music felt that " We Can 't Stop " acted as a sequel to Cyrus ' earlier single " Party in the U.S.A. " , with the difference that " she 's just partying a little harder now . " 
 However , in a more mixed review , Randall Roberts of Los Angeles Times felt that the song " seems as if it were written by an ninth @-@ grader imagining her rebellious college sister ’ s lifestyle " and felt that it lacked creativity within Cyrus ' catalog . Writing for Rolling Stone , Jon Dolan was skeptical of Cyrus ' increasingly provocative image , stating that the lyrics in the chorus would be " an odd fit for any singer " and opining that " there 's still a bit too much Disney in her voice to fill the track . " Naomi <unk> of The Fader praised the song , writing , " Cyrus said in her recent MTV doc ( Miley : The Movement ) , that she chose it to be her album 's first single : ' Not everyone came to me and said okay , you 've got the first single . I had to say no , I know this is it and I 'll go to battle if I have to , against anyone who doesn 't believe in it . Now I have this freedom to do whatever I want , because people trust me . ' She was right about this one . The song 's straightforward party is now tied to a sordid universe of <unk> the official video and the VMA performance . " Common Sense Media gave the song two stars out of five saying that " After listening to the weird intro to " We Can 't Stop " you 'll kind of wish the song did just stop right there . " 
 " We Can 't Stop " won the award for " Choice Summer Song " and was nominated for " Choice Single : Female Artist " at the 2013 Teen Choice Awards in August . In December , Billboard critics listed it as the best song of 2013 for being " one of the bolder musical choices in recent memory , and that risk paid off tremendously . " The Village Voice 's Pazz & Jop annual critics ' poll ranked " We Can 't Stop " at number nine on their poll to find the best music of 2013 . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 In the United States , " We Can 't Stop " debuted at number 11 on the Billboard Hot 100 with first @-@ week sales of 214 @,@ 000 downloads . In its seventh week on the chart , the track reached number two , a spot it would maintain for three weeks . ( Stuck behind Robin Thicke 's Blurred Lines for the entire duration . ) This peak allowed " We Can 't Stop " to tie with " Party in the U.S.A. " as Cyrus ' highest @-@ peaking single in the country at the time . As of December 2014 , the song has sold 3 @,@ 280 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . " We Can 't Stop " peaked at number 3 on the Canadian Hot 100 , and has been certified platinum by Music Canada . 
 " We Can 't Stop " experienced varying commercial success throughout Europe . In the United Kingdom , it debuted at the top of the UK Singles Chart on August 11 , 2013 ― for the week ending date August 17 , 2013 ― becoming her first top @-@ ten success and number @-@ one hit in Britain . She also became the first Disney star to top the charts in that country . It has since been certified gold by the British Phonographic Industry . In Austria , " We Can 't Stop " peaked at number eight on the Ö3 Austria Top 40 ; it also peaked at numbers 11 and 20 on the Belgian Ultratop in Wallonia and Flanders , respectively . " We Can 't Stop " charted at number 11 on the Danish Tracklisten , where it was also recognized with a platinum certification . The song charted at number three on the Norwegian VG @-@ lista , and number five on both the Spanish Singles Chart and the Swedish Sverigetopplistan , number seven on the Irish Singles Chart , and number nine in the Czech Republic . The track also reached number ten on The Official Lebanese Top 20 . 
 In other parts of the continent , " We Can 't Stop " charted in the lower ends of national record charts . The track reached number 15 on The Official Finnish Charts , number 16 on the German Media Control Charts , and number 19 in both Slovakia and on the Swiss Hitparade . It peaked at numbers 26 , 33 , and 48 on the French SNEP , Italian FIMI , and Dutch Single Top 100 , respectively . In Oceania , " We Can 't Stop " peaked at numbers one and four on the Australian ARIA Charts and The Official New Zealand Music Chart , respectively . It was certified triple @-@ platinum in the former territory , and platinum in the latter . In Asia , the song reached number 7 on the Japan Hot 100 and number 23 on the South Korean Gaon Chart . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Summary = = = 
 An accompanying music video for " We Can 't Stop " was directed by Diane Martel , and was premiered through Vevo on June 19 , 2013 . The clip depicts an ongoing house party , where guests are engaging in numerous bizarre actions . Among the activities taking place are the creation of a mountain made of white bread , the kicking of a skull made of french fries , and the simulated slicing of a woman 's fingers . Product placement is also commonplace as Cyrus amplifies her Beats Pill speaker and applies her EOS lip balm . A director 's cut of the music video was released on July 29 , which Carl Williott of Idolator noted featured " more simulated sex , one oral sex gesture near the end and actually less Miley tongue overall . " 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The clip received generally mixed reviews from critics , who were divided in their opinions regarding Cyrus ' increasingly provocative image . Jeremy <unk> from Mashable compared its concept to that of " Just Dance " by Lady Gaga , while James Montgomery of MTV News noted similarities to the music videos for " Dirrty " by Christina Aguilera and " Criminal " by Fiona Apple . Jason Lipshutz of Billboard provided a favorable review , calling it " fantastically unhinged and purposefully button @-@ pushing " , while Bonnie Fuller from The Huffington Post praised the " high @-@ spirited celebration of the freedom that young women are blessed with today to fully explore and celebrate their sexuality . " On their list of the ten best music videos of 2013 , Rolling Stone placed " We Can 't Stop " at number one , describing it as a " masterpiece for the ages " . 
 Writing for The Washington Post , Cara Kelly provided a mixed review , feeling that the video recalled " episodes of Girls mashed with Rita Ora and Chanel West Coast . " Patrick Ryan from USA Today called the clip a " bizarre , entertaining but arguably desperate effort " , while Haley Dodd from RyanSeacrest.com thought that the video presented " maybe a little too much " of Cyrus ' " edgier side " . It was later nominated for Best Pop Video , Best Female Video , Best Editing , and Best Song of the Summer for the 2013 MTV Video Music Awards . 
 With 10 @.@ 7 million views in the first twenty @-@ four hours of its release , the clip held the record for having the most views in that time @-@ frame across Vevo platforms . However , she was later surpassed by " Best Song Ever " by One Direction , with generated 10 @.@ 9 million views in July . After reaching 100 million views in thirty @-@ seven days , it also set the record for being the fastest music video to attain a Vevo certification . Both records were eventually broken by the music video for Cyrus ' follow @-@ up single " Wrecking Ball " in September ; it reached 19 @.@ 3 million first @-@ day views and passed 100 million views in six days . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Cyrus first performed " We Can 't Stop " at Jimmy Kimmel Live ! on June 26 , 2013 and at Good Morning America the following day . In September 2013 , Cyrus sang " We Can 't Stop " on Schlag den Raab in Germany , Le Grand Journal in France , and Alan Carr : Chatty Man in England . On September 21 , she sang twice at iHeartRadio Music Festival in Las Vegas , in the afternoon at festival village and in the evening at MGM Grand Garden Arena . Despite generating media attention for a provocative wardrobe , the performance was considered to be " fairly tame considering the VMAs . " 
 On October 5 , Cyrus served as the host and musical guest during an episode of Saturday Night Live , and performed an acoustic version of " We Can 't Stop " . The following Monday , Cyrus performed " We Can 't Stop " on Today as part of their Toyota Concert Series . She appeared on Late Night with Jimmy Fallon and The Ellen DeGeneres Show later that month , and sang the track during both programs . In November , Cyrus traveled to Europe again to sing " We Can 't Stop " at the 2013 MTV Europe Music Awards in Amsterdam on November 10 ; she garnered media attention for smoking a joint of marijuana on @-@ stage . In December , she performed at Jingle Ball concerts in Los Angeles ( KIIS @-@ FM Jingle Ball ) , Saint Paul , Atlanta , New York City , Washington , D.C. , Tampa and Sunrise . An episode of MTV Unplugged starring Cyrus premiered through MTV on January 29 , 2014 ; Madonna appeared as a surprise guest that evening to sing an acoustic medley of " We Can 't Stop " and her own " Don 't Tell Me " . Later that year , Cyrus performed " We Can 't Stop " during her headlining Bangerz Tour . A critic from the Nashville Scene praised Cyrus ' performance , writing , " We Can ’ t Stop was sung by Miley and hilariously lip @-@ synced by a kitten on screen . " Blake Hannon provided a positive review , writing , " The crowd erupted for the opening notes of We Can 't Stop . " Cyrus returned to perform the song during the musical festival on June 21 , 2014 , Summertime Ball at Wembley Stadium of London , in front of 80 @,@ 000 people . 
 = = = MTV Video Music Awards = = = 
 In August 2013 , Cyrus became the subject of widespread media attention and public scrutiny following a controversial performance and duet with Robin Thicke at the 2013 MTV Video Music Awards at Barclays Center in New York City . The performance began with Cyrus performing " We Can 't Stop " in bear @-@ themed attire . Following this , Thicke entered the stage and Cyrus stripped down to a skin @-@ colored two @-@ piece outfit . Cyrus subsequently touched Thicke 's crotch area with a giant foam finger and twerked against his crotch . An article published in The Hollywood Reporter described the performance as " crass " and " reminiscent of a bad acid trip " . The performance was described by XXL critic B. J. Steiner as a " trainwreck in the classic sense of the word as the audience reaction seemed to be a mix of confusion , dismay and horror in a cocktail of embarrassment " , while the BBC said Cyrus stole the show with a " raunchy performance " . The performance generated 306 @,@ 100 tweets per minute on Twitter , breaking the record for the most tweeted @-@ about event in the history of the social network ; the previous record , held by the Super Bowl XLVII halftime show featuring Beyoncé , generated 268 @,@ 000 tweets per minute . Rob Sheffield of Rolling Stone magazine recognized published a criticism of the presentation of Cyrus at the MTV Video Music Awards 2013 , “ It 's Miley , Bitch : The Tongue That Licked the World ” . The article praises the performance of the singer said : " Miley was the one star in the room who truly understood what the MTV Video Music Awards are all about — waggling your tongue , grabbing your crotch , rocking a foam finger , going to third with the Care Bears , twerking and shrieking and acting out America 's goriest pop @-@ psycho nightmares . She showed up Robin Thicke as one uptight douche , though he helped by dressing as the world 's edgiest Foot Locker manager . Miley stole the night , which is why the nation is still in recovery today . Thanks , Miley . " According to Forbes , Cyrus ' performance resulted in a gain of over 213 @,@ 000 Twitter followers , 226 @,@ 000 likes on Facebook , and 90 @,@ 000 downloads of her new promotional single , " Wrecking Ball " , within days of the controversial performance . This amounted to a total 112 % increase in Cyrus ' social media activity . 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 In July 2013 , Rebecca Black released an acoustic cover of " We Can 't Stop " , for which there were lyrical changes made . In September 2013 , Scott Bradlee 's band Postmodern Jukebox made a doo @-@ wop cover of the song . Currently the video has been viewed over 12 million times . Later in September , British band Bastille performed a rock version of the song at BBC Radio 1 's Live Lounge , using portions of " Lose Yourself " by Eminem in the introduction , " I Just Can 't Wait to Be King " from the 1994 film The Lion King at the end of each chorus , and referencing " Achy Breaky Heart " by Cyrus ' father Billy Ray . Mike Wass from Idolator commented that they brought " emotional depth and a previously absent musicality " and that they turned the song into " an eerily pretty mid @-@ tempo ballad " . Later that month , indie musician Logan Lynn released a cover version of the track , which Lindsey Weber of New York Magazine called " dreamy [ and ] guitar @-@ heavy " and an editor from The Huffington Post called " bold " and " warmer " than the original . British singer Neon Hitch released a cover of " We Can 't Stop " with lyrical adjustments , which Jenna Hally Rubenstein from MTV Buzzworthy called a " kinda @-@ reggae @-@ kinda @-@ jazz @-@ kinda ska @-@ definitely @-@ awesome cover " . The track was also performed by Avery , The Vamps , and Tay Zonday . In 2014 , The Electrical Fire released a cover version of the song , as well as an alternate version which combined it with Kanye West 's " Runaway " , pointing out the similarity between the two songs . Later in 2014 Bastille won Best Cover Woodie award in the mtvU Woodie Awards for covering the track . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Bangerz . 
 Recording 
 Recorded at Nightbird Studios ( West Hollywood , California ) ; Conway Recording Studios ( Los Angeles , California ) ; Glenwood Studios , ( Burbank , California ) 
 Mixed at The Penua Project / Innersound Management at Larrabee Sound Studios ( North Hollywood , California ) 
 Personnel 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 There are literary , archaeological , epigraphic and numismatic sources of ancient Tamil history . The foremost among these sources is the Sangam literature , generally dated to the last centuries BCE to early centuries CE . The poems in Sangam literature contain vivid descriptions of the different aspects of life and society in Tamilakam during this age ; scholars agree that , for the most part , these are reliable accounts . Greek and Roman literature , around the dawn of the Christian era , give details of the maritime trade between Tamilakam and the Roman empire , including the names and locations of many ports on both coasts of the Tamil country . 
 Archaeological excavations of several sites in Tamil Nadu and Kerala have yielded remnants from the Sangam era , such as different kinds of pottery , pottery with inscriptions , imported ceramic ware , industrial objects , brick structures and spinning whorls . Techniques such as stratigraphy and paleography have helped establish the date of these items to the Sangam era . The excavated artifacts have provided evidence for existence of different economic activities mentioned in Sangam literature such as agriculture , weaving , smithy , gem cutting , building construction , pearl fishing and painting . 
 Inscriptions found on caves and pottery are another source for studying the history of Tamilakam . Writings in Tamil @-@ Brahmi script have been found in many locations in Kerala , Tamil Nadu , Sri Lanka and also in Egypt and <unk> mostly recording grants made by the kings and chieftains . References are also made to other aspects of the Sangam society . Coins issued by the Tamil kings of this age have been recovered from river beds and urban centers of their kingdoms . Most of the coins carry the emblem of the corresponding dynasty on their reverse , such as the bow and arrow of the Cheras ; some of them contain portraits and written legends helping numismatists assign them to a certain period . 
 = = Literary sources in Tamil = = 
 By far , the most important source of ancient Tamil history is the corpus of Tamil poems , referred to as Sangam literature , generally dated from the last centuries of the pre @-@ Christian era to the early centuries of the Christian era . It consists of 2 @,@ 381 known poems , with a total of over 50 @,@ 000 lines , written by 473 poets . Each poem belongs to one of two types : Akam ( inside ) and Puram ( outside ) . The <unk> poems deal with inner human emotions such as love and the <unk> poems deal with outer experiences such as society , culture and warfare . They contain descriptions of various aspects of life in the ancient Tamil country . The <unk> by <unk> <unk> contains a full @-@ length description of Madurai and the Pandyan country under the rule of Nedunj Cheliyan III . The <unk> by <unk> contains a description of the king ’ s palace . The Purananuru and Akanaṉūṟu collections contain poems sung in praise of various kings and also poems that were composed by the kings themselves . The Sangam age anthology <unk> provides the genealogy of two collateral lines for three or four generations of the Cheras , along with describing the Chera country , in general . The poems in <unk> , written by numerous authors , were compiled by <unk> <unk> at the instance of Chera King <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> Chera kings are also mentioned in other works such as Akanaṉūṟu , <unk> , <unk> and Purananuru . The <unk> describes the Chola port city of Kaveripumpattinam in great detail . It mentions <unk> @-@ <unk> – food from Eelam – arriving at the port . One of the prominent Sangam Tamil poets is known as <unk> <unk> meaning <unk> @-@ <unk> ( proper name ) hailing from Eelam mentioned in Akanaṉūṟu : 88 , 231 , 307 ; <unk> : 189 , 360 , 343 and <unk> : 88 , 366 . 
 The historical value of the Sangam poems has been critically analysed by scholars in the 19th and 20th centuries . <unk> Pillay , a 20th @-@ century historian , while constructing the genealogy of ancient Tamil kings from Sangam literature , insists that the Sangam poems show no similarities with ancient Puranic literature and medieval Tamil literature , both of which contain , according to him , fanciful myths and impossible legends . He feels that the Sangam literature is , for the most part , a plain unvarnished tale of the happenings of a by @-@ gone age . Scholars like Dr. Venkata Subramanian , Dr. N. <unk> , Dr. <unk> and J.K. Pillay concur with this view . Noted historian <unk> Sastri dates the presently available Sangam corpus to the early centuries of the Christian Era . He asserts that the picture drawn by the poets is in obedience to literary tradition and must have been based on solid foundation in the facts of contemporary life ; he proceeds to use the Sangam literature to describe the government , culture and society of the early Pandyan kingdom . <unk> Mukund , while describing the mercantile history of Tamilakam , points out that the heroic poetry in Sangam literature often described an ideal world rather than reality , but the basic facts are reliable and an important source of Tamil history . Her reasoning is that they have been supported by archaeological and numismatic evidence and the fact that similar vivid descriptions are found in works by different poets . Dr. <unk> relies on Sangam literature to describe the early Pandyan society and justifies his source by saying that some of the poetical works contain really trustworthy accounts of early Pandyan kings and present facts as they occurred , though they never throw much light about the chronology of their rule . 
 Among the critics of using Sangam literature for historical studies is Herman <unk> , who maintains that the Sangam poems were composed in the 8th or 9th century and that they attempt to describe a period much earlier than when they were written . <unk> 's methodology of dating Sangam works has been criticized by Hart , Ferro @-@ Luzzi , and <unk> . Robert Caldwell , a 19th @-@ century <unk> , dates the Sangam works to a period that he calls the Jaina cycle which was not earlier than the 8th century ; he does not offer an opinion on the historical value of the poems . Kamil <unk> , a Czech indologist , considers this date quite impossible and says that Caldwell 's choice of works are whimsical . <unk> states that since the Sangam period is often stretched from 300 BCE to 300 CE and beyond , it would be hazardous to use the Sangam works as a single corpus of source for the entire period . 
 According to Encyclopædia Britannica , the Sangam poems were created between 1st century and 4th century and many of them are free from literary conceits . The <unk> mentions that the historical authenticity of sections of Sangam literature has been confirmed by archaeological evidence . 
 = = Literary sources in other languages = = 
 Kautilya ( c . 370 – 283 BCE ) , in his Sanskrit work Arthashastra , mentions the “ easy to travel " trade route to the South and the products of the Pandya kingdom , including some special varieties of pearls . He refers to the city of Madurai and the river <unk> in the Pandya kingdom . The Sinhalese chronicle <unk> claims that King Vijaya ( c . 543 BCE ) married a daughter of the Pandyan king Kulasekaran , to whom he was sending rich presents every year . Using the references to king Gajabahu I in the <unk> and the <unk> <unk> of the Tamil epic <unk> , historians have arrived at a literary chronological device referred to as the Gajabahu synchronism to date the events mentioned in the Tamil epic to the 2nd century CE . The famous Greek traveler Megasthenes ( c . 302 BCE ) mentions the “ <unk> " kingdom and refers to it as “ that portion of India which lies to the southward and extends to the sea " . The Roman historian Strabo ( c . 1st century BCE ) mentions the embassies sent by the Pandyas to the court of Augustus , along with a description of the ambassadors from <unk> . He also gives various details about the trading relationship between the Tamil kingdoms and Rome . Pliny the Elder ( c . 77 CE ) refers to many Tamil ports in his work The Natural History . The Periplus of the Erythraean Sea ( c . 60 – 100 CE ) gives an elaborate description of the Tamil country and describes the riches of a ' Pandian Kingdom ' : 
 " " Then come <unk> and <unk> , the first markets of <unk> ( <unk> ) , and then Muziris and Nelcynda , which are now of leading importance . <unk> of the Kingdom of <unk> ; it is a village in plain sight by the sea . Muziris , of the same Kingdom , abounds in ships sent there with cargoes from Ariake , and by the Greeks ; it is located on a river , distant from <unk> by river and sea five hundred stadia , and up the river from the shore twenty stadia ... Nelcynda is distant from Muziris by river and sea about five hundred stadia , and is of another Kingdom , the Pandian . This place also is situated on a river , about one hundred and twenty stadia from the sea .... " 
 One such port , Kudiramalai is mentioned in Greek as <unk> , a famous port of the Malabar country in Ceylon to the ancient Greeks . Pliny states that in the reign of the Emperor Claudius in 47 CE : 
 " Annius <unk> , a freedman , having farmed the customs of the Red Sea , was , while sailing along the coast of Arabia over fifteen days , driven by contrary winds into <unk> , a port of <unk> , where he was entertained with kindly hospitality by the king . In six months ' time he acquired a thorough knowledge of the Tamil language . " 
 An embassy of four envoys were sent from the island to Rome , including ambassador @-@ in @-@ chief <unk> from the King of Kudiramalai . To the Romans , the Kudiramalai envoys related particulars about their kingdom 's inhabitants , including their common life expectancy of 100 years , their government , a council of thirty persons , free civil liberties and laws pertaining to abuse of sovereign power , their trade with the Seres ( Chinese ) , their festivals surrounding " the chase " , and their delights in the elephant and the tiger . The ambassadors felt their kingdom to be richer than Rome 's , although in their eyes Rome put its wealth to much better use . The <unk> tables which speak of a temple of Augustus in the west coast of Tamilakam were composed in 222 CE . The Roman emperor Julian received an embassy from a Pandya about 361 . A Roman trading centre was located on the Pandyan coast ( Alagankulam — at the mouth of the Vaigai river , southeast of Madurai ) . The Pandyas also had trade contacts with Ptolemaic Egypt and , through Egypt , with Rome by the 1st century , and with China by the 3rd century . The 1st century Greek historian Nicolaus of Damascus met , at Damascus , the ambassador sent by an Indian King " named Pandion or , according to others , Porus " to Caesar Augustus around 13 CE ( Strabo <unk> – 4 , and Strabo <unk> – 73 ) . 
 The Buddhist Jataka story known as <unk> Jataka refers to the Damila @-@ <unk> ( Tamil country ) including the region of <unk> . In the <unk> commentary , the Damila country encompasses the <unk> . 
 The Chinese writer Pan Kou , who lived before 1st century CE , refers to the city of Kanchipuram in his work Tsien han chou . The Chinese historian Yu Huan in his 3rd century text , the <unk> , mentions The Kingdom of <unk> : 
 " ... The kingdom of <unk> is also called <unk> . It is several thousand li to the southeast of <unk> ( Northern India ) ... The inhabitants are small ; they are the same height as the Chinese ... " 
 = = Archeological sources = = 
 According to Abraham , the Sangam era corresponds roughly to the period 300 BCE – 300 CE , based on archaeology . Many historical sites have been excavated in Tamil Nadu and Kerala , many of them in the second half of the 20th century . One of the most important archaeological sites in Tamil Nadu is Arikamedu , located 3 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) south of Pondicherry . According to Wheeler , it was an Indo @-@ Roman trading station that flourished during the first two centuries CE . It has been suggested that Arikamedu was first established as a settlement c . 250 BCE and lasted until 200 CE . Kodumanal and Perur , villages on the banks of the Noyyal river in Coimbatore district , were situated on the ancient trade route between Karur and the west coast , across the Palghat gap on the Western Ghats . Both sites have yielded remains belonging to the Sangam age . Kaveripumpattinam , also known as Puhar or Poompuhar , is located near the Kaveri delta and played a vital role in the brisk maritime history of ancient Tamilakam . Excavations have been carried out both on @-@ shore and off @-@ shore at Puhar and the findings have brought to light the historicity of the region . The artefacts excavated date between 300 BCE and early centuries CE . Some of the off @-@ shore findings indicate that parts of the ancient city may have submerged under the advancing sea , as alluded to by the Sangam literature . Korkai , a port of the early Pandyas at the <unk> basin , is now located 7 km inland due to the retreating shoreline caused by sediment deposition . Alagankulam , near the Vaigai delta , was another port city of the Pandyas and an archaeological site that has been excavated in the recent years . Both the Pandyan ports have provided clues about local occupations , such as pearl fishing . Other sites that have yielded remnants from the Sangam age include Kanchipuram , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> along the Palar river ; <unk> and <unk> along the Pennar river ; Perur , <unk> , <unk> and Urayur along the Kaveri river . These excavations have yielded different varieties of ceramics such as black and red ware , rouletted ware and Russet coated ware , both locally made and imported kinds . Many of the pottery sherds contain Tamil @-@ Brahmi inscriptions on them , which have provided additional evidence for the archaeologist to date them . Other artifacts such as brick walls , ring wells , pits , industrial items , remains of seeds and shells provide clues about the nature of the settlements and the other aspects of life during the Sangam age . Archaeologists agree that activities best illustrated in the material records of Tamilakam are trade , hunting , agriculture and crafts . 
 = = = Evidence for economic activities = = = 
 Archeological evidence for agriculture in the Sangam age has been retrieved from sites such as <unk> , Kodumanal and Perur , which have yielded charred remains of seeds of crops like rice , millets including pearl millets , pulses and cotton . It has been deduced that agriculture most likely involved dry farming , with additional irrigation for cotton and rice ; mixed cropping seems to have been undertaken to replenish the nitrogen in the soil — this also suggests a spread of labour and knowledge of different sowing and harvesting techniques . The presence of cotton seeds indicates the production of a crop aimed at craft production , which is also attested by finds of cotton and spindle whorls at Kodumanal . Remains of structures that resemble an artificial water reservoir have been located at different sites . In Arikamedu , a few terracotta ring @-@ wells were found at the bottom of the reservoir ; it has been suggested that the ring wells were to assure the supply of water during the dry season . 
 A research survey at Kodumanal has unearthed the remains of an ancient blast furnace , its circular base distinguishable by its white colour , probably the result of high temperature . Around the base , many iron slags , some with embedded burnt clay , vitrified brick @-@ bats , many terracotta pipes with vitrified mouths and a granite slab , which may have been the anvil , have been recovered . Absence of potsherds and other antiquities has suggested that the smelting place was located outside the boundary of habitation . More furnaces were discovered at the same site with burnt clay pieces with rectangular holes . The pieces were part of the furnace wall , the holes designed to allow a natural draught of air to pass through evenly into the furnace . Many vitrified crucibles were also recovered from this site ; one of them notable because it was found in an in situ position . Evidence of steel making is also found in the crucibles excavated at this site . In addition to iron and steel , the metallurgy seems to have possibly extended to copper , bronze , lead , silver and gold objects . At Arikamedu , there were indications of small @-@ scale workshops containing the remains of working in metal , glass , semiprecious stones , ivory and shell . Kodumanal has yielded evidence for the practice of weaving , in the form of a number of intact terracotta spindle whorls pierced at the centre by means of an iron rod , indicating the knowledge of cotton spinning and weaving . To further strengthen this theory , a well preserved piece of woven cotton cloth was also recovered from this site . Dyeing vats were spotted at Arikamedu . 
 Many brick structures have been located at Kaveripumpattinam during on @-@ shore , near shore and off @-@ shore explorations ; these provide proof for building construction during Sangam age . The on @-@ shore structure include an I @-@ shaped wharf and a structure that looks like a reservoir . The wharf has a number of wooden poles planted in its structure to enable anchorage of boats and to facilitate the handling of cargo . Among other structures , there is a Buddhist vihara with parts of it decorated using moulded bricks and stucco . Near shore excavations yielded a brick structure and a few terracotta ring wells . Off @-@ shore explorations located a fifteen course brick structure , three courses of dressed stone blocks , brick bats and pottery . At Arikamedu , there were indications of a structure built substantially of timber , possibly a wharf . Conical jars that could have been used for storing wine and oil have been found near structures that could have been shops or storage areas . Evidence of continued building activity are present at this site , with the most distinctive structures being those of a possible warehouse , dyeing tanks and lined pits . 
 Kodumanal was popular for the gem @-@ cutting industry and manufacture of jewels . Sites bearing natural reserves of semi @-@ precious stones such as beryls , sapphire and quartz are located in the vicinity of Kodumanal . Beads of sapphire , beryl , agate , carnelian , amethyst , lapis <unk> , jasper , garnet , soapstone and quartz were unearthed from here . The samples were in different manufacturing stages – finished , semi @-@ finished , drilled and <unk> , polished and unpolished and in the form of raw material . Chips and stone slabs , one with a few grooved beads , clearly demonstrate that these were manufactured locally at Kodumanal . Excavations at Korkai have yielded a large number of pearl <unk> at different levels , indicating the practice of the trade in this region . Some of the objects excavated from Kodumanal show a lot of artistic features such as paintings on the pottery , engravings on the beads , hexagonal designs on beads , inlay work in a tiger figurine and engraved shell bangles . More than ten designs are noticed in the paintings and bead etchings . 
 There are remnants of many of the items imported from and exported to the Roman empire , at Arikamedu . Imported items recovered from here include ceramics such as amphorae and sherds of Arretine ware , glass bowls , Roman lamps , a crystal gem and an object resembling a stylus . Artifacts that may have been meant for export include jewellery , worked ivory , textiles and perhaps leather or leather @-@ related products . Similar looking ornaments have been recovered from Arikamedu and Palatine Hill in Rome , further confirming that this site was a leading trade center . The Pandyan port city Alagankulam has yielded a rouletted pottery ware that bears the figure of a ship on the shoulder portion . This figure is very similar to a finding reported from Ostia , an ancient port of the Romans . Wharf @-@ like structures found at many port cities indicate that they might have been used as docks . Based on marine explorations of various port @-@ sites , it has been suggested that stone anchors may have been used since as early as 3rd century BCE . 
 = = Epigraphical sources = = 
 During the later half of the 20th century , several inscriptions of the Sangam age have been discovered in Tamil Nadu and Kerala . Most of them are written in Tamil @-@ Brahmi script and are found in rocks or on pottery . The information obtained from such inscriptions have been used to corroborate some of the details provided by the Sangam literature . 
 = = = Cave inscriptions = = = 
 The 2nd and 13th rock edicts of Ashoka ( 273 – 232 BCE ) refers to the Pandyas , Cholas , Cheras and the <unk> . According to the edicts , these kingdoms lay outside the southern boundary of the Mauryan Empire . The <unk> inscription of the Kalinga King , Kharavela , ( c . 150 BCE ) refers to the arrival of a tribute of jewels and elephants from the Pandyan king . It also talks about a league of Tamil kingdoms that had been in existence 113 years before then . The earliest epigraphic records of the Tamil country in Tamil Nadu were found in <unk> village near Madurai . The cave inscriptions , deciphered in 1966 , have been dated to 2nd century BC and record the gift of a monastery by Pandyan king Nedunj Cheliyan to a Jain monk . These inscriptions are also the oldest Jain inscriptions in South India and among the oldest in all of India . References to Sangam age Chera dynasty are found in Tamil @-@ Brahmi inscriptions of 3rd century CE found on rocks in <unk> hill in Wynad district of Kerala . The ancient port city of <unk> is mentioned in inscriptions found in <unk> village near Madurai . The early part of the 20th century saw the discovery of about 39 inscriptions in a dozen locations , all near Madurai . The most significant of these were the ones at <unk> and <unk> . The <unk> inscriptions , dated to the 1st century BCE , record the endowments made by a group of merchants from Madurai . Another set of inscriptions from the 2nd century CE , found at <unk> village near Karur , document the construction of a rock shelter by a Chera king of the Irumporai line for a Jain monk , <unk> . Cave inscriptions at <unk> , dated to the 4th century , provide evidence for the cultivation of music and dance in the Tamil country . One of the earliest inscriptional evidence of the chieftains of the Sangam age was found at <unk> , a village near the town of <unk> in Villupuram district of Tamil Nadu . These inscriptions belonging to the 1st century CE record the grants made by the chieftain <unk> <unk> <unk> who ruled from <unk> . According to epigraphist I. Mahadevan , there were some reservations initially , about the linguistic details in the inscriptions , but further investigations have confirmed their authenticity . Inscriptions from the 2nd century CE found at <unk> village in Tirunelveli district contain a reference to a <unk> , which could mean an assembly of learned persons or an institution of higher learning . An inscription belonging to the early Cholas has been discovered near Tiruchirappalli and has been dated between the 2nd and 4th century . An analysis of the geographical sites of these cave inscriptions points to the possibility of the Tamil @-@ Brahmi script having been created at Madurai around the 3rd century BCE and its <unk> to other parts of Tamil country thereafter . 
 = = = Pottery inscriptions = = = 
 Inscriptions on pottery , written in Tamil @-@ Brahmi , have been found from about 20 archaeological sites in Tamil Nadu . Using methods such as stratigraphy and palaeography , these have been dated between 2nd century BCE and 3rd century CE . Also found in present @-@ day Andhra Pradesh and Sri Lanka , similar inscriptions in Tamil @-@ Brahmi have been found outside the ancient Tamil country in Thailand and the Red Sea coast in Egypt . Arikamedu , the ancient port city of the Cholas , and Urayur and Puhar , their early capitals , have yielded several fragmentary pottery inscriptions , all dated to the Sangam age . Kodumanal , a major industrial center known for the manufacture of gems during this period , had remains of pottery with inscriptions in Tamil , Prakrit and Sinhala @-@ Prakrit . Alagankulam , a thriving sea port of the early Pandyas , has yielded pottery inscriptions that mention several personal names including the name of a Chera prince . One of the pottery sherds contained the depiction of a large Roman ship . Many other ancient sites such as Kanchipuram , Karur , Korkai and Puhar have all yielded pottery with inscriptions on them . Outside of Tamil Nadu and Kerala , inscriptions in Tamil @-@ Brahmi have been found in Srikakulam district in Andhra Pradesh , Jaffna in modern Sri Lanka , ancient Roman ports of <unk> al @-@ Qadim and <unk> in Egypt . The 2nd century BCE potsherds found in excavations in <unk> , Jaffna , bear Tamil inscriptions of a clan name – <unk> , related to <unk> of the ancient Tamil country . The inscriptions at <unk> refer to a Tamil chieftain <unk> . 
 = = = Other inscriptions = = = 
 The <unk> inscription found near Madurai in Tamil Nadu and dated on palaeographical grounds to the 1st century BCE , refers to a person as a householder from Eelam ( <unk> @-@ <unk> ) . It reads : <unk> <unk> <unk> - " <unk> , ( resident of ) <unk> , the husbandman ( householder ) from Eelam . Apart from caverns and pottery , Tamil @-@ Brahmi writings are also found in coins , seals and rings of the Sangam age . Many of them have been picked up from the Amaravathi river bed near Karur . A smaller number of inscribed objects have been picked up from the beds of other rivers like South Pennar and Vaigai . An oblong piece of polished stone with Tamil @-@ Brahmi inscription has been located in a museum in the ancient port city of <unk> Luk Pat in southern Thailand . Based on the inscription , the object has been identified as a touchstone ( <unk> ) used for testing the fitness of gold . The inscription is dated to 3rd or 4th century . 
 = = = Polity from inscriptions = = = 
 Epigraphy provides an account of various aspects of Sangam polity and has been used to verify some of the information provided by sources such as literature and numismatics . The names of various kings and chieftains occurring in the inscriptions include Nedunj Cheliyan , Peruvaluthi , Cheras of the Irumporai family , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . References to administration includes the chiefs , superintendents , titles of ministers , palace of merchants and the village assembly . Religious references to Buddhist and Jain monks are found frequently , which have provided valuable information explaining the spread of those religions in Tamilakam . Brief mentions of various aspects of the Sangam society such as agriculture , trade , commodities , occupations , the social stratification , flora , fauna , music and dance , names of cities and names of individuals are also found in the inscriptions . 
 = = Numismatic sources = = 
 Another important source of studying ancient Tamil history are the coins that have been found in recent years in the excavations , megaliths , hoards and surface . The coins belonging to the Sangam age , found in Tamil Nadu are generally classified into three categories . The first category consists of punch @-@ marked coins from Magadha ( 400 BCE – 187 BCE ) and the Satavahanas ( 200 BCE – 200 CE ) . The second category is made up of coins from the Roman Empire dated from 31 BCE to 217 CE , coins of Phoenicians and Seleucids and coins from the Mediterranean region ( c . 300 BCE ) . The third category of Sangam age Tamil coins are the punch @-@ marked silver , copper and lead coins dated 200 BCE – 200 CE and assigned to the Sangam age Tamil kings . The coins belonging to the first two categories mostly attest to the trading relationships that the Tamil people had with the kingdoms of northern India and the outside world . But they do not offer much information regarding the Sangam age Tamil polity . The third category of coins , however , have provided direct testimony to the existence of ancient Tamil kingdoms and have been used to establish their period to coincide with that of the Sangam literature . 
 = = = Pandyan coins = = = 
 Among the many coins attributed to the early Pandyas , are a series of punch @-@ marked coins made of silver and copper , that are considered to belong to the earliest period . Six groups of silver punch @-@ marked coins and one group of copper coins have been analysed so far . All of these punch @-@ marked coins have a stylised fish symbol on their reverse , which is considered the royal emblem of the Pandyas . On the obverse of these coins are a variety symbols such as the sun , the <unk> , the trishul , a dog , stupa etc . The first group of silver coins was found at <unk> , in a hoard containing 1124 coins all belonging to the same type . The remaining coins in the five silver group and the copper group were all found in the Vaigai river bed near Madurai . Four of the six silver groups have been assigned a date close to the end of the Mauryan rule , c . 187 BCE . Since Tamilakam was deficient in metallic silver and since Roman silver did not become available in abundance until later , around 44 BCE , it has been postulated that the Pandyan kings melted silver from the coins brought in by trade with Magadha or some foreign location other than Rome . The names of the Pandyan kings who issued this series of coins is not clear . Another series of coins , all made of copper and found near Madurai , have the fish symbol on the reverse and among other symbols on the obverse , have the legend Peruvaluthi written in the Tamil @-@ Brahmi script . They have been assigned a date of around 200 BCE and are considered to have been issued by the Pandyan king Peruvaluthi . These coins are represent some of the few instances where the names of Sangam kings appear in non @-@ literary sources . Sangam literature mentions the importance attached to Vedic sacrifices by Tamil kings including the Pandyan <unk> <unk> . This fact is also corroborated by the discovery of several Pandyan coins that are referred to as the Vedic sacrifice series . These coins have symbols on their obverse that depict the sacrifices , such as a horse tied to the <unk> @-@ <unk> , a yagna kunta and a <unk> . More coins with animal symbols such as the tortoise , the elephant and the bull have been found and assigned to the Pandyan kings . Some of them even have a human portrait , possibly of the king who issued those coins , on their obverse . There are also Pandyan coins belonging to the 1st century BCE that have symbols depicting pearls , signifying the importance of pearl fishery to the Pandyan kingdom . The excavations at <unk> , near Madurai , recovered two copper coins of the early Pandyas along with Northern Black Polished Ware . These coins have been assigned a broad time period ranging from 200 BCE to 200 CE . 
 = = = Chera coins = = = 
 Many of the coins assigned to the Chera kings of Sangam age with a portrait and the legends " Makkotai " or " Kuttuvan Kotai " have been found near the Amaravathi river bed in Karur and elsewhere in Coimbatore district of Tamil Nadu state . They depict the royal emblem of the Cheras , the bow and arrow symbol , on the reverse . It was generally believed that the Satavahanas were the first indigenous monarchs to issue silver portrait coins . That has been disproved by the discovery of Makkotai and Kuttuvan Kotai coins belonging to the 1st century AD or a little later . Silver coins issued by Augustus and Tiberius have over a period of time been discovered in large numbers from the Coimbatore @-@ Karur region . 
 Among the Chera coins , the " Makkotai series " bears a unique pattern not found in other Tamil coins of its age . They contain both the portrait of a king ( facing right ) and a written legend , in this case the word " Makkotai " written in Tamil @-@ Brahmi script . These coins exhibit similarities with the Roman coins of emperors Augustus and Tiberius ; like the Roman coins , the portraits on the Makkotai series do not show any jewellery on the king . They are thought to be made of two separate pieces joined by lead , a practice prevalent elsewhere in India at that time . Official seals of the bearing the name " Makkotai " have also been recovered from the river bed ; these seals contain the portrait facing left and the legend " Makkotai " written backwards ( right @-@ to @-@ left ) . The reverse of the seals is blank . The Makkotai coins and the seals have been assigned a date range of 100 BC to end of 100 AD . 
 Another aspect of the portraits on the Makkotai coins are that they do not have identical head sizes and some facial features also vary from one coin to another , even though they all have the same written legend . Such an observation has been made of coins assigned to the Western <unk> of Gujarat , which are thought to be another inspiration for the Chera coins . Scholars who analyzed the varying portraiture on the <unk> coins have advanced several theories to explain the phenomenon : that the coins could be of different kings who chose to keep the name of an ancestor on their coins or the coins all belong to one king with portraits depicting him at his different ages . Based on such theories , the Chera coins could either belong to a series of rulers or to a single king called Cheraman Makkotai . 
 Another series of Chera coins depicts various animals along with symbols on its obverse and the Chera emblem on its reverse . Elephant , horse , bull , tortoise and lion are the animals depicted in this series , along with snake and fish . Symbols of inanimate objects include arched hills , battle axe , conch , river , swastika , trident , flowers and the sun . 
 A few other coins that contain a portrait and a legend have been unearthed ; a coin assigned to certain Kuttuvan Kotai with his portrait and the legend " Kuttuvan Kotai " is notable for the occurrence of the " <unk> " in the legend . Based on paleography of the script , it has been assigned a date of late 1st century to early 2nd century AD . A coin belonging to 100 AD with the legend " <unk> " and a full @-@ body portrait of a warrior has been assigned to the king <unk> Cheral Irumporai , as he was known as the victor of <unk> in literature . Another coin of roughly the same period of 100 AD with the legend " <unk> " and a warrior portrait has been found ; it has not been assigned to a single king , but based on the legend , there are at least six Chera kings who could be associated with it . 
 A Chera coin with the portrait of a king wearing a Roman helmet was discovered from Karur . The obverse side of the silver coin has the portrait of a king , facing left , wearing a Roman @-@ type bristled @-@ crown helmet . This coin <unk> to the 1st century BC and may be earlier to Makkotai and Kuttuvan Kotai coins . With a flat nose and protruding lips , he has a wide and thick ear lobe but wears no ear @-@ ring . The person depicted appears to be elderly . Unlike other Chera silver portrait coins , the king 's portrait on this coin faces left . The coin points to Romans having had trade contacts with the Chera kings and establishes that the Roman soldiers had landed in the Chera country to give protection to the Roman traders who had come there to buy materials . 
 Archaeological investigations conducted unearthed square or circular Chera coins made of copper from near Cochin . This was for the first time , from a <unk> context , coins of Sangam Chera period have been found in Kerala . The coin , which is almost a square in shape , has an elephant facing to the right and some symbols towards the top of the coin . The symbols could not be identified as the upper part of the coin was partially corroded . A drawn bow and arrow was visible on the other side . Below the arrow is an elephant goad ( a prod used to control elephants ) . These coins bear a striking resemblance to the ones excavated from Karur in Tamil Nadu , said the archaeologists . 
 = = = Chola coins = = = 
 The number of Chola coins discovered so far are not as many as those of Pandyas ; most of them have been found from archeological excavations at Puhar and Arikamedu , and also beds of rivers Amaravathi near Karur and South Pennar near <unk> . An early Chola coin has also been found in Thailand . The Chola coins do not contain a portrait or a legend and all of them depict symbols of animals and other inanimate objects like the animal series of the Cheras . But , all of them carry the symbol of a tiger , the Chola emblem , on their reverse . One of the coins has been assigned a date earlier than 200 BCE and some others to about the time of Roman influence , which is around the dawn of the Christian era . 
 = = = Coins of Chieftains = = = 
 Parts of the Sangam age Tamil country were ruled over by several independent chieftains , alongside the three crowned monarchs . Among them , coins belonging to the chieftains of the <unk> clan have been found in Tamil Nadu . Many of them contain a written legend on the obverse and all of them have the image of a flowing river on their obverse . Based on the legends some of these coins have been assigned to specific rulers such as <unk> , also known as <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> , and <unk> Kari . A series of coins without a legend but with a horse as the principal motif on the obverse have been assigned to the <unk> chieftains , because of the river symbol on the obverse . Numismatist R. Krishnamurthy , dates these coins to the period between 100 BCE and 100 CE . 
 = = = Eelam Tamil coins = = = 
 Excavations in the area of Tissamaharama in southern Sri Lanka have unearthed locally issued coins produced between the 2nd century BCE and the 2nd century CE , some of which carry Tamil personal names written in early Tamil characters , which suggest that Tamil merchants were present and actively involved in trade along the southern coast of Sri Lanka . 
 = Dellingr = 
 Dellingr ( Old Norse possibly " the <unk> " or " shining one " ) is a god in Norse mythology . Dellingr is attested in the Poetic Edda , compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional sources , and in the Prose Edda , written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson . In both sources , Dellingr is described as the father of Dagr , the personified day . The Prose Edda adds that , depending on manuscript variation , he is either the third husband of Nótt , the personified night , or the husband of Jörð , the personified earth . Dellingr is also attested in the legendary saga Hervarar saga ok Heiðreks . Scholars have proposed that Dellingr is the personified dawn , and his name may appear both in an English surname and place name as well as German surnames . 
 = = Attestations = = 
 = = = Poetic Edda = = = 
 Dellingr is referenced in the Poetic Edda poems Vafþrúðnismál and Hávamál . In stanza 24 of <unk> , the god Odin ( disguised as " Gagnráðr " ) asks the jötunn Vafþrúðnir from where the day comes , and the night and its tides . In stanza 25 , Vafþrúðnir responds : 
 Delling hight he who the day 's father is , but 
 night was of Nörvi born ; the new and waning moons the 
 beneficent powers created , to count the years for men . 
 In Hávamál , the dwarf <unk> is stated as having recited an unnamed spell " before Delling 's doors " : 
 For the fifteenth I know what the dwarf <unk> 
 sang before Delling 's doors . 
 Strength he sang to the Æsir , and to the <unk> prosperity , 
 wisdom to <unk> . 
 In the poem Fjölsvinnsmál , Svipdagr asks " What one of the gods has made so great the hall I behold within ? " Fjölsviðr responds with a list of names , including Dellingr . In a stanza of the poem Hrafnagaldr Óðins , the appearance of Dagr , horse , and chariot are described , and Dagr himself is referred to as " the son of Delling . " 
 = = = Prose Edda = = = 
 In chapter 10 of the Prose Edda book Gylfaginning , the enthroned figure of High states that Dellingr is a god and the third husband of Nótt . The couple have Dagr , who carries the features of his " father 's people " , which are described as " bright and beautiful " . Odin placed both Dellingr 's son , Dagr , and Dellingr 's wife , Nótt , in the sky , so that they may ride across it with their horses and chariots every 24 hours . 
 However , scholar Haukur Thorgeirsson points out that the four manuscripts of Gylfaginning vary in their descriptions of the family relations between Nótt , Jörð , Dagr , and Dellingr . In other words , depending on the manuscript , either Jörð or Nótt is the mother of Dagr and partner of Dellingr . Haukur details that " the oldest manuscript , U , offers a version where Jǫrð is the wife of Dellingr and the mother of Dagr while the other manuscripts , R , W and T , cast Nótt in the role of Dellingr 's wife and Dagr 's mother " , and argues that " the version in U came about accidentally when the writer of U or its antecedent shortened a text similar to that in RWT . The results of this accident made their way into the Icelandic poetic tradition " . 
 = = = Hervarar saga ok Heiðreks = = = 
 Five riddles found in the poem Heiðreks <unk> contained in the legendary saga Hervarar saga ok Heiðreks employ the phrase " Delling 's doors " ( Old Norse <unk> durum ) once each . As an example , in one stanza where the phrase is used Gestumblindi ( Odin in disguise ) poses the following riddle : 
 What strange marvel 
 did I see without , 
 in front of Delling 's door ; 
 its head turning 
 to Hel downward , 
 but its feet ever seek the sun ? 
 This riddle ponder , 
 O prince <unk> ! 
 <unk> riddle is good , Gestumblindi , ' said the king ; ' I have guessed it . It is the leek ; its head is fast in the ground , but it forks as it grows <unk> 
 = = Theories = = 
 Jacob Grimm states that Dellingr is the assimilated form of <unk> , which includes the name of Dellingr 's son Dagr . Grimm adds that if the <unk> likely refers to descent , and that due to this Dellingr may have been the " progenitor Dagr before him " or that the succession order has been reversed , which Grimm states often occurs in old genealogies . Benjamin Thorpe says that Dellingr may be dawn personified , similarly to his son Dagr , the personified day . 
 Regarding the references to " Delling 's door " as used in Hervarar saga ok Heiðreks , Christopher Tolkien says that : 
 What this phrase meant to the maker of these riddles is impossible to say . In Hávamál 160 it is said that the dwarf <unk> sang before Delling 's doors , which ( in view of the fact that Delling is the father of Dag ( Day ) in Vafþrúðnismál 25 ) may mean that he gave warning to his people that the sun was coming up , and they must return to their dark houses ; the phrase would then virtually mean ' at sunrise . ' As regarding <unk> for <unk> in H , and <unk> were the descendants of Dagr ( according to <unk> . 183 ) . 
 John Lindow says that some confusion exists about the reference to Dellingr in Hávamál . Lindow says that " Dellingr 's doors " may either be a metaphor for sunrise or the reference may refer to the dwarf of the same name . 
 The English family name Dallinger has been theorized as deriving from Dellingr . The English place name <unk> ( south of Derbyshire ) derives from <unk> , which itself derives from Dellingr . In Germany , the family names <unk> and Dellinger have also been theorized as deriving from Dellingr . 
 = The Stag Convergence = 
 " The Stag Convergence " is the twenty @-@ second episode of the fifth season of the American sitcom The Big Bang Theory . The episode premiered on April 26 , 2012 on CBS . In it , the main characters go to the bachelor party to celebrate Howard ( Simon Helberg ) and Bernadette 's ( Melissa Rauch ) upcoming marriage . At the party , a drunk Raj ( Kunal Nayyar ) reveals some information about Howard 's past sexual encounters . When Bernadette picks them up from the party , Howard and Rajesh find out that Bernadette learned about Howard 's sexual history from a video posted on the internet . 
 The story and concept of the episode was written by series co @-@ creator Bill Prady , and writers Steve Holland and Eric Kaplan . The teleplay was written by co @-@ creator Chuck Lorre , and writers Steven Molaro and Jim Reynolds . Peter Chakos served as director . Upon airing , " The Stag Convergence " garnered 12 @.@ 65 million viewers in the United States and 4 @.@ 1 Nielsen rating in the 18 – 49 demographic . The episode received mixed reviews from television critics , noting that it was not as heavy on jokes compared to other episodes in the series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Sheldon , Raj , Leonard and Howard discuss Howard 's bachelor party , with Howard reaffirming to Raj that strippers are banned from the party . Raj then suggests a wine tasting train trip through Napa Valley but , despite Sheldon 's approval , this idea is rejected as well . Meanwhile , Amy is filming Bernadette and Penny making wedding party gifts . She begins to ask a question about consummation but Penny tells her to ask something normal , such as what Bernadette 's married name will be . 
 The bachelor party proves to be a failure , with Sheldon 's jokes falling flat and Barry Kripke complaining about the lack of strippers . A drunk Raj then begins his speech by saying that he was lonely when he first moved to America until he met Howard . He then tells embarrassing stories about Howard 's sexual history , including how Howard lost his virginity to his second cousin , had a threesome with Raj and a Sailor Moon <unk> at ComicCon and slept with a prostitute . 
 Later , Bernadette comes to drives Howard and Raj home and reveals that Wil Wheaton put a video of Raj 's speech on YouTube . Howard had previously claimed that he told her about every girl he had been with , but had not done so . Back at her apartment , she questions whether she can marry him . She is also upset at Penny , who originally set her up with Howard . 
 Howard shows up at Bernadette 's apartment and gives Penny a heartfelt and genuine apology to give to her , which reduces Penny to tears . Bernadette overhears this and forgives him . Amy is relieved that she is still a maid of honor and the four hug . Leonard later meets Penny in the laundry room and wants to have sex , but Penny declines . 
 = = Production = = 
 The story and concept for " The Stag Convergence " were written by series co @-@ creator Bill Prady , and writers Steve Holland and Eric Kaplan . The teleplay for the episode was written by series co @-@ creator Chuck Lorre and writers Steven Molaro and Jim Reynolds . It was directed by Peter Chakos and filmed on March 27 , 2012 . Guest stars included Kevin Sussman as Stuart Bloom , John Ross Bowie as Barry Kripke , and Wil Wheaton as himself . Ian Scott Rudolph returns as Captain <unk> along with actors Jesse <unk> and Zack Sonnenberg at the bachelor party as guests in non @-@ speaking roles . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 The episode was originally broadcast on April 26 , 2012 , followed by Rules of Engagement . Upon airing , " The Stag Convergence " garnered 12 @.@ 65 million viewers while airing simultaneously with American Idol on Fox , Community on NBC , Missing on ABC and The Vampire Diaries on The CW . With the exception of American Idol , which had 14 @.@ 87 million viewers , it beat all other programs in its timeslot . Under the Nielsen rating system , the episode received a 4 @.@ 1 rating and a 13 percent share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . 
 In Canada , the episode aired on the same date on CTV Total and 3 @.@ 17 million households watched it ; the episode was the most watched TV show that week . In the United Kingdom , it aired on May 24 , 2012 and garnered 1 @.@ 444 million E4 viewers . On E4 + 1 , the show was watched by 0 @.@ 403 million viewers , giving the episode a total of 1 @.@ 847 million viewers on the night of its first broadcast and making it most watched that night on both channels . In Australia , it aired on Nine Network on May 22 , 2012 and 1 @.@ 27 million viewed the show ; the episode was ranked second on the network and second overall that night . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The episode received mixed critical reception . Oliver Sava of The A.V. Club graded it a C , claiming that Amy " gets some of the episode 's best lines " . Sava noted that it " has a lot of Jew humor , and Mayim Bialik and Simon Helberg are the perfect people to deliver it " , although disliked Barry and Wil and said that " their jokes wore thin fairly quickly " . R.L. Shaffer of IGN also gave the episode a mixed review , saying that The Big Bang Theory has become more " cynical and chauvinistic " towards female characters . Shaffer also noted he was more frustrated about " the revelation that Bernadette wouldn 't allow strippers at Wolowitz 's bachelor party " , as it is never explained why . Shaffer claimed that there were " only a few laughs here and there " and scored the episode 5 @.@ 5 out of 10 , classifying it as " mediocre " . 
 Carla Day of TV Fanatic gave a more positive review , rating the episode 4 @.@ 5 out of 5 , and praising Penny 's response to Howard 's apology and claiming that it " provided a nice chuckle . " Jill Mader of Inside Pulse also gave the episode a more positive review , praising " that the episode ended with a really sweet moment for Howard as , after all , he is a character who doesn 't often get to be sweet " and claimed that it was " definitely about people changing and moving forward , and The Big Bang Theory has done a great job of emotionally maturing many of their characters over the past couple seasons " . Despite this , she said that " the episode wasn 't as funny as [ she had ] hoped it would be " and " felt like there was more potential in Howard 's bachelor party than just revealing some unflattering secrets to Bernadette . " Robin Pierson of The TV Critic rated the episode as 56 out of 100 , describing Howard 's " little speech " as " very well written and performed " . However , he considered most of the comedy " generic " , especially in regards to the jokes about Jewish stereotypes and Penny 's dismissal of Leonard . Overall , Pierson said it " wasn 't the strongest episode of comedy " and " wasn 't a particularly interesting episode until the end " . 
 = Dinner by Heston Blumenthal = 
 Dinner by Heston Blumenthal is a restaurant in London , England . Opened in January 2011 , it gained a Michelin star within a year , and in April 2014 was listed fifth on The World 's 50 Best Restaurants in Restaurant magazine . It received a second Michelin Star in the 2014 Guide . The restaurant is headed by former Fat Duck head chef Ashley Palmer @-@ Watts . Menu options are based on historical British dishes , which were researched by food historians and through the British Library . The restaurant 's opening drew interest within the industry , and reviews have been positive . Particular dishes have received praise , including the meat fruit , a chicken liver mousse created to look like a mandarin orange . 
 = = Description = = 
 The opening of Dinner was announced in August 2010 , to open in early 2011 to replace the Michelin starred restaurant Foliage at the Mandarin Oriental Hyde Park . The opening was originally planned for 1 December , but delays occurred , which would have resulted in the restaurant being ready to open during Christmas week . The decision was made to push back the opening until after the Christmas period was over . Reservations began to be accepted on 1 December 2010 for the restaurant 's opening on 31 January 2011 . There were 42 phone lines set up on the opening day of reservations , which received over 600 telephone bookings . Prior to opening , the first three months were solidly booked . A Valentine 's day booking was sold on auction site eBay , which went for £ 250 . 
 While overseen by Heston Blumenthal , the head chef in the kitchen is Ashley Palmer @-@ Watts . Palmer @-@ Watts has previously worked with Blumenthal since 1999 , and for five years was head chef at Blumenthal 's other restaurant , the three Michelin starred The Fat Duck . The two chefs researched historical menu choices with help from the British Library and food historians . Blumenthal 's first experience of historical cuisine was in 2000 when he discovered a recipe for roast chicken which required the bird to be plucked alive , and then cooked with a small volume of mercury . This was further enhanced as he filmed Heston 's Feasts for Channel 4 , in which he created a variety of feasts from different historical eras including Tudor , Medieval and Victorian . Despite being called Dinner , the restaurant is also open for lunch as the meaning of the name is intended to be the main meal of the day , regardless of the time at which it is eaten . 
 The interior of the restaurant was designed by Adam Tihany , and features full length windows allowing diners to see straight into the kitchen . It features a pulley system based on a 16th @-@ century design used for the British Royal Court . The brand identity items such as the logo and the menus were designed by design agency <unk> . A £ 70 @,@ 000 clockwork <unk> cooks pineapples for one of the restaurant 's desserts . 
 = = = Menu = = = 
 The restaurant intends to change the menu every three months , each menu containing historical dishes ranging from the 14th to 19th centuries . Prior to opening , rumours were abound regarding the dishes to be served at Dinner , including one report from The Guardian which claimed that an ice @-@ cream meat pie was to appear on the menu . Dishes that do appear include scallops and peas with cucumber ketchup and bergamot cured mackerel salad . Each item has been based on a historical recipe , such as the scallop dish which dates from 1826 and was published in The Cook and Housewife 's Manual Mistress by Meg Dodds . One item which was reported in multiple reviews was the meat fruit , a chicken liver mousse made to look like a textured mandarin orange . The meat fruit was proving so popular that by November 2011 , some 900 were being sold per week and the restaurant was aiming to increase production to be able to supply up to 1200 a week . During the Christmas period , the Meat Fruit is decorated to appear like a plum rather than a <unk> to accord with the holiday season . 
 The ice cream trolley holds a contraption created by Blumenthal and his team , and constructed from <unk> by Mike Smith Studio at a cost of £ 25 @,@ 000 . Powered by a hand crank , it mixes custard and liquid nitrogen to create instant ice cream at the tableside and to top off the ice cream are a variety of sprinkles , popping candy , apple jelly etc . The menus themselves include details such as the year from which the menu item originates . 
 = = Melbourne = = 
 A branch of the restaurant has been announced in Melbourne 's Crown Casino , the first Blumenthal restaurant outside of the UK . Former head chef of The Fat Duck in Bray , Ashley Palmer @-@ Watts announced that he would remain in Melbourne following The Fat Duck Melbourne 's closure on August 16th 2015 and continue running Dinner by Heston in the same location . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Mark Hix in The Independent described the restaurant as producing the best food he 'd had in two years . He described the meat fruit starter as " astonishing " , and said it could have been seen as gimmicky , but " when it tastes that good , it 's difficult to complain " . Tracey <unk> dined with Mark Hix , and also praised the restaurant describing it as " no @-@ fuss " and " direct " . She also wrote that Hix remarked that the restaurant " could change the face of <unk> dining " . 
 Zoe Williams for The Daily Telegraph gave the restaurant a rating of nine out of ten , saying that the meat fruit made her want to " stand up and cheer " , but again said that although everything served was of the highest quality , the meal did not have a surprise like courses can sometimes have at The Fat Duck . For the same newspaper , Matthew Norman described it as a " theatrical tour de force " . He described the restaurant 's opening as flawless and described it as the " hottest ticket in town for a very long time to come " with a rating of ten out of ten . 
 Former Blur musician Alex James reviewed the restaurant for British tabloid The Sun . He said that , " His food was the best I 've ever had . It made the second @-@ best restaurant I 've been to seem old @-@ fashioned . " Chef Jason Atherton said that he could not recall a comparable buzz raised by a restaurant , and that he was relieved that the opening of his Pollen Street Social restaurant was not going to take place until late March 2011 , a reasonable gap after the opening of Dinner . 
 Richard Vines , whilst writing for Bloomberg , advised readers to not be put off the hype ; and while the courses are not as life changing as those served at The Fat Duck , there are stand out dishes such as the meat fruit and the tipsy cake . He also noted that the meat fruit was a favourite of Pierre <unk> . Marina O 'Loughlin visited the restaurant twice for the Metro newspaper , once just after opening and again several months later to compare how it had settled in . She thought it was a well @-@ oiled operation , but a little too much so , and questioned the originality of it as a version of the meat fruit had previously been available at the restaurant Amber in another Mandarin Oriental Hotel in Hong Kong and little touches as the years of origin which appear next to the menu items have been used before by Marco Pierre White . Jan Moir for The Daily Mail thought that the ice cream trolley was a sensation , along with the meat fruit , but could not understand the reason behind recreating the <unk> dish . 
 Jay Rayner for The Guardian described the food as " seriously good " , and summed up the review by saying " Dinner by Heston Blumenthal may be expensive , but it 's also bloody lovely . Save up . " 
 In the 2012 Michelin guide , the restaurant was awarded its first Michelin star some nine months after opening , becoming one of only four restaurants in London to gain a star in 2012 . It has also been awarded the Restaurant of the Year title by Tatler in 2011 , and won the BMW Square Meal Award for Best New Restaurant . The Zagat guide awarded the restaurant the title of Best Newcomer in 2011 . In 2012 at number 9 it was the highest new entry in The World 's 50 Best Restaurants list by UK @-@ based Restaurant Magazine , also the highest in the UK . The restaurant received a second Michelin Star in the 2014 Michelin guide , becoming Blumenthal 's sixth star . 
 = Hurricane Rosa ( 1994 ) = 
 Hurricane Rosa was the only Pacific hurricane to make landfall during the above @-@ average 1994 Pacific hurricane season . It killed at least 4 people in Mexico . Moisture from the hurricane was a factor in widespread flooding in the U.S. state of Texas that killed 22 people and caused hundreds of millions of dollars in damage in October 1994 . The pre @-@ Rosa tropical depression formed on October 8 before degenerating the next day . It reformed on October 10 and steadily strengthened as it approached Mexico . Ultimately peaking as a Category 2 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale right before landfall , Rosa was the final hurricane , nineteenth tropical storm , and second @-@ last tropical cyclone of the 1994 Pacific hurricane season . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On October 8 , a circulation associated with an area of disturbed weather acquired convection and was designated Tropical Depression Nineteen @-@ E. Upon formation , the depression was forecast to dissipate because of strong wind shear . Moving little , its development was constantly hindered by wind shear . The depression had difficulty organizing , and on October 9 , it became so disorganized that advisories were discontinued . 
 The depression 's remnants moved eastward and interacted with an area of disturbed weather . This regenerated the convection , and the depression regenerated on October 10 , possibly with a new center of circulation . However , the National Hurricane Center 's preliminary report does not indicate that the depression ever dissipated or regenerated . Moving little in a favorable environment , the depression was upgraded to Tropical Storm Rosa on October 11 , and to hurricane status a day later . At the time it was about 345 miles ( 555 km ) south of the southern tip of the Baja California Peninsula . Rosa continued drifting slowly for another day and a half . Then , a trough caused Rosa to begin moving and accelerate north @-@ northeastward . On October 14 , Rosa peaked in intensity as a Category 2 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale with winds of 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) and a central pressure of 974 mb ( 974 hPa ) . A few hours later , Rosa made landfall near La Concepción about 70 mi ( 110 km ) south @-@ southeast of Mazatlán . Rosa 's circulation weakened over the mountains , and it dissipated on October 15 . 
 = = Preparations , impact , and aftermath = = 
 On October 12 , a hurricane watch was issued for the coast from Culiacán to Manzanillo and the Baja California Peninsula south of latitude 24 ° N. At the same time , a tropical storm warning was issued from Manzanillo to Tepic . On October 14 , a hurricane warning was issued for the coast between Culiacán and Cabo Corrientes , and a tropical storm warning south of Cabo Corrientes to Manzanillo . All watches and warnings were lifted later that day . 
 On October 13 and 14 , two ships , the London Spirit and the Marie Maersk , encountered winds of tropical storm or hurricane force . The Marie Maersk was located especially close to the eye , and its observations were useful to forecasters . 
 In Nayarit and Durango , two people drowned , while in Sinaloa , four people were pronounced missing . More than 100 @,@ 000 people in Nayarit had their homes damaged . Rosa 's winds damaged many telephone poles , power lines , and houses in Sinaloa . Rainfall between 3 to 5 inches ( 76 to 127 mm ) caused many landslides in mountainous areas . Mudslides forced the evacuation of 400 people from two coastal villages in Jalisco . Rosa dumped rain over parts of coastal and inland Mexico ; the highest rainfall total was 14 @.@ 09 in ( 358 mm ) at Mesa de Pedro Pablo . 
 Rosa sent moisture into the United States , which , in combination with humidity drawn north from the Gulf of Mexico , caused heavy thunderstorms and flooding in parts of thirty eight Texas counties on October 15 to 19 . The flooding was worst around the San Jacinto and Trinity River basins , and in coastal areas . Rainfall totals ranged from 8 in ( 200 mm ) to more than 28 in ( 710 mm ) . The rain levels caused 100 @-@ year floods at nineteen stations . Several records were broken , some of which had stood since 1940 . In the case of the Lavaca River near Edna , it broke a record set in 1936 . The flooding destroyed 3069 homes , heavily damaged <unk> , and damaged <unk> others . <unk> and roads sustained damage , while broken gas and oil pipelines caused spills and environmental damage in the Lower San Jacinto River and Galveston Bay . Twenty @-@ two people died due to effects from the storm . In total , the flooding in southeastern Texas caused 700 million ( 1995 USD ) in damage . On October 18 , the Federal Emergency Management Agency ( FEMA ) declared the worst @-@ affected areas a disaster area . After the declaration , FEMA received 26 @,@ 000 applications for disaster assistance and approved 54 million ( 1995 USD ) in aid . 
 = Bremen @-@ class cruiser = 
 The Bremen class was a group of seven light cruisers built for the Imperial German Navy in the early 1900s . The seven ships , Bremen , Hamburg , Berlin , Lübeck , München , Leipzig , and Danzig , were an improvement upon the previous Gazelle class . They were significantly larger than the earlier class , and were faster and better armored . Like the Gazelles , they were armed with a main battery of ten 10 @.@ 5 cm SK L / 40 guns and a pair of torpedo tubes . 
 The ships of the Bremen class served in a variety of roles , from overseas cruiser to fleet scout to training ship . Bremen and Leipzig were deployed to the American and Asian stations , respectively , while the other five ships remained in German waters with the High Seas Fleet . At the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , Leipzig was in the Pacific Ocean in the East Asia Squadron ; she saw action at the Battle of Coronel in November and was sunk a month later at the Battle of the Falkland Islands . Bremen was sunk by a Russian mine in December 1915 , but the other five ships of the class survived the war . 
 Three of the surviving ships , Lübeck , München , and Danzig , were seized by Britain as war prizes after the end of the war and sold for scrapping . The other two ships , Hamburg and Berlin , were used as training cruisers through the 1920s . They were converted into barracks ships in the mid @-@ 1930s , a role they filled for a decade ; in 1944 , Hamburg was sunk by British bombers and later broken up for scrap , while Berlin was scuttled in deep water after the end of World War II to dispose of a load of chemical weapons . 
 = = Design = = 
 The 1898 Naval Law authorized the construction of 30 new light cruisers by 1904 ; the Gazelle @-@ class cruiser filled the requirements for the first ten <unk> design for the Bremen class was an improved version of the preceding Gazelle class , the improvements chiefly being in size and speed . To accommodate the more powerful propulsion system , a third funnel was added . The armored deck was also thickened significantly . The fourth ship of the class , Lübeck , was fitted with steam turbines , so the quality of turbine engines could be compared with otherwise identical vessels . The Bremen class was followed by the Königsberg class , which was very similar to the Bremens , including the same armament . And like the Bremens , one ship of the class , Stettin , was equipped with turbine engines while the rest had traditional triple @-@ expansion engine . 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 The Bremen @-@ class ships were 110 @.@ 6 meters ( 362 ft 10 in ) long at the waterline and 111 @.@ 1 m ( 364 ft 6 in ) long overall . They had a beam of 13 @.@ 3 m ( 44 ft ) and a draft of 5 @.@ 28 to 5 @.@ 68 m ( 17 @.@ 3 to 18 @.@ 6 ft ) forward . They displaced 3 @,@ 278 metric tons ( 3 @,@ 226 long tons ) as designed and between 3 @,@ 652 to 3 @,@ 816 t ( 3 @,@ 594 to 3 @,@ 756 long tons ; 4 @,@ 026 to 4 @,@ 206 short tons ) at full combat load . The ships ' hulls were constructed with transverse and longitudinal steel frames , and incorporated twelve watertight compartments . The hulls also had a double bottom that ran for 56 percent of the length of the hull . 
 All seven ships were good sea boats , but they were crank and rolled up to twenty degrees . They were also very wet at high speeds and suffered from a slight weather helm . Nevertheless , the ships turned tightly and were very maneuverable . In a hard turn , their speed fell up to 35 percent . They had a transverse metacentric height of .58 to <unk> m ( 1 ft 11 in to 2 ft 0 in ) . The ships had a standard crew of fourteen officers and between 274 and 287 enlisted men , though later in their careers , these figures increased to 19 and 330 , respectively . The Bremen @-@ class ships carried a number of smaller boats , including one picket boat , one pinnace , two cutters , two yawls , and one dinghy . 
 = = = Machinery = = = 
 With the exception of Lübeck , the ships ' propulsion system consisted of two triple @-@ expansion engines , designed to give 9 @,@ 863 indicated horsepower ( 7 @,@ 355 kW ) for a top speed of 22 knots ( 41 km / h ; 25 mph ) . Lübeck was instead fitted with a pair of Parsons steam turbines , rated at 11 @,@ 343 shaft horsepower ( 8 @,@ 458 kW ) and a top speed of 22 @.@ 5 knots ( 41 @.@ 7 km / h ; 25 @.@ 9 mph ) , though all seven ships exceeded these speeds on trials . All seven ships had ten coal @-@ fired Marine @-@ type water @-@ tube boilers , which were trunked into three funnels amidships . The ships carried up to 860 tonnes ( 850 long tons ) of coal , which gave the first three ships a range of 4 @,@ 270 nautical miles ( 7 @,@ 910 km ; 4 @,@ 910 mi ) at 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) ; Lübeck 's less efficient turbine engines cut her cruising radius to 3 @,@ 800 nmi ( 7 @,@ 000 km ; 4 @,@ 400 mi ) , while the last three ships of the class had a longer range , at 4 @,@ 690 nmi ( 8 @,@ 690 km ; 5 @,@ 400 mi ) . Bremen and Hamburg had three generators that produced a total output of 111 kilowatts at 110 volts ; the rest of the ships had two generators rated at 90 kilowatts at the same voltage . 
 = = = Armament and armor = = = 
 The ships of the class were armed with ten 10 @.@ 5 cm SK L / 40 guns in single mounts . Two were placed side by side forward on the forecastle , six were located amidships , three on either side , and two were placed side by side aft . The guns could engage targets out to 12 @,@ 200 m ( 40 @,@ 000 ft ) . They were supplied with 1 @,@ 500 rounds of ammunition , for 150 shells per gun . Later in their careers , Bremen and Lübeck had two 15 cm SK L / 45 guns installed in place of the two forward and two rear 10 @.@ 5 cm guns . They retained the six broadside 10 @.@ 5 cm guns . All seven ships were also equipped with two 45 cm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes with five torpedoes . These tubes were submerged in the hull on the broadside . Lübeck later had a pair of 50 cm ( 20 in ) torpedo tubes installed in deck mounts , with four torpedoes . 
 Armor protection for the members of the class consisted of two layers of steel with one layer of Krupp armor . The ships were protected by an armored deck that was up to 80 millimeters ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) thick . Sloped armor 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick gave some measure of vertical protection , coupled with the coal bunkers . The conning tower had 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick sides and a 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) thick roof . The ships ' guns were protected by 50 mm thick shields . 
 = = Construction = = 
 The seven ships of the Bremen class were built between 1902 and 1907 , at various German dockyards , including private firms and government shipyards . 
 = = Service history = = 
 The ships of the Bremen class served in a variety of roles throughout their careers . Bremen and Leipzig served abroad from 1905 to 1914 ; the former returned to Germany shortly before the outbreak of World War I , and the latter remained with the East Asia Squadron . Hamburg , Berlin , Lübeck , and Danzig served in the reconnaissance forces of the High Seas Fleet after they entered service . München meanwhile was used as a torpedo test ship during her pre @-@ war service . All seven of the ships saw action during the First World War , though only Bremen and Leipzig was lost during the conflict . 
 Danzig was present during the Battle of Heligoland Bight in August 1914 , but did not directly engage the British ships . She did , however , rescue survivors from the sinking cruiser Ariadne . Hamburg was present for the raid on Scarborough , Hartlepool and Whitby in December 1914 , where she briefly encountered — but did not engage — British light forces . Only one ship , München , saw action at the Battle of Jutland on 31 May and 1 June 1916 , where she was hit by five medium @-@ caliber shells and moderately damaged . Three of the ships , Bremen , Lübeck , and Danzig , saw action against Imperial Russian forces in the Baltic Sea during the war , including during the assault on Libau and the Battle of the Gulf of Riga in 1915 and during Operation Albion in 1917 . Bremen struck Russian mines in December 1915 and sank with the majority of her crew going down with her . Leipzig , still overseas at the start of the war , saw action at the Battles of Coronel and Falkland Islands in late 1914 . At the former , she engaged the British cruiser HMS Glasgow , and at the latter , was sunk by Glasgow and HMS Cornwall . 
 Berlin was withdrawn from service in 1916 and disarmed . München was badly damaged by a British mine in October 1916 , and thereafter decommissioned for use as a barracks ship . Hamburg was also used as barracks ship later in the war , and Leipzig became a training ship in 1917 . Danzig was the last ship to leave active service , in late 1917 . Of the five surviving ships , Berlin and Hamburg were retained by the newly reorganized Reichsmarine as training ships . The remaining three , Lübeck , München , and Danzig , were surrendered as war prizes to the United Kingdom , which sold them for scrapping in the early 1920s . Hamburg and Berlin soldiered on as training cruisers into the late 1920s and early 1930s ; by the mid @-@ 1930s , they had again been converted into floating barracks . Hamburg was sunk by British bombers in 1944 , and later raised and broken up for scrap in 1949 . Berlin survived World War II and was loaded with chemical weapons and scuttled in the Skaggerak after the war to dispose of the munitions . 
 = Illinois Route 103 = 
 Illinois Route 103 is a 9 @.@ 18 @-@ mile ( 14 @.@ 77 km ) state route in west @-@ central Illinois , United States . The route , entirely in Schuyler County , runs from U.S. Route 24 near Ripley east to the intersection of U.S. Route 67 and Illinois Route 100 across the Illinois River from Beardstown . In addition to connecting Ripley and Beardstown , Route 103 also serves the community of Sugar Grove . The highway is part of both the National Highway System and the Lincoln Heritage Trail . Route 103 is maintained by the Illinois Department of Transportation . The route was established in 1924 between Ripley and its current eastern terminus ; its western terminus was moved north to its current location in 1932 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Route 103 begins at a junction with U.S. Route 24 in Woodstock Township in southern Schuyler County , northeast of Ripley . The route initially runs eastward along the <unk> River , passing through a forested area . After the river turns southward , the highway continues east through farmland . Route 103 intersects County Route 9 before entering the unincorporated community of Sugar Grove , where it meets County Route 1 . After passing through Sugar Grove , the highway enters Bainbridge Township . The road makes a small southward dip through a tree @-@ lined area , passing a small group of buildings and crossing a creek , before returning to its eastward trajectory . The route passes to the north of the community of Cottonwood . Route 103 runs through open farmland at the eastern end of its route , crossing two creeks and passing several farm buildings . The highway terminates at a junction with U.S. Route 67 and Illinois Route 100 , across the Illinois River from Beardstown . 
 Route 103 is an undivided two @-@ lane road for its entire length . The entire route is part of the National Highway System , a network of roads deemed significant to the nation 's economy , defense , and mobility . Route 103 is also part of the Lincoln Heritage Trail , a series of highways connecting places with historic connections to Abraham Lincoln . According to the Illinois Department of Transportation , the annual average daily traffic on Route 103 in 2009 ranged from 1300 vehicles near the western terminus to 1400 near Sugar Grove ; 200 to 225 of those vehicles were trucks . 
 = = History = = 
 Route 103 was designated in 1924 between Ripley and Beardstown . A road between Ripley and the route 's current eastern terminus was first marked on state highway maps in 1924 ; this route began at Ripley and ran parallel to and south of the current route on its western half , before turning north and following the current alignment east at Layton . Route 103 was first numbered on the 1929 Illinois highway map . The western terminus of Route 103 was moved from Ripley to its current location in 1932 , and the western half of the highway moved northward to its present alignment . The community of Layton , which was near the present location of Sugar Grove , was marked along the route until 1951 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Schuyler County . 
 = Telephone ( song ) = 
 " Telephone " is a song recorded by American singer Lady Gaga featuring Beyoncé , for Gaga 's third EP , The Fame Monster ( 2009 ) . The song was written by Gaga , Rodney Jerkins , LaShawn Daniels , <unk> Franklin and Beyoncé . Inspired by her fear of suffocation , Gaga explained that the lyrics preferring relaxing on the dance floor to answering her lover 's phone call are a metaphor , the phone calling her representing the fear of not having worked hard enough to succeed . Originally , Gaga wrote the song for Britney Spears , who recorded a demo . Musically , " Telephone " consists of an expanded bridge , verse @-@ rap and a sampled voice of an operator announcing that the phone line is unreachable . Beyoncé appears in the middle of the song , singing the verses in a rapid @-@ fire way , accompanied by double beats . 
 The song received positive reviews from critics who frequently noted " Telephone " as a stand @-@ out track from The Fame Monster . It was Grammy @-@ nominated for Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals in 2011 . " Telephone " charted in a number of countries due to digital sales following the album 's release , namely in the United States , Australia , Canada , the Netherlands , New Zealand , Sweden and Hungary . The song was particularly successful in Europe where it reached the top of the charts in Belgium , Denmark , Hungary , Ireland , Netherlands , Norway and the United Kingdom . According to the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry , the single sold 7 @.@ 4 million digital copies worldwide in 2010 , making it one of Gaga 's best @-@ selling singles . 
 The accompanying music video is a continuation of the video for her 2009 song , " Paparazzi " , and is also shot as a short film . After Gaga gets bailed out of prison by Beyoncé , they go to a diner and poison the guests having breakfast . After the homicide they escape and end up in a high speed police chase . The video referenced Quentin Tarantino and his films Pulp Fiction ( 1994 ) and Kill Bill : Volume 1 ( 2003 ) . The video received generally positive reviews was nominated for three awards at the 2010 MTV Video Music Awards , including one for Video of the Year . In January 2015 Billboard named it the best video of the first half of the decade . In memory of Alexander McQueen , Gaga performed an acoustic rendition of " Telephone " mixed with " Dance in the Dark " at the 2010 BRIT Awards . It was also added to the set list of The Monster Ball Tour in 2010 , the Born This Way Ball in 2012 and ArtRave : The Artpop Ball in 2014 . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Telephone " was originally written by Gaga for singer Britney Spears 's sixth studio album , Circus , but Spears rejected it . Later , Gaga recorded the song as a collaboration with Beyoncé for The Fame Monster . Gaga said , " I wrote it for her [ Spears ] a long time ago and she just didn 't use it for her album . It 's fine because I love the song and I get to perform it now . " Spears ' demo for the song leaked in May 2010 . Additionally , the guest vocalist was originally going to be Spears , but ultimately Gaga made Beyoncé the featured vocalist instead . The main inspiration behind the song was Gaga 's fear of suffocation as she felt that she seldom found time to just let loose and have fun . 
 Fear of suffocation — something that I have or fear is never being able to enjoy myself , ... ' Cause I love my work so much , I find it really hard to go out and have a good time . ... I don 't go to nightclubs , ... You don 't see pictures of me falling out of a club drunk . I don 't go — and that 's because I usually go and then , you know , a whiskey and a half into it , I got to get back to work . 
 In May 2011 , Gaga said her " emotional connection " with the song was difficult . When she was asked if it was because the song was originally written for Britney Spears , she answered : " Well that ’ s not exactly what happened , but I don ’ t want to delve into that . I could delve into it if you turn that ( motions to recorder ) off ... But ultimately the mix and the process of getting the production finished was very stressful for me . So when I say it ’ s my worst song it has nothing to do with the song , just my emotional connection to it . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Telephone " was written by Lady Gaga , Rodney Jerkins , LaShawn Daniels , <unk> Franklin and Beyoncé . Musically , the song has been described as dance @-@ pop . Although constructed as a duet , Beyoncé 's first appearance is in the middle verse . She sings her lyrics through a brief interlude , and later backs the chorus during the rest of the song . The song starts off <unk> , with Gaga singing in a solemn voice over a harp melody , which changes immediately to a pounding beat . Essentially , Gaga is in a club and her boyfriend keeps calling , but she cannot talk as she was drinking and dancing to her favorite song . The chorus runs as follows : " Stop calling , stop calling , I don 't want to talk anymore . " " Telephone " consists of an expanded bridge , verse @-@ rap and an epilogue where a voice announces that the telephone line is not reachable at that moment . According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Sony / ATV Music Publishing , the song is set in the time signature of common time , with a tempo of 122 beats per minute . Gaga 's vocals range from the low @-@ note of F3 to the high @-@ note of C5 . It is set in the key of F minor , specifically , F Dorian mode , and has a basic sequence of Fm – A ♭ – B ♭ – Fm as its chord progression . 
 " Telephone " ' s lyrics relate to the singer preferring the dance floor to answering someone 's call . She further tells her lover that she left her head and her heart on the dance floor . The verses are sung in a rapid @-@ fire way , accompanied by double beats . According to Gaga , the phone addressed in the lyrics of the song is not just a physical phone , but also a person in her head telling her to keep working harder and harder . Gaga explained , " That 's my fear — that the phone 's ringing and my head 's ringing , ... Whether it 's a telephone or it 's just the thoughts in your head , that 's another fear . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The song has garnered positive reviews from music critics . Michael Hubbard from MusicOMH said that the song was " probably the best thing here [ on The Fame Monster ] . " He also complimented the " brilliant bridge " and the ending of the song where the caller gets through to her voicemail . Popjustice gave the song a positive review : " It 's a little bit like Gwen 's ' What You Waiting For ? ' meets Timbaland 's ' The Way I Are ' meets about fifty other things ... The structure 's quite exciting ... there is something tumultuously brilliant about Beyoncé 's contribution that makes everything seem fine and as if it was the plan all along . " Evan Sawdey from PopMatters said that " The much talked @-@ about Beyoncé collaboration ' Telephone ' , which — with its double @-@ time beat and rapid @-@ fire verses — proves to be one of the most adrenaline @-@ pumped songs that Gaga has yet crafted , the whole thing feeling like it 's about to veer of [ sic ] the tracks at any moment simply due to the giddy excitement shared between the two divas , easily turning it into the unquestioned highlight of The Fame Monster " . Mikael Woods from Los Angeles Times felt that " Telephone " is " a carefully considered meditation on how annoying it is when a dude keeps calling you while you 're throwing down at the club . " The New York Times ' Jon Caramanica commented that " Video Phone " and " Telephone " , " promised a new direction , but all Beyoncé did was show up to prove she could out @-@ Gaga Gaga , then return to her comfort zone . " 
 Nicki <unk> from Phoenix New Times listed " Telephone " as a stand @-@ out track from the album . Sarah Hajibagheri from The Times and Armond White , music and film critic for the New York Press , were not impressed with the song . Hajibagheri said " The appearance of Beyoncé 's vocal alongside ringtones on Telephone adds to the sense of utter chaos . " White elaborated that " [ The song ] celebrates a heedless refusal to communicate ; to mindlessly , heartlessly indulge pop culture — Tarantino style . " Melanie Bertoldi from Billboard gave the song a positive review , stating " Much like Kesha 's ' Blah Blah Blah ' , ' Telephone ' sets out to silence <unk> , with whom featured artist Beyoncé is all too familiar . ... By the time " Telephone " surges through a wall of cellular bleeps to return to its simple introduction , Gaga and Beyoncé have left the listener with just one option : surrender to the dancefloor . " 
 = = Accolades = = 
 In the annual Pazz and Jop mass critics poll of the year 's best in music , " Telephone " was ranked number 16 in 2010 . It was placed at number three by Rob Sheffield of Rolling Stone on his Top 25 Singles of the 2010 list . Sheffield further stated that " Telephone " was a " communication breakdown on the dance floor " and added , " Beyonce , the most egregiously non @-@ crazy pop star of our time , gets to pretend she 's as nuts as Gaga for a few minutes . " Amy Phillips from Pitchfork Media placed " Telephone " at number 55 in her list " Top Tracks of 2010 " saying it was " one of the less weird tracks " on The Fame Monster . The same year , the song was also included on year @-@ end lists of best songs compiled by MTV News and PopMatters at numbers ten and 29 respectively . On April 26 , 2011 , Gary Trust of Billboard listed " Telephone " at the fourth position on his list of the 10 All @-@ Female Hit Collaborations . 
 In 2010 , " Telephone " was nominated in the category for Favorite Song at the Australian Nickelodeon Kids ' Choice Awards and the 37th People 's Choice Awards . The following year , the song was nominated in the category for Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals at the 53rd Annual Grammy Awards . It was recognized as one of the Most Performed Songs in 2011 at the ASCAP Pop Music Awards . The same year , BMI listed " Telephone " as one of the Award @-@ Winning Songs at their awards ceremony . It also received nominations for Best Single and Best Collaboration at the 2011 Virgin Media Music Awards winning the latter . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In November 2009 due to strong digital sales , the song charted in Ireland , Australia , and the United Kingdom , debuting at numbers twenty @-@ six , twenty @-@ nine , and thirty respectively . The song became the top debut on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 issue dated December 12 , 2009 , at number thirty , due to digital sales . After weeks of fluctuating up the charts , " Telephone " reached a peak of three , becoming Gaga 's sixth consecutive top ten hit in the United States . The song peaked at number one on the Hot Dance Club Songs chart on the issue dated February 27 , 2010 . On March 15 , 2010 , Billboard announced that the song reached number one on the Pop Songs chart , thus becoming Gaga 's sixth consecutive number @-@ one on the chart , making her the only artist in history to do this . It also became Beyoncé 's sixth number @-@ one on Pop Songs . With this , Gaga and Beyoncé tied with Mariah Carey for most number @-@ ones since the Nielsen BDS @-@ based Top 40 airplay chart launched in 1992 . As of April 2016 , " Telephone " has sold 3 @,@ 400 @,@ 000 digital downloads in the United States . 
 In Australia , the song has reached a peak of three , and was certified triple platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for shipments of 210 @,@ 000 copies of the single . In New Zealand , the song debuted at thirty @-@ one , becoming the highest debut of that week . It ultimately reached a peak of three on the chart . " Telephone " debuted at number fourteen on the Canadian Hot 100 and moved to a peak of three , making it Gaga 's sixth consecutive top three single there . The song has been certified triple platinum by the Canadian Recording Industry Association ( CRIA ) for sales of 240 @,@ 000 digital downloads . 
 In the United Kingdom , " Telephone " reached number twelve on the UK Singles Chart on March 14 , 2010 . It climbed to number one the chart the following week , becoming Gaga 's fourth number @-@ one single ― and Beyoncé 's fifth ― in Britain . It has sold 757 @,@ 000 copies in the UK as of April 2016 , and was certified platinum by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) . According to the Official Charts Company , " Telephone " is the third best @-@ selling vinyl single in the UK for the 2010s decade . In Ireland , the song debuted at number twenty @-@ six , and moved up to number two , before reaching the summit of the chart the following week . " Telephone " debuted at thirty @-@ three on the Swedish charts , and in the top @-@ ten at number three on the Hungarian charts . According to the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry , the song has sold 7 @.@ 4 million copies across the world in 2010 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background and development = = = 
 The music video was filmed on January 28 , 2010 , and directed by Jonas Åkerlund . New York magazine reported that the concept of the video involved Beyoncé as she bails Gaga out of jail . In published photos from the set , Gaga and Beyoncé were seen shooting in a car called the " Pussy Wagon " , which Uma Thurman 's character drove in Quentin Tarantino 's 2003 film Kill Bill : Vol . 1 . Other concepts of the video involve scenes at a diner , a cameo from singer Tyrese Gibson , and a prison shower scene . Gaga and Beyoncé wore " destroyed denim pieces " , designed by Frank Fernández and Oscar <unk> . In an interview with E ! Online , Gaga explained the deeper meaning behind the video . 
 There was this really amazing quality in ' Paparazzi ' , where it kind of had this pure pop music quality but at the same time it was a commentary on fame culture ... I wanted to do the same thing with this video ... There certainly is a Tarantino @-@ inspired quality in the [ ' Telephone ' ] video ... His direct involvement in [ it ] came from him lending me the Pussy Wagon . We were having lunch one day in Los Angeles and I was telling him about my concept for the video and he loved it so much he said , " You gotta use the Pussy Wagon . " 
 On February 5 , 2010 , Gaga was interviewed by Ryan Seacrest on KIIS @-@ FM . She commented on the video , saying , " What I like about it is it 's a real true pop event , and when I was younger , I was always excited when there was a big giant event happening in pop music and that 's what I wanted this to be . " Gaga also said that her intent was to take " the idea that America is full of young people that are inundated with information and technology and turn it into something that was more of a commentary on the kind of country that we are . " 
 Rock band Semi Precious Weapons confirmed to MTV News that they would have a cameo role in the music video . On February 15 , 2010 , three film stills from the music video were posted on Gaga 's website . The stills depicted Gaga in three separate scenes : a kitchen scene where she wears a plastic chef 's hat and a telephone made entirely of hair on her head , a scene in a diner with her dancers , where she is seen wearing an American flag patterned bikini and bandana , and a black @-@ and @-@ white photo of Gaga wearing a hat made from multiple triangles and corded telephones . The video was originally slated to premiere in February 2010 but was pushed back to March 2010 instead . On March 9 , 2010 , more stills of the video were posted online . The video premiered on E ! News and Vevo on March 11 , 2010 . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The music video is over nine minutes long and begins where " Paparazzi " left off after Gaga was arrested for killing her boyfriend by poisoning his drink . Gaga is taken to a women 's prison , where she is led to her cell by two prison guards , who strip her of shoulder @-@ padded dress and left lying nude , while she is mocked by the other women prison inmates . One of the guards comments : " I told you she didn 't have a dick " , referring to the rumors that Gaga is intersex . For the video 's first three minutes , it shows Gaga 's activities in the prison — including kissing a lesbian prisoner ( Heather <unk> ) in the exercise yard , wearing sunglasses made out of half @-@ smoked cigarettes , and watching catfights in the commissary . Gaga 's sister , Natali Germanotta , makes a cameo in the commissary scene . After that , Gaga answers a call from Beyoncé , and begins to sing the song . She performs the first verse and chorus with other scantily clad inmates , followed by a bridge featuring Gaga wearing a yellow caution tape outfit designed by Brian Lichtenberg . 
 Gaga is bailed out and exits to find Beyoncé waiting for her in the " Pussy Wagon " . Beyoncé is nicknamed Honey Bee , a reference to the character Honey Bunny in Tarantino 's 1994 crime film Pulp Fiction . After an exchange of dialogues , Gaga and Beyoncé travel through the desert and pull over at a diner . Beyoncé sits opposite to her boyfriend , Gibson , but becomes tired of his stupidity and poisons him , but it does not kill him like she had hoped . The video later shifts to an intermediate sequence called " Let 's Make a Sandwich " , where Gaga stands in a kitchen , wearing a folded @-@ up telephone on her head , while dancers cavort behind her , holding salad tongs and assorted cutlery . Ultimately , Gaga prepares a sandwich and eats it , after a dance sequence . In the meantime , Gaga mixes poison into all of the dishes she is preparing for the unsuspecting customers causing Gibson and everybody else , including characters played by Semi Precious Weapons and her Great Dane , Lava , to die . Gaga and Beyoncé perform another dance sequence , wearing American flag inspired garments and shredded denims , while strutting around the dead bodies . Gaga and Beyoncé leave the diner in the " Pussy Wagon " and travel on a highway as a news reporter ( played by Jai Rodriguez ) reports the murders at the diner . The final shots shows Gaga and Beyoncé travelling through the desert with police sirens wailing in the background . The video ends with the line " To Be Continued ... " followed by end credits . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 James Montogomery from MTV commented : " With ' Telephone ' , Gaga has entered the rarest of pop <unk> , up there with the Madonnas and the Michael Jacksons . " Matt Donnelly from Los Angeles Times wrote that the " Telephone " music video is a " visual feast , packed with fantastic fashion , girl fights , poisoned diner food , an army of headpieces and lots of Gaga goodness . " Amy Odell from New York magazine felt that " This is Gaga 's video , but Beyoncé is the best part : she actually shows the angry , crazy side that we just knew lurked beneath her too @-@ perfect facade . " Monica Herrera from Billboard wrote : " [ The video ] more than measures up to the hype . ... ' Telephone ' clip is chock full of intrigue , prison fights , makeout scenes , mass poisoning and plenty of skin @-@ baring versions of what you might call ' outfits ' . " Tanner Stransky from Entertainment Weekly commented : " Is it as good as her epic ' Bad Romance ' video ? Sadly , I don 't think so . But it 's better than anything else out there . " Jennifer Cady of the website E ! Online praised Beyoncé 's " always fierce " look during the video . A writer of The Huffington Post wrote , " As usual there is murder , masturbation , product placement , Tarantino referencing and lots of impractical headwear . " In January 2015 , Billboard named the video as the best music video of the first half of the 2010s ( decade ) . 
 Sandy Rios , president of the Culture Campaign criticized the video on Fox News in an interview with Megyn Kelly , calling it " disgusting ... poison for the minds of our kids " . Critic Armond White , of the New York Press , described the video as " cruel and ugly " also stating that it " epitomizes the insanity of the contemporary pop mainstream " and pays " homage to Tarantino 's influence " in distorting " pop culture pleasure into nonsense " . William Goodman of Spin called the video a " Whitman 's sampler of pop nuggets " and found a " boom @-@ pow effect of brightly @-@ colored Japanese television . " He finished his review by concluding that the " video must have cost a fortune " and described it as a " big @-@ budget , pop masterwork " . Caryn Ganz of Rolling Stone called the video a " mash @-@ up of lesbian prison porn , campy sexploitation flicks and <unk> winks at the two divas ' public personas . " He noted that " If Quentin Tarantino and Russ Meyer remade Thelma & Louise as an orgy of product placement with fiercely choreographed interludes , this would be the result . " Ganz finished his review by saying that " The clip is certainly cinematic and oddly feminist , and gasps at a larger statement about consumer culture . " 
 In May 2011 , Gaga expressed some dissatisfaction with the video in an interview with Time Out , saying : " I can 't even watch the Telephone video , I hate it so much . Beyoncé and I are great together . But there are so many ideas in that video and all I see in that video is my brain throbbing with ideas and I wish I had edited myself a little bit more . " 
 = = = Recognition and accolades = = = 
 The video was placed at number three on NME 's list of " 50 Best Music Videos of 2010 " along with the comment that it 's " nearly ten minutes of product placements , a Thelma and Louise storyline , bizarre outfits and some uniquely Gaga @-@ esque dance moves . " It was also placed at number 17 on NME 's list of " 100 Greatest Music Videos " and the writer concluded , " ' Telephone ' eschews all the overreaching cosmic weirdness of her recent clips and settles for a nine @-@ minute <unk> action @-@ filled Tarantino rip @-@ off . " On Spin 's list of " The 20 Best Music Videos of 2010 " , the video was put at number seven along with the comment that " the decision to enlist the normally buttoned @-@ up Beyoncé in Gaga 's <unk> jailbird fantasia was genius . " The writers of Pitchfork Media also put the video on their list of " The Top Music Videos of 2010 " . On August 3 , 2010 , the video received three nominations at the 2010 MTV Video Music Awards , in the categories of Best Choreography , Video of the Year and Best Collaboration , winning the latter and losing the former to Gaga 's own " Bad Romance " video . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Gaga performed " Telephone " at the BRIT Awards on February 16 , 2010 , at Earls Court Exhibition Centre . The performance was inspired by the recent death of her friend , fashion designer Alexander McQueen . Initially she had planned a different version of the performance , but changed the concept at the last minute , since she wanted to pay tribute to McQueen . Hence she chose an acoustic version of " Telephone " and a remix of " Dance in the Dark " . Before the show , she posted a message on her Twitter account : " Tonight 's performance is inspired by our friend . Mask by Phillip Treacy , Sculpture by Nick Knight , Music by Lady Gaga . We miss you . " She started the performance by announcing " This is for Alexander McQueen . " Gaga was dressed in a complete white outfit with a huge Marie @-@ Antoinette style wig . The whole performance was low @-@ key in comparison to her previous ones . 
 Gaga added the song to The Monster Ball Tour 's setlist , for the European leg . It was performed in the second act , titled " Subway " . She was dressed in black and played a keytar . " Telephone " , as well as " Brown Eyes " ( from The Fame ) , was also performed on the British comedy chat show Friday Night with Jonathan Ross , on March 3 , 2010 , for an episode that aired two days later . Gaga performed " Telephone " on the Japanese television show Music Station on April 16 , 2010 . She wore a lace cat suit and a pair of plastic batwing shoulders , designed by <unk> and <unk> Nakazato respectively . In May 2011 , Gaga performed the song during Radio 1 's Big Weekend in Carlisle , Cumbria . On June 26 , 2011 , Beyoncé performed the song during the Glastonbury Festival in front of more than 175 @,@ 000 fans . The song was also performed on Gaga 's 2012 Born This Way Ball Tour with the same dance choreography . During the tour ArtRave : The Artpop Ball in 2014 , the song was performed again with the same melody as " Poker Face " . 
 = = Other versions = = 
 On May 2 , 2010 , a demo of " Telephone " featuring vocals by Britney Spears leaked onto the web . After suggestions that the demo may be fake , the producer of the song , Rodney Jerkins , confirmed the authenticity of the song , via Twitter . He added that the leaked version was an early , unmixed demo recording and , moreover , denied leaking the song , arguing that , despite the fact that he has been asked to leak the full song , he did not do it . The musical style of the demo was compared with Spears ' 2007 single " Piece of Me " , and the song itself generated comparisons with Spears ' sound in her fifth studio album Blackout . Rob Sheffield of Rolling Stone praised Spears ' version including it at number twenty @-@ five on his Top 25 Singles of the 2010 list . 
 Little Mix blended " Telephone " with Queen 's " Radio Ga Ga " ( 1984 ) during the eighth series of the British The X Factor and later released this version as a single . " Telephone " was covered by Lea Michele as Rachel Berry and Charice Pempengco as Sunshine Corazon for the American TV show Glee episode " Audition " , which aired on September 21 , 2010 . This version was released as a single , and reached number seventeen in Canada , eighteen in Ireland , twenty @-@ three in the US , and thirty in Australia . 
 = = Track listing and formats = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording and management 
 Gaga 's vocals recorded at Darkchild Studios ( Los Angeles , California ) 
 Knowles ' vocals recorded at Studio Groove ( Osaka , Japan ) 
 Mixed at Chalice Studios ( Los Angeles , California ) 
 Mastered at Oasis Mastering ( Burbank , California ) , <unk> Recording and Mastering Studios ( Hollywood , California ) 
 Knowles appears courtesy of Music World Entertainment and Columbia Records 
 Published by Stefani Germanotta P / K / A Lady Gaga ( BMI ) , Sony / ATV Songs LLC , House Of Gaga Publishing Inc . , <unk> Music Inc . ( BMI ) Rodney Jerkins / EMI Blackwood Music Publishing ( BMI ) , EMI April Music ( ASCAP ) , EMI Blackwood / RJ Productions LLC , B @-@ Day Publishing and EMI April Music , Inc . ( ASCAP ) 
 Personnel 
 Credits adapted from The Fame Monster album liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications and sales = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Sarah Churchill , Duchess of Marlborough = 
 Sarah Churchill ( née Jenyns , spelt Jennings in most modern references ) , Duchess of Marlborough ( 5 June 1660 ( old style ) – 18 October 1744 ) rose to be one of the most influential women of her time through her close friendship with Queen Anne of Great Britain . Sarah 's friendship and influence with Princess Anne was widely known , and leading public figures often turned their attentions to her in the hope that she would influence Anne to comply with requests . As a result , by the time Anne became queen , Sarah ’ s knowledge of government , and intimacy with the Queen , had made her a powerful friend and a dangerous enemy . 
 Sarah enjoyed a " long and devoted " relationship with her husband of more than 40 years , John Churchill , 1st Duke of Marlborough . She acted as Anne 's agent after Anne 's father , James II , was deposed during the Glorious Revolution ; and she promoted her interests during the rule of James 's successors , William III and Mary II . When Anne came to the throne after William 's death in 1702 , the Duke of Marlborough , together with Sidney Godolphin , the first Earl of Godolphin , rose to head the government , partly owing to his wife 's friendship with the Queen . While the Duke was out of the country commanding troops in the War of the Spanish Succession , Sarah kept him informed of court intrigue , while he sent her requests and political advice , which she would then convey to the Queen . Sarah tirelessly campaigned on behalf of the Whigs , while also devoting much of her time to building projects such as Blenheim Palace . She died in 1744 at the age of eighty @-@ four . 
 A strong @-@ willed woman who liked to get her own way , Sarah tried the Queen 's patience whenever she disagreed with her on political , court or church appointments . After her final break with Anne in 1711 , Sarah and her husband were dismissed from the court , but she returned to favour under the Hanoverians following Anne 's death . She had famous subsequent disagreements with many important people , including her daughter the second Duchess of Marlborough ; the architect of Blenheim Palace , John Vanbrugh ; prime minister Robert Walpole ; King George II ; and his wife , Queen Caroline . The money she inherited from the Marlborough trust left her one of the richest women in Europe . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Sarah Jennings was born on 5 June 1660 , probably at Holywell House , St Albans , Hertfordshire . She was the daughter of Richard Jennings ( or Jenyns ) , a Member of Parliament , and Frances Thornhurst ; her paternal grandfather was Sir John Jennings , father , by his wife Alice Spencer , of an extraordinarily large family . Her uncle ( Martin Lister ) was a prominent naturalist . Richard Jennings came into contact with James , Duke of York ( the future James II , brother of King Charles II ) , in 1663 , during negotiations for the recovery of an estate in Kent ( <unk> Court ) that had been the property of his mother @-@ in @-@ law , Susan Lister ( nee Temple ) . James 's first impressions were favourable , and in 1664 Sarah ’ s sister , Frances , was appointed maid of honour to the Duchess of York , Anne Hyde . 
 Although James forced Frances to give up the post because of her marriage to a Catholic , James did not forget the family . In 1673 , Sarah entered court as maid of honour to James ’ s second wife , Mary of Modena . 
 Sarah became close to the young Princess Anne in about 1675 , and the friendship grew stronger as the two grew older . In late 1675 , when she was still only fifteen , she met John Churchill , 10 years her senior , who fell in love with her . Churchill , who had previously been a lover of Charles II ’ s mistress , Barbara Palmer , Duchess of Cleveland , had little to offer financially , as his estates were deeply in debt . Sarah had a rival for Churchill in Catherine Sedley , a wealthy mistress of James II and the choice of Churchill 's father , Sir Winston Churchill , who was anxious to restore the family 's fortune . John may have hoped to take Sarah as a mistress in place of the Duchess of Cleveland , who had recently departed for France , but surviving letters from Sarah to John show her unwillingness to assume that role . 
 = = = Marriage = = = 
 In 1677 , Sarah 's brother Ralph died , and she and her sister , Frances , became co @-@ heirs of the Jennings estates in Hertfordshire and Kent . John chose Sarah over Catherine Sedley , but both John 's and Sarah 's families disapproved of the match , therefore they married secretly in the winter of 1677 – 78 . 
 John and Sarah were both Protestants in a predominantly Catholic court , a circumstance that would influence their political allegiances . Although no date was recorded , the marriage was announced only to the Duchess of York , and a small circle of friends , so that Sarah could keep her court position as Maid of Honour . 
 When Sarah became pregnant , her marriage was announced publicly ( on 1 October 1678 ) , and she retired from the court to give birth to her first child , Harriet , who died in infancy . When the Duke of York went into self @-@ imposed exile to Scotland as a result of the furore surrounding the Popish Plot , John and Sarah accompanied him , and Charles II rewarded John 's loyalty by creating him Baron Churchill of Eyemouth in Scotland , Sarah thus becoming Lady Churchill . The Duke of York returned to England after the religious tension had eased , and Sarah was appointed a Lady of the Bedchamber to Anne after the latter 's marriage in 1683 . 
 = = = Reign of James II ( 1685 – 1688 ) = = = 
 The early reign of James II was relatively successful ; it was not expected that a Catholic king could assert control in a fiercely Protestant , anti @-@ Catholic country . In addition , his daughter and heir was a Protestant . However , when James attempted to reform the national religion , popular discontent against him and his government became widespread . The level of alarm increased when Queen Mary gave birth to a Roman Catholic son and heir , Prince James Francis Edward , on 10 June 1688 . A group of politicians known as the Immortal Seven invited Prince William of Orange , husband of James 's Protestant daughter Mary , to invade England and remove James from power , though the plan became public knowledge very quickly . James still retained some influence , and he ordered that both Lady Churchill and Princess Anne be placed under house arrest at Anne 's residence ( the Cockpit ) in the Palace of Whitehall ; both their husbands , though previously loyal to James , had switched their allegiances to William of Orange . Sarah , however , describes in her memoirs how the two easily escaped and fled to Nottingham : 
 The Princess went to Bed at the usual time to prevent suspicion . I came to her soon after ; and by the backstairs which went down from her closet , her Royal Highness [ Princess Anne ] , my Lady Fitzharding [ one of Sarah 's closest friends ] and I , with one servant , walked to the coach where we found the Bishop [ of London ] , and the Earl of Dorset . They conducted us that night to the Bishop 's house in the city , and the next day to my Lord Dorset 's at <unk> @-@ Hall . From there we went to the Earl of Northampton 's , and thence to Nottingham , where the country gathered about the Princess ; nor did she think herself safe till she saw that she was surrounded by the Prince of Orange 's friends . 
 Although Sarah implied that she had encouraged the escape for the safety of Princess Anne , it is more likely that she was protecting herself and her husband . If James succeeded in defeating Prince William of Orange in battle he might imprison and even execute Lord and Lady Churchill for treason , whereas it was unlikely he would condemn his daughter to a similar fate . But James fled to France in December 1688 rather than confront the invading army , allowing William to take over his throne . 
 = = = Unwanted servant : William III and Mary II = = = 
 Life for Sarah during the reign of William and Mary was difficult . Although the new King and Queen had awarded Sarah ’ s husband the title Earl of Marlborough , Sarah and John enjoyed considerably less favour than they had during the reign of James II . The new Earl of Marlborough had supported the now exiled James ; and by this time Sarah ’ s influence on Anne , and her cultivation of high members of the government to promote Anne ’ s interests , was widely known . Mary II responded to this by demanding that Anne dismiss Sarah . However , Anne refused . This created a rift between Mary and Anne that never healed . 
 Other problems also emerged . In 1689 , Anne 's supporters ( including the Marlboroughs and the Duke of Somerset ) demanded that she be granted a parliamentary annuity of £ 50 @,@ 000 , a sum that would end her dependence on William and Mary . Sarah was seen as the driving force behind this bill , creating further ill @-@ feeling towards her at court . William responded to the demand by offering the same sum from the Privy Purse , to keep Anne dependent on his generosity . However , Anne , through Sarah , refused , pointing out that a parliamentary grant would be more secure than charity from the Privy Purse . Eventually Anne received the grant from Parliament , and felt she owed this to Sarah 's efforts . 
 Sarah 's success as a leader of the opposition only intensified the Queen 's animosity towards the Marlboroughs . Although she could not dismiss Sarah from Anne 's service , Mary responded by evicting Sarah from her court lodgings at the Palace of Whitehall . Anne responded by leaving the court as well , and Sarah and she went to stay with their friends Charles Seymour , the sixth Duke of Somerset , and Elizabeth , the Duchess of Somerset at Syon House . Anne continued to defy the Queen ’ s demand for Sarah ’ s dismissal , even though an incriminating document signed by the Earl of Marlborough supporting the recently exiled James II and his supporters had been discovered . This document is likely to have been forged by Robert Young , a known forger and disciple of Titus Oates ; Oates was famous for stirring a strongly anti @-@ Catholic atmosphere in England between 1679 and the early 1680s . The Earl was imprisoned in the Tower of London . The loneliness Sarah suffered during these events drew her and Anne closer together . 
 Following the death of Mary II from smallpox in 1694 , William III restored Anne ’ s honours , as she was then become next in line to the throne , and provided her with apartments at St. James 's Palace . He also restored the Earl of Marlborough to all his offices and honours , and exonerated him from any past accusations . However , fearing Sarah ’ s powerful influence , William kept Anne out of government affairs , and he did not make her regent in his absences though she was now his heir apparent . 
 = = Power behind the throne : Queen Anne = = 
 In 1702 , King William III died , and Anne became Queen . Anne immediately offered John Churchill a dukedom , which Sarah initially refused . Sarah was concerned that a dukedom would strain the family 's finances ; a ducal family at the time was expected to show off its rank through lavish entertainments . Anne countered by offering the Marlboroughs a pension of £ 5000 a year , for life , from Parliament , as well as an extra £ 2000 a year from the Privy Purse , and they accepted the Dukedom . Sarah was promptly created Mistress of the Robes ( the highest office in the royal court that could be held by a woman ) , Groom of the Stole , Keeper of the Privy Purse , and Ranger of Windsor Great Park . The Duke accepted the Order of the Garter , as well as the office of Captain @-@ General of the army . 
 During much of Anne ’ s reign , the Duke of Marlborough was abroad fighting the War of the Spanish Succession , while Sarah remained in England . Despite being the most powerful woman in England besides the Queen , she appeared at court only rarely , preferring to oversee the construction of her new estate , Woodstock Manor ( the site of the later Blenheim Palace ) , a gift from Queen Anne after the duke 's victory at the Battle of Blenheim . Nevertheless , Anne sent her news of political developments in letters and consulted Sarah 's advice in most matters . 
 Sarah was famous for telling the Queen exactly what she thought , and did not offer her flattery . Anne and Sarah had invented <unk> for themselves during their youths which they continued to use after Anne became queen : Mrs Freeman ( Sarah ) and Mrs Morley ( Anne ) . Effectively a business manager , Sarah had control over the Queen 's position , from her finances to people admitted to the royal presence . 
 = = = Wavering influence = = = 
 Anne , however , expected kindness and compassion from her closest friend . Sarah was not forthcoming in this regard and frequently overpowered and dominated Anne . One major political disagreement occurred when Sarah insisted that her son @-@ in @-@ law , Charles Spencer , the third Earl of Sunderland , be admitted into the Privy Council . Sarah allied herself more strongly with the Whigs , who supported the Duke of Marlborough in the war ; and the Whigs hoped to utilise Sarah 's position as royal favourite . Anne refused to appoint Sunderland : she disliked the radical Whigs , whom she saw as a threat to her royal prerogative . Sarah used her close friendship with the Earl of Godolphin , whom Anne trusted , to eventually secure such appointments , but continued to lobby Anne herself . She sent Whig reading materials to Anne in an attempt to win her over to her own preferred political party . In 1704 , Anne confided to Lord Godolphin that she did not think she and Sarah could ever be true friends again . 
 = = = Clash of personalities = = = 
 Sarah 's frankness and indifference for rank , so admired by Anne earlier in their friendship , was now seen to be intrusive . Unlike most women of the time — many of whom did not have influence with their own husbands — Sarah had a powerful intimacy with the two most powerful men in the country , Marlborough and Godolphin . Godolphin , though a great friend of Sarah 's , had even considered refusing high office after Anne 's accession , preferring to live quietly and away from the political side of Sarah , who was bossy , interfering , and presumed to tell him what to do when Marlborough was away . Sarah , although a woman in a man 's world of national and international politics , was always ready to give her advice ; express her opinions ; antagonize with outspoken censure ; and insist on having her say on every possible occasion . However , she had a charm and vivaciousness which was admired by many ; and she could easily delight those she met with her wit . 
 Anne 's apparent withdrawal of genuine affection occurred for a number of reasons . She was frustrated by Sarah 's long absences from Court and despite numerous letters from Anne to Sarah on this subject , Sarah rarely attended , and wrote her excuses in letters to Anne . There was also a political difference between them : Anne was a Tory ( the party known as the " Church party " , religion being one of Anne 's chief concerns ) , and Sarah was a Whig ( the party known to support Marlborough 's wars ) . Sarah did not share Anne 's deep interest in religion , a subject she rarely mentioned , although at their last fraught interview she did warn Anne that she risked God 's vengeance for her unreasoning cruelty to Sarah . The Queen did not want this difference to come between them ; but Sarah , always thinking of her husband , wanted Anne to give more support to the Whigs , which she was not prepared to do . 
 Sarah was called to Cambridge in 1703 , where her only surviving son , John , Marquess of Blandford , was taken ill with smallpox . The Duke of Marlborough was recalled from the war and was at his bedside when he died on 20 February 1703 . Sarah was heartbroken over the loss of her son and became reclusive for a period , expressing her grief by closing herself off from Anne and either not answering her letters or doing so in a cold and formal manner . However , Sarah did not allow Anne to shut her out when Anne suffered bereavement . After the death of Anne 's husband , Prince George of Denmark in 1708 , Sarah arrived uninvited at Kensington Palace to find Anne with the prince 's body . She pressed the heartbroken Queen to move from Kensington to St James 's Palace in London , which Anne bluntly refused , and instead commanded Sarah to call Abigail Masham to attend her . Aware that Abigail was gaining more influence with Anne , Sarah disobeyed her , and instead scolded her for grieving over Prince George 's death . Although Anne eventually submitted and allowed herself to be taken to St James 's Palace , Sarah 's insensitivity greatly offended her and added to the already significant strain on the relationship . 
 = = Fall from grace = = 
 = = = Abigail Masham : political rival = = = 
 Sarah had previously introduced her impoverished cousin , then known as Abigail Hill , to court , with the intention of finding a role for her . Abigail , the eldest daughter of Sarah 's aunt , Elizabeth Hill ( Jennings ) , was working as a servant to Sir John Rivers of Kent when Sarah first learned of her existence . As Sarah 's grandfather Sir John Jennings had had two and twenty children , she had a multitude of cousins and could not know them all . She gave Abigail employment within her own household at St Albans , and after a tenure of satisfactory service , Abigail was made a Lady of the Bedchamber to Queen Anne in 1704 . Sarah later claimed in her memoirs that she had raised Abigail " in all regards as a sister " . 
 Abigail was also the second cousin of the Tory leader , Robert Harley , later first Earl of Oxford and Mortimer . <unk> , subtle and retiring , Abigail was the complete opposite of Sarah , who was dominating , blunt and scathing . During Sarah ’ s frequent absences from court , Abigail and Anne grew close ; Abigail was not only happy to give the Queen the kindness and compassion that Anne had longed for from Sarah , but she also never pressured the Queen about politics ; Anne responded with pathos to her flattery and charm . She was present at Abigail ’ s secret wedding to Samuel Masham , groom of the bedchamber to Prince George , in 1707 , without Sarah ’ s knowledge . 
 Sarah was completely oblivious to any friendship between Anne and Abigail , and was therefore surprised when she discovered that Abigail frequently saw the Queen in private . Sarah found out about Abigail 's marriage several months after it had occurred , and immediately went to see Anne – with the intention of informing her of the event . It was at this interview that Anne let slip that she had begged Abigail to tell Sarah of the marriage ; Sarah became suspicious about what had really happened . After questioning servants and Royal Household for a week about Abigail 's marriage , Sarah discovered that Anne had been present and had given Abigail a dowry of £ 2000 from the Privy Purse . This proved Anne 's duplicity to Sarah : as Keeper of the Privy Purse , Sarah had been unaware of any such payment . 
 = = = Strained relationship = = = 
 In July 1708 , the Duke of Marlborough , with his ally Prince Eugene of Savoy , won a great victory at the Battle of Oudenarde . On the way to the thanksgiving service at St Paul 's Cathedral , Sarah engaged in a furious argument with Anne about the jewels Anne wore to the service , and showed her a letter from the Duke of Marlborough which expressed hope that the Queen would make good political use of the victory . The implication that she should publicly express her support for the Whigs offended Anne ; at the service Sarah told the Queen to " be quiet " after Anne continued the argument , thus offending the Queen still further . Anne 's next letter to Sarah was an exercise in chilling hostility , referring sarcastically to the " command " Sarah had given her to be silent . As a result Sarah , who rarely admitted that she was in the wrong , realised that she had gone too far and apologised for her rudeness , but her apology had little effect . Anne wrote to Marlborough , encouraging him not to let her rift with Sarah become public knowledge ; but he could not prevent his wife 's indiscretion . Sarah continued vehemently supporting the Whigs in writing and speaking to Anne , with the support of Godolphin and the other Whig ministers . The news of the public 's support for the Whigs reached Marlborough in letters from Sarah and Godolphin , which influenced his political advice to the Queen . Anne , already in ill health , felt used and harassed and was desperate for escape . She found refuge in the gentle and quiet comfort of Abigail Masham . 
 Anne had explained before that she did not wish the public to know that her relationship with Sarah was failing , because any sign that Sarah was out of favour would have a damaging impact on the Duke of Marlborough 's authority as Captain @-@ General . Sarah was kept in all of her offices – purely for the sake of her husband 's position as Captain @-@ General of the army – and the tension between the two women lingered on until early in 1711 . This year was to see the end of their relationship for good . 
 Sarah had always been jealous of Anne 's affection for Abigail Masham . Together with the Duke of Marlborough and most of the Whig party , she had tried to force Anne to dismiss her . All these attempts failed , even when Anne was threatened with an official parliamentary demand from the Whigs , who were suspicious of Abigail 's Tory influence with Anne , for Abigail 's dismissal . The whole scenario echoed Anne 's refusal to give up Sarah during the reign of William and Mary ; but the threat of Parliamentary interference exceeded anything tried against Anne in the 1690s . Anne was ultimately triumphant ; she conducted interviews with high @-@ ranking politicians of both political parties and begged them " with tears in her eyes " to oppose the motion . The general view was that the Marlboroughs had made themselves look ridiculous over a trivial <unk> since when , it was asked , did Parliament address the Queen on whom she should employ in her bedchamber ? 
 The passion she showed for Abigail , and the stubborn refusal to dismiss her , angered Sarah to the point that she implied that a lesbian affair was taking place between the two women . During the mourning period for Anne 's husband , Sarah was the only one who refused to wear suitable mourning clothes . This gave the impression that she did not consider Anne 's grief over his death to be genuine . Eventually , because of the mass support for peace in the War of the Spanish Succession , Anne decided she no longer needed the Duke of Marlborough and took the opportunity to dismiss him on trumped @-@ up charges of embezzlement . 
 = = = Final dismissal = = = 
 Sarah 's last attempt to re @-@ establish her friendship with Anne came in 1710 , when they had their final meeting . An account written by Sarah shortly afterwards shows that she pleaded to be given an explanation of why their friendship was at an end , but Anne was unmoved , coldly repeating a few set phrases , " I shall make no answer " and " you may put it in writing " . Sarah was so appalled by the Queen 's " inhuman " conduct that she was reduced to tears , and , most unusually for a woman who rarely spoke of religion , ended by threatening the Queen with the judgement of God . Anne replied that God 's judgment on her concerned herself only , but later admitted that this was the one remark from Sarah at this interview which had deeply hurt her . 
 After hearing this , the Duke of Marlborough , realising that Anne intended to dismiss them , begged her to keep them in their offices for nine months , until the campaign was over , so that they could retire honourably . However , Anne told Marlborough that " for her [ Anne 's ] honour " Sarah was to resign immediately and return her gold key – the symbol of her authority within the Royal household – within two days . Years of trying the Queen 's patience had finally resulted in her dismissal . When told the news , Sarah , in a fit of pride , told Marlborough to return the key to the Queen immediately . 
 In January 1711 , Sarah was stripped of the offices of Mistress of the Robes and Groom of the Stole and replaced by Elizabeth Seymour , Duchess of Somerset . Abigail was made Keeper of the Privy Purse . This broke a promise Anne had made to distribute these court offices to Sarah 's children . 
 The Marlboroughs also lost state funding for Blenheim Palace , and the building came to a halt for the first time since it was begun in 1705 . Now in disgrace , they left England and travelled in Europe . As a result of his success in the War of the Spanish Succession , the Duke of Marlborough was a favourite among the German courts and with the Holy Roman Empire , and the family was received in those places with full honours . 
 Sarah , however , did not like being away from England , and often complained that they were received with full honours in Europe , but were in disgrace at home . Sarah found life travelling the royal courts difficult , remarking that they were full of dull company . She took the waters at Aachen in Germany on account of her ill health , corresponded with those in England who could supply her with political gossip , and indulged in her fascination with Catholicism . 
 = = Revival of favour = = 
 Sarah and Queen Anne never made up their differences , although one eyewitness claimed to have heard Anne asking whether the Marlboroughs had reached the shore , leading to rumours that she had called them home herself . Queen Anne died on 1 August 1714 at Kensington Palace ; the Protestant Whig Privy Councillors had insisted on their right to be present , preventing Henry St. John , the first Viscount Bolingbroke from declaring for the Pretender , James Francis Edward Stuart . The Marlboroughs returned home on the afternoon of Anne 's death . The Act of Settlement of 1701 ensured a Protestant succession by passing over more than fifty stronger Roman Catholic claimants and proclaiming Georg Ludwig , Elector of Hanover ( the great grandson of James I through Georg 's mother Sophia of Hanover ) , King George I of Great Britain . 
 The new reign was supported by the Whigs , who were mostly staunch Protestants . The Tories were suspected of supporting the Catholic Pretender James Francis Edward Stuart . George I rewarded the Whigs by forming a Whig government ; at his welcome in Queen 's House at Greenwich , he conversed with the Whigs but not with the Tories . Sarah approved of his choice of Whig ministers . 
 King George also had a personal friendship with the Marlboroughs ; the Duke of Marlborough had fought with him in the War of the Spanish Succession , and John and Sarah made frequent visits to the Hanoverian court during their effective exile from England . George 's first words to Marlborough as King of Great Britain were , " My lord Duke , I hope your troubles are now over ; " Marlborough was restored to his old office of Captain @-@ General of the Army . 
 Sarah was relieved to move back to England . The Duke of Marlborough became one of the king 's close advisers , and Sarah moved back into Marlborough House , where she flaunted her eldest granddaughter , Lady Henrietta Godolphin , in the hope of finding a suitable marriage partner . Henrietta eventually married Thomas Pelham @-@ Holles , first Duke of Newcastle @-@ upon @-@ Tyne , in April 1717 , and the rest of Sarah 's grandchildren went on to make successful marriages . 
 Sarah 's concern for her grandchildren briefly came to a halt , however , when in 1716 her husband had two strokes , the second of which left him without the ability to speak . Sarah spent much of her time with him , accompanying him to Tunbridge Wells and Bath , and he recovered shortly afterwards . Even after his recovery , Sarah opened his correspondence and filtered the letters Marlborough received , lest their contents precipitate another stroke . 
 Sarah 's relationship with her children was strained . Although she had a good relationship with her daughter , Anne Spencer , she became estranged from her daughters Henrietta , Elizabeth and Mary . Similarly heartbroken when her favourite daughter Anne died in 1716 , Sarah kept her favourite cup , a lock of her hair , and adopted the Sunderlands ' youngest child , Lady Diana , who would later become her favourite granddaughter . 
 = = Later years = = 
 John Churchill died at Windsor in 1722 , and Sarah arranged a large funeral for him . Their daughter , Henrietta , became duchess in her own right . Sarah became one of the trustees of the Marlborough estate , and she used her business sense to distribute the family fortune , including the income for her daughter Henrietta . 
 Sarah ’ s personal income was now considerable , and she used the money to invest in land ; she believed this would protect her from currency devaluation . The dowager duchess purchased Wimbledon manor in 1723 , and rebuilt the manor house . Her wealth was so considerable that Sarah hoped to marry her granddaughter , Lady Diana Spencer , to Frederick , Prince of Wales , for which she would pay a massive dowry of £ 100 @,@ 000 . However , Robert Walpole , the First Lord of the Treasury ( effectively the same as today 's Prime Minister ) vetoed the plan . Walpole , although a Whig , had alienated Sarah by supporting peace in Europe ; she was also suspicious of his financial probity ; and Walpole , in turn , mistrusted Sarah . Despite this , good relations with the royal family continued , and Sarah was occasionally invited to court by Queen Caroline , who attempted to cultivate her friendship . 
 The Duchess of Marlborough was a capable business manager , unusual in a period when women were excluded from most things outside the management of their household . Her friend Arthur <unk> wrote that she was more capable of business than any man . Although she never came to like Blenheim Palace – describing it as " that great heap of stones " – she became more enthusiastic about its construction and wrote to the Duke of Somerset about the new waterworks : " I believe it will be beautiful . The Canal and <unk> ( which is already don [ e ] ) look very fine . There is to be a lake & a cascade ... which I think will bee [ sic ] a great addition to the place " . 
 The Duchess of Marlborough fought against anything she thought was undue extravagance . She wrote to the Duke of Somerset , " I have reduced the stables to one third of what was intended by Sir John [ Vanbrugh ] yet I have room for <unk> [ sic ] fine horses . " She allowed only two features of extravagance : the Marlboroughs ' tomb in the Blenheim chapel , designed by William Kent ; and the Doric Column of Victory in the park designed by Henry Herbert , 9th Earl of Pembroke , and finished by Roger Morris . The latter rose to a height of 130 feet ( 40 m ) , complete with fine embellishments . The Duchess carefully monitored the construction of all Blenheim 's features , and she fell out with anyone who did not do exactly what she wanted . 
 These detailed inspections extended to her smaller land purchases . After buying the Wimbledon estate ( which she described as " upon clay , an ill sod , very damp and ... an unhealthy place " ) , and Holdenby House near Althorp , she kept detailed accounts of her finances and expenditure , as well as a sharp look @-@ out for any dishonesty in her agents . 
 Her friendship with Queen Caroline ended when Sarah refused the Queen access through her Wimbledon estate , which resulted in the loss of her £ 500 income as Ranger of Windsor Great Park . Sarah was also rude to King George II – making it clear that he was " too much of a German " – which further alienated her from the court . Her persona non grata status at the Walpole @-@ controlled court prevented her from suppressing the rise of the Tories ; Walpole 's taxes and peace with Spain were deeply unpopular with ruling class English society , and the Tories were gaining much more support as a result . 
 Sarah never lost her good looks and , despite failing popularity , received many offers of marriage after the death of her husband , including one from her old enemy , Charles Seymour , the sixth Duke of Somerset . Ultimately , she decided against remarriage , preferring to keep her independence . 
 Sarah continued to appeal against court decisions which ruled that funding for Blenheim should come from the Marlboroughs ' personal estate , and not the government . This made her unpopular ; she could easily afford the payments herself . She was surprised by the grief she felt following the death of her eldest living daughter in 1733 . Sarah lived to see her enemy Robert Walpole fall in 1742 , and in the same year attempted to improve her reputation by approving a biographical publication titled An Account of the Dowager Duchess of Marlborough from her first coming to Court to the year 1710 . She died of old age , at the age of eighty @-@ four , on 18 October 1744 , at Marlborough House ; she was buried at Blenheim . Her husband ’ s body was exhumed from Westminster Abbey and buried beside her . 
 = = Assessment = = 
 Although the Duchess of Marlborough ’ s downfall is chiefly attributed to her selfish and self @-@ serving relationship with Queen Anne , she was a vibrant and intelligent woman , who loyally promoted Anne 's interests when she was princess . Anne was a dull conversationalist and Sarah did not find her company stimulating . Sarah believed that she had a right to enforce her political advice , whether Anne personally liked it or not , and became angry if she stubbornly refused to take it . She seems to have underestimated Anne 's strength of character , continuing to believe she could dominate a woman whom foreign Ambassadors noted had become " very determined and quite ferocious " . Apart from her notorious bad temper , Sarah 's main weakness has been described as " an almost pathological inability to admit the validity of anyone else 's point of view " . 
 Abigail Masham also played a key role in Sarah ’ s downfall . Modest and retiring , she promoted the Tory policies of her cousin Robert Harley . Despite owing her position at court to the Duchess of Marlborough , Abigail soon became Sarah ’ s enemy , and supplanted her in Anne ’ s affections . 
 During her lifetime , Sarah drafted twenty @-@ six wills , the last of which was only written a few months before her death ; and had purchased twenty @-@ seven estates . With a wealth of over £ 4 million in land ; £ 17 @,@ 000 in rent rolls ; and a further £ 12 @,@ 500 in annuities , she made financial bequests to rising Whig ministers such as William Pitt , later the first Earl of Chatham , and Philip Stanhope , the fourth Earl of Chesterfield . Although she left little to the poor and even less to charity , she left her servants annuities far above the average for the time : her favourite , Grace Ridley , received £ 16 @,@ 000 , equivalent to approximately £ 1 @.@ 32 million in today 's money . 
 Much of the money left after Sarah 's numerous bequests was inherited by her grandson , John Spencer , with the condition that he could not accept a political office under the government . He also inherited the remainder of Sarah 's numerous estates , including Wimbledon . Marlborough House remained empty for fourteen years , with the exception of James Stephens , one of her executors , before it became the property of the Dukes of Marlborough upon Stephens 's death . In 1817 , it became a royal residence , and passed through members of the British royal family until it became the Commonwealth Secretariat in 1959 . Wimbledon Park House succumbed to fire in 1785 ; and Holywell House , Sarah 's birthplace in St Albans , was demolished in 1827 . Today , much of St Albans is named after the Marlboroughs because of Sarah 's influence . 
 Sarah died , in the words of Tobias Smollett , " immensely rich and very little regretted , either by her own family or the world in general " , but her efforts to continue the Marlborough legacy cannot be ignored . Because of her influence , Sarah managed to marry off members of her family to England ’ s greatest aristocratic dynasties . Among the more famous descendants of the Marlboroughs are Winston Churchill and Diana , Princess of Wales . 
 = = Titles = = 
 5 June 1660 – [ exact date unknown ] 1677 : Miss Sarah Jennings 
 [ Exact date unknown ] 1677 – 21 December 1682 : Mrs John Churchill 
 21 December 1682 – 14 May 1685 : The Right Honourable The Lady Churchill of Eyemouth 
 14 May 1685 – 9 April 1689 : The Right Honourable The Lady Churchill of Sandridge and Eyemouth 
 9 April 1689 – 14 December 1702 : The Right Honourable The Countess of Marlborough 
 14 December 1702 – 27 June 1722 : Her Grace The Duchess of Marlborough 
 27 June 1722 – 18 October 1744 : Her Grace The Dowager Duchess of Marlborough 
 = = Children = = 
 The Duke and Duchess of Marlborough 's children who survived childhood married into the most important families in Great Britain : 
 = Descent 3 = 
 Descent 3 ( stylized as Descent ³ ) is a first @-@ person shooter video game developed by Outrage Entertainment and published by Interplay Productions . It was originally released for Microsoft Windows in North America on June 17 , 1999 . Descent 3 is the third game in the Descent video game series and a sequel to Descent II . The game takes place in a science fiction setting of the Solar System where the player is cast as Material Defender , a mercenary who must help an organization known as the Red Acropolis Research Team to stop robots infected by an alien virus . 
 Unlike in standard first @-@ person shooters , the player must control a flying ship that has a six degrees of freedom movement scheme , allowing the player to move and rotate in any 3D direction . In addition to a single @-@ player campaign mode , Descent 3 features an online multiplayer mode where numerous players can compete against each other in eight different game types . The game features both indoor and outdoor environments , made possible with the use of a hybrid engine that combines the capabilities of a portal rendering engine with those of a flight simulator @-@ like terrain engine . 
 Descent 3 received positive reviews from critics , holding a score of 89 out of 100 at review aggregate website Metacritic . The most praised aspects of the game were its graphics , artificial intelligence of enemies , and outdoor environments . An official expansion pack , Descent 3 : Mercenary , was released on December 3 , 1999 . The expansion pack includes a new series of missions , multiplayer maps , and a level editor . After its release on Microsoft Windows , the game was subsequently ported to Mac OS and Linux platforms . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Like its predecessors Descent and Descent II , Descent 3 is a six degrees of freedom shooter where the player controls a flying ship from a first @-@ person perspective in zero @-@ gravity . It is differentiated from standard first @-@ person shooters in that it allows the player to move and rotate in any 3D direction . Specifically , the player is free to move forward / backward , up / down , left / right , and rotate in three perpendicular axes , often termed pitch , yaw , and roll . Aboard the ship , the player can shoot enemies , turn on the ship 's afterburners to temporarily increase its acceleration and speed , and fire flares or turn on the ship 's headlight to explore darkened areas . 
 In the game 's single @-@ player mode , the player must complete a series of levels where different types of AI @-@ controlled enemies will try to hinder the player 's progress . The game primarily takes place inside labyrinthine underground facilities , but the player can occasionally travel over the surface of the planets where the facilities are buried to reach other nearby areas . The underground facilities are composed of a set of tunnels and rooms separated by doors . Most of them can be opened by either firing weapons at them or bumping into them , but others require special actions to be performed first before entry is allowed . For instance , some doors require special keys to open them . To finish a level and proceed to the next one , the player must complete a certain set of objectives , ranging from collecting items to activating switches , defeating enemies , and destroying objects , among others . Some levels also feature optional objectives that are not critical but add to the player 's overall completion score . 
 As the player progresses throughout the game , two additional ships become available for use . Each of the game 's three ships offers a different balance of speed , weapons , and maneuverability . Within the levels , the player may collect power @-@ ups that enhance the ship 's weaponry . Weapons are categorized into three different types : primary weapons , secondary weapons , and countermeasures . Primary weapons range from a variety of laser weapons to the Plasma Cannon and the Napalm Cannon , which projects a stream of burning fuel . Secondary weapons include different types of missiles , while countermeasures range from proximity mines to portable turrets . Most primary weapons consume energy in different rate , but some , such as the Napalm Cannon , use their own type of ammunition . In contrast , all secondary weapons and countermeasures require their own ammunition suppliers . 
 The player 's ship is protected by a shield which decreases when attacked by enemies . If the shield is fully depleted , the player dies and must start the game again from a previous section of the fight without any collected power @-@ ups . Nevertheless , the player can reclaim the missing power @-@ ups from the ruins of the destroyed ship . Shield , energy , and ammunition suppliers are dispersed among the levels to help players increase their resources . The player can also collect equipment items which grant special powers . For example , the Quad Laser modifies the laser weapons to fire four shots at once instead of the standard two , while the <unk> Device renders the player invisible to enemies for 30 seconds . During the game , the player may also deploy the Guide @-@ Bot , an assistant that keeps track of the next objective and shows the player the way to a specific target . 
 = = = Multiplayer = = = 
 In addition to the single @-@ player campaign mode , Descent 3 features an online multiplayer mode where numerous players can compete against each other in eight different game types . Notable game types include Anarchy , where the objective is to kill as many opponents as possible , Capture the Flag , where two to four teams compete against each other to capture opposing flags , and <unk> , in which players must shoot and guide a ball into their opponents ' goal . Aspects such as time limit , number of players , map to play on , and selection of what weapons are allowed , among others , can be customized to match player preference . The game also features an observer mode which allows players to watch a multiplayer game as a spectator and a co @-@ operative mode that allows players to work together to complete campaign missions . Multiplayer games support the DirectPlay , IPX , and TCP / IP protocols . Online gameplay was also possible over Parallax Online , an online gaming service which kept track of players ' statistics and rankings . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Descent 3 takes place in a science fiction setting of the Solar System where the player is cast as Material Defender <unk> , a mercenary working for a corporation called the Post Terran Mining Corporation ( PTMC ) . The game begins moments after the events of Descent II , with the Material Defender escaping the destruction of a planetoid where he was clearing PTMC 's robots infected by an alien virus . He was about to return to Earth to collect his reward , but a malfunction occurred with the prototype warp drive in the ship he was piloting , making it drift towards the Sun 's atmosphere . At the very last moment , the Material Defender is rescued via a tractor beam by an organization known as the Red Acropolis Research Team . 
 While the Material Defender recovers in the Red Acropolis station on Mars , the director of the team informs him that they have been investigating PTMC , and have uncovered a conspiracy : one of her acquaintances in the PTMC was killed by a robot , and when she contacted PTMC about it , they denied having ever employed such acquaintance , even though he had worked with them for years . The Red Acropolis had tried to notify the Collective Earth Defense ( CED ) , a large police group , of the PTMC 's actions , but they took no action , not daring to interfere with such a powerful corporation . The director also tells the Material Defender that , while he was clearing the mines during the events of Descent II , PTMC executive Samuel Dravis was actually testing and modifying the virus and deliberately tried to kill him by overloading the warp drive on his ship . After some persuasion and offers from the director , including a new ship and an AI assistant known as the Guide @-@ Bot , the Material Defender accepts to help the Red Acropolis stop the virus . 
 The Material Defender is first sent to Deimos to obtain information about the location of a scientist named Dr. Sweitzer who has evidence of the PTMC 's actions . He is then rescued in the Novak Corporate Prison on Phobos . After recovering the evidence , the Material Defender delivers it to PTMC President Suzuki in Seoul before leaving with his reward . When the Material Defender arrives at the Red Acropolis Research Station , the director tells him that the PTMC president has been killed and that the Red Acropolis Research Team are now accused of being terrorists , resulting in the destruction of the then @-@ abandoned station . After a series of missions , the Material Defender and the Red Acropolis Research Team manage to develop an antivirus and convince the CED that they are not terrorists . The CED suggest to broadcast the antivirus through their strategic platform orbiting Earth , but the results are unsuccessful . The Material Defender is then sent to Venus , where Dravis has been tracked by the Red Acropolis . In the ensuing confrontation in his stronghold , Dravis is mortally wounded by the Guide @-@ Bot 's flares and the Material Defender deactivates the virus , which disables all of the PTMC 's robots . The game ends with the CED destroying the PTMC 's orbital headquarters while the Material Defender returns to Earth . 
 = = Development = = 
 Descent 3 is the first project developed by Outrage Entertainment . The company was founded when Parallax Software , creators of previous Descent games , decided to split in two : Outrage Entertainment and Volition . Volition would focus on creating the combat space simulator FreeSpace games , while Outrage would continue with the Descent series . Development on Descent 3 began in November 1996 with a team of eight people . According to programmer Jason Leighton , one of the major problems during the game 's development cycle was a lack of direction and control . He explained that the team had " No code reviews , no art reviews , [ and ] no way of saying , ' This is bad and we should be going in a different direction ' " . This " anarchistic " development environment worked for Descent and Descent II because they were developed by small groups that worked closely together and often in the same room . However , as Outrage started to grow from eight people to almost 20 by the end of the project , the developers did not introduce enough management to control the process . As Leighton recalls , " we literally had to build the team and company at the same time we started production on the game " . 
 Originally , Descent 3 was intended to support both a software and a hardware renderer , implying that the rendering process of the game could take place either in the CPU or dedicated hardware like a video card . However , about six months after starting development , the team decided to go with a hardware @-@ only renderer because it allowed them to create " visually stunning " graphics and maintain a solid frame rate without worrying about the limitations imposed by the software renderer . This was a difficult decision since the team had to scrap many tools and software rendering technology that were already developed . In addition , computers with hardware acceleration were not common at the time the decision was made . As the developers noted , " We knew just by looking at our progress on the game under acceleration that we had a beautiful looking game with all the latest technologies — but would anyone actually be able to play it ? " Fortunately , as development progressed , hardware acceleration became more popular with each passing year . The game natively supports the Direct3D , Glide and OpenGL rendering APIs for graphics , and the A3D and <unk> technologies for sound . 
 The new technology also allowed the developers to create both indoor and outdoor environments ; one of the biggest complaints of Descent II was the fact that it was considered too " <unk> " . To this end , the developers created a new technology which featured an indoor portal rendering engine " hooked to a flight @-@ sim @-@ like terrain " engine , collectively called the Fusion Engine . The portal engine permitted designers to create small rooms with complex geometry . These rooms would later be linked together via shared dividing polygons called portals to create a <unk> world for the player to fly through . In contrast , the terrain engine , which was initially planned for another game and whose function is to create more polygonal detail as players get closer to the ground and decrease polygons when they are farther away , gave designers the ability to create expansive outdoor terrains . Transitions between both engines were achieved using an external room ( with its normal vectors inverted ) that could be placed anywhere on the terrain map . With this technique , developers could create hybrid levels where the player could transit from indoor to outdoor areas in real @-@ time and without loading screens . Leighton commented that whenever one of these transitions occurs , " the game code [ switches ] collision detection , rendering , and so on , to use the terrain engine " . 
 The company had no standardization of level design tools . Leighton said , " Some people used 3D Studio Max , some used Lightwave , and one designer even wrote his own custom modeler from scratch " . This practice led to an inconsistent quality across the game 's levels . For example , one designer would create structures with great geometry but bad texturing , while another would create the opposite . Once the structures were modeled individually , they were all imported into a custom editor , called <unk> , so that the designers could " glue everything together " . The <unk> editor received constant updates because it initially did not feature an intuitive interface for designers . It was not until the last third of the development period that the editor improved significantly . As Leighton notes , " Even in the shipped game you can tell which levels were made early on and which were made near the end of the production cycle . The later levels are much better looking , have better frame rates , and generally have better scripts " . Developers also considered the idea of shipping the game with a level editor based on the one they used to create the game 's levels . However , due to the constant changes the developers made to their own editor , it was hard for them to design a more user @-@ friendly one from the start . 
 In addition to the changes in the game 's engine , the developers decided to improve the artificial intelligence to give each enemy a distinct behavior . According to Matt <unk> , president of Outrage Entertainment and lead programmer of Descent 3 , " It 's very rewarding for the player to meet a new enemy , get to know him , learn his quirks , and figure out the best way to kill him . It 's great when a game requires both thinking and quick reactions " . Originally , the developers planned to add weather effects that would disorient the player 's ship during gameplay , but this feature was ultimately not implemented due to time and technology constraints . Multiplayer games were heavily tested to ensure their network stability and support IPX , TCP , and DirectPlay . The actual development of the game took 31 months to complete , with the developers describing it as both a joyful and painful process due to in part of the almost nonexistent management and the rapidly evolving technology at the time . 
 = = Marketing and release = = 
 Descent 3 was presented at the Electronic Entertainment Expo in 1998 , where developers showed off a demonstration of the game . In the months leading to the game 's release , the game 's publisher , Interplay Productions , ran a program that allowed Descent fans to submit a digital photo of themselves along with a pilot name to the company . These photos would later be included in the game so that players could use them as their multiplayer profiles . Outrage also released two game demos that allowed customers to try the game before purchasing it . The second demo included a single @-@ player level and several multiplayer matches which could be played through a matchmaking service provided by Outrage . From March to August 1999 , Interplay also held a Descent 3 tournament in the U.S. consisting of three phases where numerous players could compete against each other in multiplayer matches . The winner was awarded a prize of US $ 50 @,@ 000 . 
 Descent 3 was initially released for Microsoft Windows on June 17 , 1999 . A level editor was eventually released shortly afterwards and allows users to create both single and multiplayer maps for the game . A Mac OS version of the game was also released in November 1999 . The Mac OS version was ported by programmer Duane Johnson , who previously worked on the 3dfx versions of the original Descent and Descent II . Descent 3 was also ported to Linux platforms by Loki Entertainment Software after an agreement with the game 's publisher . The port , which features a multiplayer mode optimized for 16 players , was released in July 2000 . In 2014 , the game was made available on the Steam digital distribution service . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Descent 3 received positive reviews from video game critics . Erik Wolpaw , writing for GameSpot , felt that the game " improves in almost every conceivable way on its predecessors and reestablishes the series as the premier example of the play style it single @-@ handedly pioneered " . The most praised aspects of the game were its graphics , artificial intelligence of enemies , and outdoor environments . IGN reviewer Jay <unk> lauded the game 's new engine , noting that the transition between indoor and outdoor environments is seamless . Game Revolution remarked that the addition of outdoor environments " allows for an even greater use of the maneuvering capabilities , adds variety to the levels , and ensures that the game never gets dull or boring " . The reviewer also acknowledged that the game 's six degrees of freedom movement scheme may be difficult to master for some players , stating that the game " can be confusing , dizzying , and even nauseating . This is a game for the pro 's " . 
 The music and sound effects received similar praise . GameSpot pointed out that " explosions erupt with lots of satisfying , floor @-@ rattling bass , lasers ping nicely , flamethrowers emit appropriate rumbling whooshes , and there 's plenty of ambient beeping , hissing , and mechanical humming " . Game Revolution praised the graphics for their " modeling , colored lighting , incredible special effects , wonderful animation , [ and ] sheer overall feel " . Victor Lucas of Electric Playground stated similar pros , but also admitted that the game 's hardware requirements were relatively high . Criticism was leveled at the game 's story . GameSpot considered it not compelling , while Jason Cross , writing for Computer Games Magazine , felt that it " really doesn 't have much to do with actual gameplay " . PC Gamer reviewer Stephen Poole also criticized the Guide @-@ Bot 's efficiency , remarking that sometimes it can get lost or trapped while leading the player to a destination . 
 The gameplay was praised for its variety of weapons and enemies . Game Revolution said that each enemy is " unique both in ability , structure , and behavior so that each requires a specific combat approach " . Maximum PC reviewer Josh <unk> praised the levels for their interesting objectives , stating that the missions " vary widely , ranging from finding lost colleagues to defending strategic structures against enemy assaults " . Computer Games Magazine praised the fact that the developers replaced the wire @-@ frame <unk> of previous Descent games with flat @-@ shaded polygons because they " provide more detail and make it easier to recognize where you are and how to get where you want to go " . The multiplayer was highlighted positively due to its replay value and variety of game types . Computer Games Magazine also credited its " rock @-@ solid performance on standard <unk> modems and easy connectivity " , while GameSpot praised it for being " fun and stable " . The game was a runner @-@ up for GameSpy 's Action Game of the Year and a nominee for GameSpot 's PC Action Game of the Year . Despite the positive reviews , the game did not perform well in sales . As a result , Daily Radar awarded the game a " System Shock Award " , named after the Looking Glass Studios 1994 game of the same name , implying that Descent 3 is a " game that the critics loved but is over @-@ shadowed by lesser or greater games " . 
 = = Expansion pack = = 
 Descent 3 features an official expansion pack developed by Outrage and released for Microsoft Windows on December 3 , 1999 . The expansion , entitled Descent 3 : Mercenary , introduces new features , a seven @-@ level campaign , a fourth ship , and several multiplayer maps . It also includes the game 's level editor . The expansion received mixed to positive reviews from critics . IGN reviewer Rich Rouse gave Mercenary a rating of 8 @.@ 8 out of 10 and praised it for its lasting appeal , stating : " With hordes of new missions and battlefields on the CD , as well as the included level creation package , you won 't be <unk> for a long time " . In contrast , GameSpot editor Erik Wolpaw , giving the expansion a rating of 6 out of 10 , criticized the expansion for its bland level design and lack of new features . A compilation that includes both Descent 3 and its expansion pack was released on June 14 , 2001 . 
 = Ronald Skirth = 
 John Ronald Skirth ( 11 December 1897 – 1977 ) was a British soldier who served in the Royal Garrison Artillery during the First World War . His experiences during the Battle of Messines and the Battle of Passchendaele , both in 1917 , led him to resolve not to take human life , and for the rest of his army service he made deliberate errors in targeting calculations to try to ensure the guns of his battery missed their aiming point on the first attempt , giving the enemy a chance to evacuate . Many years later , after retiring from a career as a teacher , he wrote a memoir of his years in the army , describing his disillusionment with the conduct of the war and his conversion to pacifism . In 2010 the memoir was published as The Reluctant Tommy , edited by Duncan Barrett . 
 = = Early life and war service = = 
 Skirth was born in Chelmsford and grew up in Bexhill @-@ on @-@ Sea . In the First World War , having volunteered for the British Army under the Derby Scheme , and having requested that the process be expedited , he was called up in October 1916 , two months before his 19th birthday . He became a Battery Commander 's Assistant in the Royal Garrison Artillery , responsible for making the calculations necessary to target the large guns of a field battery . When he argued with a superior officer over whether to use a French church for target practice he was demoted in rank from Corporal to Bombardier . 
 Skirth saw action in the Battle of Messines , in which two of his closest friends , Bill and Geordie , were killed . On the same day he had an " epiphany " when he stumbled across the body of a dead German of about his own age , and realised that one of the shells he had targeted might well have killed him . This was to mark a turning point in his thinking about the war as he determined that he was morally responsible for his actions and for their consequences , despite the chain of command . 
 During the Battle of Passchendaele , Skirth and another friend , Jock Shiels , left their post when they discovered that their commanding officer had ignored an order to withdraw from the front line . Skirth was knocked out by a shell which killed Shiels , and subsequently suffered from shell @-@ shock and amnesia . Following a period of convalescence in hospital in France , he was sent to the Italian Front in December 1917 , where his battery was being reorganised . There , following a relapse of shell @-@ shock , he was treated in hospital in <unk> and at the mud spa at <unk> . 
 In Italy , Skirth made a resolution that he would do everything within his power to avoid further loss of human life . He felt that the " just war " he had signed up for was anything but just , and was disillusioned with the army and the conduct of the war . In a church in the Italian village of San Martino , near Vicenza , he made a private pact with God that he would never again help to take a human life . He wrote to his future wife , Ella Christian , claiming that he had become a pacifist and a conscientious objector . He also began a campaign of small acts of sabotage , introducing minor errors into his trajectory calculations so as to <unk> the guns , such that they " never once hit an inhabited target " on the first attempt , giving the enemy a chance to evacuate . His actions were never discovered by his superiors . 
 Apparently he carried out this sabotage while still in Italy where he remained until February 1919 , aside from a fortnight of leave back in England in November and December 1918 . He received the British War Medal and Victory Medal for his war service but declined the Military Medal , which he felt was offered as part of an attempt to whitewash a fatal accident he had tried to prevent . 
 = = Later life = = 
 In September 1919 Skirth returned to England , to commence teacher training , for which he had signed up before leaving to serve in the army . He trained in London , and after graduating taught briefly at a school in Bexhill @-@ on @-@ Sea , before transferring in 1922 to a post at a school in Uxbridge . 
 In 1923 he and Ella Christian became engaged and the following year , after Skirth secured a job at the Little Ealing Senior Boys ' School and found a flat they could share in Ealing , they married , on 29 December 1924 , at the Church of St Barnabus in Bexhill . In September 1929 their only child was born , a daughter whom they named Jean . ( They had expected a boy , who would have been called John . ) 
 During the Second World War , the family was evacuated to South Wales with Skirth ’ s school . In his forties by this point and suffering from ill health , he was not expected to fight , but his anti @-@ war views earned him the labels " crank , visionary , communistic and impractical " . 
 After the war , the family returned to Ealing , where Skirth and his wife Ella lived , in various homes , throughout their life together , and where he continued to work as a teacher until he took early retirement in 1958 . He died there in 1977 . 
 = = Character and beliefs = = 
 A self @-@ confessed ' dreamer ' with a romantic sensibility , Skirth was very fond of literature , and in particular poetry ; he took with him to the Western Front a much @-@ annotated copy of Francis Turner Palgrave 's Golden Treasury . His favourite poets were John Keats , Percy Bysshe Shelley and Lord Byron . He had an intense love of beauty , which he found all around him in music , architecture and the natural world . On the Western Front , he wrote , he was " deprived of the one thing that to me was as precious as life itself , my love of beauty " . 
 Although Skirth had volunteered for the Army in 1915 , as an idealistic patriot , convinced that " King and Country " were causes worth fighting for , it was not long before he became disillusioned with the war and the army . He attributed this to a combination of his sensitive character , his Christian upbringing and sense of right and wrong , and , most significantly , the horror of his war experiences . 
 After the war , Skirth remained a convinced pacifist for the rest of his life . He believed that Britain should not have declared war on Germany in 1939 and claimed that he would rather surrender and face occupation than take up arms against a hostile force . Writing in the early 1970s , he expressed hope that the next generation of political leaders would not make the same mistakes as their forebears . 
 = = Memoir = = 
 In January 1971 , having retired from his teaching career , Skirth began work on a handwritten memoir which described his conduct and experiences during the First World War , and in particular his experience of disillusionment . Although he initially intended to focus on his relationship with his wife Ella , touching on the war only briefly , he soon felt under a " compulsion " to write more about his war experiences . He worked on the memoir for over a year , eventually filling five green ring binders with many hundreds of pages , and over the next few years , despite suffering two strokes , he repeatedly went back to the material , editing , amending and adding to what he had written . 
 Skirth gave the memoir to his daughter Jean in 1975 , two years before his death in 1977 Although for many years she found it too upsetting to read in full , she felt that it was a story that should be shared with others , and in 1999 she donated four of the five ring binders , containing the bulk of the memoir but excluding its more personal sections , to the Imperial War Museum in London , where they remain to this day . 
 Once it was made available to researchers and academics , Skirth 's memoir began to attract attention , and his story was featured in Richard Schweitzer 's The Cross and the Trenches ( 2003 ) , Michele Barrett 's Casualty Figures ( 2007 ) , and in Ian Hislop 's documentary Not Forgotten : The Men Who Wouldn 't Fight ( 2008 ) , in which Hislop interviewed Jean Skirth about her father 's war experiences . 
 = = = Publication = = = 
 In 2010 the memoir was published in book form by Macmillan , as The Reluctant Tommy : Ronald Skirth 's Extraordinary Memoir of the First World War , edited by Duncan Barrett . Barrett wrote in an introduction that he felt that Skirth 's story " deserved as wide an audience as possible — and to be read in its protagonist 's own words " . Skirth 's daughter Jean , who had given permission for the memoir to be published remained uncertain whether publishing the memoir was what her father would have wanted , but believed that it was important that his story should be widely known . The book carried a foreword by Channel 4 News anchor Jon Snow , in which he wrote about his grandfather Lieutenant @-@ General Sir Thomas D 'Oyly Snow . Referring to the popular description of the lower ranks as " lions led by donkeys " , Snow acknowledged that " If Ronald Skirth was a ' lion ' , Thom Snow was ultimately a ' donkey ' . " 
 = = = Critical reaction = = = 
 The Reluctant Tommy received largely favourable reviews by Richard Holmes in the Evening Standard and Jonathan Gibbs in the Financial Times , as well as coverage in the Daily Mail , Socialist Worker and the Sunday Express . 
 [ An ] important contribution to the literature of the war ... a remorseless condemnation of war and support for the stance of the absolute pacifist ... I would certainly buy this book even if I had not been sent a review copy , and whenever I get too misty @-@ eyed about officer @-@ man relationships I shall reread it to remind me of how badly things could go wrong . And of just how vital it is , for any democratic society seeking to use war as an instrument of policy , to ensure that the connection between war 's means and its political ends is crystal clear . 
 Skirth ’ s writing may be uneven but it carries the unmistakable tenor of honesty and true belief , not least in his disgust at the behaviour of many of his superiors . His descriptions of seeing his friends gassed and blown to bits are moving as much for what he can ’ t bring himself to write , as for what he can . The book began as the story of his marriage to the girl who waited for him back home , and that sense of a happy ending shines through even the bleakest moments . 
 Not all criticism has been favourable . A review in the BBC 's Who Do You Think You Are magazine remarks on the disparities between official war records and Skirth 's version of events : 
 He movingly describes two friends and an officer being killed on Messines Ridge on 8th June 1917 — though the unit war diary notes no casualties and the named officer isn 't on the Commonwealth War Graves Register . In November 1917 he says his battery was so far forward they were ordered to withdraw and his insane CO refused to leave — Skirth claims to have disobeyed his direct order and fled with his pal Jock Shiels — yet according to the <unk> Register John Shiels of 293 Battery RGA was killed on 18th July 1917 . When the battery is later sent to Italy Skirth is quite clear that it was without guns as late as April 1918 yet the war diary records them firing numerous bombardments . [ ... ] The overall impression he gives of the tiny scale of one man caught up in a huge and apparently indifferent military machine in a war like none previous is impressive – but should be treated with great caution as factual history . 
 = Feedback ( song ) = 
 " Feedback " is a song by American recording artist Janet Jackson , released as the lead single from her tenth studio album , Discipline . It was written and produced by Rodney " Darkchild " Jerkins and D 'Mile , with additional writing from Tasleema Yasin and LaShawn Daniels . " Feedback " fuses electropop and dance , while also incorporating elements of Eurodance and hip hop . Its lyrical composition is based on Jackson 's sexual bravado ; questioning the listener while responding with a chant of " sexy , sexy . " Its chorus compares her body to instruments such as a guitar and amplifier , using metaphors to demonstrate sexual climax . The songs official remix features vocals from fellow American entertainer Ciara . 
 " Feedback " received acclaim from critics , who praised its sonic innovation and contrast from her prior release , commending Jackson as " back in the form that made her a pop superstar . " It reached number nineteen on the Billboard Hot 100 and peaked atop the Hot Dance Club Play chart , becoming her biggest hit since " Someone to Call My Lover . " Internationally , it topped the charts in South Korea and reached the top ten in Canada , Greece , Slovakia and South Africa . 
 Its music video , directed by Saam Farahmand , portrays Jackson jumping from various planets before dancing among an unidentified white liquid . The video received positive reception from critics , who praised its galactic visuals and choreography . Jackson performed " Feedback " on Good Morning America , The Ellen DeGeneres Show , and TRL , the latter being Jackson 's first admittance to MTV since her Super Bowl performance incident . " Feedback " received three nominations at the International Dance Music Awards . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Feedback " was written and produced by Rodney " Darkchild " Jerkins and D 'Mile , with additional writing from Tasleema Yasin and LaShawn Daniels . It saw Jackson returning to an experimental dance @-@ pop sound in contrast to the subdued rhythmic feel of prior album 20 Y.O. The song was her first single released via the Island label after departing with Virgin Records . Island 's A & R director likened its drum pattern to " Rhythm Nation " , though clarified , " it doesn 't sound like it . It 's a 2008 version . " The song leaked on December 12 , 2007 and was premiered by New York radio station Z100 the same day . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Feedback " is an electropop and R & B song with slight elements of Eurodance and hip @-@ hop . It features varied instrumentation , such as guitars , synthesizers and drums . It uses a " digitized " robotic effect on Jackson 's vocals to heighten its futuristic aura and sensual tone , likened to a sex gynoid by Rolling Stone . Erotic Revolutionaries author Shayne Lee wrote " In " Feedback , " she puts her body on display for a peep show in which her partner is free to explore her erotic zones . " 
 The line within the song , " My swag is serious , something heavy like a first day period , " in which Jackson compares her dominant presence to the initial side effects of a woman 's menstrual cycle , drew media attention . Digital Spy remarked the song deserved heightened notoriety due to the lyrical boast , praising her return to " brilliantly filthy form " . Louis Virtel of Movieline highlighted the line as he called " Feedback " Jackson 's " biggest feat " in several years . In 2013 , Thought Catalog declared Jackson among " 23 Essential Role Models " for young women , saying despite the line , " somehow the song is still sexy and hot and amazing . [ ... ] Her witchcraft is something to be studied for years to come . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Feedback " received general acclaim upon its release . Chuck Taylor of Billboard declared it a " bona fide smash , " equipped with " the goods for a meaningful return to pop . " Taylor noted the song " features a gracious dance groove , but more so , supplies a sing along hook and distinctive melody , " likening it to " a funked @-@ up ' All for You ' , " concluding " Welcome back , Janet . Missed you much . " Glenn Gamboa of Newsweek called it " enjoyable fluff , " with a " robo @-@ dance " sound highlighting " Jackson 's playful phrasing and ability to mine the electro @-@ groove . " Blender called it " her most distinctive track in years , " and MTV News cited Jackson as " bringing back the dance sound " to the mainstream . Nick Levine of Digital Spy deemed it a " libidinous strut " that contains " everything you want from a Jackson single " , including " hard @-@ edged beats , plenty of hooks and enough attitude to compensate for her flimsy @-@ as @-@ cling @-@ film voice . " Levine went on to call the track " a Shoulda Been Smash , if only for Janet 's boast that she 's " something heavy like a first @-@ day period . " Keith Harris of Rolling Stone called the song a " high @-@ voltage money shot , " likening Jackson 's vocals to a " sex droid , " complete with " crass " beats and " heavy breathing . " Harris added , " When Janet brags she 's heavy like a first @-@ day period [ ... ] all the amateur competition should just pack up their <unk> and go home . " 
 Entertainment Weekly 's Tim Stack analyzed it as " breathy with a propulsive beat " and " exactly how I like my <unk> , " calling Jackson " the comeback story of 2008 . " Andy Battaglia of The A.V. Club considered it " a slight digital jam " which masks Jackson among " uncertain vocal tones and incongruous lines about guitars . " IGN called Jackson 's vocals a " metallic mess " but goes on to say that the song is saved by a " mediocre hook " and a " fuzzy dance beat . " The New York Times referred to the track as " blippy and propulsive , " stating that it offers " more proof that for Ms. Jackson , sex really doesn ’ t sell . " PopMatters called it " energetic " and a " club @-@ ready track perfect for both Janet 's celebrated choreography and flirty vocal stylings , " adding " she opts to forgo any shock and awe moments , " repeating the lines , " sexy , sexy , sexy " to grab your interests , versus a full onslaught of visceral come on 's . " The Boston Globe called it " droid @-@ like , " built on " metaphors and analogies . " 
 Eric Henderson of Slant Magazine said the track " shows Janet the 4 / 4 we assumed she lost , though the beat <unk> so relentlessly here it 's hard to know how she could 've ever misplaced it . " The song 's " octane , " composition , and bridge were also praised , with Henderson adding she 's " accidentally discovered the essence of hip @-@ hop for good measure . " Slant Magazine ranked it the eighth best single of 2008 and fifty @-@ ninth best song of the decade , declaring it " infectiously bizarre " and commending its advanced production and lyrical content . NRJ France commended its " sexy chorus " and " fat electro bass " , saying it " remains easily in your head . " The Los Angeles Times noted its " top @-@ notch " and " glossed @-@ over " production , praising the " tech @-@ savvy groove " while adding " It 'll sound great in a club . " The Daily Star heralded the " buzzy hook fest " as Jackson 's " best single in a decade , " while Australia 's Daily Telegraph called it a " cracking pop track . " Elsewhere , it was called " crisp " , " danceable " , and " ridiculously good " , also " lavished with Janet 's trademark velvet harmonies . " MuuMuse ranked it the nineteenth best single of the year , while MuchMusic praised the single as a return to form , saying " People want to dance . You like to dance . Together , the world can dance once again . " Bob Burke of FMQB described the song as " a whole new groove for Jackson " that " fits like a glove , " adding " the early ' feedback ' indicates another multi @-@ format hit in the making . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Feedback " debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 at number eighty @-@ four . Several weeks later it rose to its peak position of number nineteen , becoming Jackson 's twenty @-@ ninth top twenty hit on the chart and her first top twenty hit since 2001 's " Someone to Call My Lover " . " Feedback " reached number one on the Hot Dance Club Play chart , number two on Hot Singles Sales and three on Hot Dance Airplay , number seven on Hot Digital Songs , number thirty on Pop Songs , and number twenty @-@ three on the Pop 100 . It also peaked within the top twenty @-@ five of rhythmic and urban airplay formats . It was the year 's fifth most successful song on Hot Dance Club Play and Jackson 's eighteenth number one on the chart . It has sold 822 @,@ 000 in digital sales as of 2010 . It peaked at number three in Canada and number two on Hot Canadian Digital Singles . 
 Internationally , " Feedback " reached number one on South Korea 's <unk> chart , number five in Belgium and Greece , and number eight in South Africa and Slovakia , where it charted for forty @-@ one weeks . In Japan , it peaked at number fourteen on the Japan Hot 100 , peaking at number seven on the Japan Hot 100 airplay chart . It peaked within the top twenty in Norway and New Zealand ; also reaching number twenty @-@ one in Finland , twenty @-@ two in Brazil , twenty @-@ five in Croatia , thirty @-@ two in Ireland , and the top forty in France , Denmark , and Germany . In Australia and the United Kingdom it was not as successful , Peaking at 50 and 114 respectively , However did manage to chart at 14 on the UK R & B Chart . It was the year 's thirty @-@ third most played song on Lebanon 's NRJ radio . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background and concept = = = 
 The music video for " Feedback , " directed by Saam Farahmand , was filmed over two days in December 2007 , on a sound @-@ stage located in New York City . Jackson approached Farahmand with a " futuristic " galactic concept , which he created based on Jackson 's vision . Jackson was the first pop artist to work with Farahmand , resulting in a " far more " successful attempt at mainstream recognition than his prior works . A second version of the video , with several scenes lightened and edited to appear more clearly , was released to iTunes two months after the original . Rolling Stone later announced it the third most expensive music video of 2008 . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The music video begins with a purple liquid forming the word ' <unk> ' . Jackson is then shown sitting on top of a planet in outer space , wearing a bodysuit adorned with jewelry , long ponytail , and mask . Various asteroids and dancers mounting planets in black latex attire and helmets are shown . Jackson flips her ponytail , revealing her face as cosmic dust is tossed about . Several dancers leap to other planets as Jackson descends to a cratered surface , performing abstract choreography with two dancers . Jackson jumps to another setting , shown in slow motion as the audio is filtered , landing on a white liquid surface with a crimson atmosphere . Backed by eight dancers , Jackson performs the song 's choreography as various objects crash into the liquid . Jackson and the dancers fall into the liquid , with Jackson reemerging in a red catsuit . Jackson then performs a dance routine with six glowing spheres . The final sphere ascends upward as fourteen white liquid objects explode . 
 = = = Release and reception = = = 
 The video premiered on January 7 , 2008 and debuted on Yahoo ! Music the next day . Upon mending her relationship with MTV , the video premiered on MTV 's TRL on January 14 , 2008 . The video and behind the scenes footage is featured on a DVD included with the deluxe edition of Jackson 's Discipline album . Yahoo ! Music declared " Feedback " the tenth most streamed video of 2008 . 
 Billboard favorably called it " pretty insane " . MTV News regarded Jackson as being " big @-@ time back , " citing the clip as an " indication of her new look and feel . " MTV added , " Janet looks amazing , and the track bumps , " regarding it " hot enough to undo the damage of <unk> , of course , but , more recently , 20 Y.O. " MuchMusic declared it " awesome " , adding " the dance sequence is classic Jackson fabulousness and the ending is super cool . " The Los Angeles Times praised the science fiction aura among its " planetary effects " . NRJ France praised its " magnificent " choreography , adding that the video closes with " a squirt of milk . " Eric Henderson of Slant Magazine thought it was " a minor revelation " in comparison to the song itself , though credited Jackson for " juggling CGI in a skin @-@ tight red jumpsuit during what appeared to be the middle ground of her yo @-@ yo weight swings " and " whipping up cosmic dust with that ponytail ( how 's that for an entrance ? ! ) . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Jackson performed " Feedback " on Good Morning America , The Ellen DeGeneres Show , and MTV 's TRL . " Feedback " and several other songs were scheduled to be performed on Saturday Night Live , but Jackson was required to cancel due to illness . Performances on Jimmy Kimmel Live and London nightclub G @-@ A @-@ Y were also initially planned . Jackson taught the video 's choreography to Larry King during an appearance on Larry King Live . It was later performed on the Rock Witchu Tour , Number Ones , Up Close and Personal , and the Unbreakable World Tour . 
 The performance on TRL became Jackson 's first appearance on MTV in six years , following a lengthy period in which the network blacklisted Jackson and her music videos after they were fined regarding her controversial Super Bowl performance incident . MTV News called the performance " fantastique " , with the audience " completely losing their cot @-@ damn marbles . " Jackson 's rendition on Number Ones , Up Close and Personal was called " throbbing " by The Courant , noting its " explicit dance moves " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Musician Justin West recorded an acoustic version of " Feedback . " Miley Cyrus performed a dance routine to the song on the premiere episode of YouTube series " The Miley and Mandy Show " . So You Think You Dance winner Jeanine Mason performed a dance routine to the song on the show 's fifth season . It was also used in an episode of MTV 's The Hills . In 2013 , it was mentioned in the novel Cruising : Gay Erotic Stories . Fitness magazine included it among their list of Best Songs for Running . 
 = = Awards and accolades = = 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Official remixes = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Vocals : Janet Jackson 
 Writers : Rodney Jerkins , D 'Mile , Tasleema Yasin , LaShawn Daniels 
 Producers : Rodney " Darkchild " Jerkins , D 'Mile 
 Mixing : Roberto " Tito " Vazquez , Rodney Jerkins 
 Engineer : Josh Houghkirk , Carlos Oyanedel 
 Pro Tools editing : Mike " Handz " Donaldson 
 = = Charts = = 
