 = No. 71 Wing RAAF = 
 No. 71 Wing was a Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) wing of World War II . It was formed in February 1943 at Milne Bay , Papua New Guinea , as part of No. 9 Operational Group . The wing initially comprised two squadrons of P @-@ 40 Kittyhawks , one of Lockheed Hudsons , and one of Bristol Beauforts . The wing 's mainstay soon became the Beaufort , which eventually equipped five squadrons attached to the formation . No. 71 Wing took part in the New Guinea campaign under the auspices of No. 9 Group , before transferring to No. 10 Operational Group for the Western New Guinea campaign during 1944 . It then returned to the control of Northern Command ( formerly No. 9 Group ) to support Australian ground forces in the Aitape – Wewak campaign , and completed its final combat mission only hours before the Japanese surrender in August 1945 . No. 71 Wing remained in New Guinea following the war and was disbanded in January 1946 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = New Guinea campaign = = = 
 Formed in February 1943 , No. 71 Wing consisted of No. 6 Squadron ( flying Lockheed Hudsons ) , No. 75 Squadron ( P @-@ 40 Kittyhawks ) , No. 77 Squadron ( P @-@ 40 Kittyhawks ) , and No. 100 Squadron ( Bristol Beauforts ) . Based at Milne Bay , Papua New Guinea , the wing was led by Wing Commander Ian McLachlan , and came under the aegis of No. 9 Operational Group , the RAAF 's " premier fighting unit " in the South West Pacific Area ( SWPA ) , whose purpose was to act as a mobile strike force in support of advancing Allied troops . In March the Beauforts took part in the Battle of the Bismarck Sea , " the decisive aerial engagement " in the SWPA according to General Douglas MacArthur , but was unable to score any hits against Japanese ships . 
 Between July and October 1943 , No. 71 Wing 's squadrons carried out operations against enemy bases , shipping and lines of communication along the coast of New Britain . In August , it was given responsibility for Goodenough Island , where it was joined the following month by No. 8 Squadron , flying Beauforts . No. 6 Squadron had meanwhile converted to Beauforts from Hudsons ; it remained at Milne Bay along with No. 100 Squadron , until both transferred to Goodenough in November . Between October 1943 and February 1944 , the three Beaufort squadrons took part in a series of major attacks on Rabaul , bombing and strafing airfields , infrastructure and shipping ; the Japanese withdrew their aircraft from Rabaul the following month . The wing 's commanders during this period included Wing Commander Blake Pelly in 1943 , and Group Captain Colin Hannah , former leader of No. 6 Squadron , in early 1944 , before he was repatriated to Australia due to illness . 
 = = = Western New Guinea campaign = = = 
 By early 1944 , No. 9 Operational Group had become a static garrison force for the New Guinea area , and was renamed Northern Command in April to better reflect its new role . The following month No. 71 Wing , now led by Wing Commander Ralph Moran , advanced to Nadzab , where it came under the auspices of No. 10 Operational Group ( later the Australian First Tactical Air Force ) . There Nos. 8 and 100 Squadrons engaged in attacks on Japanese positions in Wewak , each flying over 140 sorties during the month . 
 In June , the wing went forward to Aitape , where its Beaufort complement was augmented by No. 30 Squadron flying Bristol Beaufighters , and No. 110 Squadron USAAF flying P @-@ 39 Airacobras . These four squadrons undertook 1 @,@ 510 sorties during the Battle of Aitape in July , delivering 670 tons of bombs . On 7 August , No. 8 Squadron flew 64 missions , a record for a Beaufort unit . US General Charles P. Hall praised the wing for contributing " in a large measure ... to the success of the operation by continuous interruption of enemy lines of communication and bombing and strafing of enemy concentrations and supplies " . Commodore John Collins , who during the battle led a Royal Australian Navy task force that included the cruisers HMAS Australia and HMAS Shropshire , also paid tribute : " The accuracy of these bombardments was ensured by excellent air spotting . Beauforts of 71 Wing RAAF gave this spotting and deserve much credit for the efficient manner in which it was undertaken , particularly since the airmen were not trained spotters and a Beaufort is hardly a suitable plane for the work . " 
 = = = Aitape – Wewak campaign = = = 
 With the decision in September 1944 that No. 71 Wing would not advance to Morotai with No. 10 Operational Group , but rather support the Australian 6th Division in the Aitape – Wewak campaign , overall control of the wing returned to Northern Command . The same month , the first Beauforts of No. 7 Squadron arrived in Aitape to augment Nos. 8 and 100 Squadrons ; the wing was further strengthened in November with a flight of CAC Boomerangs from No. 4 ( Army Cooperation ) Squadron . Wing Commander Eric Cooper , previously in charge of No. 7 Squadron , became No. 71 Wing 's new Officer Commanding in October . The Beaufort units flew around 500 sorties per month from November 1944 to January 1945 , but thereafter had to reduce their rate of effort due to aircrew , ordnance and fuel shortages . During a three @-@ day period in March , two Beauforts blew up in mid @-@ air while releasing their bombs ; the aircraft were pulled from strike missions for ten days until the problem was traced to a faulty tail unit in the 100 @-@ pound ( 45 kg ) bombs . 
 Cooper handed over to Group Captain Val Hancock , former commander of No. 100 Squadron , in April 1945 . To maximize support to Australian ground troops in the lead @-@ up to the final assault on Wewak , No. 71 Wing 's three extant Beaufort squadrons were joined by two more , Nos. 6 and 15 . Approximately sixty Beauforts and Boomerangs struck Japanese positions behind Dove Bay prior to amphibious landings on 11 May to cut off retreating enemy troops . Over the entire month , the wing dropped more than 1 @,@ 200 tons of bombs and flew in excess of 1 @,@ 400 sorties . By mid @-@ year , however , the wing was again acutely short of fuel and ordnance , so much so that the squadrons took to arming their Beauforts with captured Japanese bombs . On 9 July , enough supplies arrived to enable the wing to continue operating at nominal strength . No. 71 Wing was active to the last day of the Pacific War , flying its final combat mission involving thirty Beauforts only hours before news arrived of victory on 15 August 1945 . Thereafter its squadrons dropped leaflets to remaining pockets of Japanese resistance , making them aware of the surrender . The last entry in No. 71 Wing 's operations book was for 21 January 1946 at Tadji , New Guinea . The headquarters was disbanded six days later . 
 = SMS Grosser Kurfürst ( 1875 ) = 
 For the battleship of the same name , see SMS Grosser Kurfürst 
 SMS Grosser Kurfürst ( or Großer ) was an ironclad turret ship of the German Kaiserliche Marine . She was laid down at the Imperial Dockyard in Wilhelmshaven in 1870 and completed in 1878 ; her long construction time was in part due to a redesign that was completed after work on the ship had begun . Her main battery of four 26 cm ( 10 in ) guns was initially to be placed in a central armored battery , but during the redesign this was altered to a pair of twin gun turrets amidships . 
 Grosser Kurfürst was sunk on her maiden voyage in an accidental collision with the ironclad SMS König Wilhelm . The two ships , along with SMS Preussen were steaming in the English Channel on 31 May 1878 . The three ships encountered a group of fishing boats , and in turning to avoid them , Grosser Kurfürst inadvertently crossed too closely to König Wilhelm . The latter rammed Grosser Kurfürst , which sank in the span of about eight minutes , taking between 269 and 276 of her crew with her . Her loss spurred a series of investigations into the circumstances of the collision , which ultimately resulted in the acquittal of both Rear Admiral Carl Ferdinand Batsch , the squadron commander , and Count Alexander von Monts , the captain of Grosser Kurfürst . Political infighting over the affair led to the ousting of Rear Admiral Reinhold von Werner from the navy . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Grosser Kurfürst was ordered by the Imperial Navy from the Imperial Dockyard in Wilhelmshaven ; her keel was laid in 1869 under construction number 2 . The ship was launched on 17 September 1875 and commissioned into the German fleet on 6 May 1878 . Grosser Kurfürst cost the German government 7 @,@ 303 @,@ 000 gold marks . As designed , Grosser Kurfürst was to have had her primary armament arranged in a central battery ; after she was laid down , she was altered to mount her main guns in a pair of twin turrets . Although she was the first ship in her class of three vessels to be laid down , she was the last to be launched and commissioned . This was because she was redesigned after work had begun , and she was built by the newly established Imperial Dockyard . Her sister Preussen was built by an experienced commercial ship builder , and Friedrich der Grosse was laid down after the redesign was completed . 
 The ship was 96 @.@ 59 meters ( 316 @.@ 9 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 16 @.@ 30 m ( 53 @.@ 5 ft ) and a draft of 7 @.@ 12 m ( 23 @.@ 4 ft ) forward . Grosser Kurfürst was powered by one 3 @-@ cylinder single expansion steam engine , which was supplied with steam by six coal @-@ fired transverse trunk boilers . The ship 's top speed was 14 knots ( 26 km / h ; 16 mph ) , at 5 @,@ 468 indicated horsepower ( 4 @,@ 077 kW ) . She was also equipped with a full ship rig . Her standard complement consisted of 46 officers and 454 enlisted men . 
 She was armed with four 26 cm ( 10 in ) L / 22 guns mounted in a pair of gun turrets placed amidships . As built , the ship was also equipped with two 17 cm ( 6 @.@ 7 in ) L / 25 guns . Grosser Kurfürst 's armor was made of wrought iron and backed with teak . The armored belt was arrayed in two strakes . The upper strake was 203 mm ( 8 @.@ 0 in ) thick ; the lower strake ranged in thickness from 102 to 229 mm ( 4 @.@ 0 to 9 @.@ 0 in ) . Both were backed with 234 to 260 mm ( 9 @.@ 2 to 10 @.@ 2 in ) of teak . The gun turrets were protected by 203 to 254 mm ( 8 @.@ 0 to 10 @.@ 0 in ) armor on the sides , backed by 260 mm of teak . 
 = = Service history = = 
 = = = Collision and loss = = = 
 In April 1878 , the armored squadron was reactivated for the annual summer training cycle , under the command of Rear Admiral Carl Ferdinand Batsch . Grosser Kurfürst joined the unit , which included her sisters Preussen and Friedrich der Grosse and the large ironclad König Wilhelm , after her commissioning on 6 May . A grounding by Friedrich der Grosse caused serious damage to her hull and prevented her from taking part in the upcoming training cruise . The three ships left Wilhelmshaven on the 29th . König Wilhelm and Preussen steamed in a line , with Grosser Kurfürst off to starboard . On the morning of the 31st , the three ships encountered a pair of sailing vessels off Folkestone . Grosser Kurfürst turned to port to avoid the boats while König Wilhelm sought to pass the two boats , but there was not enough distance between her and Grosser Kurfürst . She therefore turned hard to port to avoid Grosser Kurfürst , but the action was not taken quickly enough , and König Wilhelm found herself pointed directly at Grosser Kurfürst . König Wilhelm 's ram bow tore a hole in Grosser Kurfürst . 
 A failure to adequately seal the watertight bulkheads aboard Grosser Kurfürst caused the ship to sink rapidly , in the span of about eight minutes . Figures for the number of fatalities vary . Erich Gröner reports that out of a crew of 500 men , 269 died in the accident , while Lawrence Sondhaus states that 276 men were killed . Many of the bodies ended up in Cheriton Road Cemetery , where there is a substantial memorial . Arthur Sullivan , on his way to Paris , witnessed the incident , writing , " I saw it all – saw the unfortunate vessel slowly go over and disappear under the water in clear , bright sunshine , and the water like a calm lake . It was too horrible – and then we saw all the boats moving about picking up the survivors , some so exhausted they had to be lifted on to the ships . " Among those rescued was the ship 's captain , Count Alexander von Monts . 
 König Wilhelm was also badly damaged in the collision , with severe flooding forward . König Wilhelm 's captain initially planned on beaching the ship to prevent it from sinking , but determined that the ship 's pumps could hold the flooding to an acceptable level . The ship made for Portsmouth , where temporary repairs could be effected to allow the ship to return to Germany . In the aftermath of the collision , the German navy held a court martial for Rear Admiral Batsch , the squadron commander , and Captains Monts and Kuehne , the commanders of the two ships , along with Lieutenant <unk> , the first officer aboard Grosser Kurfürst , to investigate the sinking . 
 = = = Inquiry = = = 
 In the ensuing inquiry , chaired by Rear Admiral Reinhold von Werner , Monts testified that he had not been given sufficient time to familiarize himself with the ship and its crew , who were themselves unfamiliar with the vessel . Monts argued that the mobilization process for the newly commissioned ship should have lasted four to six weeks , rather than the three he had been given . The day before the squadron left Wilhelmshaven , Batsch complained to General Albrecht von Stosch , the chief of the Kaiserliche Marine , that a significant number of dockyard workers were still finishing work on Grosser Kurfürst . Werner and the board determined that Admiral Batsch was at fault and exonerated Monts . 
 Stosch was infuriated that the proceedings had been allowed to become a forum for criticism of his policies , for which he blamed Werner . He appealed to Kaiser Wilhelm I , stating that the inquiry had unfairly blamed Admiral Batsch , and requested a new court martial for the involved officers . Simultaneously , Stosch began a campaign to force Werner out of the navy . This was in part to ensure that Batsch , his protégé , would be next in line after Stosch retired . Despite his popularity , particularly with Kaiser Wilhelm I and his son , Werner was unable to resist Stosch 's efforts to force his ouster . On 15 October 1878 , he requested retirement . 
 The second court martial again found Batsch guilty and Monts innocent of negligence . A third investigation , held in January 1879 , reversed the decision of the previous verdicts and sentenced Monts to a prison term of one month and two days , though the Kaiser refused to implement the punishment . This necessitated another trial , which returned to the initial verdict and sentenced Batsch to six months in prison . The Kaiser commuted Batsch 's sentence after he had served two months ' time . Disappointed that his protégé had taken the blame for the sinking , Stosch requested another court martial for Monts , who was found not guilty . The Kaiser officially approved the verdict , which put an end to the series of trials over the sinking of Grosser Kurfürst . 
 = Joan of Arc ( poem ) = 
 Joan of Arc is a 1796 epic poem composed by Robert Southey . The idea for the story came from a discussion between Southey and Grosvenor Bedford , when Southey realised that the story would be suitable for an epic . The subject further appealed to Southey because the events of the French Revolution were concurrent to the writing of the poem and would serve as a parallel to current events . Eventually , Samuel Taylor Coleridge helped rewrite parts of the poem for a 1798 edition . Later editions removed Coleridge 's additions along with other changes . 
 The poem is divided into two @-@ halves with the first describing Joan 's quest to meet Charles , the Dauphin of France . Eventually , she is capable of gaining the Dauphin 's support and begins to lead the French military . The secondary half describes the French defeat of the British army at Orléans . After many victories , the poem ends with Charles crowned King of France . Joan of Arc serves as a way for Southey to express his views on history and on politics ; these include his republican ideals , his claims that political tyranny was a common element in Europe , and his opposition to Christian practices that he thought were superstitious . Later editions of the poem shifted from a promotion of a deistic view of religion to a more traditional view . Critics gave the work mixed reviews , with some emphasising the quality of the images and themes of the poem . However , others believed that the poem lacked merit and some believed that the subject matter was inappropriate to the time . Many critics felt that Southey rushed in composing the work and did not devote enough time to it . 
 = = Background = = 
 In July 1793 , Southey discussed the story of Joan of Arc with Grosvenor Bedford , his friend . The conversation led to him believe that Joan of Arc would serve as a good basis for an epic so he began to work a plan for the poem and started composing lines . The subject of the poem appealed to Southey because it reflected incidents surrounding the French Revolution that started in early 1793 . By 8 August , he had around 300 lines of the poem written . On 13 August , he devoted his time to writing a 12 @-@ book poem that he hoped to complete by the end of September . After admitting this desire for haste in the preface to the poem 's first edition , critics accused Southey of not spending enough time on composing the poem . During Summer 1794 , Southey attempted to find a publisher for John of Arc while taking up The Fall of Robespierre , a poetic drama about the French Revolution , with Samuel Taylor Coleridge . 
 During 1794 , Southey began to plan with Coleridge and others about a political system that they would start in America called Pantisocracy . He needed to get money for the project and he contacted Richard Cruttwell on 19 July 1794 to publish Joan of Arc for that end . After notifying Bedford about the plan , Bedford advised Southey to contact William Nicol , a London publisher , to publish the work and raise more money . Southey did find a publisher , Joseph Cottle , to print his poem . A notification for the publication of Joan of Arc was included in a publication of Southey 's poems later in 1794 , but the edition was stopped from being printed since it lacked the minimum of 50 subscribers to pay for the cost . The poem was finally published by Cottle in 1796 ( see 1796 in poetry ) after changes to the text including a section added by Coleridge . The second edition would later be printed without Coleridge 's lines and they were instead published on their own . For the second edition , Southey revised many lines and added more research to the work . It was printed in May 1798 . Later editions were published in 1806 , 1812 , and 1837 , with the final one further toning down Southey 's republican sentiment . 
 = = Poem = = 
 Of the various versions and changes , the 1798 version is the most regular of the editions . The story describes Joan from her first appearance at Vaucouleurs until the Dauphin Charles VII is crowned at Rheims . The rest of the events are described in flashbacks throughout the first half . As the story begins , an 18 @-@ year @-@ old Joan travels to Vaucouleurs , home of Robert de Baudricourt , with her uncle Claude . She arrives searching for the Dauphin and meets Charles Dunois as the general tries to raise troops for France 's defence . He helps her through Lorraine to Chinon while explaining her background and life 's story to the general . She tells of her family , her natural living , and the effects of the soldiers who brought war to France told to her by a French soldier named Conrade . Of these various incidents , the English 's massacring French prisoners at the Battle of Agincourt and the starvation of the people of Rouen during a siege are mentioned . They finally arrive at Chinon where they are able to find the French court . 
 When Joan comes to speak with Charles , the Dauphin pretends to be a common member of the court while someone else pretends to be him . Joan is able to see through the ruse and immediately proclaims that she is sent to restore the French crown to him at Rheims . Charles has her examined by priests and scholars to determine that she is free of black magic . While questioned , Joan describes how God came to her with visions and describes her faith in a similar manner to deism . This causes the examiners to believe that she is a heretic until a blue flame appears along with a sound , which is enough to silence any doubts about her faith . The flame reveals a suit of armour for her , but one individual interrupts her immediate donning of the armour to claim that France is cursed and that she would be a victim . The individual , as it turns out , is Conrade , who blames himself that Joan left her peaceful life to help a French court that was corrupt . He also warns her that he experienced a vision of her burning at the stake . 
 Following this , Joan begins to gather troops and she takes her army to the forests around Orleans . While they camp there , a girl named Isabel comes and begins to describe the events surrounding siege of the city . Joan sends a messenger to offer the English peace , but the English decline . The French attack the English and , as soon as they start , a storm starts up and lightning flashes about them . This scares the English and Joan is able to win and enter the city . Soon after , Joan is able to lift the siege . The story continues with various French victories and the English are pushed back from fort after fort . Eventually , the English are pushed back to Tourelles . While the English fight their way there , one of the generals , Salisbury , is able to wound Joan . Her companion , Theodore , is able to kill Salisbury in return but he is brought down by the general Talbot . The French soon lay siege to Tourelles and begin a bloody fight to take the fort . During the battle , the French take many captives and the generals wish to execute them . However , Joan intervenes and ensures the safety of the captives ' lives . 
 In sparing the lives , the French are awarded by God with the collapse of a bridge that leads to many of the English soldiers drowning and a quick victory . The English , after losing Tourelles , fall back to the coast to await for reinforcements . Word comes that the Burgundian troops are coming to help the English . Joan meets with the Duke of Burgundy to warn him against a battle before she returns to her men to help bury the dead . Talbot 's son comes with reinforcements from England , and the English army attacks the French at Patay . During the battle , Joan is able to kill the son and Conrade is able to kill the father . This causes the English to flee and , in turn , allows the French to retake Rheims . Once Rheims is free , Charles comes and is crowned the King of France . The story ends with Joan telling him to be a good king . 
 = = Themes = = 
 In terms of subject matter , the story of Joan of Arc was not well known outside of a legend . A history dealing with Joan written by Clement L <unk> was written in 1790 but it was probably unknown to Southey . This would serve as the major historical source of information on her until Jules <unk> 's history published during the mid @-@ 19th century . Of non @-@ historical works , Voltaire 's La Pucelle was well known but the work attacks Joan . Joan 's reputation was polemical , and Joan would later be turned into a French hero with Napoleon 's encouragement . Friedrich Schiller would also deal with the legend the same way in Die Jungfrau von Orleans . In terms of works relying on the general idea of a warrior woman , many such figures exited in epics : Virgil and Camilla , Tasso has Clorinda , and Spenser had Britomart . However , such females were not the central figure as a woman was unique to Southey at the time . 
 The poem 's focus on France served as a way for Southey to discuss his feelings about the French Revolution . In particular , Southey was upset that the British were calling men from their farms to serve as a militia during the time . In terms of the French , Southey did not support Robespierre and the others who followed him in France . However , he did support the idea of the French Republic . When he heard of Marie Antoinette 's execution in October 1793 , Southey told his friend Bedford that he condemned the action although he held to his Republican beliefs . However , he was further upset when word came that Brissot , the Girondin leader , was executed . This caused him to believe that all of the countries were equally bad , except the Republican United States , which he hoped to make his home . In 1794 , many of Southey 's feelings on Robespierre 's involvement in these actions were included in both Joan of Arc and the Fall of <unk> , which followed after Robespierre 's own execution . However , Southey had by then become very radical and believed that Robespierre was a great man who only helped mankind in his actions . 
 The poem also contains many of Southey 's views on the Catholic Church and how it influenced his political views . Part of this comes from Southey 's trip to Lisbon and Madrid in 1795 where he was exposed to what he believed as Catholic superstition . He believed that the church and the Catholic leaders kept the people ignorant , and he believed that the Muslims that were cast out of Spain were more tolerant . Many of these ideas are repeated in a speech within the work by Henry V , and the character attributes ignorance and vice to oppression . Southey believed that the only way to escape from these problems was for people to believe they were part of one universal family . His enemies later described Southey 's as holding Jacobin belief and claimed he supported the extremism of <unk> , when his sympathies laid to a larger extent with the Girondins that were replaced by the Jacobins . However , the poem is still subversive since it described a French patriot fighting against the English that parallels the strife during Southey 's time . 
 The figure of Joan of Arc represents both a common person and a child that was free from society 's corruption . Between the editions , however , Southey 's understanding of politics and religion began to change , and this is reflected in the changes of Joan of Arc for the second edition . Joan was originally a character that had a natural understanding of religion that was connected to a Socinian form of Christianity . She , as a child , was ignorant of Church and of theology except what was revealed to her directly . However , this was replaced in the second edition with Joan having a more traditional form of religion that was provided to her during her youth . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Regarding Joan of Arc , William Wordsworth wrote to William Matthews , 21 March 1796 , claiming : " You were right about Southey , he is certainly a coxcomb , and has proved it completely by the preface to his Joan of Arc , an epic poem which he has just published . This preface is indeed a very conceited performance and the poem though in some passages of first @-@ rate excellence is on the whole of very inferior execution . " Charles Lamb , in a 10 June 1796 letter to Coleridge , stated , " With Joan of Arc I have been delighted , amazed . I had not presumed to expect of any thing of such excellence from <unk> why the poem is alone sufficient to redeem the character of the age we live in from the imputation of degenerating in Poetry [ ... ] The subject is well chosen . It opens well [ ... ] On the whole , I expect Southey one day to rival Milton . " Coleridge , in a 31 December 1796 letter to John Thelwall , admitted , " I entirely according with your opinion of Southey 's Joan [ ... ] the poem tho ' it frequently reached the sentimental , does not display , the poetical , Sublime . In language at once natural , <unk> , & dignified , in manly pathos , in sooth & sonnet @-@ like description , and above all , in character , & dramatic dialogue , Southey is unrivalled ; but as certainly he does not possess opulence of Imagination , lofty @-@ paced Harmony , or that toil of thinking , which is necessary in order to plan a Whole . " 
 John Aikin , in a review for the April 1796 Monthly Review , claimed , " We were sorry to observer , in the preface to this work , certain facts stated in order to display the extreme rapidity with which it was written . An epic poem in 12 books finished in six weeks , and , on its improved plan in 10 books , almost entirely recomposed during the time of printing ! Is it possible that a person of classical education have so slight an opinion of ( perhaps ) the most arduous effort of human invention , as to suffer the fervour and confidence of youth to hurry him in such a manner through a design which may fix the reputation of a whole life ? " The review continued : " To proceed to the execution of the design : we do not hesitate to declare our opinion that the poetical powers displayed in it are of a very superior kind , and such as , if not wasted in premature and negligent exertions , promise a rich harvest of future excellence . Conceptions more lofty and daring , sentiments more commanding , and language more energetic than some of the best passages in this poem afford , will not easily be found : — nor does scarcely any part of it sink to languor ; as the glow of feeling and genius animates the whole . " 
 An anonymous review in the June 1796 Critical Review argued , " When the character of the Maid of Orleans , and the part taken by her against the English , are considered , together with the manner in which the history has been treated by other writers , some suspicion may at first arise , that Mr. Southey has chosen a subject scarcely suited to the dignity of epic poetry . His prudence at least may be called into <unk> how can he expect to interest the English nation in the fortunes of a heroine who was an active champion against his own countrymen , or be hardly enough to <unk> those successes that involved the English in disgrace ? " In regard to the effort put into writing the poem , the review concluded : " The poetical powers of Mr. Southey are indisputable very superior , and capable , we doubt not , of producing a poem that will place him in the first class of English poets . He is at present , he tells his readers , engaged in the execution of Madoc [ ... ] We cannot , therefore , help expressing our wish , that he would not put his future poem to so hazardous an experiment as he has this , by assigning himself so little time for its completion . " 
 Following this was an anonymous review for the 1796 Analytical Review that stated , " we learn with astonishment , that Joan of Arc , in its first form , in twelve books , was [ ... ] finished in six weeks [ ... ] We thought it right to mention a fact on which the author , by detailing it in the beginning of his preface , appears to lay some stress ; but we wish entirely to forget it in our examination of the poem , and request our readers to do the same . The story , upon which this poem is founded , is one of the most interesting in the history of France , and is , in several respects , happily adapted to epic representation . " The review concluded : " The general result of the impression which the perusal of this poem has made upon our minds is this : that , although the poem has some redundancies , which the chastised taste of maturer years would have struck out ; though a manifest incongruity runs through the piece , in ascribing to characters of the fifteenth century the politics and metaphysics of an enlightened philosopher of the eighteenth ; and though allegorical personages [ ... ] but ill supply the place of that grand machinery [ ... ] which have obtained the glorious <unk> of immortality ; we , nevertheless , admire , the noble spirit of freedom , which is evidently the poet 's inspiring muse " . 
 = Roa – Hønefoss Line = 
 The Roa – Hønefoss Line ( Norwegian : Roa – <unk> , formerly Roa – <unk> ) is a 32 @-@ kilometer ( 20 mi ) long , single track railway line between Roa and Hønefoss in Norway . At Roa Station , the line connects to the Gjøvik Line , while at Hønefoss Station , it connects to the Randsfjorden Line and the Bergen Line . The line runs through Buskerud and Oppland and allowed the Bergen Line access to Oslo at Oslo East Station . 
 The Line was built by the Norwegian State Railways ( NSB ) and opened on 1 December 1909 , along with the last part of the Bergen Line . The line was electrified in 1961 . Until 1989 , nearly all Oslo – Bergen trains used the line to terminate at Oslo East Station . It was also possible to reach Oslo from Hønefoss via the Randsfjord Line , albeit terminating at Oslo West Station . NSB also ran a local service between Hønefoss and Oslo along the Roa – Hønefoss Line . Oslo – Bergen trains ran via the Randsfjord Line after 1989 and local train services have been terminated . However , the line remains in use for freight trains along the Oslo – Bergen route . 
 = = Route = = 
 The line starts at Roa Station , which is also located on the Gjøvik Line and is 57 @.@ 54 kilometers ( 35 @.@ 75 mi ) from Oslo Central Station ( Oslo S ) . Located at 313 @.@ 2 meters ( 1 @,@ 028 ft ) above mean sea level , Roa has the highest elevation on the whole line . The line runs first west , then south to Jevnaker Station , passing <unk> Station , <unk> Station , <unk> Station , <unk> Tunnel and <unk> Station , before reaching Jevnaker , which is 19 kilometers ( 12 mi ) from Roa . For a long time , Jevnaker had two separate stations located at each end of the town , with the other station serving as the terminus of the Randsfjord Line . 
 The line then runs south @-@ west , past <unk> and <unk> , before reaching Viul . There , there is a branch to a lumber mill . After Viul , the line runs through two tunnels , 95 and 185 meters ( 312 and 607 ft ) long . At <unk> , located 27 kilometers ( 17 mi ) from Roa , there was formerly a spur to a military camp . The line then runs over a 55 @-@ meter ( 180 ft ) long bridge over <unk> before passing Hønen and a spur at Hønen and to a <unk> bakery . Just before reaching Hønefoss Station , the line runs on a 216 meters ( 709 ft ) long bridge over <unk> . At Hønefoss , the Roa – Hønefoss Line and the Randsfjord Line come in from the east while the Randsfjord Line and the Bergen Line continue to the west . Hønefoss is 89 @.@ 57 kilometers ( 55 @.@ 66 mi ) from Oslo via Roa and 124 @.@ 21 kilometers ( 77 @.@ 18 mi ) via Drammen . 
 = = History = = 
 Hønefoss Station opened on 13 October 1868 as an intermediate station on the Randsfjord Line which connects Randsfjorden to Drammen . The initial proposals for the Bergen Line route went from Hønefoss via Sandvika to Oslo West Station ( Oslo V ) . However , this was met with a combination of political opposition and technical restrictions . During the 1880s and 1890s , all lines that did not connect to Sweden were to be built with 1 @,@ 067 mm ( 3 ft 6 in ) narrow gauge . The Drammen Line , which connected Sandvika to Oslo , was narrow gauge , as were the rest of the lines west of Oslo . During the planning of the Gjøvik Line ( at the time known as the North Line ) , military considerations eventually led to the decision to build it with standard gauge . Eventually it was decided that the Bergen Line would also be built with standard gauge . However , to reach Oslo from Hønefoss , a longer route to connect to the Gjøvik Line would have to be built , allowing the line to connect to the more important Oslo East Station . The construction of the Roa – Hønefoss Line and the Bergen Line from Hønefoss to <unk> was passed by the Parliament of Norway on 2 June 1898 . 
 The line was built by NSB as part of the Bergen Line project , for which construction across the mountain had commenced in 1895 . Construction of the Roa – Hønefoss Line started in 1903 . This section is relatively flat and was the easiest part of the project to build . The line was officially opened along with the section of the Bergen Line from Gulsvik to Hønefoss , by King Haakon VII on 27 November 1909 . It was taken into ordinary use on 1 December . At the time the line opened , there were stations at Roa , <unk> , Jevnaker , <unk> and Hønefoss . 
 To begin with , the line had a single through train from Oslo to Bergen , with an additional summer express — with a limited number of stops . In addition , there were two additional trains from Hønefoss to Oslo . From 1 May 1912 , a night train was also introduced and the same year mixed passenger and freight trains were introduced from Ål on the Bergen Line to Oslo . A station was opened at Viul on 16 August 1915 , and another at <unk> on 1 October . Because of economic impact of World War I , the night train services was reduced to only twice a week from 20 May 1917 until 7 June 1919 . In 1930 , new stations were established at <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and Hønen . During World War II from 1940 to 1945 , the frequency was reduced to no more than one train per day . During parts of 1940 , the Oslo – Bergen line was instead run via the Drammen and Randsfjord Lines . However , two local trains were kept on the route from Hønefoss to Roa . 
 From 18 November 1945 , the daily Oslo – Bergen trains again ran via Roa , while the local trains from Oslo to Hønefoss increased to three daily round trips . Three weekly night trains were introduced from 1946 . From 2 January to 1 May 1947 , there was four weekly express services from Oslo to Geilo on the Bergen Line . By 1950 , the situation had normalized and there were daily day and night trains and three weekly express trains — the latter with no stops between Hønefoss and Oslo . <unk> Station opened on 18 August 1952 . 
 In the 1930s , it was decided that the Bergen Line was to be electrified . After the first section , from Bergen to Voss , was completed in 1954 , the Gjøvik Line and the Roa – Hønefoss Line were the next to be electrified . The sections Oslo – Jaren and Roa – Hønefoss opened with 15 kV 16 2 ⁄ 3 Hz AC electric traction on 1 February 1961 . Automatic signaling was put into service on 10 December 1973 and automatic train stop was put into operation on 27 October 1987 . 
 From 3 June 1984 , the day train was moved to run via Drammen . Until 1989 , the Roa – Hønefoss Line had four daily round trips with a local train from Hønefoss via Roa to Oslo , normally a Class 65 or Class 67 unit . From 1989 , this was reduced to a single round trip , with a morning train from Hønefoss to Oslo and a return in the afternoon . Eventually this was taken over by a Class 69 unit and by the late 1990s taken out of service . The Roa – Hønefoss Line remains a pure freight track for long @-@ haul freight trains on the Bergen Line . After the opening of the Oslo Tunnel and Oslo Central Station in 1989 , passenger trains run via Drammen ; however , the Roa – Hønefoss Line is used as a reserve line for passenger trains when the Drammen Line or Randsfjord Line is out of service . 
 = Vipera berus = 
 Vipera berus , the common European adder or common European viper , is a venomous snake that is extremely widespread and can be found throughout most of Western Europe and as far as East Asia . Known by a host of common names including common adder and common viper , adders have been the subject of much folklore in Britain and other European countries . They are not regarded as especially dangerous ; the snake is not aggressive and usually bites only when alarmed or disturbed . Bites can be very painful , but are seldom fatal . The specific name , berus , is New Latin and was at one time used to refer to a snake , possibly the grass snake , Natrix natrix . 
 The common adder is found in different terrains , habitat complexity being essential for different aspects of its behaviour . It feeds on small mammals , birds , lizards , and amphibians , and in some cases on spiders , worms , and insects . The common adder , like most other vipers , is ovoviviparous . Females breed once every two or three years , with litters usually being born in late summer to early autumn in the Northern Hemisphere . Litters range in size from three to 20 with young staying with their mothers for a few days . Adults grow to a total length ( including tail ) of 60 to 90 cm ( 24 to 35 in ) and a mass of 50 to 180 g ( 1 @.@ 8 to 6 @.@ 3 oz ) . Three subspecies are recognized , including the nominate subspecies , Vipera berus berus described here . The snake is not considered to be threatened , though it is protected in some countries . 
 = = Etymologies = = 
 The name " adder " is derived from <unk> an Old English word that had the generic meaning of serpent in the older forms of many Germanic languages . It was commonly used in the Old English version of the Christian Scriptures for the devil and the serpent in the Book of Genesis . In the 14th century , " a <unk> " in Middle English was <unk> to " an adder " ( just as " a <unk> " became " an apron " and " a <unk> " changed into " an umpire " ) . 
 In keeping with its wide distribution and familiarity through the ages , Vipera berus has a large number of common names in English , which include : 
 Common European adder , common European viper , European viper , northern viper , adder , common adder , crossed viper , European adder , common viper , European common viper , cross adder , or common cross adder . 
 In Sweden , Norway , and Denmark , the snake is known as <unk> or <unk> , roughly translated as " striking serpent " or " cutting serpent " . In Finland , it is known as <unk> or simply <unk> , in Estonia it is known as <unk> , while in Lithuania it is known as <unk> . 
 = = Description = = 
 Relatively thick @-@ bodied , adults usually grow to 60 cm ( 24 in ) in total length ( including tail ) , with an average of 55 cm ( 22 in ) . Maximum size varies by region . The largest , at over 90 cm ( 35 in ) , are found in Scandinavia ; specimens of 104 cm ( 41 in ) have been observed there on two occasions . In France and Great Britain , the maximum size is 80 – 87 cm ( 31 – 34 in ) . Mass ranges from 50 g ( 1 @.@ 8 oz ) to about 180 grams ( 6 @.@ 3 oz ) . 
 The head is fairly large and distinct and its sides are almost flat and vertical . The edge of the snout is usually raised into a low ridge . Seen from above , the rostral scale is not visible , or only just . Immediately behind the rostral , there are two ( rarely one ) small scales . Dorsally , there are usually five large plates : a squarish frontal ( longer than wide , sometimes rectangular ) , two parietals ( sometimes with a tiny scale between the frontal and the parietals ) , and two long and narrow supraoculars . The latter are large and distinct , each separated from the frontal by one to four small scales . The nostril is situated in a shallow depression within a large nasal scale . The eye is relatively large — equal in size or slightly larger than the nasal scale — but often smaller in females . Below the supraoculars are six to 13 ( usually eight to 10 ) small circumorbital scales . The temporal scales are smooth ( rarely weakly keeled ) . There are 10 – 12 sublabials and six to 10 ( usually eight or 9 ) supralabials . Of the latter , the numbers 3 and 4 are the largest , while 4 and 5 ( rarely 3 and 4 ) are separated from the eye by a single row of small scales ( sometimes two rows in alpine specimens ) . 
 Midbody there are 21 dorsal scales rows ( rarely 19 , 20 , 22 , or 23 ) . These are strongly keeled scales , except for those bordering the ventral scales . These scales seem loosely attached to the skin and lower rows become increasingly wide ; those closest to the ventral scales are twice as wide as the ones along the midline . The ventral scales number 132 @-@ 150 in males and 132 – 158 in females . The anal plate is single . The subcaudals are paired , numbering 32 – 46 in males and 23 – 38 in females . 
 The colour pattern varies , ranging from very light @-@ coloured specimens with small , incomplete , dark dorsal crossbars to entirely brown ones with faint or clear , darker brown markings , and on to melanistic individuals that are entirely dark and lack any apparent dorsal pattern . However , most have some kind of zigzag dorsal pattern down the entire length of their bodies and tails . The head usually has a distinctive dark V or X on the back . A dark streak runs from the eye to the neck and continues as a longitudinal series of spots along the flanks . Unusual for snakes , the sexes are possible to tell apart by the colour . Females are usually brownish in hue with dark @-@ brown markings , the males are pure grey with black markings . The basal colour of males will often be slightly lighter than that of the females , making the black zigzag pattern stand out . The melanistic individuals are often females . 
 = = Geographic range = = 
 Vipera berus has a wide range . It can be found across the Eurasian land @-@ mass ; from northwestern Europe ( Great Britain , Scandinavia , Germany , France ) across southern Europe ( Italy , Serbia , Albania , Croatia , Montenegro , Bosnia and Herzegovina , Republic of Macedonia , Bulgaria , and northern Greece ) and eastern Europe to north of the Arctic Circle , and Russia to the Pacific Ocean , Sakhalin Island , North Korea , northern Mongolia and northern China . It is found further north than any other snake species . The type locality was originally listed as " Europa " . Mertens and Müller ( 1940 ) proposed restricting the type locality to " Upsala , <unk> " ( Uppsala , Sweden ) and it was eventually restricted to <unk> , Uppsala by designation of a neotype by <unk> & Wahlgren ( 2008 ) . 
 In several European countries , it is notable as being the only native venomous snake . It is one of only three snake species native to Britain . The other two , the Grass snake and the Smooth snake are non @-@ venomous . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 In the United Kingdom , it is illegal to kill , injure , harm , or sell adders under the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 . The common viper is categorised as " endangered " in Switzerland , and is also protected in some other countries in its range . It is also found in many protected areas . This species is listed as protected ( Appendix III ) under the Berne Convention . 
 The International Union for the Conservation of Nature Red List of Threatened Species describes the conservation status as of " least concern " in view of its wide distribution , presumed large population , broad range of habitats , and likely slow rate of decline though it acknowledges the population to be decreasing . Reduction in habitat for a variety of reasons , fragmentation of populations in Europe due to intense agriculture practices , and collection for the pet trade or for venom extraction have been recorded as major contributing factors for its decline . 
 = = Habitat = = 
 Sufficient habitat complexity is a crucial requirement for the presence of this species , in order to support its various behaviors — basking , foraging , and hibernation — as well as to offer some protection from predators and human harassment . It is found in a variety of habitats , including : chalky downs , rocky hillsides , moors , sandy heaths , meadows , rough commons , edges of woods , sunny glades and clearings , bushy slopes and hedgerows , dumps , coastal dunes , and stone quarries . It will venture into wetlands if dry ground is available nearby and thus may be found on the banks of streams , lakes , and ponds . 
 In much of southern Europe , such as southern France and northern Italy , it is found in either low lying wetlands or at high altitudes . In the Swiss Alps , it may ascend to about 3 @,@ 000 m ( 9 @,@ 800 ft ) . In Hungary and Russia , it avoids open <unk> ; a habitat in which V. <unk> is more likely to occur . In Russia , however , it does occur in the forest steppe zone . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 This species is mainly diurnal , especially in the north of its range . Further south it is said to be active in the evening , and it may even be active at night during the summer months . It is predominantly a terrestrial species , although it has been known to climb up banks and into low bushes in order to bask or search for prey . 
 Adders are not usually aggressive , tending to be rather timid and biting only when cornered or alarmed . People are generally bitten only after stepping on them or attempting to pick them up . They will usually disappear into the undergrowth at a hint of any danger , but will return once all is quiet , often to the same spot . Occasionally , individual snakes will reveal their presence with a loud and sustained hissing , hoping to warn off potential aggressors . Often , these turn out to be pregnant females . When the adder is threatened , the front part of the body is drawn into an S @-@ shape to prepare for a strike . 
 The species is cold @-@ adapted and hibernates in the winter . In Great Britain , males and females hibernate for about 150 and 180 days respectively . In northern Sweden hibernation lasts 8 – 9 months . On mild winter days , they may emerge to bask where the snow has melted and will often travel across snow . About 15 % of adults and 30 – 40 % of juveniles die during hibernation . 
 = = Feeding = = 
 Diet consists mainly of small mammals , such as mice , voles , and shrews , as well as lizards . Sometimes , slow worms are taken , and even weasels and moles . They feed on amphibians , such as frogs , newts , and salamanders . Birds are also reported to be consumed , especially nestlings and even eggs , for which they will climb into shrubbery and bushes . Generally , diet varies depending on locality . Juveniles will eat nestling mammals , small lizards and frogs as well as worms and spiders . Once they reach about 30 cm ( 0 @.@ 98 ft ) in length , their diet begins to resemble that of the adults . 
 = = Reproduction = = 
 In Hungary , mating takes place in the last week of April , while in the north it happens later in the second week of May . Matings have also been observed in June and even early October , but it is not known if the autumn matings result in any young . Females often breed once every two years , or even once every three years if the seasons are short and the climate is severe . 
 Males find females by following their scent trails , sometimes tracking them for hundreds of meters a day . If a female is found and flees , the male follows . Courtship involves side @-@ by @-@ side parallel " flowing " behavior , tongue flicking along the back and excited lashing of the tail . Pairs stay together for one or two days after mating . Males chase away their rivals and engage in combat . Often , this also starts with the aforementioned flowing behavior before culminating in the dramatic " adder dance . " In this act , the males confront each other , raise up the front part of the body vertically , make swaying movements and attempt to push each other to the ground . This is repeated until one of the two becomes exhausted and crawls off to find another mate . Interestingly , Appleby ( 1971 ) notes that he has never seen an intruder win one of these contests , as if the frustrated defender is so aroused by courtship that he refuses to lose his chance to mate . There are no records of any biting taking place during these bouts . 
 Females usually give birth in August or September , but sometimes as early as July , or as late as early October . Litters range in size from 3 to 20 . The young are usually born encased in a transparent sac from which they must free themselves . Sometimes , they succeed in freeing themselves from this membrane while still inside the female . The neonates measure 14 to 23 centimetres ( 5 @.@ 5 to 9 @.@ 1 in ) in total length ( including tail ) , with an average total length of 17 cm ( 6 @.@ 7 in ) . They are born with a fully functional venom apparatus and a reserve supply of yolk within their bodies . They shed their skins for the first time within a day or two . Females do not appear to take much interest in their offspring , but the young have been observed to remain near their mothers for several days after birth . 
 = = Venom = = 
 Because of the rapid rate of human expansion throughout the range of this species , bites are relatively common . Domestic animals and livestock are frequent victims . In Great Britain , most instances occur in March – October . In Sweden , there are about 1 @,@ 300 bites a year , with an estimated 12 % that require hospitalisation . At least eight different antivenoms are available against bites from this species . 
 Mallow et al . ( 2003 ) describe the venom toxicity as being relatively low compared to other viper species . They cite Minton ( 1974 ) who reported the LD50 values for mice to be 0 @.@ 55 mg / kg IV , 0 @.@ 80 mg / kg IP and 6 @.@ 45 mg / kg SC . As a comparison , in one test the minimum lethal dose of for a guinea pig was 40 – 67 mg , but only 1 @.@ 7 mg was necessary when <unk> <unk> venom was used . Brown ( 1973 ) gives a higher subcutaneous LD50 range of 1 @.@ 0 – 4 @.@ 0 mg / kg . All agree that the venom yield is low : Minton ( 1974 ) mentions 10 – 18 mg for specimens 48 – 62 cm ( 19 – 24 @.@ 5 in ) in length , while Brown ( 1973 ) lists only 6 mg . 
 Relatively speaking , bites from this species are not highly dangerous . In Britain there have been only 14 known fatalities since 1876 — the last a 5 @-@ year @-@ old child in 1975 — and one near fatal bite of a 39 @-@ year @-@ old woman in Essex in 1998 . An 82 @-@ year @-@ old woman died following a bite in Germany in 2004 , although it is not clear whether her death was due to the effect of the venom . Even so , professional medical help should always be sought as soon as possible after any bite . Very occasionally bites can be life @-@ threatening , particularly in small children , while adults may experience discomfort and disability long after the bite . The length of recovery varies , but may take up to a year . 
 Local symptoms include immediate and intense pain , followed after a few minutes ( but perhaps by as much as 30 minutes ) by swelling and a tingling sensation . Blisters containing blood are not common . The pain may spread within a few hours , along with tenderness and inflammation . Reddish <unk> lines and bruising may appear , and the whole limb can become swollen and bruised within 24 hours . Swelling may also spread to the trunk , and with children , throughout the entire body . Necrosis and <unk> syndromes are very rare . 
 Systemic symptoms resulting from anaphylaxis can be dramatic . These may appear within 5 minutes post bite , or can be delayed for many hours . Such symptoms include nausea , retching and vomiting , abdominal colic and diarrhoea , incontinence of urine and faeces , sweating , fever , vasoconstriction , tachycardia , lightheadedness , loss of consciousness , blindness , shock , angioedema of the face , lips , gums , tongue , throat and epiglottis , urticaria and <unk> . If left untreated , these symptoms may persist or fluctuate for up to 48 hours . In severe cases , cardiovascular failure may occur . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The species has three recognised subspecies : 
 The subspecies V. b. <unk> and V. b. <unk> have been regarded as full species in some recent publications . 
 = Joey Santiago = 
 Joseph Alberto " Joey " Santiago ( born June 10 , 1965 ) is a Filipino @-@ American guitarist and composer . Active since 1986 , Santiago is best known as the lead guitarist for the American alternative rock band the Pixies . After the band 's breakup in 1993 , Santiago produced musical scores for film and television documentaries , and he formed The Martinis with his wife , Linda Mallari . He also contributed to albums by Charles Douglas and former Pixies band @-@ mate Frank Black . Santiago resumed his role as the Pixies ' lead guitarist when they reunited in 2004 . 
 Santiago has described his guitar technique as " angular and bent " , and he cites Les Paul , George Harrison , Chet Atkins , Wes Montgomery , Joe Pass and Jimi Hendrix as major influences on his style . His guitar playing , as part of the Pixies ' sound , was held in high regard by critics : MTV 's Laurel Bowman commented that Santiago 's " sonic plow was the key element in the Pixies ' monstrous presence " . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Santiago was born in Manila , Philippines , on June 10 , 1965 , the third of six sons of an anesthesiologist . In 1972 , when President Marcos declared martial law , the family emigrated to the United States . After two years in Yonkers , New York , the family moved to Longmeadow , Massachusetts , where Santiago attended Longmeadow High School and graduated from Wilbraham & Monson Academy in 1983 . His first experience with a musical instrument was playing a Hammond organ at the age of eight , but he never took on the instrument seriously because he had to share it with five brothers . Santiago first played a guitar at the age of nine after he noticed a classical guitar hanging on his oldest brother 's wall for decoration . The first song he learned to play was The Velvet Underground 's " Rock and Roll " . 
 As a teenager , Santiago became interested in computer programming , naming his first program " Iggy " and his second " Pop " after punk rocker Iggy Pop . He participated in a cycle ride across the United States in aid of charity , but on completing it did not bother to collect the sponsor 's money . 
 After graduating from high school in 1983 , Santiago studied at the University of Massachusetts Amherst . He remained without a major as long as the university would permit him to , but eventually chose economics . He met Charles Thompson , an anthropology student and the future Pixies frontman , after he heard Thompson and his roommate playing their guitars . Santiago rushed home to collect his guitar , and was soon playing " non @-@ blues @-@ scale , non @-@ cover @-@ song rock " with Thompson . 
 Santiago and Thompson shared a room at the start of the second semester . Santiago soon introduced his new roommate to 1970s punk and the music of David Bowie . He later recalled their time together in college : " Charles and I had a suite at the college dorm . We 'd go to shows , I remember seeing Black Flag and Angst . Initially , I think we just liked each other . I did notice right away that he was playing music ... He 'd write ' em [ the songs ] , and I 'd throw my ideas on the guitar . " In their second year of college , Thompson traveled to Puerto Rico as an exchange student . After six months there living with a " weird , psycho roommate , " Thompson sent Santiago a letter with the words " We gotta do it , now is the time , Joe , we gotta chase our dreams " ; Santiago replied , saying " Yes , now 's the time . " Upon receiving this reply , Thompson decided to return to Amherst to start a rock band with Santiago . 
 = = Pixies = = 
 Upon Thompson 's return to Massachusetts , the pair dropped out of college and moved to Boston . They both took temporary jobs in warehouses , with Santiago working for a butcher block company . In January 1986 , Thompson formed the Pixies with Santiago . Thompson gave Santiago the choice of bass or lead guitar ; Santiago chose to play lead . The pair arrived at a name after Santiago selected the word randomly from a dictionary and liked the definition , " mischievous little elves . " They recruited Kim Deal a week later after placing a classified ad in a Boston paper for a bassist " into Hüsker Dü and Peter , Paul and Mary . " Drummer David Lovering was later hired on recommendation from Deal 's husband . 
 The Pixies rehearsed throughout 1986 , and began performing around Boston in late 1986 and during 1987 . Santiago met his future wife , Linda Mallari , when he sat beside her after a 1987 Pixies show at The Rat . Mallari noted their shared Filipino ancestry and suggested they write music together . She then offered to join the Pixies , but Santiago replied , " We already have a chick in the band . " Throughout Santiago 's time with the Pixies , the two often met up to write songs and drink martinis , but they did not release any material . According to Santiago , they " broke up a couple of times " early in their relationship . 
 The Pixies signed to the English independent record label 4AD in 1987 . On meeting the head of the label , Ivo Watts @-@ Russell , Santiago remarked : " All I care about is that you make me famous in the Philippines because all the chicks are really pretty " . Watts @-@ Russell later said " that 's probably all I ever heard Joey really say , " and by that time , Santiago 's quietness had been noted by those close to the band . The Pixies ' first release , Come On Pilgrim , featured his trademark angular lead guitar on tracks such as " The Holiday Song " and " Vamos " . 
 After the band 's next two albums , 1988 's Surfer Rosa and 1989 's Doolittle , the relationship between the band members became strained ; the Pixies were constantly touring and had released three albums in two years . During their homecoming Boston concert , on the post @-@ Doolittle " Fuck or Fight " tour , Santiago smashed up his instrument and stormed offstage . The band announced a break soon afterwards . During this time , Santiago visited the Grand Canyon to " find himself . " After the band reconvened in 1990 , Santiago contributed to the band 's later releases , 1990 's Bossanova and 1991 's Trompe le Monde , adopting a surf guitar style in the former . The Pixies eventually broke up in 1992 , mostly due to tensions between Francis and Deal , although the breakup was not publicly announced until 1993 . 
 = = The Martinis and composing = = 
 After the breakup of the Pixies , Santiago went into a depression for the first couple of years but remained on good terms with bandmate Black Francis ( who soon adopted the name Frank Black ) . Black , who was recording his 1993 debut album , Frank Black , contacted Santiago to ask whether he would contribute lead guitar . Santiago agreed , and he and Mallari drove from their home in Florida to Los Angeles . The couple ended up moving into Black 's old apartment in L.A. on a whim . Santiago played lead guitar on a number of Frank Black 's solo albums , including 1994 's Teenager of the Year , and contributed lead guitar to Steve Westfield 's 1994 album Mangled . He also formed The Martinis a year later with Mallari . Their recorded output by the end of the 1990s comprised a single song , the self @-@ recorded " Free " ( 1995 ) , which appeared on the film soundtrack of Empire Records . The band played live only occasionally until 2001 . 
 In the mid @-@ 1990s , Santiago began to explore audio editing software . After composing for several independent films , including Crime and Punishment in Suburbia in 2000 ( where he collaborated again with Black ) , Santiago co @-@ scored the Fox Network TV series Undeclared with Michael Andrews . He continued to contribute lead guitar to albums , collaborating with Charles Douglas on his 2004 album Statecraft . He scored the 2003 film The Low Budget Time Machine and wrote two songs , " Birthday Video " and " Fake Purse , " for the Showtime television series Weeds in 2005 . 
 Mallari and Santiago continued to write new material as part of the Martinis , but no longer played live . Their debut album , Smitten , took two years to write and was released in 2004 ; the pair collaborated with a number of musicians , including drummer Josh Freese , during the recording . Santiago described the album as " a lot poppier and quirkier " than the band 's previous material . The band simultaneously released The Smitten Sessions , a limited edition EP . 
 = = Pixies reunion and future projects = = 
 After the Pixies broke up in 1993 , Santiago had stayed in touch with every band member . In the summer of 2003 , Black decided to begin reuniting the Pixies and called Santiago first . Santiago later explained : " He called me on my cellphone and I was in Cape Cod visiting family . He said in this coy voice , ' Hey Joey , uh , you been <unk> ' these rumors that we 're getting back together ? Gee , I wonder who started it ? ' I go , ' Charles , did you do that ? ' and he goes , ' Yeah . ' " Santiago then contacted Lovering and Deal to inform them of Black 's decision and by the summer of 2004 the band had reunited . DreamWorks asked the Pixies in early 2004 to compose a song for the Shrek 2 soundtrack . They agreed , and early versions of this new song were recorded in Santiago 's basement . With his soundtrack experience , the band , in the words of Deal , " worked it up a bit in Joey 's Pro Tools thing " , before submitting it to the studio . DreamWorks rejected the song , so the band released it as a single , " Bam Thwok " . 
 Aside from the Pixies and The Martinis , Santiago scored the soundtrack of the documentary Radiant City in 2006 . He signed with the commercial sound agency Elias Arts in the same year , and focused on composing music for television commercials . In a March 2006 Billboard.com interview , he dismissed the possibility of a new Pixies album for the time being : " I 'd only be interested if it happens in an organic manner ; if all our schedules are aligned and we 're all feeling it . That 's the only reason to do it . " Santiago also played a benefit concert for drummer Wally Ingram in February 2007 as part of The Martinis ; the band 's first gig for six years . 
 = = Musical style = = 
 Santiago describes his guitar playing as " angular and bent , " " all derived from guitar moments that perk my ears up " . Notable in his style is how he uses distortion and feedback to leave spaces open . A good example is the intro of There Goes My Gun . He attributes much of his style to songs he enjoyed when first learning the guitar , such as The Beatles ' " Savoy Truffle " , where " George Harrison played that bent note that I fell in love with and later milked it for all it was worth . " He used such techniques with the Pixies : Doolittle 's " Dead " begins with Santiago 's guitar " squawking " on an E @-@ flat like " a wounded animal " . As Santiago was learning the guitar , he saw himself as a self @-@ conscious amateur , and still speaks of a lack of confidence in his playing . 
 Santiago , rather than listening to popular radio , borrowed rock and roll records from the public library as he was growing up ; he first discovered Les Paul and Jimi Hendrix , who led to jazz guitarist Wes Montgomery . Santiago later commented on Montgomery 's influence : " And that 's when I said , ' Ah , that 's a hook . That 's some hooky stuff in the jazz world ' " . He discovered jazz and country artists such as Joe Pass and Chet Atkins after studying the liner notes of albums . Santiago was directly influenced by the " Hendrix chord " , the sharp 9th dominant chord which , in the words of author Ben Sisario , " tapped a hidden rage that matched the horror of Thompson 's scream " . As a teenager , Santiago also listened to classic rock and protopunk artists such as The Who , The Rolling Stones , The Velvet Underground and Iggy Pop . 
 The stage antics of Santiago often contrasted with his generally quiet demeanor ; he often experimented with his guitar and equipment during songs . Deal 's husband , John Murphy , said that during performances of " Vamos " , which features guitar feedback throughout , Santiago used to " whack the crap out of his amp " , often picking up the amplifier and moving it around . During some solos , Santiago would often pull the guitar up to his mouth and break guitar strings with his teeth . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Pixies 
 Come On Pilgrim ( 1987 ) 
 Surfer Rosa ( 1988 ) 
 Doolittle ( 1989 ) 
 Bossanova ( 1990 ) 
 Trompe le Monde ( 1991 ) 
 Indie Cindy ( 2014 ) 
 Frank Black 
 Frank Black ( 1993 ) 
 Teenager of the Year ( 1994 ) 
 Dog in the Sand ( 2001 ) 
 Devil 's Workshop ( 2002 ) 
 Show Me Your Tears ( 2003 ) 
 Frank Black Francis ( additional editing , 2004 ) 
 The Martinis 
 Smitten ( 2004 ) 
 The Smitten Sessions ( 2004 ) 
 The Everybody 
 Avatar ( 2009 ) 
 Other appearances 
 Santiago is credited as guitar unless otherwise specified : 
 Mangled ( Steve Westfield , 1994 ) 
 Stuff ( Holly <unk> , 1997 ) 
 It Came from the Barn ( producer ) ( Pajama Slave Dancers , 1997 ) 
 Home Is Where My Feet Are ( Holly <unk> , 2002 ) 
 Statecraft ( Charles Douglas , 2004 ) 
 Weeds : Music from the Original Series ( composed and performed " Birthday Video " and " Fake Purse " ) ( Weeds , 2005 ) 
 In Pursuit Of Your Happiness ( Mark Mulcahy , 2005 ) 
 Songs About Time ( The Rentals , 2009 ) 
 <unk> , <unk> Man : A Musical Tribute To The Songs Of Shel Silverstein ( Various Artists , 2010 ) 
 = SMS Karlsruhe ( 1916 ) = 
 SMS Karlsruhe was a light cruiser of the Königsberg class , built for the Kaiserliche Marine ( Imperial Navy ) during World War I. She was named after the earlier Karlsruhe , which had sunk in November 1914 , from an accidental explosion . The new cruiser was laid down in 1914 at the Kaiserliche Werft shipyard in Kiel , launched in January 1916 , and commissioned into the High Seas Fleet in November 1916 . Armed with eight 15 cm SK L / 45 guns , the ship had a top speed of 27 @.@ 5 kn ( 50 @.@ 9 km / h ; 31 @.@ 6 mph ) . 
 She saw relatively limited service during the war , due to her commissioning late in the conflict . She was present during a brief engagement with British light forces in August 1917 , though she did not actively participate in the battle . She joined the large task force assigned to Operation Albion in October 1917 , but did not see significant action during that operation either . She was assigned to what was to have been the final sortie of the High Seas Fleet in the closing days of the war , but a large @-@ scale mutiny in significant parts of the fleet forced the cancellation of the plan . Karlsruhe was interned in Scapa Flow after the end of the war , and scuttled there on 21 June 1919 . Unlike most of the other ships sunk there , her wreck was never raised . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Karlsruhe was ordered under the contract name " Ersatz Niobe " and was laid down at the Kaiserliche Werft shipyard in Kiel in 1915 . She was launched on 31 January 1916 , after which fitting @-@ out work commenced . She was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet on 15 November 1916 . The ship was 151 @.@ 4 meters ( 496 ft 9 in ) long overall and had a beam of 14 @.@ 2 m ( 46 ft 7 in ) and a draft of 5 @.@ 96 m ( 19 ft 7 in ) forward . She displaced 7 @,@ 125 t ( 7 @,@ 012 long tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two sets of steam turbines powered by ten coal @-@ fired and two oil @-@ fired Marine @-@ type water @-@ tube boilers . These provided a top speed of 27 @.@ 5 knots ( 50 @.@ 9 km / h ; 31 @.@ 6 mph ) and a range of 4 @,@ 850 nautical miles ( 8 @,@ 980 km ; 5 @,@ 580 mi ) at 12 kn ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . 
 The ship was armed with eight 15 cm SK L / 45 guns in single pedestal mounts . Two were placed side by side forward on the forecastle , four were located amidships , two on either side , and two were arranged in a super @-@ firing pair aft . They were supplied with 1 @,@ 040 rounds of ammunition , for 130 shells per gun . Karlsruhe also carried two 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) L / 45 anti @-@ aircraft guns mounted on the centerline astern of the funnels . She was also equipped with a pair of 60 cm ( 24 in ) torpedo tubes with eight torpedoes in deck @-@ mounted swivel launchers amidships . She also carried 200 mines . The ship was protected by a waterline armored belt that was 60 mm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) thick amidships . The conning tower had 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick sides , and the deck was covered with 60 mm thick armor plate . 
 = = Service history = = 
 On 16 August 1917 , Karlsruhe participated in a mine @-@ sweeping operation in the North Sea . The minesweepers were clearing Route Yellow , one of the channels in the minefields used by U @-@ boats to leave and return to port . Karlsruhe was joined by the cruiser SMS Frankfurt and three torpedo boats . At 12 : 55 , lookouts on one of the minesweepers spotted a British squadron of three light cruisers and sixteen destroyers approaching . The minesweepers fled south under cover of smoke screens , after which the British broke off the attack . Karlsruhe and the rest of the escort failed to come to their aid , however , and the commander of the operation was subsequently relieved of command . 
 In early September 1917 , following the German conquest of the Russian port of Riga , the German navy decided to eliminate the Russian naval forces that still held the Gulf of Riga . The Admiralstab ( Navy High Command ) planned Operation Albion to seize the Baltic island of Ösel , and specifically the Russian gun batteries on the Sworbe Peninsula . On 18 September , the order was issued for a joint operation with the army to capture Ösel and Moon Islands ; the primary naval component comprised the flagship , the battlecruiser Moltke , along with the III and IV Battle Squadrons of the High Seas Fleet . The invasion force amounted to approximately 24 @,@ 600 officers and enlisted men . Karlsruhe and the rest of the II Scouting Group provided the cruiser screen for the task force . 
 The operation began on the morning of 12 October , when Moltke and the III Squadron ships engaged Russian positions in Tagga Bay while the IV Squadron shelled Russian gun batteries on the Sworbe Peninsula on Ösel . On 18 – 19 October , Karlsruhe and the rest of the II Scouting Group covered minesweepers operating off the island of Dagö , but due to an insufficient number of minesweepers and bad weather , the operation was postponed . By 20 October , the islands were under German control and the Russian naval forces had either been destroyed or forced to withdraw . The Admiralstab then ordered the naval component to return to the North Sea . 
 In October 1918 , Karlsruhe and the rest of the II Scouting Group were to lead a final attack on the British navy . Karlsruhe , Nürnberg , and Graudenz were to bombard targets in Flanders while Pillau , Cöln , Dresden , and Königsberg were to attack merchant shipping in the Thames estuary , to draw out the British Grand Fleet . Admirals Reinhard Scheer and Franz von Hipper intended to inflict as much damage as possible on the British navy , to secure a better bargaining position for Germany , whatever the cost to the fleet . On the morning of 29 October 1918 , the order was given to sail from Wilhelmshaven the following day . Starting on the night of 29 October , sailors on Thüringen and then on several other battleships mutinied . The unrest ultimately forced Hipper and Scheer to cancel the operation . 
 Following the capitulation of Germany in November 1918 , most of the High Seas Fleet 's ships , under the command of Rear Admiral Ludwig von Reuter , were interned in the British naval base in Scapa Flow . Karlsruhe was among the ships interned . The fleet remained in captivity during the negotiations that ultimately produced the Versailles Treaty . Von Reuter believed that the British intended to seize the German ships on 21 June 1919 , which was the deadline for Germany to have signed the peace treaty . Unaware that the deadline had been extended to the 23rd , Reuter ordered the ships to be sunk at the next opportunity . On the morning of 21 June , the British fleet left Scapa Flow to conduct training maneuvers , and at 11 : 20 Reuter transmitted the order to his ships ; Karlsruhe sank at 15 : 50 . She was never raised for scrapping . The rights to her wreck were sold in 1962 . 
 = New York State Route 129 = 
 New York State Route 129 ( NY 129 ) is a 7 @.@ 75 @-@ mile ( 12 @.@ 47 km ) long state highway in the western part of Westchester County , New York . The route begins at New York State Route 9A ( South Riverside Avenue ) in the village of Croton on Hudson at the Hudson River . NY 129 then travels through the towns of Cortlandt and Yorktown , running along the northern edge of the New Croton Reservoir . It passes under ( southbound ) and over ( northbound ) the Taconic State Parkway in Yorktown with no direct interchange . NY 129 ends in Yorktown at an intersection with NY 118 . 
 NY 129 was designated in 1908 as a section of Route 2 , a legislative route designated by the New York State Legislature . However , in 1921 , the route was realigned off the route that would become NY 129 in favor of NY 9A . Nine years later , the state designated the route as NY 129 during the state highway renumbering . The route originally followed a route used by NY 131 once the routes were swapped in the 1940s , with NY 131 being decommissioned soon after . NY 129 was extended to end at a traffic circle with NY 100 in the hamlet of Pines Bridge . This lasted up to at least 1969 , when the designation was truncated back to NY 118 , which was extended to the traffic circle instead . The traffic circle in Pines Bridge was removed by 1991 . Originally , NY 129 had an interchange with the Taconic , but the ramps were removed in 1969 and a new interchange was built on nearby Underhill Road . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 129 begins at an intersection with NY 9A ( South Riverside Avenue ) in the village of Croton @-@ on @-@ Hudson , next to U.S. Route 9 ( US 9 ) . NY 129 proceeds northward from NY 9A along Maple Street , a two @-@ lane commercial street through the village . At Van Cortlandt Park , NY 129 becomes residential , passing Croton @-@ Harmon High School as it bends to the northeast . At the junction with Grand Street , NY 129 continues northeast on Grand Street , which is a two @-@ lane residential street . The route continues northeast through the village , crossing an intersection with Quaker Bridge Road before becoming a wooded lane in the town of Cortlandt . In Cortlandt , NY 129 continues north as Grand Street , paralleling a local creek and entering Croton Dam Plaza . 
 Running along the western edge of the plaza , NY 129 bends north at a view of the New Croton Dam , continuing its way north alongside the New Croton Reservoir . NY 129 soon changes names to Croton Dam Road , passing east of the Croton Harman School District headquarters . At an intersection with East Mount Airy Road , NY 129 runs eastward along the reservoir , changing names to Yorktown Road . On a short stint away from the reservoir , NY 129 intersects with Croton Road before crossing over the Hunters Brook Bridge , where it crosses into the historic community of Huntersville . Continuing northeast from Huntersville , NY 129 , now known as Croton Lake Road , bends through the town of Yorktown . 
 Through Yorktown , NY 129 is a two @-@ lane residential street alongside the reservoir , soon making a gradual bend to the southeast into an intersection with County Route 131 ( CR 131 ; Underhill Avenue ) , a former alignment of NY 131 . At the junction with CR 131 , NY 129 turns southward , soon winding its way southeast under the lanes of the Taconic State Parkway , and back alongside the New Croton Reservoir . After crossing under the Taconic , the route then drops back down to the reservoir and passing a house reported to have been moved from Huntersville before it was flooded . Making several winds to the southeast , NY 129 connects to the Gate House Bridge , soon running eastward through Yorktown . NY 129 intersects with NY 118 ( Saw Mill River Road ) . This intersection serves as the eastern terminus of NY 129 , as NY 118 continues east along the reservoir . 
 = = History = = 
 What is now NY 129 was developed in the early 20th century as part of a general project to improve access and transportation across the reservoirs . In 1908 , the New York State Legislature created Route 2 , an unsigned legislative route ( an unsigned internal route ) extending from the New York City line at Yonkers to the Columbia County village of Valatie . Route 2 initially followed modern NY 129 , Croton Avenue , and NY 35 between Croton @-@ on @-@ Hudson and Peekskill ; however , it was realigned on March 1 , 1921 , to use what is now NY 9A instead . NY 129 was designated to most of its current alignment as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York . It originally followed Croton Dam Road , the southern perimeter road around the New Croton Reservoir , while Croton Lake Road , the northern route , was designated as NY 131 by the following year . The alignments of NY 129 and NY 131 in the vicinity of the reservoir were swapped c . 1941 and the NY 131 designation ceased to exist by the mid @-@ 1940s . With the route changes , NY 129 was extended to terminate at NY 100 at a traffic circle in Pines Bridge while NY 118 terminated near Croton Lake . This extension lasted for over two decades until NY 118 was extended over the alignment of NY 129 to the traffic circle by 1969 . 
 Ramps from NY 129 to the Taconic State Parkway were removed by the East Hudson Parkway Authority in November 1969 , to be replaced with a bridge . This required a shutdown of NY 129 and required drivers going north to Underhill Road . In fall 1988 , the original Hunter Brook Bridge ( less than 19 feet ( 5 @.@ 8 m ) wide ) was replaced , as it was never designed to take heavy traffic such as concrete @-@ mixing trucks . Between 1988 and 1991 , the traffic circle between NY 118 and NY 100 was removed in favor of a three @-@ way intersection between the two highways . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Westchester County . 
 = 2000 Japanese Grand Prix = 
 The 2000 Japanese Grand Prix ( formally the XXVI Fuji Television Japanese Grand Prix ) was a Formula One motor race held on 8 October 2000 at the Suzuka Circuit in Suzuka , Japan . It was the 16th and penultimate round of the 2000 Formula One season , as well as , the 26th Japanese Grand Prix . The 53 @-@ lap race was won by Ferrari driver Michael Schumacher after starting from pole position . Mika Häkkinen finished second in a McLaren with teammate David Coulthard finishing third . Schumacher 's win confirmed him as 2000 Drivers ' Champion , as Häkkinen could not surpass Schumacher 's points total with only one race remaining . 
 Häkkinen started the race alongside Michael Schumacher on the front row of the grid . Michael Schumacher attempted to defend his lead off the line by moving into Häkkinen 's path , but Häkkinen passed Michael Schumacher heading into the first corner , with Coulthard withstanding Williams driver Ralf Schumacher attempts to pass him to maintain third position . Michael Schumacher managed to close the gap to his title rival by lap 31 and passed Häkkinen during the second round of pit stops . This allowed him to maintain a 1 @.@ 9 second gap between himself and Häkkinen towards the end of the race to secure his eighth victory of the season . 
 Michael Schumacher received praise from many within the Formula One community , including former Champion Jody Scheckter and Ferrari president Luca di Montezemolo , though he was criticised by former Italian president Francesco <unk> for his conduct when the Italian National Anthem was played on the podium . The Ferrari driver also received predominant congratulations from the European press . Häkkinen 's second @-@ place finish secured him second position in the Drivers ' Championship , while Ferrari extended the gap to McLaren in the Constructors ' Championship to thirteen points , with one race remaining in the season . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The Grand Prix was contested by eleven teams , each of two drivers . The teams , also known as constructors , were McLaren , Ferrari , Jordan , Jaguar , Williams , Benetton , Prost , Sauber , Arrows , Minardi and BAR . Tyre supplier Bridgestone brought three different tyre types to the race : the Medium dry compound and two wet @-@ weather compounds , the intermediate and full wet . The Suzuka Circuit underwent a minor circuit change ahead of the Grand Prix . The pit lane entry was moved from the end of the 130R left @-@ hand corner to the exit of the Casio chicane in an effort to improve safety . 
 Going into the race , Ferrari driver Michael Schumacher led the Drivers ' Championship with 88 points , ahead of Mika Häkkinen on 80 points and David Coulthard on 63 . Rubens Barrichello was fourth on 55 points , with Ralf Schumacher fifth on 24 points . A maximum of 20 points were available for the final two races , which meant Häkkinen could still win the title . Michael Schumacher only needed to clinch victory in the race , regardless of where Häkkinen finished , Schumacher would be more than ten points ahead of Häkkinen with one race remaining . Otherwise , Häkkinen could win the Championship in the final race of the season in Malaysia by out @-@ scoring his rival . In the event of a points tie , Michael Schumacher would win the Championship on count @-@ back , having more wins . In the Constructors ' Championship , Ferrari were leading on 143 points , McLaren and Williams were second and third on 133 and 34 points respectively , while Benetton with 20 and Jordan with 17 contended for fourth place . Championship drivers Barrichello and Giancarlo Fisichella had each gained second @-@ place finishes while Ralf Schumacher and Heinz @-@ Harald Frentzen had both achieved third place podium finishes . 
 A pneumatic value failure in the preceding race , the United States Grand Prix , had forced Häkkinen to retire from the Grand Prix . With two races of the season remaining and an eight @-@ point deficit after losing the lead in the Drivers ' Championship , Häkkinen remained confident about his title chances : " I know that what happened to me in the last Grand Prix , when I had to retire , can happen to anyone , It could happen to Michael . So I am very optimistic . I have come here prepared and thinking about these two races together . Not one , two . " Michael Schumacher emphasised the pressure of leading the championship going into Japan : " It hasn 't been a relaxing time at all and I still haven 't completely got over the jetlag from the States . But I 'm prepared to sacrifice this and a lot more to bring the title back to Maranello . And the same can be said of the entire team . " Ferrari team principal Jean Todt and former World Champion Jody Scheckter called for Barrichello and Coulthard to race fairly as both drivers were ordered by their teams to assist their teammates in the Championship battle . 
 Following the United States Grand Prix on 24 September , the teams conducted testing sessions at various racing circuits across Europe between 26 – 29 September to prepare for the Grand Prix . McLaren 's test driver Olivier Panis flew to the Circuit de Nevers Magny @-@ Cours to undertake preparations for Suzuka and development work on their 2001 car . Ferrari test driver Luca Badoer spent two days at the Fiorano Circuit testing mechanical components and ran on an artificially wet track for testing of Bridgestone 's wet weather tyre compounds . Williams , with rookie competitor Jenson Button , went to the Autódromo do Estoril for two days and tried wet weather tyres and different aerodynamic configurations . Prost travelled to Magny @-@ Cours and their test driver Stéphane Sarrazin collected three days of chassis design data for the upcoming <unk> chassis . Benetton opted to miss testing prior to the event but their test driver Mark Webber tried developments at the Circuit de Catalunya that were incorporated into their 2001 car . 
 At the drivers meeting held the Friday before the event , the Fédération Internationale de l 'Automobile ( FIA ) Race Director Charlie Whiting announced that any potential blocking manoeuvres that interfered with the World Championship battle would result in a driver being shown a waved black and white flag , before giving a black flag to signal disqualification from the race . The penalty also had a potential ban for up to three Formula One World Championship events for any driver found to have breached the new ruling . Ralf Schumacher agreed with the penalties . However , McLaren team principal Ron Dennis was more vocal in opposing the new rules as he believed they were arbitrary and were against choosing team tactics . He was also unhappy with the inclusion of Italian lawyer Roberto Causo as a race steward because Dennis held the view that any decision would be biased towards Ferrari . 
 Some teams had made modifications to their cars in preparation for the event . Honda introduced a more powerful version of its V10 engine for Saturday 's qualifying session and the race . Sauber brought lighter components to reduce the weight of their cars and the Williams team arrived with a revised rear wing . Williams engine suppliers BMW confirmed that they would be running the same specification of engine introduced in Belgium . 
 = = = Practice and qualifying = = = 
 Four practice sessions were held before the Sunday race — two on Friday , and two on Saturday . The Friday morning and afternoon sessions each lasted an hour . The third and final practice sessions were held on Saturday morning and lasted 45 minutes . The Friday morning and afternoon sessions were held in dry and warm weather conditions . Michael Schumacher was fastest in the first practice session with a time of 1 : 38 @.@ 474 , ahead of Häkkinen and Coulthard . Barrichello set the fourth quickest time and caused the session to be yellow flagged when he lost control of his car and spun at the hairpin between turns ten and eleven and crashed into the perimeter fencing . Ralf Schumacher was fifth fastest , ahead of Fisichella . Frentzen and Jarno Trulli set the seventh and ninth fastest times respectively for Jordan ; they were separated by Jaguar 's Eddie Irvine . Jacques Villeneuve in the BAR completed the top ten despite spinning off the circuit which caused grass to penetrate his radiators . In the second practice session , Michael Schumacher set the fastest lap of the day , a 1 : 37 @.@ 728 , six @-@ tenths of a second faster than Häkkinen . Barrichello had trouble selecting first gear on his final run although he set the third quickest time . Coulthard was fourth fastest , ahead of Button . Frentzen and Trulli continued their good form setting the sixth and seventh fastest times . Arrows driver Pedro de la Rosa , Villeneuve and Ricardo Zonta completed the top ten fastest drivers . During the session , an earthquake measuring 7 @.@ 1 on the <unk> scale was felt at Suzuka , although no structural damage was reported around the circuit despite mild alarm . 
 The weather remained dry and warm for the Saturday morning practice sessions . Michael Schumacher again set the fastest time for the third session , a 1 : 37 @.@ 176 , quicker than his best on Friday . The Williams drivers were running quicker ; Ralf Schumacher in second and Button in fourth . They were separated by Coulthard . Fisichella set the fifth quickest time , ahead of Villeneuve , who spun into the gravel late in the session . Barrichello , Irvine , Johnny Herbert and de la Rosa completed the top ten . In the final practice session , Häkkinen set the quickest time , a 1 : 37 @.@ 037 , one @-@ tenth of a second faster than Michael Schumacher . Button was happy with the performance of his car and was third fastest . Barrichello maintained his consistent performance and set the fourth fastest time despite again spinning into the gravel traps . He was ahead of Ralf Schumacher who had his fastest time revoked after exceeding track limits . Coulthard was sixth , two @-@ tenths of a second faster than Fisichella . Irvine , Alexander Wurz and Villeneuve completed the top ten ahead of qualifying . 
 Saturday 's afternoon qualifying session lasted for an hour . Each driver was limited to twelve laps , with the grid order decided by the drivers ' fastest laps . During this session , the 107 % rule was in effect , which necessitated each driver set a time within 107 % of the quickest lap to qualify for the race . The session was held in dry weather conditions . The air temperature ranged between 23 – 24 ° C ( 73 – 75 ° F ) and the track temperature was between 27 – 31 ° C ( 81 – 88 ° F ) . Michael Schumacher clinched his eighth pole position of the season , his fifth at the circuit , in a time of 1 : 35 @.@ 825 . He was joined on the front row of the grid by Häkkinen , who was nine thousands of a second slower than his championship rival and battled him for grid position throughout the session . Häkkinen 's teammate Coulthard qualified third , and conceded that he was not quick enough to challenge for pole position . The two Williams drivers qualified on the third row of the grid ; Button ahead of Ralf Schumacher although both drivers had mixed feelings over their performance . Both Jaguar drivers took seventh and tenth and were <unk> with their pace . Frentzen reported that his car was difficult to handle but was happy to manage an qualifying position of eighth . Villeneuve took ninth despite suffering from excessive oversteer and was unable to improve his time because he changed his car in the opposite direction . Herbert who rounded out the top ten felt he could have qualified on the fourth row despite changes to his set @-@ up . Wurz qualified eleventh and missed on qualifying in the top ten by nearly two thousands of a second . His teammate Fisichella started from twelfth position and reported his car lost performance after the morning practice sessions . Both Arrows drivers filled the seventh row of the grid – de la Rosa was faster than Verstappen – and were afflicted with problems on the cars limiting their running . Trulli had issues with his car 's handling and qualified 15th . Heidfeld qualified 16th , ahead of teammate Jean Alesi . Zonta had limited qualifying time because of an engine change and managed 18th overall . The tenth row of the grid was filled by both Sauber drivers ; Mika Salo in front of Pedro Diniz . Salo used the spare Sauber because his race car had issues with its alternator Both of Diniz 's two fastest qualifying times were disallowed because of him laying oil on the circuit in the morning practice sessions . The two Minardi drivers qualifed at the rear of the grid with Marc Gené faster than Gastón Mazzacane . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 The drivers took to the track at 10 : 00 JST ( UTC + 9 ) for a 30 @-@ minute warm @-@ up session . It took place in dry weather conditions . Both Ferrari cars maintained their good performance from qualifying ; Michael Schumacher set the fastest time of 1 : 38 @.@ 005 . Barrichello was third in the other Ferrari car . They were split by the McLaren drivers — Häkkinen was second and Coulthard rounded out the top four . 
 The race started at 14 : 30 local time . The conditions for the race were dry and overcast for the race . The air temperature was at 22 ° C ( 72 ° F ) and the track temperature at 23 ° C ( 73 ° F ) . Approximately 151 @,@ 000 people attended the race . During the final parade lap , Häkkinen 's car developed an leak in the hydraulic system which caused smoke to depart but managed to take the start . Frentzen started the race using Jordan 's spare monocoque . Häkkinen accelerated faster than Michael Schumacher off the line , withstanding the German 's attempts to maintain his position to clinch the lead heading into the first corner . Behind the leading three in the run down into the first corner , Ralf Schumacher moved ahead of Barrichello and Coulthard withstood his attempts to pass for third position . Verstappen made the best start in the field , moving from 14th to tenth at the end of the first lap , while Fisichella made a poor start and lost eight places over the same distance ; the result of his anti @-@ stall system activating . At the completition of the first lap , Häkkinen led from Michael Schumacher , Coulthard , Ralf Schumacher , Irvine , Barrichello , Button , Herbert , Villeneuve , Verstappen , Frentzen , Trulli , de la Rosa , Wurz , Salo , Alesi , Heidfeld , Zonta , Diniz , Fisichella , Gené and Mazzacane . 
 Häkkinen set the fastest lap of the race on lap two and began to maintain the gap between himself and Michael Schumacher while both drivers pulled away from the rest of the field . Villeneuve moved into eighth position when he passed Herbert on lap seven , while Trulli clinched 11th from teammate Frentzen . Verstappen became the first retirement of the race when he coasted across the circuit with gearbox problems on lap nine and drove to his garage . Diniz made his first pit stop on lap 13 , starting the first round of pit stops . At the front of the field , Häkkinen increased the gap between himself and Michael Schumacher to two seconds , who in turn was a further ten seconds ahead of Coulthard in third . Ralf Schumacher was a further 8 @.@ 8 seconds behind the second McLaren driver , but was drawing ahead of Irvine in fifth . Further back , Trulli made a pit stop from tenth on lap 15 and emerged in 18th position . Irvine became the first of the front runners to pit the following lap and emerged behind Frentzen . 
 Wurz , Herbert , Salo and Heidfeld all made pit stops on lap 18 , while Trulli lost time after going off the track . On the 19th lap , Ralf Schumacher , Villeneuve , Frentzen , Pedro de la Rosa and Fisichella made their first pit stops . Barrichello and Button made pit stops on the following lap , and rejoined ahead of Irvine . Alesi retired from the race with an engine failure and spun off onto the circuit on lap 21 . Häkkinen made a pit stop on lap 22 . Michael Schumacher took over the lead for one lap before his pit stop on lap 23 giving it to Coulthard . The Scot took his pit stop on lap 24 handing back the lead to teammate Häkkinen . On the same lap , Villeneuve passed Irvine into turn 16 for seventh position . All of the drivers had made pit stops by the end of lap 25 . The race order was Häkkinen , Michael Schumacher , Coulthard , Barrichello , Ralf Schumacher , Button , Irvine , Herbert , Frentzen , Trulli , Diniz , Zonta , Salo , de la Rosa , Heidfeld , Fisichella , Gené , Wurz and Mazzacane . Häkkinen set a new fastest lap of the race on lap 26 , a 1 : 39 @.@ 189 , as he built a gap between himself and Michael Schumacher to 2 @.@ 9 seconds . 
 Trulli became the first driver to make a second pit stop on lap 28 . Light rain began to fall on lap 29 and track started to become slippery . The gap between Häkkinen and Michael Schumacher fell by one second after the McLaren driver encountered lapped traffic on lap 30 . Ralf Schumacher lost sixth position to teammate Button after making a mistake on the same lap , while Frentzen pulled off the track at the entry of First Curve to retire from a hydraulic pump issue which caused his gearbox to fail . Michael Schumacher closed the gap to Häkkinen by 0 @.@ 7 seconds by lap 31 , although he made minor contact with Zonta two laps later . Further down the order , Heidfeld overtook Trulli for 13th position on lap 34 . The second round of pit stops began on the same lap when Irvine made a pit stop . Häkkinen made his second stop on lap 37 , and came out of the pit lane 25 @.@ 8 seconds behind rival Michael Schumacher but ahead of Coulthard . Michael Schumacher began to immediately pull away from Häkkinen . Coulthard , Barrichello and Button remained in third , fourth and fifth positions respectively , during their second stops on lap 38 and 39 . Wurz went into retirement when he spun sideways near the entry of the pit lane on lap 40 . Michael Schumacher took his final pit stop on the same lap , and emerged 4 @.@ 1 seconds in front of Häkkinen . 
 Ralf Schumacher became the sixth retirement of the race when he lost the rear @-@ end and spun into the gravel trap when trying to lap Gené at turn two on lap 42 . This allowed Villeneuve to enter the points @-@ scoring positions in sixth . Heidfeld became the final driver to make a scheduled pit stop on the same lap . At the conclusion of lap 42 , with the scheduled pit stops completed , the order was Michael Schumacher , Häkkinen , Coulthard , Barrichello , Button , Villeneuve , Herbert , Irvine , Zonta , Salo , Diniz , Trulli , Fisichella , de la Rosa , Gené , Heidfeld and Mazzacane . Heidfeld retired from a suspension failure on lap 43 as de la Rosa passed Fisichella for 13th position on the same lap , and Fisichella was forced onto the gravel to avoid <unk> de la Rosa made up a further position overtaking Trulli five laps later . Gené became the race 's final retirement with an expired engine on lap 49 . Michael Schumacher maintained his lead throughout the remaining four laps and crossed the finish line on lap 53 to win his eighth race of the 2000 season in a time of 1 ' 29 : 53 @.@ 435 , at an average speed of 128 @.@ 902 miles per hour ( 207 @.@ 448 km / h ) . Michael Schumacher was crowned 2000 Drivers ' Champion as Häkkinen could not catch his points total in the one remaining race . He also became the first driver to clinch the title with Ferrari since Jody Scheckter in 1979 . Häkkinen finished second in his McLaren , 1 @.@ 8 seconds behind , ahead of teammate Coulthard in third , Barrichello in fourth , Button in fifth , and Villeneuve rounding out the points scoring positions in sixth . Herbert , Irvine , Zonta , Salo and Diniz rounded out the next five <unk> de la Rosa , Trulli , Fisichella and Mazzacane were the last of the classified finishers . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 The top three drivers appeared on the podium to collect their trophies and in the subsequent press conference . Michael Schumacher revealed that he took a cautious approach when the track became slippery due to rain in the second stint . He also added his team made adjustments during the first stop which helped to contribute to his quick pace . Häkkinen congratulated Michael Schumacher on clinching the Drivers ' Championship and said that although he felt naturally disappointed , he admitted that " to be a good winner , sometimes you also have to be a good loser " . He also confirmed that Ferrari 's strategy lost him the chance of victory and acknowledged that Schumacher was at an advantage after his second pit stop . Coulthard described his race as " quiet " because of the lack of action he encountered . He also admitted that he struggled to handle the car in the wet conditions . 
 Michael Schumacher 's title triumph was well received in the Formula One paddock and in the media . German national newspaper Die Welt said : " A dream has been fulfilled and it will have far @-@ reaching consequences . Ferrari and Formula One are alive again in this season and a new monument has been created ... Hard work and self @-@ sacrifice have been rewarded . " In Italy , events were held across the country to celebrate Michael Schumacher 's championship victory . Candido <unk> , director of the Italian sports newspaper La Gazzetta dello Sport described the moment as : " On the dawn of a luminous autumn Sunday Ferrari reconciled itself with history . " 
 Ferrari president Luca di Montezemolo described Michael Schumacher 's title victory as the " most beautiful day of my life " . He further dedicated the championship to the Ferrari team , their worldwide fan base , Ferrari 's majority owner FIAT , and the team 's sponsors and suppliers for their continued support . Former World Champion Scheckter praised both Ferrari and Michael Schumacher , though he expressed disappointment at losing his status as the final World Champion for Ferrari . However , the former President of Italy Francesco <unk> criticised Michael Schumacher 's conduct during the Italian National Anthem where the German traditionally imitated a conductor when it was heard . Michael Schumacher responded by saying that he did not mean to cause offence and insisted that he was respectful to the national anthem . 
 Off track , the argument over the new rules implemented at the Grand Prix and the inclusion of lawyer Roberto Causo as a race steward was renewed . FIA president Max Mosley published a letter dated from 19 October to Ron Dennis which accused him of damaging the image of Formula One with his recent stream of comments over the issues . Mosley also defended Race Director Charlie Whiting 's announcement that marshals could use racing flags to caution drivers over unsportsmanlike behaviour . Dennis responded by apologising for his comments , saying that he did not intend to bring Formula One into disrepute and cause disrespect to Causo . " It certainly has not ever been my intention to damage a sport to which I have devoted most of my working life . " he said . 
 As a consequence of the race , Michael Schumacher won the Drivers ' Championship with a twelve @-@ point gap over championship rival Häkkinen , who in turn was confirmed as the runner @-@ up in the Championship . Coulthard maintained third with 67 points , nine points ahead of Barrichello , and 43 in front of Ralf Schumacher . In the Constructors ' Championship , Ferrari increased their lead to thirteen points . Williams , with 36 points , increased the gap to their rivals Benetton by 16 points , while BAR passed Jordan for fifth place on 18 points , with one race of the season remaining . 
 = = Classification = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 = = = Race = = = 
 = = Championship standings after the race = = 
 Bold text indicates who still has a theoretical chance of becoming World Champion . 
 Note : Only the top five positions are included for both sets of standings . 
 = Spider @-@ Man Unlimited ( video game ) = 
 Spider @-@ Man Unlimited is an endless runner video game developed and published by Gameloft based on the Marvel Comics superhero Spider @-@ Man . The player controls the title character and his alternate versions during his fight against the members of the Sinister Six and their multiverse counterparts . The game 's main mode features definitive goals in contrast to the traditional aim of running as far as possible . The game is also known for having regular , special , time @-@ limited , community events . 
 First announced in June 2014 , Spider @-@ Man Unlimited was released for Apple iOS , Android and Windows Phone on September 10 , 2014 . Starting in October 2014 , Gameloft released seven updates that added new chapters to the story mode , Spider @-@ Men and Spider @-@ Women , enemies , events and stages . Since its release , it has been downloaded 30 million times and has been well received by gaming critics . Reviewers praised the game 's controls , sound , animation and the variety of characters , while criticizing its energy system , which they considered a limit to the playability . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After Spider @-@ Man defeats a figure known as the Gold Goblin , Nick Fury tells him the Green Goblin has used a portal to assemble a multiverse Sinister Six and plans to take over Spider @-@ Man 's dimension . S.H.I.E.L.D. then used the portal to assemble alternative versions of Spider @-@ Man and other spider @-@ powered heroes like Spider @-@ Girl , Spider @-@ Ham , and Spider @-@ Man 2099 to aid in the battle . Spider @-@ Man pursues the Green Goblin and his alternative versions . After he defeats the alternative Goblins , Spider @-@ Man fights various versions of Vulture , Electro , Sandman , Doctor Octopus , and Mysterio , as well as the Sinister Soldiers — armored soldiers working for the multiverse Sinister Six . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Spider @-@ Man Unlimited is an endless runner game in which Spider @-@ Man runs across New York rooftops , including that of the Oscorp building , as well as Sinister Six spaceships and a giant Doctor Octopus machine , as he dodges obstacles , defeats enemies , and collect power @-@ ups and vials . Regular enemies are defeated by slide attacks and punches , while bosses requires the player to fling projectiles at them . Players earn combos by overthrowing enemies ; almost hitting an obstacle or going through a ring also increases the player 's combo count . Sections in which Spider @-@ Man swings through streets , climbs the sides of buildings and free @-@ falls from buildings are interspersed with the running portions of the game . 
 The game has a story mode that , in contrast to traditional endless runners , features definitive goals — for example defeating a predetermined number of enemies , collecting random items , reaching a specific point , or defeating the boss . It is divided into chapters , called " issues " , each having 5 main missions that end with a boss fight , and various side missions . Some missions can only be completed by a specific version of Spider @-@ Man . Others were restricted to characters of a certain level ; but with the third update , it was modified to require a certain amount of " Spidey Power " , or the player 's team multiplier . By completing missions , the player can win experience points to reach the next level and in @-@ game currency : regular vials or rarer ISO @-@ 8 . Players can improve their power @-@ ups and buy alternate versions of Spider @-@ Man by spending vials . 
 To get a new version of Spider @-@ Man as a " card " , players can use their vials or ISO @-@ 8 to open portals to an alternate dimension from which a randomly selected Spider @-@ Man arrives . Each card can be leveled up and has a star rating called the level cap . To level up a card , players can earn experience points during a run . A card can also be sacrificed to level up another , and by fusing two equal cards , players can increase a card 's level cap . By using vials , which usually gives players a 3- or 4 @-@ star character , players have a small chance of acquiring a rare version of Spider @-@ Man , while ISO @-@ 8 ensures they get a rare one . Each card has a score multiplier that is raised once a Spider is leveled up and a special ability . For example , Spider @-@ Armor increases by 30 % the score earned by running . Each card occupies a character slot , of which six are available . Players can unlock slots by completing an issue , or can buy it using vials and , as the price increases , ISO @-@ 8s . 
 In addition to the story mode , the game features an unlimited , de facto endless runner @-@ style mode and time @-@ limited events , both of which are score @-@ based games . The leaderboard of the unlimited mode awards prizes based on daily rank . In events , players can compete against other players and win rewards ; players earn the Spider @-@ Man featured in that event by ranking at certain positions on the leaderboard or reaching certain objectives . The seventh update added an alliance mode for online players ; it is a territorial competition to gain the possession of New York streets , in which a player can join an alliance or create one 's own to confront other 's alliances . Additionally , players can complete extra missions called " Spidey Ops " , in which one or more characters , up to a maximum of six , become unavailable for a set period of time ; when they return they gain experience and vials . 
 The game 's energy system gives players 5 energy points at the start . Beginning a run in any mode costs one point , and it takes 10 minutes for a point to recharge . Players can pay to refill energy by spending ISO @-@ 8s . Players can make friends at the leaderboard ; once per day they can send and request 5 energy points , which are stored in their <unk> . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 Spider @-@ Man Unlimited was developed and published by Paris @-@ based company Gameloft . Its soundtrack was composed by Pascal Dion , and it was directed by Baptiste <unk> , produced by Steve Melanson , designed by Corentin <unk> , and programmed by Jerome Chen . At a press release on June 6 , 2014 , Gameloft announced it had formed a partnership with Marvel Entertainment and was developing a Spider @-@ Man @-@ based game for smartphones and tablets . Later that month , during the Electronic Entertainment Expo , an announcement trailer was exhibited and the game was made playable . A second trailer was shown at the San Diego Comic @-@ Con International that July . The game was released for iOS , Android OS , and Windows Phone on September 10 , 2014 . 
 The idea for the game was first conceived as the production team thought that endless runner games were popular but were always too similar . To create an endless runner that would differentiate itself from others in the genre , the staff focused on Spider @-@ Man 's main powers , which originally led to a swinger @-@ only game . However , they found it " a bit boring " , and it was complicated to have boss fights and to add new systems and gameplay styles . Then they reconceptualized the game as a runner with elements of swinging , fighting , wall @-@ climbing , and free @-@ falling . The storyline of the game was created to focus on the Sinister Six and the multiple versions of Spider @-@ Man . Gameloft was allowed to explore other stories such as the Spider @-@ Verse , but they were required to consult with Marvel to decide which were to be featured . The product manager , Tatiana <unk> , was the responsible for choosing among the options and she discusses the ideas with the narrative designer . After the narrative designer creates the main plotline and dialogues , they consult Marvel writer Fred Van Lente for feedback . The same process of having Marvel feedback occurs for the addition of new characters and environments . Environments were created by the level design team , which was responsible for deciding which obstacles or types of boss attacks fit best , based on how distinct they would be from other levels . As new updates were released , new environments like the New York Highline , 2099 New York and snowy New York were added . 
 The animation techniques for the characters were based on previous Spider @-@ Man games , films and comics . Characters were designed to be balanced and , with this in mind , the production team tried to implement similar abilities for the Spider @-@ Men and Spider @-@ Women , despite giving them different skills . Originally , Marvel only allowed the staff to use 30 characters , but the developers felt it was limited — only having 1 female character , for example — and requested more variety . Requests on their forums , Facebook page , subreddit , and Twitch.tv were also considered , but they always focus on thematic releases ; for example , " Monster Spiders " ( Spider @-@ X and Tarantula ) or dimensional variations of Spider @-@ Man . Since the inception of the game , the production team planned to add a character with a level cap higher than 100 as they imagined players would eventually master all the available characters . This resulted in the creation of the " Titan " characters to expand the game replay value . To avoid overpowering them and reducing other characters ' value , however , they made Titans difficult to acquire . 
 As of 2015 , Gameloft was frequently releasing updates to the game . The main reason for adding new updates is to group characters thematically and to synchronize with Marvel Comics . As such , the first update , released in October 2014 , started the " Spider @-@ Verse " storyline ; this remained the main theme until the fourth update , released in April 2015 . The main villains of this storyline , the Inheritors , were faced in the " Great Hunt " event ; first Karn and Morlun , then <unk> and <unk> , and ultimately Solus . The seventh update , released in September 2015 , added events and environments based on the Spider @-@ Island storyline into the game . The eighth , released in October 2015 , continued Spider @-@ Island , and added Renew Your Vows character Annie Parker and costumes from the All @-@ New , All @-@ Different storyline . The game even anticipated the comics when a new Spider @-@ Woman 's costume debuted in the second update , released in December 2014 , before its March 2015 comics debut . 
 The updates also contribute to the main story mode ; the first added Sandman as its boss , while the fourth added Doctor Octopus , and the sixth added Mysterio . New characters are frequently added through the updates , and some of them , such as Spider @-@ Gwen , Silk , Spider @-@ Punk , and <unk> Jr . , made their first appearances in Spider @-@ Man Unlimited . Other common update content includes thematic fights against specific villains , such as Jack O 'Lantern , Hydro @-@ Man , and Silver Sable . The sixth improved objective counters for events , while the seventh added short mission @-@ style events . Some updates like the first and the sixth also included bug fixes , while the first adapted it to run on Windows Phone devices with 512 megabytes of RAM , and the sixth also made it compatible with the <unk> Program . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Spider @-@ Man Unlimited has been well received by customers ; as of December 2014 , it has been downloaded more than 30 million times . Critics have provided " generally favorable reviews " , according to Metacritic , which assigns a score of 79 out of 100 based on 10 reviews . Jim Squires , writing for Gamezebo , stated the game " is both how you do a runner right AND how you do a superhero game right . " Shaun Musgrave of TouchArcade recommended it to both Spider @-@ Man fans and endless runner fans . Polygon 's Justin McElroy said " Spider @-@ Man Unlimited [ sic ] is a top @-@ notch game all on its own " . The staff of Download.com appreciated its combination of " great graphics , super @-@ <unk> skills , and the old @-@ school feel of a classic runner game " . For <unk> , Jennifer Allen wrote , " Despite [ some problems ] , Spider @-@ Man Unlimited is a surprisingly well @-@ made endless runner " . Peter Willington of Pocket Gamer wrote that those waiting for a Spider @-@ Man game would " be disappointed " but that it is " a high quality auto @-@ runner " . 
 Squires , Willington , and McElroy praised the responsiveness of the game 's controls , and the Download.com staff enjoyed its intuitiveness . Regarding the audio , Musgrave and Willington praised the voice acting , Musgrave commended the soundtrack , and Willington praised the sound effects . Musgrave , Willington , and McElroy also commended the animation ; Musgrave and Willington mainly appreciated the comic book @-@ like style , and Musgrave and McElroy the varied environments . Squires said it has " a perfect mix of speed , humor , missions , and collectibles " , while McElroy and the Download.com staff highlighted the possibility of having collectible Spider @-@ Men . Squires and Musgrave praised the variability between running , swinging , climbing and free @-@ falling ; the former stated , " The result is a game that continues to feel fresh long after the hundredth play " . 
 Musgrave commented , " the art style does sometimes hinder the gameplay " , and Willington was critical of the story mode , which he said had a " weak plot " and lacked character development . The Download.com staff also noted some lags and software bugs , while Musgrave and Allen stated the controls sometimes had problems recognizing swipes . Squires commented that a problem of the game is its level cap limit when the player is using only one character . However , according to Musgrave , the game 's energy system was " the biggest point of controversy " ; he , Willington , Allen , and Mike Fahey of Kotaku criticized it . In opposition , McElroy said the energy system is a " microtransaction hook " that is easily surmountable without spending any real money , and Squires affirmed that because of the duration of a run it " ends up feeling a lot fairer in practice than it sounds on paper " . 
 = Another Simpsons Clip Show = 
 " Another Simpsons Clip Show " is the third episode of The Simpsons ' sixth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on September 25 , 1994 . In the episode , Marge reads a romance novel in bed , and it prompts her to have a family meeting , where the Simpson family recall their past loves in form of clips from previous episodes . 
 The episode was written by Jon Vitti ( credited as " Penny Wise " ) and directed by David Silverman . It is the second Simpsons episode featuring a clip show format and uses clips from all the previous five seasons . The episode features cultural references to the 1992 book The Bridges of Madison County and the 1967 film The Graduate . The episode has received rather negative reviews , since clip shows tend to be the least favorite episodes among fans . It acquired a Nielsen rating of 8 @.@ 7 and was the fourth highest rated show on the Fox network that week . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Marge is reading The Bridges of Madison County one night and wakes up Homer to ask if he thinks the romance has gone out of their marriage . He grumbles , saying that he was working all day , but Marge points out that it is actually Saturday night at <unk> ; Homer ignores her and tosses the book into the newly built fireplace in their bedroom . Marge groans and falls asleep . 
 In the morning , Marge gets the family together to discuss romance , but they can only come up with vignettes from their failed relationships ( and in the parents ' case , near @-@ extramarital affairs ) in the form of clips from previous episodes . Homer , however , saves the day when he brings up how he and Marge got together ( in clips from the second season episode " The Way We Was " ) . Ultimately , the kids do not care for this one and wind up watching Itchy & Scratchy while Homer and Marge share another special moment . 
 = = Production = = 
 As the title of the episode suggests , it is second clip show episode of The Simpsons after " So It 's Come to This : A Simpsons Clip Show " , the 18th episode of the fourth season . It was written by Jon Vitti , who used the pseudonym Penny Wise in the closing credits because he did not want to be credited for writing a clip show , and it was directed by David Silverman . The episode also includes contributions from John Swartzwelder , Frank Mula , David Richardson , Jeff Martin , Bill Oakley , Josh Weinstein , Matt Groening , Sam Simon , Al Jean , Mike Reiss , Jay Kogen , Wallace Wolodarsky , Nell Scovell , David M. Stern , George Meyer , Conan O 'Brien , Robert Cohen , Bill Canterbury , and Dan McGrath . 
 During the early years of the show , the staff was forced by the Fox network into doing clip shows to save money . There was originally intense pressure on the producers of the show to create extra episodes in each season , and the plan was to make four clip shows per season to meet that limit . Writers and producers , however , felt that this many clip shows would alienate fans of the series . The Fox network 's reasoning was that clip shows cost half of what a normal episode cost to produce , but they could sell syndication rights at full price . 
 = = = Referenced clips = = = 
 This flashback episode uses clips from episodes released during the first five seasons : 
 = = = Cultural references = = = 
 At the beginning of the episode Marge is reading " The Bridges of Madison County " , also when Bart , Lisa , and Maggie are watching Itchy & Scratchy , Marge says they watch the same shows all the time , while Lisa says that the Itchy & Scratchy cartoons are just pasted together from pieces of old episodes ( and pointing out that Ren and Stimpy do it all the time ) . This comment is a sly joke about the construction of this episode ; the blackboard and couch gags are taken from other episodes , there are clips from past episodes , and the interstitials are actually clips from past episodes that feature the family members talking in the kitchen . These three aspects support the idea of this episode being a clip show to the extreme . 
 In the clip from " Lady Bouvier 's Lover " , Grampa tries to stop the wedding between Jacqueline Bouvier and Mr. Burns by banging on the window while shouting " Mrs. Bouvier ! " , which is a reference to the 1967 film The Graduate . Marge is seen reading the 1992 book The Bridges of Madison County by Robert James Waller . 
 The Arab Strap song First Big Weekend refers to this episode , stating ″ Sunday afternoon we go up to John 's with a lot of beer in time to watch the Simpsons . It was a really good episode about love always ending in tragedy except , of course , for Marge and Homer . ″ 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Another Simpsons Clip Show " finished 68th in the ratings for the week of September 19 to September 25 , 1994 , with a Nielsen rating of 8 @.@ 7 . The episode was the fourth highest rated show on the Fox network that week , beaten only by Beverly Hills , 90210 , The X @-@ Files , and Married ... With Children . 
 The episode has received rather negative reviews , since clip shows tend to be the least favorite episodes among fans . Nevertheless , it is considered one of the better clip show episodes of The Simpsons . The episode has been described as " framed in such a way as to still make [ it ] worth watching , [ ... ] like a slideshow that 's not quite so boring , " " another clip show , although not the worst of them , " or as " the episode title pretty much says it all " . Colin Jacobson of DVD Movie Guide said in a review : " The romance related storyline fizzles . That leaves us with a good collection of clips , but since we can already watch them in their original episodes , why bother with this cheap excuse for product ? " 
 Lisa 's comments — " romance is dead , it was acquired in a hostile takeover by Hallmark and Disney , homogenized , and sold off piece @-@ by @-@ piece " — have been used in case studies of the cultural representations of organizations . 
 Scottish indie @-@ rock band Arab Strap referred to this episode in the lyrics of their debut single " The First Big Weekend " ( " Sunday afternoon we go up to John 's with a lot of beer in time to watch The Simpsons - it was a really good episode about love always ending in tragedy except , of course , for Marge and Homer . It was quite moving at the end and to tell you the truth my eyes were a bit damp " ) . 
 = Cyclone Winifred = 
 Severe Tropical Cyclone Winifred was the worst tropical cyclone to make landfall in northern Queensland since Cyclone Althea in 1971 and the first since Althea to inflict significant damage on the northeastern coast of Australia . The sixth named storm of the 1985 – 86 Australian region cyclone season , Winifred originated as a tropical low north of Cairns , Queensland on 27 January 1986 . Slowly organizing , the system was recognized as a tropical cyclone after gaining tropical characteristics on 30 January , christened with the name Winifred the same day . Meandering southward , the cyclone began to curve southeastward that evening before suddenly turning toward the coast , southwestward , on 31 January , steadily intensifying in that time . By the time it came ashore near Silkwood , Queensland at 0445 UTC on 1 February , it was producing Category 3 @-@ force winds on the Australian tropical cyclone intensity scale and a minimum atmospheric pressure of 957 mbar ( 28 @.@ 38 inHg ) . Weakening as it drifted inland , Winifred persisted as a tropical depression for another five days after landfall before finally dissipating on 5 February . 
 In advance of Winifred 's approach , the Australian Bureau of Meteorology ( BoM ) issued cyclone watches and warnings for various locations along the Queensland coast , prompting evacuations in several towns . Damage after landfall was widespread and severe , with thousands of homes damaged , flooding as a result of heavy rainfall along major rivers , and severe damage to crops . Debris obstructed roads across northern Queensland and power outages disrupted electrical service , even at water treatment plants , forcing officials to warn residents to boil water as a precautionary measure . Overall , the cyclone caused $ 86 @.@ 4 million in agriculture @-@ related damages , with sugar cane and banana harvests suffering the most . Tourist operations were generally uninterrupted by the storm , while ecological and environmental damage , if any , was mild . Even so , high winds uprooted trees in wide swaths of forests , with those not completely defoliated . Overall , Winifred caused three deaths and inflicted $ 130 million ( 1986 AUD ; $ 154 million USD ) in damage . 
 In the aftermath of the cyclone , the Australian government distributed financial and emergency aid , offering to provide assistance to hard @-@ hit banana and sugar cane farmers in northern Queensland . Hundreds of State Emergency Service ( SES ) volunteers were deployed to restore electrical and water services , evacuate local citizens , provide food , and repair and protect structures . The Department of Social Security ( DSS ) sent employees to receive claims for damage , requests for financial aid , and filings for unemployment benefits . Meanwhile , the Commonwealth of Australia initiated a three @-@ year , $ 150 million program to provide relief to damaged areas . Fund payments , however , were frequently incorrectly distributed , and in some cases , fraudulent . In the confusion in the days following the cyclone , looters stole possessions in areas within the vicinity of Innisfail , and relief efforts were impeded by thunderstorms at Cairns . The Bureau of Meteorology ( BoM ) was subject to heavy criticism in the days following the storm 's landfall , accused of not giving ample warning in advance of Winifred 's approach ; however , these concerns were later addressed in its report on the cyclone 's impact . Due to the severity of the storm 's damage , the name Winifred was retired after the season ended . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Cyclone Winifred can be traced to a tropical low first noted approximately 450 mi ( 720 km ) north of Cairns , Queensland on 27 January 1986 . The system initially drifted to the northwest , exhibiting characteristics indicating gradual organization . On the morning of 29 January , it curved southward while slowly strengthening . Observations gathered by the Geostationary Meteorological Satellite ( GMS ) on 30 January evidenced that the low had developed into a tropical cyclone while maintaining a minimum atmospheric pressure of 995 mbar ( 29 @.@ 38 inHg ) . As a result , the Australian Bureau of Meteorology ( BoM ) subsequently designated the disturbance the name Winifred at 1400 UTC as it meandered southward , the sixth named storm of the 1985 – 86 Australian region cyclone season . The cyclone continued to steadily intensify , attaining Category 1 @-@ equivalent intensity on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale during the morning of 1 February , with winds of 118 km / h ( 73 mph ) . Forecasting of Winifred 's track was impeded by the presence of a canopy of persistent high @-@ level cirrus clouds shielding the eye and rainbands of the cyclone throughout its course , leading to inaccuracies in locating the cyclone 's centre through satellite observations . 
 Forecasts initially projected the cyclone recurving southeastward late on 30 January before tracing southwestward during the evening of 31 January . Maintaining a relatively large eye with a width of about 51 km ( 32 mi ) , the cyclone intensified while nearing the shoreline of northern Queensland ; by 0300 UTC the following day , though , a slight reduction in its size was noticeable , and by the time the cyclone made landfall , its eye was merely 41 km ( 25 mi ) in diameter . In conjunction , the storm 's minimum atmospheric pressure sank to 957 mbar ( 28 @.@ 38 inHg ) by the time the cyclone made landfall near Silkwood at 0445 UTC , indicative of the storm 's peak intensity ; the low pressure , coinciding with 10 @-@ minute maximum sustained winds of 130 km / h ( 80 mph ) , placed Winifred as a Category 2 @-@ equivalent storm on the Saffir – Simpson scale , or a Category 3 severe tropical cyclone on the Australian scale . Drifting father inland , Winifred 's radar features became distorted as it weakened ; despite this , it lingered overland as a tropical depression for another five days before finally dissipating . Although official best track data recorded the storm dissipated on 5 February , Winifred was operationally declared dissipated on 6 February . The cyclone was the first in 14 years to significantly impact the northeastern coast of Australia . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Numerous warnings were issued throughout the course of the cyclone . The first cyclone watch related to Cyclone Winifred was declared by the Bureau of Meteorology ( BoM ) on 29 January for various locations in Queensland , spanning from Thursday Island to Cooktown , and was adjusted as Winifred approached . The initial cyclone warning was issued on the morning of 30 January , stretching between Cape Flattery and Townsville , while the previous cyclone watch was expanded to cover areas from Lockhart River to St Lawrence . The warning was later extended to reach Cooktown and Bowen , and was further lengthened to span regions from Cairns to St Lawrence . On the morning of 1 February , observations indicated that the cyclone had suddenly veered toward the coast , and a Flash Tropical Cyclone Advice was subsequently released , noting the potential for powerful winds between Fitzroy Island and Innisfail . In conjunction , the Queensland Flood Warning Centre initiated flood warnings along the Tully , Herbert , <unk> , Barcoo , Thomson , Diamantina , and Cooper waterways . The BoM also imposed a gale warning stretching from Cooktown to Cardwell , accompanied a strong wind warning between Cape Melville and Gladstone . 
 Winifred forced many to flee from hotels in northern Queensland , and at Cairns , boats were ordered to be docked at harbor . State Emergency Service ( SES ) members and other individuals worked to evacuate dozens of people in Ingham , as well as along the Tully , Burdekin , and Herbert rivers . Inhabitants of caravan parks were forced to vacate their residences in Innisfail and helicopter crews cleared residents from Ingham and Babinda . Meanwhile , many at <unk> along the banks of the Burdekin River left their homes as a cautionary <unk> and 47 citizens of Mourilyan evacuated to a club lodge . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Offshore impacts were significant ; on 30 January , the yacht Darkie washed ashore at South Brook Island , its crew of four surviving . Throughout Queensland , the cyclone isolated small towns , cut off telephone service , inflicted severe damage to crops , and generated widespread flooding . Between Cairns and Ingham , Winifred obliterated structures , toppled power lines , uprooted trees , wrecked 1000 homes , and damaged hundreds of others . Service of the <unk> between Gordonvale and Babinda was interrupted after tracks were inundated , and travelers were forced to travel by bus instead . At the latter city , approximately 500 homes suffered significant damage , and at Innisfail , 200 residences were destroyed . Several individuals were recovered safely from wreckage of a building collapse in each city . At Babinda , sixteen other structures were wrecked , with the cyclone unroofing an additional 50 houses and flattening 40 sheds . Five individuals were badly injured , two of them impaled by flying glass and other debris . Officials noted that the cyclone tore off the police station door and unroofed a Uniting Church . Helicopter reconnaissance indicated severe damage to sugarcane and banana crops as well as a critical electrical power tower , with considerable damage observed in the town proper . 
 At Innisfail , Winifred damaged 190 houses , downed electrical wires , overturned trees , and flooded lowlands , with reports of over 200 mm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) in rainfall . Innisfail Hospital , meanwhile , suffered the loss of several windows , inciting the evacuation of patients to the first floor . The cyclone drove a small vessel ashore at nearby Banana Island ; in addition , a teenage girl was severely impaled by a flying slab of iron in downtown Innisfail , later dying as a result of her injuries . Meanwhile , at <unk> , a man was knocked off a shed roof by a strong gust and was subsequently declared dead . Winds leveled dozens of structures at Mission Beach , Tully , Silkwood , <unk> Beach , Cardwell , El Arish , South Johnstone , and Mourilyan . At Mourilyan , 12 boats sank in the town harbor , and all structures were damaged to some extent , with 20 houses roofless and one flattened . At Tully , the capacity of the <unk> Hydro Power Station was slightly reduced after rubbish became stuck in its components , and at Ingham , the Herbert River peaked at a height of 15 @.@ 8 m ( 52 ft ) , overflowing its barriers by 10 m ( 33 ft ) . Cyclone Winifred inundated the main street of Ingham with flood waters , completely obstructed numerous north @-@ to @-@ south streets , flooded stores , and cut off electricity from <unk> College . A 35 @-@ year @-@ old man was discovered dead down a storm water drain , having drowned in the storm 's flood waters . Debris and flooding also impeded and obstructed of parts of the Bruce , Gillies , and Palmerston highways . 
 Rescue and relief work was impeded by overloaded telephone communications , and consequentially , Telecom ceased telephone service between Townsville and Ingham . Nearly 400 mm ( 16 in ) of rainfall was measured at <unk> along the Tully River , and flooding was noted along the boundaries of both the Tully and Herbert rivers , of which the prior had receded from its peak level to 9 @.@ 09 m ( 29 @.@ 8 ft ) by the afternoon of 3 February . The city of Cairns and its outskirts experienced power outages , and high tides nearby compelled ship owners to seek refuge at ports . Blackouts rendered chlorination facilities and water treatment plants useless , and residents were subsequently advised to boil water . Damage to three roofs was reported at <unk> Beach north of Cairns , and in Cairns proper , damaged ten houses , with five of them unroofed , toppled trees , and knocked down power lines . The storm delivered similarly severe damage along Marlin Beach within the vicinity of Cairns , washing away stretches of its coastline , unroofing two residences , damaging 13 other structures , and overturning power lines . The loss of electricity at one building in the Cairns Base Hospital complex , which was also unroofed , left it running on emergency power . 
 One person was struck and injured by an uprooted tree at Atherton , which suffered the loss of one house . All residences in Cardwell endured some degree of damage , with six unroofed , and the town itself was without power . Roads in Charters Towers were obstructed , and minor damage was observed at Cowley Beach , Dunk Island , and East Russell . Nearly all buildings in El Arish were damaged , and at Gordonvale , flooding inflicted widespread crop damage and winds toppled trees and power lines . Flood waters cut off the town of Halifax and inundated local businesses . Although no structural damage was recorded in <unk> , the cyclone uprooted trees , crippled Archer Bridge above Kennedy Creek , and halted electrical and telephone service . Mena Creek was completely cut off , and at <unk> , 30 homes experienced damage and 20 farms were wrecked . At Millaa Millaa , the cyclone damaged 12 dwellings , and hundreds of barns , also impeding access to power and water supplies . Meanwhile , at <unk> , winds damaged 50 houses , toppled electrical wires , and strewed roads with debris . Despite the fact that flooding was less serious at <unk> Beach , the storm still damaged dozens of houses and toppled electrical poles , with the towns of Ravenshoe and Silkwood experiencing power outages following the disturbance 's passage . Although only inconsequential residential damage occurred at <unk> Creek and <unk> , damage at Tully was more serious , with considerable flooding , destruction to six houses , damage to a police station , and a localized blackout . 
 The cyclone caused $ 50 million in damage to the banana crop and $ 3 million to <unk> between Ingham to Cairns alone . Agricultural impairment was not limited to Babinda ; throughout northern Queensland , the storm devastated banana and <unk> crops . Avocado farms at Atherton and pineapple farms in <unk> and <unk> experienced considerable losses ; in addition , $ 35 million in sugar cane crops near Innisfail were destroyed , with 60 – 70 percent of the entire year 's harvest ruined . Within the vicinity of Tully , the storm ruined 30 percent of the crop , causing $ 10 million in losses . In general , the sugar industry , already economically weak , bore the brunt of the system 's impact . Overall , Winifred caused $ 86 @.@ 4 million in agricultural losses ; the cyclone ruined 1 @.@ 5 million tones of sugar , costing $ 40 million , 3 @.@ 7 million cases of bananas , costing $ 34 @.@ 6 million , and 15 percent of the maize crop , costing $ 500 @,@ 000 . Winifred also damaged $ 4 @.@ 9 million in <unk> , and $ 3 @.@ 8 million in avocados , lychees , custard apples , flowers , and <unk> , as well . Effects to dairy and poultry industries were less severe , with losses reported at $ 2 million and $ 600 @,@ 000 , respectively . Winds uprooted large swaths of forest , with $ 1 million in damage at government @-@ owned forests alone . 
 Ecological damage was widespread but generally mild . Although damage to mangroves was minor , the cyclone defoliated swaths of many coastal and island forests . For the most part , cays and reefs were unharmed , with no visible change in the general appearance or shape of reefs and little underwater change as well . It was noted , however , that water clarity surrounding certain reefs was poor . River plumes of the Herbert , Tully , Murray , Hull , Johnstone , and Mulgrave / Russell rivers were noticeably changed , with some paths diverted . The Herbert River plume expanded to encompass areas near the Greater Palm group of islands , the Mulgrave / Russell around the Frankland Islands . In addition , the loss of a raft system utilized for farming of giant clams was noted near Fitzroy Island . Tourist operations experienced little damage from Winifred , with only minimal damage on Dunk Island , <unk> Island , and Mission Beach . Overall , Winifred caused three deaths and $ 130 million ( 1986 AUD ) in damage , and was described by the Bureau of Meteorology as the worst cyclone to strike Queensland since Cyclone Althea in 1971 . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 On 3 February , the head of the State Emergency Service ( SES ) and then @-@ Premier Joh Bjelke @-@ Petersen toured northern Queensland to inspect damage . The government of Australia vowed to assist by providing financial and emergency services , also offering to provide aid to banana and sugar cane farmers who suffered losses as a result of Winifred . Two government helicopters were sent shortly thereafter , assessing the severity of damage , evacuating residents , and delivering food . Bjelke @-@ Petersen later expressed anger at the federal government for having increased the threshold for disaster relief before raising loans , and also stated that the Federal Minister for Primary Industry , John Kerin , had no right to accompany him on his visit to northern Queensland , only offering to discuss an offer provided that the federal government was willing to provide financial assistance . Approximately 500 volunteers for the SES were deployed the same day , reinstating electrical and other essential services , evacuating regional citizens , delivering bread to numerous towns , and sending 700 tarpaulins to shield roofless houses . Rescue and relief work was hindered by high traffic on telephone networks , forcing Telecom to cease calls between Townsville and Ingham . 
 Emergency crews of the government 's Department of Social Security ( DSS ) visited locations throughout the region , receiving damage claims , requests for monetary aid , and filings for unemployment benefits . The Commonwealth pledged to provide $ 150 million in relief over a three @-@ year period to the government of Queensland in exchange for deregulation ; however , its offer was initially rejected . Planes flew claims adjusters and other officials to Innisfail , establishing an insurance emergency service in the city hall , while the Insurance Council of Queensland deployed its special emergency service employees for the first time . As a result of severe damage , a disaster declaration for northern regions was issued by Queensland Government on 4 February . The first $ 10 million in aid from the state government , paid by the federal government , was supplied the same day . Meanwhile , the SES continued its cleanup efforts , removing debris and repairing structures . Looters took advantage of confusion in the days following the cyclone , striking residences throughout Innisfail . By the end of the day , 2200 tarpaulins had been distributed ; however , the previously @-@ smooth relief efforts were impeded by thunderstorms in Cairns . 
 The Bureau of Meteorology ( BoM ) was subject to scrutiny in the aftermath of Winifred , and was criticized for its lack of advance warning . <unk> and warnings were received by regional television and radio stations up to 15 minutes late following issuance . Winifred 's sudden and unexpected turn was little @-@ anticipated by BoM meteorologists , with employees unable to verify the cyclone 's centre from the Cairns radar until only about 9 : 30 a.m. on 1 February , with radar error of up to 44 km ( 27 mi ) observed . However , a Flash Tropical Cyclone Advice was immediately issued shortly thereafter , reaching media outlets near noon that day . Media outlets went suggested the creation of a new Tropical Cyclone Warning Centre ( TCWC ) in Townsville as a result , but the suggestion was dismissed , with a centre already established in Brisbane . A spokesman for the SES stated that no warning was given by the BoM at 9 a.m. , with the storm 's alarming approach ; the Service had initially been anticipating the storm 's recurvature out to sea , only to receive a flash warning hours later . Months after Winifred , a Commonwealth inquiry sought to investigate misuse of National Disaster Relief Scheme funds related to Winifred , with a $ 145 @,@ 000 payment to a National Party official , Mike Behan , one of several abuses . Due to the severity of the storm 's damage , the name Winifred was retired after the season ended . 
 = Tyrant ( Resident Evil ) = 
 Tyrant is the code name of a series of boss characters in the Resident Evil horror video game series by Capcom , introduced in the original Resident Evil in 1996 . Tyrants are towering , biologically engineered undead supersoldiers created and used by the sinister Umbrella Corporation . Tyrant creatures make appearances as boss characters in most Resident Evil games and the desire to create an obedient bioweapon lies at the core of the series ' storyline . Tyrants also appear in other media and merchandise of the Resident Evil franchise , as well as in some unrelated games . 
 Since their debut , the Tyrant series became one of the most recognisable and popular characters of the franchise and even gaming in general . A particularly notable Tyrant is Nemesis , the title character of the video game Resident Evil 3 : Nemesis . 
 = = Character design = = 
 Capcom artists went through a trial @-@ and @-@ error process designing the Tyrant creatures and their transformations . For example , the T @-@ 103 ( more popularly known as " Mr. X " and sometimes also as " <unk> " ) was originally envisioned as armed with firearms ; in some sketches it can be seen wearing a respirator and various armored outfits instead of a trenchcoat ( there were also other types of coats , including a <unk> ) , and even its overall physical build has varied greatly ( from very slim to extremely muscular ) . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = In video games = = = 
 The game series features many types of Tyrants as the result of several different experiments . Following the discovery of the Progenitor virus , the Umbrella Corporation ’ s founders become eager to create a Bio @-@ Organic Weapon ( BOW ) that is both powerful and capable of following orders . Prior to the events of Resident Evil Zero , Umbrella used the Progenitor virus to create the Tyrant virus ( T @-@ virus ) , which they believe can be used to manufacture powerful organisms . A problem with the virus ’ compatibility with humans set the project back , as only humans with a very rare genetic makeup are capable of mutating into potent and manageable life forms . Umbrella eventually overcame this setback by resorting to using clones of Sergei Vladimir , one of their executives who happens to be genetically compatible . 
 The events of Resident Evil Zero and Resident Evil chronicle the Umbrella Corporation 's development of the Tyrant prototypes , the T @-@ 001 ( the Proto @-@ Tyrant ) and T @-@ 002 . Though the early Tyrants are defeated in their first encounters , Umbrella manages to use the battle data from those defeats to produce other , more efficient Tyrants in the later installments of Resident Evil . Numerous Tyrants have been created throughout the game series ' storyline , such as Tyrant T @-@ 078 and the mass @-@ produced <unk> from Resident Evil Code : Veronica , Hypnos from Resident Evil Survivor and Thanatos from Resident Evil Outbreak , each with its own defining characteristics . A revamped version of Tyrant also existed in Resident Evil 5 during the game 's development , but not in the finished product . 
 Tyrants have been consistently depicted as grotesque and brutally violent creatures , but their intelligence has varied . The first two Tyrants in Resident Evil Zero and Resident Evil are depicted as unintelligent , while the T @-@ 103 ( Mr. X ) in Resident Evil 2 and the titular Nemesis T @-@ Type in Resident Evil 3 : Nemesis are shown to possess limited intelligence and the ability to carry out specific instructions . Both Nemesis and the T @-@ 103 series ( two more T @-@ 103 Tyrants , code @-@ named Ivan , appear in Resident Evil : The Umbrella Chronicles ) are prone to uncontrolled mutation when damaged . Alexia Ashford in Code Veronica retains her full intelligence after being exposed to the T @-@ Veronica virus and gains psychic abilities , including pyrokinesis ; similarly , the TG @-@ virus mutated Morpheus D. Duvall in Resident Evil : Dead Aim ( Tyrant T @-@ 092 ) gains bio @-@ electric abilities . The weapons used by Tyrants have also varied ; while most Tyrants in the Resident Evil series rely on sheer physical force to subdue opponents , Nemesis , retaining some intelligence due to the Nemesis parasite , is able to use a shoulder @-@ fired hand @-@ held rocket launcher ( and a minigun in Resident Evil : Operation Raccoon City ) and T @-@ <unk> ( Tyrant @-@ Armored Lethal Organic System ) in The Umbrella Chronicles is equipped with a shoulder @-@ mounted multiple rocket launcher . 
 Outside of the Resident Evil franchise , there is a Tyrant card in the NDS version of SNK vs. Capcom : Card Fighters Clash . In Marvel vs. Capcom 2 : New Age of Heroes , Jill Valentine has a special move that calls forth a Tyrant . A prototype Tyrant appears in the background of the Tricell Laboratory stage in Marvel vs. Capcom 3 : Fate of Two Worlds ; Tyrant was considered for addition as a playable character , but was rejected over concerns about the game 's ESRB rating . The Nemesis T @-@ Type was later added as a playable character in Ultimate Marvel vs. Capcom 3 . 
 = = = In other media = = = 
 The Tyrant Fossil appears only in the novel Resident Evil : Underworld . In the third Resident Evil live @-@ action film , Resident Evil : Extinction ( and its novelization ) , Umbrella 's researcher Dr. Sam Isaacs tries to subdue his mutation after being bitten by an enhanced zombie with Anti @-@ Virus , but he is shot for insubordination by an executive , Alexander Slater , and immediately revives as a Tyrant ; compared to most of the Tyrants from the games , Isaacs retains his mental faculties and personality even after his mutation . A new version of Tyrant resembling the T @-@ 078 with the power limiter appears in the CG film Resident Evil : Damnation . 
 = = = In merchandise = = = 
 Several Tyrant action figures were released by various manufacturers , including these by Toy Biz in 1998 ( T @-@ 002 and T @-@ 103 ) , Moby Dick Toys in 2001 ( four T @-@ 103 Tyrants ) , Palisades Toys in 2001 ( T @-@ 103 ) and 2002 ( T @-@ 002 ) , and NECA in 2007 ( T @-@ 002 ) . A 1 : 6 scale ( 35 cm ) resin figure of T @-@ 002 in Umbrella Chronicles was also released by Gaya Entertainment and a PVC <unk> was released by Organic , both in 2008 . Since 2011 , various Tyrant " infected " cards were featured in Bandai 's Resident Evil Deck Building Game . In 2012 , Resident Evil theme restaurant Biohazard Cafe & Grill S.T.A.R.S. in Tokyo was furnished with one @-@ to @-@ one scale Tyrant prop made by the special effects studio creating costumes for Toei Company 's tokusatsu heroes ; the exposition is a central part of the restaurant . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In 2009 , IGN featured the Tyrants in the lists of the best Resident Evil bosses and the series ' best villains ( readers ' choice ) . That same year , the Tyrant was included among the 12 characters and creatures that the staff of IGN would like see to return in Resident Evil 6 , commenting that " almost as much a hallmark of the RE franchise as the zombie , the Tyrant is a recurring favorite . " IGN added : " Resident Evil is supposed to be a terrifying experience , and much of the terror stems from pitting players against foes who completely outmatch them . That 's the Tyrant in a nutshell . " IGN also included an " any type of Tyrant " in their dream roster for Marvel vs. Capcom 3 . In 2012 , PlayStation Official Magazine ranked Tyrant as the seventh top Resident Evil monster ( in addition to Nemesis placing fifth ) . That same year , IGN ranked the T @-@ 002 as the best boss in the series , adding that " even 15 years later , Resident Evil games continue to use this formula ( and its finish ) as a blueprint for bosses . " 
 In 2000 , GameSpot ranked Tyrant as the tenth best villain in video gaming . In 2013 , Complex ranked the original Tyrant as the 13th greatest soldier in video games , the encounter with it as the 25th best boss battle of all time , and the second Tyrant fight in Code : Veronica as the 46th hardest boss battle in video game history . Some publications also singled out the Tyrant T @-@ 103 model ( Mr. X ) for a special acclaim . In 2010 , PSU.com included the scene of Mr. X suddenly busting through a brick wall in Resident Evil 2 on the list of ten " pant @-@ wetting PlayStation moments " . PSU.com also featured Mr. X , along with the T @-@ 002 and Nemesis , on their 2011 list of the " seven badass bosses " in the 15 years of Resident Evil . That same year , Empire ranked it as the 39th greatest video game character overall , adding that " Nemesis never quite captured the silent dread of Mr. X. " 
 = Tromsø Satellite Station = 
 Tromsø Satellite Station ( Norwegian : Tromsø <unk> , TSS ) , until 1988 known as Tromsø Telemetry Station ( Norwegian : Tromsø <unk> ) , is a satellite earth station located in Tromsø , Norway . The facility is owned by Kongsberg Satellite Services ( KSAT ) , a joint venture between the Kongsberg Group and the Norwegian Space Centre ( NSC ) . In addition to hosting its own antennas serving thirty satellites , TSS acts as the center @-@ point of KSAT 's operations and provides backbone services for the high Arctic Svalbard Satellite Station ( SvalSat ) and the Antarctic Troll Satellite Station ( TrollSat ) . 
 Originally proposed in 1965 , the station was established by the Royal Norwegian Council for Scientific and Industrial Research ( NTNF ) in 1967 in close cooperation with the Norwegian Defence Research Establishment ( NDRE ) and located adjacent to Tromsø Geophysical Observatory . From its inception until 1974 , it served low @-@ Earth orbit ( LEO ) satellites operated by the European Space Research Organization ( ESRO ) . To a lesser extent it was also used by Canadian Space Agency and National Aeronautics and Space Administration ( NASA ) LEO satellites . Norway 's non @-@ membership in ESRO and later the European Space Agency ( ESA ) caused Tromsø to not become a ground station for Landsat . A gradual increase in operations occurred from 1982 , such as for the International Cospas @-@ Sarsat Programme and the European Remote @-@ Sensing Satellite . TSS became part of NSC in 1990 , although it was partially sold to the Swedish Space Corporation ( SSC ) in 1995 . SvalSat merged with TSS in 2002 to form KSAT . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Establishment and use by ESRO = = = 
 The first proposals for a telemetry station in Tromsø were made in early 1964 . The concept was to build a real @-@ time telemetry station which would allow for simultaneous observations of the ionosphere from both satellites and sounding rockets . The idea was backed by Norway 's Space Research Committee . Ideas for a real @-@ time telemetry station also arose in ESRO and NTNF included the project in its five @-@ year space program in 1965 . Similar proposals were made in northern Sweden and a race started between Norwegian and Swedish interests to gain ESRO 's support for a station . Norway had budgetary limitations prohibiting a full @-@ scale station , and instead support was gained from the United States and Canada . The project was also backed by NDRE . 
 The choice of Tromsø as a location for a telemetry stations was in part tied to the Tromsø Geophysical Observatory — which had been located in Tromsø since 1928 — and the planned University of Tromsø . The Canadian Space Agency was at the time working on the Alouette 2 program and were seen by NDRE as a natural cooperation partner . The NASA 's International Satellite for <unk> Studies was also being designed and NASA therefore decided to supply equipment for a telemetry station in Tromsø to be operational by August 1966 . 
 Parallel to NDRE 's work , NTNF was working with ESRO to gain support for a telemetry station . There was a degree of urgency as ESRO wanted the facility completed by 1967 in time for the launch of the spacecraft ESRO @-@ 2 . NTNF and ESRO were also working on the establishment of Kongsfjord Telemetry Station in Ny @-@ Ålesund . The agreement to build the station was approved by the Parliament of Norway in mid 1966 . Part of the reason for the Norwegian support was the opportunity of training Norwegians in pulse @-@ code modulation and digital computing . For NDRE the station was a chance to apply its latest minicomputer , the Simulation for Automatic Machinery ( SAM ) . 
 A major planning issue was the need for a minicomputer at the station . NDRE argued that it was fully capable of delivering such a system , but NTNF instead wanted to minimize risk by buying the PDP @-@ 8 from Digital Equipment Corporation in the United States . However , NDRE was awarded the contract , in part because of NTNF 's obligation to support Norwegian technology and in part because NDRE agreed to purchase a suitable foreign computer if they could not successfully manufacture one themselves . A new minicomputer , SAM @-@ 2 , was built at NDRE and completed in April 1967 . It was the first computer built in Europe and among the first three in the world which used integrated circuits . SAM @-@ 2 was so successful that the developers established Norsk Data to commercialize the technology . 
 The contract with ESRO resulted in TSS providing telemetry for ESRO @-@ IA , ESRO @-@ IB , ESRO @-@ 2B , <unk> @-@ 1 , <unk> @-@ 2 , TD @-@ 1A and ESRO @-@ 4 , all of which had low @-@ Earth orbits . The two telemetry stations used a large portion of the Norwegian space budget , but became platforms which allowed for development of technology . Tromsø Satellite Station worked well in tandem with Andøya Rocket Range and became an international center for study of the auroral zone . The University of Tromsø was established in 1968 and started teaching in 1972 . The same year , it took over the geophysical observatory and cosmic geophysics became one of the university 's fields of excellence . 
 The original contract with ESRO lasted until 1 July 1974 , when their low @-@ Earth orbit program terminated . NTNF proposed closing Tromsø Telemetry Station as the remaining customers did not provide sufficient revenue to keep operations viable . Norway also declined to join the European Space Agency ( ESA ) , which resulted in little hope in ESA choosing to cooperate with a Norwegian earth station . NTNF also looked into outright selling the station to ESA , but the offer was turned down . Kongsfjord Telemetry Station was closed in 1974 . 
 = = = Commercialization = = = 
 In 1973 NTNF started planning to use the station for downloading from NASA 's Landsat program . Sufficient funding from the government was secured in mid 1976 , after a successful lobby operation which emphasized the possibility of environmental observation in Norway 's territorial waters . 7 @.@ 5 million Norwegian krone ( NOK ) was granted for upgrades in 1977 . Norway entered negotiations with the US , but soon ESA and NASA started discussions regarding two European telemetry stations for Landsat to serve all ESA members . ESA and Sweden pushed for Kiruna , Sweden , to be the location of ESA 's northern telemetry station and Tromsø was discarded because of Norway 's decision to not join ESA . 
 Norway expanded its exclusive economic zone to 200 nautical miles ( 370 km ; 230 mi ) in 1977 , increasing the country 's land and sea area by more than one million square kilometers ( 400 @,@ 000 sq mi ) . Because of the reserves of fish and oil it became imperative for the Norwegian government to conduct surveillance . NTNF therefore commenced work to establish an earth station for NASA 's Seasat , which was approved by Parliament in early 1977 . A processing computer was developed as a cooperation between the Norwegian Institute of Technology , NDRE , NTNF and Norsk Data , which was tailored to analyze Seasat 's synthetic aperture radar ( SAR ) and named Computer of Experimental SAR . Seasat A failed after 104 days and Tromsø had by that time been used for telemetry for two minutes . 
 TSS did not became operational again until 1982 , when the International Cospas @-@ Sarsat Programme made use of the station . The Ministry of Trade and Industry took a renewed interest in the satellite station in the early in 1980s and proposed in 1982 that Norway join ESA 's European Remote @-@ Sensing Satellite ( ERS ) program . This started the process of Norway becoming a full member of ESA in 1987 . The telemetry station received investments of NOK 100 million during the 1980s and was organized as a foundation in 1984 . It took the name Tromsø Satellite Station in 1988 . Part of the goal of the project was to create technical spin @-@ offs ; the one successful company was <unk> , which had 45 employees at the time it was bought by Kongsberg Defence & Aerospace in 1994 . By then it had become a global manufacturer of Earth observation ground stations . 
 The Norwegian Space Centre was established as a foundation on 5 July 1987 , under the protection of the Ministry of Trade and Industry . It immediately took over Andøya Rocket Range and TSS followed suit in 1990 . TSS was upgraded in 1991 to be able to operate with ERS @-@ 1 . In 1995 NRS established a subsidiary , Norwegian Space Centre Property , to own the facilities in Tromsø and Longyearbyen . The same year , TSS was converted to a limited company , of which half was sold to the Swedish Space Corporation ( SSC ) . The aim was that TSS would operate as a fully commercial enterprise . Its first major contract was with the Canadian Radarsat . 
 After Rolf Skår was appointed director of NSC , plans were launched to try to win the ground station contract for NASA 's planned Earth Observing System ( EOS ) . NASA was considering locating the ground station in Greenland , at McMurdo Station in Antarctica or at <unk> in Sweden . Skår invited a NASA delegation to visit Svalbard , and from 1996 NSC and NASA started negotiating a contract to establish a ground station at Longyearbyen . The first satellite to use SvalSat was Landsat 7 , which was launched on 15 April 1999 . NSC bought SSC 's ownership in TSS and Lockheed Martin 's ownership in SvalSat in 2001 . On 1 February 2002 , NSC and Kongsberg <unk> merged their interests in satellite technology and operations into Kongsberg Satellite Station , which became the sole owner of both SvalSat and TSS . Legally , Kongsberg Satellite Services is a continuation of the operating company of TSS . KSAT opened Troll Satellite Station in 2007 . 
 = = Operations = = 
 TSS is owned and operated by Kongsberg Satellite Services ( KSAT ) , which is again equally owned by Kongsberg Defence and Aerospace and the Norwegian Space Centre , the latter which is an agency of the Ministry of Trade and Industry . KSAT is not tied to a particular operator of satellites and the antennas communicate with multiple satellites , thus reducing costs compared to dedicated ground stations . For a typical satellite , data is delivered to the end customer no more than thirty minutes after downloading . 
 The site is only able to communicate with LEO satellites in ten of their fourteen orbits , unlike SvalSat and TrollSat which can communicate in all orbits . All three stations are interconnected and communicate with the Tromsø Network Operations Center , which is part of the TSS complex . This allows for redundancy as TSS , SvalSat and TrollSat can be used to communicate with all satellites connected to the system . The operation center is responsible for backup , scheduling and conflict resolution , in addition to network planning , customer support and ground station control . The facilities use interoperability and shared ground services , such as a common protocol for communication and similar design of the antennas , to increase flexibility and reduce costs and risk . 
 The antennas at TSS serve more than thirty missions and contain both a multi @-@ frequency uplink and L , S and X band downlink . In addition there are customer @-@ owned reception , telemetry , tracking and control systems . TSS acts as a local user terminal for the Cospas @-@ Sarsat system used for search and rescue . By using a combination of SvalSat and TrollSat , customers can download data twice per orbit , twenty @-@ six times per day , with only a forty @-@ minute maximum delay . These are the only two ground stations able to communicate with all orbits of LEO satellites . Tromsø is connected to SvalSat via the Svalbard Undersea Cable System . 
 = 10th Battalion ( Australia ) = 
 The 10th Battalion was an infantry battalion of the Australian Army that served as part of the Australian Imperial Force during World War I. Among the first units raised in Australia during the war , the battalion was recruited from South Australia in August 1914 and along with the 9th , 11th and 12th Battalions , it formed part of the 3rd Brigade , 1st Division . After its personnel completed basic training , the battalion embarked for the Middle East , where further training was undertaken in Egypt before the battalion was committed to the Gallipoli Campaign . On 25 April 1915 , the 10th Battalion took part in the Landing at Anzac Cove , coming ashore during the initial stages of the operation as part of the covering force . Members from the 10th Battalion penetrated the furthest inland of any Australian troops during the initial fighting , before the Allied advance inland was checked . After this , the battalion helped defend the beachhead against a Turkish counter @-@ attack in May , before joining the August Offensive , a failed Allied effort to break the deadlock . Casualties were heavy throughout the campaign and in November 1915 , the surviving members were withdrawn from the peninsula and in early 1916 the battalion was reformed in Egypt . After a period of reorganisation , during which the 10th provided a cadre staff to the newly formed 50th Battalion , it was transferred to the Western Front in March 1916 , and for the next two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years took part in trench warfare in France and Belgium until the Armistice in 1918 . The last detachment of men from the 10th Battalion returned to Australia in September 1919 . 
 Following the war , the battalion was re @-@ raised as a part @-@ time unit based in South Australia , drawing personnel and lineage from a number of previously existing militia units . The unit served briefly during the inter @-@ war years , before being merged with the 50th Battalion in 1930 as the size of Australia 's part @-@ time military forces was decreased following the conclusion of the compulsory service scheme . It was later re @-@ raised in its own right in the mid @-@ 1930s as the Australian military was reorganised as part of the country 's war preparations and later , during World War II , the 10th was mobilised for full @-@ time service . Following Japan 's entry into the war , the battalion was assigned to defend the New South Wales southern coast before being reassigned to the defence of Darwin and being amalgamated with the 48th Battalion in August 1942 . In the post @-@ war period , the 10th Battalion was re @-@ raised in 1948 as part of the Citizens Military Force and throughout the 1950s provided training to national servicemen . In 1960 , it became part of the Royal South Australia Regiment ( RSAR ) and was reduced to a several company @-@ sized elements within that regiment 's 1st Battalion , before being reformed as a full battalion within the RSAR in 1965 . It remained on the Australian Army 's order of battle until 1987 , when it was amalgamated with the 27th Battalion to form the 10th / 27th Battalion , Royal South Australia Regiment . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 The 10th Battalion was raised shortly after the outbreak of World War I as part of the Australian Imperial Force ( AIF ) , an all @-@ volunteer force raised for overseas service . Recruited in South Australia , the battalion came into being on 17 August 1914 at the Morphettville Racecourse in Adelaide , drawing volunteers mainly from the local population as well as some from Broken Hill in outback New South Wales . Volunteers included men who had previously served in the part @-@ time forces before the war , coming from a variety of units including the 10th Australian Infantry Regiment , which had formerly been known as the " Adelaide Rifles " . Commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Stanley Price Weir , after formation the battalion was attached to the 3rd Brigade , 1st Division , along with the 9th , 11th and 12th Battalions , and was one of the first units of the AIF raised for the war . With an establishment of 31 officers and 974 other ranks spread across eight companies , the battalion 's personnel received a short period of individual basic training , culminating in the presentation of the regimental colours on 17 September and a march past the state Parliament House on 21 September . The following month , collective training at company and battalion level took place at Belair National Park and at Glenelg , South Australia . On 20 October , the battalion embarked on the ex @-@ passenger liner , HMAT Ascanius , bound for the Middle East ; it was the first South Australian infantry unit to leave Australia during the war . 
 After briefly stopping in Albany , where its convoy was delayed due to concerns over the presence of German warships en route , the 10th Battalion departed Australian waters in November and proceeded towards Egypt . Initially , the plan had been for the battalion to continue on the United Kingdom from where it would subsequently move to the Western Front . Poor conditions and overcrowding in training camps in the United Kingdom resulted in the decision to disembark the Australians in Alexandria instead . Arriving there on 4 December 1914 , the battalion was sent into camp at Mena , near Cairo . 
 The 10th Battalion underwent desert training in January and February 1915 , during which time it was reorganised around the four @-@ company structure that had been adopted by the British . Designated ' A ' to ' D ' , each company consisted of 228 men that were spread across four platoons . In late February , the 3rd Brigade received orders that it was being committed to an operation in the Dardanelles and , after moving by rail to Alexandria , boarded Ionian , a Greek steamer , on 1 March . After reaching Lemnos , a shortage of fresh water on the island meant that the battalion was housed on the ship for the next seven weeks , although this was spent ashore conducting exercises and mounting guard duty . Planning for a landing on the Gallipoli Peninsula began in early April ; while this proceeded , on 15 April the battalion was issued its distinctive blue and purple unit colour patch . 
 On 24 April 1915 , the 10th Battalion embarked for Gallipoli . Two companies and the battalion headquarters were allocated to the battleship HMS Prince of Wales , while the other two companies embarked on two destroyers , Scourge and Foxhound . At approximately 4 : 30 am on 25 April 1915 , the 10th Battalion was one of the first units to come ashore at Anzac Cove as part of the covering force – drawn from Colonel Ewen Sinclair @-@ Maclagan 's 3rd Brigade – for the main Anzac landing . Troops from the battalion landed near the centre of the cove and , ascending the <unk> Ridge , attempted to push inland towards the Sari Bair Range . According to the Australian War Memorial they are " believed to have penetrated further inland " than any other Australian unit . Casualties in the first weeks of the campaign were heavy , with the battalion losing 397 men killed or wounded between 25 April and 9 May . The advance stalled as Turkish resistance grew , and the Turks launched a heavy counter @-@ attack on 19 May . By this time , the 3rd Brigade was located around Bolton 's Ridge , with the brigade 's four battalions occupying the line abreast ; the 10th Battalion occupying a position south of Lone Pine , overlooking a wheat field through which the Turkish attack came . Caught in heavy crossfire , the attack was turned back with heavy losses . Following this , as both sides dug in , the campaign ground to a stalemate , and the battalion undertook mainly defensive duties along the perimeter around Anzac Cove . On 8 July , the remnants of the battalion , which now consisted of just over 500 personnel , was withdrawn to Imbros Island for a brief rest period out of the line , before returning to Anzac on 11 July ; after this , the 10th Battalion relieved the 11th , occupying a position around Silt Spur , opposite Lone Pine . 
 In early August , the Allies attempted to break out from the beach , launching an offensive around Suvla , Cape Helles and Anzac ; the 10th Battalion played a support role during the offensive , providing reinforcement parties and machine gun crews to support the 1st Brigade during the Battle of Lone Pine . The offensive was a costly failure and afterwards stalemate returned to the battlefield . As winter approached , conditions on the peninsula grew harsher and a large number of personnel had to be evacuated sick as a wave of dysentery swept through the battalion . In September , the 2nd Division arrived as reinforcements . In mid @-@ November , as the Allied commanders debated the future of the campaign , the 3rd Brigade received orders to pull back from the frontline , so that it could be withdrawn to Lemnos Island for rest . On 16 November , the 10th Battalion took up reserve positions on the beach , before embarking upon the transport Princess Ena . It landed at Mudros , and spent the rest of November and December there . Meanwhile , the main Allied force was evacuated from the peninsula , with the last Australian troops withdrawing on 20 December . On Boxing Day 1915 , the 10th Battalion sailed for Egypt , arriving in Alexandria just before New Years . Losses on Gallipoli had been heavy – 711 casualties were reported in the battalion between April and September 1915 – and the AIF underwent a period of reorganisation as it was expanded in preparation for its deployment to the European battlefield . As a part of this process , the 10th Battalion provided a cadre of experienced personnel to the newly raised 50th Battalion , which was assigned to the 13th Brigade , 4th Division , and was brought up to strength with fresh recruits from Australia . 
 In March 1916 , the 10th Battalion sailed to France along with the rest of the 1st Division and deployed to the Somme . The battalion 's first significant action on the Western Front came in July 1916 when it was involved in the Battle of Pozières , an effort to secure the village of Pozières and the high ground beyond it as part of the wider Battle of the Somme . For his actions during this battle , Second Lieutenant Arthur Blackburn , an original member of the battalion who had served with it during the Gallipoli campaign , was awarded the Victoria Cross . Later , the 10th Battalion fought around Ypres , in Belgium , before being transferred back to the Somme in the winter and deploying to defend the trenches . In 1917 , after the German withdrawal towards the Hindenburg Line , the battalion was again moved to Belgium to take part in the Third Battle of Ypres , where it was committed to fighting around the Menin Road in September . During an attack around Polygon Wood , Private Roy Inwood 's actions resulted in him being awarded the battalion 's second Victoria Cross . The battalion suffered heavily during its early involvement in the Ypres fighting and was briefly withdrawn before being recommitted to support operations around Broodseinde at the beginning of October . In the early hours of 9 October 1917 , a force of 88 men from the 10th Battalion carried out a raid on German positions in what became known as the " Mystery of Celtic Wood " ; 32 men were killed during the raid , and a further 37 were wounded . 
 In early 1918 , following the collapse of Russia , the Germans were able to transfer many troops to the Western Front . In March , they launched the Spring Offensive , attacking the southern part of the British sector in the Somme . As the Allies were pushed back towards Amiens , the Australian divisions were brought south to help blunt the attack . Throughout late March and into April 1918 , the 10th Battalion took part in a series of defensive actions , including fighting around Hazebrouck , as the German offensive was turned back , before joining in the preliminary operations before the Allied Hundred Days Offensive that ultimately brought about an end to the war . It was at this stage in the fighting , in June , during fighting around Merris in France , that Corporal Phillip Davey earned the battalion 's third Victoria Cross . The attack so impressed the British Inspector General that he described it as " the best show ever done by a battalion in France " . 
 On 8 August 1918 , when the Allies launched the Hundred Days Offensive , the battalion participated in an attack on Amiens that has since been described as one of the most successful for the Allies on the Western Front and , in the words of Erich Ludendorff , the " ... blackest day for the German Army " . The battalion remained at the front until late September 1918 ; its last battle took place at Jeancourt , during which it suffered a further 140 casualties . Later in the month , the Australian Corps , having been severely depleted due to heavy casualties and the dwindling supply of reinforcements from Australia , was withdrawn from the line for rest and re @-@ organisation . As a result , the battalion took no further part in the fighting and when the Armistice was declared on 11 November 1918 it was still out of the line . Over 9 @,@ 000 men served in the battalion 's ranks during the war , including over 25 full drafts of reinforcements , and miscellaneous transfers from other units and general service reinforcements . Casualties totalled 1 @,@ 015 men killed and 2 @,@ 136 wounded . In addition to the three Victoria Crosses , members of the battalion were awarded one CMG , one Bar to the DSO and nine DSOs , four Bars to the MC and thirty @-@ four MCs , sixteen Distinguished Conduct Medals , one Military Medal with two Bars , eleven MMs with one Bar , one hundred and forty @-@ nine MMs , and nine MSMs . In 1927 , the battalion was awarded a total of 24 battle honours for its war service . 
 Following the cessation of hostilities , the Australian government decided that it would not contribute to the proposed Allied occupation force in Germany and would begin the process of demobilisation of the AIF as soon as possible . Owing to the large number of soldiers deployed overseas , this process took some time , and it was decided to progressively return men from each battalion , rather than send them home as a formed unit . As numbers dwindled , units were amalgamated for administrative purposes , and as a consequence the 9th and 10th Battalions were merged on 5 February 1919 ; the final contingent of troops from the 10th Battalion did not return home until September 1919 when they disembarked in Adelaide from the transport Takada . 
 = = = = Commanding officers = = = = 
 The 10th Battalion 's commanding officers during World War I , listed in chronological order of the date they first commanded the battalion , were as follows : 
 Lieutenant Colonel Stanley Price Weir ; 
 Major Frederick William <unk> ; 
 Major George <unk> Shaw ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Miles Fitzroy Beevor ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Maurice Wilder @-@ <unk> ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel George Ernest <unk> ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel James Samuel Denton ; 
 Major Felix Gordon Giles ; ( son of explorer Alfred Giles ) 
 Major Rupert <unk> Rafferty ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Ross Blyth Jacob ; 
 Major Alexander Steele ; 
 Captain Gordon Cathcart Campbell ( nephew of Chief Justice of South Australia Sir Samuel Way ) ; 
 Major Clarence <unk> ; 
 Captain Roy Kintore <unk> ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel John Newman ; 
 Major William Francis James McCann . 
 = = = = Battalion song = = = = 
 The words to the battalion song were written by C.R. Beresford and the music by H. Brewster @-@ Jones : 
 <unk> not within a barrack yard they put us through our drill , 
 They licked us into soldier shape in camp at Morphettville ; 
 So khaki @-@ clad and Enfield @-@ armed , we 'll fight at Tommy 's side , 
 To hold secure the fields of France against the German tide . 
 Chorus 
 Left , right , left , right ; keep the column swinging ; 
 Every step our destination nears ; 
 Long , long miles we 'll shorten by our singing , 
 Kits are heavy but a chorus cheers — 
 All our help old Mother England 's needing — 
 Soon we 'll have to prove that we are men , 
 And the 10th Battalion will be leading ; 
 We 're Australians in Old Ten . 
 We hail from busy Rundle Street and north of Goyder 's line ; 
 But far from there , beneath strange skies , our glinting bayonets shine . 
 For half the world is now between us and the crowded quay 
 Where to the strains of " Auld Lang Syne " our troopship puts to sea . 
 We long to hear the maxim 's purr and smell the cordite strong , 
 Across the busy firing line the crowded trench along ; 
 The chatter that our rifles make , as down the line it runs 
 To swell that wartime music grand , the chorus of the guns . 
 The magic of the new lands we see won 't banish from our mind 
 Those bright @-@ eyed , dear Australian maids , the best of all <unk> ; 
 The grand old Jack , wind @-@ blown , above , with all its colours bright , 
 Means them and home , and all we love ; so we march out to fight . 
 = = = Inter @-@ war years and World War II = = = 
 The 10th Battalion was disbanded shortly after its return to Australia , although some of its personnel were used to raise the Adelaide @-@ based 1st Battalion , 10th Infantry Regiment , a part @-@ time unit of the Citizens Force ( later known as the Militia ) . This unit drew its lineage from the 78th Infantry Regiment , which could trace its history back to 1854 , when two battalions of the Adelaide Rifles had been formed . The act of merging these units was part of a larger Army @-@ wide reorganisation that created a convoluted lineage in many units , which according to historian Peter Stanley has resulted in confusion among military historians . In 1921 , when the AIF was officially disbanded and the part @-@ time military forces were reorganised to perpetuate the AIF 's numerical designations , the 10th Battalion was re @-@ raised in its own right in Adelaide , drawing personnel from the 2nd Battalions of the 10th , 32nd and 50th Infantry Regiments . Through these links , the 10th Battalion inherited a battle honour from the Boer War . At this time it was allocated to the 3rd Brigade , which was part of the 4th Military District . 
 The battalion received a King 's Colour in 1925 in recognition of its service during World War I. Two years later , in 1927 , territorial titles were introduced and the battalion assumed the designation of " The Adelaide Rifles " . The motto Pro Patria was adopted at this time . In 1930 , amid the austerity of the Great Depression and following the election of the Scullin Labor government and the subsequent suspension of the compulsory training scheme , the decision was made to amalgamate the battalion due to a decline in the numbers of volunteers . It was merged with the 50th Battalion , with whom it shared history , to become the 10th / 50th Battalion . Again the unit was assigned to the 3rd Brigade . 
 The 10th and 50th remained linked until 1936 ; at that time , in response to fears of a possible war in Europe following the reoccupation of the Rhineland , it was decided to expand the size of the Militia . As a result , on 1 October 1936 , the 10th / 50th Battalion was split and the 10th Battalion was re @-@ raised as a separate unit , and was once again assigned to the 3rd Brigade . After Japan 's entry into World War II in December 1941 , the 10th Battalion mobilised at <unk> to undertake garrison duties in Australia . While the 3rd Brigade 's two other battalions – the 27th and 43rd – were sent to Darwin , the 10th was initially deployed to <unk> on the New South Wales south coast , defending the strategically important industrial area around Wollongong , but in August it was ordered to join Northern Territory Force and moved to Darwin to defend the port against a possible Japanese invasion . Before it arrived , though , an Army @-@ wide reorganisation resulted in the 10th being amalgamated with the 48th Battalion , to form the 10th / 48th Battalion on 27 August 1942 . The reorganisation was the result of personnel shortages that had come about due to an over @-@ mobilisation of the Australian military , and resulted in the amalgamation of several Militia units . In 1943 , the 10th / 48th Australian Infantry Battalion was gazetted as an " AIF " unit , which meant that its members could be deployed outside Australian territory , but was disbanded in August 1945 , never having served outside Australia . 
 During the war , another battalion with a similar designation , the 2 / 10th Battalion , was raised as part of the all volunteer Second Australian Imperial Force ( 2nd AIF ) . Although many members of the Militia volunteered to join the 2nd AIF , the units of the 2nd AIF were considered separate from those of the Militia and many existed at the same time . Recruited from South Australians , the 2 / 10th was raised in mid @-@ October 1939 and formed part of the 18th Brigade that was initially assigned to the 6th Division before being transferred to the 7th . Over the course of the war it served in the United Kingdom , North Africa , New Guinea and Borneo before being disbanded in December 1945 . 
 = = = After World War II = = = 
 In 1948 , when Australia 's part @-@ time military force was re @-@ raised as the Citizens Military Force ( CMF ) , the 10th Battalion returned to the order of battle , <unk> the designation of The Adelaide Rifles . Throughout the 1950s , as part of Central Command , the battalion provided training for national servicemen until 1960 , when a widespread re @-@ organisation of the CMF saw the creation of six state @-@ based multi @-@ battalion regiments as the smaller , regional regiments of the past were consolidated . As a result , the 10th Battalion was subsumed into the Pentropic 1st Battalion , Royal South Australia Regiment , providing two companies : ' D ' ( The Adelaide Company ) and ' E ' ( The Port Adelaide Company ) . In 1961 , the battalion , although technically off the Army 's order of battle , was entrusted with the 12 battle honours that had been earned by the 2 / 10th Battalion during World War II . 
 In 1965 , the Australian Army ended its brief experiment with the Pentropic divisional establishment , and on 1 July 1965 the 10th Battalion , Royal South Australia Regiment , was re @-@ raised as a unit in its own right . This battalion remained on the order of battle as a Reserve unit until 29 November 1987 , when it was amalgamated with the 27th Battalion , to form the 10th / 27th Battalion , Royal South Australia Regiment ( 10 / 27 RSAR ) . This battalion has adopted the 10th Battalion 's Unit Colour Patch , carries the colours of both the 10th and 27th Battalions , and perpetuates the battle honours of both of these units and several South Australian battalions of the 2nd AIF that were raised for service during World War II ; it also recruits from the same areas , being headquartered in Adelaide with depots across South Australia and in Broken Hill . 
 = = Battle honours = = 
 The 10th Battalion received the following battle honours : 
 South Africa 1899 – 1902 ( inherited ) ; 
 World War I : Somme 1916 – 18 , Pozières , Bullecourt , Ypres , Menin Road , Polygon Wood , Broodseinde , Poelcappelle , Passchendaele , Lys , Hazebrouck , Kemmel , Amiens , Albert 1918 , Hindenburg Line , Epehy , France and Flanders 1916 – 18 , ANZAC , Landing at ANZAC , Defence at ANZAC , Suvla , Sari Bair , Gallipoli 1915 , Egypt 1915 – 16 . 
 World War II : North Africa 1941 , Defence of Tobruk , The Salient 1941 , South West Pacific 1942 – 45 , Buna – Gona , Cape Endaiadere – Sinemi Creek , Sanananda – Cape Killerton , Milne Bay , Liberation of Australian New Guinea , Shaggy Ridge , Borneo , Balikpapan ( inherited ) . 
 = Joseph Dennie = 
 Joseph Dennie ( August 30 , 1768 – January 7 , 1812 ) was an American author and journalist who was one of the foremost men of letters of the Federalist Era . A Federalist , Dennie is best remembered for his series of essays entitled The Lay Preacher and as the founding editor of Port Folio , a journal espousing classical republican values . Port Folio was the most highly regarded and successful literary publication of its time , and the first important political and literary journal in the United States . Timothy Dwight IV once referred to Dennie as " the Addison of America " and " the father of American Belles @-@ Lettres . " 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Dennie was born on August 30 , 1768 , in Boston , Massachusetts to Joseph Dennie , a member of a well @-@ to @-@ do merchant family , and his wife Mary Green , whose father was Bartholomew Green , Jr . The Greens were a prominent printing family in colonial America ; the progenitor of the family , Samuel Green , emigrated from England with John Winthrop and was one of the first printers in the colonies . Having moved to Lexington at the age of seven , Dennie returned to Boston in 1783 to study bookkeeping and later clerk in a counting house . He began preparing to enter Harvard College in 1785 , under the guidance of Reverend Samuel West . West had a significant impact on Dennie , fostering his pupil 's interest in literature , as well as instilling in Dennie a decidedly pro @-@ British mindset . 
 In 1787 Dennie was admitted to the sophomore class of Harvard College , where he was very popular with his peers . This popularity did not extend to his tutors , and he was suspended in December 1789 for six months after insulting the faculty . Dennie had difficulty finding suitable employment after earning his degree in 1790 , but by 1793 he was practicing law ( though earning very little for his work ) . In a January 1794 letter to his parents , however , Dennie reports that he had been appointed as a reader for the Episcopalian church in Charlestown , New Hampshire . Nevertheless , he insisted that this new vocation would not deter him from his goal of practicing law , though by then he was planning on remaining in New Hampshire to practice rather than returning to Massachusetts . Shortly after writing the letter , Dennie was admitted to the Court of Common Pleas and opened a practice in Charlestown . However , he rarely appeared in open court ; indeed , he probably made only one appearance . 
 = = Publishing career = = 
 Throughout the 1790s Dennie contributed to various journals , including the Federal Orrery and the Massachusetts Magazine , often using pen names such as <unk> and <unk> . In 1795 , his writing being enthusiastically received , Dennie was persuaded to begin a literary journal , The Tablet . William Spotswood , a Boston printer and bookseller , agreed to oversee the entire enterprise , splitting the profits evenly with Dennie . Such a literary journal was a novel idea at the time , and it was well received among the city 's elite . Despite the initial excitement surrounding the project and content from noted writers such as John Sylvester John Gardiner , The Tablet lasted only a few months before folding , having published thirteen issues . 
 Dennie 's disappointment over the failure of The Tablet inspired him to begin work on The Lay Preacher , the first of which appeared in The Farmer 's Weekly Museum , a New Hampshire newspaper which was the leading literary journal of the 1790s . After Dennie took over as editor of the paper in 1796 , its circulation increased dramatically , stretching , as one commentator put it , " from Maine to Georgia . " Under Dennie 's leadership the paper had a decidedly Federalist slant , supporting both the Quasi @-@ War and the Alien and Sedition Acts . Dennie collaborated often with his friend Royall Tyler ; the two wrote a satirical column by the name of " The Shop of Messrs. Colon and <unk> " which appeared in the Museum . In 1798 Dennie lost a considerable amount of money when the paper 's printer went bankrupt . He remained as editor for a few months afterward at a reduced salary , but was soon replaced by the printer 's brother . The paper 's circulation dropped precipitously following Dennie 's departure . Later in the year Dennie ran an unsuccessful campaign for Congress ; following this defeat , he turned down offers to edit several prominent journals , including a generous offer from Boston 's Independent Chronicle , as he refused to work for a Democratic paper . Instead , he accepted an appointment from Timothy Pickering ( at the time United States Secretary of State ) to a position as Pickering 's personal secretary . 
 Once in Philadelphia , Dennie resumed his editorial career with the Gazette of the United States , a Federalist @-@ friendly newspaper . In 1800 Dennie , along with Philadelphia bookseller Asbury Dickens , began work on the Port Folio . Under the pseudonym Oliver <unk> , Esq . , Dennie wrote , in 1803 , a scathing attack on Jeffersonian democracy , for which he was brought up on charges of seditious libel . Dennie wrote , in part : 
 A democracy is scarcely tolerable at any period of national history . Its omens are always sinister , and its powers are unpropitious . It is on its trial here , and the issue will be civil war , desolation , and anarchy . No wise man but discerns its imperfections , no good man but shudders at its miseries , no honest man but proclaims its fraud , and no brave man but draws his sword against its force . The institution of a scheme of policy so radically contemptible and vicious is a memorable example of what the villany of some men can devise , the folly of others receive , and both establish in spite of reason , reflection , and sensation . 
 This paragraph was reprinted in Federalist newspapers throughout the country . While Dennie was acquitted , the severity of the attacks leveled in Port Folio would henceforth be lessened . However , when Dennie criticized democracy , it was not the republican democracy found in the United States today , but rather the " democracy " found in France under Robespierre and Napoleon . Dennie was invoking Aristotle 's argument that " an absolute democracy is not to be reckoned among the legitimate forms of government . It is the corruption and degeneracy , and not the sound constitution of a republic . " 
 = = Death = = 
 Dennie had health trouble throughout his life , as well as a predilection for wine . His father ( who had battled mental illness ) died on September 28 , 1811 ; Dennie was not able to attend his father 's funeral , as he himself was gravely ill at the time , and this caused him great grief . He briefly recovered , but succumbed to cholera morbus four months after his father 's death . Dennie died on January 7 , 1812 , and was interred two days later at St. Peter 's Church , Philadelphia . His epitaph was written by John Quincy Adams . The epitaph erroneously gives Lexington , Massachusetts as his birthplace ; in fact , Dennie was born in Boston , but his family moved to Lexington shortly thereafter . 
 = = Works = = 
 Dennie , Joseph ; Pedder , Laura Green ( 2008 ) . The Letters Of Joseph Dennie 1768 @-@ 1812 . Kessinger Publishing . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 Dennie , Joseph ; Hall , John E. ( 1817 ) . The Lay Preacher . Harrison Hall . 
 = = Supplemental bibliography = = 
 Rothman , Irving N. ( 1973 ) . " Alexander Wilson 's Forest Adventure : the Sublime and the Satirical in Wilson 's Poem ' The Foresters . ' " Journal of the Society in the Bibliography of Natural History [ British Museum ] <unk> @-@ 54 . [ The Port Folio ] 
 Rothman , Irving N. ( 1979 ) . " An Imitation of Boileau 's Fourth Satire in the American Republic . " Revue de <unk> <unk> 53 ( <unk> ) : 76 @-@ 85 . [ The Port Folio ] 
 Rothman , Irving N. ( 1973 ) . " John Trumbull 's Parody of Spenser 's Epithalamium , " The Yale University Library Gazette 47 ( April ) : 193 @-@ 215 . [ The Port Folio ] 
 Rothman , Irving N. ( 2003 ) . “ Joseph Dennie , a <unk> , and Philip Freneau , a <unk> , on Ballooning in Early America . ” <unk> Annual Report of the Institute for Space Systems Operations . Houston : <unk> , 118 @-@ 23 . [ The Port Folio ] 
 Rothman , Irving N. ( 1973 ) . “ Niagara Falls and The Port Folio . ” Aldus [ University of Houston ] 11 : 242 @-@ 54 . [ The Port Folio ] 
 Rothman , Irving N. ( 1968 ) . " Structure and Theme in Samuel Ewing 's Satire , the ' American Miracle , ' " American Literature 40 ( November ) : 294 @-@ 308 . [ The Port Folio ] 
 Rothman , Irving N. ( 1971 ) . " Two <unk> Satires by John Quincy Adams . " Early American Literature 6 : 234 @-@ 51 . [ The Port Folio ] 
 Rothman , Irving N. ( 1967 ) . Verse Satire in The Port Folio , an Early American Magazine , Edited by Joseph Dennie , 1801 @-@ 1812 . Ph.D. Dissertation , University of <unk> i @-@ viii , 1 @-@ 220 . 
 = Die Hand Die Verletzt = 
 " Die Hand Die Verletzt " is the fourteenth episode of the second season of the science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network on January 27 , 1995 . It was written by Glen Morgan and James Wong , directed by Kim Manners , and featured guest appearances by Susan Blommaert , Dan Butler , and Heather McComb . The episode is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . " Die Hand Die Verletzt " earned a Nielsen household rating of 10 @.@ 7 , being watched by 10 @.@ 2 million households in its initial broadcast . The episode received positive reviews , with many critics praising its writing . The title translates from German as " the hand that wounds . " 
 The X @-@ Files series centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . In this episode Mulder and Scully are called to Milford Falls , New Hampshire to investigate the death of a teenager who seems to have died during an occult ritual of some sort . As a result of their arrival in town a few of the local high school 's faculty , who had self @-@ stylized as devil @-@ worshipers when they were teens but long ago stopped worshiping the devil , decide they should take steps to conceal their past activities . Matters are further complicated when the devil seems to have decided to personally interfere . 
 Die Hand Die Verletzt uses the lapsed devil @-@ worshipers as a way to parody insincere followers of mainstream religions . When confronted with proof of their religion 's claims the school faculty members are mostly worried about how their obligations could impact their secular lives , several being either scared or annoyed by the prospect of having to become devout . This was the last episode written by Morgan and Wong before they left to create Space : Above and Beyond . They decided to add several in @-@ jokes with The X @-@ Files creative team . The episode has several scenes involving animals , each filmed with living creatures . In one such scene frogs rain from the sky . Actor Dan Butler has been quoted as being terrified of an anaconda used during one scene . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In fictional Milford Haven , New Hampshire , a group of high school faculty members meet to discuss various social events . The adults initially appear to be socially conservative , debating whether students should perform the musical Grease or Jesus Christ Superstar . However , when the group ends the meeting in a prayer , they recite a Satanic chant . 
 Later , a group of students go out into the woods at night to play with black magic , an attempt to " score " on the part of the boys in the group . The experiment causes unexplainable things to happen , causing all but one of the teenagers to flee . The remaining teen 's mutilated body is discovered the next day , leading Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) to investigate . Locals — including the faculty members — claim that the children have unleashed a demonic force with their rituals ; a theory which is given validity by strange occurrences , such as frogs falling from the sky and water in the drinking fountain draining counter @-@ clockwise , contrary to the Coriolis effect . Unknown to the agents , substitute teacher Mrs. Paddock ( Susan Blommaert ) is behind the murder , keeping the eyes and heart of the victim in her desk . One of the faculty members , Jim Ausbury ( Dan Butler ) suspects one of his colleagues killed the boy , but the others believe it was an outside force . Ausbury 's stepdaughter , Shannon ( Heather McComb ) , suffers a breakdown during science class while dissecting a pig foetus . 
 Meeting with Mulder and Scully , Shannon tearfully tells them that Ausbury and the other Satanists repeatedly raped and impregnated her as part of their rituals , sacrificing her babies . When the agents confront Ausbury with the accusations , he is shocked , and denies them . Shannon stays after school to make up her assignment of dissecting the pig . Mrs. Paddock takes her bracelet and uses it as part of a spell that causes Shannon to slit her wrists . When Ausbury learns that the other faculty members plan to use Shannon as a scapegoat , he admits the sect 's existence to Mulder . He confirms that rituals did happen while Shannon was present , but said that exposure to sensational media coverage led her to " remember " the sexual abuse . Meanwhile , Scully researches Mrs. Paddock and finds that no one knows anything about her or her background . During a sudden power outage , Mrs. Paddock steals Scully 's pen and uses it to impersonate her in a call to Mulder , pretending to be in trouble . Mulder handcuffs Ausbury in the basement to prevent his possible escape , then leaves to help Scully . Soon after , a giant snake appears and devours Ausbury . 
 Mulder arrives at the school , where Scully claims that she never called him . They find Mrs. Paddock seemingly attacked by the remaining faculty members , and go to search for them . The faculty members capture the two agents , convinced that they need to perform a sacrifice to regain favor with the Devil and make up for their diluted faith before it is too late . As they are about to kill Mulder and Scully , Mrs. Paddock causes them to instead kill themselves , confirming that their attempt was indeed too late . The agents escape their bonds and find Mrs. Paddock missing , with only a parting message on the chalkboard stating , " Goodbye . It 's been nice working with you . " 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 " Die Hand Die Verletzt " was written by Glen Morgan and James Wong , who were co @-@ executive producers for the series as well as writers . The episode originally stemmed from an idea of Glen Morgan 's to have a scene where a snake eats a man . Series creator Chris Carter described the episode as " a cautionary tale about playing with fire , playing with things bigger and badder than you might imagine " . In an interview , he also praised the purposefully clashing tones of the entry , noting that it begins almost comical , with the PTC saying Satanic prayers and toads raining from the skies . However , as it goes on , it becomes increasingly more and more dark . Morgan and co @-@ writer James Wong left the series after this episode to produce the series Space : Above and Beyond . The line written by Mrs. Paddock on a chalkboard at the end of the episode , " It 's been nice working with you , " also acted as a goodbye to the crew of the show . The two later returned to the show in the fourth season . 
 Crowley High School refers to British <unk> and occultist Aleister Crowley . The character names Deborah Brown and Paul Vitaris were based on fans of the series who were active on the internet . In fact , the inspiration for Vitaris — Paula Vitaris — wrote episode reviews of the series for the magazine Cinefantastique , starting with the third season of the show . Mrs. Paddock 's name comes from Shakespeare 's MacBeth . Paddock is the toad demon that calls the witches away in the first scene of the play . The episode 's title means " The hand that wounds " in German . The title is taken from a part of the prayer that the PTA says near the beginning , which , in its entirety is " Sein ist die Hand die <unk> " , meaning " His is the hand that wounds " . 
 = = = Directing and filming = = = 
 " Die Hand Die Verletzt " was the first episode of the series to be directed by Kim Manners , who would go on to direct many of the series ' episodes . Originally , another director was supposed to helm this episode , but plans fell through and Manners was hired . The production staff was initially worried about Manners , because he subscribed to the Stephen J. Cannell school of thought regarding television directing ; Cannell felt that the writers and directors should both work together to cast characters , look at locations , and film the episode . This school of thought was perceived , at the time , " as a lesser kind " of directing , according to Morgan . However , Morgan was a proponent of Manners , and eventually secured his position for the episode . 
 While fake frogs were considered for the scene where they fall from the sky , the producers decided to make use of real frogs instead , dropped from a short distance . According to Carter , the " fake ones looked too bad and didn 't hop away after command " . The snake going down the stairs proved difficult to film as the animal kept on falling onto the floor after slithering down the steps . Actor Dan Butler was terrified of the animal , being unable to talk while shooting the scene in the basement . The actor 's fright meant the make @-@ up team did not need to apply fake sweat to his face . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , proposed that the episode is a parody of organized religion , most specifically those who follow a religion , but only pay it lip service . The two argue that the principal joke in the episode is " to look at the way religious faith has been so watered down and paid nothing but lip service , its rituals and doctrines reinterpreted so that only what 's comfortable is adhered to . " This parody , however , is turned on its head : the followers paying lip service in " Die Hand Die Verletzt " are not stereotypical Christians , but rather , devil worshippers . Shearman and Pearson compare Mrs. Paddock — which the episode insinuates to be the devil incarnate — coming to Milford Haven , New Hampshire to judge his followers to St. Paul " coming back and taking a pop at all fair weather Christians who only affirm their faith at their own convenience . " 
 Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club noted the recurring motif of doors . He highlighted various examples — such as the light emanating behind the door in the beginning of the episode , the door in which Mrs. Paddock hides when she kills people , and the door to Mr. Ausbury 's basement in which the Satanic rituals took place — noting that " there 's the whole notion of opening a door to another world and letting an ancient evil into our own " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Die Hand Die Verletzt " premiered on the Fox network on January 27 , 1995 . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 10 @.@ 7 , with an 18 share . Nielsen ratings are audience measurement systems that determine the audience size and composition of television programming in the U.S. This means that roughly 10 @.@ 7 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 18 percent of households watching television , were watching the episode . It was viewed by 10 @.@ 2 million households and over 17 @.@ 7 million viewers . The episode later debuted in the United Kingdom on May 23 , 1995 on Sky One . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Die Hand Die Verletzt " received early praise from critics . Entertainment Weekly gave " Die Hand Die Verletzt " an " A – " , noting that , in the episode , " Mulder and Scully largely step aside in this wacky , wicked effort chock @-@ full of stunning imagery and wry comment . " The magazine praised Blommaert 's acting , calling her " <unk> diabolical " . Paul Cornell , Martin Day , and Keith Topping , in their book X @-@ Treme Possibilities , gave the episode mostly positive reviews , although they criticized the ending . Day applauded the episode 's themes of " loss of faith … ritual abuse [ and ] repressed memories " , along with the " great set pieces " , and the plot twists . However , he was slightly critical that the episode did not have a solid conclusion , and that the identity of Mrs. Paddock was never revealed . Cornell was even more critical about the lack of closure , calling it " a vast unanswered question " and " very troubling in a show that 's concerned with seeing the truth " . However , he too was also complimentary towards the set pieces , calling them " groovy " . 
 Later reviews were also complimentary . VanDerWerff gave the episode an " A " and called it " a good example of the show heading in a different direction but still largely feeling like the same show . " He praised the episode for being " fun [ and ] creepy " . VanDerWerff also praised the final scene , noting that " rare that Mulder and Scully completely get played , but they do here , and it makes the episode an even better sick joke . " Ultimately , he praised the " sick sense of humor " , the " outright left turns into demented darkness " , and " the horrifying visuals " . Shearman and Pearson awarded the episode five stars out of five , citing the " very good " conceit about organized religion , the humor , and the " great set pieces " as positive factors . 
 Nick De Semlyen and James White of Empire named it the fourth " greatest " episode of the series , describing it as a " thoroughly dark and creepy episode " . Katie Anderson of Cinefantastique named the scene in which Shannon begins hallucinating that the pig fetus that she is dissecting is alive and screaming the fifth " Scariest Moment " in The X @-@ Files . Connie Ogle from PopMatters ranked the members of the Satanic PTA as some of the " greatest " monsters @-@ of @-@ the @-@ week , writing , " You don ’ t want to cross the Satan @-@ worshiping teachers at this high school , but there are more vengeful evil forces to displease . " 
 = 1971 Iraq poison grain disaster = 
 The 1971 Iraq poison grain disaster was a mass methylmercury poisoning incident that began in late 1971 . Grain treated with a methylmercury fungicide and never intended for human consumption was imported into Iraq as seed grain from Mexico and the United States . Due to a number of factors , including foreign @-@ language labelling and late distribution within the growing cycle , this toxic grain was consumed as food by Iraqi residents in rural areas . People suffered from paresthesia ( numbness of skin ) , ataxia ( lack of coordination of muscle movements ) and vision loss , symptoms similar to those seen when Minamata disease affected Japan . The recorded death toll was 650 people , but figures at least ten times greater have been suggested . The 1971 poisoning was the largest mercury poisoning disaster when it occurred , with cases peaking in January and February 1972 and stopping by the end of March . 
 Reports after the disaster recommended tighter regulation , better labelling and handling of mercury @-@ treated grain , and wider involvement of the World Health Organization in monitoring and preventing poisoning incidents . Investigation confirmed the particular danger posed to fetuses and young children . 
 = = Context = = 
 The properties of mercury make it an effective fungicide . However , in Europe and America , its health risks ( even when consumed in small quantities ) were known . <unk> had been banned in Sweden in 1966 , the first country to do so , and the United Kingdom followed in 1971 . Previous mercury @-@ poisoning incidents had occurred in Iraq in 1956 and 1960 . In 1956 , there had been around 200 cases , and 70 deaths ; in 1960 there had been 1000 cases and 200 deaths , in both cases due to ethylmercury compounds . Among the recommendations made after the 1960 incident had been to colour any toxic grain for easy identification . Before the 1971 incident , around 200 – 300 cases of methylmercury poisoning had been reported worldwide . Drought had reduced harvests in 1969 , affecting 500 @,@ 000 people , and in 1970 . Saddam Hussein , as the government 's no . 2 behind Ahmed Hassan al @-@ Bakr , decided to import mercury @-@ coated seed grain for the late 1971 planting season . Hussein himself may have worked in the Department of Agriculture in the aftermath of the 1960 incident . 
 = = Causes = = 
 Some 95 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 93 @,@ 000 long tons ; 105 @,@ 000 short tons ) of grain ( 73 @,@ 201 tonnes of wheat grain and 22 @,@ 262 tonnes of barley ) , coloured a pink @-@ orange hue , were shipped to Iraq from the United States and Mexico . The wheat arrived in Basra on SS Trade Carrier between 16 September and 15 October , barley between 22 October and 24 November 1971 . Iraq 's government chose <unk> , a high @-@ yield wheat seed developed in Mexico by Norman Borlaug . The seeds contained an average of 7 @.@ 9 μg / g of mercury , with some samples containing up to nearly twice that . The decision to use mercury @-@ coated grain has been reported as made by the Iraqi government , rather than the supplier , Cargill . The three Northern governorates of <unk> , Kirkuk and Erbil together received more than half the shipments . Contributing factors to the epidemic included the fact that distribution started late , and much grain arrived after the October – November planting season . 
 Farmers holding grain ingested it instead , since their own planting had been completed . Distribution was hurried and open , with grain being distributed free of charge or with payment in kind . Some farmers sold their own grain lest this new grain devalue what they had . This left them dependent on tainted grain for the winter . Many Iraqis were either unaware of the significant health risk posed , or chose to ignore the warnings . Initially , farmers were to certify with a thumbprint or signature that they understood the grain was poison , but according to some sources , distributors did not ask for such an indication . Warnings on the sacks were in Spanish and English , not at all understood , or included the black @-@ and @-@ white skull and crossbones design , which meant nothing to Iraqis . The long latent period may have granted farmers a false sense of security , when animals fed the grain appeared to be fine . The red dye washed off the grain ; the mercury did not . Hence , washing may have given only the appearance of removing the poison . 
 Mercury was ingested through the consumption of homemade bread , meat and other animal products obtained from livestock given treated barley , vegetation grown from soil contaminated with mercury , game birds that had fed on the grain and fish caught in rivers , canals , and lakes into which treated grain had been dumped by the farmers . Ground seed dust inhalation was a contributing factor in farmers during sowing and grinding . Consumption of ground flour through homemade bread is thought to have been the major cause , since no cases were reported in urban areas , where government flour supplies were commercially regulated . 
 = = Symptoms , outbreak and treatment = = 
 The effect of mercury took some time – the latent period between ingestion and the first symptoms ( typically paresthesia – numbness in the extremities ) was between 16 and 38 days . <unk> was the predominant symptom in less serious cases . Worse cases included ataxia ( typically loss of balance ) , blindness or reduced vision , and death resulting from central nervous system failure . Anywhere between 20 and 40 mg of mercury has been suggested as sufficient for paresthesia ( between 0 @.@ 5 and 0 @.@ 8 mg / kg of body weight ) . On average , individuals affected consumed 20 kg or so of bread ; the 73 @,@ 000 tonnes provided would have been sufficient for over 3 million cases . 
 The hospital in Kirkuk received large numbers of patients with symptoms that doctors recognised from the 1960 outbreak . The first case of <unk> poisoning was admitted to hospital on 21 December . By 26 December , the hospital had issued a specific warning to the government . By January 1972 , the government had started to strongly warn the populace about eating the grain , although dispatches did not mention the large numbers already ill . The Iraqi Army soon ordered disposal of the grain and eventually declared the death penalty for anyone found selling it . Farmers dumped their supplies wherever possible , and it soon got into the water supply ( particularly the River Tigris ) , causing further problems . The government issued a news blackout and released little information about the outbreak . 
 The World Health Organization assisted the Iraqi government through the supply of drugs , analytical equipment and expertise . Many new treatments were tried , since existing methods for heavy metal poisoning were not particularly effective . <unk> was administered to several patients , but caused rapid deterioration of their condition . It was ruled out as a treatment for this sort of poisoning following the outbreak . <unk> resins , penicillamine and dimercaprol sulfonate all helped , but are believed to have been largely insignificant in overall recovery and outcomes . Dialysis was tested on a few patients late in the treatment period , but they showed no clinical improvement . The result of all treatments was varied , with some patients ' blood mercury level being dramatically reduced , but a negligible effect in others . All patients received periods of treatment interspersed with lay periods ; continuous treatment was suggested in future cases . Later treatment was less effective in reducing blood toxicity . 
 = = Effects = = 
 6 @,@ 530 patients were admitted to hospitals with poisoning , and 459 deaths reported . Cases reached a peak of hundreds per day in January , and had largely subsided by the beginning of March . The last admittance was on 27 March ; admissions represented every age and gender stratum , although those under the age of ten represented a third of admitted cases . This number is " certainly an underestimate " , because of the availability of hospital treatment , hospital overcrowding and lack of faith in treatment . In the most severely affected areas , prevalence was 28 % and mortality was 21 % of the cases . Some Iraqi doctors believe both the number of cases and fatalities are at least ten times too low , with perhaps 100 @,@ 000 cases of brain damage . One suggested reason for the vast discrepancy between reported and estimated numbers of deaths is the Iraqi custom , common to large parts of the Middle East , for a person to die at home when possible . Home deaths would not have been recorded . 
 A large number of patients with minor symptoms recovered completely ; those with more serious symptoms improved . This was in contrast to expected outcomes , largely based on analysis of Minamata disease in Japan . In boys with mercury levels below clinical poisoning , a reduction in school performance was noted , although this correlation could not be confirmed . In infants , the mercury poisoning caused central nervous system damage . Relatively low doses caused slower development in children , and abnormal reflexes . Different treatments for mercury poisoning have since been developed , and " quiet baby syndrome " , characterised by a baby who never cries , is now a recognised symptom of methylmercury @-@ induced brain damage . Ongoing recommendations of the food regulation authorities have focused on consumption by pregnant women and infant children , noting the particular susceptibility of fetuses and infants to methylmercury poisoning . Data from Iraq have confirmed that methylmercury can pass to a child in utero , and mercury levels were equal to or higher in the newborn child than in the mother . 
 In 1974 , a joint Food and Agriculture Organization ( FAO ) and World Health Organisation ( WHO ) meeting made several recommendations to prevent a similar outbreak . These included stressing the importance of labelling bags in the local language and with locally understood warning symbols . The possibility of an additive creating a strong bitter taste was studied . The meeting urged governments to strictly regulate <unk> and ethylmercury use in their respective countries , including limiting use to where no other reasonable alternative was available . It also recommended the involvement of the FAO and WHO in assisting national governments in regulation and enforcement , and the setting up of national poison control centres . Over 9 – 13 November , a Conference on Intoxication due to <unk> @-@ Treated Seed was held in Baghdad . It supported the recommendations of the FAO / WHO report and further suggested that local and national media should publicise outbreaks , including size and symptoms ; it considered the distribution of this information crucial . It also laid out a general plan as to the collection of relevant information from the field and potential analysis for further investigation . It called on national governments to make use of WHO involvement whenever feasible , and absolved world governments in clear terms , saying that " No country should ever feel that any blame will attach to it for allowing an outbreak to occur " . 
 Iraq now has the highest incidence of Parkinson 's in the world . Parkinson 's symptoms are very similar to mercury poisoning symptoms . Mercury that enters the brain has a half @-@ life of 27 @.@ 5 years and chelators are not able to remove it . 
 = H @-@ 63 ( Michigan county highway ) = 
 H @-@ 63 is a county @-@ designated highway ( CDH ) in the Upper Peninsula of the US state of Michigan . The highway parallels the Interstate 75 ( I @-@ 75 ) corridor between St. Ignace and Sault Ste . Marie . The road is called Mackinac Trail after the Upper Peninsula branch of an Indian trail used before European settlers reached the area . Originally , the roadway was built as a section of US Highway 2 ( US 2 ) before being added to the CDH system in the 1970s . 
 H @-@ 63 serves as a two @-@ lane alternative to the I @-@ 75 freeway across the eastern end of the Upper Peninsula . Between the northern side of St. Ignace , the roadway has connections to two state highways before running concurrently with M @-@ 48 near Rudyard . H @-@ 63 ends on the south side of Sault Ste . Marie . 
 = = Route description = = 
 H @-@ 63 starts a winding trail at Business Loop I @-@ 75 ( BL I @-@ 75 ) north of St. Ignace in rural Mackinac County . From there , the highway heads northward towards the <unk> Casino . The road then passes within viewing distance of I @-@ 75 past the Horseshoe Bay Wilderness . As it continues , H @-@ 63 has a connection to the southern terminus of M @-@ 123 with access to I @-@ 75 via a connecting road to M @-@ 123 . After crossing to the west side of I @-@ 75 , H @-@ 63 has access to I @-@ 75 via a connecting road to the western terminus of M @-@ 134 . The CDH runs to the north and into Chippewa County . As it does so , H @-@ 63 turns away from I @-@ 75 as the latter curves northeastward . South of Rudyard and into center of the community , H @-@ 63 runs concurrently with M @-@ 48 for about three miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) . 
 From Rudyard northward , H @-@ 63 turns northeasterly toward , and runs parallel to , I @-@ 75 . At Kinross , there is an interchange between I @-@ 75 and M @-@ 80 ; H @-@ 63 has a brief concurrency with M @-@ 80 so that the latter can connect to all of the ramps in the interchange . The trail then crosses to the eastern side of I @-@ 75 . Near Dafter , the CDH intersects M @-@ 28 . Along this section , H @-@ 63 is roughly a half mile ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) away from the I @-@ 75 freeway at any given point as it continues northward to the Sault Ste . Marie area . H @-@ 63 terminates at its intersection with Business Spur I @-@ 75 ( BS I @-@ 75 ) on the south side of the city . 
 = = History = = 
 The first transportation route in the area was the Mackinac Trail , used by Native Americans before the Europeans arrived in the area ; the trail in the area was the Upper Peninsula branch of a longer route that also connected the modern @-@ day Saginaw with Mackinaw City and the Straits of Mackinac . Until 1933 , no roadway was built along the path of the Indian trail . After that year , US 2 was rerouted between St. Ignace and Sault Ste . Marie using the modern routing of H @-@ 63 . This placed the Mackinac Trail on the state trunkline highway system for the first time . In 1962 and 1963 , the state transferred the highway to county control when US 2 was rerouted to follow the completed I @-@ 75 freeway . With the transfer to local control , Mackinac Trail became a county road . Later , it was given the H @-@ 63 designation after October 5 , 1970 as part of the County @-@ Designated Highway System . The designation on the 1971 state map follows the routing used today . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Tropical Storm Soudelor ( 2009 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Soudelor , known in the Philippines as Tropical Depression Gorio , was a weak tropical cyclone that produced deadly flooding in the Philippines , China and Vietnam in July 2003 . Forming out of an area of low pressure on July 9 , Soudelor failed to maintain deep convection around its center for the duration of its existence . On July 10 , the depression brushed the northern Philippines and intensified into a tropical storm on July 11 . Later that day , the storm crossed the Leizhou Peninsula . The last public advisory from the JMA was issued the following day after Soudelor made landfall in southern China . 
 In the Philippines , Soudelor produced severe flooding that killed one person and resulted in the issuance of a state of calamity . The storm later killed 15 people in southern China after a group of hikers were washed away in a flash flood on Hainan Island . In Vietnam , rainfall up to 250 mm ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) caused widespread flooding . Lightning triggered by the storm killed two people in the country . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Late on 7 July 2009 , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) reported that an area of disturbed weather had formed 900 km ( 560 mi ) to the northwest of Yap . Deep convection was embedded in a broad , weak , poorly defined circulation that was starting to be enhanced by a Tropical Upper Tropospheric Trough to the east of the system . Over the next couple of days , gradual development took place and early on July 9 , a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert was issued by the JTWC . Around the same time , the Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration ( PAGASA ) designated the system as a tropical depression , giving it the name Gorio . Later that day both the JMA and the JTWC reported that the depression had formed and started to issue warnings on the depression , with the JTWC designating it as 05W ; 
 On July 10 , PAGASA issued their final advisory on Tropical Depression Gorio as it moved out of their area of responsibility . Hampered by an unfavorable upper @-@ level environment , the depression barely intensified into a tropical storm early on July 11 . Upon becoming a tropical storm , the JMA named the system Soudelor reporting peak winds of 65 km / h , ( 40 mph ) . Later that day the JTWC reported that Soudelor had weakened into a depression ; however they re @-@ upgraded it to a tropical storm as it moved closer to Hainan Province . Shortly before landfall in Leizhou Peninsula , China , the JTWC downgraded the storm to a tropical depression . After moving back over water in the Gulf of Tonkin , the JTWC issued their final advisory on the depression . The JMA , however , continued to monitor Soudelor until it made landfall near <unk> , China several hours later . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 = = = Philippines = = = 
 The Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration issued public storm signal one for nine regions of the northern Philippines . As a tropical depression , Soudelor brushed northern Luzon in the Philippines , producing upwards of 330 mm ( 13 in ) of rainfall which resulted in flash flooding and landslides . In Ilocos Norte , major roadways were completely blocked by high waters . The storm affected 19 @,@ 845 people throughout the Philippines and one person was killed after being swept away by a fast current . At least ten villages were flooded during the storm . Three homes were destroyed and two more were damaged by Soudelor . A total of 42 barangays were flooded by the storm , killing 21 cows and isolating low @-@ lying areas . On July 10 , a battalion from the army engineers were deployed to the affected region to repair infrastructure . Following the storm , the hardest hit town <unk> , Ilocos Norte , was put under a state of calamity and regional aid was deployed to the area . Total damage was estimated at PHP 205 million $ 4 @.@ 4 ( US 2009 ) . 
 = = = China = = = 
 In Hong Kong , the Hong Kong Observatory issued standby signal No. 1 as Soudelor neared the region on July 11 . The following day , the signal was raised to strong wind No. 3 due to the possibility of landfall near the region . The signal was lowered back to No. 1 later that day before they were all canceled early on July 12 . The emergency response system was put at level four water @-@ disaster in preparation for torrential rainfall from Soudelor . A red alert was also declared for the affected regions . Torrential rains in Hainan caused significant flooding that killed 15 hikers and left several others missing . Numerous roads were also cut off or destroyed by landslides and 30 villages were inundated with flood waters . In Hong Kong , outer bands of Soudelor produced squally rain showers on July 11 . About 20 trees reportedly fell within Hong Kong , one of which struck a mini bus terminal . The direct economic loss to china was estimated at about RMB <unk> , ( $ 5 @.@ 4 million 2009 USD ) . 
 = = = Vietnam = = = 
 Ahead of the storm , 4 @,@ 000 fishing vessels were ordered to return to port and up to 200 volunteers were mobilized to deal with damages from the storm . Officials evacuated people from 297 residences to higher grounds and reported that 977 other homes were in threatened areas . Roughly <unk> billion ( US $ 3 @.@ 98 million ) was set aside by the Government of Vietnam to assist residents in natural disasters , including Soudelor . An estimated 5 @,@ 000 sandbags and 1 @,@ 000 cubic meters of canvas were distributed to flood @-@ prone areas . The remnants of Soudelor produced widespread torrential rains in Northern Vietnam on July 13 . Rainfall totals peaked at 250 mm ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) in the region . Heavy rainfall , amounting to 130 mm ( 5 @.@ 1 in ) , was also recorded in Hanoi . The capital city experienced flash flooding , inundating numerous streets and buildings . Two men were killed by lightning strikes associated with the storm . Officials reported that at least 13 large trees had been downed by high winds . Flood waters in the hardest @-@ hit areas reached a depth of 0 @.@ 35 m ( 1 @.@ 1 ft ) . One person was killed after being swept away . A tornado also touched down during the storm , destroying the roofs of three homes . Thousands of hectares of croplands were inundated by flood waters . Following the storm , 1 @,@ 000 tonnes of rice was allocated for victims of the floods . 
 = Goodbye Mr. Fish = 
 " Goodbye Mr. Fish " or sometimes " Good @-@ bye Mr. Fish " , " Goodbye , Mr. Fish " or just " Mr. Fish " is the second episode of the first season of the American sitcom The Cosby Show . The episode was directed by Jay Sandrich and written by Earl Pomerantz . " Goodbye Mr. Fish " originally aired in the United States on NBC on Thursday September 27 , 1984 , at 8 : 00 PM Eastern time . 
 The episode focuses on the death of Rudy 's pet goldfish , which was difficult to explain to her and difficult for her to deal with . The episode was a critical and commercial success , achieving both high ratings and positive critical feedback . Its viewer ratings placed it third for the opening week of the 1984 – 85 United States network television season and it earned Primetime Emmy Award and Writers Guild Award nominations for its writing . 
 Several critics either describe this as the most memorable episode of the series or mention it first when describing the series ' memorable episodes . Other critics as well as Bill Cosby include it on short lists of series highlights . Clips of this episode are included in the season 4 two @-@ part " Looking Back " episode . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Cliff ( Bill Cosby ) comes home from a long day at work and tries to take a nap . Vanessa ( Tempestt Bledsoe ) disturbs him to say that Rudy 's ( Keshia Knight Pulliam ) goldfish , Lamont , has died , but she does not realize it yet . They have a hard time explaining to Rudy what has happened . Once they do , Rudy becomes depressed . Later that day , the older kids start making fun of Lamont 's death , Theo saying they should hold a memorial service for the fish around the family toilet . When Cliff feels that the rest of the family is insensitive to Rudy 's loss , he requires the entire family to participate in a memorial service for Lamont in the bathroom in proper funeral attire . Rudy loses interest in the funeral and leaves to watch television , ending the ceremony abruptly . She later returns to the bathroom and asks for privacy , not because she wants to say goodbye to Lamont as Cliff thinks , but because she needs to use the toilet . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Bill Cosby as Cliff Huxtable 
 Phylicia Ayers @-@ Allen as Clair Huxtable 
 Malcolm @-@ Jamal Warner as Theo Huxtable 
 Keshia Knight Pulliam as Rudy Huxtable 
 Tempestt Bledsoe as Vanessa Huxtable 
 Lisa Bonet as Denise Huxtable 
 = = Production = = 
 This was first episode taped and produced for the show , on August 1 , 1984 , following the " Pilot " taped much earlier in May 1984 . The show originated at the NBC studio in Brooklyn before a live studio audience with six different sets : a living room , a master bedroom , a kitchen , a child 's bedroom , a hallway , and a bathroom . The taping endured so many retakes that it took three times as long as was scheduled . The set used was notably different from the one used during the pilot . In the first episode , the first floor has extra rooms that it does not have in the rest of the series , beginning with this episode . As of 1987 , this was one of the few sitcom episodes that showed the bathroom , according to Patricia Leigh Brown of The New York Times . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In 2009 , TV Guide created TV Guide 's 100 Greatest Episodes of All @-@ Time , with this episode ranked number 15 . Earl Pomerantz was nominated for the Writers Guild of America Award for Best Screenplay - Episodic Comedy and the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Writing for a Comedy Series for this episode . The episode was also nominated for an Emmy in the category of Outstanding Live and Tape Sound Mixing and Sound Effects for a Series . The episode finished third in the Nielsen Media Research ratings for the week with a 19 @.@ 1 million person viewership and a 22 @.@ 5 share for the week ending September 30 behind Dallas ( 22 @.@ 4 million ) and Falcon Crest ( 19 @.@ 8 million ) . This followed a first @-@ place ranking for the " Pilot " the week before . This was the first episode of the series to air after the September 24 date that marked the official beginning of the 1984 – 85 United States network television season . 
 David Hinckley of the Daily News describes Rudy as " impossibly cute " in this episode . Producer Marcy Carsey considered the episode to be an example of how the series dealt with the " reactions to small @-@ scale events " . According to Lisa Schwarzbaum of Entertainment Weekly , this is considered by many to be the most memorable episode of the series . Other critics consider it to be among the highlights of the series including Allison Samuels of Newsweek who remembered Cosby for two performances in the series in which he " hid his potato @-@ chip habit from his wife and delivered a deadpan eulogy as he flushed his daughter 's goldfish down the toilet " . William Raspberry of The Washington Post and Graham Jefferson of USA Today considered the episode to be a highlight of the series . Cosby was quoted in Ebony as counting the episode on the short list of highlights from the series . This was the first episode mentioned by several writers discussing the series , including Renee Graham of the Boston Globe , Matt Roush of USA Today ( in 1987 after the first 81 episodes ) , and Candace Murphy of the Oakland Tribune . In the fourth season two @-@ part November 12 , 1987 " Looking Back " episode , the family tries to help the newlywed Sondra Huxtable and Elvin reconcile after their first fight . The episode recounts highlights of the first 81 episodes to help Elvin understand Sondra and her family and this episode is highlighted . According to TBS , the following lines in the funeral part of the script were among the most memorable in the entire series : 
 Cliff : " We 're here to say goodbye to a cherished friend : Lamont , the goldfish . " 
 Vanessa : " I always felt safe with him around . " 
 = Alain Prost = 
 Alain Marie Pascal Prost , OBE , Chevalier de la Légion d 'honneur ( born 24 February 1955 ) is a French former racing driver . A four @-@ time Formula One Drivers ' Champion , only Sebastian Vettel ( four championships ) , Juan Manuel Fangio ( five championships ) , and Michael Schumacher ( seven championships ) have equalled or surpassed his number of titles . From 1987 until 2001 Prost held the record for most Grand Prix victories . Schumacher surpassed Prost 's total of 51 victories at the 2001 Belgian Grand Prix . In 1999 , Prost received the World Sports Awards of the Century in the motor sport category . 
 Prost discovered karting at the age of 14 during a family holiday . He progressed through motor sport 's junior ranks , winning the French and European Formula Three championships , before joining the McLaren Formula One team in 1980 at the age of 24 . He finished in the points on his Formula One début at the San Martin <unk> in Buenos Aires , Argentina ( where he took his first podium a year later ) and took his first race victory at his home Grand Prix in France a year later , driving for the factory Renault team . 
 During the 1980s and early 1990s , Prost formed a fierce rivalry mainly with Ayrton Senna , but also Nelson Piquet and Nigel Mansell . In 1986 , at the last race of the season , he beat Mansell and Piquet of Williams to the title after Mansell retired late on in the race , and Piquet was pulled in for a late precautionary pit stop . Senna joined Prost at McLaren in 1988 and the two had a series of controversial clashes , including a collision at the 1989 Japanese Grand Prix that gave Prost his third Drivers ' Championship . A year later at the same venue they collided again , but this time Prost , driving for Ferrari , lost out . Before the end of a winless 1991 season Prost was fired by Ferrari for his public criticism of the team . After a sabbatical in 1992 , Prost joined the Williams team , prompting reigning drivers ' champion Mansell to leave for CART . With a competitive car , Prost won the 1993 championship and retired from Formula One driving at the end of the year . 
 In 1997 , Prost took over the French Ligier team , running it as Prost Grand Prix until it went bankrupt in 2002 . From 2003 to 2012 he competed in the Andros Trophy , which is an ice racing championship , taking 38 race victories and winning the championship 3 times . 
 Prost employed a smooth , relaxed style behind the wheel , deliberately modeling himself on personal heroes like Jackie Stewart and Jim Clark . He was nicknamed " The Professor " for his intellectual approach to competition . Though it was not a name he particularly cared for , he would admit later that it was an appropriate summation of his approach to his racing . Skilled at setting up his car for race conditions , Prost would often conserve his brakes and tyres early in a race , leaving them fresher for a challenge at the end . 
 = = Personal and early life = = 
 Alain Prost was born near the town of Saint @-@ Chamond , close to the cities of Lyon and Saint @-@ Etienne in the département of Loire , France , to André Prost and Marie @-@ Rose <unk> , born in France of Armenian descent . Prost had one younger brother called Daniel , who died of cancer in September 1986 . Although short , standing at 1 @.@ 67 m ( 5 ft 6 in ) Prost was an active , athletic child , who enthusiastically took part in diverse sports , including wrestling , roller skating and football . In doing so he broke his nose several times . He considered careers as a gym instructor or a professional footballer before he discovered kart racing at the age of 14 while on a family holiday . This new sport quickly became his career of choice . 
 Prost is married to Anne @-@ Marie ( born 14 February 1955 ) . They have two sons , Nicolas ( born 18 October 1981 ) and Sacha Prost ( born 30 May 1990 ) . Prost also has a daughter , Victoria . As of 2015 , Nicolas races in Formula E for <unk> Renault , a team partially run by his father . Prost lived in his hometown , Saint @-@ Chamond , until he and his Renault team fell out in the early 1980s . In April 1983 the Prost family moved to Sainte @-@ Croix , Switzerland , and shortly after to <unk> , Switzerland . They moved to Switzerland after Renault workers went to Prost 's house in France and burned his Mercedes @-@ Benz . They lived there until November 1999 , when they moved to Nyon in the same country . 
 In 1985 Prost was awarded the Légion d 'Honneur by President François Mitterrand . 
 = = Driving career = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ Formula One = = = 
 Prost won several karting championships in his teens . In 1974 he left school to become a full @-@ time racer , supporting himself by tuning engines and becoming a kart distributor . His prize for winning the 1975 French senior karting championship was a season in French Formula Renault , a category in which he won the title and all but one race in 1976 . 
 Prost went on to win the 1977 Formula Renault European championship before moving up to Formula Three ( F3 ) in 1978 . In 1979 he won both the French and European F3 championships , by which time he was on the shopping lists of several Formula One teams . After carefully considering his options , he chose to sign with McLaren for 1980 . He surprised the British team by declining their offer of a race drive in a third car at the final race of the 1979 season at Watkins Glen — reasoning that the token effort would benefit neither him nor the team . 
 = = = Formula One = = = 
 = = = = 1980 : McLaren = = = = 
 Prost began his career with McLaren ( being run by Teddy Mayer ) in 1980 alongside Ulsterman John Watson . On his debut in Buenos Aires he finished in sixth place earning one point , something achieved by only a handful of drivers . Prost added four more points to his tally during the season , scoring points at Interlagos , Brands Hatch and Zandvoort . Prost finished the year 15th in the drivers ' championship , equalling points with former world champion Emerson Fittipaldi . Despite the encouraging debut season , Prost had several accidents , breaking his wrist during practice at Kyalami and suffering a concussion during practice at Watkins Glen . He also retired from the Canadian round in Montreal a week earlier because of rear suspension failure . At the end of the season , despite having two years remaining on his contract , he left McLaren and signed with Renault . Prost has said that he left because of the large number of breakages on the car and because he felt the team blamed him for some of the accidents . 
 = = = = 1981 – 1983 : Renault = = = = 
 1981 
 Prost was partnered with fellow Frenchman René Arnoux for 1981 . Motor sports author Nigel Roebuck reports that there were problems between Prost and Arnoux from the start of the season , Prost being immediately quicker than his more experienced teammate . He did not finish the first two Grands Prix , due to collisions with Andrea de Cesaris in Long Beach and Didier Pironi at Jacarepaguá , but scored his first podium finish at Buenos Aires . He also did not finish in the next four races , and then won his first Formula One race at his home Grand Prix in France at the fast Dijon circuit , finishing two seconds ahead of his old teammate John Watson . 
 For Prost , his debut victory was memorable mostly for the change it made in his mindset . " Before , you thought you could do it , " he said . " Now you know you can . " Prost led from the start the next 5 races , and won two more races during the season , took his first pole position in Germany and finished on the podium every time he completed a race distance . He won again in Holland and Italy , and finished fifth in the drivers ' championship , seven points behind champion Nelson Piquet . 
 1982 
 Prost won the first two Grands Prix of the 1982 season in South Africa , where Prost recovered from losing a wheel , and Brazil , where he finished 3rd but was awarded the win after Piquet ( 1st ) and Keke Rosberg ( 2nd ) were disqualified . He finished in the points on four other occasions , but did not win again . Despite retiring from seven races , Prost improved on his drivers ' championship position , finishing in fourth , but with nine fewer points than the previous year . His relationship with Arnoux deteriorated further after the French Grand Prix . Prost believes that Arnoux , who won the race , went back on a pre @-@ race agreement to support Prost during the race . His relationship with the French media was also poor . He has since commented that " When I went to Renault the journalists wrote good things about me , but by 1982 I had become the bad guy . I think , to be honest , I had made the mistake of winning ! The French don 't really like winners . " 
 In November 1982 , three years before it became a round of the F1 World Championship , Prost , along with fellow F1 drivers Jacques Laffite and Nelson Piquet , made the trip to Melbourne , Australia to drive in the non @-@ championship 1982 Australian Grand Prix at the short ( 1 @.@ 609 km ( 1 @.@ 000 mi ) ) Calder Park Raceway . Driving a Formula Pacific spec Ralt <unk> powered by a 1 @.@ 6 litre Ford engine , Prost sat on pole for the race with a time of 39 @.@ 18 . He then led every lap to win what would be the first of 3 Australian Grand Prix wins . He finished 15 @.@ 32 seconds clear of Laffite , with 1981 AGP winner , young Brazilian driver Roberto Moreno finishing third . 
 1983 
 Arnoux left Renault in 1983 , and American Eddie Cheever replaced him as Prost 's partner . Prost earned a further four victories for Renault during the season and finished second in the drivers ' championship , two points behind Nelson Piquet . Piquet and the Brabham team overhauled Prost and Renault in the last few races of the season . Prost , who felt the team had been too conservative in developing the car , found himself increasingly at odds with Renault 's management , who made him the scapegoat for failing to win a championship . In addition to that , the French fans recalled the bitter fight that had caused their favourite , Arnoux , to leave the team . Prost said in an interview with ESPN during the final race that his car was " not competitive " and that he " didn 't lose by my own fault " Renault fired Prost only two days after the South African race . He re @-@ signed for McLaren for the 1984 season within days and moved his family home to Switzerland after Renault factory workers burned the second of 2 of Prost 's cars , one of them being a Mercedes @-@ Benz . 
 = = = = 1984 – 1989 : Return to McLaren = = = = 
 1984 
 The Frenchman joined double world champion Niki Lauda at McLaren ( now being run by Ron Dennis ) in 1984 , driving the John Barnard designed McLaren MP4 / 2 which used a 1 @.@ 5 litre TAG @-@ Porsche V6 engine . He lost the world championship to Lauda in the final race of the season in Portugal by half a point , despite winning seven races to Lauda 's five , including winning in Portugal . The half point came from the Monaco Grand Prix , where Prost had been leading , albeit with Ayrton Senna ( <unk> ) and Stefan Bellof ( Tyrrell ) closing on him rapidly , when Clerk of the Course Jacky Ickx stopped the race at half distance due to heavy rain , which was controversial as Ickx displayed the red flag without consulting the race officials . Under Formula One regulations , Prost received only half of the nine points normally awarded for a victory . 
 Prost 's seven wins in 1984 equalled the record set by Jim Clark in 1963 . 
 1985 
 In 1985 Prost became the first French Formula One World Champion . He won five of the sixteen Grands Prix during the season . He had also won the San Marino Grand Prix , but was disqualified after his car was found to be 2 kg underweight in post @-@ race scrutineering . Prost finished 20 points ahead of his closest rival , Michele Alboreto . Prost 's performance in 1985 earned him the Légion d 'honneur distinction in France . 
 While proud to be the first French World Champion , Prost , annoyed that French journalists were proclaiming it as a win for France , pointed out in interviews that other than himself , nothing about the car ( the MP4 / 2B ) had anything to do with France . The team was British ( having been founded by a New Zealander ) , the tyres were American <unk> , the TAG @-@ Porsche engine was German , the chassis itself was built by Hercules Aerospace in the USA , and was sponsored by an American tobacco company ( Marlboro ) and the Saudi Arabian owned company Techniques d <unk> Garde ( TAG ) . 
 1986 
 Niki Lauda retired for good at the end of 1985 , and was replaced at McLaren by 1982 World Champion Keke Rosberg for 1986 . Prost successfully defended his title , despite his car struggling against the Honda @-@ powered Williams cars driven by Nelson Piquet and Nigel Mansell . Until the latter stages of the final race of the 1986 season , the Australian Grand Prix , Prost appeared set to finish second in the Championship , behind Mansell . Prost had the same number of wins as Piquet , but he had four second places to Piquet 's three , thus placing him second before the final race . While running third behind Piquet , and directly behind Prost on the road ( 3rd was all he needed to win the title ) , Mansell suffered a rear tyre failure at 180 mph ( 290 km / h ) and crashed out . The Williams team then pitted Piquet to change tyres as a safety precaution , while Prost had already pitted earlier due to a puncture and did not need to change his tyres again . He then held the lead ahead of a charging Piquet to the chequered flag and the Championship . 
 Another memorable race that year for Prost was at the San Marino Grand Prix . He was cruising to victory when his car began to run out of fuel three corners from the chequered flag . Frantically weaving the car back and forth to slosh the last drops of fuel into the pickup , he managed to keep it running just long enough to creep over the line and win the race ( Prost commented after the race that when his car started running dry he immediately thought to himself " shit , I am going to lose this race again " , referring to his 1985 disqualification at Imola ) . It happened again at the German Grand Prix : while running in fourth position , Prost 's car ran out of fuel on the finishing straight of the last lap . Instead of retiring at a time in the season when points were critical , Prost got out of his car and tried to push it to the finish , to great applause from the crowd . The finish line was too far , though , and he never reached it . He was eventually classified sixth in the race , as the seventh @-@ placed car ( the Brabham @-@ BMW of Derek Warwick ) was a lap behind . 
 1987 
 With Rosberg retiring from Formula One at the end of 1986 season , underrated Swede Stefan Johansson filled the McLaren seat alongside Prost for the 1987 season . Even though McLaren had introduced the new Steve Nichols designed MP4 / 3 after three seasons with the MP4 / 2 model ( Barnard had departed for Ferrari ) , the TAG engines were not the force they had been previously , lagging behind in power and with unreliability previously unseen . He never gave up though and challenged Piquet and Mansell almost until the end , winning three races and breaking Jackie Stewart 's record for race victories by winning for the 28th time at the Portuguese Grand Prix . Prost considers his win in the opening round in Brazil as his best and most rewarding race ever . The Williams @-@ Hondas had been dominant during qualifying , and Prost started fifth on the grid with a time three seconds slower than Mansell 's pole time . Knowing he didn 't have the qualifying speed , he instead worked on his race set @-@ up , and with everyone else going for a high @-@ downforce set @-@ up , the Frenchman went the other way . The set @-@ up meant less tyre wear , thanks to slower speeds in the corners while going fast down the straights . With his car having less tyre wear than his rivals , Prost was able to get through the 61 laps of the abrasive Jacarepaguá Circuit with only two stops compared to the three or more by his rivals ( Piquet pitted for tyres 3 times within the first 40 laps ) . Prost finished 40 seconds in front of Piquet , with Johansson a further 16 seconds back in third . 
 When you win a race like this the feeling is very , very good . There have been times when I have been flat @-@ out to finish sixth , but you can 't see that from the outside . In 1980 I finished three or four times in seventh place . I pushed like mad , yet everyone was gathered around the winner and they were thinking that I was just trundling around . But that 's motor racing . So in fact the only thing you can judge in this sport is the long term . You can judge a career or a season , but not one race . 
 Prost finished the 1987 season in fourth place in the championship behind Piquet , Mansell and Lotus driver Ayrton Senna . Prost finished 30 points behind champion Nelson Piquet . Other than his debut season in 1980 , and 1991 , it was the furthest away he would finish a season from the championship lead . 
 1988 
 Despite Nelson Piquet winning the 1987 Drivers ' Championship and Williams winning the Constructors ' Championship , Honda decided not to supply the team with their engines , partly due to Williams ' refusal to dump Nigel Mansell and hire Japanese driver and Honda test driver Satoru Nakajima ( who debuted with Lotus in 1987 ) , and instead supplied the McLaren team for 1988 . Prost had convinced Ron Dennis to sign Ayrton Senna to a three @-@ year contract , which played a role in luring Honda ( Senna 's ability had been highly regarded by the Japanese giant when using their engines with Lotus in 1987 and both were keen to continue their association ) . However , this began the rivalry that pushed two of the sport 's greatest drivers to unprecedented heights of success and controversy . McLaren @-@ Honda dominated the season , winning 15 out of 16 races . Prost finished first or second in every race other than his two retirements at Silverstone and Monza . He won seven races and in total outscored his new teammate Ayrton Senna by 11 points , despite Senna winning one more race than Prost . However , only the 11 best results from the season counted toward the championship total , and this gave Senna the title by three points . Prost went on to be a proponent of essentially the 1990s scoring system – all results counting to the final results with the winner scoring 10 , not 9 , points . 
 In November of that year , Prost had a meeting with the head of Honda 's R & D department and F1 racing program , Nobuhiko Kawamoto in Geneva . He expressed his feelings that Honda was giving Senna preferential treatment , and Kawamoto then confirmed Prost 's fears , explaining that the Honda engineers were of a new generation , and that they liked Senna 's panache and samurai @-@ like driving . Kawamoto was able to convince Prost that he would work something out on the Honda end of the McLaren @-@ Honda partnership for the 1989 season , but this was not to be . 
 1989 
 McLaren 's domination continued throughout 1989 , and the Prost @-@ Senna struggle for supremacy put them on a collision course . Mutual admiration turned to all @-@ out hatred , with the Frenchman accusing his Brazilian teammate of " dangerous driving " and of receiving more than a fair share of attention from both McLaren and Honda . For his part , Senna accused Prost of being in the pocket of FISA 's French president Jean @-@ Marie Balestre . The animosity between the two drivers came to a head at Round 2 in San Marino . The drivers made an agreement between them that whoever won the start would not be challenged by the other going into the first turn ( in this case , the Tosa bend on the Imola circuit ) . Prost kept to the agreement after Senna won the first start . Prost however won the restart ( caused by Gerhard Berger 's fiery crash in his Ferrari ) , but was passed by Senna under brakes for Tosa . Prost went to a friend of his , a French journalist , and told him about the broken agreement between him and Senna . Against Prost 's wishes , the journalist went public with the story . During testing at Pembrey in Wales , Senna denied in public any such agreement had ever existed between himself and Prost , but the Frenchman 's claim was backed up by Marlboro 's John Hogan who had been present when the agreement was made . 
 Their embittered season ended as many pundits had feared . In the Japanese Grand Prix at the end of lap 46 , Senna made his move at the Casino Chicane . Prost , turning into the corner , turned into his teammate 's path resulting in a collision and the cars sliding interlocked down the escape road . Prost , thinking the World Championship was over , climbed out of his stalled car . To separate the cars , the marshals pushed Senna 's McLaren backwards onto the track . This left it in a dangerous position , so they pushed it forwards again . As they did so , Senna bump @-@ started the engine . He drove through the chicane and rejoined . The nose of his car was damaged and he had to pit , but he rejoined only five seconds behind the Benetton of Alessandro Nannini . On lap 50 , Ayrton sliced past Nannini at the chicane to take the lead and won the race . But it was Nannini who appeared on the top step of the podium , race officials having excluded Senna for missing the chicane . McLaren appealed the decision , but the FIA Court of Appeal not only upheld the decision but fined Senna US $ 100 @,@ 000 and gave him a suspended six @-@ month ban . Thus Prost clinched his third driver 's title in controversial circumstances . 
 However , Prost had the firm belief that Honda and Ron Dennis viewed Senna as the future of the team . Prost recalled that by the Italian Grand Prix he had one car with maybe four or five mechanics , while his teammate had two cars and 20 people around him . Before the race Prost , who had announced in July 1989 that he would depart from McLaren , announced he was joining Ferrari . Although Prost was forced to make a public apology to both McLaren and Honda over his Monza comments , he received support from Nigel Mansell ( who would be his 1990 team mate at Ferrari ) , and former team mate Rosberg who claimed that once it became known they would not be using the Japanese engines the next season , their Honda engines did not seem to work as well as was once normal . Prost actually won the Italian Grand Prix , after Senna 's engine blew with only 9 laps remaining . Until that point Prost 's MP4 / 5 had not been a match for Senna 's on Monza 's long straights , which had many , especially those in the press , wondering if there was actually truth to Prost 's claim that his Honda engines were not as good as the ones Senna was able to use . 
 As 1989 wore on , Prost continually claimed his Honda V10s were not producing the same amount of power as those in Senna 's car . It actually got to the point where Honda F1 boss Osamu Goto felt compelled to speak to the specialist British media on the matter . He claimed that Senna 's foot @-@ tapping style with the accelerator helped keep the <unk> @-@ E 's revs up in the engine 's mid @-@ range where most of the power was , while Prost 's smoother style dropped the engines into low revs where they had a pick @-@ up problem . Apparently the talk was convincing until most of those present noticed Goto continually called them Ayrton and Prost respectively . An example of Prost 's claims came during the Mexican Grand Prix . Despite his car running less wing than Senna 's which theoretically would give him greater top speed , Prost 's McLaren was not able to pass Senna 's on the long front straight even though he came of the final <unk> Curve clearly faster than the Brazilian and also had the benefit of a tow . In stark contrast , late in the race when Senna was lapping Prost ( who was on fresh tyres ) , Senna was easily able to power past Prost on the straight . 
 = = = = 1990 – 1991 : Ferrari = = = = 
 1990 
 The Frenchman replaced Gerhard Berger at Ferrari and was partnered with Britain 's Nigel Mansell for 1990 ( Berger took Prost 's seat at McLaren ) . As reigning world champion , Prost took over as the team 's lead driver and was said to have played on Mansell 's inferiority complex . Mansell recalls one incident where at the 1990 British Grand Prix , the car he drove didn 't handle the same as in the previous race where he had taken pole position , and later found out from team mechanics that Prost saw Mansell as having a superior car and had them swapped without Mansell knowing . Prost won five races for Ferrari that year , in Brazil , Mexico , France , Britain and Spain . Notable among these was the Mexican Grand Prix , where he won after starting in 13th position . In both the Mexican and Spanish races , he led Mansell to Ferrari 1 – 2 finishes . The championship once again came to the penultimate round of the season in Japan with Prost trailing his McLaren adversary , Ayrton Senna , by nine points . As in 1989 , a controversial collision between the two settled the race . At the first corner Senna , as admitted a year later , intentionally drove his race car into Prost 's , taking them both out of the race and sealing the title in his favour . " What he did was disgusting , " Prost said . " He is a man without value . " Prost finished the season seven points behind Senna , and his Ferrari team were runners @-@ up to McLaren . 
 1991 
 Mansell left the Scuderia due to his unstable relationship with Prost , to rejoin Williams for the 1991 Formula One season . Mansell 's replacement was Frenchman Jean Alesi , who had been impressive during the previous two years at Tyrrell . Ferrari had entered a downturn , partially as their famous V12 engine was no longer competitive against the smaller , lighter and more fuel efficient V10s of their competitors . The Ferrari chassis , despite a major revision by the French Grand Prix ( F @-@ 643 ) was also not up to the level of the McLaren and the Williams models . Prost won no races , only getting onto the podium five times . He took this out on the team , publicly criticising the team and the Ferrari 643 , and subsequently had his contract terminated before the end of the season , immediately prior to the Australian Grand Prix . He was replaced by Italian driver Gianni Morbidelli for the final race of the 1991 season and by another Italian , Ivan Capelli , for the following season . Despite being sacked , Prost received a significant payment from Ferrari to not drive for any other team . 
 It was the second time in his career that Alain Prost had been fired by a factory backed team for his public criticism of the team and car , having been fired under similar circumstances by Renault at the end of the 1983 season . 
 In Japan , the car was like a horrible truck to drive . No pleasure at all . I 've underlined the defects of the Ferrari throughout the season , but no @-@ one has listened to a word . 
 1991 was the first time since his debut year in 1980 in which Alain Prost did not win a Formula One Grands Prix . 
 = = = = 1993 : Williams = = = = 
 Prost went on to a sabbatical year in 1992 , which was dominated by Nigel Mansell in a Williams @-@ Renault . Prost performed pre @-@ season testing for Ligier early in 1992 and later turned down an offer to drive for the team . After hearing that Prost would be his teammate again in 1993 , Mansell left Williams to race in the CART series . The Frenchman had a clause in his contract which prevented rival Ayrton Senna from joining the team that year . Prost was part of a new @-@ look driver line @-@ up at Williams , with test driver Damon Hill coming in to replace Riccardo Patrese , who had left to join Benetton . 
 Prost won his fourth , and final , title , but in a year where he was regularly challenged by teammate Hill , and Ayrton Senna . Shortly before the Portuguese Grand Prix in October 1993 , Prost announced he would not defend his world title , as the clause in the Frenchman 's contract did not extend to 1994 and Senna would be able to join Williams for the upcoming season , and instead opted to retire as the driver with the record for most grand prix victories — a record which stood for almost a decade . On the podium in Adelaide in 1993 , Prost 's last race , he and Senna embraced , and it was as if — now that Prost was no longer a rival — Senna saw no reason for any more hostility . Prost was surprised by the gesture . Prost 's performances earned him an OBE . 
 German Michael Schumacher broke Prost 's record of 51 Grand Prix wins during the 2001 season . However , the Frenchman still holds the records for the most Grand Prix starts in turbo powered cars ( 126 ) , most wins at home Grand Prix ( six at the French Grand Prix ) and wins with most different teams ( 4 : Renault , McLaren , Ferrari , and Williams ) . He also shares the record for starting every race of the season from the front row ( 16 in 1993 ) , with Ayrton Senna in 1989 , and Damon Hill in 1996 . 
 He is also thus far the most recent Frenchman to win his home Grand Prix . 
 = = = = Rivalry with Ayrton Senna = = = = 
 Prost 's battles with Ayrton Senna were particularly notable . The rivalry originated in 1988 , when Senna joined Prost at the McLaren team . The most notable event during the season between the two occurred during the Portuguese Grand Prix , where Senna tried to block Prost from taking the lead by forcing the Frenchman to run close to the <unk> ; Prost managed to edge Senna outwards , taking the lead as they went into the first corner but he remained angered by the Brazilian 's manoeuvre . 
 The rivalry intensified after the 1989 San Marino Grand Prix , where the two drivers had an agreement that neither would get in each other 's way to the first corner ( cf . 1982 San Marino Grand Prix ) . At the start , Senna got away in the lead and Prost followed him through the first corner without getting in Senna 's way . Gerhard Berger 's crash on lap four stopped the race . At the restart , it was Prost this time that got away the better of the two ; but Senna forced his way past Prost in the first corner , breaking the pair 's agreement at the start of the race , leaving the Frenchman furious with Senna . Senna argued it was the restart . Prost himself was angered by McLaren apparently favouring Senna because of Senna 's better relationship with engine supplier Honda , so he announced mid @-@ season that he had signed to race for Ferrari the following season . 
 The rivalry reached its peak at the end of 1989 , when the title was to be decided between Senna and Prost at Suzuka . The two McLarens collided at the Casio Triangle chicane when Prost blocked an attempted pass by Senna . Prost walked away while Senna returned to the track . Senna went on to win the race , but was later disqualified in a highly controversial ruling over his path back to the track . After an unsuccessful appeal by McLaren , the Brazilian received a further US $ 100 @,@ 000 fine and a six @-@ month suspension , leading Senna to accuse FIA president Jean @-@ Marie Balestre of favoring his compatriot Prost . Senna 's disqualification meant that it was mathematically impossible for him to overhaul Prost 's points total , and so the 1989 Championship went to the Frenchman . There has been much debate as to whether Senna was overambitious in his overtaking manoeuver , whether Prost intentionally ran into Senna , or whether the collision was simply a racing incident between two team @-@ mates who were embittered with each other . 
 The following season saw the two drivers collide again . With Senna leading Prost , now in a Ferrari , in the world drivers ' championship , Prost qualified second for the penultimate race of the season in Suzuka with Senna on pole . Between the end of qualifying and race day , pole position was switched to the other side of the track without explanation . Senna complained that no longer being on the racing line , his side of the grid was dirty , meaning he would get less grip and therefore a slower start compared to Prost who had been moved to the clean side of the grid . The Brazilian 's appeal was rejected . At the start of the race , Prost got the better start of the two ; but whilst braking for the first corner , Senna refused to back off and collided with Prost at 160 mph ( 260 km / h ) , clinching the title for the Brazilian . Prost almost retired from the sport , saying " What he did was disgusting . He is a man without value . " A year later , Senna admitted that the move was premeditated , in retaliation for the collision at the chicane on the same course the previous year . 
 There was another controversial incident in 1991 . Prost 's inferior Ferrari was unable to put up a challenge regularly to Senna 's <unk> McLaren . At the German Grand Prix at Hockenheim , Prost battled Senna for 4th place , however he felt Senna defended too aggressively and at the first chicane forced Prost to take avoiding action by using the escape road . Prost stalled his car rejoining the race . Coincidentally , Senna ran out of fuel on the last lap at the very same point . 
 The Frenchman took a sabbatical in 1992 after being fired from Ferrari for publicly criticizing the car and the team , while the Brazilian struggled as McLaren was no longer competitive with Williams . Prost announced his signing with Williams for the upcoming 1993 season . Senna had wanted to join Williams too , as they were the most competitive , but Prost had a clause in his contract forbidding the Brazilian as a teammate . An infuriated Senna called the Frenchman a " coward " during a press conference at Estoril , and decried his unwillingness to compete for the drivers ' championship on equal sporting terms : 
 I think if Prost wants to be called the sole champion , three @-@ times world champion , come back in a sportive way , maybe win another championship , he should be sportive . The way he 's doing , he 's behaving like a coward . And if he wants to be sportive , he must be prepared to race anybody , at any condition , at equal terms . 
 During the 1993 season , Prost and Senna continued their on @-@ track rivalry . Prost was escorted by police to the Interlagos circuit for the 1993 Brazilian Grand Prix due to the hostility of Brazilians towards him . The two continued their on @-@ track battles at Silverstone where Senna aggressively defended his position against Prost . At Prost 's last Grand Prix , the 1993 Australian Grand Prix , he was pulled up by Senna onto the top step of the podium for an embrace . 
 On 1 May 1994 , Ayrton Senna was killed during the San Marino Grand Prix . Prost was a pallbearer at the Brazilian 's funeral . Speaking four years after the Brazilian 's death , Prost told Nigel Roebuck that he had " always refused to speak about him " . When Senna died , Prost stated that " a part of himself had died also " , because their careers had been so bound together . Senna had also felt the same when Prost had retired at the end of 1993 , when he admitted to a close friend that he had realised how much of his motivation had come from fighting with Prost . Only a couple of days before his death , when filming an in @-@ car lap of Imola for French television channel TF1 , he greeted Prost , by then a pundit on the channel : " A special hello to my , ... to our dear friend Alain . We all miss you Alain . " Prost said that he was amazed and very touched by the comment . 
 = = = Helmet = = = 
 Prost uses a helmet design based on the three colours of the French flag , those being blue , white and red , along with his name along the side . During his early career however , Prost used a basic design of white all over with some blue detail around the visor ( blue helmet with a white 180 ° flipped Y and red lines in the lower branch of the flipped Y and in the upper branch , surrounding the top ) . During Prost 's time at Renault , he used more blue details , most notably around the rear of his helmet . Prost 's helmet changed in 1985 , as his helmet now had the blue detail around the front , surrounding the visor ( with also a blue stripe on the side region , making the white area become a P ) and a white ring with red lines surrounding the top ( forming a white circle with a blue half in the rear of the top ) . . Prost kept a similar design for his entry at Ferrari and Williams . Sometimes , Prost used variants of his helmet design , in 2007 he used his original design , but with the circle top all red and a red line in the lower chin area . In 2010 , he used a pearl white helmet with silver flames and a blue @-@ white @-@ red @-@ white @-@ blue stripe <unk> the visor , designed by <unk> design . 
 = = Later life = = 
 During 1994 and 1995 , Prost worked as TV pundit for the French TV channel TF1 . He also worked for Renault as a PR man . Prost went back to his old team McLaren , working as a technical advisor ; he also completed L <unk> du Tour , an annual mass @-@ participation bike ride that takes place on a stage of the Tour de France . Although not an official race , riders fight hard for places ; Prost finished 12th in his category , 42nd overall out of over 5000 riders . 
 = = = Prost Grand Prix = = = 
 During 1989 Prost began to contemplate starting his own team , as his relationship with his McLaren teammate , Ayrton Senna , had turned sour . Prost and John Barnard , formerly chief designer at McLaren , came close to founding a team in 1990 ; but a lack of sponsorship meant that this was not possible , so Prost moved to Ferrari and Barnard left Ferrari to join Benetton . After falling out with the Italian team at the end of 1991 , Prost found himself without a drive for 1992 ; after the failure of extensive negotiations with Guy Ligier about buying his Ligier team , Prost decided to join Williams for 1993 . In 1995 , when Prost was working for Renault , people began to assume that a Prost @-@ Renault team would be formed in the near future . Renault refused Prost 's request to supply engines for his team , ending the speculation . 
 On 13 February 1997 , Prost bought the Ligier team from Flavio Briatore and renamed it " Prost Grand Prix " . The day after he bought the team , Prost signed a three @-@ year deal with French car manufacturer Peugeot , who would supply the team with engines from 1998 until 2000 . For the team 's first season , Prost kept one of Ligier 's 1996 drivers , Olivier Panis , who had won the Monaco Grand Prix the previous year ; Japanese driver Shinji Nakano was signed to partner Panis . The team raced with the Mugen @-@ Honda engines used by Ligier the previous season , while the car was actually the originally intended Ligier <unk> , but was renamed the Prost <unk> . Things looked promising at the start of the season , as the team picked up two points on its Grand Prix debut in Australia when Olivier Panis finished fifth . The team scored a further 13 points before Panis broke his leg in an accident during the Canadian Grand Prix . He was replaced by Minardi 's Jarno Trulli . From there , things started to go downhill slightly , the team scored only five points during Panis ' recovery . The Frenchman came back at the end of the season to race the final three Grand Prix . Prost GP finished sixth in the constructors ' championship in its first season , with 21 points . 
 Prost became the president of Prost Grand Prix at the start of 1998 . With Peugeot supplying the engines for Prost GP , Mugen @-@ Honda decided to supply the Jordan team . Prost GP scored a single point during the season , Jarno Trulli finishing sixth in Belgium . 
 1999 was a crucial year for Prost GP . Prost hired John Barnard as a technical consultant , Barnard 's B3 Technologies company helping <unk> <unk> and the design of the Prost <unk> . Panis and Trulli agreed to stay on with the team for the season . While the car did not prove to be a major concern , the Peugeot V10 engine proved to be heavy and unreliable . 
 Peugeot 's final year as Prost 's engine supplier in 2000 saw some optimism , Prost hiring his 1991 Ferrari team mate Jean Alesi to drive the lead car and German Nick Heidfeld , who had won the 1999 Formula 3000 championship , to partner him . The season proved to be yet another disastrous one , with the <unk> proving to be unreliable and ill handling . Things weren 't helped when both drivers collided with each other in the Austrian Grand Prix . Newly hired technical director Alan Jenkins was fired midway through the year . Prost restructured the team , hiring Joan <unk> as the managing director and replacing Jenkins with Henri Durand as the team 's new technical director . 
 2001 saw some much needed optimism for the team as Ferrari agreed to be the team 's engine supplier for the season , the team now moving in the right direction . But the money ran out at the start of the 2002 season and Prost was out of business , leaving debts of around $ 30 million . 
 = = = After Prost Grand Prix = = = 
 During 2002 , Prost spent time with his family and competed in eight bicycle races , finishing third in the Granite – Mont <unk> . The Frenchman raced in the Andros ice race series in 2003 , finishing second in the championship behind Yvan Muller ; he also became an Ambassador for Uniroyal , a position he would keep until May 2006 . 
 Prost continued to compete in the Andros Trophy , winning the title with Toyota in 2006 / 07 , 2007 / 08 and with Dacia in 2011 / 2012 . 
 For the 2010 Formula One season , the Sporting Regulations were changed so that a former driver sits on the stewards ' panel . Prost was the first such driver to take on this role , at the 2010 Bahrain Grand Prix . Prost also took part in the Race of Champions in 2010 , a race organised for legends of motor sport to compete in equal machinery . 
 In February 2012 , Prost was named as Renault 's new international ambassador , representing the company in sports demonstrations and at events organized or attended by Renault . 
 Prost has finished the <unk> Cape Epic , an eight @-@ day 700 km mountain bike race in South Africa , twice . He first completed the race in 2012 with partner Sebastien di Pasqua and then again in 2013 , and started but did not finish the race in 2014 . 
 In October 2013 it was announced that Prost would join forces with Jean @-@ Paul <unk> 's <unk> racing team to form <unk> , a team which would compete in the FIA Formula E Championship for electric racing cars from its commencement in September 2014 . In June 2014 the team announced that its initial driver line @-@ up would consist of Nicolas Prost and Sébastien Buemi . The team went on to win the inaugural Formula E teams championship . 
 = = Racing record = = 
 = = = Complete Formula One World Championship results = = = 
 ( key ) ( Races in bold indicate pole position , races in italics indicate fastest lap ) 
 ‡ Race was stopped with less than 75 % of laps completed , half points awarded . 
 = = = Formula One non @-@ championship results = = = 
 ( key ) ( Races in bold indicate pole position ) ( Races in italics indicate fastest lap ) 
 = Pony Express = 
 The Pony Express was a mail service delivering messages , newspapers , mail , and small packages from St. Joseph , Missouri , across the Great Plains , over the Rocky Mountains and the Sierra Nevada to Sacramento , California , by horseback , using a series of relay stations . 
 Officially operating as the Leavenworth and Pike 's Peak Express Company of 1859 , in 1860 it became the Central Overland California and Pikes Peak Express Company ; this firm was founded by William H. Russell , Alexander Majors , and William B. Waddell , all of whom were notable in the freighting business . 
 During its 19 months of operation , it reduced the time for messages to travel between the Atlantic and Pacific coasts to about 10 days . From April 3 , 1860 to October 1861 , it became the West 's most direct means of east – west communication before the telegraph was established and was vital for tying the new state of California with the rest of the United States . 
 = = Inception and founding = = 
 The idea of a fast mail route to the Pacific coast was prompted largely by California 's newfound prominence and its rapidly growing population . After gold was discovered there in 1848 , thousands of prospectors , investors and businessmen made their way to California , at that time a new territory of the U.S. By 1850 , California entered the Union as a free state . By 1860 , the population had grown to 380 @,@ 000 . The demand for a faster way to get mail and other communications to and from this westernmost state became even greater as the American Civil War approached . 
 In the late 1850s , William Russell , Alexander Majors , and William Waddell were the three founders of the Pony Express . They were already in the freighting and <unk> business . At the peak of the operations , they employed 6 @,@ 000 men , owned 75 @,@ 000 oxen , thousands of wagons and warehouses plus a sawmill , a meatpacking plant , a bank and an insurance company . 
 Russell was a prominent businessman , well respected among his peers and the community . Waddell was co @-@ owner of the firm Morehead , Waddell & Co . After Morehead was bought out and retired , Waddell merged his company with Russell 's , changing the name to Waddell & Russell . In 1855 they took on a new partner , Alexander Majors , and founded the company of Russell , Majors & Waddell . They held government contracts for delivering army supplies to the western frontier , and Russell had a similar idea for contracts with the U.S. Government for fast mail delivery . 
 By utilizing a short route and using mounted riders rather than traditional stagecoaches , they proposed to establish a fast mail service between St. Joseph , Missouri , and Sacramento , California , with letters delivered in 10 days , a duration many said was impossible . The initial price was set at $ 5 per 1 ⁄ 2 ounce ( 14 g ) , then $ 2 @.@ 50 , and by July 1861 to $ 1 . The founders of the Pony Express hoped to win an exclusive government mail contract , but that did not come about . 
 Russell , Majors , and Waddell organized and put together the Pony Express in two months in the winter of 1860 . The undertaking assembled 120 riders , 184 stations , 400 horses , and several hundred personnel during January and February 1861 . 
 Alexander Majors was a religious man and resolved " by the help of God " to overcome all difficulties . He presented each rider with a special edition Bible and required this oath , which they were also required to sign . 
 " I , ... , do hereby swear , before the Great and Living God , that during my engagement , and while I am an employee of Russell , Majors , and Waddell , I will , under no circumstances , use profane language , that I will drink no intoxicating liquors , that I will not quarrel or fight with any other employee of the firm , and that in every respect I will conduct myself honestly , be faithful to my duties , and so direct all my acts as to win the confidence of my employers , so help me God . " 
 The Pony Express demonstrated that a unified transcontinental system of communications could be established and operated year round . When replaced by the telegraph , the Pony Express quickly became romanticized and became part of the lore of the American West . Its reliance on the ability and endurance of individual young , hardy riders and fast horses was seen as evidence of rugged American individualism of the Frontier times . 
 From 1866 until 1889 , the Pony Express logo was used by stagecoach and freight company Wells Fargo , which provided secure mail service . The United States Postal Service ( USPS ) used " Pony Express " as a trademark for postal services in the US . Freight Link international courier services , based in Russia , adopted the Pony Express trademark and a logo similar to that of the USPS . 
 = = Operation = = 
 In 1860 , there were about 157 Pony Express stations that were about 10 miles ( 16 km ) apart along the Pony Express route . This was roughly the distance a horse could travel at a gallop before tiring . At each station stop the express rider would change to a fresh horse , taking only the mail pouch called a mochila ( from the Spanish for pouch or backpack ) with him . 
 The employers stressed the importance of the pouch . They often said that , if it came to be , the horse and rider should perish before the mochila did . The mochila was thrown over the saddle and held in place by the weight of the rider sitting on it . Each corner had a cantina , or pocket . Bundles of mail were placed in these cantinas , which were padlocked for safety . The mochila could hold 20 pounds ( 9 kg ) of mail along with the 20 pounds ( 9 kg ) of material carried on the horse . Included in that 20 pounds ( 9 kg ) were a water sack , a Bible , a horn for alerting the relay station master to prepare the next horse , and a revolver . Eventually , everything except one revolver and a water sack was removed , allowing for a total of 165 pounds ( 75 kg ) on the horse 's back . Riders , who could not weigh over 125 pounds ( 57 kg ) , changed about every 75 – 100 miles ( 120 – 160 km ) , and rode day and night . In emergencies , a given rider might ride two stages back to back , over 20 hours on a quickly moving horse . 
 It is unknown if riders tried crossing the Sierra Nevada in winter , but they certainly crossed central Nevada . By 1860 there was a telegraph station in Carson City , Nevada . The riders received $ 100 a month as pay . A comparable wage for unskilled labor at the time was about $ 0 @.@ 43 – $ 1 per day . 
 Alexander Majors , one of the founders of the Pony Express , had acquired more than 400 horses for the project . He selected horses from around the west , paying an average of $ 200 . These averaged about 14 1 ⁄ 2 hands ( 4 feet 10 inches or 1 @.@ 47 meters ) high and averaged 900 pounds ( 410 kg ) each ; thus , the name pony was appropriate , even if not strictly correct in all cases . 
 = = Pony Express route = = 
 The approximately 1 @,@ 900 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 3 @,@ 100 km ) route roughly followed the Oregon and California Trails to Fort Bridger in Wyoming , and then the Mormon Trail ( known as the Hastings Cutoff ) to Salt Lake City , Utah . From there it followed the Central Nevada Route to Carson City , Nevada before passing over the Sierra into Sacramento , California . 
 The route started at St. Joseph , Missouri on the Missouri River , it then followed what is modern @-@ day U.S. Highway 36 ( US 36 the Pony Express Highway ) to Marysville , Kansas , where it turned northwest following Little Blue River to Fort Kearny in Nebraska . Through Nebraska it followed the Great Platte River Road , cutting through Gothenburg , Nebraska , clipping the edge of Colorado at <unk> , Colorado , and passing Courthouse Rock , Chimney Rock , and Scotts Bluff , before arriving at Fort Laramie in Wyoming . From there it followed the Sweetwater River , passing Independence Rock , Devil 's Gate , and Split Rock , to Fort Caspar , through South Pass to Fort Bridger and then down to Salt Lake City . From Salt Lake City it generally followed the Central Nevada Route blazed by Captain James H. Simpson of the Corps of Topographical Engineers in 1859 . This route roughly follows today 's US 50 across Nevada and Utah . It crossed the Great Basin , the Utah @-@ Nevada Desert , and the Sierra Nevada near Lake Tahoe before arriving in Sacramento . Mail was then sent via steamer down the Sacramento River to San Francisco . On a few instances when the steamer was missed , riders took the mail via horseback to Oakland , California . 
 = = = Stations = = = 
 There were 184 stations along the long and arduous route used by the Pony Express . The stations and station keepers were essential to the successful , timely and smooth operation of the Pony Express mail system . The stations were often fashioned out of existing structures , several of them located in military forts , while others were built anew in remote areas where living conditions were very basic . The route was divided up into five divisions . To maintain the rigid schedule , 157 relay stations were located from 5 to 25 miles ( 8 to 40 km ) apart as the terrain would allow for . At each swing station , riders would exchange their tired mounts for fresh ones , while " home stations " provided room and board for the riders between runs . This technique allowed the mail to be whisked across the continent in record time . Each rider rode about 75 miles ( 120 km ) per day . 
 = = First journeys = = 
 = = = Westbound = = = 
 The first Westbound Pony Express trip left St. Joseph on April 3 , 1860 and arrived ten days later in San Francisco , California , on April 14 . These letters were sent under cover from the East to St. Joseph , and never directly entered the U.S. mail system . Today there is only a single letter known to exist from the inaugural westbound trip from St. Joseph , Missouri to San Francisco , California . The mailing depicted below is on a pre @-@ stamped ( embossed ) envelope , first issued by the U.S. Post Office in 1855 , used five years later here . 
 The messenger delivering the mochila from New York and Washington , DC , missed a connection in Detroit and arrived in Hannibal , Missouri , two hours late . The railroad cleared the track and dispatched a special locomotive called Missouri with a one @-@ car train to make the 206 @-@ mile ( 332 km ) trek across the state in a record 4 hours 51 minutes , an average of 40 miles per hour ( 64 km / h ) . It arrived at Olive and 8th Street , a few blocks from the company 's new headquarters in a hotel at <unk> House at 12th and Penn Street and the company 's nearby stables on Penn Street . The first pouch contained 49 letters , five private telegrams , and some papers for San Francisco and intermediate points . 
 St. Joseph Mayor M. Jeff Thompson , William H. Russell , and Alexander Majors gave speeches before the mochila was handed off . The ride began at about 7 : 15 p.m. The St. Joseph Gazette was the only newspaper included in the bag . 
 The identity of the first rider has long been in dispute . The St. Joseph Weekly West ( April 4 , 1860 ) reported Johnson William Richardson was the first rider . Johnny Fry is credited in some sources as the rider . Nonetheless , the first westbound rider carried the pouch across the Missouri River ferry to Elwood , Kansas . The first horse @-@ ridden leg of the Express was only about 1 ⁄ 2 mile ( 800 m ) from the Express stables / railroad area to the Missouri River ferry at the foot of Jules Street . Reports indicated that horse and rider crossed the river . In later rides , the courier crossed the river without a horse and picked up his mount at a stable on the other side . 
 The first westbound mochila reached its destination , San Francisco , on April 14 , at 1 : 00 a.m. 
 = = = Eastbound = = = 
 The first eastbound Pony Express trip left San Francisco , California , on April 3 , 1860 and arrived at its destination ten days later in St. Joseph , Missouri . From St. Joseph , letters were placed in the U.S. mails for delivery to eastern destinations . There are only two letters known to exist from the inaugural eastbound trip from San Francisco to St. Joseph . 
 = = Mail = = 
 As the Pony Express Mail service existed only briefly in 1860 and 1861 there are consequently very few surviving examples of Pony Express mail . Also , contributing to the scarcity of surviving Pony Express mail is that the cost to send a 1 ⁄ 2 @-@ ounce ( 14 g ) letter was $ 5 @.@ 00 at the beginning , ( about $ 130 @.@ 00 to today 's standards ) . By the end period of the Pony Express , the price had dropped to $ 1 @.@ 00 per 1 ⁄ 2 ounce but even that was considered expensive ( equivalent to $ 26 in 2015 ) just to mail one letter . As this mail service was also a frontier enterprise , removed from the general population in the east , along with the largely unaffordable rates , there are consequently few pieces of surviving Pony Express mail in the hands of collectors and museums . There are only 250 known examples of Pony Express mail . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Various postmarks were added to mail to be carried by the Pony Express at the point of departure . 
 = = Fastest mail service = = 
 William Russell , senior partner of ' Russell , Majors , and Waddell ' and one of the biggest investors in the Pony Express , used the 1860 presidential election as a way to promote the Pony Express and how fast it could deliver the U.S. Mail . Prior to the election , Russell hired extra riders to ensure that fresh riders and relay horses were available along the route . On November 7 , 1860 , a Pony Express rider departed Fort Kearny , Nebraska Territory ( the end of the eastern telegraph line ) with the election results . Riders sped along the route , over snow @-@ covered trails and into Fort Churchill , Nevada Territory ( the end of the western telegraph line ) . California 's newspapers received word of Lincoln 's election only seven days and 17 hours after the East Coast papers , an unrivaled feat at the time . 
 = = Attacks = = 
 The Paiute War was a minor series of raids and ambushes initiated by the Paiute Indian tribe in Nevada , which resulted in the disruption of mail services of the Pony Express . It took place from May through June 1860 , though sporadic violence continued for a period afterward . In the brief history that the Pony Express operated only once did the mail not go through . After completing eight weekly trips from both Sacramento and Saint Joseph , the Pony Express was forced to suspend mail services because of the outbreak of the Paiute Indian War in May 1860 . 
 Approximately 6 @,@ 000 Paiutes in Nevada had suffered during a winter of fierce blizzards that year . By spring , the whole tribe was ready to embark on a war , except for the Paiute chief named <unk> . For three days <unk> fasted and argued for peace . Meanwhile , a raiding party attacked Williams Station , a Pony Express station located on the Carson River near present @-@ day Lake Lahontan . One account says the raid was a deliberate attempt to provoke war . Another says the raiders had heard that men at the station had kidnapped two Paiute women , and fighting broke out when they went to investigate and free the women . Either way , the war party killed five men and the station was burned . 
 During the following weeks , other isolated incidents occurred when whites in Paiute country were ambushed and killed . The Pony Express was a special target . Seven other express stations were also attacked ; some 16 employees were killed and approximately 150 express horses were either stolen or driven off . The Paiute war cost the Pony Express company about $ 75 @,@ 000 in livestock and station equipment , not to mention the loss of life . In June of that year , the Paiute uprising had been ended through the intervention of U.S. government troops , after which four delayed mail shipments from the East were finally brought to San Francisco on June 25 , 1860 . 
 During this brief war , one Pony Express mailing , which left San Francisco on July 21 , 1860 , did not immediately reach its destination . That mail pouch ( mochila ) did not reach St. Joseph and subsequently New York until almost two years later . 
 = = Famous riders = = 
 In 1860 , riding for the Pony Express was difficult work — riders had to be tough and lightweight . A famous advertisement allegedly read : 
 Wanted : Young , skinny , wiry fellows not over eighteen . Must be expert riders , willing to risk death daily . Orphans preferred 
 The Pony Express had an estimated 80 riders who were traveling east or west along various points of the route at any given time . In addition , there were also about 400 other employees , including station keepers , stock tenders and route superintendents . Many young men applied for jobs with the Pony Express , all eager to face the dangers and the challenges that sometimes lay along the delivery route . Waddell and Majors could have easily hired them at a much lesser rate , but instead paid them a handsome sum for that time of one hundred dollars a month . Famous American author Mark Twain , who saw the Pony Express in action first hand , described the riders in his travel memoir <unk> It as : " ... usually a little bit of a man " . Though the riders were small , lightweight , generally teenage boys , their untarnished record proved them to be heroes of the American West for the much needed and dangerous service they provided for the nation . Establishing a complete list of riders is virtually impossible . There was no official list of riders kept by the express company and the scarcity of newspapers along the route contributed to the absence of this information . When the American Civil War broke out in 1861 , the Pony Express was forgotten about almost entirely , and consequently there was not much interest in pursuing and searching out this information for many years following , by which time much of it had simply vanished in the course of everyday affairs . A partial list of riders has been compiled in Raymond and Nancy Settle 's 1972 book Saddles & Spurs . 
 = = = First riders = = = 
 The identity of the first westbound rider to depart St. Joseph has been disputed , but currently most historians have narrowed it down to either Johnny Fry or Billy Richardson . Both <unk> were hired at St. Joseph for A. E. Lewis ' Division which ran from St. Joseph to Seneca , Kansas , a distance of 80 miles ( 130 km ) . They covered at an average speed of 12 1 ⁄ 2 miles per hour ( 20 km / h ) , including all stops . Before the mail pouch was delivered to the first rider on April 3 , 1860 , time was taken out for ceremonies and several speeches . First , Mayor M. Jeff Thompson gave a brief speech on the significance of the event for St. Joseph . Then William H. Russell and Alexander Majors addressed the gala crowd about how the Pony Express was just a " precursor " to the construction of a transcontinental railroad . At the conclusion of all the speeches , approximately 7 : 15 p.m. , Russell turned the mail pouch over to the first rider . A cannon fired , the large assembled crowd cheered , and the rider dashed to the landing at the foot of Jules Street where the ferry boat Denver , under a full head of steam , alerted by the signal cannon , waited to carry the horse and rider across the Missouri River to Elwood , Kansas Territory . On April 9 at 6 : 45 p.m. , the first rider from the east reached Salt Lake City , Utah . Then , on April 12 , the mail pouch reached Carson City , Nevada at 2 : 30 p.m. The riders raced over the Sierra Nevada Mountains , through Placerville , California and on to Sacramento . Around midnight on April 14 , 1860 , the first mail pouch was delivered via the Pony Express to San Francisco . Bringing with it was a letter of congratulations from President Buchanan to California Governor Downey along with other official government communications , newspapers from New York , Chicago , and St. Louis , along with other important mail to banks and commercial houses in San Francisco . In all , 85 pieces of mail were delivered on this first trip . 
 James Randall is credited as the first eastbound rider from the San Francisco Alta telegraph office since he was on the steamship Antelope to go to Sacramento . Mail for the Pony Express left San Francisco at 4 : 00 pm , carried by horse and rider to the waterfront , and then on by steamboat to Sacramento where it was picked up by the Pony Express rider . At 2 : 45 a.m. , William ( Sam ) Hamilton was the first Pony Express rider to begin the journey from Sacramento . He rode all the way to Sportsman Hall Station where he gave his mochila filled with mail to Warren Upson . A California Registered Historical Landmark plaque at the site reads : 
 This was the site of Sportsman 's Hall , also known as the Twelve @-@ Mile House . The hotel operated in the late 1850 's and 1860 's by John and James Blair . A stopping place for stages and teams of the Comstock , it became a relay station of the central overland Pony Express . Here , at 7 : 40 a.m. , April 4 , 1860 , Pony rider William ( Sam ) Hamilton , riding in from Placerville , handed the Express mail to Warren Upson who , two minutes later , sped on his way eastward . 
 = = = William Cody = = = 
 Probably more than any other rider in the Pony Express , William Cody ( better known as Buffalo Bill ) epitomizes the legend and the folklore , be it fact or fiction , of the Pony Express . Numerous stories have been told of young Cody 's adventures as a Pony Express rider . At the age of 15 Cody was on his way west to California when he met Pony Express agents along the way and signed on with the company . Cody helped in the construction of several way @-@ stations . Thereafter , he was employed as a rider and was given a short 45 @-@ mile ( 72 km ) delivery run from the township of <unk> which lay to the west . After some months he was transferred to Slade 's Division in Wyoming where he made the longest non @-@ stop ride from Red Buttes Station to Rocky Ridge Station and back when he found that his relief rider had been killed . The distance of 322 miles ( 518 km ) over one of the most dangerous sections of the entire trail was completed in 21 hours and 40 minutes , and 21 horses were required to complete this section . Cody was present for many significant chapters in early western history , including the gold rush , the building of the railroads and cattle herding on the Great Plains . A career as a scout for the Army under General Phillip Sheridan following the Civil War earned him his nickname and established his notoriety as a frontiersman . 
 = = = Robert Haslam = = = 
 Robert Haslam ( Pony Bob ) was among the most brave , resourceful , and best @-@ known riders of the Pony Express . He was born January 1840 in London , England , and came to the United States as a teenager . Haslam was hired by Bolivar Roberts , helped build the stations , and was given the mail run from Friday 's Station at Lake Tahoe to Buckland 's Station near Fort Churchill , 75 miles ( 121 km ) to the east . 
 His greatest ride , 120 miles ( 190 km ) in 8 hours and 20 minutes while wounded , was an important contribution to the fastest trip ever made by the Pony Express . The mail carried Lincoln 's inaugural address . Indian problems in 1860 led to Pony Bob Haslam 's record @-@ breaking ride . He had received the eastbound mail ( probably the May 10 mail from San Francisco ) at Friday 's Station . When he reached Buckland 's Station his relief rider was so badly frightened over the Indian threat that he refused to take the mail . Haslam agreed to take the mail all the way to Smith 's Creek for a total distance of 190 miles ( 310 km ) without a rest . After a rest of nine hours , he retraced his route with the westbound mail where , at Cold Springs , he found that Indians had raided the place , killing the station keeper and running off all of the stock . On the ride he was shot through the jaw with an Indian arrow , losing three teeth . Finally , he reached Buckland 's Station , making the 380 @-@ mile ( 610 km ) round trip the longest on record . 
 Pony Bob continued to work as a rider for Wells Fargo and Company after the Civil War , scouted for the U.S. Army well into his fifties , and later accompanied his good friend Buffalo Bill Cody on a diplomatic mission to negotiate the surrender of Chief Sitting Bull in December 1890 . He drifted in and out of public mention but eventually died in Chicago during the winter of 1912 ( age 72 ) in deep poverty after suffering a stroke . Buffalo Bill paid for his friend 's headstone at Mount <unk> Cemetery ( 111 Street and Sacramento ) on Chicago 's far south side . 
 = = = Jack Keetley = = = 
 Jack Keetley was hired by A. E. Lewis for his Division at the age of nineteen , and put on the run from Marysville to Big Sandy . He was one of those who rode for the Pony Express during the entire nineteen months of its existence . 
 Jack Keetley 's longest ride , upon which he doubled back for another rider , ended at Seneca where he was taken from the saddle sound asleep . He had ridden 340 miles ( 550 km ) in thirty @-@ one hours without stopping to rest or eat . After the Pony Express was disbanded , Keetley went to Salt Lake City where he engaged in mining . He died there on October 12 , 1912 where he was also buried . 
