 In 1907 , Keetley wrote the following letter ( excerpt ) : 
 Alex Carlyle was the first man to ride the Pony Express out of St. Joe . He was a nephew of the superintendent of the stage line to Denver , called the " Pike 's Peak Express . " The superintendent 's name was Ben <unk> . Carlyle was a consumptive , and could not stand the hardships , and retired after about two months trial , and died within about six months after retiring . John Frye was the second rider , and I was the third , and Gus Cliff was the fourth . 
 I made the longest ride without a stop , only to change horses . It was said to be 300 miles and was done a few minutes inside of twenty @-@ four hours . I do not vouch for the distance being correct , as I only have it from the division superintendent , A.E. Lewis , who said that the distance given was taken by his English <unk> which was attached to the front wheel of his buggy which he used to travel over his division with , and which was from St. Joe to Fort Kearney . 
 = = = Billy Tate = = = 
 Billy Tate was a 14 @-@ year @-@ old Pony Express rider who rode the express trail in Nevada near Ruby Valley . During the Paiute uprising of 1860 he was chased by a band of Paiute Indians on horseback and was forced to retreat into the hills behind some rocks where he killed seven of his assailants in a shoot @-@ out before being killed himself . His body was found riddled with arrows but was not scalped , a sign that the Paiutes honored their enemy . 
 = = Horses = = 
 An estimated 400 horses in total were used by the Pony Express to deliver the mail . Horses were selected for swiftness and endurance . On the east end of Pony Express route the horses were usually selected from U.S. Cavalry units . At the west end of the Pony Express route in California , W.W. Finney purchased 100 head of short coupled stock called " California Horses " ' while A.B. Miller purchased another 200 native ponies in and around the Great Salt Lake Valley . The horses were ridden quickly between stations , an average distance of 15 miles ( 24 km ) , and then were relieved and a fresh horse would be exchanged for the one that just arrived from its strenuous run . 
 During his route of 80 to 100 miles ( 130 to 160 km ) , a Pony Express rider would change horses 8 to 10 times . The horses were ridden at a fast trot , canter or gallop , around 10 to 15 miles per hour ( 16 to 24 km / h ) and at times they were driven to full gallop at speeds up to 25 miles per hour ( 40 km / h ) . Horses of the Pony Express were purchased in Missouri , Iowa , California , and some western U.S. territories . 
 The various types of horse ridden by riders of the Pony Express included Morgans and thoroughbreds which were often used on the eastern end of the trail . Mustangs were often used on the western ( more rugged ) end of the mail route . 
 = = Saddle = = 
 In 1844 , years before the Pony Express came to St. Joseph , Israel Landis opened a small saddle and harness shop there . His business expanded as the town grew , and when the Pony Express came to town Landis was the ideal candidate to produce saddles for the newly founded Pony Express . Because Pony Express riders rode their horses at a quick pace over a distance of 10 miles ( 16 km ) or more between stations , every consideration was made to reduce the overall weight the horse had to carry . To help reduce this load , special lightweight saddles were designed and crafted . Using less leather and fewer metallic and wood components they fashioned a saddle that was similar in design to the regular stock saddle generally in use in the West at that time . 
 The mail pouch was a separate component to the saddle that made the Pony Express unique . Standard mail pouches for horses were never employed because of their size and shape , as it was time consuming detaching and attaching it from one saddle to the other , causing undue delay in changing mounts . With many stops to make , the delayed time at each station would accumulate to appreciable proportions . To get around this difficulty , a mochila , or covering of leather , was thrown over the saddle . The saddle horn and <unk> projected through holes which were specially cut to size in the mochila . Attached to the broad leather skirt of the mochila were four cantinas , or box @-@ shaped hard leather compartments , where letters were carried on the journey . 
 = = Closing = = 
 During its brief time in operation , the Pony Express delivered approximately 35 @,@ 000 letters between St. Joseph , Missouri , and Sacramento , California . Although the Pony Express proved that the central / northern mail route was viable , Russell , Majors and Waddell did not get the contract to deliver mail over the route . The contract was instead awarded to Jeremy <unk> in March 1861 , who had taken over the southern Congressionally favored Butterfield Overland Mail Stage Line . The so @-@ called ' Stagecoach King ' , Ben Holladay , acquired the Russell , Majors and Waddell stations for his stagecoaches . 
 Shortly after the contract was awarded , the start of the American Civil War caused the stage line to cease operation . From March 1861 , the Pony Express ran mail only between Salt Lake City and Sacramento . The Pony Express announced its closure on October 26 , 1861 , two days after the transcontinental telegraph reached Salt Lake City and connected Omaha , Nebraska , and Sacramento , California . Other telegraph lines connected points along the line and other cities on the east and west coasts . 
 The Pony Express grossed $ 90 @,@ 000 and lost $ 200 @,@ 000 . 
 In 1866 , after the Civil War was over , Holladay sold the Pony Express assets along with the remnants of the Butterfield Stage to Wells Fargo for $ 1 @.@ 5 million . 
 = = Commemorations = = 
 In 1869 the United States Post Office issued the first U.S. Postage stamp to depict an actual historic event , and the subject that was chosen was the Pony Express . Until then only the faces of George Washington , Benjamin Franklin , Thomas Jefferson and Andrew Jackson were found on the face of U.S. Postage . Sometimes mistaken for an actual stamp used by the Pony Express , the ' Pony Express Stamp ' issue was released in 1869 ( 8 years after the Pony Express service had ended ) to honor the men who rode the long and sometimes dangerous journeys and to commemorate the service they provided for the nation . In 1940 and 1960 commemorative stamps were issued for the 80th and 100th anniversaries of the Pony Express respectively . 
 National Pony Express Association ( <unk> ) is a non @-@ profit , volunteer @-@ led historical organization . Its purpose is to preserve the original Pony Express trail and to continue the memory and importance of Pony Express in American history in partnership with the National Park Service , Pony Express Trail Association , and the Oregon @-@ California Trails Association . 
 April 3 , 2010 was the Pony Express ' 150th anniversary . Located in St. Joseph , Missouri , the <unk> House Museum , which was the Pony Express ' headquarters , hosted events celebrating the anniversary . 
 = = = Historical research = = = 
 The foundation of accountable Pony Express history rests in the few tangible areas where records , papers , letters and mailings have yielded the most historical evidence . Until the 1950s most of what was known about the short @-@ lived Pony Express was the product of a few accounts , hearsay and folklore , generally true in their overall aspects , but lacking in verification in many areas for those who wanted to explore the history surrounding the founders , the various riders and station keepers or who were interested in stations or Forts along the Pony Express route . 
 The most complete books on the Pony Express are The Story of the Pony Express and Saddles and Spurs by Raymond & Mary Settle and Roy Bloss . Settle 's account is unique as he was the first writer and historical researcher to make use of Pony Express founder William B. Waddell 's papers , now in a collection at the Huntington Library in San Marino , California . Mr. Settle wrote in the mid @-@ 1950s . Mr. Bloss was a writer for the Pony Express Centennial . While Settle 's work was published generally without his annotations and notes , the writer 's background here is unique and Settle does have an excellent bibliography . When Settle prepared to publish his well @-@ researched account he had a good volume of footnotes , citations prepared , but the editors chose not to use most of them . Instead , they opted for a less expensive approach to print and publish and released an accurate , but simplified account . Settle was not pleased with this new and sudden development , as he put much time and effort into the annotations . Yet , the account Settle wrote was and is a definitive one and is considered the best account on the history of the Pony Express amongst many historians . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Wells Fargo used the Pony Express logo for its guard and armored car service . The logo continued to be used when other companies took over the security business into the 1990s . From 2001 , the Pony Express logo is no longer used for security businesses since the business has been sold . 
 The United States Postal Service has trademarked " Pony Express " along with " Air Mail " . 
 The Pony Express route has been designated the Pony Express National Historic Trail . Approximately 120 historic sites along the trail may eventually be open to the public , including 50 stations or station ruins . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 The continued remembrance and popularity of the Pony Express can be linked to Buffalo Bill Cody , his autobiographies , and his Wild West Show . The first book dedicated solely to the Pony Express was not published until 1900 . However , in his first autobiography , published in 1879 , Cody claims to have been an Express rider . While this claim has recently come under dispute , his show became the " primary keeper of the pony legend " when it premiered as a scene in the Wild West Show . 
 = = = Film = = = 
 The Pony Express ( 1925 ) 
 Frontier Pony Express ( 1939 ) 
 Pony Post ( 1940 ) 
 Plainsman and the Lady ( 1946 ) 
 Pony Express ( 1953 ) 
 Last of the Pony Riders ( 1953 ) 
 The Pony Express Rider ( 1976 ) 
 Days of the Pony Express ( 2008 ) 
 Spirit of the Pony Express ( 2012 ) 
 = = = Television = = = 
 The Range Rider ( 1951 – 1953 ) season 1 episode " The Last of the Pony Express " 
 Pony Express ( 1959 – 1960 ) 
 Bonanza ( 1959 – 1973 ) season 7 two @-@ part episode " Ride the Wind " 
 The Young Riders ( 1989 – 1992 ) 
 Into the West ( 2005 ) 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Tea & Sympathy ( Bernard Fanning album ) = 
 Tea & Sympathy is the debut solo album by Australian musician Bernard Fanning . It was released on 31 October 2005 by Dew Process records while Powderfinger — Fanning 's main band — were on hiatus . Contrary to Powderfinger 's usual alternative style , the album blends alternative and country @-@ folk music . Most of the record was written after the cancer related death of his brother in 2002 . His brother 's death coincided with the end of Fanning 's twelve @-@ year relationship with his partner and both events were instrumental in his move away from his typically political and socially lyrical subject matter . 
 Fanning recorded four songs at his home studio in Brisbane and the rest at Real World Studios near Bath , England . Fanning worked with producer Tchad Blake in both sessions . To support the album 's release Fanning toured Australia twice and performed across North America and the UK . 
 " Tea & Sympathy " topped the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) albums chart and won three awards at the 2006 ARIA Awards , as well as an APRA Award and a J Award . 
 = = Background and production = = 
 After the 2004 release of Fingerprints : The Best of Powderfinger , 1994 @-@ 2000 , Powderfinger took a hiatus , and several members played in the side projects Drag and The Predators . Fanning decided to work independently and acted on direction he felt unable to explore as a member of Powderfinger . Some of his inspiration was derived from a will to see if he was capable of recording a solo album , considering what he viewed as his limited guitar playing abilities ; compared to bandmates Darren Middleton and Ian Haug . The distance from the band , coupled with the more relaxed writing process for Tea & Sympathy helped Fanning to unwind from the stress leftover from 10 years working recording and touring with Powderfinger . 
 Fanning wanted to create a politically oriented album with which he could attack then Prime Minister of Australia John Howard , following Howard 's 2004 election victory over Mark Latham . However , the death of Fanning 's brother from cancer in 2002 , coupled with the end of a twelve @-@ year relationship saw him steer the album in a different direction . Fanning explained that after going through " a pretty weird time in the past twelve months " , he did not intend to talk about his experiences , but to express them through music . The motivation for some songs came from the 2005 Big Day Out ; disappointment with the antisocial nature of the event and the heavy metal music played spurred him to " make music that was the opposite of that " . 
 Fanning worked with producer Tchad Blake and was funded by record label Dew Process . Sessions for the album began in February 2005 when Fanning and several other musicians recorded tracks at Blake 's Brisbane studio . Four of these — " Not Finished Just Yet " , " Believe " , " Wash Me Clean " , and " Hope & Validation " — appeared on the album after being mixed by Blake . The other tracks were recorded and mixed at Real World Studios near Bath , England . In Bath , Fanning worked with musicians including Jerry Marotta , Keith Duffy , and John <unk> . While writing Fanning listened to music of guitarists Lightning Hopkins , Tom Petty , and singer @-@ songwriter Gillian Welch , who all influenced his work . " I 'd love to play guitar like that , but I simply don 't have the skill to do it " , said Fanning of Hopkins ' work . 
 The album 's title comes from a saying which Fanning explained to The Age as " you offer someone tea and sympathy , you sit down with them , have a cup of tea and you just talk . " He noted that there is a credit on an album by The Rolling Stones for the provision of " tea and sympathy " . The album cover photography and album inlay photography is by Ami Barwell 
 = = Touring and promotion = = 
 Fanning toured much of Australia to support Tea & Sympathy . Prior to the launch of two major tours , Fanning held a number of low @-@ key album launch shows . These drew praise from critics — Time Off 's Ben Preece reported , " The chemistry between the Powderfinger frontman and his band ( nicknamed The Gap Jazz School Choir ) is excellent and their constant in @-@ between song banter is hilarious . Then , of course , there ’ s the music . " He commended the multiple genre changes during the 90 @-@ minute performance , as well as Fanning 's vocal showcase . 
 The Which Way Home ? tour , named after the album 's sixth track , was announced on 2 December 2005 , and lasted from through February to March 2006 . Fanning performed in Sydney , Canberra , Adelaide , Melbourne , Hobart , Perth and Brisbane . He was joined on tour by Perth band The Panics and Brisbane singer Andrew Morris . On 11 August , Fanning announced that tours across the United States and Canada would follow the album 's 8 August North American release . An 11 September UK release was also announced with Dew Process revealing that numerous London shows had already been sold out . 
 Performances in London attracted much expatriate support ; Fanning joked , " I think I have about 14 English fans " . The performances were received positively ; musicOMH 's Barnaby Smith rated his 4 September showing at London 's Arts Theatre four stars , commenting on Powderfinger @-@ esque " loud , anthemic , guitar @-@ driven rock in a ' 70s vein " , and praising Fanning 's utilisation of the piano and guitar as part of his performance , as well as his dedicating the song " Give It All Up " to the recently deceased Steve Irwin . 
 = = Album and single releases = = 
 Tea & Sympathy was released in Australia on 31 October 2005 , in North America on 11 August 2006 , and in the United Kingdom on 18 September 2006 . The album peaked at number one on Australia 's ARIA Albums Chart and number 11 on New Zealand 's RIANZ Albums Chart . The Australian Record Industry Association has since certified Tea & Sympathy platinum five times over for sales in excess of 350 @,@ 000 units . 
 " Wish You Well " was the first single released from the album . Although it did not chart in Australia , it peaked at number 24 in New Zealand , and topped the Triple J Hottest 100 , 2005 . The inspiration for the song came to Fanning when he woke one morning , " and ' Wish You Well ' just arrived in a splurge . There were swallows flying around . I was in an unusually positive frame of mind . " musicOMH 's Barnaby Smith described " Wish You Well " as reminiscent of Daryl Braithwaite and a " basic song with [ a ] catchy chorus you might sing round a campfire " . The online release " Songbird " was the album 's second single . The song was broadly popular , and contributed to Fanning 's winning " Songwriter of the Year " at the 2006 APRA Awards . " Songbird " won " Most Performed Blues and Roots Work " at the 2007 ceremony and was nominated for " Most Performed Australian Work " . The single did not appear on the ARIA Singles Chart , but peaked at number 11 on the Australian national airplay charts . It also reached number 14 on the Triple J Hottest 100 , 2005 . 
 " Watch Over Me " was released as the final single on 24 June 2006 . All proceeds from the single were passed on to Australian charity Youngcare . Fanning also toured with Kasey Chambers , again giving proceeds to the charity . Fanning said that " the aim of this show and the single release is to raise money for Youngcare but also to raise awareness of the terrible situation that these young people face " , referring to children forced to live in aged facilities . " Watch Over Me " spent eight weeks on the ARIA Singles Chart , where it peaked at number 16 . The song was performed by Fanning , Chambers , and Clare Bowditch at the 2006 ARIA Awards . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 I realised about three songs into writing it how insulting that was to people who write country music ... someone like me trying to make a country record . 
 — Bernard <unk> why he abandoned his plan to make a purely country record . 
 The country @-@ folk @-@ alternative blend on Tea & Sympathy formed a stark contrast to Powderfinger 's last work , Vulture Street — the band 's heaviest work yet . Initially intended to be a purely country album , Fanning abandoned the prospect shortly into the writing phase because he did not think he was able to make music of the quality he had expected . He thus turned to an amalgamation of country , rock , and folk elements . Fanning considered Powderfinger music to " always [ have ] a song that just kind of grabs you " but doubted his album had similar elements ; instead he focused on an album that as a whole would move the listener . The album is primarily acoustic — " Which Way Home ? " a notable exception — and features fiddles and mandolins for backing music . The album centres on themes of love , in the context of the recent end to Fanning 's relationship . Only three songs on the album exceed four minutes , while four are less than three minutes long ; Fanning was critical of the " convention that a song should go on for 3 [ and a half ] , four minutes " . 
 Opening track " Thrill is Gone " was written by Fanning as a joke about a hypothetical ending in his relation with rock music . The song is reminiscent of 70s country / folk Led Zeppelin , setting the mood for the rest of the album . Numerous songs on the album are influenced by Neil and Tim Finn ; " Believe " , " Sleeping Rough " , " The Strangest Thing " , and " Wish You Well " all have comparisons drawn to the brothers . " Not Finished Just Yet " and " Songbird " , meanwhile , are reminiscent of Neil Young — a long @-@ term Powderfinger influence . " Wish You Well " , " Not Finished Just Yet " , and " Yesterday 's Gone " were noted as examples of " Fanning frankly prodding and probing matters of the heart " by dB . 
 On " Wash Me Clean " , Fanning aimed to imitate Nick Drake ; songs that " you to sleep because they 've got so much air and space in them " . This came as a contrast to the louder , more vocal Powderfinger work he was accustomed to . " Watch Over Me " , released and promoted in support of Australian charity Youngcare , was one of the slowest and most emotional songs on the album — The Age 's Daniel <unk> described it as " emotionally wrenching " . It was written alongside " Believe " following the 2005 Big Day Out . Sometimes construed as a relationships @-@ based song , " Watch Over Me " was written by Fanning after watching Pope John Paul II 's funeral . " Down To The River " was equally slow in portions , mixed in with sections of " searing , heart @-@ rending pleading " — praised as the best song Fanning had written by musicOMH 's Barnaby Smith . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Tea & Sympathy was awarded " Best Cover Art " and " Album of the Year " at the 2006 ARIA Music Awards ; it was also nominated for " Best Blues & Roots Album " and " Highest Selling Album " . " Wish You Well " won " Best Video " , while " Watch Over Me " was nominated for " Single of the Year " . " Wish You Well " topped the Triple J Hottest 100 , 2005 , and was the most broadcast song on Australian radio in 2006 . Fanning won " Best Male Artist " for his work on the album , and as part of his acceptance speech challenged fellow Australian musicians to write protest songs — something they had been criticised for a lack of by ARIA Hall of Fame inductee Rob Hirst . Tea & Sympathy was nominated for the inaugural J Award in 2005 , and Fanning won " Songwriter of the Year " at the 2006 APRA Awards . MTV Australia named Tea & Sympathy " Album of the Year " at its 2006 Video Music Awards . 
 Tea & Sympathy 's critical reception was moderate . It was generally seen as being less entertaining than Fanning 's Powderfinger work — The Age said Powderfinger were a " rock band ingrained in the national psyche " like Cold Chisel , but that Tea & Sympathy showed little resemblance to Cold Chisel frontman Jimmy Barnes 's groundbreaking debut album , <unk> . Barnaby Smith of musicOMH said the album was not " a work to suggest [ Fanning 's ] solo career might better Powderfinger " . The BBC 's Jenna Bachelor wrote that the album is " pleasant enough without pulling up any trees " . 
 Despite Fanning 's claims he could not write a country song , the Australian Broadcasting Corporation ( ABC ) and BBC drew comparisons to Neil Young and supergroup Crosby , Stills , Nash & Young . The ABC said Tea & Sympathy resembled the band 's work , " though without the hippy , drippy lyrics " , while the BBC observed a " harmony porch style sound " highly similar to that of Young . Allmusic wrote that " Fanning 's influences are strictly old school " , noting Manassas ' self @-@ titled album and Elton John 's Tumbleweed Connection as similar . 
 Fanning 's vocals drew praise ; Allmusic 's Andy Whitman said he was a " fine , soulful singer " whose " vocal presence alone merits attention " . Other aspects of the album , though , were seen in a more negative <unk> musicOMH said songs like " Wash Me Clean " " simply lack a strong enough melody " , while the BBC wrote that Fanning " might have to be happy with ' straight in at 101 , ' in the UK " despite topping the ARIA Albums Chart . The Age concluded its review by calling Tea & Sympathy " a low @-@ key but worthy personal offering " . 
 In October 2010 , Tea & Sympathy ( 2005 ) was listed in the book , 100 Best Australian Albums . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 " Thrill Is Gone " – 3 : 11 
 " Wish You Well " – 2 : 31 
 " Not Finished Just Yet " – 3 : 17 
 " Songbird " – 2 : 36 
 " Believe " – 3 : 07 
 " Which Way Home ? " – 3 : 21 
 " Wash Me Clean " – 2 : 37 
 " Hope & Validation " – 3 : 09 
 " Sleeping Rough " – 4 : 34 
 " The Strangest Thing " – 3 : 14 
 " Further Down the Road " – 4 : 41 
 " Down to the River " – 4 : 13 
 " Yesterday 's Gone " – 2 : 34 
 " Watch Over Me " – 3 : 31 
 " Weekend of Mystery " ( iTunes bonus release ) – 3 : 26 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = = Chart procession and succession = = 
 = Your Love Is My Drug = 
 " Your Love Is My Drug " is a song by American singer @-@ songwriter Kesha , taken from her debut studio album , Animal ( 2010 ) . It was released as the album 's third single on May 14 , 2010 . The song was written by Kesha and Pebe Sebert , with Ammo , who co @-@ produced the song with Dr. Luke and Benny Blanco . " Your Love Is My Drug " ' s initial writing took place during a plane ride . Kesha stated the song had a carefree message and was not meant to be taken too seriously . The song 's inspiration came from Kesha and her ex @-@ boyfriend ; it is about their psychotic relationship with their love for one another being compared to a drug . According to Kesha , the song sounds happy but also contains a dark undertone , of an obsession for someone and is about being heartbroken . 
 Prior to the release of Animal , the song charted in the United States , the United Kingdom , and Canada . After being released as a single the song reached the top five in Australia and the United States , as well as reaching the top ten in Canada . It has gone on to sell over three million copies in the US alone . 
 Kesha performed the song alongside " Tik Tok " on the 35th season of Saturday Night Live where she was covered in glow in the dark tribal @-@ like make @-@ up . In the music video , Kesha is portrayed in the desert while being chased around by her love interest . The main idea behind the video is being so in love with someone that you lose your head , comparable to love being a drug . The video features a digital animation sequence which was inspired by The Beatles ' Yellow Submarine . 
 = = Writing and inspiration = = 
 " Your Love Is My Drug " was written by Kesha , alongside her mother Pebe Sebert and Joshua Coleman . The song was produced by Dr. Luke , Benny Blanco and Ammo . In an interview with MTV , Kesha stated the song was " written on an airplane , in like 10 minutes " and that the song had a carefree message ; it is " stupid and fun " and not to be taken too seriously . When asked about the final line of the song ( " I like your beard " ) and where it came from , Kesha explained , " I 've always been into bearded dudes . Hello , I 'm from Nashville , I 'm into hillbillies [ ... ] the redneck look is hot right now , and that 's great for me . I 'm over dudes trying to look like they 're in boy bands . " Kesha later elaborated explaining the song 's inspiration , 
 " It ’ s about me and my ex @-@ boyfriend , and our tumultuous , psychotic relationship . We ’ d act weird , like drug addicts with each other , calling and seeing each other all the time . I was in love at the time , and ( the song ) sounds pretty happy , but it ’ s a little bit of a dark song . You ’ re so obsessed with somebody you start acting like a weirdo . … I write about falling in love , being in love , breaking up because he ’ s a loser , being heartbroken . I not only sing about getting rowdy , but love . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Your Love Is My Drug " is a midtempo song drawing from the electropop and dance @-@ pop genres . The song combines heavy Auto @-@ Tune that is layered with a heavy electronic backdrop . Kesha opens the track singing " Maybe I need some rehab / Or maybe just need some sleep / I 've got a sick obsession , I 'm seeing it in my dreams " while she depicts the tale of a teen love obsession . Her vocals throughout the song have been described as a shouty sing @-@ speak style . Sara Anderson of AOL Radio called the song a " bubblegum track " that fuses elements of " ’ 80s glam rock " , with " Kesha 's signature auto @-@ tuned vocals and casual chatty ad @-@ libs " . Kesha ends the song saying " Your love is my drug ... I like your beard , " which was inspired by her ideal man . According to sheet music published at Musicnotes , the song is written in common time with a moderate beat rate of 120 beats per minute . The song is written in the key of F ♯ major and Kesha 's vocal range in the song spans from the note of C ♯ 4 to the note of Eb5 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Fraser McAlpine from BBC complimented the song and Kesha for knowing her way around a strong pop chorus , giving the single four out of five stars . McAlpine noted that " some evidence of range would be welcomed at this point , [ ... ] [ since ] there 's a whole other side to her that you 'd never know if you just listened to the singles " commenting that her persona was the " boozy <unk> card " and that the power ballads on her album could have been better for a release . He went on to conclude " even though her ' act ' is to be far too revealing about her dirty habits , she has still managed to create something of a mystique cloud around herself " . Billboard magazine 's Monica Herrera was impressed with the song , calling it " blissful " . She went on to compliment the song for its strong chorus that has the ability to " stick with the listener for days " . Sara Anderson of AOL Radio called the song " a playful take on a teen love obsession " , complimenting " Kesha 's signature auto @-@ tuned vocals and casual chatty ad @-@ libs " . Anderson commented on the chorus of the song calling it " a modern Cyndi Lauper @-@ inspired chorus " . Nate Adams of No Ripcord was positive in his review of the song , calling it " a fun little disco tune " , and wrote that the singer " isn 't reinventing the wheel by any stretch of the imagination , but she has her share of catchy would @-@ be hits . " 
 Robert Copsey of Digital Spy gave the song four out of five stars , commenting that although she sings through the verses in her " usual speak @-@ sing fashion " , the chorus is " joyously irresistible " . He also brands the song a " bubblegum electro stomper " adding that the song distinguishes itself from her previous singles writing that it manages to " put some distance between the singer and the novelty sound of her previous hits , while still being the fun , trashy and frankly quite filthy " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In January 2010 , due to strong digital sales , the song charted in Canada , the United States , and the United Kingdom , debuting at numbers 48 , 27 , and 63 respectively . In the United States the song was listed for six weeks before dropping off to re @-@ enter at 91 on the week of April 3 , 2010 . After weeks of steadily ascending the charts the single reached a peak of four where it was listed for two weeks . The charting gave her her third straight top @-@ ten hit in the country . On June 9 , 2010 , " Your Love Is My Drug " reached the number one position on the Billboards Pop Songs chart , making Kesha the fifth female artist since the beginning of 2000 , and the third in the last two years , to earn at least two number ones from a debut album . " Your Love Is My Drug " also peaked at number one on Billboard 's Hot Dance Club Songs where it stayed for one week . The song has received 2 × Platinum certification by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for sales of 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 units . As of August 2012 , the song has sold 3 @,@ 110 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . 
 In Canada , the song spent a total of six weeks on the chart before dropping off to re @-@ enter at 98 . After steadily ascending the charts , the song moved up to reach a peak of six . The single fell the following week to the number seven position where it stayed for two weeks . In the succeeding week the song rose to the number six position where it stayed for an additional three weeks . The song entered at number 63 on the UK Singles Chart , dropping off the chart the following week . The single re @-@ entered the chart on the week of May 16 , 2010 , at 60 . On June 19 , 2010 after four weeks of the single climbing the chart , it reached a new peak of 13 . " Your Love Is My Drug " has spent more weeks in the UK top 20 than its higher charting predecessor " Blah Blah Blah " . In New Zealand the song debuted at number 29 and as of the May 17 , 2010 issue it has gone to 15 . The single entered the ARIA Charts at number 25 . The following week , the single moved up to 17 . As of the June 6 , 2010 edition the song has reached a peak of three . It has since been certified Platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for shipments of 70 @,@ 000 units . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for the song was directed by Honey and it was shot on April 6 and April 7 , 2010 , in the Lancaster , California desert . It premiered on Vevo at 12 : 01 a.m. on May 13 , 2010 . Kesha described the concept behind the video in an interview with MTV , stating , " I wanted it to be like a psychedelic trip of the mind , comparable with being so disgustingly in love with someone that you lose your head . " She chose to also incorporate an animal aspect to the video explaining that she was " a huge animal lover " . Kesha elaborated on the experience , " I also ride an elephant — no big deal ! — and , um , I dance around a cave with black @-@ light body paint and a python . I was in a cave , in the desert , and it was really fun . " When asked about the inspiration for the video , she said " This video was inspired by the Beatles ' Yellow Submarine movie , the animation aspect . There 's a little bit of [ that ] in there too " . Her love interest in the clip was portrayed by Marc @-@ Edouard Leon , a member of the directing team Skinny . 
 The video begins with Kesha waking up next to her love interest ; she then proceeds to run away while being chased by the man . Kesha walks through the desert while split scenes of her are shown where she is riding an elephant and wearing a tiger mask while crawling around in the sand . They are later seen on a boat singing and pretending to row while digitally animated water is added . It then cuts to a scene of all animation in which Kesha is portrayed as a mermaid . The mermaid and the man share a kiss ; the video then jumps to a scene on a rocky hillside with Kesha walking around the sand with the man standing above on a rock . The video then cuts to another scene where Kesha is covered in glow in the dark body paint while dancing around in a cave with a python around her neck . The video ends with Kesha and her lover sitting around a campfire while still in the desert . 
 James Montgomery from MTV said that " Your Love Is My Drug " was a " supremely catchy pop tune " and that the video was " the perfectly blissed @-@ out accompaniment . " Montgomery chided the video for " not making much sense " but noted " that hardly matters " as " Kesha has stumbled on a perfect formula for pop success : Don 't think too big , or too much . Sometimes an elephant ride is just an elephant ride " . His conclusion of the video and of Kesha herself was , " It 's a lot harder than you 'd think to make something seem this effortless . Like I said , you can accuse Kesha of many things — but don 't ever say she 's not smart . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 This song was performed on Saturday Night Live on April 17 , 2010 . During the performance , Kesha was covered in tribal @-@ like make @-@ up and performed in the dark with only black light lighting , making the make @-@ up glow in the dark . On May 29 , 2010 , Kesha performed " Your Love Is My Drug " alongside previous single " Tik Tok " at the MTV Video Music Awards Japan . She also performed the song in a set for BBC Radio 1 's Big Weekend . On August 13 , 2010 , Kesha performed " Your Love Is My Drug " on NBC 's Today Show . 
 = = Popular culture = = 
 " Your Love Is My Drug " was featured in one episode of Degrassi : The Next Generation . In Chile , the song was used the promo Chilean TV channel La Red in 2010 Mujeres <unk> . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Songwriting – Kesha Sebert , Pebe <unk> , Joshua Coleman 
 Production – Dr. Luke , Benny Blanco , Ammo 
 Instruments and programming – Dr. Luke , Benny Blanco , Ammo 
 Vocal Editing – Emily Wright 
 Recording – Vanessa Silberman , Megan Dennis , Becky Scott 
 Engineering – Emily Wright , Matt Beckley 
 Source 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = = Certifications = = = 
 = = Radio date and release history = = 
 = Pilot ( Fringe ) = 
 The pilot episode of the television series Fringe premiered on the Fox network on September 9 , 2008 . The pilot was written by series creators J.J. Abrams , Alex Kurtzman , and Roberto Orci , and directed by Alex Graves . The episode introduces the character Olivia Dunham , portrayed by Anna Torv , an FBI special agent drawn into the world of applied fringe science . John Noble portrays Dr. Walter Bishop , a scientist formerly incarcerated in a mental institution for over seventeen years . Joshua Jackson plays his son , Peter , who is hired by Olivia to assist with Walter 's work . 
 Although the pilot was set in and around Boston , filming occurred in Toronto , Canada . The episode cost $ 10 million to produce , making it one of the most expensive pilots in television history . The pilot was leaked online three months prior to its broadcast on television . There was speculation that it was leaked deliberately to increase interest in the program ; however , this was denied by executive producer Bryan Burk . The episode was generally well received by critics , and was watched by 9 @.@ 13 million American viewers on its premiere . It is noted that the pilot is actually two episodes , running together for 81 minutes and counted as only one ( episode ) by the creators and fans . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A man on an international flight injects himself with an insulin pen , which releases a biological agent that quickly kills everyone aboard by causing their flesh to crystallize . The airplane 's autopilot system lands the plane at Boston 's Logan Airport , where various federal agencies create a task force to investigate what occurred during the flight . F.B.I. Special Agent Olivia Dunham ( Torv ) and her partner , Agent Scott ( Mark Valley ) , are together in bed at a motel , where Scott says that he loves her . Dunham receives a call from her boss Charlie Francis ( Kirk Acevedo ) , who tells her to head to the airport . Dunham is added to the interagency task force headed by Phillip Broyles ( Lance Reddick ) . 
 Following a tip , Dunham and Scott are sent to a storage facility where they uncover a biochemical laboratory , which explodes when detonated by a suspect they are chasing . Scott is affected by the chemicals released in the explosion , and is placed into an artificial coma to slow the progression of the chemical reaction . While investigating a possible cure to Scott 's condition , Dunham blackmails Peter Bishop ( Jackson ) to gain access to his father Dr. Walter Bishop ( John Noble ) , whose top @-@ secret work at Harvard in " fringe science " resulted in him being sent to a mental institution . Dunham manages to release Walter from the institution ; however , he becomes enraged when he discovers his laboratory in Harvard has been shut down . Broyles reopens the laboratory , where Dunham transfers Scott 's body . To identify the man from the storage facility , Walter synchronizes Dunham 's brainwaves with the comatose Scott 's so that she can read his mind . Walter claims that syncing brainwaves , and even reanimating the dead , can be accomplished up to six hours after death . With the help of Dunham 's assistant , federal agent Astrid Farnsworth ( Jasika Nicole ) , the experiment succeeds . Dunham identifies the man in Scott 's memory , Morgan Steig , as a passenger on the plane . The team learns Steig 's twin brother , Richard Steig , was an employee of Massive Dynamic , a company founded by William Bell , Walter 's old lab partner . 
 Dunham goes to Massive Dynamic headquarters and meets with executive director Nina Sharp ( Blair Brown ) , who agrees to give her all the information on Steig . The suspect is arrested and initially refuses to provide a list of the ingredients present in the toxin , but Peter 's threat of exposing him to the chemicals causes him to reveal the ingredients . The information provides a cure for Scott . The suspect reveals that he did not sell his chemicals , but was forced into what he did by someone from Dunham 's office . The suspect leads Dunham to a buried tape recording of his phone conversations about the chemicals and the attack , where Dunham realizes that Scott was involved with the attack from the beginning . While she races back to the hospital , Scott awakens and kills the suspect . He is chased by Dunham , but crashes his car and is mortally wounded . Before he dies , Scott asks Dunham why Broyles would send her to investigate the storage units in the first place . Dunham convinces the Bishops to stay and help her with her new work , which Broyles describes as a task force to investigate events related to " the pattern " . Elsewhere , Scott 's dead body is brought to a Massive Dynamic high @-@ tech lab , where Sharp orders that Scott be interrogated , since he has only been dead for five hours . 
 = = Production = = 
 Co @-@ creator J.J. Abrams ' inspiration for Fringe came from a range of sources , including the writings of Michael Crichton , the Ken Russell film Altered States , and the television series The X @-@ Files and The Twilight Zone . The specific story for Fringe was developed during long conversations between series creators Abrams , Roberto Orci and Alex Kurtzman . The team was discussing several different options , and the idea behind Fringe appealed to them most because it contained a long @-@ term story and characters ' backstories which were not " evident but alluded to in the pilot " . The team spent a lot of time thinking about the " trifecta of characters " that they needed to have in the series , and why there were uniquely interesting . The creators decided on the idea of a father @-@ son story because it was compelling and accessible , " you don 't necessarily have to know anything about science , because everyone has a parent and everyone has issues with a parent . And I think for us it 's always about coming into it through character " . Orci stated that the series is a combination of a procedural and an " extremely serialized and very <unk> " series , quoting as examples of each , Law & Order and Lost . 
 The first actors cast in the pilot were Kirk Acevedo and Mark Valley in mid January 2008 . John Noble and Lance Reddick were next to be cast , although it was incorrectly believed that Tomas Arana had been cast in Reddick 's role . This was followed by the casting of Anna Torv , Blair Brown and Jasika Nicole . Abrams said that Torv was cast because she was a combination of " sophistication , great talent , amazing looks and a complexity that is the key to the character being an interesting central character " . Kurtzman felt that she was someone " you want to spend time with " , which was critical to a series about science . Joshua Jackson was the last series regular to be cast . Jackson auditioned for the role of James T. Kirk in Abrams ' Star Trek and believed this is what impressed the producer to cast him in his television project . According to Abrams , Jackson 's casting was " very last minute " . 
 While the pilot was set in and around Boston , production was set in Toronto , Canada . The episode cost $ 10 million to produce , making it one of the most expensive pilots in television history . Following the pilot 's filming , production for the series moved to New York . The producers were forced to hire a new cow for the remainder of the season because they were not allowed to travel the original cow from Canada to New York . Production team members noted that they were prepared to paint new cows if viewers noted the differences in spots . 
 Three months prior to its broadcast , an incomplete version of the pilot was released through BitTorrent clients , fueling speculation that it was leaked deliberately to increase interest in the program . Executive producer Burk denied the claims , saying that " we hate putting anything out there until it 's done , and that 's really the reason why you guys didn 't get any advance copies " . Abrams said that while the production crew " freaked out " about the leak , he was pleased that the " response has been much more positive than not , especially for something that wasn 't completed yet " . The broadcast version of the pilot had new scenes added while other scenes were removed ; Abrams also said that there was " tightening and moving some moments here and there " , and the ending was entirely different . Burk also stated that the composer , Michael Giacchino , had not finished his score at the time of the leak , and the most of the featured music was temp music . A variation of a piece of Giacchino 's music called " Hollywood and Vines " used in the pilot was originally featured on Lost , as it was created for that show , also created by Abrams . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Pilot " was watched by 9 @.@ 13 million American viewers , with ratings improving over the course of the episode . The episode garnered a 3 @.@ 2 / 9 Nielsen ratings in the key 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ old demographic , and was the 12th most watched series of the week . The 3 @.@ 2 refers to 3 @.@ 2 % of all people of ages 18 – 49 years old in the U.S. , and the 9 refers to 9 % of all people of ages 18 – 49 years old watching television at the time of the broadcast in the U.S. The pilot officially premiered at the 2008 Television Critics Association tour , where it received mixed to positive reviews from critics . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Metacritic gave the episode a Metascore — a weighted average based on the impressions of a select 25 critical reviews — of 67 , signifying generally favorable reviews . Barry Garron of Hollywood Reporter found it promising because " it is reminiscent of better @-@ of @-@ the @-@ sexes charm " . USA Today 's Robert Bianco said , " what Abrams brings to Fringe is a director 's eye for plot and pace , a fan 's love of sci @-@ fi excitement , and a story @-@ teller 's gift for investing absurd events with real emotions and relatable characters . " Travis Fickett of IGN gave the pilot 7 @.@ 6 out of 10 , calling it " a lackluster pilot that promises to be a pretty good series " . Tim Goodman of San Francisco Chronicle remarked that despite " some flaws in it — mostly from a clash of tones — it still <unk> on creativity , creepiness , fine acting and burgeoning character development " . Chicago Sun @-@ Times ' Misha Davenport called it an " update of The X @-@ Files with the addition of terrorism and the office of Homeland Security . 
 John Doyle of The Globe and Mail called the pilot " splendidly made " . However , Doyle considered the instance of Torv stripping to a bikini " indulgent " , and questioned the wisdom of making " her body an object of scrutiny " in the first episode . Matthew Gilbert of Boston Globe wrote that " after the electrifying start , Fringe unfolds as an uneven , unwieldy piece of work that provides very few chills and thrills " . LA Weekly 's Robert Abele found Fringe is " a smorgasbord of a show , but one a little too synthetically engineered to allow you the chance to discover what it is " . John Leonard of New York was skeptical of the premise and storyline , but found Torv " wonderfully played " her character . Heather Havrilesky of Salon.com felt the plot was too over @-@ the @-@ top , and described Abrams as " the ultimate boyish idiot @-@ savant <unk> ... He can 't exercise a little self @-@ restraint " . 
 The pilot episode was negatively received by the conservative " family values " advocacy group Parents Television Council , who named the show the worst of the week and denounced the " excessive violence and gore " . 
 = Tennis Court ( song ) = 
 " Tennis Court " is a song by New Zealand singer Lorde , taken from her debut album Pure Heroine ( 2013 ) . On 7 June 2013 , the song was released as the album 's second single by Universal Music Group , following " Royals " . Tennis Court EP was also released , comprising three additional tracks . " Tennis Court " served as the fourth single from Pure Heroine in the United States . Written by Lorde and Joel Little and produced by Little , " Tennis Court " combines alternative pop , art pop and electropop genres with elements from downtempo , hip hop and EDM . It features synthesisers and electronic pulses in its composition . The lyrics address Lorde 's new @-@ found fame and criticise the " high life . " 
 " Tennis Court " was well received by critics , who complimented the song 's production and musical style . The single garnered success in Oceania , peaking at number one on the New Zealand singles chart and entering the top thirty chart in Australia . In Europe , it charted in Belgium ( in both Flanders and Wallonia ) , France , the UK and Germany ; the song also appeared on multiple US charts . " Tennis Court " was certified platinum by both the Australian Recording Industry Association and Recorded Music NZ . A music video for the song was directed by Joel <unk> and features Lorde staring into the camera during one continuous shot . To promote Pure Heroine and the song , Lorde performed " Tennis Court " several times , including on Live on Letterman . 
 = = Background and writing = = 
 Lorde was spotted by Universal Music Group ( UMG ) after performing at her school . She signed with UMG at age 13 , and was later paired up with Joel Little . 
 Lorde detailed the writing process for " Tennis Court " was different from that of her other tracks . By and large , Lorde would have a lyric forming before going into the studio to record . Nonetheless , Little and Lorde first wrote the music and the beat , and the lyrics were built on the instant music . According to Little , Lorde developed her songwriting skills on " Tennis Court " , for which she wrote the melody and the whole chorus : 
 " That song was one where we had everything except the chorus . She was sitting in the back of the room while I was working on the music and she was saying , " I think I 've got a chorus idea . " I asked , " Can I hear it ? " and she said , " No , no , no . " She wouldn 't sing it to me and then once she had it , she basically sang the entire chorus as you hear it now . I was like , " Holy shit , this is seriously good . " This was the first time she had this fully formed , amazing idea for a chorus . This is , I don 't know how long into the process , but it was when I was like , " This girl is going to be an amazing songwriter , or has turned into one in a really short amount of time . " Then I just added the " <unk> " and we tweaked a couple things here and there . " 
 = = Distribution = = 
 On 7 June 2013 , " Tennis Court " was released as Pure Heroine 's second single in Australia and New Zealand . On the same day , an extended play — Tennis Court EP — was released digitally in some European countries and physically ( as a 10 @-@ inch vinyl ) on 22 July . The single was released for digital download in Scandinavia on 12 August 2013 , and a 7 @-@ inch vinyl was released in the US on 27 August 2013 . Lava and Republic Records were going to send " Tennis Court " to US modern rock radio on 11 March 2014 and to US contemporary hit radio on 8 April 2014 as the third US radio single , following " Royals " and " Team " . However , its release was cancelled in favour of " Glory and Gore " . Nevertheless , the label later decided to cancel the contemporary hit radio ( CHR ) release of " Glory and Gore " and send " Tennis Court " as originally planned . " Tennis Court " impacted US hot adult contemporary radio and CHR on 21 and 22 April 2014 , respectively . " Tennis Court " was released in the United Kingdom on 12 May 2014 . 
 = = Production and composition = = 
 " Tennis Court " was produced by Joel Little , who recorded it at his Golden Age Studios in Morningside , Auckland . The song was produced using the software Pro Tools ; it is characterised as a downtempo hip hop and EDM @-@ influenced alternative pop , art pop and electropop song . It utilises synthesisers and electronic pulses in its arrangement . The track lasts for a duration of 3 : 18 ( three minutes and eighteen seconds ) . Written in the key of A minor , it has a moderate tempo of 92 beats per minute . Lorde 's vocal range spans one octave , from the low @-@ note of G3 to the high @-@ note of G4 . Billboard editor Jason Lipshutz commented that " Tennis Court " showcases Lorde 's " darker edges of pop music " style . Nick <unk> from Forbes wrote that the track is reminiscent of The Postal Service 's song " The District Sleeps Alone Tonight " , while Siân Rowe from NME compared it to works by Lana Del Rey . An editor from Clash , Joe Zadeh , noted the similarities between " Tennis Court " and The xx 's song " Together . " 
 The lyrics of " Tennis Court " address Lorde 's newly established fame and criticise the " high life . " Lorde said she wrote the song " after having had a glimpse into the music industry , and I was just thinking about how superficial people can be and how we put up all these fronts . " She found the idea of a tennis court " very visually beautiful " and " something I kept coming back to on Tumblr and all that sort of thing " , saying it was " kind of a symbol of nostalgia for me . It was something which was familiar and safe to me . " She also described the song as being " about the town where she grew up and the friends [ with whom ] she would ... hang out all summer . " Paul Lester , writing for The Guardian , compared the song 's lyrical theme to that of two other songs by Lorde : " Royals " and " Million Dollar Bills " ( from The Love Club EP ) . 
 " Tennis Court " opens with Lorde questioning " Don 't you think that is boring how people talk ? " featuring her , in the words of Lester , " sweet , sultry and sour " voice , which suggests " a frictional relationship with the high life . " A critic from Digital Spy , Robert Cospey , wrote that the track " finds [ Lorde ] caught between fame and a more innocent time " with the lines " My head 's filling up fast with wicked games / How can I fuck with fun again when I 'm known ? " The tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek word " Yeah ! " is repeated after each verse . Another lyric , " It 's a new art form showing people how little we care " is described as " perfectly damning the wave of banal hedonism most recently celebrated by the MTV Video Music Awards " , according to Kevin Liedel from Slant Magazine . At the bridge , Lorde sings " I fall apart , with all my heart / And you can watch from your window " , which was described as a " perfect " commentary on the breakdowns of teenage celebrities in an article published by The Huffington Post . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Tennis Court " received critical acclaim from music critics and media outlets . Siân Rowe from NME ranked the EP a seven out of ten , complimenting the song for its " forward @-@ looking genres " and Lorde 's " strong pop vocals . " Emily Yoshida from Grantland labelled it a " <unk> winsome , ever @-@ so @-@ slightly chopped ballad " , while writer Kyle Jaeger for The Hollywood Reporter praised the track 's lyrical content and its catchy melody . " Tennis Court " was picked as one of the standout tracks of Pure Heroine by Stephen Thomas Erlewine from AllMusic , Jon Hadusek from Consequence of Sound , and Time Out editor Nick Levine . In an interview with USA Today , English singer @-@ songwriter Elton John praised " Tennis Court " , describing it as " one of the most touching , beautiful things on earth . " 
 " Tennis Court " debuted at number one on the New Zealand Singles Chart during the week of 17 June 2013 , becoming Lorde 's second number one on the chart ; " Royals " was her first . Spending a total of 21 weeks on the chart , the single was certified double platinum by the Recorded Music NZ ( RMNZ ) for exceeding sales of 30 @,@ 000 copies there . " Tennis Court " became the 19th best selling single of 2013 in New Zealand . In Australia , the track peaked at number 20 on the ARIA Singles Chart , remaining to chart for 22 weeks . It was certified double platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for 70 @,@ 000 copies shipped in the region . In the United States , it peaked at number 71 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart and has sold 355 @,@ 000 copies there , as of April 2014 . It also reached number nine on the US Hot Rock Songs . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The official music video for " Tennis Court " was directed by Joel <unk> , who previously worked with Lorde on the accompanying video for her debut single " Royals " . The video was filmed as a one @-@ shot . Lorde appears in " black clothing , braided hair , and dark lipstick . " It features Lorde staring into the camera as the song plays ; she does not lip sync the lyrics except for the word " Yeah ! " after each verse and during the chorus . The set lighting fades in and out throughout the video . 
 Writing for The Washington Post , <unk> Butler observed a discrepancy between Lorde 's statement that " In a perfect world , [ she ] would never do any interviews , and probably there would be one photo out there of [ her ] " , and the fact that , in the music video , Lorde is " front and center . " Butler viewed the video as " a metaphor for celebrity . " Writing for Ryan Seacrest 's website , Kathleen Perricone complimented the " super simple " clip , which allowed Lorde 's " voice and lyrics [ to ] really shine . " Lindsay Zoladz , of Pitchfork Media , compared the video to that for The Replacements ' " Bastards of Young . " MTV Buzzworthy blogger Luke O 'Neil wrote that the " Tennis Court " video is " a bit unsettling at first , but eventually it starts to make sense . [ Lorde is ] trying to do things a bit differently , and so far it seems like it 's working . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 To promote " Tennis Court " , Lorde held a concert at Le Poisson Rouge in New York and performed the song among others on 6 August 2013 . This was her first US show . On 24 September 2013 , she performed the track at The Fonda Theatre in Los Angeles , California . On 3 October 2013 , Lorde held a concert at the Warsaw Venue in Brooklyn and performed the song among other tracks from the album . On 13 November 2013 , Lorde performed several songs from Pure Heroine during the Live on Letterman to promote the album , including " Tennis Court . " Lorde held a concert at Soho , England and performed a series of songs from her album on 19 November , including " Tennis Court " . The song was also performed by Lorde during the " Almost Acoustic Christmas " event on KROQ @-@ FM radio station on 9 December . 
 Lorde performed " Tennis Court " at the 2014 Billboard Music Awards in May . The following month , she performed a Goth @-@ influenced medley of " Tennis Court " and " Team " at the 2014 MuchMusic Video Awards . Lorde also performed the song during several music festivals . In April , Lorde performed " Tennis Court " at the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival . Around 2014 , she also performed the single live during the Laneway Festival in Sydney , and Lollapalooza Brazil in Sao Paulo . At the Lollapalooza Festival in Grant Park on 1 August 2014 , she performed the track among other songs from Pure Heroine . The performance of Lorde was well received by media outlets , with Billboard picked it as the fifth best performance of the festival , while Rolling Stone deemed it the best part of Lollapalooza in Chicago , writing , " She danced like she was trying to fling her arms off her body , but just as with her voice , the sense that she was in absolute possession of her abilities never waned . She nailed every stomp and every note — but it was clearly fueled by passion , not perfection . " 
 = = Usage and remixes = = 
 " Tennis Court " was played during the 2013 Wimbledon Championships – Women 's Singles Final by British Broadcasting Company ( BBC ) . " Tennis Court " was remixed by Australian musician Flume in 2014 . In July 2014 American producer Diplo released his version , titled the Diplo 's Andre Agassi Reebok Pump Mix . In 2014 , " Tennis Court " was featured in the soundtrack of the PlayStation 4 , Xbox One and Microsoft Windows versions of Grand Theft Auto V. 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = = = Single = = = 
 = = = Tennis Court EP = = = 
 = Lady Bouvier 's Lover = 
 " Lady Bouvier 's Lover " is the twenty @-@ first episode of The Simpsons ' fifth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on May 12 , 1994 . In the episode , Abe Simpson falls in love with Marge 's mother , Jacqueline Bouvier , and they start dating . However , on a night out in town , Mr. Burns takes her away from him . Abe is broken hearted when he learns that Jackie is going to marry Mr. Burns . 
 The episode was written by Bill Oakley and Josh Weinstein , and directed by Wes Archer . It was recorded in October 1993 at the Darryl F. Zanuck Building on the 20th Century Fox lot in West Los Angeles . The episode features cultural references to films such as The Gold Rush and The Graduate , and songs such as " Moonlight Serenade " and " Sing , Sing , Sing " . Since airing , the episode has received mixed reviews from television critics . It acquired a Nielsen rating of 10 @.@ 0 , and was the third highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network the week it aired . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Simpson family gathers to celebrate Maggie 's birthday . After the party , Abe feels depressed , so Marge sets him up for a date with her mother , Jacqueline Bouvier . Eventually , the couple falls in love , which enrages Homer ; his argument is that if the pair married , he and Marge would be brother and sister and the children would look like freaks . To impress Jackie , Abe takes her out on the town , but when he does , Mr. Burns steals her from him . Abe is heartbroken . Mr. Burns declares that he is in love with Jackie , and they are going to get married , against both Marge 's interest . Meanwhile , Bart buys a $ 350 Itchy & Scratchy animation cel with one of Homer 's credit cards . In order to pay Homer back , Bart blackmails Mr. Burns for $ 350 . 
 On the day of the wedding , Mr. Burns and Jackie attempt to marry . However , Abe crashes the ceremony and asks that Jackie marry him instead of Mr. Burns . Partly due to Mr. Burns 's boorish behavior , she decides not to marry either man . Deciding that Jackie 's decision is good enough for him , Abe grabs her and they hop on a bus , leaving Mr. Burns lonely . As the bus pulls away from the stop , " The Sound of Grampa " plays on the bus driver 's radio . Abe shouts to the driver to turn off the noise , but the driver ignores the request . They both take their seats at the back of the bus to view the departing crowd at the church . The screen fades to black as the ballad of " The Sound of Grampa " continues to play in the background . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Lady Bouvier 's Lover " was written by Bill Oakley and Josh Weinstein , and directed by Wes Archer . The episode was inspired by the fact that The Simpsons has many elderly characters , which the writers felt was unique for network television , so they sought to highlight those characters . Originally , the episode was supposed to be about Misery . One of the ideas was that Grampa would get injured on Mr. Burns 's property and get stuck there , leading Grampa to think that Mr. Burns would kill him when he was discovered there . However , this idea was cut out in production because the script was over 85 pages long . 
 The episode was recorded at the Darryl F. Zanuck Building on the 20th Century Fox lot in West Los Angeles , where the cast and crew of The Simpsons gathered on a Monday morning in October 1993 . Before the recording session took part , the main voice actors of the show ( Dan Castellaneta , Harry Shearer , Julie Kavner , Yeardley Smith , Nancy Cartwright , and Hank Azaria ) sat down with executive producer David Mirkin and a crew of writers at a table reading to determine what shape the script was in . There was " genuine hearty laughter at various points " during the script run @-@ through , said Ray Richmond , a reporter for the Los Angeles Daily News . Immediately after the reading , the crew of writers hurried to make script changes based on what got laughs and what did not , while the actors waited impatiently . Mirkin told Richmond that the script would require the equivalent of ten rewrites : " At every step , there are amendments and additions and refinements . " Richmond commented that as the recording session started , the " astounding versatility " of the actors became clear ; " Castellaneta bounces from being Homer to Grampa to Barney without taking a breath and minus any evident vocal similarities . " Mirkin said the episode was also a tour de force for Kavner , who in one scene voices Marge , Marge 's two sisters , and Marge 's mother . He added that even though she enjoyed the process , it was tough on Kavner 's voice because those characters talk with " gravelly voices " . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The episode 's title is a play on the 1928 D. H. Lawrence novel Lady Chatterley 's Lover . Grampa is hassled twice by lawyers representing the estates of deceased entertainers : the first time representing Charlie Chaplin , for his " unauthorized imitation " of the bread roll dancing scene from the 1925 silent film The Gold Rush , and the second time he is approached by them is after imitating Jimmy Durante . Grampa banging on the church window while shouting " Mrs. Bouvier ! " , and the subsequent getaway on the bus , are references to the film The Graduate , as is the closing song , a parody of " The Sound of Silence " by Simon and Garfunkel . Mrs. Bouvier says her friends , Zelda Fitzgerald , Frances Farmer and Sylvia Plath , were jealous of her good looks and it drove them crazy . All three women were known for having been institutionalized , Fitzgerald and Farmer for schizophrenia and Plath for a breakdown that resulted in suicide . Mrs. Bouvier 's favorite tune — played during the dance at the Springfield Community Center and later by Grampa at the wedding — is Glenn Miller 's song " Moonlight Serenade " . The swing tune played during Mrs. Bouvier and Mr. Burns 's dance is the 1936 song " Sing , Sing , Sing " , written by Louis Prima and performed by Benny Goodman . Bart and Lisa sing the 1980s advertising jingle used for Armour and Company 's brand of hot dogs . Everyone then sings the advertising jingle for Chicken Tonight , complete with chicken dance moves . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Lady Bouvier 's Lover " finished 50th in the ratings for the week of May 9 to May 15 , 1994 , with a Nielsen rating of 10 @.@ 0 . The episode was the third highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , following Beverly Hills , 90210 and Melrose Place . 
 Since airing , the episode has received mixed reviews from television critics . DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson called the episode a " generally good program , though not one of the year ’ s best " . Jacobson said he dislikes Marge 's mother ; " she ’ s one of the series ’ less interesting characters , which is probably why she appears so rarely . " However , he thinks Grampa is " always fun " , and " it ’ s nice to see him in an ebullient mood , at least for a while . " Patrick Bromley of DVD Verdict gave the episode a B − grade and said he is " never terribly interested in episodes that revolve around [ Grampa ] Simpson " . He believes Grampa is " great as a background character , but less so when he takes center stage " . He added : " I 'm also especially uninterested in episodes revolving around Marge 's mother . Having said that , this episode does have a number of inspired moments — notably the subplot involving Bart 's pursuit of an Itchy & Scratchy cel , as well as one of the series ' many homages to The Graduate . " Bill Gibron of DVD Talk gave the episode a score of 4 out of 5 . The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , wrote : " Homer 's nightmare vision of Bart , Lisa and Maggie as ordinary kids is a highlight of this especially crazy — surreal jokes , flashbacks and dream sequences whizz by at an alarming rate — installment . " 
 = Fearless ( Taylor Swift song ) = 
 " Fearless " is a country pop song performed by American singer @-@ songwriter Taylor Swift . The song was co @-@ written by Swift in collaboration with Liz Rose and Hillary Lindsey and produced by Nathan Chapman and Swift . " Fearless " was released on January 3 , 2010 by Big Machine Records as the fifth and final single from Swift 's second studio album of the same name ( 2008 ) . Swift composed the song while traveling on tour to promote her eponymous debut album , Taylor Swift ( 2006 ) . She wrote " Fearless " in regard to the fearlessness of falling in love and eventually titled her second studio album after the song . Musically , it contains qualities commonly found in pop rock music and , lyrically , is about a perfect first date . 
 " Fearless " received acclaim from contemporary critics , many of whom complimented it for appealing to different age groups . In the United States , " Fearless " debuted and peaked at number 9 on the Billboard Hot 100 and was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , becoming the first single released after being certified gold by the RIAA . " Fearless " also entered charts in Canada and Spain . Swift performed the song in various venues , some of which were included on the Fearless Tour ( 2009 – 10 ) . Footage from the Fearless Tour performances were used to comprise a music video for " Fearless " , directed by Todd <unk> . The video features both footage of the tour itself and backstage . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Fearless " was written by Swift in collaboration with Liz Rose and Hillary Lindsey and produced by Nathan Chapman alongside Swift . Swift conceived the song while touring as opening act in order to promote her eponymous debut album , Taylor Swift ( 2006 ) . While writing the song , she was not dating anyone or " even in the beginning stages of dating anybody . " She wrote the song after she analyzed the ideology of what was the best first date . While developing " Fearless " , Swift explained the writing process , stating , " I think sometimes when you ’ re writing love songs , you don ’ t write them about what you ’ re going through at the moment , you write about what you wish you had . " The song was composed with two concepts in mind . Swift described the song 's primary concept to be about " the fearlessness of falling in love " , and " no matter how many times you get hurt , you will always fall in love again . " The second , is about the best first date , which Swift stated she hadn 't experienced at the time of writing " Fearless " . After completing the song , Swift deeply deliberated her personal definition of the word " fearless " . To her , " fearless doesn 't mean you 're completely unafraid and it doesn 't mean that you 're bulletproof . It means that you have a lot of fears , but you jump anyway . " That influenced her to title the album Fearless . The song was first released as a promotional single from the album on October 14 , 2008 as part of Countdown to Fearless an exclusive campaign by the iTunes Store ; it was later released as the fifth and final single from Fearless on January 4 , 2010 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Fearless " is four minutes and one second in length . Alexis Petridis of The Guardian described the song 's genre as a " kind of <unk> perfect pop rock " . He said the most country part of the song was a lyric that referenced a " one horse town " . The song is set in common time and has a moderate tempo of 100 beats per minute . It is written in the key of F major and Swift 's vocals span two octaves , from F3 to C5 . It follows the chord progression F – C – Gm – B ♭ -C . Tom Ronald of Great American Country interpreted the song 's message to be about " taking courage on the dating circuit . " In a different perspective , Rob Sheffield of Blender magazine said the lyrics " And I don 't know why but with you / I 'd dance in a storm in my best dress , fearless " demonstrated how Swift enjoyed making a scene . He added that she would not wear " anything else to go ride around in a storm " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Fearless " received critical acclaim for its ability to relate to different age groups . Leah Greenblatt of Entertainment Weekly said Swift 's vocals fit the song 's melody and instrumentation , which , according to her , is " slick " and " radio @-@ friendly " . Heather Phares of Allmusic selected the track as one of the best songs on Fearless . Alice Fisher of the United Kingdom magazine The Observer congratulated " Fearless " for being one of Swift 's " great songs with perceptive lyrics about universal truths that can be enjoyed at any age . " Jim Harrington of The San Jose Mercury News believed " Fearless " contained appeal to different age groups : " Moms and daughters , as well as groups of teens and couples out for a date night , [ can sing ] along with equal gusto . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 Upon its release as a promotional single , on the week ending November 1 , 2008 , " Fearless " debuted and peaked at number nine on the Billboard Hot 100 with sales of 162 @,@ 000 digital downloads , becoming Swift 's third consecutive top ten song on the chart . In the succeeding week , the song fell to number 38 and after four weeks of roaming the Billboard Hot 100 it fell off the charts . Following its single release , the song re @-@ entered the Billboard Hot 100 at number 94 on the week ending March 13 , 2010 . Its highest position on the chart while being released as a single was number 76 on the week ending April 10 , 2010 . The song is one of 13 songs from Fearless charted within the top 40 of the Billboard Hot 100 , breaking the record for the most top 40 entries from a single album . " Fearless " spent a total of 15 weeks ascending and descending the Billboard Hot 100 . " Fearless " also peaked at number ten on the Hot Country Songs , making this her tenth consecutive top ten hit but also her lowest @-@ charting single , and number 18 on the now @-@ defunct Pop 100 . The single was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for the purchase of over 500 @,@ 000 digital downloads . It therefore became the first single released after being certified gold by the RIAA , as a result of digital downloads . As of October 2012 , " Fearless " has sold over 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 copies in the United States , and has since been certified platinum by the RIAA . 
 On the week ending November 29 , 2008 , " Fearless " debuted and peaked at number sixty @-@ nine in Canada , spending a total of five weeks on the chart . The song peaked at number thirty @-@ two in Spain . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Swift 's first televised performance of " Fearless " was on November 10 , 2008 on the Late Show with David Letterman . She went on to perform the song on The Ellen DeGeneres Show and Clear Channel Communications 's Stripped . Swift performed the song on all venues of her first headlining concert tour , the Fearless Tour , which extended from April 2009 to July 2010 . During each performance , Swift escorted a silver sparkly dress and black boots and played an acoustic guitar as floral patterns with a moving butterfly were projected on the stage . Alice Fisher of The Observer attended the May 7 , 2009 concert at Shepherd 's Bush Empire in London and said that while Swift drifted off during the performance , it " clearly made perfect sense to the girls in the audience . " Jocelyn Vena of MTV News reported that the audience loudly sang along to the performance of " Fearless " at the August 27 , 2009 concert at Madison Square Garden in New York City . The song is also performed on the Speak Now World Tour . 
 Various tour performances were used to comprise a music video for " Fearless " , directed by Todd <unk> . The video premiered on February 17 , 2010 on CMT . It begins when Swift tells her band before they step onstage , " You guys , this tour has been the best experience of my entire life . " The video <unk> footage from the tour itself with fans excitedly showing off signs to Swift with behind @-@ the @-@ scenes footage of Swift and her band as they travel on the Fearless Tour . It ends with the singer waving goodbye as she exits the stage . Upon watching the video , Vena interpreted it to be " Swift 's love letter to her fans " , as it showed an " inside view of what it 's like to go on tour " . To date , the video has over 23 million views on YouTube . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 U.S. digital download 
 " Fearless " ( single version ) – 4 : 01 
 U.S. / EU CD single 
 " Fearless " ( radio edit ) – 4 : 01 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Year @-@ end charts = = = 
 = Typhoon Rananim = 
 Typhoon Rananim , known in the Philippines as Typhoon Karen , was the strongest typhoon to make landfall on the Chinese province of Zhejiang since 1956 . It formed on August 6 , 2004 , intensifying into a tropical storm on August 8 . Rananim gradually intensified , initially moving northward before turning to the northwest and attaining typhoon status . After developing a small eye , the typhoon attained peak winds of 150 km / h ( 90 mph ) as it passed between Taiwan and Okinawa . On August 12 , Rananim moved ashore in China , and it dissipated three days later . The name Rananim means " hello " in the Chuukese language . 
 Impact outside of China was minimal and largely limited to heavy rains , although one death was reported in Taiwan . In the country , strong winds and heavy rainfall left heavy damage near the coast , as well as to farms further inland . Rananim destroyed 64 @,@ 300 houses and damaged another 125 @,@ 000 . The typhoon affected 75 counties , affecting 18 million people , and overall damage was estimated at ¥ 20 @.@ 1 billion ( $ 2 @.@ 44 billion 2004 USD , $ 3 @.@ 06 billion 2016 USD ) , primarily in Zhejiang . There were 168 deaths in China , which caused the name Rananim to be retired from the naming list . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Typhoon Rananim were from an area of convection that persisted west @-@ northwest of Guam in early August . The system tracked generally westward in an area of moderate wind shear , maintaining a weak circulation center . On August 6 , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) estimated the system developed into a tropical depression . Shortly before that time , the Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration ( PAGASA ) initiated advisories on the system , giving it the name Karen . 
 Further convective organization occurred as the circulation consolidated , and the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) issued a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert late on August 6 . The next day , the agency initiated advisories on Tropical Depression 16W about 780 km ( 485 mi ) east of the Philippines island of Luzon . Subsequently , the depression maintained a northward track , due to its location along the northwest periphery of a near @-@ equatorial ridge , as well as the presence of a tropical upper tropospheric trough . Although the circulation was broad , the winds intensified enough for the JMA to upgrade the depression to Tropical Storm Rananim on August 8 . 
 Upon intensifying into a tropical storm , Rananim had a better @-@ defined circulation than earlier in its duration ; however , the convection was displaced from the center . The structure gradually organized , with increasing outflow and convective symmetry . On August 9 , the storm turned toward the northwest due to a building ridge the northeast . At 0600 UTC on August 10 , Rananim intensified into a typhoon about 715 km ( 445 mi ) east @-@ southeast of Taiwan . Steady strengthening continued , and the storm passed about 365 km ( 225 mi ) southwest of Okinawa early on August 11 . Shortly thereafter , Rananim left the PAGASA area of warning responsibility . A small eye became evident on satellite imagery , and late on August 11 the JMA estimated the typhoon attained peak winds of 150 km / h ( 90 mph ) . The JTWC , however , assessed Rananim as intensifying slightly more despite decreased outflow , reaching peak winds of 165 km / h ( 105 mph ) . 
 After passing north of Taiwan , Rananim made landfall at peak intensity around 1300 UTC on August 12 , near Wenling in Zhejiang province in China . The China Meteorological Administration reported that the typhoon was the strongest to hit Zhejiang since Typhoon Sally in 1956 . Moving over land , the typhoon quickly weakened to tropical storm status as it turned toward the west . Early on August 13 , the JMA downgraded Rananim to a tropical depression and issued the last warning ; by that time , the circulation was over Jiangxi . The depression lasted another two days before dissipating over northwest Hunan . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 After receiving heavy damage from Typhoon <unk> a month earlier , residents in Taiwan prepared for Rananim by erecting sandbags along flood prone areas , while the Central Weather Bureau advised mariners to be on alert due to the storm . As it passed to the north of the country , the typhoon dropped moderate rainfall , reaching 345 mm ( 13 @.@ 6 in ) in Hsinchu . There was one death on the island . Around the same time as affecting Taiwan , Rananim passed southwest of Okinawa , producing wind gusts up to 176 km / h ( 109 mph ) , as well as heavy rainfall totaling 229 mm ( 9 @.@ 0 in ) on Miyako @-@ jima . 
 Prior to the typhoon 's arrival in China , officials evacuated 467 @,@ 900 people , many of them to government shelters across the region . It was estimated that about 30 % of coastal houses were too weak to withstand the winds from the typhoon . In addition , officials ordered the closure of all restaurants and entertainment venues . Ferry service near Shanghai was disrupted , and 9 @,@ 900 ships were moved to safer areas . In addition , several airports across the region were closed , including in Shanghai . 
 As it moved ashore in Zhejiang , Rananim produced widespread rainfall across the country , primarily along its path . 20 stations reported totals of over 300 mm ( 12 in ) , including Yueqing where rainfall reached 703 @.@ 5 mm ( 27 @.@ 70 in ) in 24 hours , setting a new record . Rananim also produced strong winds as it moved through the region , with a record @-@ breaking gust of 211 km / h ( 131 mph ) reported in the offshore <unk> Islands . Wenling City , where the typhoon moved ashore , reported a peak gust of 192 km / h ( 120 mph ) . High waves were also observed as Rananim made landfall , and a storm tide of 7 @.@ 42 m ( 24 @.@ 3 ft ) in <unk> . 
 Upon moving ashore , Rananim destroyed hundreds of homes near the coast , with destroyed traffic signs and billboards , as well as widespread flooding . Strong winds caused widespread power outages and uprooted thousands of trees . About 64 @,@ 300 houses were destroyed , and another 125 @,@ 000 were damaged , leaving thousands of people homeless . Overall , the typhoon affected 75 counties , with 302 villages isolated due to high water . The combination of strong winds and flooding left heavy crop damage , killing 55 @,@ 000 livestock , primarily cattle , and affecting 4 @,@ 000 km2 ( 1 @,@ 545 mi2 ) of fields ; an estimated 230 km2 ( 89 mi2 ) of crops were destroyed . The typhoon severely impacted the infrastructure along its path , with 1 @,@ 163 km ( 721 mi ) of roads damaged . Further inland , the rains produced a landslide in Yueqing , which destroyed 52 houses and killed 25 people . In Shanghai , about 145 km ( 90 mi ) north of the landfall location , Rananim left little damage , although its rainfall alleviated a heat wave . Across the country , damage was estimated at ¥ 20 @.@ 1 billion ( $ 2 @.@ 44 billion 2004 USD , $ 3 @.@ 06 billion 2016 USD ) , primarily in Zhejiang . 
 Overall , Rananim affected about 18 million people in China . A total of 3 @,@ 321 people were injured , 185 of them seriously . By the day after Rananim moved ashore , the death toll was estimated at 29 , although by the next day the total reached 115 . Four days after landfall , there were 147 known deaths , which increased to 164 the following day . The final death toll was set at 168 , although 24 people were missing as of the last count . Most of the deaths were from collapsed houses , with others due to flooding , landslides , or flying debris . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Immediately after Rananim dissipated , the government of China allocated ¥ 61 million ( $ 7 @.@ 4 million 2004 USD ) for the affected people . Officials deployed over 200 members of the People 's Liberation Army to assist in rescues . They used steel bars , ropes , and their hands to search through rubble for storm survivors . At the same time , utility crews worked to restore power and water in the affected areas . A few weeks after the typhoon , an earthquake and another typhoon struck the same region as Rananim had , creating additional flooding , damage , and deaths . The series of natural disasters stretched the resources of the local agencies , although the local Red Cross was still able to provide food , clothing , and blankets . The agency also launched appeals for additional relief supplies . The affected storm victims collectively received 50 tons of rice , 500 kg ( 1 @,@ 100 lb ) of pork , and 500 kg ( 1 @,@ 100 lb ) of salt , vegetables , and water . A damaged school in Yueqing required additional buildings to be built for classes to resume by September . An estimated 85 % of the destroyed homes were built before or during the 1980s , compared to 10 % built in the 1990s . As a result , the government rebuilt homes across the affected area to higher building standards in order to mitigate future losses from typhoons . 
 Due to the heavy damage in China , the name Rananim was retired during the 38th session of the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific and World Meteorological Organization typhoon committee in November 2005 ; it was replaced with the name <unk> . The name <unk> was later also retired in 2010 and replaced with Rai . Rananim was the eighth Pacific typhoon to be retired . 
 = American Sign Language = 
 American Sign Language ( ASL ) is the predominant sign language of Deaf communities in the United States and most of anglophone Canada . Besides North America , dialects of ASL and ASL @-@ based creoles are used in many countries around the world , including much of West Africa and parts of Southeast Asia . ASL is also widely learned as a second language , serving as a lingua franca . ASL is most closely related to French Sign Language ( LSF ) . It has been proposed that ASL is a creole language of LSF , although ASL shows features atypical of creole languages , such as agglutinative morphology . 
 ASL originated in the early 19th century in the American School for the Deaf ( ASD ) in Hartford , Connecticut , from a situation of language contact . Since then , ASL use has propagated widely via schools for the deaf and Deaf community organizations . Despite its wide use , no accurate count of ASL users has been taken , though reliable estimates for American ASL users range from 250 @,@ 000 to 500 @,@ 000 persons , including a number of children of deaf adults . ASL users face stigma due to beliefs in the superiority of oral language to sign language , compounded by the fact that ASL is often glossed in English due to the lack of a standard writing system . 
 ASL signs have a number of phonemic components , including movement of the face and torso as well as the hands . ASL is not a form of pantomime , but iconicity does play a larger role in ASL than in spoken languages . English loan words are often borrowed through fingerspelling , although ASL grammar is unrelated to that of English . ASL has verbal agreement and aspectual marking , and has a productive system of forming agglutinative classifiers . Many linguists believe ASL to be a subject @-@ verb @-@ object ( SVO ) language , but there are several alternative proposals to account for ASL word order . 
 = = Classification = = 
 ASL emerged as a language in the American School for the Deaf ( ASD ) , founded in 1817 . This school brought together Old French Sign Language , various village sign languages , and home sign systems ; ASL was created in this situation of language contact . ASL was influenced by its forerunners but distinct from all of them . 
 The influence of French Sign Language ( LSF ) on ASL is readily apparent ; for example , it has been found that about 58 % of signs in modern ASL are cognate to Old French Sign Language signs . However , this is far less than the standard 80 % measure used to determine whether related languages are actually dialects . This suggests that nascent ASL was highly affected by the other signing systems brought by the ASD students , despite the fact that the school 's original director Laurent Clerc taught in LSF . In fact , Clerc reported that he often learned the students ' signs rather than conveying LSF : 
 I see , however , and I say it with regret , that any efforts that we have made or may still be making , to do better than , we have inadvertently fallen somewhat back of Abbé de l <unk> . Some of us have learned and still learn signs from uneducated pupils , instead of learning them from well instructed and experienced teachers . 
 It has been proposed that ASL is a creole with LSF as the <unk> language and with the native village sign languages as substrate languages . However , more recent research has shown that modern ASL does not share many of the structural features that characterize creole languages . ASL may have begun as a creole and then undergone structural change over time , but it is also possible that it was never a creole @-@ type language . There are modality @-@ specific reasons that sign languages tend towards agglutination , for example the ability to simultaneously convey information via the face , head , torso , and other body parts . This might override creole characteristics such as the tendency towards isolating morphology . Additionally , Clerc and Gallaudet may have used an artificially constructed form of manually coded language in instruction rather than true LSF . 
 Although the United States , the United Kingdom , and Australia share English as a common oral and written language , ASL is not mutually intelligible with British Sign Language ( BSL ) or Auslan . All three languages show degrees of borrowing from English , but this alone is not sufficient for cross @-@ language comprehension . It has been found that a relatively high percentage ( 37 – 44 % ) of ASL signs have similar translations in Auslan , which for oral languages would suggest that they belong to the same language family . However , this does not seem justified historically for ASL and Auslan , and it is likely that this resemblance is due to the higher degree of iconicity in sign languages in general , as well as contact with English . 
 American Sign Language is growing in popularity among many states . Many people in high school and colleges wanting to take it as a foreign language , but until recently , it was not a creditable foreign language elective . The issue was that many didn 't consider it a foreign language . ASL users , however , have a very distinct culture and way they interact when talking . Their facial expressions and hand movements reflect what they are conveying . They also have their own sentence structure which sets the language apart . 
 American sign language is now being accepted by many colleges as a foreign language credit ; many states are making it mandatory to accept it . 
 = = History = = 
 Prior to the birth of ASL , sign language had been used by various communities in the United States . In the United States , as elsewhere in the world , hearing families with deaf children have historically employed ad @-@ hoc home sign , which often reaches much higher levels of sophistication than gestures used by hearing people in spoken conversation . As early as 1541 at first contact by Francisco Vásquez de Coronado , there were reports that the Plains Indians had developed a sign language to communicate between tribes of different languages . 
 In the 19th century , a " triangle " of village sign languages developed in New England : one in Martha 's Vineyard , Massachusetts ; one in Henniker , New Hampshire , and one in Sandy River Valley , Maine . Martha 's Vineyard Sign Language ( MVSL ) , which was particularly important for the history of ASL , was used mainly in Chilmark , Massachusetts . Due to intermarriage in the original community of English settlers of the 1690s , and the recessive nature of genetic deafness , Chilmark had a high 4 % rate of genetic deafness . MVSL was used even by hearing residents whenever a deaf person was present . 
 ASL is thought to have originated in the American School for the Deaf ( ASD ) , founded in Hartford , Connecticut in 1817 . Originally known as The American Asylum , At Hartford , For The Education And Instruction Of The Deaf And Dumb , the school was founded by the Yale graduate and divinity student Thomas Hopkins Gallaudet . Gallaudet , inspired by his success in demonstrating the learning abilities of a young deaf girl Alice Cogswell , traveled to Europe in order to learn deaf pedagogy from European institutions . Ultimately , Gallaudet chose to adopt the methods of the French Institut National de Jeunes <unk> de Paris , and convinced Laurent Clerc , an assistant to the school 's founder Charles @-@ Michel de l <unk> , to accompany him back to the United States . Upon his return , Gallaudet founded the ASD on April 15 , 1817 . 
 The largest group of students during the first seven decades of the school were from Martha 's Vineyard , and they brought MVSL with them . There were also 44 students from around Henniker , New Hampshire , and 27 from the Sandy River valley in Maine , each of which had their own village sign language . Other students brought knowledge of their own home signs . Laurent Clerc , the first teacher at ASD , taught using French Sign Language ( LSF ) , which itself had developed in the Parisian school for the deaf established in 1755 . From this situation of language contact , a new language emerged , now known as ASL . 
 More schools for the deaf were founded after ASD , and knowledge of ASL spread to these schools . In addition , the rise of Deaf community organizations bolstered the continued use of ASL . Societies such as the National Association of the Deaf and the National Fraternal Society of the Deaf held national conventions that attracted signers from across the country . This all contributed to ASL 's wide use over a large geographical area , atypical of a sign language . 
 Up to the 1950s , the predominant method in deaf education was <unk> – acquiring oral language comprehension and production . Linguists did not consider sign language to be true " language " , but rather something inferior . Recognition of the legitimacy of ASL was achieved by William Stokoe , a linguist who arrived at Gallaudet University in 1955 when this was still the dominant assumption . Aided by the civil rights movement of the 1960s , Stokoe argued for <unk> , the use of sign language in deaf education . Stokoe noted that sign language shares the important features that oral languages have as a means of communication , and even devised a transcription system for ASL . In doing so , Stokoe revolutionized both deaf education and linguistics . In the 1960s , ASL was sometimes referred to as " <unk> " , but this term is now considered obsolete . 
 = = Population = = 
 Counting the number of ASL signers is difficult because ASL users have never been counted by the American census . The ultimate source for current estimates of the number of ASL users in the United States is a report for the National Census of the Deaf Population ( <unk> ) by Schein and Delk ( 1974 ) . Based on a 1972 survey of the <unk> , Schein and Delk provided estimates consistent with a signing population between 250 @,@ 000 and 500 @,@ 000 . The survey did not distinguish between ASL and other forms of signing ; in fact , the name " ASL " was not yet in widespread use . 
 Incorrect figures are sometimes cited for the population of ASL speakers in the United States based on misunderstandings of known statistics . Demographics of the deaf population have been confused with those of ASL use , since adults who become deaf late in life rarely use ASL in the home . This accounts for currently cited estimations which are greater than 500 @,@ 000 ; such mistaken estimations can reach as high as 15 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . A 100 @,@ 000 @-@ person lower bound has been cited for ASL users ; the source of this figure is unclear , but it may be an estimate of <unk> deafness , which is correlated with but not equivalent to signing . 
 ASL is sometimes incorrectly cited as the third- or fourth @-@ most @-@ spoken language in the United States . These figures misquote Schein and Delk ( 1974 ) , who actually concluded that ASL speakers constituted the third @-@ largest population requiring an interpreter in court . Although this would make ASL the third @-@ most used language among monolinguals other than English , it does not imply that it is the fourth @-@ most @-@ spoken language in the United States , since speakers of other languages may also speak English . 
 = = Geographic distribution = = 
 ASL is used throughout Anglo @-@ America . This contrasts with Europe , where a variety of sign languages are used within the same continent . The unique situation of ASL seems to have been caused by the proliferation of ASL through schools influenced by the American School for the Deaf , wherein ASL originated , and the rise of community organizations for the Deaf . 
 Throughout West Africa , ASL @-@ based sign languages are spoken by educated deaf adults . These languages , imported by boarding schools , are often considered by associations to be the official sign languages of their countries , and are named accordingly , e.g. Nigerian Sign Language , Ghanaian Sign Language . Such signing systems are found in Benin , Burkina Faso , Ivory Coast , Ghana , Liberia , Mauritania , Mali , Nigeria , and Togo . Due to lack of data , it is still an open question how similar these sign languages are to the variety of ASL used in America . 
 In addition to the aforementioned West African countries , ASL is reported to be used as a first language in Barbados , Bolivia , Cambodia , the Central African Republic , Chad , China ( Hong Kong ) , the Democratic Republic of the Congo , Gabon , Jamaica , Kenya , Madagascar , the Philippines , Singapore , and Zimbabwe . ASL is also used as a lingua franca throughout the deaf world , widely learned as a second language . 
 = = Varieties = = 
 Varieties of ASL are found throughout the world . There is little difficulty in comprehension among the varieties of the United States and Canada . 
 Just as there are accents in speech , there are regional accents in sign . People from the South sign slower than people in the North — even people from northern and southern Indiana have different styles . 
 Mutual intelligibility among these ASL varieties is high , and the variation is primarily lexical . For example , there are three different words for English about in Canadian ASL ; the standard way , and two regional variations ( Atlantic and Ontario ) , as shown in the videos on the right . Variation may also be phonological , meaning that the same sign may be signed in a different way depending on the region . For example , an extremely common type of variation is between the handshapes / 1 / , / L / , and / 5 / in signs with one handshape . 
 There is also a distinct variety of ASL used by the Black Deaf community . Black ASL evolved as a result of racially segregated schools in some states , which included the residential schools for the deaf . Black ASL differs from standard ASL in vocabulary , phonology , and some grammatical structure . While African American Vernacular English ( AAVE ) is generally viewed as more innovating than standard English , Black ASL is more conservative than standard ASL , preserving older forms of many signs . Black sign language speakers use more two @-@ handed signs than in mainstream ASL , are less likely to show <unk> lowering of signs produced on the forehead ( e.g. KNOW ) , and use a wider signing space . Modern Black ASL borrows a number of idioms from AAVE ; for instance , the AAVE idiom " I feel you " is <unk> into Black ASL . 
 ASL is used internationally as a lingua franca , and a number of closely related sign languages derived from ASL are used in many different countries . Even so , there have been varying degrees of divergence from standard ASL in these imported ASL varieties . Bolivian Sign Language is reported to be a dialect of ASL , no more divergent than other acknowledged dialects . On the other hand , it is also known that some imported ASL varieties have diverged to the extent of being separate languages . For example , Malaysian Sign Language , which has ASL origins , is no longer mutually comprehensible with ASL and must be considered its own language . For some imported ASL varieties , such as those used in West Africa , it is still an open question how similar they are to American ASL . 
 When communicating with hearing English speakers , ASL @-@ speakers often use what is commonly called Pidgin Signed English ( PSE ) or ' contact signing ' , a blend of English structure with ASL . Various types of PSE exist , ranging from highly English @-@ influenced PSE ( practically <unk> English ) , to PSE which is quite close to ASL lexically and grammatically , but may alter some subtle features of ASL grammar . Fingerspelling may be used more often in PSE than it is normally used in ASL . There have been some constructed sign languages , known as Manually Coded English ( <unk> ) , which match English grammar exactly and simply replace spoken words with signs ; these systems are not considered to be varieties of ASL . 
 Tactile ASL ( TASL ) is a variety of ASL used throughout the United States by and with the deaf @-@ blind . It is particularly common among those with Usher 's syndrome . This syndrome results in deafness from birth followed by loss of vision later in life ; consequently , those with Usher 's syndrome often grow up in the Deaf community using ASL , and later transition to TASL . TASL differs from ASL in that signs are produced by touching the palms , and there are some grammatical differences from standard ASL in order to compensate for the lack of non @-@ manual signing . 
 = = Stigma = = 
 In 2013 the White House published a response to a petition that gained over 37 @,@ 000 signatures to officially recognize American Sign Language as a community language and a language of instruction in schools . The response is titled " there shouldn 't be any stigma about American Sign Language " and addressed that ASL is a vital language for the Deaf and hard of hearing . <unk> associated with sign languages and the use of sign for educating children often lead to the absence of sign during periods in children 's lives when they can access languages most effectively . Scholars such as Beth S. Benedict advocate not only for bilingualism ( using ASL and English training ) but also for early childhood intervention for children who are deaf . 
 The majority of children born to deaf parents are hearing . These children , known as <unk> ( " Children Of Deaf Adults " ) are often more culturally Deaf than deaf children , the majority of whom are born to hearing parents . Unlike many deaf children , <unk> acquire ASL as well as Deaf cultural values and behaviors from birth . These bilingual hearing children may be mistakenly labeled as being " slow learners " or as having " language difficulties " due to preferential attitudes towards spoken language . 
 = = Writing systems = = 
 Although there is no well @-@ established writing system for ASL , written sign language dates back almost two centuries . The first systematic writing system for a sign language seems to be that of Roch @-@ Ambroise Auguste <unk> , developed in 1825 . However , written sign language remained marginal among the public . In the 1960s linguist William Stokoe created Stokoe notation specifically for ASL . It is alphabetic , with a letter or diacritic for every phonemic ( distinctive ) hand shape , orientation , motion , and position , though it lacks any representation of facial expression , and is better suited for individual words than for extended passages of text . Stokoe used this system for his 1965 A Dictionary of American Sign Language on Linguistic Principles . 
 SignWriting , proposed in 1974 by Valerie Sutton , is the first writing system to gain use among the public and the first writing system for sign languages to be included in the Unicode Standard . SignWriting consists of more than 5000 distinct iconic graphs / glyphs . Currently it is in use in many schools for the Deaf , particularly in Brazil , and has been used in international sign language forums with speakers and researchers in more than 40 countries , including Brazil , Ethiopia , France , Germany , Italy , Portugal , Saudi Arabia , Slovenia , Tunisia , and the United States . Sutton SignWriting has both a printed and an electronically produced form so that persons can use the system anywhere that oral languages are written ( personal letters , newspapers and media , academic research ) . The systematic examination of the International Sign Writing Alphabet ( <unk> ) as an equivalent usage structure to the International Phonetic Alphabet for spoken languages has been proposed . According to some researchers , SignWriting is not a phonemic orthography , and does not have a one @-@ to @-@ one map from phonological forms to written forms . This assertion has been disputed and the process for each country to look at the <unk> and create a phonemic / <unk> assignment of features of each sign language was proposed by researchers <unk> . Roberto Cesar Reis da Costa and Madson Barreto in a thesis forum on June 23 , 2014 . The SignWriting community has an open project on Wikimedia Labs to support the various Wikimedia projects on Wikimedia Incubator and elsewhere involving SignWriting . The ASL Wikipedia request was marked as eligible in 2008 and the test ASL Wikipedia has 50 articles written in ASL using SignWriting . 
 The most widely used transcription system among academics is <unk> , developed at the University of Hamburg . Based on Stokoe Notation , <unk> was expanded to about 200 graphs in order to allow transcription of any sign language . Phonological features are usually indicated with single symbols , though the group of features that make up a handshape is indicated collectively with a symbol . 
 Several additional candidates for written ASL have appeared over the years , including <unk> , ASL @-@ <unk> , and <unk> . 
 For English @-@ speaking audiences , ASL is often glossed using English words . These glosses are typically all @-@ capitalized and are arranged in ASL order . For example , the ASL sentence DOG NOW <unk> > IX = 3 CAT , meaning " the dog is chasing the cat " , uses NOW to mark ASL progressive aspect and shows ASL verbal inflection for the third person ( written with > IX = 3 ) . However , glossing is not used to write the language for speakers of ASL . 
 = = Phonology = = 
 Each sign in ASL is composed of a number of distinctive components . A sign may use one hand or both . Each hand assumes a handshape with a particular orientation in a particular location on the body or in the " signing space " , and may involve movement . Changing any one of these may change the meaning of a sign , as illustrated by the ASL signs THINK and <unk> : 
 There are also meaningful non @-@ manual signals in ASL . This may include movement of the eyebrows , the cheeks , the nose , the head , the torso , and the eyes . 
 William Stokoe proposed that these components are analogous to the phonemes of spoken languages . There has also been a proposal that these are analogous to classes like place and manner of articulation . As in spoken languages , these phonological units can be split into distinctive features . For instance , the handshapes / 2 / and / 3 / are distinguished by the presence or absence of the feature [ ± closed thumb ] , as illustrated to the right . ASL has processes of allophony and phonotactic restrictions . There is ongoing research into whether ASL has an analog of syllables in spoken language . 
 = = Grammar = = 
 = = = Morphology = = = 
 ASL has a rich system of verbal inflection . This involves both grammatical aspect — how the action of verbs flows in time — and agreement marking . Aspect can be marked by changing the manner of movement of the verb ; for example , continuous aspect is marked by incorporating rhythmic , circular movement , while punctual aspect is achieved by modifying the sign so that it has a stationary hand position . Verbs may agree with both the subject and the object , and are marked for number and reciprocity . Reciprocity is indicated by using two one @-@ handed signs ; for example , the sign SHOOT , made with an L @-@ shaped handshape with inward movement of the thumb , inflects to SHOOT [ reciprocal ] , articulated by having two L @-@ shaped hands " shooting " at each other . 
 ASL has a productive system of classifiers , which are used to classify objects and their movement in space . For example , a rabbit running downhill would use a classifier consisting of a bent V classifier handshape with a downhill @-@ directed path ; if the rabbit is hopping , the path is executed with a bouncy manner . In general , classifiers are composed of a " classifier handshape " bound to a " movement root " . The classifier handshape represents the object as a whole , incorporating such attributes as surface , depth , and shape , and is usually very iconic . The movement root consists of a path , a direction and a manner . 
 = = = = Fingerspelling = = = = 
 ASL possesses a set of 26 signs known as the American manual alphabet , which can be used to spell out words from the English language . These signs make use of the 19 handshapes of ASL . For example , the signs for ' p ' and ' k ' use the same handshape but different orientations . A common misconception is that ASL consists only of fingerspelling ; although such a method ( Rochester Method ) has been used , it is not ASL . 
 Fingerspelling is a form of borrowing , a linguistic process wherein words from one language are incorporated into another . In ASL , fingerspelling is used for proper nouns and for technical terms with no native ASL equivalent . There are also some other loan words which are <unk> , either very short English words or abbreviations of longer English words , e.g. O @-@ N from English ' on ' , and A @-@ P @-@ T from English ' apartment ' . Fingerspelling may also be used to emphasize a word that would normally be signed otherwise . 
 = = = Syntax = = = 
 The basic word order of ASL is disputed . Most linguists agree that ASL is a subject @-@ verb @-@ object ( SVO ) language with various phenomena affecting this basic word order . Basic SVO sentences are signed without any pauses : 
 FATHER – LOVE – CHILD 
 " The father loves the child . " 
 However , other word orders may also occur , as ASL allows the topic of a sentence to be moved to sentence @-@ initial position , a phenomenon known as <unk> . In object @-@ subject @-@ verb ( OSV ) sentences , the object is <unk> , marked by a forward head @-@ tilt and a pause : 
 <unk> , FATHER – LOVE 
 " The father loves the child . " 
 Even more word orders can be obtained through the phenomenon of subject copy . In subject copy , the subject is repeated at the end of the sentence , accompanied by head nodding , either for clarification or emphasis : 
 FATHER – LOVE – CHILD – FATHERcopy 
 " The father loves the child . " 
 ASL also allows null subject sentences , where the subject is implied rather than stated explicitly . Subjects can be copied even in a null subject sentence , in which the subject is omitted from its original position , yielding a verb @-@ object @-@ subject ( VOS ) construction : 
 LOVE – CHILD – FATHERcopy 
 " The father loves the child . " 
 <unk> , accompanied with a null subject and a subject copy , can produce yet another word order , object @-@ verb @-@ subject ( <unk> ) . 
 <unk> , LOVE – FATHERcopy 
 " The father loves the child . " 
 These properties of ASL allow it a variety of word orders , leading many to question which is the true , underlying , " basic " order . There are several other proposals that attempt to account for the flexibility of word order in ASL . One proposal is that languages like ASL are best described with a topic – comment structure , where words are ordered by their importance in the sentence rather than by their syntactic properties . Another hypothesis is that ASL exhibits free word order , in which syntax is not encoded in word order whatsoever , but can be encoded by other means ( e.g. head nods , eyebrow movement , body position ) . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 A common misconception is that signs are iconically self @-@ explanatory , that they are a transparent imitation of what they mean , or even that they are pantomime . In fact , many signs bear no resemblance to their referent , either because they were originally arbitrary symbols or because their iconicity has been obscured over time . Even so , in ASL iconicity plays a significant role ; a high percentage of signs resemble their referents in some way . This may be due to the fact that the medium of sign — three @-@ dimensional space — naturally allows more iconicity than oral language . 
 In the era of the influential linguist Ferdinand de Saussure , it was assumed that the mapping between form and meaning in language must be completely arbitrary . Although onomatopoeia is a clear exception , since words like ' choo @-@ choo ' bear clear resemblance to the sounds that they mimic , the <unk> approach was to treat these as marginal exceptions . ASL , with its significant inventory of iconic signs , directly challenges this theory . 
 Research on acquisition of pronouns in ASL has shown that children do not always take advantage of the iconic properties of signs when interpreting their meaning . It has been found that when children acquire the pronoun " you " , the iconicity of the point ( at the child ) is often confused , being treated more like a name . This is a similar finding to research in oral languages on pronoun acquisition . It has also been found that iconicity of signs does not affect immediate memory and recall ; less iconic signs are remembered just as well as highly iconic signs . 
 = Common raven = 
 The common raven ( Corvus corax ) , also known as the northern raven , is a large all @-@ black passerine bird . Found across the Northern Hemisphere , it is the most widely distributed of all corvids . There are at least eight subspecies with little variation in appearance , although recent research has demonstrated significant genetic differences among populations from various regions . It is one of the two largest corvids , alongside the thick @-@ billed raven , and is possibly the heaviest passerine bird ; at maturity , the common raven averages 63 centimetres ( 25 inches ) in length and 1 @.@ 2 kilograms ( 2 @.@ 6 pounds ) in mass . Common ravens can live up to 21 years in the wild , a lifespan exceeded among passerines by only a few Australasian species such as the satin bowerbird and probably the <unk> . Young birds may travel in flocks but later mate for life , with each mated pair defending a territory . 
 Common ravens have coexisted with humans for thousands of years and in some areas have been so numerous that people have regarded them as pests . Part of their success as a species is due to their omnivorous diet ; they are extremely versatile and opportunistic in finding sources of nutrition , feeding on carrion , insects , cereal grains , berries , fruit , small animals , and food waste . 
 Some notable feats of problem @-@ solving provide evidence that the common raven is unusually intelligent . Over the centuries , it has been the subject of mythology , folklore , art , and literature . In many cultures , including the indigenous cultures of Scandinavia , ancient Ireland and Wales , Bhutan , the northwest coast of North America , and Siberia and northeast Asia , the common raven has been revered as a spiritual figure or god . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The common raven was one of the many species originally described by Linnaeus in his 18th century work , Systema Naturae , and it still bears its original name of Corvus corax . It is the type species of the genus Corvus , derived from the Latin word for " raven " . The specific epithet , corax / <unk> , is the Ancient Greek word for " raven " or " crow " . 
 The modern English word raven has cognates in all other Germanic languages , including Old Norse ( and subsequently modern Icelandic ) <unk> and Old High German ( h ) <unk> , all which descend from Proto @-@ Germanic * <unk> . An old Scottish word <unk> or <unk> , akin to the French <unk> , has been used for both this bird and the carrion crow . Obsolete collective nouns for a group of ravens ( or at least the common raven ) include " unkindness " and " conspiracy " . In practice , most people use the more generic " flock " . 
 = = = Classification = = = 
 The closest relatives of the common raven are the brown @-@ necked raven ( C. ruficollis ) , the pied crow ( C. albus ) of Africa , and the Chihuahuan raven ( C. cryptoleucus ) of the North American southwest . While some authorities recognized as many as 11 subspecies , others only recognize eight : 
 = = = Evolutionary history = = = 
 The common raven evolved in the Old World and crossed the Bering land bridge into North America . Recent genetic studies , which examined the DNA of common ravens from across the world , have determined that the birds fall into at least two clades : a California clade , found only in the southwestern United States , and a Holarctic clade , found across the rest of the Northern Hemisphere . Birds from both clades look alike , but the groups are genetically distinct and began to diverge about two million years ago . 
 The findings indicate that based on mitochondrial DNA , common ravens from the rest of the United States are more closely related to those in Europe and Asia than to those in the California clade , and that common ravens in the California clade are more closely related to the Chihuahuan raven ( C. cryptoleucus ) than to those in the Holarctic clade . Ravens in the Holarctic clade are more closely related to the pied crow ( C. albus ) than they are to the California clade . Thus , the common raven species as traditionally delimited is considered to be paraphyletic . 
 One explanation for these genetic findings is that common ravens settled in California at least two million years ago and became separated from their relatives in Europe and Asia during an ice age . One million years ago , a group from the California clade evolved into a new species , the Chihuahuan raven . Other members of the Holarctic clade arrived later in a separate migration from Asia , perhaps at the same time as humans . 
 A recent study of raven mitochondrial DNA showed that the isolated population from the Canary Islands is distinct from other populations . The study did not include any individuals from the North African population , and its position is therefore unclear , though its morphology is very close to the population of the Canaries ( to the extent that the two are often considered part of a single subspecies ) . 
 = = Description = = 
 A mature common raven ranges between 54 and 67 cm ( 21 " and 26 " ) long , with a wingspan of 115 to 130 cm ( 45 @-@ 51 " ) . Recorded weights range from 0 @.@ 69 to 2 kg ( 1 @.@ 5 to 4 @.@ 4 lb ) , thus making the common raven one of the heaviest passerines . Birds from colder regions such as the Himalayas and Greenland are generally larger with slightly larger bills , while those from warmer regions are smaller with proportionally smaller bills . Representative of the size variation in the species , ravens from California weighed an average of 784 g ( 1 @.@ 728 lb ) , those from Alaska weighed an average of 1 @,@ 135 g ( 2 @.@ 502 lb ) and those from Nova Scotia weighed an average of 1 @,@ 230 g ( 2 @.@ 71 lb ) . The bill is large and slightly curved , with a culmen length of 5 @.@ 7 to 8 @.@ 5 cm ( 2 @.@ 2 to 3 @.@ 3 in ) , easily one of the largest bills amongst passerines ( perhaps only the thick @-@ billed raven has a noticeably larger bill ) . It has a longish , strongly graduated tail , at 20 to 26 @.@ 3 cm ( 7 @.@ 9 to 10 @.@ 4 in ) , and mostly black iridescent plumage , and a dark brown iris . The throat feathers are elongated and pointed and the bases of the neck feathers are pale brownish @-@ grey . The legs and feet are good @-@ sized , with a tarsus length of 6 to 7 @.@ 2 cm ( 2 @.@ 4 to 2 @.@ 8 in ) . Juvenile plumage is similar but duller with a blue @-@ grey iris . 
 Apart from its greater size , the common raven differs from its cousins , the crows , by having a larger and heavier black beak , shaggy feathers around the throat and above the beak , and a wedge @-@ shaped tail . Flying ravens are distinguished from crows by their tail shape , larger wing area , and more stable soaring style , which generally involves less wing flapping . Despite their bulk , ravens are easily as agile in flight as their smaller cousins . In flight the feathers produce a creaking sound that has been likened to the rustle of silk . The voice of ravens is also quite distinct , its usual call being a deep croak of a much more sonorous quality than a crow 's call . In North America , the Chihuahuan raven ( C. cryptoleucus ) is fairly similar to the relatively small common ravens of the American southwest and is best distinguished by the still relatively smaller size of its bill , beard and body and relatively longer tail . All @-@ black carrion crow ( C. corone ) in Europe may suggest a raven due to their <unk> bill but are still distinctly smaller and have the wing and tail shapes typical of crows . 
 In the Faroe Islands a now extinct colour @-@ morph of this species existed , known as the pied raven . 
 White ravens are occasionally found in the wild . Birds in British Columbia lack the pink eyes of an albino , and are instead leucistic , a condition where an animal lacks any of several different types of pigment , not simply melanin . 
 Common ravens have a wide range of vocalizations which are of interest to ornithologists . <unk> carried out important studies in the early 1960s , recording and photographing his findings in great detail . Fifteen to 30 categories of vocalization have been recorded for this species , most of which are used for social interaction . Calls recorded include alarm calls , chase calls , and flight calls . The species has a distinctive , deep , resonant prruk @-@ prruk @-@ prruk call , which to experienced listeners is unlike that of any other corvid . Its very wide and complex vocabulary includes a high , knocking toc @-@ toc @-@ toc , a dry , grating <unk> , a low guttural rattle and some calls of an almost musical nature . 
 Like other corvids , ravens can mimic sounds from their environment , including human speech . Non @-@ vocal sounds produced by the common raven include wing whistles and bill snapping . <unk> or clicking has been observed more often in females than in males . If a member of a pair is lost , its mate reproduces the calls of its lost partner to encourage its return . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Common ravens can thrive in varied climates ; indeed this species has the largest range of any member of the genus , and one of the largest of any passerine . They range throughout the Holarctic from Arctic and temperate habitats in North America and Eurasia to the deserts of North Africa , and to islands in the Pacific Ocean . In the British Isles , they are more common in Scotland , Wales , northern England and the west of Ireland . In Tibet , they have been recorded at altitudes up to 5 @,@ 000 m ( 16 @,@ 400 ft ) , and as high as 6 @,@ 350 m ( 20 @,@ 600 ft ) on Mount Everest . The population sometimes known as the Punjab raven — described as Corvus corax <unk> ( also spelt <unk> or <unk> ) by Allan Octavian Hume but more often considered synonymous with <unk> — is restricted to the Sindh district of Pakistan and adjoining regions of northwestern India . Except in Arctic habitats , they are generally resident within their range for the whole year . Young birds may disperse locally . 
 Most common ravens prefer wooded areas with large expanses of open land nearby , or coastal regions for their nesting sites and feeding grounds . In some areas of dense human population , such as California in the United States , they take advantage of a plentiful food supply and have seen a surge in their numbers . On coasts , individuals of this species are often evenly distributed and prefer to build their nest sites along sea cliffs . Common ravens are often located in coastal regions because these areas provide easy access to water and a variety of food sources . Also , coastal regions have stable weather patterns without extreme cold or hot temperatures . 
 In general , common ravens live in a wide array of environments but prefer heavily contoured landscapes . When the environment changes in vast degrees , these birds will respond with a stress response . The hormone known as corticosterone is activated by the hypothalamic – pituitary – adrenal axis . <unk> is activated when the bird is exposed to stress , such as migrating great distances . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 Common ravens usually travel in mated pairs , although young birds may form flocks . Relationships between common ravens are often quarrelsome , yet they demonstrate considerable devotion to their families . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 Common ravens are omnivorous and highly opportunistic : their diet may vary widely with location , season and serendipity . For example , those foraging on tundra on the Arctic North Slope of Alaska obtained about half their energy needs from predation , mainly of <unk> rodents , and half by scavenging , mainly of caribou and ptarmigan carcasses . 
 In some places they are mainly scavengers , feeding on carrion as well as the associated maggots and carrion beetles . With large @-@ bodied carrion , which they are not equipped to tear through as well as birds such as hook @-@ billed vultures , they must wait for the prey to be torn open by another predator or flayed by other means . Plant food includes cereal grains , berries and fruit . They prey on small invertebrates , amphibians , reptiles , small mammals and birds . Ravens may also consume the undigested portions of animal feces , and human food waste . They store surplus food items , especially those containing fat , and will learn to hide such food out of the sight of other common ravens . Ravens also raid the food caches of other species , such as the Arctic fox . They sometimes associate with another canine , the grey wolf , as a <unk> , following to scavenge wolf @-@ kills in winter . Ravens are regular predators at bird nests , brazenly picking off eggs , nestlings and sometimes adult birds when they spot an opportunity . They are considered perhaps the primary natural threat to the nesting success of the critically endangered California condor , since they readily take condor eggs and are very common in the areas where the species is being re @-@ introduced . 
 Common ravens nesting near sources of human garbage included a higher percentage of food waste in their diet , birds nesting near roads consumed more road @-@ killed vertebrates , and those nesting far from these sources of food ate more arthropods and plant material . Fledging success was higher for those using human garbage as a food source . In contrast , a 1984 – 1986 study of common raven diet in an agricultural region of south @-@ western Idaho found that cereal grains were the principal constituent of pellets , though small mammals , grasshoppers , cattle carrion and birds were also eaten . 
 One behavior is recruitment , where juvenile ravens call other ravens to a food bonanza , usually a carcass , with a series of loud yells . In Ravens in Winter , Bernd Heinrich posited that this behavior evolved to allow the juveniles to outnumber the resident adults , thus allowing them to feed on the carcass without being chased away . A more mundane explanation is that individuals co @-@ operate in sharing information about carcasses of large mammals because they are too big for just a few birds to exploit . Experiments with baits however show that such recruitment behaviour is independent of the size of the bait . 
 Furthermore , there has been research suggesting that the common raven is involved in seed dispersal . In the wild , the common raven chooses the best habitat and disperses seeds in locations best suited for its survival . 
 = = = Predation = = = 
 Owing to its size , gregariousness and its defensive abilities , the common raven has few natural predators . Predators of its eggs include owls , martens , and sometimes eagles . Ravens are quite vigorous at defending their young and are usually successful at driving off perceived threats . They attack potential predators by flying at them and lunging with their large bills . Humans are occasionally attacked if they get close to a raven nest , though serious injuries are unlikely . There are a few records of predation by large birds of prey . Their attackers in America have reportedly included great horned owls , northern goshawks , bald eagles , golden eagles and red @-@ tailed hawks , it is possible that the two hawks only have attacked young ravens , as had a peregrine falcon who in one instance swooped at a newly fledged raven but was successfully chased off by the parent ravens . In Eurasia , their reported predators include , in addition to golden eagles , Eurasian eagle @-@ owls , white @-@ tailed eagles , Steller 's sea @-@ eagles , eastern imperial eagles and gyrfalcons . Because they are potentially hazardous prey for raptorial birds , raptors must usually take them by surprise and most attacks are on fledgling ravens . More rarely still , large mammalian predators such as lynxes , coyotes and cougars have also attacked ravens . This principally occurs at a nest site and when other prey for the carnivores are scarce . Ravens are highly wary around novel carrion sites and , in North America , have been recorded waiting for the presence of American crows and blue jays before approaching to eat . 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 Juveniles begin to court at a very early age , but may not bond for another two or three years . Aerial acrobatics , demonstrations of intelligence , and ability to provide food are key behaviors of courting . Once paired , they tend to nest together for life , usually in the same location . Instances of non @-@ monogamy have been observed in common ravens , by males visiting a female 's nest when her mate is away . 
 Breeding pairs must have a territory of their own before they begin nest @-@ building and reproduction , and thus aggressively defend a territory and its food resources . Nesting territories vary in size according to the density of food resources in the area . The nest is a deep bowl made of large sticks and twigs , bound with an inner layer of roots , mud , and bark and lined with a softer material , such as deer fur . The nest is usually placed in a large tree or on a cliff ledge , or less frequently in old buildings or utility poles . 
 Females lay between three and seven pale bluish @-@ green , brown @-@ blotched eggs . Incubation is about 18 to 21 days , by the female only . However , the male may stand or crouch over the young , sheltering but not actually brooding them . Young fledge at 35 to 42 days , and are fed by both parents . They stay with their parents for another six months after fledging . 
 In most of their range , egg laying begins in late February . In colder climates , it is later , e.g. April in Greenland and Tibet . In Pakistan , egg @-@ laying takes place in December . Eggs and hatchlings are preyed on , rarely , by large hawks and eagles , large owls , martens and canids . The adults , which are very rarely predated , are often successful in defending their young from these predators , due to their numbers , large size and cunning . They have been observed dropping stones on potential predators that venture close to their nests . 
 Common ravens can be very long @-@ lived , especially in captive or protected conditions ; individuals at the Tower of London have lived for more than 40 years . Lifespans in the wild are considerably shorter at typically 10 to 15 years . The longest known lifespan of a banded wild common raven was 23 years , 3 months . 
 = = = Intelligence = = = 
 Crows , ravens , magpies , and jays are not just feathered machines , rigidly programmed by their genetics . Instead , they are beings that , within the constraints of their molecular inheritance , make complex decisions and show every sign of enjoying a rich awareness . 
 The brains of common ravens count among the largest of any bird species . Specifically , their <unk> is large , for a bird . They display ability in problem @-@ solving , as well as other cognitive processes such as imitation and insight . 
 Linguist Derek Bickerton , building on the work of biologist Bernd Heinrich , has argued that ravens are one of only four known animals ( the others being bees , ants , and humans ) who have demonstrated displacement , the capacity to communicate about objects or events that are distant in space or time from the communication . Young , unmated common ravens roost together at night , but usually forage alone during the day . However , when one discovers a large carcass guarded by a pair of adult ravens , the unmated raven will return to the roost and communicate the find . The following day , a flock of unmated ravens will fly to the carcass and chase off the adults . Bickerton argues that the advent of linguistic displacement was perhaps the most important event in the evolution of human language , and that ravens are the only other vertebrate to share this with humans . 
 One experiment designed to evaluate insight and problem @-@ solving ability involved a piece of meat attached to a string hanging from a perch . To reach the food , the bird needed to stand on the perch , pull the string up a little at a time , and step on the loops to gradually shorten the string . Four of five common ravens eventually succeeded , and " the transition from no success ( ignoring the food or merely yanking at the string ) to constant reliable access ( pulling up the meat ) occurred with no demonstrable trial @-@ and @-@ error learning . " This supports the hypothesis that common ravens are ' inventors ' , implying that they can solve problems . Many of the feats of common ravens were formerly argued to be stereotyped innate behaviour , but it now has been established that their aptitudes for solving problems individually and learning from each other reflect a flexible capacity for intelligent insight unusual among non @-@ human animals . 
 Another experiment proved that some could deceive intentionally at least to other common ravens . 
 Common ravens have been observed calling wolves to the site of dead animals . The wolves open the carcass , leaving the scraps more accessible to the birds . They watch where other common ravens bury their food and remember the locations of each other 's food caches , so they can steal from them . This type of theft occurs so regularly that common ravens will fly extra distances from a food source to find better hiding places for food . They have also been observed pretending to make a cache without actually depositing the food , presumably to confuse onlookers . 
 Common ravens are known to steal and cache shiny objects such as pebbles , pieces of metal , and golf balls . One theory is that they hoard shiny objects to impress other ravens . Other research indicates that juveniles are deeply curious about all new things , and that common ravens retain an attraction to bright , round objects based on their similarity to bird eggs . Mature birds lose their intense interest in the unusual , and become highly <unk> . 
 = = = Play = = = 
 There has been increasing recognition of the extent to which birds engage in play . Juvenile common ravens are among the most playful of bird species . They have been observed to slide down snowbanks , apparently purely for fun . They even engage in games with other species , such as playing catch @-@ me @-@ if @-@ you @-@ can with wolves , otters and dogs . Common ravens are known for spectacular aerobatic displays , such as flying in loops or interlocking talons with each other in flight . 
 They are also one of only a few wild animals who make their own toys . They have been observed breaking off twigs to play with socially . 
 = = Relationship with humans = = 
 = = = Conservation and management = = = 
 Compared to many smaller Corvus species ( such as American crow ) , ravens prefer undisturbed montane or forest habitat or rural areas over urban areas . In other areas , their numbers have increased dramatically and they have become agricultural pests . Common ravens can cause damage to crops , such as nuts and grain , or can harm livestock , particularly by killing young goat kids , lambs and calves . Ravens generally attack the faces of young livestock , but the more common raven behaviour of scavenging may be misidentified as predation by ranchers . 
 In the western Mojave Desert , human settlement and land development have led to an estimated 16 @-@ fold increase in the common raven population over 25 years . Towns , landfills , sewage treatment plants and artificial ponds create sources of food and water for scavenging birds . Ravens also find nesting sites in utility poles and ornamental trees , and are attracted to roadkill on highways . The explosion in the common raven population in the Mojave has raised concerns for the desert tortoise , a threatened species . Common ravens prey upon juvenile tortoises , which have soft shells and move slowly . Despite this , and there being no danger of extinction , the US Congress added ravens to the Migratory Bird Treaty Act of 1918 in 1971 . Plans to control the population have included shooting and trapping birds , as well as contacting landfill operators to ask that they reduce the amount of exposed garbage . A hunting bounty as a method of control was historically used in Finland from the mid @-@ 18th century until 1923 . Culling has taken place to a limited extent in Alaska , where the population increase in common ravens is threatening the vulnerable Steller 's eider ( <unk> <unk> ) . 
 = = = Cultural depictions = = = 
 Across its range in the Northern Hemisphere , and throughout human history , the common raven has been a powerful symbol and a popular subject of mythology and folklore . 
 In some Western traditions , ravens have long been considered to be birds of ill omen , death and evil in general , in part because of the negative symbolism of their all @-@ black plumage and the eating of carrion . In Sweden , ravens are known as the ghosts of murdered people , and in Germany as the souls of the damned . In Danish folklore , <unk> that ate a king 's heart gained human knowledge , could perform great malicious acts , could lead people astray , had superhuman powers , and were " terrible animals " . 
 As in traditional mythology and folklore , the common raven features frequently in more modern writings such as the works of William Shakespeare , and , perhaps most famously , in the poem " The Raven " by Edgar Allan Poe . Ravens have appeared in the works of Charles Dickens , J. R. R. Tolkien , Stephen King , George R. R. Martin and Joan Aiken among others . 
 It continues to be used as a symbol in areas where it once had mythological status : as the national bird of Bhutan ( Kings of Bhutan wear the Raven Crown ) , official bird of the Yukon territory , and on the coat of arms of the Isle of Man ( once a Viking colony ) . 
 The modern unisex given name Raven is derived from the English word " raven " . As a masculine name , Raven parallels the Old Norse Hrafn , and Old English * <unk> , which were both bynames and personal names . 
 = = = = Mythology = = = = 
 In Tlingit and Haida cultures , raven was both a trickster and creator god . Related beliefs are widespread among the peoples of Siberia and northeast Asia . The Kamchatka Peninsula , for example , was supposed to have been created by the raven god <unk> . There are several references to common ravens in the Old Testament of the Bible and it is an aspect of Mahakala in Bhutanese mythology . 
 In Norse mythology , Huginn ( from the Old Norse for " thought " ) and Muninn ( Old Norse for " memory " or " mind " ) are a pair of ravens that fly all over the world , Midgard , and bring the god Odin information . Additionally among the Norse , raven banner standards were carried by such figures as the Jarls of Orkney , King Cnut the Great of England , Norway and Denmark , and Harald Hardrada . In the British Isles , ravens also were symbolic to the Celts . In Irish mythology , the goddess Morrígan alighted on the hero Cú Chulainn 's shoulder in the form of a raven after his death . In Welsh mythology they were associated with the Welsh god Bran the Blessed , whose name translates to " raven . " According to the Mabinogion , Bran 's head was buried in the White Hill of London as a talisman against invasion . 
 A legend developed that England would not fall to a foreign invader so long as there were ravens at the Tower of London ; although this is often thought to be an ancient belief , the official Tower of London historian , Geoff Parnell , believes that this is actually a romantic Victorian invention . 
 In the Jewish , Christian and Islamic traditions , the raven was the first animal to be released from Noah 's Ark . " So it came to pass , at the end of forty days , that Noah opened the window of the ark which he had made . Then he sent out a raven , which kept going to and fro until the waters had dried up from the earth . He also sent out from himself a dove , to see if the waters had receded from the face of the ground . " The raven is mentioned a dozen times in the Bible . In the New Testament Jesus tells a parable using the raven to show how people should rely on God for their needs and not riches ( Luke 12 : 24 ) . The raven is also mentioned in Quran at the story of Cain and Abel . Adam 's firstborn son Cain kills his brother Abel but he doesn 't know what to do with the corpse : " Then Allah sent a raven scratching up the ground , to show him how to hide his brother 's naked corpse . He said : Woe unto me ! Am I not able to be as this raven and so hide my brother 's naked corpse ? And he became repentant . " 
 = 1927 FA Charity Shield = 
 The 1927 Football Association Charity Shield was the 14th FA Charity Shield , an annual English association football match . The match , held at Stamford Bridge on 12 October 1927 , was contested by Cardiff City , who beat Arsenal in the final of the 1926 @-@ 27 FA Cup , and amateur side Corinthian . This was the first FA Charity Shield appearance for both sides , although Corinthian had previous won the Sheriff of London Charity Shield on several occasions . 
 After a goalless first half , Corinthian went ahead early in the second half with a goal from Gilbert Ashton . There were a large number of attacks from both sides , but it took until the 77th minute before Cardiff equalised with a header by Hughie Ferguson after a series of passing plays . With only a few minutes remaining on the clock , Cardiff won a corner kick and from the cross , and Len Davies tapped the ball into the net to put them ahead . The game finished with the score two goals to one in Cardiff City 's favour . Several charities benefited from the proceeds of the match , including the King Edward VII 's Hospital for Officers and the National Institute for the Blind . 
 = = Background = = 
 The FA Charity Shield was founded in 1908 as a successor to the Sheriff of London Charity Shield . It was a contest between the respective champions of the Football League and Southern League , and then by 1913 teams of amateur and professional players . At a Football Association Council meeting on 22 April 1927 , it was decided that the following season 's Charity Shield match should be played between the winner of the 1926 – 27 FA Cup and the amateur team Corinthians . This would mark the first occasion Corinthians would play in the competition , they had previously won the Sheriff of London Charity Shield on four occasions . 
 Cardiff City qualified for the 1927 FA Charity Shield as winners of the 1926 – 27 FA Cup . They defeated Arsenal by one goal to nil , with the only goal of the game coming from Hughie Ferguson . It was the club 's first FA Cup victory , and the only time that the trophy had been won by a club outside of England . A few months after Cardiff 's victory , the match between them and Corinthians for the FA Charity Shield was set to take place at Stamford Bridge on 12 October . Corinthian announced their team a few days prior to the game , though goalkeeper Benjamin Howard Baker was subsequently replaced by A.M. Russell , who normally played for Cambridge University A.F.C .. Due to an injury to Tom Watson , Billy Hardy was switched to the other wing in defence for Cardiff City . 
 = = Match = = 
 = = = Summary = = = 
 The Corinthians gained a corner kick early on , and Cardiff cleared . This was followed up by a further attack by the amateurs , but R.G. Jenkins ' shot went straight to Tom Farquharson in the Cardiff goal . Cardiff attacked twice in quick succession ; both chances were squandered . A.H. <unk> , Frank Hartley and Jenkins moved up @-@ field for Corinthian with some passing movement and played the ball through for Claude Ashton , but he shot wide of the post . Three corners followed for Cardiff , which were each stopped by Russell in goal for Corinthian stopped each chance . A few minutes later Len Davies headed the ball down to the feet of Ferguson , but the Cardiff player fired the ball wide of the goal despite being only a few feet away from the goal line . Just before half time , Cardiff won a direct free kick ; Fred Keenor hammered the ball into a wall of Corinthian players . 
 The second half began with a speedy Cardiff attack . Corinthian countered , resulting in shots from both Claude and Gilbert Ashton within 15 seconds of each other . Another Cardiff attack resulted in Ferguson missing the goal from a few feet out once again . After four minutes in the second half , Corinthians attacked once more . Fred Ewer played it down the left wing to Kenneth Hegan , who passed it into the centre towards Gilbert Ashton , who fired it past Farquharson . Shortly after the restart , Billy <unk> appeared to be about to score a certain goal for Cardiff , but was charged down by Russell . Further chances came in rapid succession ; for Cardiff , Ferguson struck the crossbar with one shot ; then for Corinthian , Claude Ashton passed forward to Jenkins , who struck it wide of an open goal mouth . Hegan sent the ball over the bar , and then a further shot by Claude Ashton was charged down . 
 In the 77th minute , Keenor , Ferguson and Davies passed the ball among themselves before playing it wide to <unk> . Ferguson ran to the centre and the ball was crossed towards him . Ferguson leapt and headed the ball into the net to equalise for Cardiff . It looked like Cardiff were about to go ahead , however , a last minute tackle by Alfred Bower prevented Ernie Curtis from scoring , giving the Welsh team another corner . The ball was fired towards the goal mouth , and was shot into the goal from close range by Davies putting Cardiff ahead . The final two attacks of the game were both by Cardiff , with Russell saving a header by Ferguson and then Curtis firing the ball over the crossbar . 
 = = = Details = = = 
 Source : 
 = = Post @-@ match = = 
 The match raised money for several charities . King Edward VII 's Hospital for Officers received £ 210 ; National Institute for the Blind , £ 52 10s ; Newspaper Press Fund , £ 52 10s ; National Institute of Journalist 's Orphans , £ 52 10s ; London Lock Hospital , £ 52 10s ; Prince of Wales General Hospital , £ 52 10s ; Sheffield Royal Infirmary , £ 52 10s ; Railway Benevolent Institution , £ 25 ; and the Surgical Aid Society received £ 25 . A further sum of £ 210 was given to several Welsh based charities . 
 Corinthian never played in another FA Charity Shield , although they would later be runner @-@ up in a resurrected Sheriff of London 's Charity Shield , first to Arsenal in 1931 and in 1932 , and then to Tottenham Hotspur in 1934 . The club ceased to exist in 1939 , when they merged with fellow amateur team Casuals to form the Corinthian @-@ Casuals , which still plays today . The format of the FA Charity Shield changed several further times over the following decades , and in 1974 it was moved to August to become the opening match of each year 's Football League season , and played between the winner of the FA Cup and the most senior league , now the Premier League . 
 Cardiff City is yet to return to the FA Charity Shield , which was renamed the FA Community Shield in 2002 . However , between 2001 and 2006 , the match was held at Cardiff 's Millennium Stadium while the new Wembley Stadium was under construction . The closest Cardiff City has come so far to returning to the match was in 2008 when they reached the FA Cup Final once more , but lost by a goal to nil against Portsmouth . 
 = Lev Chernyi = 
 Lev Chernyi ( Russian : <unk> <unk> ; IPA : [ <unk> <unk> ] ; died September 21 , 1921 ) was a Russian individualist anarchist theorist , activist and poet , and a leading figure of the Third Russian Revolution . In 1917 , Chernyi was released from his political imprisonment by the Imperial Russian regime , and swiftly became one of the leading figures in Russian anarchism . After strongly denouncing the new Bolshevik government in various anarchist publications and joining several underground resistance movements , Chernyi was arrested by the Cheka on a charge of counterfeiting and in 1921 was executed without trial . 
 = = Early life , philosophy and imprisonment = = 
 Chernyi was born Pavel <unk> <unk> ( Russian : Па ́ <unk> Дми ́ <unk> <unk> ́ <unk> ; IPA : [ <unk> <unk> ͡ ɕ <unk> ͡ <unk> ] ) to an army colonel father . A " déclassé intellectual " whom anarchist historian Paul Avrich compares with Volin , Chernyi advocated a Nietzschean overthrow of the values of bourgeois Russian society , and rejected the voluntary communes of anarcho @-@ communist Peter Kropotkin as a threat to the freedom of the individual . Chernyi advocated the " free association of independent individuals " in a book titled <unk> Anarchism and published in 1907 . Scholars including Avrich and Allan <unk> have interpreted this vision of society to have been greatly influenced by the individualist anarchists Max Stirner , and Benjamin Tucker . Subsequent to the book 's publication , Chernyi was imprisoned in Siberia under the Russian Czarist regime for his revolutionary activities . 
 = = Return to Moscow and opposition to the Bolsheviks = = 
 On his return from Siberia in 1917 , Chernyi enjoyed great popularity among Moscow workers as a lecturer , and was at this time one of Russia 's leading individualist anarchists and one of anarchism 's main ideologues . He was the Secretary and leading theorist of the Moscow Federation of Anarchist Groups , which was formed in March 1917 after the abdication of Tsar Nicholas II and was primarily concerned with disseminating propaganda to Moscow 's poorer classes . 
 A personal acquaintance of Lev Kamenev and other leading Bolsheviks , Chernyi denounced the nascent Russian Soviet Republic at a rally on March 5 , 1918 , declaring that for anarchists , the socialist state was as much an enemy as its bourgeois predecessor and promising to " paralyze the governmental mechanism " . A vociferous advocate of seizing private homes , Chernyi agitated against the state in the pages of <unk> , the anarchist weekly newspaper , proposing increasingly detailed means of decentralized production and " complete absence of internal power structures " . In the spring of 1918 , the anarchist groups within the Moscow Federation formed armed detachments in reaction to the growing repression of all resistance and free expression . These were the Black Guards , precursors to the anarchist Black Army which fought the Bolsheviks in the Russian Civil War . On the night of April 11 , the Cheka ( Soviet secret police ) raided a building occupied by the Moscow Federation , with the official aim of arresting and charging " robber bands " in the anarchist ranks . They were met with armed resistance by the Black Guards and in the ensuing battle , approximately forty anarchists were killed or wounded and about five hundred were imprisoned . 
 = = Arrest and execution = = 
 Having helped establish an underground group in 1918 , Chernyi joined another group called the Underground Anarchists the following year . The organization , which had been founded by Kazimir <unk> and Piotr <unk> , published two issues of an incendiary broadsheet denouncing the Communist dictatorship as the worst tyranny in human history . On September 25 , 1919 , together with a number of leftist social revolutionaries , the Underground Anarchists bombed the headquarters of the Moscow Committee of the Communist Party during a plenary meeting . Twelve Communists were killed and fifty @-@ five others were wounded , including eminent Bolshevik theorist and Pravda editor Nikolai Bukharin . Chernyi was detained along with <unk> Baron on a counterfeiting charge . In August 1921 , the Moscow Izvestia published an official report announcing that ten " anarchist bandits " , among them Chernyi , had been shot without hearing or trial . However , historian of anarchism Paul Avrich contends that Chernyi was executed in September of that year rather than August . Although he was not personally involved in the bombing of the Communist Party headquarters , Chernyi was , because of his association with the Underground Anarchists , a likely candidate for a <unk> . The Communists refused to turn over his body to his family for burial , and rumors persisted that he had in fact died of torture . 
 = = Related pages = = 
 Individualist anarchism in Europe 
 List of anarchist poets 
 One of the people who visited his lectures was Gerard Shelley 
 = Bass Maltings , Sleaford = 
 The Bass Maltings in Sleaford , England are a large group of eight disused malt houses originally owned by the Bass Brewery of Burton upon Trent . Constructed between 1901 and 1907 to Herbert A. Couchman 's design , the maltings are the largest group of malt houses in England ; they have been designated Grade II * on the National Heritage List for England , recognising them as " particularly important ... of more than special interest . " 
 Part of the predominantly agricultural county of Lincolnshire , the Sleaford area was a major producer of barley in the 1880s . When germinated and dried to form malt , barley forms a key ingredient in the production of beer . Along with the town 's railway links , this attracted the Bass brewery company to the town . The use of more efficient techniques at Bass 's other plant led to the closure of Sleaford 's maltings in 1959 . Despite being used to rear poultry in the late 20th century , the buildings have not been fully occupied since Bass left and a fire in 1976 caused severe damage to three of the malthouses . Derelict since the 1990s , proposals to convert the buildings into office , retail and residential space were put on hold in early 2015 after lengthy delays over planning permission and the withdrawal of a major investor . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Industry and vacancy = = = 
 In the late @-@ 19th century , the Sleaford area was a major barley producer and by the 1880s , Sleaford was a stop on railway lines connecting the town to Boston , Grantham , Bourne , Spalding and Lincoln . These qualities made the town desirable for the production of malt , a crucial ingredient in beer production . The brewers Bass , Ratcliffe and Gretton Ltd were attracted to the town and in 1880 proposed a new malting complex there , which would consolidate malting closer to the barley source and reduce costs by up @-@ scaling production . Drilling in 1892 revealed suitable artesian water sources under Sleaford ; plans were submitted nine years later and over 13 acres of land off Mareham Lane was purchased ; work started in 1901 and was complete by 1907 . 
 The company ran the complex at full capacity until after the Second World War ; however , in the 1950s , Bass installed new and more efficient pneumatic malting systems at their original Burton @-@ on @-@ Trent plant , making the Sleaford complex redundant and paving the way for its closure in 1959 . Vacant space was let to businesses , but the enormous complex was only ever partially occupied after Bass left . Vulnerable to damage and poorly maintained , fires started in 1969 and 1976 , the latter resulting major damage to three of the malthouses . Some of the space was used for chicken @-@ rearing by G. W. <unk> ( Property ) Ltd. from 1973 into the 1990s . 
 = = = Regeneration = = = 
 A regeneration scheme was announced in 2004 ; supported by the Phoenix Trust , the maltings would be converted into residential , retail and business space . Public consultation took place in 2005 and 2006 , with around 90 % of participants supporting regeneration and three @-@ quarters asking for a cinema and entertainment complex . Lincolnshire Enterprise granted £ 200 @,@ 000 towards the regeneration scheme and the <unk> Group came forward to develop the project . Over the next three years , they worked with the Prince 's Regeneration Trust to draw up plans for the site 's regeneration which protected the historic exterior . In 2009 , their proposals were submitted for planning permission . North Kesteven District Council approved the £ 50 million development in 2011 ; Tesco was also granted permission to build a £ 20 million supermarket as part of the redevelopment . The maltings would be converted into retail and office space , alongside 220 apartments . 
 However , in 2012 , Sleaford Town Council refused to grant permission for a link road connecting Boston Road to the site because of " concerns about closing a level crossing and the loss of trees " at the Boston Road Recreation Ground . After a lengthy stalemate , the District Council served a compulsory purchase order on the site in 2014 , but Tesco announced early the following year that it would no longer be investing in the maltings complex following a series of financial setbacks to the company . Although <unk> ( by then known as Avant Homes ) announced its commitment to converting parts of the site to residential use , the leader of North Kesteven District Council , Marion Brighton , stated that the plans were " effectively on hold " following the withdrawal of Tesco . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The maltings were constructed to designs by Herbert A. Couchman , Bass & Co . ' s chief engineer . Built in red brick with Welsh slate roofing , the complex follows a rectangular plan along an east @-@ west orientation : a central four @-@ storey water tower is flanked by four malthouses . Behind the tower is a tall , octagonal chimney . The malthouses are identical in design and layout ; barley was fed into a granary section , before being moved onto the germination floors and eventually transported to one of the twin kilns , where malting took place . Their southern fronts consisted of a six @-@ storey building of five bays with a gable spanning three windows that faces the other ranges . Projecting northwards is a ten @-@ bay section of four @-@ storeys which formed the germination floors . 
 With a frontage of nearly 1 @,@ 000 ft and a total area of 50 @,@ 000 sq ft , the maltings complex is believed to be largest of its type in England ; the architectural historians Sir Nikolaus Pevsner and John Harris commented that " for sheer impressiveness little in English industrial architecture can equal the scale of this building . In 1974 , it was recorded in the National Heritage List for England as a designated Grade II * listed building in recognition of its importance as an example of a large @-@ scale industrial malting complex in which " considerations of form , massing , symmetry and scale have produced a design of high aesthetic quality combined with clear functional expression " ; it also represents the importance of the English brewing industry in the late @-@ 19th and early 20th centuries and large @-@ scale malting at its peak . Owing to its derelict state , the building was also placed on English Heritage 's " at risk " register in 2011 . 
 There are five workers ' cottages along the path from Mareham Lane to the industrial site ; each are Grade II listed . The complex 's offices , storage depot , weigh offices , <unk> , gateways , walls and mess rooms are also listed at the same grade . 
 = Blakeney Chapel = 
 Blakeney Chapel is a ruined building on the Norfolk coast of England . Despite its name , it is in the parish of Cley next the Sea , not the adjoining village of Blakeney , and was probably not a chapel . The building stood on a raised mound or " eye " on the seaward end of the coastal marshes , less than 200 m ( 220 yd ) from the sea and just to the north of the current channel of the River Glaven where it turns to run parallel to the shoreline . It consisted of two rectangular rooms of unequal size , and appears to be intact in a 1586 map , but is shown as ruins in later charts . Only the foundations and part of a wall still remain . Three archaeological investigations between 1998 and 2005 provided more detail of the construction , and showed two distinct periods of active use . Although it is described as a chapel on several maps , there is no documentary or archaeological evidence to suggest that it had any religious function . A small hearth , probably used for smelting iron , is the only evidence of a specific activity on the site . 
 Much of the structural material was long ago carried off for reuse in buildings in Cley and Blakeney . The surviving ruins are protected as a scheduled monument and Grade II listed building because of their historical importance , but there is no active management . The ever @-@ present threat from the encroaching sea is likely to accelerate following a realignment of the Glaven 's course through the marshes , and lead to the loss of the ruins . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Blakeney Chapel ruins consist of an east @-@ west rectangular structure ( S1 ) 18 m × 7 m ( 59 ft × 23 ft ) in size with a smaller rectangular building ( S2 ) , 13 m × 5 m ( 43 ft × 16 ft ) built onto the southern side of the main room . Most of the structure is buried , only a 6 m ( 20 ft ) length of a flint and mortar wall being exposed to a height of 0 @.@ 3 m ( 1 ft ) prior to the excavation of 2004 – 05 . The ruins stand on the highest point of Blakeney Eye at about 2 m ( 7 ft ) above sea level . The Eye is a sandy mound in the marshes that is located inside the sea wall at the point where the River Glaven turns westward towards the sheltered inlet of Blakeney Haven . Cley Eye is a similar raised area on the east bank of the river . Despite the name , Blakeney Eye , like most of the northern part of the marshes in this area , is actually part of the parish of Cley next the Sea . 
 The land on which the building stands was in the possession of the Calthorpe family until its purchase by banker Charles Rothschild in 1912 . Rothschild gave the property to the National Trust , which has managed it since . There is no public access to the site . 
 The ruins are protected as a scheduled monument and Grade II listed building because of their historical importance . These listings do not cover the land around them , but the whole of the marsh forms part of the 7 @,@ 700 @-@ hectare ( 19 @,@ 000 @-@ acre ) North Norfolk Coast Site of Special Scientific Interest ( SSSI ) because of its internationally important wildlife value . The SSSI is now additionally protected through Natura 2000 , Special Protection Area ( SPA ) and <unk> listings , and is part of the Norfolk Coast Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty ( AONB ) . 
 = = Documented history = = 
 The building was first shown on a 1586 map of the Blakeney and Cley area , apparently drawn to be used in evidence in a legal case regarding the rights to " wreck and salvage " , the outcome of which is unknown . The original map disappeared in the 19th century , but a number of copies still exist . In this map , the building on the Eye is shown as intact and roofed , but it has no name . A map by the <unk> from 1769 has the building as " Eye House " , but by 1797 cartographer William Faden 's map of Norfolk shows the " chapel ruins " , a description that was then consistently used from the 19th century onwards . Some maps , including Faden 's , show a second ruined chapel across the Glaven on Cley Eye , but no other documentation exists for that building . 
 The medieval churches of St Nicholas , Blakeney and St Margaret 's , Cley , and the now ruined Blakeney friary , were not the first religious buildings in the area . An early church was recorded in the 1086 Domesday Book at <unk> ( " Snitterley " was a former name for Blakeney , the current name first appearing in 1340 ) , but the 11th @-@ century church 's location is unknown , and there is no reason to think that it is on the site of the ' chapel ' . 
 An anonymous booklet on Blakeney published in 1929 states that there was a " chapel of ease " on the marshes , served by a friar from the Convent , but the document on which this seems to be based , a Calendar of Patent Rolls dated 20 April 1343 , simply notes that a local hermit was given permission to seek alms in " divers parts of the realms " . There is no evidence of a dedication of any religious building on the marshes , and no mention of a chapel in any surviving medieval documents . 
 = = Investigations = = 
 The first investigation of the chapel ruins , supported by the National Trust , was conducted by the local history group in the winter of 1998 – 99 . This survey was conducted under a licence from English Heritage that allowed access but did not permit excavation , so it relied on height measurements , geophysics ( resistivity , and magnetometry ) and <unk> sampling . The area surveyed was 100 m long and 40 m wide ( 109 yd by 44 yd ) . The magnetometry failed to detect the subterranean features of the chapel , but did show an unexpected linear anomaly , related to buried ironwork from wartime defences . The resistivity survey clearly showed the larger room , but barely detected the smaller , suggesting that it had less substantial foundations , was probably less well @-@ constructed , and possibly later in date . 
 Plans for a realignment of the Glaven channel meant that the Eye would be left unprotected to the north of the river , and would eventually be destroyed by coastal change . It was decided that the only practical course of action was to investigate the site while it still existed , and a preliminary evaluation was carried out in 2003 as preparation for a full survey in 2004 – 05 . The surveyed area covered 10 ha ( 25 acre ) , significantly more than the 0 @.@ 4 ha ( 1 acre ) of the 1998 investigations . 50 trenches were excavated in a herringbone pattern outside the buildings , each 50 m long and 1 @.@ 80 m wide ( 194 by 5 @.@ 9 ft ) , and six trenches of varying dimensions were created inside the chapel . The latter equated in total area to two of the standard trenches . The geology was investigated with eight boreholes , and geophysics ( magnetometry and metal detection ) were used to locate subsurface anomalies . 
 The major excavation of the site in the winter of 2004 – 05 concentrated on the building and a 10 m ( 33 ft ) zone surrounding it . The results indicated that there were a number of phases of occupation . The remains of the building were reburied after excavation , so nothing is now visible at the surface . 
 = = Archaeology = = 
 = = = Early occupation = = = 
 The earliest evidence of permanent occupation is a series of ditches of 11th or 12th century date which are believed to have formed an enclosure , the south east corner of which lies below the " chapel " . Evidence for any buildings within the enclosure has either been lost to the Glaven or is buried outside the survey area . Few finds were associated with the ditches , although some fragments of Roman or earlier pottery and three Henry III pennies were found nearby . As elsewhere on the site , there is little evidence to link the old pottery to its location when found . By the time of the construction of the main building , some time in the 14th century , the ditches had filled with sand . A small hearth was built at ground level , shortly before or during the erection of S1 . It appears to have had fairly light use , but the presence of slag suggests that it was intended for smelting iron , perhaps by a smith . There was evidence for a number of small fires elsewhere in S1 at a similar date to the hearth , but whether they were related to the smelting is unknown . At this time , hearths could not melt metallic iron , but produced a ' bloom ' ( a mixture of iron and slag ) which could be converted to wrought iron by repeated heating and hammering . Another , even earlier , smelting hearth is known from West <unk> , 17 km ( 10 mi ) further east on the Norfolk coast . The main ore in this area is the iron @-@ rich local <unk> . 
 = = = Medieval = = = 
 The larger north building was built without deep foundation trenches , but was nevertheless a solid , well @-@ built flint and mortar construction . The building had " substantial time and money spent on it " in the opinion of the principal archaeologist . The flints were selected to decrease in size as the walls rose , and the internal corners were decorated with limestone blocks set as quoins . <unk> were recovered , with a distribution suggesting that they were once part of the fabric of the building as <unk> ( strengthening for the mortar ) . There were entrances in the west and northeast walls , and some evidence that there were once windows in the northwest and south walls . The floor was compacted soil , and the original roof material is unknown , but the presence of a few glazed floor tiles and Flemish pantiles of a somewhat later date is consistent with a higher @-@ status appearance . There was no internal wall at this date , but there may have been an external wooden extension to the southwest corner . 
 The medieval building was eventually abandoned , and much of the structural material was taken for reuse in Blakeney and Cley villages . A stone archway in Cley is traditionally believed to have come from the chapel , and would fit the western entrance , although it could have been brought from elsewhere such as the ruined Blakeney friary . The ' chapel ' building was deserted around 1600 , but whether the collapse of its east end was the cause or a consequence of its disuse is unknown . The main building seems to have suffered a major fire at some stage , and no wooden structures have been found . The site was flooded at least three times , subsequent to the building 's collapse . At some stage , part of the western wall was lost , the steep slope where it stood suggesting that it may have been taken by the sea . 
 Most of the pottery found within the larger room was 14th to 16th century , nearly a third of which was imported from the continent , reflecting the Glaven ports ' importance in international trade at this time . The pottery appeared to be mainly domestic in nature , including jugs and cooking vessels . 
 = = = Post @-@ medieval = = = 
 The 17th @-@ century room , S2 , used the south wall of the existing structure as its own north wall , and was largely built using materials salvaged from S1 , although the standard of the work was poorer . The new room had a double fireplace , but there was no evidence of a dividing wall between the two hearths . Limestone blocks , identical to the quoins in S1 , were used as structural and decorative features in the fireplace . In addition to the pantiles taken from S1 , there were Cornish slate roof tiles . Whether they formed part of the roof of S2 or were associated with the possible wooden extension is unclear . 
 At the same time that S2 was built , a dividing wall , again of inferior quality , was built across S1 to create a western room . There were no molehills within the smaller building , which had suggested that , unlike its neighbour , it has a buried solid floor , and this was confirmed by excavation . This had a floor originally made of mortar , relaid at least once , but then covered with a layer of flint cobbles , suggesting that it was a working area . The old hearth was not covered , so it may have still been used . A new fireplace was also added , apparently of a domestic design , although the context makes that function improbable . A well @-@ marked track led southwest down the slope from S1 , and a large midden was close to the path . It has been suggested that a " clean " pit north of S1 was a well , with fresh water floating above the saltwater below , a phenomenon known from Blakeney Point and elsewhere on the Norfolk coast . 
 There is only limited evidence for use after the 17th @-@ century desertion , including a 19th @-@ century tobacco pipe and some Victorian glassware . A wartime barbed wire fence ran through the ruins , and was detected by excavation and magnetometry . Other modern finds included a gin trap , bullets and other small metal objects . 
 = = Purpose = = 
 Blakeney Eye has a long history of occupation , with many finds from the Neolithic , but few from Roman or Anglo @-@ Saxon dates , although a gold bracteate was a rare and significant 6th @-@ century find . Animal and plant finds showed that both domesticated species , such as goats , and locally available prey such as curlews were eaten ; rabbit and canid remains may reflect the use of fur from these mammals . Evidence of cereal processing and storage is difficult to date , but may be medieval . 
 The buildings were abandoned during the 17th century , and their uses , which may have been varied over the long period of occupation , remain unknown . The east – west orientation and superior workmanship of S1 would not preclude religious use , but there is no other evidence , archaeological or documentary , to support that possibility . The limited number of finds , even of material which could not have been reused , have suggested that any medieval habitation must have been very limited in numbers of people and time . Other plausible uses have been suggested , such as a custom house or a warrener 's house , but again there is nothing to support these speculations . 
 = = Threats = = 
 Realignment of the River Glaven means the ruins are now to the north of the river embankment , and essentially unprotected from coastal erosion , since the advancing shingle will no longer be swept away by the stream . The chapel will be buried by a ridge of shingle as the spit continues to move south , and then lost to the sea , perhaps within 20 – 30 years . 
 The ridge of shingle runs west from Weybourne along the Norfolk coast , before becoming a spit extending into the sea at Blakeney . Saltmarshes can develop behind the ridge , but the sea attacks the spit through tidal and storm action . The amount of shingle moved by a single storm can be " spectacular " ; the spit has sometimes been breached , becoming an island for a time , and this may happen again . The northernmost part of Snitterley village was lost to the sea in the early Middle Ages , probably due to a storm . 
 In the last two hundred years , the maps have been accurate enough for the distance from the ruins to the sea to be measured . The 400 m ( 440 yd ) in 1817 had become 320 m ( 350 yd ) by 1835 , 275 m ( 300 yd ) in 1907 , and 195 m ( 215 yd ) by the end of the 20th century . The spit is moving towards the mainland at about 1 m ( 1 yd ) per year ; and several raised islands or " eyes " have already been lost to the sea as the beach has rolled over the saltmarsh . Landward movement of the shingle meant that the channel of the Glaven , itself excavated in 1922 because an earlier , more northerly course was overwhelmed between Blakeney and Cley , was becoming blocked increasingly often . This led to flooding of Cley village and the environmentally important freshwater marshes . The Environment Agency considered a number of remedial options . Attempting to hold back the shingle or breaching the spit to create a new outlet for the Glaven would be expensive and probably ineffective , and doing nothing would be environmentally damaging . The Agency decided to create a new route for the river to the south of its original line , and work to realign a 550 m ( 600 yd ) stretch of river 200 m ( 220 yd ) further south was completed in 2007 at a cost of about £ 1 @.@ 5 million . 
 Managed retreat is likely to be the long @-@ term solution to rising sea levels along much of the North Norfolk coast . It has already been implemented at other important sites like Titchwell Marsh . 
 = Blood on the Dance Floor ( song ) = 
 " Blood on the Dance Floor " is a song by Michael Jackson . The song was released as the first single from the remix album , Blood on the Dance Floor : HIStory in the Mix . Jackson and Teddy Riley created the track in time for the 1991 release of Dangerous . However , it did not appear on that record and was minimally altered before commercial release in 1997 . The song is about a predatory woman by the name of Susie , who seduces Jackson before plotting to stab him with a knife . The composition explores a variety of genres ranging from rock to funk and Hi @-@ NRG . 
 Commentators compared " Blood on the Dance Floor " to music from Dangerous . Others commented on the song 's perceived aggressive tone and the vocal style , the broad genres heard and possible lyrical interpretations of the song . Reviews at the time of release were largely mixed , but contemporary reviews have been favorable . The song was promoted with a music video that premiered on Top of the Pops . It centered on Susie seducing Jackson in a courtship dance , before opening a switchblade . " Blood on the Dance Floor " was the only track from the remix album performed on the HIStory World Tour . The lead single peaked at number one in several countries , including the UK . 
 = = Production and music = = 
 Teddy Riley came up with the song 's title while Michael recorded the piece for his Dangerous album in 1991 — it failed to make the final track listing . Teddy was reportedly upset that Jackson did not call him to " vacuum clean this old master " upon realizing it would be included on Blood on the Dance Floor : HIStory in the Mix . Riley wanted to update the musical composition before it appeared on the remix album . 
 Instruments played in the song include a guitar and piano , the latter of which has an F2 @-@ Eb5 range in scientific pitch notation . Jackson 's vocal range on the track is C3 @-@ Bb5 and aspects of the song are performed in the key A @-@ flat major . Genres that have been attributed to the song are rock , pop , house , dance , R & B , funk and new jack swing . Jackson incorporates many of the vocal traits associated with his work , such as hiccups and gasps . Neil Strauss of The New York Times suggests that the predatory woman in the title track , " Susie " , is a metaphor for AIDS . However , in an interview with Adrian Grant , Jackson denied that the song was about AIDS . 
 = = Commentary = = 
 The Dallas Morning News described " Blood on the Dance Floor " as an angry tale of a back @-@ stabbing woman and Michael Saunders of The Boston Globe described it as " a middling dance @-@ funk cut " . Anthony <unk> of The Buffalo News said of the single , " [ it is ] laced with Teddy Riley 's new jack swing sound and a pounding techno beat " , whereas The Cincinnati Post characterized the song as a " lackluster first release ... dated , played @-@ out dance track " , but gave the album an overall favorable review . Jim Farber of New York Daily News , noted of the vocals and musical style , " [ Jackson ] coughs up a series of strangulated mutters and <unk> hiccups in lieu of a vocal , while its chilly , faux @-@ industrial music proves as appealing as a migraine " . 
 William Ruhlman of Allmusic observed , " ' Blood on the Dance Floor ' is an uptempo Jackson song in the increasingly hysterical tradition of ' Billie Jean ' and ' Smooth Criminal ' with Jackson huffing , puffing , and yelping through some nonsense about a stabbing ... over a fairly generic electronic dance track " . He was not complimentary of the B @-@ sides that accompanied it . Stephen Thomas Erlewine , also of Allmusic , had a negative reaction to the record . He described " Blood on the Dance Floor " as a " bleak reworking of ' Jam ' and ' Scream ' " . 
 Music commentator Nelson George , compared the song to material from Dangerous , notably the critically acclaimed tracks " Jam " and " Dangerous " . He described it as a " pile driving " song that " explodes from radio speakers " . A longtime commentator on Jackson 's public life , J. Randy Taraborrelli , gave a retrospective analysis of the album in the biography , The Magic & the Madness . Taraborrelli thought that " Blood on the Dance Floor " was one of Jackson 's best songs , a song that US fans " don 't even know exists " . In 2005 , J T Griffith , of Allmusic , believed that in hindsight , " Blood on the Dance Floor " was actually a good song . He explained , " [ it is ] a second @-@ rate mixture of ' Beat It ' and ' Thriller ' but Jackson 's missteps are better than most pop music out there . This track showcases all the artist 's trademarks : the <unk> , the grunts , and funky basslines . It is hard to hear ' Blood on the Dance Floor ' and not want to moonwalk or dance like a ghoul " . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 " Blood on the Dance Floor " was the only track from Blood on the Dance Floor : History in the Mix to appear on the set list of the HIStory World Tour . The music video for " Blood on the Dance Floor " was directed by Jackson and Vincent Paterson . It premiered on Top of the Pops in the UK on March 28 , 1997 , several weeks ahead of its release as a single . The video opens with a thrown switchblade impaling a spray painted image . The impaled image is that of a blood dripping love heart with " <unk> + ME " scrawled across it . Jackson and a group of dancers then enter a salsa dance hall and he begins to dance with a woman , " Susie " , while shaking a piece of percussion . The singer then appears seated while the woman dances seductively above him on a table top . 
 After the 1st verse and chorus , there is an a cappella moment , in which Jackson breathes to the drums and the bass , then the strings , then spins , drops down and claps , then he main song starts with the 2nd verse . 
 Throughout the video , Jackson shows a sexual attraction towards the dancing woman — played by Sybil Azur . Jackson caresses her ankle , calf , knee and thigh , and at one stage looks up her dress . The woman is then seen opening a flick knife as the pair engage in a final courtship dance . The video closes in the same manner it began , with the switchblade impaling the spray painted image . The music video won the Brazilian <unk> Video Award : Best International Music Video of the Year . Interviewed on her experience during the video one of the dancers , Carmit Bachar ( of [ The Pussycat Dolls ] ) noted , " I was called in by Vincent Paterson for ' Blood on the Dance Floor ' . It was to have a Latin feel , some sort of mambo . I arrived wearing a little salsa dress , fish nets , heels , and my hair was up in a kind of bun with a flower . I was ' camera ready ' . I showed up with the whole outfit . It 's not that producers can 't see what they like , or the potential in somebody , but what I do helps them to see their vision more " . 
 A " Refugee Camp Mix " of " Blood on the Dance Floor " appeared on Jackson 's video collection , HIStory on Film , Volume II and Michael Jackson 's Vision . The original song would later appear on the Number Ones DVD , which contained previously unreleased scenes . Furthermore , Paterson recorded an unreleased , alternate version of the music video , shot with an 8 mm camera . Writer David Noh , described it as , " grainy , overexposed , and sexy as shit " . According to Paterson , " Michael loved it , but Sony hated it and refused to release it " . The New York Times described the United States promotional effort for the Blood on the Dance Floor : HIStory in the Mix campaign as " subdued " , creating " hardly a sound " and " perplexing to many people in the industry " . Jackson 's label Epic Records , refuted allegations they were not promoting the album sufficiently , saying , " We are completely behind the album ... Michael is certainly one of our superstars and is treated as such ... We just went into this one with our global hats on " . The New York Times acknowledged that promotion was stronger internationally , where Jackson had more commercial force and popularity . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 The song became a top ten hit in almost every European Union state . " Blood on the Dance Floor " peaked at number one in the UK , Spain and New Zealand , charting for 11 weeks in the latter two nations . In the UK it sold 85 @,@ 000 copies in its first week , enough to take the number one spot from " I Believe I Can Fly " by friend and collaborator R. Kelly . The song was Jackson 's seventh UK chart topper as a solo artist , although it fell to number eight in its second week of release . The European country where " Blood on the Dance Floor " had the most longevity was Switzerland , where it spent 18 weeks in the chart . By contrast , the song appeared in the Italian chart for only one week . 
 The single peaked at number 42 on the US Billboard Hot 100 . This relatively lower peak position has been attributed to the lack of US promotion and — according to J. Randy Taraborrelli and Allmusic writer William Ruhlman — the ongoing US public interest in the singer 's private life over his music . " Blood on the Dance Floor " was the 20th and last of Jackson 's reissued singles from the Visionary campaign . Issued in June 2006 , it charted at number 19 in the UK . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Visionary single 
 CD side 
 " Blood on the Dance Floor " – 4 : 14 
 " Blood on the Dance Floor " ( Fire Island Vocal Mix ) – 8 : 55 
 DVD side 
 " Blood on the Dance Floor " ( video ) – 4 : 15 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Written , composed and produced by Michael Jackson and Teddy Riley 
 Solo and background vocals , vocal arrangement by Michael Jackson 
 Teddy Riley and Brad Buxer : Keyboards and synthesizers , drum programming 
 Guitar by Nile Rodgers 
 Matt Carpenter : Digital Systems programming 
 Engineered by Teddy Riley , Dave Way and Mick Guzauski 
 Mixed by Mick Guzauski 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Chart procession and succession = = = 
 = Pneumonia = 
 Pneumonia is an inflammatory condition of the lung affecting primarily the microscopic air sacs known as alveoli . Typical signs and symptoms include a varying severity and combination of productive or dry cough , chest pain , fever , and trouble breathing , depending on the underlying cause . 
 Pneumonia is usually caused by infection with viruses or bacteria and less commonly by other microorganisms , certain medications and conditions such as autoimmune diseases . Risk factors include other lung diseases such as cystic fibrosis , COPD , and asthma , diabetes , heart failure , a history of smoking , a poor ability to cough such as following a stroke , or a weak immune system . Diagnosis is often based on the symptoms and physical examination . Chest X @-@ ray , blood tests , and culture of the sputum may help confirm the diagnosis . The disease may be classified by where it was acquired with community , hospital , or health care associated pneumonia . 
 Vaccines to prevent certain types of pneumonia are available . Other methods of prevention include handwashing and not smoking . Treatment depends on the underlying cause . Pneumonia believed to be due to bacteria is treated with antibiotics . If the pneumonia is severe , the affected person is generally hospitalized . Oxygen therapy may be used if oxygen levels are low . 
 Pneumonia affects approximately 450 million people globally ( 7 % of the population ) and results in about 4 million deaths per year . Pneumonia was regarded by William Osler in the 19th century as " the captain of the men of death " . With the introduction of antibiotics and vaccines in the 20th century survival improved . Nevertheless , in developing countries , and among the very old , the very young , and the chronically ill , pneumonia remains a leading cause of death . Pneumonia often shortens suffering among those already close to death and has thus been called " the old man 's friend " . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 People with infectious pneumonia often have a productive cough , fever accompanied by shaking chills , shortness of breath , sharp or stabbing chest pain during deep breaths , and an increased rate of breathing . In the elderly , confusion may be the most prominent sign . 
 The typical signs and symptoms in children under five are fever , cough , and fast or difficult breathing . Fever is not very specific , as it occurs in many other common illnesses , may be absent in those with severe disease , malnutrition or in the elderly . In addition , a cough is frequently absent in children less than 2 months old . More severe signs and symptoms in children may include blue @-@ tinged skin , unwillingness to drink , convulsions , ongoing vomiting , extremes of temperature , or a decreased level of consciousness . 
 Bacterial and viral cases of pneumonia usually present with similar symptoms . Some causes are associated with classic , but non @-@ specific , clinical characteristics . Pneumonia caused by Legionella may occur with abdominal pain , diarrhea , or confusion , while pneumonia caused by Streptococcus pneumoniae is associated with rusty colored sputum , and pneumonia caused by Klebsiella may have bloody sputum often described as " currant jelly " . Bloody sputum ( known as hemoptysis ) may also occur with tuberculosis , Gram @-@ negative pneumonia , and lung abscesses as well as more commonly with acute bronchitis . Mycoplasma pneumonia may occur in association with swelling of the lymph nodes in the neck , joint pain , or a middle ear infection . Viral pneumonia presents more commonly with wheezing than does bacterial pneumonia . Pneumonia was historically divided into " typical " and " atypical " based on the belief that the presentation predicted the underlying cause . However , evidence has not supported this distinction , thus it is no longer emphasized . 
 = = Cause = = 
 Pneumonia is due to infections caused primarily by bacteria or viruses and less commonly by fungi and parasites . Although there are more than 100 strains of infectious agents identified , only a few are responsible for the majority of the cases . Mixed infections with both viruses and bacteria may occur in up to 45 % of infections in children and 15 % of infections in adults . A causative agent may not be isolated in approximately half of cases despite careful testing . 
 The term pneumonia is sometimes more broadly applied to any condition resulting in inflammation of the lungs ( caused for example by autoimmune diseases , chemical burns or drug reactions ) ; however , this inflammation is more accurately referred to as pneumonitis . 
 Conditions and risk factors that predispose to pneumonia include smoking , immunodeficiency , alcoholism , chronic obstructive pulmonary disease , asthma , chronic kidney disease , and liver disease . The use of acid @-@ suppressing medications — such as proton @-@ pump inhibitors or H2 blockers — is associated with an increased risk of pneumonia . The risk is also increased in old age . 
 = = = Bacteria = = = 
 Bacteria are the most common cause of community @-@ acquired pneumonia ( CAP ) , with Streptococcus pneumoniae isolated in nearly 50 % of cases . Other commonly isolated bacteria include Haemophilus influenzae in 20 % , <unk> pneumoniae in 13 % , and Mycoplasma pneumoniae in 3 % of cases ; Staphylococcus aureus ; Moraxella catarrhalis ; Legionella pneumophila and Gram @-@ negative bacilli . A number of drug @-@ resistant versions of the above infections are becoming more common , including drug @-@ resistant Streptococcus pneumoniae ( <unk> ) and methicillin @-@ resistant Staphylococcus aureus ( MRSA ) . 
 The spreading of organisms is facilitated when risk factors are present . Alcoholism is associated with Streptococcus pneumoniae , anaerobic organisms , and Mycobacterium tuberculosis ; smoking facilitates the effects of Streptococcus pneumoniae , Haemophilus influenzae , Moraxella catarrhalis , and Legionella pneumophila . Exposure to birds is associated with Chlamydia <unk> ; farm animals with <unk> <unk> ; aspiration of stomach contents with anaerobic organisms ; and cystic fibrosis with Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Staphylococcus aureus . Streptococcus pneumoniae is more common in the winter , and should be suspected in persons aspirating a large amount anaerobic organisms . 
 = = = Viruses = = = 
 In adults , viruses account for approximately a third and in children for about 15 % of pneumonia cases . Commonly implicated agents include rhinoviruses , coronaviruses , influenza virus , respiratory syncytial virus ( RSV ) , adenovirus , and parainfluenza . Herpes simplex virus rarely causes pneumonia , except in groups such as : newborns , persons with cancer , transplant recipients , and people with significant burns . People following organ transplantation or those otherwise @-@ immunocompromised present high rates of cytomegalovirus pneumonia . Those with viral infections may be secondarily infected with the bacteria Streptococcus pneumoniae , Staphylococcus aureus , or Haemophilus influenzae , particularly when other health problems are present . Different viruses predominate at different periods of the year ; during influenza season , for example , influenza may account for over half of all viral cases . Outbreaks of other viruses also occasionally occur , including hantaviruses and coronavirus . 
 = = = Fungi = = = 
 Fungal pneumonia is uncommon , but occurs more commonly in individuals with weakened immune systems due to AIDS , immunosuppressive drugs , or other medical problems . It is most often caused by Histoplasma capsulatum , <unk> , Cryptococcus neoformans , Pneumocystis <unk> ( pneumocystis pneumonia ) , and <unk> immitis . <unk> is most common in the Mississippi River basin , and coccidioidomycosis is most common in the Southwestern United States . The number of cases has been increasing in the later half of the 20th century due to increasing travel and rates of immunosuppression in the population . 
 = = = Parasites = = = 
 A variety of parasites can affect the lungs , including Toxoplasma gondii , Strongyloides <unk> , Ascaris <unk> , and Plasmodium malariae . These organisms typically enter the body through direct contact with the skin , ingestion , or via an insect vector . Except for <unk> <unk> , most parasites do not affect specifically the lungs but involve the lungs secondarily to other sites . Some parasites , in particular those belonging to the Ascaris and Strongyloides genera , stimulate a strong eosinophilic reaction , which may result in eosinophilic pneumonia . In other infections , such as malaria , lung involvement is due primarily to cytokine @-@ induced systemic inflammation . In the developed world these infections are most common in people returning from travel or in immigrants . Around the world , these infections are most common in the immunodeficient . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Idiopathic interstitial pneumonia or noninfectious pneumonia is a class of diffuse lung diseases . They include diffuse alveolar damage , organizing pneumonia , nonspecific interstitial pneumonia , lymphocytic interstitial pneumonia , <unk> interstitial pneumonia , respiratory bronchiolitis interstitial lung disease , and usual interstitial pneumonia . 
 = = Mechanisms = = 
 Pneumonia frequently starts as an upper respiratory tract infection that moves into the lower respiratory tract . It is pneumonitis ( lung inflammation ) combined with consolidation ( liquid in spaces normally inflated with air ) . 
 = = = Viral = = = 
 Viruses may reach the lung by a number of different routes . Respiratory syncytial virus is typically contracted when people touch contaminated objects and then they touch their eyes or nose . Other viral infections occur when contaminated airborne droplets are inhaled through the mouth or nose . Once in the upper airway , the viruses may make their way in the lungs , where they invade the cells lining the airways , alveoli , or lung parenchyma . Some viruses such as measles and herpes simplex may reach the lungs via the blood . The invasion of the lungs may lead to varying degrees of cell death . When the immune system responds to the infection , even more lung damage may occur . Primarily white blood cells , mainly mononuclear cells , generate the inflammation . As well as damaging the lungs , many viruses simultaneously affect other organs and thus disrupt other body functions . Viruses also make the body more susceptible to bacterial infections ; in this way , bacterial pneumonia can arise as a co @-@ morbid condition . 
 = = = Bacterial = = = 
 Most bacteria enter the lungs via small aspirations of organisms residing in the throat or nose . Half of normal people have these small aspirations during sleep . While the throat always contains bacteria , potentially infectious ones reside there only at certain times and under certain conditions . A minority of types of bacteria such as Mycobacterium tuberculosis and Legionella pneumophila reach the lungs via contaminated airborne droplets . Bacteria can spread also via the blood . Once in the lungs , bacteria may invade the spaces between cells and between alveoli , where the macrophages and neutrophils ( defensive white blood cells ) attempt to inactivate the bacteria . The neutrophils also release cytokines , causing a general activation of the immune system . This leads to the fever , chills , and fatigue common in bacterial pneumonia . The neutrophils , bacteria , and fluid from surrounding blood vessels fill the alveoli , resulting in the consolidation seen on chest X @-@ ray . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 Pneumonia is typically diagnosed based on a combination of physical signs and a chest X @-@ ray . However , the underlying cause can be difficult to confirm , as there is no definitive test able to distinguish between bacterial and non @-@ bacterial origin . The World Health Organization has defined pneumonia in children clinically based on either a cough or difficulty breathing and a rapid respiratory rate , chest indrawing , or a decreased level of consciousness . A rapid respiratory rate is defined as greater than 60 breaths per minute in children under 2 months old , 50 breaths per minute in children 2 months to 1 year old , or greater than 40 breaths per minute in children 1 to 5 years old . In children , increased respiratory rate and lower chest indrawing are more sensitive than hearing chest crackles with a stethoscope . <unk> and nasal flaring may be other useful signs in children less than five . 
 In general , in adults , investigations are not needed in mild cases . There is a very low risk of pneumonia if all vital signs and <unk> are normal . In persons requiring hospitalization , pulse oximetry , chest radiography and blood tests — including a complete blood count , serum electrolytes , C @-@ reactive protein level , and possibly liver function tests — are recommended . The diagnosis of influenza @-@ like illness can be made based on the signs and symptoms ; however , confirmation of an influenza infection requires testing . Thus , treatment is frequently based on the presence of influenza in the community or a rapid influenza test . 
 = = = Physical exam = = = 
 Physical examination may sometimes reveal low blood pressure , high heart rate , or low oxygen saturation . The respiratory rate may be faster than normal , and this may occur a day or two before other signs . Examination of the chest may be normal , but it may show decreased chest expansion on the affected side . Harsh breath sounds from the larger airways that are transmitted through the inflamed lung are termed bronchial breathing and are heard on <unk> with a stethoscope . <unk> ( rales ) may be heard over the affected area during inspiration . Percussion may be dulled over the affected lung , and increased , rather than decreased , vocal resonance distinguishes pneumonia from a pleural effusion . 
 = = = Imaging = = = 
 A chest radiograph is frequently used in diagnosis . In people with mild disease , imaging is needed only in those with potential complications , those not having improved with treatment , or those in which the cause is uncertain . If a person is sufficiently sick to require hospitalization , a chest radiograph is recommended . Findings do not always match the severity of disease and do not reliably separate between bacterial infection and viral infection . 
 X @-@ ray presentations of pneumonia may be classified as lobar pneumonia , bronchopneumonia ( also known as lobular pneumonia ) , and interstitial pneumonia . Bacterial , community @-@ acquired pneumonia classically show lung consolidation of one lung segmental lobe , which is known as lobar pneumonia . However , findings may vary , and other patterns are common in other types of pneumonia . Aspiration pneumonia may present with bilateral opacities primarily in the bases of the lungs and on the right side . Radiographs of viral pneumonia may appear normal , appear hyper @-@ inflated , have bilateral patchy areas , or present similar to bacterial pneumonia with lobar consolidation . <unk> findings may not be present in the early stages of the disease , especially in the presence of dehydration , or may be difficult to be interpreted in the obese or those with a history of lung disease . A CT scan can give additional information in indeterminate cases . 
 = = = Microbiology = = = 
 In patients managed in the community , determining the causative agent is not cost @-@ effective and typically does not alter management . For people that do not respond to treatment , sputum culture should be considered , and culture for Mycobacterium tuberculosis should be carried out in persons with a chronic productive cough . Testing for other specific organisms may be recommended during outbreaks , for public health reasons . In those hospitalized for severe disease , both sputum and blood cultures are recommended , as well as testing the urine for antigens to Legionella and Streptococcus . Viral infections can be confirmed via detection of either the virus or its antigens with culture or polymerase chain reaction ( PCR ) , among other techniques . The causative agent is determined in only 15 % of cases with routine microbiological tests . 
 = = = Classification = = = 
 <unk> refers to lung inflammation ; pneumonia refers to pneumonitis , usually due to infection but sometimes non @-@ infectious , that has the additional feature of pulmonary consolidation . Pneumonia is most commonly classified by where or how it was acquired : community @-@ acquired , aspiration , healthcare @-@ associated , hospital @-@ acquired , and ventilator @-@ associated pneumonia . It may also be classified by the area of lung affected : lobar pneumonia , bronchial pneumonia and acute interstitial pneumonia ; or by the causative organism . Pneumonia in children may additionally be classified based on signs and symptoms as non @-@ severe , severe , or very severe . 
 The setting in which pneumonia develops is important to treatment , as it correlates to which pathogens are likely suspects , which mechanisms are likely , which antibiotics are likely to work or fail , and which complications can be expected based on the person 's health status . 
 = = = = Community = = = = 
 Community @-@ acquired pneumonia ( CAP ) is acquired in the community , outside of health care facilities . Compared with health care – associated pneumonia , it is less likely to involve multidrug @-@ resistant bacteria . Although the latter are no longer rare in CAP , they are still less likely . 
 = = = = Healthcare = = = = 
 Health care – associated pneumonia ( <unk> ) is an infection associated with recent exposure to the health care system , including hospital , outpatient clinic , nursing home , dialysis center , chemotherapy treatment , or home care . 
 <unk> is sometimes called <unk> ( medical care – associated pneumonia ) . 
 = = = = = Hospital = = = = = 
 Hospital @-@ acquired pneumonia is acquired in a hospital ( specifically , pneumonia that occurs 48 hours or more after admission , which was not incubating at the time of admission ) , and as such is likely to involve hospital @-@ acquired infections , with higher risk of multidrug @-@ resistant pathogens . Also , because hospital patients are often ill ( which is why they are present in the hospital ) , comorbidities are an issue . 
 = = = = = Ventilator = = = = = 
 Ventilator @-@ associated pneumonia occurs in people breathing with the help of mechanical ventilation ( specifically , it is pneumonia that arises more than 48 to 72 hours after endotracheal intubation ) . Like any medical device , ventilators involve some risk of infection because of how difficult it is to prevent bacteria from colonizing the internal parts and surfaces , even with diligent cleaning . People who need ventilators typically are rather ill , to begin with , so a superimposed pneumonia is not always easily managed . Immunodeficiency may be involved because of poor nutritional status and whichever disorders are comorbid . 
 = = = Differential diagnosis = = = 
 Several diseases can present with similar signs and symptoms to pneumonia , such as : chronic obstructive pulmonary disease ( COPD ) , asthma , pulmonary edema , bronchiectasis , lung cancer , and pulmonary emboli . Unlike pneumonia , asthma and COPD typically present with wheezing , pulmonary edema presents with an abnormal electrocardiogram , cancer and bronchiectasis present with a cough of longer duration , and pulmonary emboli presents with acute onset sharp chest pain and shortness of breath . 
 = = Prevention = = 
 Prevention includes vaccination , environmental measures and appropriate treatment of other health problems . It is believed that , if appropriate preventive measures were instituted globally , mortality among children could be reduced by 400 @,@ 000 ; and , if proper treatment were universally available , childhood deaths could be decreased by another 600 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Vaccination = = = 
 Vaccination prevents against certain bacterial and viral pneumonias both in children and adults . Influenza vaccines are modestly effective at preventing symptoms of influenza . The Center for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) recommends yearly vaccination for every person 6 months and older . <unk> health care workers decreases the risk of viral pneumonia among their patients . 
 Vaccinations against Haemophilus influenzae and Streptococcus pneumoniae have good evidence to support their use . <unk> children against Streptococcus pneumoniae has led to a decreased incidence of these infections in adults , because many adults acquire infections from children . A Streptococcus pneumoniae vaccine is available for adults , and has been found to decrease the risk of invasive pneumococcal disease . Other vaccines for which there is support for a protective effect against pneumonia include pertussis , varicella , and measles . 
 = = = Medications = = = 
 When influenza outbreaks occur , medications such as amantadine or rimantadine may help prevent the condition ; however are associated with side effects . <unk> or oseltamivir decrease the chance that those exposed will develop symptoms ; however , it is recommended that potential side effects are taken into account . 
 = = = Other = = = 
 Smoking cessation and reducing indoor air pollution , such as that from cooking indoors with wood or dung , are both recommended . Smoking appears to be the single biggest risk factor for pneumococcal pneumonia in otherwise @-@ healthy adults . Hand hygiene and coughing into one 's sleeve may also be effective preventative measures . Wearing surgical masks by the sick may also prevent illness . 
 Appropriately treating underlying illnesses ( such as HIV / AIDS , diabetes mellitus , and malnutrition ) can decrease the risk of pneumonia . In children less than 6 months of age , exclusive breast feeding reduces both the risk and severity of disease . In those with HIV / AIDS and a CD4 count of less than 200 cells / <unk> the antibiotic <unk> / <unk> decreases the risk of Pneumocystis pneumonia and is also useful for prevention in those that are <unk> but do not have HIV . 
 Testing pregnant women for Group B Streptococcus and Chlamydia trachomatis , and administering antibiotic treatment , if needed , reduces rates of pneumonia in infants ; preventive measures for HIV transmission from mother to child may also be efficient . <unk> the mouth and throat of infants with meconium @-@ stained amniotic fluid has not been found to reduce the rate of aspiration pneumonia and may cause potential harm , thus this practice is not recommended in the majority of situations . In the frail elderly good oral health care may lower the risk of aspiration pneumonia . Zinc supplementation in children 2 months to five years old appears to reduce rates of pneumonia . 
 = = Management = = 
 Oral antibiotics , rest , simple analgesics , and fluids usually suffice for complete resolution . However , those with other medical conditions , the elderly , or those with significant trouble breathing may require more advanced care . If the symptoms worsen , the pneumonia does not improve with home treatment , or complications occur , hospitalization may be required . Worldwide , approximately 7 – 13 % of cases in children result in hospitalization , whereas in the developed world between 22 and 42 % of adults with community @-@ acquired pneumonia are admitted . The <unk> @-@ 65 score is useful for determining the need for admission in adults . If the score is 0 or 1 , people can typically be managed at home ; if it is 2 , a short hospital stay or close follow @-@ up is needed ; if it is 3 – 5 , hospitalization is recommended . In children those with respiratory distress or oxygen saturations of less than 90 % should be hospitalized . The utility of chest physiotherapy in pneumonia has not yet been determined . Non @-@ invasive ventilation may be beneficial in those admitted to the intensive care unit . Over @-@ the @-@ counter cough medicine has not been found to be effective nor has the use of zinc in children . There is insufficient evidence for <unk> . 
 = = = Bacterial = = = 
 Antibiotics improve outcomes in those with bacterial pneumonia . Antibiotic choice depends initially on the characteristics of the person affected , such as age , underlying health , and the location the infection was acquired . In the UK , treatment before culture results with amoxicillin is recommended as the first line for community @-@ acquired pneumonia , with doxycycline or clarithromycin as alternatives . In North America , where the " atypical " forms of community @-@ acquired pneumonia are more common , macrolides ( such as azithromycin or erythromycin ) , and doxycycline have displaced amoxicillin as first @-@ line outpatient treatment in adults . In children with mild or moderate symptoms , amoxicillin remains the first line . The use of fluoroquinolones in uncomplicated cases is discouraged due to concerns about side @-@ effects and generating resistance in light of there being no greater clinical benefit . 
 For those who require hospitalization and caught their pneumonia in the community the use of a β @-@ lactam such as <unk> plus macrolide such as azithromycin or a fluoroquinolones is recommended . The addition of corticosteroids also appears to improve outcomes . 
 The duration of treatment has traditionally been seven to ten days , but increasing evidence suggests that shorter courses ( three to five days ) are similarly effective . Recommended for hospital @-@ acquired pneumonia include third- and fourth @-@ generation cephalosporins , <unk> , fluoroquinolones , aminoglycosides , and vancomycin . These antibiotics are often given intravenously and used in combination . In those treated in hospital , more than 90 % improve with the initial antibiotics . 
 = = = Viral = = = 
 <unk> inhibitors may be used to treat viral pneumonia caused by influenza viruses ( influenza A and influenza B ) . No specific antiviral medications are recommended for other types of community acquired viral pneumonias including SARS coronavirus , adenovirus , hantavirus , and parainfluenza virus . Influenza A may be treated with rimantadine or amantadine , while influenza A or B may be treated with oseltamivir , zanamivir or <unk> . These are of most benefit if they are started within 48 hours of the onset of symptoms . Many strains of H5N1 influenza A , also known as avian influenza or " bird flu " , have shown resistance to rimantadine and amantadine . The use of antibiotics in viral pneumonia is recommended by some experts , as it is impossible to rule out a complicating bacterial infection . The British Thoracic Society recommends that antibiotics be withheld in those with mild disease . The use of corticosteroids is controversial . 
 = = = Aspiration = = = 
 In general , aspiration pneumonitis is treated conservatively with antibiotics indicated only for aspiration pneumonia . The choice of antibiotic will depend on several factors , including the suspected causative organism and whether pneumonia was acquired in the community or developed in a hospital setting . Common options include clindamycin , a combination of a beta @-@ lactam antibiotic and metronidazole , or an <unk> . Corticosteroids are sometimes used in aspiration pneumonia , but there is limited evidence to support their effectiveness . 
 = = Prognosis = = 
 With treatment , most types of bacterial pneumonia will stabilize in 3 – 6 days . It often takes a few weeks before most symptoms resolve . X @-@ ray finding typically clear within four weeks and mortality is low ( less than 1 % ) . In the elderly or people with other lung problems , recovery may take more than 12 weeks . In persons requiring hospitalization , mortality may be as high as 10 % , and in those requiring intensive care it may reach 30 – 50 % . Pneumonia is the most common hospital @-@ acquired infection that causes death . Before the advent of antibiotics , mortality was typically 30 % in those that were hospitalized . 
 Complications may occur in particular in the elderly and those with underlying health problems . This may include , among others : empyema , lung abscess , bronchiolitis obliterans , acute respiratory distress syndrome , sepsis , and worsening of underlying health problems . 
 = = = Clinical prediction rules = = = 
 Clinical prediction rules have been developed to more objectively predict outcomes of pneumonia . These rules are often used in deciding whether or not to <unk> the person . 
 Pneumonia severity index ( or PSI Score ) 
 <unk> @-@ 65 score , which takes into account the severity of symptoms , any underlying diseases , and age 
 = = = <unk> effusion , empyema , and abscess = = = 
 In pneumonia , a collection of fluid may form in the space that surrounds the lung . Occasionally , microorganisms will infect this fluid , causing an empyema . To distinguish an empyema from the more common simple <unk> effusion , the fluid may be collected with a needle ( <unk> ) , and examined . If this shows evidence of empyema , complete drainage of the fluid is necessary , often requiring a drainage catheter . In severe cases of empyema , surgery may be needed . If the infected fluid is not drained , the infection may persist , because antibiotics do not penetrate well into the pleural cavity . If the fluid is sterile , it must be drained only if it is causing symptoms or remains unresolved . 
 In rare circumstances , bacteria in the lung will form a pocket of infected fluid called a lung abscess . Lung abscesses can usually be seen with a chest X @-@ ray but frequently require a chest CT scan to confirm the diagnosis . <unk> typically occur in aspiration pneumonia , and often contain several types of bacteria . Long @-@ term antibiotics are usually adequate to treat a lung abscess , but sometimes the abscess must be drained by a surgeon or radiologist . 
 = = = Respiratory and circulatory failure = = = 
 Pneumonia can cause respiratory failure by triggering acute respiratory distress syndrome ( ARDS ) , which results from a combination of infection and inflammatory response . The lungs quickly fill with fluid and become stiff . This stiffness , combined with severe difficulties extracting oxygen due to the alveolar fluid , may require long periods of mechanical ventilation for survival . 
 Sepsis is a potential complication of pneumonia but occurs usually in people with poor immunity or <unk> . The organisms most commonly involved are Streptococcus pneumoniae , Haemophilus influenzae , and Klebsiella pneumoniae . Other causes of the symptoms should be considered such as a myocardial infarction or a pulmonary embolism . 
 = = Epidemiology = = 
 Pneumonia is a common illness affecting approximately 450 million people a year and occurring in all parts of the world . It is a major cause of death among all age groups resulting in 4 million deaths ( 7 % of the world 's total death ) yearly . Rates are greatest in children less than five , and adults older than 75 years . It occurs about five times more frequently in the developing world than in the developed world . Viral pneumonia accounts for about 200 million cases . In the United States , as of 2009 , pneumonia is the 8th leading cause of death . 
 = = = Children = = = 
 In 2008 , pneumonia occurred in approximately 156 million children ( 151 million in the developing world and 5 million in the developed world ) . In 2010 , it resulted in 1 @.@ 3 million deaths , or 18 % of all deaths in those under five years , of which 95 % occurred in the developing world . Countries with the greatest burden of disease include India ( 43 million ) , China ( 21 million ) and Pakistan ( 10 million ) . It is the leading cause of death among children in low income countries . Many of these deaths occur in the newborn period . The World Health Organization estimates that one in three newborn infant deaths is due to pneumonia . Approximately half of these deaths can be prevented , as they are caused by the bacteria for which an effective vaccine is available . In 2011 , pneumonia was the most common reason for admission to the hospital after an emergency department visit in the U.S. for infants and children . 
 = = History = = 
 Pneumonia has been a common disease throughout human history . The symptoms were described by Hippocrates ( c . 460 BC – 370 BC ) : " <unk> , and <unk> affections , are to be thus observed : If the fever be acute , and if there be pains on either side , or in both , and if expiration be if cough be present , and the <unk> expectorated be of a blond or livid color , or likewise thin , frothy , and florid , or having any other character different from the common ... When pneumonia is at its height , the case is beyond remedy if he is not purged , and it is bad if he has dyspnoea , and urine that is thin and acrid , and if sweats come out about the neck and head , for such sweats are bad , as proceeding from the suffocation , rales , and the violence of the disease which is obtaining the upper hand . " However , Hippocrates referred to pneumonia as a disease " named by the ancients " . He also reported the results of surgical drainage of <unk> . Maimonides ( 1135 – 1204 AD ) observed : " The basic symptoms that occur in pneumonia and that are never lacking are as follows : acute fever , sticking <unk> pain in the side , short rapid breaths , serrated pulse and cough . " This clinical description is quite similar to those found in modern textbooks , and it reflected the extent of medical knowledge through the Middle Ages into the 19th century . 
 Edwin <unk> was the first to observe bacteria in the airways of persons having died of pneumonia in 1875 . Initial work identifying the two common bacterial causes , Streptococcus pneumoniae and Klebsiella pneumoniae , was performed by Carl Friedländer and Albert <unk> in 1882 and 1884 , respectively . Friedländer 's initial work introduced the Gram stain , a fundamental laboratory test still used today to identify and categorize bacteria . Christian Gram 's paper describing the procedure in 1884 helped to differentiate the two bacteria , and showed that pneumonia could be caused by more than one microorganism . 
 Sir William Osler , known as " the father of modern medicine " , appreciated the death and disability caused by pneumonia , describing it as the " captain of the men of death " in 1918 , as it had overtaken tuberculosis as one of the leading causes of death in this time . This phrase was originally coined by John Bunyan in reference to " consumption " ( tuberculosis ) . Osler also described pneumonia as " the old man 's friend " as death was often quick and painless when there were much slower and more painful ways to die . 
 Several developments in the 1900s improved the outcome for those with pneumonia . With the advent of penicillin and other antibiotics , modern surgical techniques , and intensive care in the 20th century , mortality from pneumonia , which had approached 30 % , dropped precipitously in the developed world . Vaccination of infants against Haemophilus influenzae type B began in 1988 and led to a dramatic decline in cases shortly thereafter . Vaccination against Streptococcus pneumoniae in adults began in 1977 , and in children in 2000 , resulting in a similar decline . 
 = = Society and culture = = 
 = = = Awareness = = = 
 Due to the relatively low awareness of the disease , 12 November was declared as the annual World Pneumonia Day , a day for concerned citizens and policy makers to take action against the disease , in 2009 . 
 = = = Costs = = = 
 The global economic cost of community @-@ acquired pneumonia has been estimated at $ 17 billion annually . Other estimates are considerably higher . In 2012 the estimated aggregate costs of treating pneumonia in the United States were $ 20 billion ; the median cost of a single pneumonia @-@ related hospitalization is over $ 15 @,@ 000 . According to data released by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services , average 2012 hospital charges for inpatient treatment of uncomplicated pneumonia in the U.S. were $ 24 @,@ 549 and ranged as high as $ 124 @,@ 000 . The average cost of an emergency room consult for pneumonia was $ 943 and the average cost for medication was $ 66 . Aggregate annual costs of treating pneumonia in Europe have been estimated at € 10 billion . 
 = Bowie Seamount = 
 Bowie Seamount is a large submarine volcano in the northeastern Pacific Ocean , located 180 km ( 110 mi ) west of Haida Gwaii , British Columbia , Canada . 
 The seamount is named after William Bowie of the Coast & Geodetic Survey . 
 The volcano has a flat @-@ topped summit ( thus making it a guyot ) rising about 3 @,@ 000 m ( 10 @,@ 000 ft ) above the seabed , to 24 m ( 79 ft ) below sea level . The seamount lies at the southern end of a long underwater volcanic mountain range called the Pratt @-@ Welker or Kodiak @-@ Bowie Seamount chain , stretching from the Aleutian Trench in the north almost to the Queen Charlotte Islands in the south . 
 Bowie Seamount lies on the Pacific Plate , a large segment of the Earth 's surface which moves in a northwestern direction under the Pacific Ocean . Its northern and eastern flanks are surrounded by neighboring submarine volcanoes ; Hodgkins Seamount on its northern flank and Graham Seamount on its eastern flank . 
 = = Geology = = 
 = = = Structure = = = 
 Seamounts are volcanic mountains which rise from the seafloor . The unlimited supply of water surrounding these volcanoes can cause them to behave differently from volcanoes on land . The lava emitted in eruptions at Bowie Seamount is made of basalt , a common gray to black or dark brown volcanic rock low in silica content ( the lava is mafic ) . When basaltic lava makes contact with the cold sea water , it may cool very rapidly to form pillow lava , through which the hot lava breaks to form another pillow . Pillow lava is typically fine @-@ grained , due to rapid cooling , with a glassy crust , and has radial jointing . 
 With a height of at least 3 @,@ 000 m ( 10 @,@ 000 ft ) and rising to within only 24 m ( 79 ft ) of the sea surface , Bowie Seamount is the shallowest submarine volcano on the British Columbia Coast , as well as in Canadian waters , and one of the shallowest submarine volcanoes in the northeast Pacific Ocean . Most seamounts are found hundreds to thousands of metres below sea level , and are therefore considered to be within the deep sea . In contrast , if Bowie Seamount were on land it would be about 600 m ( 2 @,@ 000 ft ) higher than Whistler Mountain in southwestern British Columbia and 800 m ( 2 @,@ 600 ft ) lower than Mount Robson , the highest mountain in the Canadian portion of the Rocky Mountains . 
 Bowie Seamount is about 55 km ( 34 mi ) long and 24 km ( 15 mi ) wide . Its flat @-@ topped summit is made of weakly consolidated tephra and consists of two terraces . The lowest terrace is about 230 m ( 750 ft ) below sea level while the highest is about 80 m ( 260 ft ) below sea level , but contains steep @-@ sided secondary summits that rise to within 25 m ( 82 ft ) below sea level . From a physical perspective , the effective size of the submarine volcano is possibly a lot greater than its mass alone would suggest . The effects of other submarine volcanoes along the Pacific Northwest , including Cobb Seamount off the coast of Washington , can be noticed in the composition and abundance of the tiny floating organisms called plankton up to 30 km ( 20 mi ) away from the seamount summit . Because of its similar size , Bowie Seamount most likely has a similar effect on its adjacent waters . 
 = = = Eruptive history = = = 
 Bowie Seamount was formed by submarine eruptions along fissures in the seabed throughout the last glacial , or " Wisconsinian " , period , which began about 110 @,@ 000 years ago and ended between 10 @,@ 000 and 15 @,@ 000 years ago . While most submarine volcanoes in the Pacific Ocean are more than one million years old , Bowie Seamount is relatively quite young . Its base was formed less than one million years ago but its summit shows evidence of volcanic activity as recently as 18 @,@ 000 years ago . This is very recent in geological terms , suggesting the volcano may yet have some ongoing volcanic activity . 
 Close to Bowie 's submerged summit , former coastlines cut by wave actions and beach deposits show that the submarine volcano would once have stood above sea level , as either a single volcanic island or as a small cluster of shoals that would have been volcanically active . Sea levels during the last glacial period , when Bowie Seamount was formed , were at least 100 m ( 300 ft ) lower than they are today . 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 The origin of the volcanism that produced Bowie Seamount is not without controversy . Geological studies indicate that the Kodiak @-@ Bowie Seamount chain may have formed above a center of upwelling magma called a mantle plume . The seamounts comprising the Kodiak @-@ Bowie Seamount chain would be formed above the mantle plume and carried away from the mantle plume 's magmatic source as the Pacific Plate moves in a northwesterly direction towards the Aleutian Trench , along the southern coastline of Alaska . 
 The volcanic rocks which make up some of the seamounts in the Kodiak @-@ Bowie Seamount chain are unusual in that they have an acid @-@ neutralizing chemical substance like typical ocean @-@ island basalts but a low percentage of strontium as found at mid @-@ ocean ridge basalts . However , the strontium @-@ bearing volcanic rocks comprising Bowie Seamount also contain lead . Therefore , the magma mixtures that formed Bowie Seamount seem to have originated from varying degrees of partial melting of a depleted source in the Earth 's mantle and basalts which had distinctly high lead isotopic ratios . Estimates during geological studies indicate that the abundance of the depleted @-@ source component ranges from 60 to 80 percent . 
 Some aspects of the origin of the Kodiak @-@ Bowie Seamount chain remain uncertain . The volcanic rocks found at the Tuzo Wilson Seamounts south of Bowie are fresh glassy pillow basalts of recent age , as would be expected if these seamounts are located above or close to a mantle plume south of the Queen Charlotte Islands . However , the origin of Bowie Seamount is less certain because even though the seafloor which Bowie lies on formed 16 million years ago during the late Miocene period , Bowie 's summit shows evidence of recent volcanic activity . If Bowie Seamount formed above a mantle plume at the site presently occupied by the Tuzo Wilson Seamounts , it has been displaced from its magma source by about 625 km ( 390 mi ) at a rate of about 4 cm ( 2 in ) per year . The geologic history of Bowie Seamount is consistent with its flat @-@ topped eroded summit , but the source for Bowie 's recent volcanic activity remains uncertain . Still others , such as Dickens Seamount and Pratt Seamount further north of Bowie Seamount , fall a little to the side of the chain 's expected trend . Another hypothesized origin of some or all seamounts in the Kodiak @-@ Bowie Seamount chain is that they formed on top of the Explorer Ridge , a divergent tectonic plate boundary west of Vancouver Island , and have been displaced from it by seafloor spreading . 
 Although some of the seamounts in the Kodiak @-@ Bowie Seamount chain appear to follow the expected age progression for a mantle plume trail , others , such as Denson Seamount , are older than that hypothesis would suggest . As a result , the Kodiak @-@ Bowie Seamount chain has also been proposed by geoscientists to be a mix of ridge and mantle plume volcanism . 
 = = Biology = = 
 Bowie Seamount supports a biologically rich area with a vigorous ecosystem . Studies have recorded high densities of crab , sea stars , sea anemones , sponges , squid , octopus , rockfish , halibut and <unk> . Eight species of marine mammal have been found in the Bowie Seamount area , including Steller sea lions , orca , humpback and sperm whales , along with 16 varieties of seabirds . This has made Bowie Seamount a rare habitat in the northeast Pacific Ocean and one of the most biologically rich submarine volcanoes on Earth . The rich marine life is due to the intense food supply of microscopic animals and plants , including phytoplankton and zooplankton . 
 = = = Bowie Seamount Marine Protected Area = = = 
 Because of its biological richness , Bowie Seamount was designated as Canada 's seventh Marine Protected Area on April 19 , 2008 under the Oceans Act and has been described as an " Oceanic Oasis " . The announcement was made by federal Fisheries Minister Loyola Hearn and <unk> , President of the Council of the Haida Nation , in <unk> on the Queen Charlotte Islands , also called Haida Gwaii . During the announcement , Natural Resources Minister Gary Lunn said : " Bowie Seamount is an oceanic oasis in the deep sea , a rare and ecologically rich marine area , and our government is proud to take action to ensure it is protected . By working in partnership with the Council of the Haida Nation and groups like the World Wildlife Fund @-@ Canada , we are ensuring this unique treasure is preserved for future generations . " It measures about 118 km ( 73 mi ) long and 80 km ( 50 mi ) wide , totaling an area of 6 @,@ 131 km2 ( 2 @,@ 367 sq mi ) . This is the northernmost of the two Marine Protected Areas on the British Columbia Coast ; the southernmost is the Endeavour Hydrothermal Vents , an active hydrothermal vent zone of the Juan de Fuca Ridge 250 km ( 160 mi ) southwest of Vancouver Island . The Bowie Seamount Marine Protected Area also includes Peirce Seamount ( also called Davidson Seamount ) and Hodgkins Seamount . 
 = = Diving explorations and studies = = 
 The shallow depth of Bowie Seamount makes it the only underwater mountain off the British Columbia Coast easily reached using scuba diving equipment . In March 1969 , dives were made at the submarine volcano by Canadian Forces Maritime Command divers from the CSS Parizeau during a new study for device package placement . Two dives were made to the summit where monochrome photographs were taken to establish the environment of Bowie 's base and some biological tests were gathered to detect possible harmful organisms , including plants , animals , or bacteria . These specimens were identified at the Pacific Biological Station in Nanaimo , creating a list of eleven varieties of sea bottom invertebrates . 
 In August 1969 , Canadian Forces Maritime Command divers made more dives during scientific studies by the Fisheries Research Board of Canada . They recognized the existence of very thick groups of rockfish floating on top of Bowie 's flat @-@ topped summit and a variety of bottom life . A number of monochrome photographs were taken and a few seaweeds were gathered for documents , but no species record was created for other types of oceanic life around Bowie Seamount . 
 In November 1996 , a release of the National Geographic Magazine comprised a piece of writing titled " Realm of the Seamount " , illustrating dives made at Bowie Seamount by two diving explorers named Bill <unk> and Eric Hiner . They explored Bowie Seamount down to depths of 50 m ( 160 ft ) using scuba diving equipment while the slopes of the seamount down to 150 m ( 490 ft ) . Images photographed by the two diving explorers featured one of Bowie 's rugged peaks covered with thick seaweeds and multicoloured sea bottom invertebrates . Thick groups of young rockfish were detected on Bowie 's steep flanks . 
 Scientist Bill Austin of <unk> Marine Lab in the Northeast Pacific looked over a video film earned throughout the National Geographic dives to verify the flora and fauna of the sea bottom surrounding Bowie Seamount . From the video film , Austin recognized some of the most noticeable invertebrates and noted that a few species more regularly occurring between high @-@ tide and low @-@ tide marks and shallow environments were found deeper than might normally be expected , and were bigger than normal . 
 A team of five divers , led by photographer / videographer Neil McDaniel , visited the seamount August 3 – 5 , 2003 and conducted a biological and photographic survey of the summit down to depths of about 40 m ( 130 ft ) . A total of 18 taxa of algae , 83 taxa of conspicuous invertebrates and 12 taxa of fishes were documented , approximately 180 underwater still photographs were taken and approximately 90 minutes of digital video were recorded . Of particular note were the dense schools of rockfish hovering over the summit and numerous curious <unk> . 
