 = = Indigenous people = = 
 To the Haida Nation , the indigenous people who played a key role to establish the Bowie Seamount Marine Protected Area , the submarine volcano is called <unk> <unk> . In their language it means " Supernatural Being Looking Outward " . 
 This seamount has long been recognized by the Haida Nation as a special place . <unk> , President of the Council of the Haida Nation , has said : " <unk> <unk> represents a shift in recognizing the need for respect and care for the Earth . This is a very significant turning point in reversing the trends that have been leading to the depletion of life in the sea . " 
 = = Marine hazard = = 
 Given its shallow depth , Bowie Seamount is a potential marine hazard because of the strong storms that strike the British Columbia Coast during winter . Waves have been recorded with heights of more than 20 m ( 70 ft ) , enough to expose the summit and cause devastation to any vessel <unk> the area . For this reason , Bowie Seamount is recognized as a hazard to navigation and is avoided by shipping vessels . 
 = Kangchu system = 
 The Kangchu system was a socio @-@ economic system of organisation and administration developed by Chinese agricultural settlers in Johor during the 19th century . The settlers organised themselves into informal associations ( similar to the Kongsi organisations found in other Chinese communities ) , and chose a leader from among themselves . In Chinese , " Kangchu " ( Chinese : <unk> , Pinyin : <unk> <unk> , Teochew : <unk> <unk> ) literally means ‘ master of the riverbank ’ , and was the title given to the Chinese headmen of these river settlements . The " Kangchu " leaders are also called " Kapitan " . 
 The term " Kangchu " became widely used during the 19th century , as Chinese immigrants began to settle in and around Johor state and set up gambier and pepper plantations . The social and economic welfare of the early Chinese settlers came under the charge of local Chinese leaders , who were responsible for running these agricultural plantations , which were situated along the river banks . The Kangchu system traces its origins from the 18th century when Chinese coolies settled in Penang and Riau and set up gambier and pepper plantations there . The sovereign rulers of Johor , Temenggong Ibrahim and his successor , Sultan Abu Bakar , took up the Kangchu system during the first half of the 19th century to provide a more organised form of administration as Chinese immigrants began to settle in the state in great numbers and developed the state 's agricultural economy . Variants of the Kangchu system also thrived in other parts of Maritime Southeast Asia , where gambier and pepper were cultivated and where there were significant Chinese populations . The Kangchu and coolies who worked in the gambier and pepper plantations were mainly of Teochew origin , and were generally first- or second @-@ generation Chinese immigrants . In 1917 , the British colonial government in Johor implemented an act which abolished the Kangchu system in the state , and the value for gambier declined during the early 20th century . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 The origins of the Kangchu system dates back to the mid @-@ 18th century , when early Chinese settlers in Penang experimented in cash crop plantations with various types of crops , including pepper , gambier , <unk> and clove . The plantations were abandoned by the late 18th @-@ century , as Penang experienced wars from Buginese seafarers that resulted in many gambier plantations being destroyed ; contributing to the decline in plantations was the growing popularity of the spice trade that reaped much greater profits . At the beginning of the 19th century , these Chinese settlers began to look south to Malacca and Singapore , where gambier and pepper plantations had also been established . 
 In the late 1820s , Chinese settlers from Singapore also began to look towards Johor for gambier and pepper cultivation at the encouragement of Temenggong Abdul Rahman and his successor , Daing Ibrahim . As more Chinese settlers established gambier and pepper plantations in Johor during the 1840s , Temenggong Ibrahim formed a bureaucracy made up of Malay officials to oversee administrative affairs upon the Kangchu . He began issuing official permits , known as Surat Sungai ( transliterated as " river documents " ) in Malay , to the Kangchu ( leaders of the settlers ) which permitted them to establish these plantations along the river banks . In turn , the Kangchu were required to pay taxes from the profits generated by the gambier and pepper farms and the Surat Sungai , which had to be renewed after a specified period of time . 
 = = = Mid to late @-@ 19th century = = = 
 The first gambier and pepper plantations appeared in Southern Johor , notably Skudai . Lau Lib Keng , a Chinese settler based in Skudai , was the first person to receive a Surat Sungai , whereby the river banks of Skudai were leased to Lau for the cultivation of gambier and pepper . More Chinese settlers came to Johor from the 1850s onwards , and forested areas in Southern Johor such as Tebrau , <unk> and <unk> were cleared for the cultivation of gambier and pepper . By the time Temenggong Ibrahim 's son , Abu Bakar took office from his father in 1862 , at least 37 Surat Sungai have been issued to various Kangchu , all of whom were collectively responsible for the operations of the 1 @,@ 200 gambier and pepper farms in the state . Most of these Chinese leaders were also members of secret societies , and communal warfare often broke out in Singapore between different dialect groups as a result of conflicting economic interests . From the late 1850s onwards , the Kangchu began to exert political influence in the state affairs by establishing close ties with Temenggong Abu Bakar . In 1865 , Abu Bakar granted official recognition to the Teochew @-@ dominated Johor branch of the Ngee Heng Kongsi after a Kangchu , Tan Kee Soon , raised a small army to subdue Sultan Ali 's forces , from whom Abu Bakar was facing considerable dissent but was unable to raise an organised army . Abu Bakar nevertheless called for the Ngee Heng Kongsi to accept Chinese settlers of other dialect groups to prevent possible communal warfare as a result of conflicting economic interests . 
 The crop produce from these plantations were generally exported to other countries from Singapore with the assistance of Chinese merchants based in that city . From the 1860s onwards , many of these Kangchu chalked up debts and began to sell their property rights to these merchants or to larger business magnates ( Kongsi in Teochew ) based in Singapore , who were known to the locals as Tuan Sungai ( literally Masters of the River ) . The Kangchu then were often hired as supervisors or managers by the merchants to keep watch on the day @-@ to @-@ day operations of the gambier and pepper plantations . Temenggong Abu Bakar began to issue contract @-@ style letters of recognition to these Kangchu ; the letters were known by their Malay name Surat <unk> . 
 As the gambier and pepper plantations expanded in the 1870s , the more established Kangchu were entrusted with larger blocks of farms and made contracts with Chinese merchants from Singapore . The profits generated from harvests of these plantations formed the bulk of Johor 's economy , and financed the development of Johor 's infrastructure . Abu Bakar 's relationship with the Chinese leaders was excellent , and he appointed many of them to political positions in the state . Of particular note , Abu Bakar appointed two Chinese leaders to the Johor State Council : a Kangchu from Chaozhou , Tan Hiok Nee , and a contractor from Taishan , Wong Ah Fook , who also owned gambier and pepper farms in Mersing in the 1880s . As the land along the river banks in Southern Johor was already taken by the earlier waves of Chinese settlers , newer Chinese settlers began migrating northwards in the 1870s and established new gambier and pepper plantations further north ; new plantations were established in Yong Peng , Batu Pahat , <unk> , Endau and Kota Tinggi . In particular , Abu Bakar actively encouraged Chinese settlers to establish plantations in Muar , shortly after the British Colonial Government ruled in favour of Abu Bakar over Tengku Alam Shah ( Sultan Ali 's eldest son ) and his family , and granted Abu Bakar control of Muar . 
 = = = Decline = = = 
 At the end of the 19th century , Johor 's economy began to diversify from gambier and pepper plantations to other agricultural crops . Starting with coffee in 1881 , crops such as tapioca , tea , pineapple and rubber were introduced into the state . Coffee and tapioca was quickly abandoned in the 1890s when the value of these crops experienced a drop , while rubber was introduced and quickly established a strong foothold in Johor , as the world demand for rubber increased greatly around 1910 . Prices for gambier plunged between 1905 and 1906 , and many Kangchu abandoned gambier in favour of rubber . Further decline in the number of gambier and pepper plantations was fuelled by the colonial government 's suppression of traditional farming methods employed by the Kangchu for planting gambier and pepper ; these method led to soil exhaustion and a depletion of forests which was used as firewood in small factories . A few years before the Kangchu system was abolished , exports for both gambier and pepper plunged by a further 60 % between 1912 and 1917 . 
 The British had long frowned upon the Kangchu because of their links with secret societies in Singapore as well as their indulgence in social vices such as gambling and opium smoking , activities which the British had been actively suppressing in Singapore and the Federated Malay States . As early as 1890 , the Governor of the Straits Settlements , Cecil Clementi Smith had lobbied Abu Bakar to adopt the Societies Ordinance and ban the Ngee Heng Kongsi , but was promptly turned down . Shortly after the British appointed an adviser to Johor , the British began attributing the high crime rates in the state to Chinese settlers loyal to the Kangchu . In 1915 , the Johor state government , now effectively under the control of the British Colonial Government , passed the Societies Enactment which prompted the dissolution of the Ngee Heng Kongsi the following year . The Kangchu system was officially abolished December 1917 in an enactment passed by the Johor state government , which was by then effectively administered by the British colonial government . 
 = = Role of the Kangchu = = 
 The Temenggong of Johor ( later Sultan of Johor ) conferred upon the Kangchu with a large degree of administrative autonomy within the plot of land which each was granted . These included the right to collect taxes on behalf for the Temenggong , as well as for the welfare needs among the Chinese coolies living within the plot of land . The Kangchu generally granted tax exemption for the basic consumption by workers within the settlement . Some coolies took on new jobs such as shopkeepers and traders to serve the needs of other coolies within the settlement , and the Kangchu granted tax exemptions to these shopkeepers and traders on the sale of pork , opium and alcohol as well . The Kangchu reserved a portion of the land for the construction of a settlement for the coolies , from which small towns were formed and became the administrative centre of the Kangchu . These administrative centres were generally established within the coolie settlements located at the foot of the river , and were known as <unk> ( literally " Foot of the river " , Chinese : <unk> , Pinyin : <unk> <unk> , Teochew : <unk> <unk> ) . 
 The Kangchu acted as the middleman in the bulk purchase of the settlement 's commodities through suppliers based in Singapore . In particular , opium was highly popular among the coolies , although frowned upon by the British who took strong measures to suppress its distribution . The Kangchu formed illegal opium syndicates which had links to Chinese leaders from Singapore and other Malay states in the north , particularly Selangor . British contempt for the Kangchu was also fuelled by the coolies ' preference for gambling and prostitution , both of which were seen as social vices by the British colonial government . The Kangchu maintained friendly relations with the Temenggong ( later Sultan ) , and worked closely with the Ngee Heng Kongsi in administrative matters . In particular , the state government attempted to forge close relations with the Kangchu by the appointment of a Malay official who was conversant in Teochew and literate in Chinese characters , Mohamed Salleh bin Perang , as the liaison officer between the Temenggong and the Kangchu . Several years later , in the early 1870s , the state government worked closely with the Ngee Heng Kongsi to draft the Kanun Kangchu which had legal clauses that defined the powers of the Kangchu in Johor . The Kanun Kangchu contained 81 clauses in total , and was implemented in 1873 . 
 = = Variants outside Johor = = 
 = = = Singapore = = = 
 Chinese settlers began migrating from the Riau Islands to Singapore in the 19th century shortly before the founding of Singapore by Sir Stamford Raffles in 1819 . The native Malays joined the Chinese in growing gambier , although they cultivated it for subsistence rather than for commercial purposes . The number of gambier and pepper farms expanded greatly between 1819 and 1840 , fuelled by the increasing demand for gambier by Chinese traders from China as well as pepper by European traders . As land nearer to the town in the south was quickly used up in the 1820s , the Kangchu began to establish farms near the northern parts of Singapore , particularly stretches of land across the Straits of Johor from Jurong , to the west of Punggol in the northeast . By 1851 , there were about 800 gambier and pepper farms which covered 75 % of Singapore 's land surface , of which 24 @,@ 220 acres ( 98 @.@ 0 km2 ) was dedicated to gambier while 2 @,@ 614 was dedicated to pepper . 
 In the 1850s and 1860s , many Kangchu abandoned their plantations in Singapore as gambier produce declined due to over farming of the soil , and began to establish new gambier and pepper plantations in neighbouring Johor . Nevertheless , many of these Kangchu settled down as merchants in Singapore and managed the gambier and pepper farms by proxy , mainly through the liaison body of the Ngee Heng Kongsi which had members in Singapore and Johor . Some of these merchants purchased the property rights of gambier and pepper farms from the Kangchu in Johor , who would then assume managerial tasks to ensure the smooth operation of the plantation and the settlement . 
 Unlike its counterpart in Johor , the Ngee Heng Kongsi ( also called " <unk> Hin Kongsi " in Hokkien ) was recognised as an illegal society in Singapore and its activities were actively suppressed by the colonial government . Factionalism appeared within the Ngee Heng Kongsi in Singapore by the 1850s , as business leaders from various dialect groups were unable to agree upon key issues . In particular , relations between the Teochews and Hokkiens were hostile , partly because some Hokkien merchants competed with the Teochew merchants in the gambier and pepper trade , most of whom had established their bases in the Boat Quay area along the Singapore River . 
 The existence of the Kangchu was not recognised by the British colonial government , even though they exercised a similar degree of autonomy as their counterparts in Johor . Nevertheless , the Kangchu in Singapore had easy access to forested land in Singapore compared to their counterparts in Johor , as the British colonial government adopted a laissez @-@ faire attitude to the Kangchu and imposed very little regulation on their agricultural activities . However , the British were wary of the fact that many Kangchu in Singapore were members of the Ngee Heng Kongsi , which was illegal in Singapore and enjoyed monopoly rights over the regional opium trade . The British appointed a Chinese official among the Kangchu to oversee the social and economic affairs of the gambier and pepper plantations in Singapore and to act as the intermediary . 
 = = = Riau Islands = = = 
 The first gambier and pepper plantations appeared in the Riau Islands in the 1730s , after the Buginese warrior and second <unk> Muda of Riau , Daing <unk> , brought Chinese coolies from Malaya to Riau for the purpose of gambier cultivation , which was then widely used for medication among the locals . Another exodus of Chinese migrated to Riau in 1740 following unrest which erupted in Batavia , during which many Chinese were massacred . Chinese settlement in Riau continued into the 18th century , the majority of them coming from the <unk> area in Guangdong province , along with a sizeable minority from the southern parts of Fujian province . 
 Gambier and pepper farming were mainly confined to the Bintan ( formerly spelled as <unk> ) and Galang Islands . Similar to the Kangchu system in Johor , gambier and pepper plantations were established on grants of land by the <unk> Muda of Riau , who would issue land permits ( Surat Sungai ) to the Kangchu who would direct the operations of the plantation and workers within the settlement . In the early and middle 19th century , many Chinese settlers and merchants from Riau relocated their businesses to Singapore , and established trading links between Riau and Singapore . These settlers and merchants still maintained trading links with Riau , as the Kangchu from Riau often shipped their produce to Singapore for free trade to evade taxes imposed by the Dutch colonial government . Like Singapore , competition for the gambier and pepper trade between the Teochews and Hokkiens in Riau led to communal tensions and sporadic violence in Riau during the 1840s and 1850s . In the early 20th century , the Chinese abandoned gambier and pepper plantations in favour of other agricultural practices , as the worldwide prices for gambier experienced a drastic drop in value and many pepper plants fell prey to a disease plaguing the archipelago . 
 = = = Sarawak = = = 
 The first Chinese immigrants settled along the coastal regions of Sarawak in significant numbers from the 18th century onwards and were engaged in the metal mining industry , mainly for gold and bauxite . As the supply of gold became exhausted from the 1820s onwards , the Chinese miners gradually turned to trade and agriculture . The Chinese of Teochew and Hakka heritage established gambier and pepper plantations in the 1870s and 1880s , and the White Rajah of Sarawak began to organise an administrative system for these plantations similar to the Kangchu system in Johor . The Kangchu of each plantation was appointed by the Charles Brooke , the then @-@ White Rajah . Each Kangchu was given responsibilities to oversee the operations of the plantations under his jurisdiction and the welfare of the coolies living there . In 1875 , the British promulgated a set of laws which defined the roles and responsibilities of the Kangchu ; they were modelled very closely to the Kanun Kangchu that was introduced by Sultan Abu Bakar of Johor in 1873 . 
 Charles Brooke encouraged the immigration of the Chinese coolies , beginning in the 1860s , to expand the state 's gambier and pepper industry . Chinese settlers in neighbouring Sabah and Pontianak also established gambier and pepper plantations , although they existed as independent fiefdoms . These plantations rose to become one of the state 's major industries as worldwide prices for gambier went up during the 1880s and 1890s . In the 20th century , as worldwide gambier prices took a dive , the Kangchu channelled their efforts into pepper and opium cultivation in the state . Sarawak 's Kangchu system fell into obscurity in the 1920s , as the opium trade with Hong Kong steadily declined during the course of the decade . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The Kangchu system facilitated the growth of the gambier and pepper plantations and developed Johor 's and Singapore 's economies in the 19th century . The development of Johor 's inland towns were attributed to the efforts by the various Kangchu , who were responsible for drawing the settlement plan for the coolies living within the plantation they were working on , from which new towns were formed . The Chinese immigrant population in Johor and Singapore grew in size during this period ; Riau also experienced a similar growth during the 18th century . As a result of mass immigration by the Chinese into Johor , the Chinese quickly outnumbered the Malays in the state , although many Chinese coolies relocated to Singapore or other parts of Malaya as the gambier and pepper industry declined in the 20th century . Several towns and other places in Johor and Singapore , built upon sites of former gambier and pepper plantations , are named after former features of the Kangchu system , and are largely populated by ethnic Chinese . 
 The Teochew dialect became the lingua franca among the Chinese in many parts of Johor and Riau , as the majority of the Chinese from these areas were of Teochew origin , many of whom were descended from the Chinese coolies who had worked in the gambier and pepper plantations . The Teochews form the second @-@ largest dialect group among Chinese Singaporeans , and many families can trace their family ancestry to immigrants who were Kangchu or coolies in these plantations . 
 = Bridgwater = 
 Bridgwater is a market town and civil parish in Somerset , England . At the 2011 census , it had a population of 35 @,@ 886 . 
 Bridgwater is at the edge of the Somerset Levels , in level and well @-@ wooded country ; to the north are the Mendips and to the west the Quantock hills . The town lies along both sides of the River Parrett , 10 miles ( 16 km ) from its mouth , has been a major port and trading centre and maintains a large industrial base . It is linked to Taunton by the Bridgwater and Taunton Canal . Bridgwater is between two junctions of the M5 motorway and Bridgwater railway station is on the main railway line between Bristol and Taunton . 
 Historically , the town had a politically radical tendency . The Battle of Sedgemoor , where the Monmouth Rebellion was finally crushed in 1685 , was fought nearby . Notable buildings include the Church of St Mary and the house in Blake Street , largely restored , which was the birthplace of Admiral Blake in 1598 , and is now the Blake Museum . The town has an arts centre and plays host to the annual Bridgwater Guy Fawkes Carnival . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 It is thought that the town was originally called Brigg , meaning quay . It has been argued that the name may instead come from the Old English brycg ( gang plank ) or Old Norse <unk> ( quay ) , though this idea has been opposed on etymological grounds . In the Domesday Book the town is listed as <unk> , while <unk> was also used . After the Norman invasion the land was given to Walter of Douai , hence becoming known variously as Burgh @-@ Walter , <unk> @-@ Walter and Brigg @-@ Walter , eventually corrupted to Bridgwater . An alternative version is that it derives from " Bridge of Walter " ( i.e. Walter 's Bridge ) . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Bridgwater proper = = = 
 Bridgwater is mentioned both in the Domesday Book and in the earlier Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle dating from around 800 , owing its origin as a trade centre to its position at the mouth of the chief river in Somerset . It was formerly part of the Hundred of North Petherton . In a legend of Alfred the Great , he burnt some cakes while hiding in the marshes of Athelney near Bridgwater , after the Danish invasion in 875 , while in 878 the major engagement of the Battle of Cynwit may have been at nearby Cannington . 
 William Briwere was granted the lordship of the Manor of Bridgwater by John of England in 1201 , and founded Bridgwater Friary . Through Briwere 's influence , King John granted three charters in 1200 ; for the construction of Bridgwater Castle , for the creation of a borough , and for a market . Bridgwater Castle was a substantial structure built in Old Red Sandstone , covering a site of 8 or 9 acres ( 32 @,@ 000 to 36 @,@ 000 m ² ) . A tidal moat , up to 65 feet ( 20 m ) wide in places , flowed about along the line of the modern thoroughfares of Fore Street and Castle Moat , and between Northgate and Chandos Street . The main entrance opposite the Cornhill was built with a pair of adjacent gates and drawbridges . In addition to a keep , located at the south @-@ east corner of what is now King Square , documents show that the complex included a dungeon , chapel , stables and a bell tower . Built on the only raised ground in the town , the castle controlled the crossing of the town bridge . A 12 feet ( 4 m ) thick portion of the castle wall and water gate can still be seen on West Quay , and the remains of a wall of a building that was probably built within the castle can be viewed in Queen Street . The foundations of the tower forming the north @-@ east corner of the castle are buried beneath <unk> House . William Briwere also founded St John 's hospital which , by the time of the Dissolution of the Monasteries under Henry VIII , was worth the substantial sum of almost 121 pounds , as well as starting the construction of the town 's first stone bridge . William Briwere also went on to found the Franciscan Bridgwater Friary in the town . 
 During the 11th century Second Barons ' War against Henry III , Bridgwater was held by the barons against the King . Other charters were granted by Henry III in 1227 ( confirmed in 1318 , 1370 , 1380 ) , which gave Bridgwater a guild merchant which was important for the regulation of trade , allowing guild members to trade freely in the town , and to impose payments and restrictions upon others . Bridgwater 's peasants under Nicholas Frampton took part in the Peasants ' Revolt of 1381 , sacking Sydenham House , murdering the local tax collectors and destroying the records . 
 Bridgwater was incorporated by charter of Edward IV ( 1468 ) , confirmed in 1554 , 1586 , 1629 and 1684 . Parliamentary representation as a borough constituency began in 1295 and continued until the Reform Act of 1870 , when the original borough constituency was disenfranchised for corruption . From 4 July 1870 the town was incorporated within the county constituency of West Somerset . When Parliamentary seats were redistributed for the 1885 general election , a new county division of Bridgwater was created . A variety of markets were granted to the town during the Middle Ages including a Midsummer fair ( on 24 June ) , one at the beginning of Lent was added in 1468 , and one at Michaelmas . The importance of these markets and fairs for the sale of wool and wine , and later of cloth , declined after medieval times . The shipping trade of the port revived after the construction of the new dock in 1841 , and corn and timber have been imported for centuries . 
 Gunpowder Plotter Guy Fawkes is celebrated as a local hero during the carnival season , including a grand illuminated procession through Bridgwater town centre , which culminates in the <unk> . 
 In the English Civil War the town and the castle were held by the Royalists under Colonel Francis Wyndham , a personal acquaintance of the King . British history might have been very different had his wife , Lady ( <unk> ) Wyndham , been a little more accurate with a musket shot that missed Cromwell but killed his aide de camp . Eventually , with many buildings destroyed in the town , the castle and its valuable contents were surrendered to the Parliamentarians on 21 July 1645 . The castle itself was deliberately destroyed ( slighted ) the following year , while in 1651 Colonel Wyndham made arrangements for Charles II to flee to France following the Battle of Worcester . 
 Following the restoration of the monarchy , in 1663 the non @-@ conformist Reverend John Norman , vicar from 1647 to 1660 , was one of several ' religious fanatics ' confined to their homes by Lord Stawell 's militia . A large religious meeting house , thought to have been Presbyterian , was demolished and its furniture burned on the Cornhill in 1683 . By 1688 , matters had calmed down enough for a new chapel , Christ Church , to be founded in <unk> Street , the congregation of which became Unitarian in 1815 . 
 In the 1685 Monmouth Rebellion , the rebel James Scott , 1st Duke of Monmouth was proclaimed King on the Cornhill in Bridgwater and in other local towns . He eventually led his troops on a night @-@ time attack on the King 's position near Westonzoyland . Surprise was lost when a musket was accidentally discharged , and the Battle of Sedgemoor resulted in defeat for the Duke . He later lost his head in the Tower of London , and nine locals were executed for treason . 
 The Chandos Glass Cone was built in 1725 as a glasswork firing kiln by James Brydges , 1st Duke of Chandos as part of an industrial development . After a short period of use for glassmaking it was converted for the production of pottery , bricks and tiles , which continued until 1939 . The majority of the brickwork cone was demolished in 1943 . The bottom 2 @.@ 4 metres ( 7 ft 10 in ) has been preserved and scheduled as an ancient monument . 
 Bridgwater became the first town in Britain to petition the government to ban slavery , in 1785 . In 1896 , the trade unionists of Bridgwater 's brick and tile industry were involved a number of strikes . The Salisbury government sent troops to the town to clear the barricades by force after the reading of the Riot Act . 
 A by @-@ election in 1938 enabled the town to send a message to the government and Hitler , when an Independent anti @-@ appeasement candidate , journalist Vernon Bartlett was elected . 
 In World War II the Bridgwater and Taunton Canal formed part of the Taunton Stop Line , designed to prevent the advance of a German invasion . <unk> can still be seen along its length . The first bombs fell on Bridgwater on 24 August 1940 , destroying houses on Old Taunton Road , and three men , three women and one child were killed . Later a prisoner of war camp was established at Colley Lane , holding Italian prisoners . During the preparations for the invasion of Europe , American troops were based in the town . 
 The first council estate to be built was in the 1930s at Kendale Road , followed by those at Bristol Road . The 1950s saw the start of a significant increase in post @-@ war housebuilding , with council house estates being started at Sydenham and Rhode Lane and the former cooperative estate near Durleigh . 
 On 4 November 2011 West Quay alongside the River Parrett and 19 adjoining properties were evacuated after a 40 metres ( 130 ft ) stretch of the retaining wall partially collapsed after heavy rain and flooding . 
 = = = Port of Bridgwater = = = 
 In the medieval period the River Parrett was used to transport Hamstone from the quarry at Ham Hill . Bridgwater was part of the Port of Bristol until the Port of Bridgwater was created in 1348 , covering 80 miles ( 130 km ) of the Somerset coast line , from the Devon border to the mouth of the River Axe . Under an 1845 Act of Parliament the Port of Bridgwater extends from Brean Down to Hinkley Point in Bridgwater Bay , and includes parts of the River Parrett ( to Bridgwater ) , River Brue and the River Axe . 
 Historically , the main port on the river was at Bridgwater ; the river was bridged at this point : the first bridge was built in 1200 . Quays were built in 1424 ; another quay , the Langport slip , was built in 1488 upstream of the Town Bridge . A Customs House was sited at Bridgwater , on West Quay ; and a dry dock , launching slips and a boat yard on East Quay . The river was navigable , with care , to Bridgwater Town Bridge by 400 to 500 tonnes ( 440 to 550 tons ) vessels . By trans @-@ shipping into barges at the Town Bridge the Parrett was navigable as far as Langport and ( via the River Yeo ) to Ilchester . After 1827 , it was also possible to transfer goods to Taunton via the Bridgwater and Taunton Canal at Huntworth . A floating harbour was constructed between 1837 – 1841 and the canal was extended to the harbour . The harbour area contained flour mills , timber yards and chandlers . 
 Shipping to Bridgwater expanded with the construction of Bridgwater Docks , and reached a peak between 1880 and 1885 ; with an average of 3 @,@ 600 ships per year entering the port . Bridgwater also built some 167 ships ; the last one was the Irene , launched in 1907 . Peak tonnage occurred in 1857 , with 142 vessels totalling 17 @,@ 800 tonnes ( 19 @,@ 600 tons ) . 
 Dunball wharf was built in 1844 by Bridgwater coal merchants , and was formerly linked to the Bristol and Exeter Railway by a rail track which crossed the A38 . In 1875 , the local landowner built The Dunball Steam Pottery & Brick & Tile Works adjacent to the wharf . 
 Although ships no longer dock in the town of Bridgwater , 90 @,@ 213 tonnes ( 99 @,@ 443 tons ) of cargo were handled within the port authority 's area in 2006 , most of which was stone products via the wharf at Dunball . It is no longer linked to the railway system . The link was removed as part of the railway closures made as a result of the Beeching Report in the 1960s . Dunball railway station , which had opened in 1873 , was closed to both passengers and goods in 1964 . All traces of the station , other than " Station Road " have been removed . The wharf is now used for landing stone products , mainly marine sand and gravels dredged in the Bristol Channel . Marine sand and gravel accounted for 55 @,@ 754 tonnes ( 61 @,@ 458 tons ) of the total tonnage of 90 @,@ 213 tonnes ( 99 @,@ 443 tons ) using the Port facilities in 2006 , with salt products accounting for 21 @,@ 170 tonnes ( 23 @,@ 340 tons ) in the same year . 
 Sedgemoor District Council acts as the Competent Harbour Authority for the port , and has provided pilotage services for all boats over 98 feet ( 30 m ) using the river since 1998 , when it took over the service from Trinity House . Pilotage is important because of the constant changes in the navigable channel resulting from the large tidal range , which can exceed 39 feet ( 11 @.@ 9 m ) on spring tides . 
 Its historic estates include the manor of Sydenham . 
 = = Governance = = 
 The Local Government Act 1972 removed the historic status of Bridgwater as a Borough , as it became part of the district of Sedgemoor , which has its headquarters in King 's Square . 
 Bridgwater Town Council was created in 2003 , with sixteen elected members representing six wards of the town ; Bower ( three ) , <unk> ( two ) , Hamp ( three ) , Quantock ( three ) , Sydenham ( three ) and Victoria ( two ) . With powers or functions over allotments , bus shelters , making of <unk> , cemeteries , clocks , crime prevention , entertainment and arts , highways , litter , public buildings , public conveniences , recreation , street lighting , tourism , traffic calming , community transport and war memorials . 
 Bridgwater and West Somerset is a county constituency represented in the House of Commons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom . It elects one Member of Parliament ( MP ) by the first past the post system of election . The current MP is Ian Liddell @-@ Grainger , a member of the Conservative Party . 
 = = = Members of Parliament = = = 
 The Bridgwater constituency has been represented in Parliament since 1295 . After the voting age was lowered in January 1970 , Susan Wallace became the first 18 @-@ year @-@ old to vote in the UK , during the 1970 Bridgwater by @-@ election that elected Tom King , who took the title Baron King of Bridgwater in 2001 . At the 2010 General Election , Bridgwater became part of the new Bridgwater and West Somerset constituency . 
 Bridgwater is in the South West England constituency for elections to the European Parliament . 
 = = = Twinning = = = 
 Bridgwater is twinned with <unk> <unk> , in the Czech Republic ( since 1991 ) , La <unk> in France , <unk> , <unk> in Germany , and Marsa in Malta . 
 = = = Geology = = = 
 Bridgwater is centred on an outcrop of marl in an area dominated by low @-@ lying alluvial deposits . There are local deposits of gravels and sand . It is situated in a level and well @-@ wooded area , on the edge of the Somerset Levels . To the north are the Mendip range and on the west the Quantock hills . The town lies along both sides of the River Parrett , 10 miles ( 16 km ) from its mouth , which then flows to discharge into the Bridgwater Bay National Nature Reserve . It consists of large areas of mud flats , saltmarsh , sandflats and shingle ridges , some of which are vegetated . It has been designated as a Site of Special Scientific Interest since 1989 , and is designated as a wetland of international importance under the Ramsar Convention . The risks to wildlife are highlighted in the local Oil Spill Contingency Plan . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Along with the rest of South West England , Bridgwater has a temperate climate which is generally wetter and milder than the rest of the country . The annual mean temperature is approximately 10 ° C ( 50 @.@ 0 ° F ) . Seasonal temperature variation is less extreme than most of the United Kingdom because of the adjacent sea temperatures . The summer months of July and August are the warmest with mean daily maxima of approximately 21 ° C ( 69 @.@ 8 ° F ) . In winter mean minimum temperatures of 1 or 2 ° C ( 34 or 36 ° F ) are common . In the summer the Azores high pressure affects the south @-@ west of England , however convective cloud sometimes forms inland , reducing the number of hours of sunshine . Annual sunshine rates are slightly less than the regional average of 1 @,@ 600 hours . In December 1998 there were 20 days without sun recorded at Yeovilton . Most the rainfall in the south @-@ west is caused by Atlantic depressions or by convection . Most of the rainfall in autumn and winter is caused by the Atlantic depressions , which is when they are most active . In summer , a large proportion of the rainfall is caused by sun heating the ground leading to convection and to showers and thunderstorms . Average rainfall is around 700 mm ( 28 in ) . About 8 – 15 days of snowfall is typical . November to March have the highest mean wind speeds , and June to August have the lightest winds . The predominant wind direction is from the south @-@ west . 
 = = Demography = = 
 Bridgwater had a population of 35 @,@ 800 according to the 2001 census ( up from 22 @,@ 718 in 1951 , 3 @,@ 634 in 1801 , and 7 @,@ 807 in 1831 ) . 
 = = Economy = = 
 As early as 1300 , the port exported wheat , peas and beans to Ireland , France and Spain , and by 1400 was also exporting cloth from Somerset and the adjoining counties . By 1500 it was the largest port in Somerset , later becoming the fifth largest in England , until eclipsed by Bristol in the 18th century . In its heyday , imports included wine , grain , fish , hemp , coal and timber . Exports included wheat , wool , cloth , cement , bricks and tiles . Unlike Bristol , Bridgwater was never involved in the slave trade and , in 1797 , was the first town in Britain to petition the government to ban it . 
 The Bridgwater ship the Emanuel was one of three that took part in Martin Frobisher 's 1577 search for the Northwest Passage . In 1828 , 40 ships were registered in the port , averaging 60 tons each . 
 = = = Industry = = = 
 Bridgwater was the leading industrial town in Somerset and remains a major centre for manufacturing . A major manufacturing centre for clay tiles and bricks in the 19th century , including the famous " Bath brick " , were exported through the port . In the 1890s there were a total of 16 brick and tile companies , and 24 million bricks per annum were exported during that decade alone . These industries are celebrated in the Somerset Brick and Tile Museum on East Quay . 
 These industries collapsed in the aftermath of World War II due to the failure to introduce mechanisation , although the automated Chilton Tile Factory , which produced up to 5 million tiles each year , lasted until 1968 . The importance of the Bath Brick declined with the advent of detergents and other cleaning products . <unk> ponds used to make bricks and can still be found along the paths . 
 During the 19th century , Castle House ( originally named Portland Castle after Portland cement ) , reputedly the first domestic house in the UK to be built from concrete , was constructed in 1851 by John Board , a local brick and tile manufacturer . The building is now Grade II * listed , and in 2004 was featured in the BBC television programme Restoration . 
 In the 19th century , Bridgwater was also home to a number of iron foundries . George <unk> 's Bridgwater Iron Works worked on bridges , railways and machinery for Brunel and Robert Stephenson . This location allowed the import by boat of raw materials from Wales and the dispatch of finished work to south Devon using the Bristol and Exeter Railway . The carriage workshops for the latter were on an adjacent site . The works passed to his son and then traded as <unk> , Spink & Else . Some of the ironwork was produced for the Royal Albert Bridge at Saltash , Cornwall . In 1873 it became the Bridgwater Engineering Company Limited but this failed in 1878 . W & F Wills Ltd produced steam locomotives and <unk> . 
 At the start of World War II , the government built a factory to manufacture high explosives at Puriton near Bridgwater . Called ROF Bridgwater , the plant is today owned by BAE Systems and closed after decommissioning was completed in July 2008 . 
 British Cellophane Ltd , a joint venture between La Cellophane SA and Courtaulds opened a major factory producing cellophane in Bridgwater 1937 . The factory produced Bailey Bridges during World War II for the invasion of Europe . Bought by UCB Films in 1996 , the town suffered a blow in 2005 when <unk> Films closed the cellophane factory . At one time the factory employed around 3 @,@ 000 people , although at the time of closure this had been reduced to just 250 . However recovery has begun with the establishment of new businesses on the Express Park business park including the relocation of Gerber Juice and new enterprises <unk> and <unk> as well as the Exel centre for the NHS Logistics Authority . 
 Bridgwater is now a major centre of industry in Somerset , with industries including the production of plastics , engine parts , industrial chemicals , and foods . <unk> Animal Feed Mill is now the only industry still located at the docks . Being close to the M5 motorway and half way between Bristol and Exeter , Bridgwater is also home to two major distribution centres , while retailer Argos has a regional distribution centre based at Huntworth . A new £ 100 m Regional Agricultural Business Centre opened in 2007 , following construction which began in 2006 . 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 Bridgwater is home to the Somerset Brick and Tile Museum , built on part of the former Barham Brothers site ( brick and tile manufacturers between 1857 and 1965 ) . Castle House was built in 1851 and was one of the first to make extensive use of concrete demonstrating " an innovative interpretation of traditional masonry features in concrete " . 
 A house in Blake Street , largely restored , is believed to be the birthplace of Robert Blake in 1598 , and is now the Blake Museum . It was built in the late 15th or early 16th century , and has been designated by English Heritage as a grade II * listed building . His statue from 1898 by F. W. Pomeroy has been repositioned from the front of the Corn Exchange to face down Cornhill . Sydenham House was previously a manor estate built in the early 16th century , which was refronted and rebuilt after 1613 . It now stands in the grounds of the former British Cellophane plant . Its owners were on the losing side in the Civil War and again in the Monmouth Rebellion . The public library by E Godfrey Page dates from 1905 . 
 = = Transport = = 
 As trade expanded during the Industrial Revolution , Bridgwater was linked to Taunton by the Bridgwater and Taunton Canal ( 1827 ) , although initially it ran from a basin south of Bridgwater at Huntworth . As trade grew docks were built in the town , linked to an extension of the canal , with both opening in 1841 . The docks were dredged by a scraper @-@ dredger Bertha similar to the one Brunel had designed for the Bristol Floating Harbour . 14 June 1841 saw the opening of the Bristol and Exeter Railway from Bristol to Bridgwater . The railway also opened a coach and wagon works in the town ; the last of the buildings is currently in 2005 scheduled for demolition . Bridgwater railway station , designed by Isambard Kingdom Brunel is now a Grade II listed building . An end to the unequal competition between rail and canal came in 1867 when the Bristol and Exeter Railway purchased the canal . A number of local branches were also built , for example to serve the Northgate Brewery ( now replaced by a car park north of Angel Crescent ) and the former British Cellophane factory . The Somerset and Dorset branch line to Edington was opened in 1890 . Its former Bridgwater station is now occupied by J Sainsbury . 
 The importance of shipping and the docks started to decline after 1886 , the year in which the opening of the Severn Tunnel caused a severe drop in coal imports by sea . The situation worsened as the railways were extended into Somerset and beyond , and ships became too big for the port . The last commercial use of the docks was when coal imports ceased on 31 July 1971 , and although they now house a marina they are currently little used . The surrounding quays have been developed for housing , although the remains of wooden quays on the riverbank can still be seen . All but a small remnant of the <unk> ( a huge mound of spoil from the original dock excavations ) was removed in the 1980s to make way for the development on the north side of the dock . Due to the port , ship building was also an important industry , and around 140 ships were built in the town during the 19th century by companies including David Williams , Joseph Gough , Watsons and William Lowther . F J Carver and Son owned a small dry dock on East Quay and constructed the last ship to be built in the town — the Irene . The former associated industry of rope making is commemorated in street furnishings and paving on East Quay and in the name of <unk> street . 
 The Drove Bridge , which marks the current extent of the Port of Bridgwater is the nearest to the mouth and the newest road bridge to cross the river . With a span of 184 feet ( 56 m ) , the bridge was constructed as part of the Bridgwater Northern Distributor road scheme ( 1992 ) , and provides a navigable channel which is 66 feet ( 20 m ) wide with 8 @.@ 2 feet ( 2 @.@ 5 m ) headroom at normal spring high tides . Upstream of this is the retractable Telescopic Bridge , built in 1871 to the design of Sir Francis Fox , the engineer for the Bristol and Exeter Railway . It carried a railway siding over the river to the docks , but had to be movable , to allow boats to proceed upriver . An 80 @-@ foot ( 24 m ) section of railway track to the east of the bridge could be moved sideways , so that the main 127 @-@ foot ( 39 m ) girders could be retracted , creating a navigable channel which was 78 feet ( 24 m ) wide . It was manually operated for the first eight months , and then powered by a steam engine , reverting to manual operation in 1913 , when the steam engine failed . The bridge was last opened in 1953 , and the traverser section was demolished in 1974 , but public outcry at the action resulted in the bridge being listed as a Scheduled Ancient Monument , and the rest of the bridge was kept . It was later used as a road crossing , until the construction of the Chandos road bridge alongside it , and is now only used by pedestrians . Parts of the steam engine were moved to Westonzoyland Pumping Station Museum in 1977 . 
 The next bridge is the Town Bridge . There has been a bridge here since the 13th century , when Bridgwater was granted a charter by King John . The present bridge was designed by R. C. Else and G. B. Laffan , and the 75 @-@ foot ( 23 m ) cast iron structure was completed in 1883 . It replaced an earlier bridge , which was the first cast iron bridge to be built in Somerset when it was completed in 1797 . The stone abutments of that bridge were reused by the later bridge , which formed the only road crossing of the river in Bridgwater until 1958 . Above the bridge there were two shoals , called The Coals and The Stones , which were a hazard to barge traffic on the river , and bargees had to choose carefully when to navigate the river , to ensure that there was sufficient water to carry them over these obstructions . In March 1958 a new reinforced concrete road bridge , the Blake Bridge , was opened as part of a bypass to take traffic away from the centre of Bridgwater . It now carries the A38 and A39 roads . On the southern edge of Bridgwater there is a bridge which carries the Bristol and Exeter Railway across the River Parrett . Isambard Kingdom Brunel designed a brick bridge , known as the Somerset Bridge , with a 100 feet ( 30 m ) span but a rise of just 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) . Work started in 1838 and was completed in 1841 . Brunel left the scaffold supporting the centre of the bridge in place as the foundations were still settling but was forced to remove it in 1843 to reopen the river for navigation . Brunel demolished the brick arch and had replaced it with a timber arch within six months without interrupting the traffic on the railway . This was in turn replaced in 1904 by a steel girder bridge . Slightly further east is a modern concrete bridge which carries the M5 motorway over both the river and the railway line . It was started in 1971 and opened in 1973 . 
 = = Education = = 
 The primary and infant schools in Bridgwater include : <unk> Community Primary School , Hamp Community Junior School , Sedgemoor Manor School , St John and St Francis Primary School , St Joseph 's Catholic Primary School , St Mary 's Primary School , Somerset Bridge Primary School , Spaxton Church of England Primary School , Westover Green Primary School and Hamp Nursery and Infants School . Secondary schools include : Robert Blake Science College , <unk> Academy , Chilton Trinity School , East Bridgwater Community School which was previously known as Sydenham School and is a Performing and Visual Arts College , and <unk> School which has specialist Language College status . Special schools in the town include : Elmwood Special School , New Horizon Centre School and Penrose School . 
 Bridgwater was selected as the first town in the South West , outside Bristol , to be selected for the UK government 's Building Schools for the Future ( BSF ) initiative , which aimed to rebuild and renew nearly every secondary school in England . Within Bridgwater , BSF was to redevelop all of the four secondary schools and two special provision schools at an expected cost of around £ 100 million . This included the complete relocation and rebuilding of a new school combining the both <unk> and Penrose School . In July 2010 , several components of the Bridgwater BSF programme were cancelled and others were singled out for further review . Following a meeting with Education Secretary Michael Gove , Bridgwater MP Ian Liddell @-@ Granger announced that the fate of all six affected schools would be subject to review , including the ones that were cancelled . 
 Further Education is provided by Bridgwater College which was formerly Bridgwater Technical School . The site of the Poplar School Of Engineering And Navigation was later used for Dr Morgan 's Grammar School For Boys . Other schools which have since closed include : Bridgwater Grammar School For Boys , Bridgwater Grammar School For Girls and Westover Senior Council School . 
 = = Religious sites = = 
 Among several places of worship the chief is the Church of St Mary ; this has a north porch and windows dating from the 14th century , besides a 170 feet ( 52 m ) slender spire ; but it has been much altered by restoration . It possesses a fine painted reredos , and has been designated by English Heritage as a grade I listed building . 
 The Church of St John the Baptist in Blake Place was built by John Brown in 1843 . Elim Pentecostal Church on Church Street was a public house after being used as a church and is now a shop . There is a Salvation Army Citadel located in Moorland Road , on the Sydenham Estate and St Joseph 's Roman Catholic in <unk> Place . Classes in Buddhism and meditation are held in the Quaker Meeting House on <unk> Street . 
 = = Arts = = 
 Nearing Bridgwater on the M5 motorway it is possible to see the Willow Man sculpture , a striding human figure constructed from willow , sometimes called the Angel of the South ( see also Angel of the North ) . Standing 12 metres ( 39 ft ) tall , it was created by sculptor Serena de la Hey and is the largest known sculpture in willow , a traditional local material . 
 The Bridgwater Arts Centre was opened on 10 October 1946 , the first community arts centre opened in the UK with financial assistance from the newly established Arts Council of England . It is situated in a Grade I listed building in the architecturally protected Georgian Castle Street , designed by Benjamin Holloway for the Duke of Chandos , and built over the site of the former castle . Holloway was also the architect of the Baroque Lions building on West Quay , constructed around 1730 . Bridgwater Arts Centre was the venue for the first post @-@ war meeting of the Congres <unk> d 'Architecture Moderne in 1947 . 
 Somerset Film ( then Somerset Film & Video ) opened their community media centre , The Engine Room , in March 2003 . The centre allows the public to drop in and use the computers and equipment for free ( on certain days ) to teach themselves how to edit video , design websites or screen films at open evenings . Cameras and edit suites can also be hired and day courses on using creative software are run regularly . The founder is Phil Shepherd . Bridgwater was chosen as the location as it was in the centre of Somerset . 
 Castle Street was used as a location in the 1963 film Tom Jones . Horror writer and film journalist Kim Newman was educated at Dr Morgan 's school in Bridgwater , and set his 1999 experimental novel Life 's Lottery in a fictionalised version of the town ( <unk> ) . A sailor who had sailed " from Bridgwater with bricks " and found " There was lice in that bunk in Bridgwater " features in James Joyce 's Ulysses ( Chapter 16 ) . 
 In 2013 , community radio station Access FM was launched on 104 @.@ 2 FM . This was the first truly local radio station for the town since BCR FM was bought by Choice Media in 2006 which eventually became The Breeze . Access FM was initiated as a function of Bridgwater 's YMCA and as such held the same values as the charity . Access FM was founded by Martin Hodgson ( CEO of Bridgwater YMCA ) , Grant Francis ( owner of Special Media Projects ) and Tom Copestake , a youth worker who had worked with a christian radio station in Coventry before moving to work at Bridgwater YMCA . Soon after the station launched on the 9th of June 2013 , Jason Pimm joined the management team to help with development . The community station began with the intentions of providing youth based programming to 16 - 25 year olds in order to give the younger generation something new and productive to get involved with . Many of the voluntary presenters were aged 16 - 20 and the station acted as the first step into the industry . Under the management and direction of Tom Copestake and technical skills of Grant Francis , Access FM had mild success within the community , attending multiple events and marking new ground for local radio in the area . The station was the first in history to provide live broadcast coverage from Bridgwater Guy Fawkes Carnival in 2014 . 
 Tom Copestake left Access FM in October of 2015 and the station went through a re @-@ branding process under a revised management team . Local radio expert Dave Englefield joined Martin Hodgson , Grant Francis and Jason Pimm , along with Bryan <unk> MBE to create Sedgemoor FM , which launched on the 4th of April 2016 . Sedgemoor FM broadcasts on <unk> across Bridgwater and the rest of the district , providing listeners with a unique schedule of programming specific for the community . Dave Englefield now directs station and sales operations , Grant Francis continues his work as technical manager and Jason Pimm plays as support to both as station administrator and facilitator . Deciding to push Sedgemoor FM towards an older demographic than it 's predecessor , the team have successfully created a radio station that the community have welcomed . Scheduling consists of a variety of informative and entertaining radio shows including Dave Englefield 's Breakfast Show , Sedgemoor Life with Jackie Sealy and The Carnival Show with Andy Bennett , along with local and national news coverage , local events guide , The Lowdown , and Just The Job , which highlights current job vacancies in the area . 
 = = = Annual events = = = 
 Bridgwater is now best known for the illuminated " Bridgwater Guy Fawkes Carnival " that attracts around 150 @,@ 000 people from around the country and overseas . Now held annually on the Saturday after the first Friday of November ( i.e. - the nearest Saturday to 5 November ) , it was original held on the first Thursday of November , later moving to the first Friday . It consists of a display of 100 or more entries , many consisting of large vehicles ( " Carnival floats " ) up to 100 feet ( 30 m ) long , festooned with dancers ( or team member in tableaux ) and up to 22 @,@ 000 lightbulbs , that follows a 2 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) route over 2 to 3 hours . Later in the evening of the Carnival , there is the simultaneous firing of large fireworks ( known as squibs ) in the street outside the town hall , known as " <unk> " . 
 Bridgwater Fair normally takes place in September — it starts on the last Wednesday in September and lasts four days . The fair takes place on St Matthew 's Field , better known locally as the Fair Field . The fair is now a funfair , ranked as second largest in England after the Nottingham Goose Fair . It originated in 1249 as a horse and cattle fair , lasting for eight days near St Matthew 's day ( 21 September ) , giving the venue its name . During the first weekend of July , the annual " <unk> " arts festival is held in Bridgwater . The event includes an extensive programme of rock , jazz and classical music , dance , drama and visual arts with national and local participants . 
 A new annual event was launched in 2014 , taking place in May each year . The Bridgwater Science Festival brings science related family entertainment and activities to town . The event takes place in the Town Hall , and works with local organisations and the University of the West of England . 
 = = Sports = = 
 Bridgwater Town F.C. are a football club based at Fairfax Park . The original version of the club was founded in 1898 . The club currently plays in the Southern League Division One South and West . Bridgwater & Albion RFC are Somerset 's <unk> placed rugby team , playing in National League 3 South and are based at College Way . It was originally founded in 1875 . The cricket club play at The Parks on Durleigh Road . Bridgwater Hockey Club were formed in the 1920s but now play their matches at Burnham @-@ on @-@ Sea . 
 East Bridgwater Sports Centre offers badminton courts , outside football pitches , squash courts and a fitness room . 
 Bridgwater had a series of swimming pools from 1890 until 2009 . The first pool , in Old Taunton Road , was replaced by the Bridgwater Lido on Broadway , opened in 1960 by Princess Alexandra . The lido , which had three pools , a diving bay and paddling pool , was demolished in the late 1980s to make way for a supermarket , and to fund the indoor Sedgemoor Splash swimming pool in Mount Street , which opened in 1991 . In 2009 , after the local council were unable to raise the funds needed to upgrade the pool , it was closed and demolished to make way for another supermarket . A new pool was planned as part of the Building Schools for the Future ( BSF ) rebuild of Chilton Trinity School , however , the government 's review of the BSF programme may result in the cancellation of the new school and pool build . 
 The town is both on the route of the Samaritans Way South West and the River Parrett Trail . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 Admiral Robert Blake was born in Bridgwater , and attended the local grammar school ( Bridgwater Grammar School For Boys ) . His home is now the Blake Museum and contains details of his career amongst its exhibits of local history and archaeology . 
 Donald Crowhurst ( 1932 – 69 ) , who tried to fake a round @-@ the @-@ world solo yacht journey , set up his business in the town and was a Town Councillor . 
 Sir Paul Dukes was born in Bridgwater , an alumnus of Caterham School , and went on to be the premier SIS agent in pre @-@ revolution Russia . Known as the Man with a Hundred Faces , he eluded Bolshevik capture and is still the only man to be knighted based on his exploits as a spy . 
 Wayne Goss , makeup artist and YouTube personality , born in Bridgwater in 1978 . 
 Peter Haggett CBE FBA ( b . 1933 ) , eminent academic geographer and professor at University of Bristol , educated at Dr Morgan 's Grammar School in Bridgwater 
 Chris Harris , English performer , director and writer who starred in Into the Labyrinth . He has starred in and directed the pantomime at the Theatre Royal , Bath since 2001 . 
 Charles Kent , England rugby player . 
 Robert Dibble , England rugby player . Played club rugby for Bridgwater & Albion RFC and Newport RFC . 
 Tommy Woods ( rugby ) , England rugby player . Played club rugby for Bridgwater & Albion RFC and Rochdale Hornets . 
 David <unk> MBE . England and Great Britain hockey player - 1989 @-@ 2000 brought up in Bridgwater . 
 Simon ( 1984 ) and Richard Mantell ( 1981 ) , brothers and field hockey players for England , were both born in Bridgwater . 
 Breaker Morant Anglo @-@ Australian Boer War Soldier . 
 Kim Newman , science fiction novelist , horror film expert , TV presenter and film critic , educated at Dr Morgan 's Grammar School in Bridgwater . 
 Henry Phillpotts , Bishop of Exeter , born in Bridgwater in 1778 . 
 Andrew <unk> , portrait miniature artist , born in Bridgwater 1763 . 
 Jean Rees , artist and co @-@ founder of the Bridgwater Arts Centre. b 1914 . 
 James Sully , psychologist , born in Bridgwater in 1842 . 
 Fanny Talbot born in Bridgwater in 1824 , philanthropist and friend of John Ruskin who donated first property to the National Trust . 
 = Ipswich Town F.C. = 
 Ipswich Town Football Club ( / <unk> <unk> / ; also known as Ipswich , The Blues , Town , or The Tractor Boys ) is a professional association football club based in Ipswich , Suffolk , England . They play in the Championship , the second highest division in English football , having last appeared in the Premier League in the 2001 – 02 season . 
 The club was founded in 1878 but did not turn professional until 1936 , and was subsequently elected to join the Football League in 1938 . They play their home games at Portman Road in Ipswich . The only fully professional football club in Suffolk , they have a long @-@ standing and fierce rivalry with Norwich City in Norfolk , with whom they have contested the East Anglian derby 139 times since 1902 . The club 's traditional home colours are blue shirts and white shorts . 
 Ipswich have won the English league title once , in their first season in the top flight in 1961 – 62 , and have twice finished runners @-@ up , in 1980 – 81 and 1981 – 82 . They won the FA Cup in 1977 – 78 , and the UEFA Cup in 1980 – 81 . They have competed in the top two tiers of English football uninterrupted since 1957 – 58 , currently the longest streak among Championship clubs after Coventry were relegated in the 2011 – 12 season . They have competed in all three European club competitions , and have never lost at home in European competition , defeating Real Madrid , AC Milan , Internazionale , Lazio and Barcelona , among others . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early years and entry to the Football League = = = 
 The club was founded as an amateur side in 1878 and were known as Ipswich A.F.C. until 1888 when they merged with Ipswich Rugby Club to form Ipswich Town Football Club . The team won a number of local cup competitions , including the Suffolk Challenge Cup and the Suffolk Senior Cup . They joined the Southern Amateur League in 1907 and , with results improving steadily , became champions in the 1921 – 22 season . The club won the league a further three times , in 1929 – 30 , 1932 – 33 and 1933 – 34 , before becoming founder members of the Eastern Counties Football League at the end of the 1934 – 35 season . A year later , the club turned professional and joined the Southern League , which they won in its first season and finished third in the next . 
 Ipswich were elected to The Football League on 30 May 1938 , and played in Division Three ( South ) until the end of the 1953 – 54 season , when they won the title and promotion to Division Two . 
 = = = Promotion and instant First Division success = = = 
 The club were immediately relegated back to Division Three ( South ) the following year at the end of a poor season , but made better progress after Scott Duncan was replaced as team manager by Alf Ramsey in August 1955 . The club won the Division Three ( South ) title again in 1956 – 57 , and returned to the higher division . This time , Ipswich established themselves in Division Two , and as the division champions , won promotion to the top level of English football , Division One , in 1960 – 61 . 
 In the top flight for the first time , Ipswich became Champions of the Football League at the first attempt in 1961 – 62 . As English league champions , they qualified for the 1962 – 63 European Cup , defeating Maltese side Floriana 14 – 1 on aggregate before losing to Milan . Ramsey quit the club in April 1963 to take charge of the England national team ; after the team won the 1966 World Cup , he received a knighthood for " services to football " in 1967 . 
 = = = Decline and revival after Ramsey = = = 
 Ramsey was replaced by Jackie Milburn , under whose leadership fortunes on the pitch plummeted . Two years after winning the league title , Ipswich slipped down to the Second Division in 1964 , conceding 121 league goals in 42 games – one of the worst @-@ ever defensive records in English senior football . Milburn quit after just one full season and was replaced by Bill McGarry in 1964 . The club remained in the Second Division for four years until McGarry guided Ipswich to promotion along with his assistant Sammy Chung in the 1967 – 68 season , winning the division by a single point ahead of Queens Park Rangers . McGarry left to manage Wolves and was replaced by Bobby Robson in January 1969 . 
 = = = The Bobby Robson era = = = 
 Robson led Ipswich to two major trophies and several seasons in top flight European football . The successful period began in 1973 when the club won the Texaco Cup and finished fourth in the league , qualifying for the UEFA Cup for the first time . By the late 1970s , Robson had built a strong side with talent in every department , introducing the Dutch pair Arnold Mühren and Frans Thijssen to add flair to a team that featured British internationals including John Wark , Terry Butcher and Paul Mariner , although the Ipswich squad perhaps lacked the depth of established big clubs like Liverpool and Manchester United . Ipswich regularly featured in the top five of the league and in the UEFA Cup . At their peak in the 1979 – 80 season , they beat Manchester United 6 – 0 in a league game at Portman Road , a game where United goalkeeper Gary Bailey also saved three penalties . The defeat cost United two points – the margin which eventually separated them and champions Liverpool . Major success came in 1978 when Ipswich beat Arsenal at Wembley Stadium to win their only FA Cup trophy , the triumph was followed by a UEFA Cup victory in 1981 . The club also finished as league runners @-@ up in 1981 and 1982 . 
 Robson 's success with Ipswich had attracted the attention of many bigger clubs , and he had been linked with the Manchester United job when Dave Sexton was sacked in May 1981 , but the job went to Ron Atkinson instead . It was the Football Association who lured Robson away from Portman Road a year later , when he accepted their offer to manage the England national team in July 1982 . 
 = = = Relegation after Robson and promotion under Lyall = = = 
 His successor at Ipswich was his assistant manager Bobby Ferguson . Under Ferguson , Town finished mid @-@ table twice , but worsening performances meant that they began to struggle in the top division . The recent construction of an expensive new stand at Portman Road had limited the club 's budget , despite the money gaining from sales of key players including Frans Thijssen and John Wark . 
 Ipswich were finally relegated to the Second Division at the end of the 1985 – 86 season . Terry Butcher , their last remaining key player from the successful 1981 team , was sold to Rangers that summer . Ferguson , who had remained in charge despite the relegation , resigned in May 1987 after reaching the promotion play @-@ offs but failing to return the club to the first division . Ipswich Town were then managed by John Duncan for three years until he was replaced by former West Ham boss John Lyall in May 1990 , with Ipswich still in the Second Division . Lyall guided Ipswich to the Second Division title and promotion to the new FA Premier League , ready for the 1992 – 93 season . Suffering only two league defeats before the New Year , Ipswich started the season well and were fourth in the Premier League in January 1993 , but a dip in form during the final weeks of the season saw Ipswich finish in a disappointing 16th place . Poor form continued into the following season and Ipswich only avoided relegation that year when Sheffield United suffered a last @-@ gasp 3 – 2 defeat at Chelsea on the final day of the season . Six months later , fortunes on the pitch had not improved , and Lyall was sacked as Ipswich manager in December 1994 with the club rooted to the bottom of the Premiership . 
 = = = Relegation and revival under George Burley = = = 
 Lyall 's successor , George Burley , was unable to turn team performances around , and Ipswich suffered a Premiership record defeat , 9 – 0 , at Manchester United , on their way to relegation . Back in the second tier of the league , Burley led the club to three consecutive promotion playoffs , but they were to endure defeats in all three semi @-@ finals . Ipswich finally returned to the Premiership in 2000 after coming from behind to beat Barnsley 4 – 2 in the last Division One playoff final at Wembley Stadium . Ipswich performed well in the Premiership in their first season with Burley 's side finishing in an impressive fifth place — being pipped by Liverpool on the last day of the season for a place in the Champions League . Consolation was a UEFA Cup place and FA Premier League Manager of the Year Award for Burley . 
 This spell in the top division ended after two seasons and the loss of income due to relegation led to the club going into financial administration . There was the minor consolation of again qualifying for the UEFA Cup , this time via the UEFA Fair Play ranking , and Ipswich survived two ties before losing in the second round proper to Czech side Slovan Liberec . A poor start to the season , culminating in a 0 – 3 defeat at struggling Grimsby Town , meant that Burley was sacked in October 2002 after nearly eight years as manager . 
 = = = Since 2002 = = = 
 First team coach Tony Mowbray was given four games as caretaker manager , winning once , but he was ultimately replaced as manager by the former Oldham Athletic , Everton and Manchester City manager Joe Royle , who had played for local rival Norwich City . Royle inherited a side struggling near the Division One relegation zone , but revived fortunes such that the team narrowly failed to reach the playoffs . The 2003 – 04 season saw the club come out of administration and continue to challenge for promotion back to the Premier League . They finished that season in fifth , but were defeated in the playoff semi @-@ finals by West Ham United . 
 Narrowly missing automatic promotion in 2004 – 05 , Royle again took Ipswich to the play @-@ offs , but once more they lost to West Ham United in the semi @-@ finals . 2005 – 06 saw Ipswich finish in 15th place — the club 's lowest finish since 1966 . Joe Royle resigned by mutual consent on 11 May 2006 , and a month later , Jim Magilton was officially announced as the new manager . In November 2007 , the club were involved in takeover discussions with both businessman Marcus Evans and former Birmingham City director David Sullivan . In December 2007 , Evans completed his takeover of the club , purchasing an 87 @.@ 5 % stake in the club , investing around £ 44 million , which included the purchase of the club 's existing £ 32 million debt . The club agreed a sponsorship deal with the Marcus Evans Group on 20 May 2008 , lasting until 2013 , the longest in the club 's history . Magilton was sacked in April 2009 , and new Chief Executive Simon Clegg replaced him with Roy Keane . Keane 's spell as manager came to an end after an unsuccessful 18 months , when he was sacked in January 2011 , to be replaced briefly by Ian McParland in a caretaker role before Paul Jewell took the reins on a permanent basis . With Ipswich bottom of the Championship , Jewell left his position on 24 October 2012 by mutual consent . He was replaced temporarily by Chris Hutchings for a single match in a caretaker role , before Mick McCarthy was appointed full @-@ time on 1 November 2012 . He led Ipswich to avoid relegation , taking them from bottom of the league in November to finish in 14th position , 9th the following season and in 2014 – 15 a 6th @-@ place finish and playoff semi @-@ final exit at the hands of local rivals Norwich City . Ipswich failed to replicate their success of the previous season and finished 7th in 2015 @-@ 16 their third consecutive top ten finish since McCarthy took over as manager . 
 = = Colours and crest = = 
 One of Ipswich Town 's nicknames is The Blues , stemming from their traditional kit , which is predominantly blue . Since turning professional , Ipswich have used a number of away colours , including white , orange , red and black vertical stripes , claret and green , cream and black vertical stripes and dark blue and claret . 
 The shirts worn by players of Ipswich Town did not sport a crest until the mid @-@ 1960s , when they adopted a design featuring a gold lion rampant guardant on a red background on the left half and three gold ramparts on a blue background on the right half . In 1972 , the crest was redesigned as the result of a competition , won by the Treasurer of the Supporters Club , John Gammage . Each element of the new design was intended to represent the region . 
 I regarded the Suffolk Punch as a noble animal , well suited to dominate our design and represent the club . And to complete the badge I thought of the town of Ipswich which contains many historical buildings , including the Wolsey Gate , and is close to the sea with a large dock area . 
 The crest was modified in 1995 after consultation with a Supporters Forum , with the turrets of the Wolsey Gate moved to the top of the crest , the yellow background changed to red , the Suffolk Punch given a more dominant physique and the F.C. expanded to Football Club . Three stars were added to the sleeve of the team 's away shirt for the 2004 – 05 season , and also to the home kit for the 2005 – 06 season . These stars were added to represent the three major trophies which Ipswich Town have won ; the FA Cup , the UEFA Cup and the old Division One . The stars were relocated directly above the crest when the shirt was redesigned prior to the 2007 – 08 season . 
 In 2006 , the club donated 500 orange and blue @-@ and @-@ white shirts to children in Iraq . 
 = = Stadium = = 
 Between 1878 and 1884 , Ipswich Town played at two grounds in the town , Broom Hill and Brook 's Hall , but in 1884 , the club moved to Portman Road and have played there ever since . At their new home , Ipswich became one of the first clubs to implement the use of goal nets , in 1890 , but the more substantial elements of ground development did not begin until , in 1901 , a tobacco processing plant was built along the south edge of the ground . 
 The first stand , a wooden structure , was built on the Portman Road side of the pitch in 1905 . In 1911 the roof was blown off , and the ground was later commandeered by the British Army for the duration of World War I. The club turned professional in 1936 , and work began on the first bank of terracing at the north end of the pitch . The following year , on the back of winning the Southern League , a similar terrace was built at the southern " Churchmans " end . All sides were terraced by 1954 , and floodlights were erected in 1959 for use in lower light conditions . The two @-@ tier Portman Stand was built along the east side of the ground in place of the existing terraces in 1971 , and the West Stand was extended in 1982 by the addition of a third tier . The rebuilt West Stand was renamed as the " Pioneer Stand " as a result of the club 's sponsorship by the electronics company Pioneer Corporation and was converted to all @-@ seating in 1990 . In 1990 , following the recommendations of the Taylor Report in the wake of the Hillsborough disaster the previous year , the terraces in both the north and south stands were also converted to all @-@ seating , creating the first complete all @-@ seater stadium in the top flight of English football with a spectator capacity of 22 @,@ 600 . 
 Success on the pitch led to further investment in the infrastructure , with the club spending over £ 22 million on redeveloping both North and South stands , resulting in a current capacity of 30 @,@ 311 . In the past ten years , statues of both Sir Alf Ramsey and Sir Bobby Robson have been unveiled outside the stadium . The North Stand was renamed in honour of former manager Bobby Robson in September 2009 . On 31 March 2012 , in conjunction with celebrations of the 50th anniversary of Ipswich Town winning the 1st Division on their 1st attempt , the South Stand was renamed in honour of Ipswich and England 's former manager Sir Alf Ramsey . Portman Road now features two stands named after their own most successful managers in the club history as well as being England 's most successful managers . The playing surface at Portman Road is highly regarded and has been voted best pitch in the league on a number of occasions . The former groundsman , Alan Ferguson , received a number of accolades , including both Premiership and Championship Groundsman of the Year . 
 = = Supporters = = 
 During the 2008 – 09 season , Ipswich Town recorded an average attendance of 18 @,@ 873 , approximately 63 % of available capacity , the seventh @-@ highest attendance in The Championship . The highest attendance of the season was 28 @,@ 274 in the local derby against Norwich City . 
 Locally , much is made of the informal title " Pride of Anglia " . Fans claim the title for either winning the East Anglian Derby , finishing highest in the league , having the better current league position , having the more successful club history . The club 's main local rival is Norwich City . When the two teams meet it is known as the ' East Anglian derby ' , or , informally , as the ' Old Farm derby ' , a comic reference to the ' Old Firm Derby ' played between Scottish teams Celtic and Rangers . 
 A recent nickname for Town is " The Tractor Boys " , which was coined during the club 's brief period in the Premiership ( 2000 – 01 and 2001 – 02 ) when the team regularly competed against more fashionable clubs . The nickname is an example of self @-@ deprecating humour referring to Ipswich 's agricultural heritage . The origins of the nickname are not certain , but the first generally accepted use of the nickname was created whilst playing at Leeds United in 2000 – 2001 : Ipswich were winning the game 2 – 1 and the Leeds fans started chanting , ' We 're being beaten by a bunch of tractor drivers . ' <unk> by supporters of more established Premiership clubs during Town 's spell in the Premiership lent the ironic chant ' 1 – 0 to the Tractor Boys ' increased potency and publicity , and the nickname is commonly used by the media . Former Town manager Jim Magilton commented , in the local press , that he disliked the nickname and said that it conjured up , ' images of carrot @-@ crunching yokels ' , while players such as Matt Holland accepted the chant with good humour . 
 = = Statistics and records = = 
 Mick Mills holds the record for Ipswich league appearances , having played 591 first @-@ team matches between 1966 and 1982 . The club 's top league goalscorer is Ray Crawford , who scored 203 goals between 1958 and 1969 , while Ted Phillips holds the record for the most goals scored in a season , 41 in the 1956 – 57 season in Division Three ( South ) . Allan Hunter is the most capped player for the club , making 47 appearances for Northern Ireland . 
 The club 's widest victory margins in the league have been their 7 – 0 wins against Portsmouth in the Second Division in 1964 , against Southampton in the First Division in 1974 and against West Bromwich Albion in the First Division in 1976 . Their heaviest defeats in the league were 10 – 1 against Fulham in 1963 and 9 – 0 against Manchester United in 1995 . 
 Ipswich 's record home attendance is 38 @,@ 010 for a sixth round FA Cup match against Leeds United on 8 March 1975 . With the introduction of regulations enforcing all @-@ seater stadiums , it is unlikely that this record will be beaten in the foreseeable future . 
 The highest transfer fee received for an Ipswich player is £ 8 @.@ 1 million as part of a deal worth in excess of £ 12 million from Sunderland for Connor Wickham in June 2011 , while the most spent by the club on a player was £ 4 @.@ 75 million for Matteo Sereni from Sampdoria in July 2001 , following the club 's qualification for the UEFA Cup . 
 = = Players = = 
 As of 23 July 2016 . 
 = = = First team squad = = = 
 Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 = = = Players of the Year = = = 
 Towards the end of each season , a player is voted as " Player of the Year " by the fans . For the 2015 – 16 season , the player of the year is goalkeeper <unk> <unk> . <unk> is the fourth goalkeeper to win the award and the first winner from Poland . 
 = = Managers = = 
 As of 27 February 2016 . Only permanent managers are shown . 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = Ipswich Town in popular culture = = 
 A number of Ipswich players appeared alongside Sylvester Stallone and Pelé in the 1981 prisoner of war film Escape to Victory , including John Wark , Russell Osman , Robin Turner , Laurie <unk> , and Kevin O 'Callaghan . Other Ipswich Town players stood in for actors in the football scenes — Kevin Beattie for Michael Caine , and Paul Cooper for Sylvester Stallone . 
 = = Ipswich Town Ladies = = 
 A ladies team affiliated with the club , Ipswich Town L.F.C. , currently compete in the FA Women 's Premier League South East Division 1 , the fourth tier of Women 's football in the country . They play their home games at Rushmere Sports Club . 
 = Arthur Rose Eldred = 
 Arthur Rose Eldred ( August 16 , 1895 – January 4 , 1951 ) was an American agricultural and railroad industry executive , civic leader , and the first Eagle Scout in the Boy Scouts of America ( BSA ) . As a 17 @-@ year @-@ old candidate for the highest rank bestowed by the BSA , he was personally interviewed by a panel composed of the youth organization 's founding luminaries , including Ernest Thompson Seton and Daniel Carter Beard . Eldred was awarded the coveted distinction of Eagle Scout on September 2 , 1912 , becoming the first of more than two million boys in the U.S. since then to earn Scouting 's most vaunted rank . Eldred also received the Bronze Honor Medal for lifesaving , and was the first of four generations of Eagle Scouts in his family . 
 A graduate of Cornell University , Eldred enlisted at age 22 in the United States Navy in January 1918 , nine months after the U.S. entry into World War I. After serving aboard various Navy vessels and seeing combat in that conflict , he then worked in the agriculture and produce transportation industries , serving as a railroad industry official . Eldred continued as an active Scout leader and school board member throughout much of his adult life . 
 = = Scouting as a youth = = 
 Eldred was born in Brooklyn , New York , and raised in Oceanside , Long Island , New York by his mother after his father died . Eldred ’ s older brother , Hubert W. Eldred , was instrumental in starting Troop 1 of Oceanside , Long Island , New York in November 1910 . Troop 1 was fully uniformed and their appearance so impressed Chief Scout Executive James E. West that he asked the troop to serve as honor guard for the visit of Baden @-@ Powell , the founder of Scouting . West paid the expenses for the troop to travel to New York on January 31 , 1912 . Baden @-@ Powell inspected Troop 1 , and spoke with Eldred at some length . 
 In March 1911 , Eldred earned First Class rank . In April 1912 , he completed the 21 merit badges required for Eagle Scout . Merit badges are awards for mastering skills taught in the Scouting program . At the time , only 141 merit badges had then been earned by about 50 Scouts . As originally implemented , Eagle Scout was part of the merit badge system and was not a rank . Thus Eldred , like several of the early Eagles , did not earn the Life or Star awards that later preceded Eagle Scout . Eldred 's merit badges were noted in the Honor Roll of the August 1912 edition of Boys ' Life . 
 Eldred did not have a troop board of review , a review by the adult troop leaders to ensure eligibility . Instead , Eldred had a thorough National Board of Review consisting of West , Ernest Thompson Seton , Daniel Carter Beard , and Wilbert E. Longfellow , who wrote in the Handbook for Boys on life @-@ saving and swimming . At the time there had still not been a council @-@ level system for Eagle Scouts boards of review . West informed Eldred of his Eagle award in a letter dated August 21 , 1912 . This letter also informed Eldred of the delay in the medal , caused by the fact that the design of the Eagle Scout medal had not been finalized . Eldred was presented Eagle Scout on Labor Day , September 2 , 1912 , becoming the first to earn Scouting 's highest rank , just two years after the founding of the BSA itself . 
 In August 1912 , Eldred was camping with the troop in Orange Lake , New York . While swimming in the lake , fifteen @-@ year @-@ old Melvin Daly , another Scout who was a non @-@ swimmer , began to drown . Eldred rescued Daly with the assistance of Merritt Cutler . Chief Scout Seton presented Eldred with the Honor Medal for this action . 
 = = Education and career = = 
 Eldred entered Cornell University in 1912 and graduated in 1916 having studied agriculture . At the university , Eldred was a member of the Alpha Zeta fraternity , president of the Agricultural Association and participated in track and cross @-@ country . 
 = = = Naval service = = = 
 Eldred enlisted in the United States Navy in January 1918 , during World War I. He was initially assigned to the Philadelphia Naval Yard before shipping out on the transport USS Henderson ( AP @-@ 1 ) on Sunday , June 30 , 1918 from Bush Terminal in Brooklyn , New York for overseas duty . On July 1 , 1918 his convoy spotted two enemy submarines and attacked them with depth charges . It is not known whether the submarines were damaged . During the Henderson 's seventh troop transport voyage to France there was a fire on board on July 2 , 1918 , that resulted in the ship returning to the United States . All but one or two of those on board were rescued by the destroyers USS Mayrant ( DD @-@ 31 ) and USS Paul Jones ( DD @-@ 10 ) and eventually taken aboard the USS Von Steuben ( ID @-@ <unk> ) , which continued to Brest , France , where Eldred 's knowledge of French proved useful . From there , he was sent by train to Italy . 
 Eldred arrived in Italy in July 1918 and eventually at Sub Chaser Base 25 , located in Corfu , Greece in September 1918 . There he served as a machinist aboard submarine chaser SC @-@ 244 , where they patrolled the Strait of Otranto and were engaged in combat . While in Corfu , Eldred and many others got sick with the flu during the 1918 flu pandemic . The conditions at the hospital were so bad that he had to crawl to a stream to get water , which resulted in a permanent scar on his left hip . Eldred began his return to the United States and arrived in Malta on December 25 , 1918 . By February 1919 , he was in Gibraltar . He was given the option of staying in the Navy until they arrived home in six months or being discharged and paying his own way home . He elected the discharge and was separated from the Navy on March 4 , 1919 . He met some U.S. Army soldiers who were en route to America aboard an Army troop ship . They took him aboard as a stowaway and loaned him an Army uniform . Eldred slept in a life boat on the way back to America . 
 = = = Business and civic endeavors = = = 
 After the war , Eldred worked for a dairy , then became the agricultural agent for Atlantic County , New Jersey in 1921 and established the Atlantic City municipal market . He later promoted produce transportation for the Reading Railroad . As the trucking industry became a major competitor for the carriage of agricultural products , Eldred became the manager of the Eastern Railroad Association 's Motor Carrier Committee . He also served on the Camden County Council , the Clementon School District Board of Education , and also served as Overbrook Regional school board president . 
 = = Adult Scouting life , descendants , and legacy = = 
 Eldred was a board of review examiner throughout the 1920s . He was later the troop committee chairman for Troop 77 in Clementon , New Jersey . Eldred 's descendants have followed in his footsteps . Eldred was present when his eldest son , Willard " Bill " G. Eldred , had his Eagle Scout ceremony on October 27 , 1944 . Eldred also had a younger son , Arthur , and one daughter , Patricia . Two of Eldred 's grandsons are also Eagle Scouts : James I. Hudson III ( 1968 ) and Willard " Bill " Eldred ( 1977 ) . Four of his great @-@ grandsons , Kyle Kern , Tyler Eldred , Tennessee Abbott , and Bobby Hitte , were Scouts as of March 2007 , working towards Eagle Scout . Tyler Eldred and Kyle Kern did not make Eagle Scout and were no longer in Scouting as youths by July 2009 . Tennessee Abbott had his Eagle Scout ceremony on May 2 , 2010 . Bobby Hitte became an Eagle Scout in 2012 , 100 years after Arthur and another Eldred descendant , Jack Eldred , had joined Scouting . 
 Eldred died at the age of 55 from colon cancer on January 4 , 1951 at his home in Clementon . He is buried in Berlin Cemetery , Berlin , New Jersey . The National Eagle Scout Association chapter of the BSA 's Theodore Roosevelt Council in Massapequa , New York is named in honor of Eldred . In October 1976 the Village of Rockville Centre , New York honored Arthur Eldred by dedicating Eagle Scout Park in the village in his memory . The ceremony was attended by his widow , son Bill and grandsons . 
 = Dear Doctor = 
 " Dear Doctor " is the thirteenth episode of the first season of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : Enterprise and originally aired on January 23 , 2002 , on UPN . The episode was written by Maria and Andre Jacquemetton , and was directed by James A. Contner . 
 Set in the 22nd century , the series follows the adventures of the first Starfleet starship Enterprise , registration NX @-@ 01 . In this episode , Doctor Phlox ( John Billingsley ) faces a serious dilemma as a dying race begs for help from the crew of the Enterprise . The culture consists of two related races , but only the more genetically advanced race has been stricken by a planet @-@ wide plague . 
 UPN requested that the ending of the episode be changed , something that Billingsley did not like . However , he and other members of the cast and crew approved of the final episode . Due to the subject matter and the ending , it is seen as a controversial episode by fans . Although " Dear Doctor " received the same audience share as the previous episode , there was a 6 @.@ 6 % drop in viewers to 5 @.@ 7 million viewers for its first broadcast . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Doctor Phlox receives a letter from his Interspecies Medical Exchange counterpart , Doctor Jeremy Lucas , who is serving a term on <unk> . He begins to compose a letter back , describing his experiences with the crew , and the ways in which humans are different . Meanwhile , on the Bridge , the crew are discussing a pre @-@ warp vessel they have encountered . The alien they speak with , a Valakian , begs them to assist with a medical emergency their species is facing . Sub @-@ Commander T 'Pol reveals that the Vulcans are unaware of the species , but she agrees with Captain Archer to help them . Phlox continues his letter , describing the challenges of treating the disease – with over fifty million lives at stake . 
 Enterprise arrives at the Valakian homeworld , where they are met by <unk> , the Valakian director of a clinic , and <unk> , a Menk orderly . T 'Pol , Phlox , Archer , and Ensign Sato make a tour of the medical facility . Sato discovers that there is a second lesser @-@ evolved yet unaffected race , the Menk , who live alongside the Valakians . Phlox makes the startling discovery that the Valakians are slowly dying out , not from an easily curable medical condition , but because of a genetic disease which is experiencing an accelerated rate of mutation . He also believes that the answer to a cure may lie in the Menk . 
 Archer , meanwhile , is debating whether to provide the Valakians with Warp drive , ultimately deciding against it . Upon further investigation , Phlox learns that the Valakians suffer from the illness because their gene pool has reached a " dead end " and that the Menk are undergoing an " awakening process . " He also finds that the Valakians have been stifling and underestimating the Menk . He has found a cure , but does not believe it would be ethical to administer . Archer considers how a " primary directive " would be helpful , and provides the Valakians with medicine that will diminish the symptoms for a decade , anticipating the <unk> ' natural evolution and new levels of understanding between them . 
 = = Production = = 
 UPN requested a modified ending to the episode , as the original version had Phlox and Archer disagreeing over what to do with the Valakians . Archer would have wanted to save the race , while Phlox would have wanted evolution to take its course . John Billingsley , who played Doctor Phlox in Enterprise , didn 't agree with the changed version , saying " the ending that had initially been created I was fairly comfortable with . But the head of the studio suggested some revisions on the ending . What do you do ? I wasn 't as happy with the revisions , but it 's not my show , you have to sort of adjust , even if sometimes it does seem a bit of a contradiction in terms for what your character is supposed to be about . " 
 Billingsley also enjoyed the romantic subplot with Kellie Waymire as Elizabeth Cutler , however he was concerned that Waymire 's working schedule wouldn 't allow her to return to the show easily and so he wasn 't anticipating the romance being followed up upon in future episodes . She had previously appeared as Cutler in the episode " Strange New World " , and was pleased for her character to be involved with Phlox saying that she 'd be interested to see if the romantic plot was brought back by writers in a future episode . Waymire made one final appearance as Cutler in " Two Days and Two Nights " , before her death on November 13 , 2003 of an undiagnosed medical condition . Amongst other guest stars in this episode was Karl Wiedergott , who is better known for his voice work on The Simpsons . 
 = = Reception and home media = = 
 " Dear Doctor " was first aired on UPN on January 23 , 2002 . The episode was watched by 5 @.@ 7 million viewers and received a 3 @.@ 7 / 6 percent share . This means that it was seen by 3 @.@ 7 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 6 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . This was the same share as the previous episode , " Silent Enemy " , but a 6 @.@ 6 % drop in the number of actual viewers overall . 
 Michelle Erica Green , whilst writing for Trek Nation described " Dear Doctor " as the " first truly great episode " of Enterprise and compared it to " Pen Pals " from Star Trek : The Next Generation and " Tuvix " from Star Trek : Voyager in the way that the ethical dilemma is presented . She enjoyed the " seamlessly interwoven subplots and moving character development " and the pace of the episode , but wanted to see more of the society of the two races . Peter Schorn , writing a review for the first season for IGN , described " Dear Doctor " as one of the more solid episodes . Jamahl Epsicokhan , on his website Jammer 's Reviews , said that it was " by miles the best episode so far " . He calls it a " real story " with an actual issue , and praises the performance of John Billingsley as Phlox . 
 The episode was received warmly by members of the Enterprise cast and crew . Anthony Montgomery said prior to the end of the first series that he " absolutely loved ' Dear Doctor ' ; I thought that was fantastic " . After the end of the series , John Billingsley named the episode as one of his favourites as it was the first time he felt the character was three @-@ dimensional , and executive producer Brannon Braga subsequently called the episode a " classic " . Writer André Bormanis said that " Dear Doctor " was " great example of a classic Star Trek / Science Fiction " what if " scenario that raised interesting and complex social issues . " 
 The first home media release of the episode was on VHS in the UK on August 5 , 2002 . It was first released in the United States on DVD , having been released as part of the season one box set during May 2005 . The Blu ray release of Enterprise was announced in early 2013 , and was released in the United States on March 26 with the UK release following on April 1 . 
 = = = Controversy = = = 
 Almost immediately after airing , " Dear Doctor " received criticism from fans who disagreed with the conclusion of the episode . John Billingsley said in an interview afterwards that he " had a feeling that probably there ’ d be some upset " . He didn 't pay much attention to the response of fans on the internet , and said of the online criticism that he " wasn ’ t aware of it until well after the fact " . It was subsequently mentioned in an article on ethics in Star Trek written by Faith and Ethics reporter Stuart Laidlaw of the Toronto Star , who compared the actions of Phlox and Archer at the end of the episode to the response of the international community during the Rwandan Genocide . 
 = McDonald 's Cycle Center = 
 McDonald 's Cycle Center ( formerly Millennium Park Bike Station ) is an indoor bike station in the northeast corner of Millennium Park in the Loop community area of Chicago , in the U.S. state of Illinois . The city of Chicago built the center at the intersection of East Randolph Street and Columbus Drive , and opened it July 2004 . Since June 2006 , it has been sponsored by McDonald 's and several other partners , including city departments and bicycle advocacy organizations . The bike station , which serves bicycle commuters and utility cyclists , provides lockers , showers , a snack bar with outdoor summer seating , bike repair , bike rental and 300 bicycle parking spaces . The Cycle Center is accessible by membership and day pass . It also accommodates runners and inline skaters , and provides space for a Chicago Police Department Bike Patrol Group . 
 Planning for the Cycle Center was part of the larger " Bike 2010 Plan " , in which the city aimed to make itself more accommodating to bicycle commuters . This plan ( now replaced by the " Bike 2015 Plan " ) included provisions for front @-@ mounted two @-@ bike carriers on Chicago Transit Authority ( CTA ) buses , permitting bikes to be carried on Chicago ' L ' trains , installing numerous bike racks and creating bicycle lanes in streets throughout the city . Additionally , the Chicago metropolitan area 's other mass transit providers , Metra and Pace , have developed increased bike accessibility . Chicago Mayor Richard M. Daley was an advocate of the plan , noting it is also an environmentally friendly effort to cut down on traffic . McDonald 's controversially claimed that , since it is providing a healthier menu and fostering grade school physical education in an effort to help its customers improve their health , sponsoring bicycle and exercise activity in the park augments the company 's other initiatives . 
 Environmentalists , urban planners and cycling enthusiasts around the world have expressed interest in the Cycle Center , and want to emulate what they see as a success story in urban planning and transit @-@ oriented development . Pro @-@ cycling and environmentalist journalists in publications well beyond the Chicago metropolitan area have described the Cycle Center as exemplary , impressive , unique and ground @-@ breaking . 
 = = History and background = = 
 Lying between Lake Michigan to the east and the Loop to the west , Grant Park has been Chicago 's " front yard " since the mid @-@ 19th century . Its northwest corner , north of Monroe Street and the Art Institute , east of Michigan Avenue , south of Randolph Street , and west of Columbus Drive , had been Illinois Central rail yards and parking lots until 1997 , when it was made available for development by the city as Millennium Park . According to 2007 data released in 2008 , Millennium Park trailed only Navy Pier as a Chicago tourist attraction . 
 The Millennium Park bicycle center was designed by David Steele of the architectural firm Muller & Muller , which won a $ 120 @,@ 000 contract to design the station by Memorial Day 2004 , and commenced the design in August 2003 . This was at a time when bike stations were in place or being planned in several U.S. cities , such as Denver , and , in California , Los Angeles , Berkeley , Long Beach and Palo Alto . Developed at the time of " Bike 2010 Plan " discussions , the station was part of Mayor Daley 's vision of Chicago as the most bicycle @-@ friendly city in the United States . From the outset the plan was to have separate operators for the Cycle Center 's rental and repair services , as well as its coffee and juice bar . 
 The bike station had originally been planned to occupy 10 @,@ 000 square feet ( 929 m2 ) and cost $ 2 million , but when completed , the Cycle Center was 16 @,@ 448 square feet ( 1 @,@ 528 m2 ) and located on a larger exterior plaza . The final two @-@ floor design cost $ 3 @.@ 2 million , and a federal grant from the Federal Highway Administration and the Federal Transit Administration for projects that lessen traffic congestion and improve air quality funded its construction . 
 The Cycle Center was completed in June 2004 and the official opening occurred on July 19 , 2004 , the Monday following the Millennium Park 's grand opening gala . Attendees for the ribbon cutting included Mayor Daley , CDOT Commissioner Miguel d <unk> , Chicago Park District General Superintendent Timothy Mitchell , and representatives from the Chicago Bike Federation , Public Building Commission , Chicago Police Department , and Chicago City Council . Managed by the Chicago Department of Transportation ( CDOT ) , the Cycle Center is on the fifth and sixth floors of the Millennium Park parking garage . 
 Although bicycle centers were already common throughout Europe , Long Beach , California is credited with pioneering commuter @-@ biking hubs offering valet parking , showers and repair services in the United States . As the concept grew , public agencies and private groups in other cities followed suit . The development of the Millennium Park Cycle Center was part of a reversal of bike <unk> stemming from <unk> v. Township of Wayne — a 1998 Illinois Supreme Court ruling that bikes are " permitted " but not " intended " users of the roads , meaning that local governments have a limited responsibility to keep cyclists safe and that municipalities are immune from bicycle @-@ injury lawsuits unless the street has been clearly marked as a bike route . The city has been actively accommodating cyclists since 1999 through the CDOT Bike Lane Project . At the time of the July 2004 Cycle Center opening , Illinois Senate Bill 275 , which would have removed the liability disincentive to add bike lanes , mark bike routes and give cyclists reasonable protection , was at issue . At the time , the city of Chicago had 90 miles ( 140 km ) of bike lanes ( with an additional 110 miles ( 180 km ) forthcoming ) , in excess of 9 @,@ 000 bike racks , and it had implemented a policy allowing bicycles on CTA trains ( at all times excluding weekday morning and afternoon rush hours ) , CTA buses and Pace buses . In June 2005 , Metra allowed a limited number of bicycles on trains during off @-@ peak and weekend hours for the first time on a trial basis . By 2006 , the city had 315 miles ( 507 km ) of bike lanes . The planning emphasis in Chicago uses what is known as transit @-@ oriented development , which encourages developers to include bicycle parking . 
 The structure was originally named the Millennium Park Bike Station , but in June 2006 McDonald 's announced a $ 5 million grant to underwrite the operations of the Cycle Center for 50 years . The bike facility had been the last unsponsored component of Millennium Park . As part of the endowment , McDonald 's agreed to be the sponsor of free summer physical fitness programs such as yoga , pilates , and a variety of dance class sessions in Millennium Park for 10 years . McDonald 's agreed not to use any of its traditional commercial signage such as the Golden Arches . The McDonald 's sponsorship of the Cycle Center and park fitness activity came just a few months after Chicago was named the fattest city in America by Men 's Fitness . 
 The Cycle Center is designed to encourage bicycle commuting to Millennium and Grant Parks as well as to work and other nearby downtown locations , such as the Art Institute of Chicago . It represents two major initiatives by the mayor : to promote cycling and to make the city greener . By supporting cycling as an alternate form of transportation , it will help reduce traffic congestion , improve air quality and promote the health benefits of cycling . 
 = = Design = = 
 The physical focal point of the Cycle Center is an atrium that introduces the two lower levels of facilities and provides an aesthetic above @-@ ground presence . The atrium , which has been praised by Pulitzer Prize @-@ winning architecture critic Blair Kamin more than once , has a sloping solar paneled roof . The 120 solar panels produce 6 @.@ 5 percent of the electricity supply required for the climate @-@ controlled building . The Cycle Center has an opaque design , with thin steel frames for its main windows . The interior design uses stainless steel and blond wood , and shade is produced by awnings . 
 The Cycle Center includes parking for up to 300 bikes , lockers , an Internet station , a cafe , bike rentals , bike repair and private stall showers . During business hours , the facility has 100 spaces set aside for first @-@ come , first @-@ served usage , but after hours the facility is limited to dues @-@ paying members . In addition to the riders , the Chicago Police Lakefront Bicycle Patrol Unit is stationed at the Cycle Center . As the city 's high @-@ profile bicycle parking facility , it has served as a demonstration location for efforts to lobby for further bicycle accommodations for the Active Transportation Alliance , League of Illinois Bicyclists , and Illinois Lieutenant Governor Pat Quinn . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 When the heated and air conditioned McDonald 's Cycle Center opened , bicycle parking facilities with amenities , which had first appeared in the U.S. on the West Coast , did not exist in the Midwest . When it opened in 2006 the bike station was one of the country 's largest and most modern . The Cycle Center 's bicycle parking facilities use high @-@ capacity , two @-@ tiered <unk> racks that accommodate more than twice as many bicycles per square foot as traditional bike racks . These racks were manufactured by Josta , a German manufacturer of bicycle parking systems and stands . The interior design was a joint collaboration between the city of Chicago , Josta , and Cycle @-@ Safe , Inc. of Grand Rapids , Michigan , which also produces lockers and racks for bicycles . The Chicago Park District runs the station , which has a full @-@ time staff . 
 The Cycle Center is at 239 East Randolph Street ( at Columbus Drive ) , and offers convenient connections to mass transit at the nearby Chicago Transit Authority hub , the McCormick Place Busway and Metra trains at Millennium Station . For the annual series of festivals held in Grant Park , such as Lollapalooza and Taste of Chicago , the McDonald 's Cycle Center is complemented by the Chase Bike Valet at the corner of Lake Shore Drive and Monroe Street , which is one block east of Millennium Park . Chase Bank and organizations such as the Active Transportation Alliance sponsor the Chase Bike Valet . The city and its Cycle Center are considered exemplary by other cities in pursuit of covered , secure bicycle parking near public transportation . 
 = = = Membership = = = 
 The Cycle Center offers a wide variety of services to its members , and is busiest on Monday and Tuesday mornings . Illinois residents are eligible for Cycle Center monthly or annual memberships , which provide access to the showers and lockers ; allow participation in the shared bicycle program ; and include discounts on bicycle services , accessories , I @-@ GO car sharing membership , and City bike events . The Cycle Center is affiliated with , and provides free special @-@ event valet bicycle service for events such as Bike The Drive , <unk> Ride , and Chicago Marathon . As part of their membership agreement , members cannot store perishables and illegal substances in the lockers . 
 In April 2005 , the Cycle Center approached its 500 @-@ member capacity , and began a waiting list . Monthly membership was $ 15 and yearly membership was $ 90 . When the Cycle Center was renamed in 2006 , it had an approximate membership of 500 cyclists , who each paid dues of either $ 15 monthly or $ 99 annually . About 50 @,@ 000 riders used the Cycle Center in its first two years . By 2007 , the annual membership cost for those selected from the wait list was $ 20 per month or $ 149 per year . There are 240 lockers available to members . The Cycle Center has eight private stall showers , four each for men and women , that are equipped with an attached personal dressing area . The station has offered a nutritional continental breakfast including cereal , coffee , fruit , juice and yogurt . 
 = = = Rentals = = = 
 The Cycle Center offers a wide variety of bicycle styles , models and accessories for hourly , daily , weekly or monthly rental . Helmets , locks , and trail maps are included with each rental . Deposits can be secured with a valid credit card or driver 's license . Children under 18 years old must have a parent or guardian for rentals . Among the types of rentals available are <unk> , wagons , tandem bicycles and inline skates , and discounts are available with online rentals . Bike Chicago manages the rentals at the Cycle Center , as well as at Navy Pier , North Avenue Beach and Foster Avenue Beach . The citywide rental network emulates those in cities such as Paris , where they have long been common . Showers and lockers were initially available to non @-@ members for a $ 1 fee , but by 2009 , the fee had been raised to $ 3 . One hundred lockers are available to day users . 
 = = = Repair = = = 
 The Cycle Center 's repair center offers full @-@ time professional bicycle mechanics from 10 am to 6 pm during the summer , between Memorial Day weekend and Labor Day weekend inclusive , and part @-@ time during the rest of the year . The repair center has tools available for those who want to fix their bicycle themselves . Repair services are deeply discounted . 
 = = = Tours = = = 
 The Cycle Center conducts two- to three @-@ hour tours , with reservations dependent on the seasons . Tours include the Lake Michigan lakefront , the North Side , the South Side and night @-@ time sightseeing . Self @-@ guided tours are also available . Reservations are recommended from April to August and are required during the rest of the year . In May 2006 , regular tours were offered . The biking event Le Tour de Shore was held over 2 days in 2008 . Starting at the Cycle Center , the event took riders 90 miles ( 140 km ) near Lake Michigan , through the Indiana Dunes National Lakeshore , and along the backroads of both Indiana and Michigan . The Chicago Trolley Company takes bicyclists from the Cycle Center to the DuSable Museum of African American History twice daily for the Presidential Bike tour , which starts on the South Side of Chicago . The bike tour travels to Barack Obama 's home in the Kenwood community area , the place of his and Michelle Obama 's marriage and other culturally related destinations . 
 = = Critical review = = 
 The Chicago Tribune 's architecture critic , Blair Kamin , gave the Cycle Center three stars ( out of a possible four ) , described as a " gem " for the city and praised several elements of its detail . It has received accolades from numerous architecture and bicycling enthusiasts . Other Tribune writers have described the station as an " oasis for the urban cyclist " and reminiscent of " a hip health club " . The Toronto Star described it similarly , saying that it is a " jewel @-@ like glass building " with " amenities of an upscale health club " ; it quoted a cycling advocate who said " It 's not heaven , but it 's close " . According to The Plain Dealer , the Cycle Center is the United States ' " best @-@ known [ bike ] station " , while The Oregonian describes it as " the ultimate in bicycle stations " . The Boston Globe felt that the Cycle Center put Chicago over the top as the nation 's most cycling @-@ friendly city . 
 The Cycle Center avoided much of the controversy that beset most of Millennium Park by remaining open during the paid rental of a large portion of the park by Toyota on September 8 , 2005 . What proved more controversial were McDonald 's claims that , since it is providing a healthier menu and fostering grade school physical education in an effort to help its customers improve their health , sponsoring bicycle and exercise activity in the park augments the company 's other initiatives . Longtime writer for the Chicago Tribune and current Tribune health and fitness reporter , Julie Deardorff , described the move as a continuation of the ' " <unk> " of America ' and as somewhat " insidious " because the company is making itself more prominent as the social sentiment is to move away from fast food . 
 The Cycle Center has helped Chicago to become known as a cycling @-@ friendly city . According to an article in The Washington Post based on selections by the Adventure Cycling Association and Bicycling magazine , Chicago is one of the ten most cycling @-@ friendly cities in the U.S. because of the Cycle Center and the Chicago Department of Transportation 's Bicycle Program . The Cycle Center was featured in the Federal Transit Administration 's April 2009 report to the United States Congress on a new generation of innovative transit systems entitled Reinventing Transit : American communities finding smarter , cleaner , faster transportation solutions . Cities as far away as Melbourne , Australia , point to Chicago as an example of a city with cycling @-@ friendly features because of the Cycle Center ( they also used European cities such as Amsterdam and Lyon , France , as well as U.S. cities such as Davis , California and Portland , Oregon as examples ) . The Chicago Architecture Foundation awarded its 2004 Stein Ray & Harris Patron of the Year award in the governmental category to Millennium Park , specifically mentioning the bike station , Commissioner d <unk> and the City of Chicago Department of Transportation , along with several other leaders responsible for the development of other park features . 
 = Harry Potter and the Half @-@ Blood Prince = 
 Harry Potter and the Half @-@ Blood Prince is the sixth and penultimate novel in the Harry Potter series , written by British author J. K. Rowling . Set during protagonist Harry Potter 's sixth year at Hogwarts , the novel explores the past of Harry 's nemesis , Lord Voldemort , and Harry 's preparations for the final battle against Voldemort alongside his headmaster and mentor Albus Dumbledore . 
 The book was published in the United Kingdom by Bloomsbury and in the United States by Scholastic on 16 July 2005 , as well as in several other countries . It sold nine million copies in the first 24 hours after its release , a record at the time which was eventually broken by its sequel , Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows . There were many controversies before and after it was published , including the right to read the copies delivered prior to the release date in Canada . Reception to the novel was generally positive and it won several awards and honours , including the 2006 British Book of the Year award . 
 Reviewers noted that the book took on a darker tone than its predecessors , though it did contain some humour . Some considered the main themes to be love and death , and trust and redemption . The character development of Harry and several other teenage characters was also remarked upon . 
 The film adaptation of Harry Potter and the Half @-@ Blood Prince was released 15 July 2009 by Warner Bros. 
 = = Plot = = 
 Severus Snape , a member of the Order of the Phoenix , meets with Narcissa Malfoy , Draco 's mother , who expresses concern that her son might not survive a dangerous mission given to him by Lord Voldemort . He makes an Unbreakable Vow with her to protect and assist Draco in his mission . 
 Dumbledore takes Harry to the temporary home of Horace Slughorn , former Potions teacher at Hogwarts , and persuades him to return to teach . Harry is taken to the Burrow , where Hermione has already arrived . The next morning they get their Ordinary Wizarding Level ( <unk> ) results , and school supplies lists . Later , Ron Weasley and Hermione Granger follow Draco to Dark Arts supplier <unk> and Burkes . Harry is instantly suspicious of Draco , whom he believes to be a Death Eater . 
 The students return to school , where Dumbledore announces that Snape would be teaching Defence Against the Dark Arts this year , while Slughorn would resume his post as Potions teacher . Harry now excels in Potions , thanks to having received a used Potions textbook that once belonged to someone named " The Half @-@ Blood Prince " , who wrote numerous tips and spells in his Potions textbook . The Half @-@ Blood Prince 's tips help Harry win a bottle of Felix Felicis , or lucky potion , from his lessons . However , Harry 's newfound brilliance in potions angers Hermione and causes much tension between the two . 
 Believing that Harry needs to learn Voldemort 's past to gain advantage in a foretold battle , Dumbledore schedules regular meetings with Harry , in which they use Dumbledore 's Pensieve to look at memories of those who have had direct contact with Voldemort . Harry learns about Voldemort 's family and his evolution into a murderer obsessed not only with power , but with gaining eternal life . 
 Using his Felix Felicis , Harry eventually succeeds in retrieving one of Slughorn 's memories about how he revealed the secrets about splitting one 's soul and hiding it in several objects called Horcruxes , granting Voldemort immortality . Dumbledore explains that in order to grant him mortality , all the horcruxes must be destroyed . Two Horcruxes , including Riddle 's Diary from Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets , have already been destroyed but five others remain . 
 The love lives of the main characters come into play during the year . Ron and Hermione grow closer together , but after learning from his sister Ginny that Hermione had previously kissed Viktor Krum , Ron shuns her . Harry 's attempts to repair things between the two fail , resulting in Ron going out with Lavender Brown to make Hermione jealous . Ron and Hermione later reconcile after Ron is nearly killed in an attempt on Dumbledore 's life . As a result of this , Ron and Lavender break up when Lavender sees the two of them walking out of the girl 's dormitories together . However , this was only because she hadn 't noticed Harry , who had already hurried on ahead . Harry meanwhile falls in love with Ginny , but he is reluctant to enter a relationship with her for most of the year because of his friendship with Ron . He does enter in a relationship with her though , with the permission of Ron . 
 Later in the year , Harry and Dumbledore journey to a cave to retrieve a Horcrux . Dumbledore expertly finds a secret passageway to a hollow , where Harry and Dumbledore take a boat across the toxic lake . They reach the basin where the Horcrux is hidden underneath a potion . Dumbledore drinks the potion , which severely weakens him , while Harry fights off Voldemort 's <unk> . They take the Horcrux , Slytherin 's locket , and return to find that the Dark Mark has been placed over Hogwarts in their absence . Dumbledore uses his magic to freeze Harry in place while Harry remains hidden by his cloak of invisibility . Draco arrives , accompanied by Death Eaters that he helped get inside Hogwarts . Draco disarms Dumbledore of his wand then threatens to kill him , acting on his mission from Voldemort . Dumbledore tries to stall Draco , who is unable to go through with it , but Snape arrives and kills Dumbledore . 
 Because of Dumbledore 's death , his spell on Harry is broken , and Harry rushes after Snape to avenge Dumbledore . Snape reveals that he is the Half @-@ Blood Prince and escapes with Draco and the other Death Eaters . Later , Harry finds out that the locket is not the real Horcrux , containing only a note from someone named " R. A. B. " . 
 After Dumbledore 's funeral , Harry breaks up with Ginny , saying it is too dangerous for their relationship to continue . Harry is so devastated by Dumbledore 's death , he decides to tell his friends he will not be returning to Hogwarts next year and will instead search out and kill Voldemort by destroying all of the Horcruxes . Ron and Hermione vow to join him in destroying Lord Voldemort for good . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Franchise = = = 
 Harry Potter and the Half @-@ Blood Prince is the sixth book in the Harry Potter series . The first book in the series , Harry Potter and the Philosopher 's Stone , was first published by Bloomsbury in 1997 , with an initial print @-@ run of 500 copies in hardback , 300 of which were distributed to libraries . By the end of 1997 , the UK edition won a National Book Award and a gold medal in the 9- to 11 @-@ year @-@ olds category of the Nestlé Smarties Book Prize . The second book , Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets , was originally published in the UK on 2 July 1998 and in the US on 2 June 1999 . Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban was then published a year later in the UK on 8 July 1999 and in the US on 8 September 1999 . Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire was published on 8 July 2000 at the same time by Bloomsbury and Scholastic . Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix , the longest novel in the Harry Potter series , was released 21 June 2003 . After the publishing of Harry Potter and the Half @-@ Blood Prince , the seventh and final novel , Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows , was released 21 July 2007 . The book sold 11 million copies within 24 hours of its release : 2 @.@ 7 million copies in the UK and 8 @.@ 3 million in the US . 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Rowling stated that she had Harry Potter and the Half @-@ Blood Prince " planned for years " , but she spent two months going over her plan before she began writing seriously . This was a lesson learned after she did not check the plan for Goblet of Fire and had to rewrite a third of the book . She started writing the book before her second child , David , was born , but she took a break to care for him . The first chapter , " The Other Minister " , which features the meeting between the Muggle Prime Minister , the Minister for Magic Cornelius Fudge , and his successor , Rufus Scrimgeour , was a concept Rowling tried to start in Philosopher 's Stone , Prisoner of Azkaban , and Order of the Phoenix , but she found " it finally works " in Half @-@ Blood Prince . She stated that she was " seriously upset " writing the end of the book , although Goblet of Fire was the hardest to write . When asked if she liked the book , she responded , " I like it better than I liked ' Goblet ' , ' Phoenix ' or ' Chamber ' when I finished them . Book six does what I wanted it to do and even if nobody else likes it ( and some won 't ) , I know it will remain one of my favourites of the series . Ultimately you have to please yourself before you please anyone else ! " 
 Rowling revealed the title of Half @-@ Blood Prince on her website on 29 June 2004 . This was the title she had once considered for the second book , Chamber of Secrets , though she decided that the information disclosed belonged better in book six . On 21 December 2004 , she announced she had finished writing it , along with the release date of 16 July . Bloomsbury unveiled the cover on 8 March 2005 . 
 = = Controversies = = 
 The record @-@ breaking publication of Half @-@ Blood Prince was accompanied by controversy . In May 2005 , bookmakers in the UK suspended bets on which main character would die in the book amid fears of insider knowledge . A number of high value bets were made on the death of Albus Dumbledore , many coming from the town of Bungay where , it was believed , the books were being printed at the time . Betting was later reopened . Additionally , in response to Greenpeace 's campaign on using forest friendly paper for big @-@ name authors , Bloomsbury published the book on 30 % recycled paper . 
 = = = Right @-@ to @-@ read controversy = = = 
 In early July 2005 , a Real Canadian Superstore in Coquitlam , British Columbia , Canada , accidentally sold fourteen copies of The Half @-@ Blood Prince before the authorised release date . The Canadian publisher , Raincoast Books , obtained an injunction from the Supreme Court of British Columbia prohibiting the purchasers from reading the books before the official release date or from discussing the contents . Purchasers were offered a Harry Potter T @-@ shirt and an autographed copy of the book if they returned their copies before 16 July . 
 On 15 July , less than twelve hours before the book went on sale in the Eastern time zone , Raincoast warned The Globe and Mail newspaper that publishing a review from a Canada @-@ based writer at midnight , as the paper had promised , would be seen as a violation of the trade secret injunction . The injunction sparked a number of news articles alleging that the injunction had restricted fundamental rights . Canadian law professor Michael Geist posted commentary on his blog ; Richard Stallman called for a boycott , requesting the publisher issue an apology . The Globe and Mail published a review from two UK @-@ based writers in its 16 July edition and posted the Canadian writer 's review on its website at 9 : 00 that morning . Commentary was also provided on the Raincoast website . 
 = = Style and themes = = 
 Some reviewers noted that Half @-@ Blood Prince contained a darker tone than the previous Potter novels . The Christian Science Monitor 's reviewer Yvonne Zipp considered the first half to contain a lighter tone to soften the unhappy ending . The Boston Globe reviewer Liz Rosenberg wrote , " lightness [ is ] slimmer than ever in this darkening series ... [ there is ] a new charge of gloom and darkness . I felt depressed by the time I was two @-@ thirds of the way through " . She also compared the setting to Charles Dickens 's depictions of London , as it was " brooding , broken , gold @-@ lit , as living character as any other " . Christopher Paolini called the darker tone " disquieting " because it was so different from the earlier books . Liesl Schillinger , a contributor to The New York Times book review , also noted that Half @-@ Blood Prince was " far darker " but " leavened with humor , romance and snappy dialogue " . She suggested a connection to the 11 September attacks , as the later , darker novels were written after that event . David Kipen , a critic of the San Francisco Chronicle considered the " darkness as a sign of our paranoid times " and singled out curfews and searches that were part of the tightened security at Hogwarts , as a resemblance to our world . 
 Julia Keller , a critic for the Chicago Tribune , highlighted the humour found in the novel and claimed it to be the success of the Harry Potter saga . She acknowledged that " the books are dark and scary in places " but " no darkness in Half @-@ Blood Prince ... is so immense that it cannot be rescued by a snicker or a smirk . " She considered that Rowling was suggesting that difficult times could be worked through with imagination , hope , and humour , and compared this concept to works such as Madeleine L 'Engle 's A Wrinkle in Time and Kenneth Grahame 's The Wind in the Willows . 
 Rosenberg wrote that the two main themes of Half @-@ Blood Prince were love and death and praised Rowling 's " affirmation of their central position in human lives " . She considered love to be represented in several forms : the love of parent to child , teacher to student , and the romances that developed between the characters . Zipp noted trust and redemption to be themes promising to continue in the final book , which she thought " would add a greater layer of nuance and complexity to some characters who could sorely use it . " Deepti <unk> also pointed out Harry 's character development , that he was " no longer a boy wizard ; he 's a young man , determined to seek out and face a young man 's challenges " . Paolini had similar views , claiming , " the children have changed ... they act like real teenagers . " 
 = = Publication and reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Harry Potter and the Half @-@ Blood Prince was met with positive reviews . Liesl Schillinger of The New York Times praised the novel 's various themes and suspenseful ending . However , she considered Rowling 's gift " not so much for language as for characterisation and plotting " . Kirkus Reviews said it " will leave readers pleased , amused , excited , scared , infuriated , delighted , sad , surprised , thoughtful and likely wondering where Voldemort has got to , since he appears only in flashbacks " . They considered Rowling 's " wry wit " to turn into " outright merriment " , but called the climax " tragic , but not uncomfortably shocking " . Yvonne Zipp of The Christian Science Monitor praised the way Rowling evolved Harry into a teenager and how the plot threads found as far back as Chamber of Secrets came into play . On the other hand , she noted that it " gets a little exposition @-@ heavy in spots " and older readers may have seen the ending coming . 
 Christopher Paolini , writing for Entertainment Weekly , pointed out that the change of tone was " disquieting " as the world evolved , and praised the character development , though he considered Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire the best . The Boston Globe correspondent Liz Rosenberg wrote , " The book bears the mark of genius on every page " and praised the imagery and darker tone of the book , considering that the series could be crossing over from fantasy to horror . The Associated Press writer Deepti <unk> praised the newfound emotional tones and ageing Harry to the point where " younger fans may find [ the series ] has grown up too much " . Emily Green , a staff writer of the Los Angeles Times , was generally positive about the book but was concerned whether young children could handle the material . Cultural critic Julia Keller of the Chicago Tribune called it the " most eloquent and substantial addition to the series thus far " and considered the key to the success of the Potter novels to be humour . 
 = = = Awards and honours = = = 
 Harry Potter and the Half @-@ Blood Prince has won several awards , including the 2006 British Book of the Year Award and the 2006 Royal Mail Award for Scottish Children 's Books for ages 8 – 12 in its native United Kingdom . In the United States , the American Library Association listed it among its 2006 Best Books for Young Adults . It won both the 2005 reader @-@ voted Quill Awards for Best Book of the Year and Best Children 's Book . It also won the Oppenheim Toy Portfolio Platinum Seal for notable book . 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 Before publication , 1 @.@ 4 million advanced orders were placed for Half @-@ Blood Prince on Amazon.com , breaking the record held by the previous novel , Order of the Phoenix , with 1 @.@ 3 million . The initial print run for Half @-@ Blood Prince was a record @-@ breaking 10 @.@ 8 million . Within the first 24 hours of release , the book sold 9 million copies worldwide , 2 million in the UK and about 6 @.@ 9 million in the U.S. , which prompted Scholastic to rush an additional 2 @.@ 7 million copies into print . Within the first nine weeks of publication , 11 million copies of the U.S. edition were reported to have been sold . The U.S. audiobook , read by Jim Dale , set sales records with 165 @,@ 000 sold over two days , besting the adaptation of Order of the Phoenix by twenty percent . 
 = = Translations = = 
 Harry Potter and the Half @-@ Blood Prince was published simultaneously in the UK , the US , Canada , Australia , New Zealand and South Africa . Along with the rest of the books in the Harry Potter series , it was eventually translated into 67 languages . However , because of high security surrounding the manuscript , translators did not get to start on translating Half @-@ Blood Prince until its English release date , and the earliest were not expected to be released until the fall of 2005 . In Germany , a group of " hobby translators " translated the book via Internet in less than two days after release , far before German translator Klaus Fritz could translate and publish the book . 
 = = Editions = = 
 Since its wide hardcover release on 16 July 2005 , Half @-@ Blood Prince was released as a paperback on 23 June 2006 in the UK . Two days later on 25 July , the paperback edition was released in Canada and the U.S. , where it had an initial print run of 2 million copies . To celebrate the release of the American paperback edition , Scholastic held a six @-@ week sweepstakes event in which participants in an online poll were entered to win prizes . Simultaneous to the original hardcover release was the UK adult edition , featuring a new cover , and which was also released as a paperback on 23 June . Also released on 16 July was the Scholastic " Deluxe Edition " , which featured reproductions of Mary <unk> 's artwork and had a print run of about 100 @,@ 000 copies . Bloomsbury later released a paperback " Special Edition " on 6 July 2009 and a " Signature Edition " paperback on 1 November 2010 . 
 = = Film adaptation = = 
 The film adaptation of the sixth book was originally scheduled to be released on 21 November 2008 , but was changed to 15 July 2009 . Directed by David Yates , the screenplay was adapted by Steve Kloves and produced by David Heyman and David Barron . The film grossed over $ 934 million worldwide , which made it the second @-@ highest grossing film of 2009 worldwide and the fifteenth highest of all time . Additionally , Half @-@ Blood Prince gained an Academy Award nomination for Best Cinematography . 
 = SMS Kolberg = 
 SMS Kolberg was a light cruiser of the German Kaiserliche Marine ( Imperial Navy ) during the First World War , the lead ship of her class . She had three sister ships , SMS Mainz , Cöln , and Augsburg . She was built by the Schichau @-@ Werke ; her hull was laid down in early 1908 and she was launched later that year , in November . She was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet in June 1910 . She was armed with a main battery of twelve 10 @.@ 5 cm SK L / 45 guns and had a top speed of 25 @.@ 5 kn ( 47 @.@ 2 km / h ; 29 @.@ 3 mph ) . 
 Kolberg saw action in several engagements with the British during the war , including the raid on Scarborough , Hartlepool and Whitby in December 1914 and the Battle of Dogger Bank the following month . She also saw action against the Russians on two occasions , during the Battle of the Gulf of Riga in August 1915 and Operation Albion in November 1917 . After the end of the war , she was ceded to France as a war prize and renamed Colmar . She served only briefly in the French Navy , including a deployment to Asia in 1924 . She was stricken in 1927 and broken up two years later . 
 = = Design = = 
 Kolberg was ordered under the contract name Ersatz Greif and was laid down in early 1908 at the Schichau @-@ Werke shipyard in Danzig . She was launched on 14 November 1908 , after which fitting @-@ out work commenced . She was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet on 21 June 1910 . The ship was 130 @.@ 50 meters ( 428 ft 2 in ) long overall and had a beam of 14 m ( 45 ft 11 in ) and a draft of 5 @.@ 58 m ( 18 ft 4 in ) forward . She displaced 4 @,@ 915 t ( 4 @,@ 837 long tons ; 5 @,@ 418 short tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two sets of Melms & Pfenniger steam turbines driving four 2 @.@ 25 @-@ meter ( 7 ft 5 in ) propellers . They were designed to give 19 @,@ 000 metric horsepower ( 13 @,@ 974 kW ; 18 @,@ 740 shp ) . These were powered by fifteen coal @-@ fired Marine water @-@ tube boilers . These gave the ship a top speed of 25 @.@ 5 knots ( 47 @.@ 2 km / h ; 29 @.@ 3 mph ) . Kolberg carried 970 t ( 950 long tons ; 1 @,@ 070 short tons ) of coal that gave her a range of approximately 3 @,@ 250 nautical miles ( 6 @,@ 020 km ; 3 @,@ 740 mi ) at 14 knots ( 26 km / h ; 16 mph ) . Kolberg had a crew of eighteen officers and 349 enlisted men . 
 The ship was armed with twelve 10 @.@ 5 cm SK L / 45 guns in single pedestal mounts . Two were placed side by side forward on the forecastle , eight were located amidships , four on either side , and two were side by side aft . These were replaced in 1916 – 1917 with six 15 cm SK L / 45 guns . She also carried four 5 @.@ 2 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) SK L / 55 anti @-@ aircraft guns , though these were replaced with a pair of two 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) SK L / 45 anti @-@ aircraft guns in 1918 . She was also equipped with a pair of 45 cm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes submerged in the hull . Two deck @-@ mounted 50 cm ( 20 in ) torpedo tube launchers were added in 1918 . She could also carry 100 mines . The conning tower had 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick sides , and the deck was covered with up to 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) thick armor plate . 
 = = Service history = = 
 After her commissioning in 1910 , Kolberg served with the reconnaissance forces of the German fleet . On 14 October 1914 , Kolberg and the minelaying cruiser Nautilus steamed into the North Sea to lay a minefield off the Firth of Forth , but upon realizing British forces were operating off the Dogger Bank , they broke off the operation and returned to port . Kolberg 's first major action of World War I was the raid on Scarborough , Hartlepool and Whitby on 15 – 16 December 1914 . She was assigned to the II Scouting Group with three other light cruisers , tasked with screening for the battlecruisers of the I Scouting Group , commanded by Rear Admiral Franz von Hipper . While the battlecruisers were conducting the bombardments of the towns , Kolberg laid a field of 100 mines off the British coast . When the German forces withdrew , the weather became bad enough that Hipper ordered the other light cruisers to steam independently to the rendezvous with the main fleet ; Kolberg had meanwhile joined up with the battlecruisers and proceeded with them . 
 A little over a month later , she saw action at the Battle of Dogger Bank , on 24 January 1915 . The engagement began when Kolberg encountered the British cruiser HMS Aurora ; both ships opened fire , drawing the British and German battlecruiser squadrons to the action . Kolberg quickly scored two hits on Aurora , which replied with two hits of her own . One of the shells struck Kolberg below the waterline and the other shell hit the ship above the waterline ; the hits killed two men . In August 1915 , the ship went into the Baltic to participate in the Battle of the Gulf of Riga . She was assigned to serve as a flotilla leader for three and a half flotillas of torpedo boats , as part of an assault force into the Gulf of Riga . On the 10th , she joined the battlecruiser SMS Von der Tann to shell the island of Utö , though numerous reports of submarines in the area convinced the Germans to withdraw . On either 15 or 16 August 1915 , a Russian submarine fired a single torpedo at Kolberg which missed . 
 In November 1917 , Kolberg returned to the Baltic , for another attack on the Gulf of Riga , Operation Albion . By this point , she had been assigned as the flagship of the VI Scouting Group along with her sister Augsburg and Strassburg . At 06 : 00 on 14 October 1917 , the three ships left Libau to escort minesweeping operations in the Gulf of Riga . They were attacked by Russian 12 @-@ inch ( 300 mm ) coastal guns on their approach and were temporarily forced to turn away . By 08 : 45 , however , they had anchored off the Mikailovsk Bank and the minesweepers began to clear a path in the minefields . Two days later , Strassburg and Kolberg joined the dreadnoughts König and Kronprinz for a sweep of the Gulf of Riga . In the ensuing Battle of Moon Sound , the battleships destroyed the old pre @-@ dreadnought Slava and forced the pre @-@ dreadnought Grazhdanin to leave the Gulf . Later that day , Kolberg moved into the Gulf and engaged a Russian coastal battery at Woi on Moon Island for ten minutes , starting at 13 : 35 . The Russian guns did not return fire , so Kolberg ceased firing , and at 14 : 25 , anchored in the <unk> Sound with Strassburg . A landing party of forty men was assembled to capture the Russian guns at Woi ; they landed on the island at 15 : 45 and by 17 : 30 , the landing party had captured the guns and rendered them inoperable . 
 By 1918 , Kolberg was reduced to serve as a coastal defense ship . She was stricken from the naval register on 5 November 1919 , and subsequently surrendered to the French in Cherbourg on 28 April 1920 , under the name " W " . She was commissioned in the French Navy as Colmar . In 1924 , she was assigned to a colonial tour in Asia , along with the old armored cruiser Jules Ferry . In September 1924 , the two French ships contributed to a multi @-@ national landing party of around 1 @,@ 800 men drawn together due to violence in Shanghai . She remained in French service for only a few years , until she was stricken on 21 July 1927 . Ultimately , she was broken up for scrap two years later in Brest , France . 
 = Silent Hill 4 = 
 Silent Hill 4 : The Room is a survival horror video game , the fourth installment in the Silent Hill series , published by Konami and developed by Team Silent , a production group within Konami Computer Entertainment Tokyo . The game was released in Japan in June 2004 and in North America and Europe in September of the same year . Silent Hill 4 was released for the PlayStation 2 , Xbox and Microsoft Windows . Its soundtrack was released at the same time . In 2012 , it was released on the Japanese PlayStation Network . 
 Unlike the previous installments , which were set primarily in the town of Silent Hill , this game is set in the fictional town of South Ashfield , and follows Henry Townshend as he attempts to escape from his locked @-@ down apartment . During the course of the game , Henry explores a series of supernatural worlds and finds himself in conflict with an undead serial killer . 
 Silent Hill 4 features an altered gameplay style with third @-@ person navigation and plot elements taken from previous installments . Upon its release , the game received generally positive critical reaction , and its departure from the typical features of the series received a range of reactions . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The objective of Silent Hill 4 : The Room is to guide player character Henry Townshend as he seeks to escape from his apartment . Gameplay centers on the apartment , which is shown through a first @-@ person perspective and contains the only save point . The other areas of the game are reached through holes formed in the apartment . For the first half of the game , the room restores Henry 's " health " ( a measure of the amount of damage that he can endure before ' dying ' ) ; in the second half of the game , however , the room becomes possessed by hauntings that drain his health . 
 In the main levels of the game the player uses the usual third @-@ person view of the Silent Hill series . The player has a limited item inventory which can be managed by leaving unneeded items in a chest in Henry 's room . Silent Hill 4 emphasizes combat during gameplay , with a near @-@ absence of complex puzzles in favor of simple item @-@ seeking tasks . Unlike previous games in the series , separate difficulty settings for combat and puzzles are not available , changing the combat difficulty also affects the difficulty of puzzles . In the second half of the game Henry is accompanied and helped in combat by his neighbor Eileen Galvin ; Eileen cannot die while she is with Henry , although as she takes damage she succumbs to possession . The damage Eileen takes in the game determines whether or not she dies during the final boss fight , directly affecting the ending achieved . 
 = = = Combat = = = 
 Combat in Silent Hill 4 follows the pattern set by the other games with a few key differences . The player has access to a variety of melee weapons but only two firearms . Certain melee weapons are breakable . Items which can be equipped such as talismans ( which protect the player from damage from the hauntings in Henry 's room ) will eventually break after a short period of use . Another key difference in the combat system is that melee attacks may be " charged " before they are used , inflicting a greater amount of damage to an opponent than a quick attack . 
 One of the most significant changes is the introduction of immortal ghosts of antagonist Walter Sullivan 's victims . The ghosts , which have the ability to hurt Henry , can be nullified by two items . These items can also exorcise the hauntings in Henry 's apartment . Ghosts can also be knocked down for a lengthy period of time with one of two special bullets or pinned permanently with a special sword . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 The protagonist and player character of Silent Hill 4 is Henry Townshend , a resident of the South Ashfield Heights Apartments building in the fictitious town of Ashfield . Henry is an " average " man who has been described by Konami as an introvert in his late 20s . For the most part Henry navigates the game 's world alone , although he eventually works with his neighbor Eileen Galvin . Henry also deals with the new supporting characters of Cynthia Velázquez , Andrew DeSalvo , Richard Braintree and Jasper Gein . 
 Silent Hill 4 : The Room incorporates two unseen , minor characters from previous installments : investigative journalist Joseph Schreiber and deceased serial killer Walter Sullivan . Joseph was first referenced in Silent Hill 3 with a magazine article he has written condemning the " Hope House " orphanage run by Silent Hill 's religious cult , which the game 's protagonist , Heather , can discover . In Silent Hill 2 , Walter is referenced in a newspaper article detailing his suicide in his jail cell after his murder of two children . Sullivan appears in two forms : an undead adult enemy and a neutral child supporting character . Walter 's previous victims play a small role in the game as enemies . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 At the beginning of the game , Henry Townshend has been locked in his apartment in South Ashfield for five days with no means of communication and having recurring nightmares . Shortly afterwards , a hole appears in the wall of his bathroom , through which he enters alternate dimensions . His first destination is an abandoned subway station , where he meets Cynthia Velázquez , a woman convinced she is dreaming and who is soon killed by an unknown man . Awakening in his apartment , he hears confirmation on his radio that she is indeed dead in the real world . Similar events repeat with the next three people Henry finds : Jasper Gein ; Andrew DeSalvo , a former employee of an orphanage run by Silent Hill 's cult ; and Richard Braintree , a resident in Henry 's apartment complex . All the deaths bear similarities to the deceased serial killer Walter Sullivan 's modus operandi . 
 Henry finds scraps of the diary of his apartment 's former occupant , journalist Joseph Schreiber , who was investigating Walter 's murder spree . Walter is an orphan who has been led to believe his biological mother was in Henry 's apartment , where he had been found abandoned after birth . To " purify " the apartment , Walter , now in an undead state , is attempting to complete a ritual , which requires twenty @-@ one murders to be committed . Midway through the game , a child manifestation of Walter interrupts the murder of the intended twentieth victim , Eileen Galvin , and she joins Henry trying to find Joseph . At the same time , supernatural occurrences begin to manifest in Henry 's apartment . The two eventually find Joseph 's ghost , who tells them that their only escape is to kill Walter and reveals that Henry is the intended twenty @-@ first victim . 
 Shortly after Henry acquires Walter 's umbilical cord , an item required to kill him , Eileen leaves Henry and returns to his apartment , either hoping to stop Walter from completing the ritual or under Walter 's possession . He finds her with Walter , possessed and about to walk into a deathtrap , and a fight between the two men ensues . There are four possible endings , determined by whether or not Eileen survived the fight and on the condition of Henry 's apartment . The " 21 Sacraments " ending sees Walter and his child manifestation in his apartment , while the radio reveals that Henry and Eileen have died , along with the superintendent Frank Sunderland and several others . In " Eileen 's Death , " Henry awakens in his apartment , and learns from his radio that Eileen has died , to his sorrow . In " Mother , " Henry escapes from his apartment building , and brings flowers to Eileen , who plans to return to the apartment building . His apartment , meanwhile , has become completely possessed . " Escape " begins similarly to the " Mother " ending , but Eileen resolves to find a new place to live , and his apartment is not shown to be possessed . There is no UFO " joke ending " , a staple of the series . 
 = = Development = = 
 Development of the fourth Silent Hill game by Konami Computer Entertainment Tokyo 's development group Team Silent began shortly after the release of Silent Hill 2 and alongside Silent Hill 3 , with the intentions of creating a new style of game that would take the series in a different direction than the previous games . Despite what has been popularized around the Internet , Silent Hill 4 was always meant to be connected to Silent Hill and not an unrelated separate horror game that later became a Silent Hill title , although different gameplay mechanics and change were intended . News of the game 's development was made public by October 2003 , and official announcements by Konami followed at Gamers ' Day 2004 . The game was produced by the series ' recurring sound designer and composer Akira Yamaoka . Its working title , prior to its incorporation into the rest of the series , was simply Room 302 . 
 The main concept behind the new game structure was to take the idea of " the room " as " the safest part of your world " and make it a danger zone . The first @-@ person perspective was included in this area of the game to give the room 's navigation a personal and claustrophobic feel . The producers nonetheless retained the classic third @-@ person perspective in all other areas to accommodate the increased emphasis on action and combat . The developers re @-@ used locations already explored in the first half of the game to show the changes undergone by each character introduced in the locations . 
 It was noted that the game , like previous titles in the series , refers to the film Jacob 's Ladder ( 1990 ) and that the protagonist Henry Townshend shares a likeness to actor Peter Krause . The architecture of the apartment and the addition of the hole is comparable to a similar non @-@ Euclidean space in author Mark Z. <unk> 's novel House of Leaves ( 2000 ) . Other nods includes the novel Rosemary 's Baby ( 1967 ) , American television series Twin Peaks ( 1990 – 1991 ) , and American horror author Stephen King . The creators of the game have acknowledged writer Ryū Murakami 's book Coin Locker Babies ( 1980 ) as an inspiration for the game 's premise . 
 = = Music = = 
 The soundtrack for Silent Hill 4 : The Room was released alongside the game in 2004 , composed by Akira Yamaoka with vocals by Mary Elizabeth McGlynn and Joe Romersa . The Japanese version featured a second disk containing music by series composer Akira Yamaoka played along to the reading of traditional Japanese stories . The American version contained 13 exclusive tracks and remixes . 
 A remix of the song " Your Rain " from the game 's soundtrack was used on Konami 's Dance Dance Revolution <unk> . Several tracks from the game were also featured in the Silent Hill Experience promotional UMD . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Silent Hill 4 : The Room was first released in Japan on June 17 , 2004 . The game was shipped for its subsequent North American and European releases on September 7 , with pre @-@ ordering customers receiving the soundtrack for free with the game in the former market . The game , alongside its two PS2 predecessors , was rereleased in 2006 as part of The Silent Hill Collection European boxset , as a tie @-@ in with the release of the Silent Hill film , and again in 2009 . Microsoft has confirmed that their Xbox 360 console is backward compatible with the game 's Xbox port . 
 The previews of Silent Hill 4 : The Room provided at E3 2004 led IGN to name it the best PlayStation 2 adventure game in show . Upon its release in 2004 the game also attracted the attention of mainstream news outlets CNN , the BBC and The Times . Silent Hill 4 topped game sales charts in Japan during a video game sales slump , but dropped to tenth place one week later . Official statements by Konami referred to sales of the game in North America as " favorable . " 
 Review aggregator Metacritic shows an average score rating of 76 out of 100 for both the PS2 and Xbox versions , indicating " generally favorable reviews " . Marc Saltzman of CNN wrote : " Unlike Hollywood horror movies that often get worse with each new sequel ( " Friday the 13th Part VIII : Jason Takes Manhattan , " for example ) , Konami 's scary Silent Hill series gets better -- and creepier -- with age . " Video game magazine Game Informer praised Silent Hill 4 : The Room , stating that its " disarming voyeurism , bizarre camera angles , and exceptionally well @-@ placed tension is what the series has been trying to do all along , but The Room is the first entry to do it right . " According to a reviewer for Edge magazine , " [ l ] ook at it one way , and it 's a choking journey with unprecedented attention to unease and psychological horror , a game framed with unparalleled sophistication . From another angle , it 's just a clunky PSone throwback , with all the design wit of a dodo . " The New York Times found it completely lacking in " true terror . " 
 The plot of the game was generally well received by reviewers , who praised it as horrifying , compelling , and " dark " . 1UP.com praised the titular room as constantly maintaining a sense of unease for the player . Game Revolution enjoyed the relatively normal appearance of the environment outside Henry 's room at the game 's beginning , writing : " Are these strange <unk> real , or are they just the nightmares of some lunatic shut @-@ in who chained up his own door ? It effectively blurs the line between reality and delusion , leading to a singularly creepy game . " In contrast , IGN 's Douglass C. Perry felt that the familiarity of the story as compared with the other Silent Hill storylines detracted from its horror appeal , although he cared about its characters more than in previous games . Critics were , for the most part , pleased with the voice acting in the game , although it did receive criticism for the characters ' calmness . Nevertheless , producer and composer Akira Yamaoka said that the characters were , to him , " a little weak . " 
 The graphics of the game environments were praised as detailed . According to Bethany Massimilla of GameSpot , " The game looks its best in corroded , bloody , gritty environments , like the damp , steel halls of the water prison or the subterranean subway layers that , at one point in the game , are walled in living , moving flesh . " The character and monster designs received praise as well @-@ done . Reviewers generally commended the audio as contributing to the horror of the game , although 1UP wrote that it was sub @-@ par for the series . 
 The gameplay 's departures from that of previous installments in the series drew a range of reactions . GameZone enjoyed the changes , writing that they were needed to keep the series fresh . The decision to place the only save point and storage area for items in the titular room , with no option to discard unwanted items , was generally criticised , with reviewers finding it inconvenient to have to return there . The puzzles had mixed reactions . Kristan Reed of Eurogamer expressed disappointment with the degree to which the game had been geared as a combat game with an absence of standard Silent Hill puzzles , while GameSpy 's Bryn Williams worried that the puzzles ' obscurity and " non @-@ lateral " nature might discourage more casual players . IGN disliked the replacement of logic @-@ based puzzles in favour of obtaining various items , and was also displeased by the lack of boss fights . Another source of criticism was the repetition of the first four environments during the second half of the game . 
 Metacritic shows a lower average rating of 67 out of 100 for the PC version , indicating " mixed or average reviews " . IGN 's Perry complained about " the <unk> textures we 've seen in years and some serious graphical glitches " and " extremely low mouse sensitivity " inhibiting gameplay . GameSpot 's review praised the graphics as having " been optimized well for the PC " but acknowledging " keyboard and mouse controls just don 't fare that well in an environment of constantly shifting perspective views that can make navigation frustrating . " 
 = Hurricane Neddy = 
 " Hurricane Neddy " is the eighth episode of The Simpsons ' eighth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on December 29 , 1996 . It was written by Steve Young , directed by Bob Anderson and features a cameo by Jon Lovitz as Jay Sherman from The Critic . In this episode , " Hurricane Barbara " viciously strikes Springfield but , by pure chance , the house of Ned Flanders is the only one destroyed . As a result , he begins to lose his faith in both God and the townspeople around him , especially Homer , as he suffers a nervous breakdown . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In midst of a quiet afternoon , the wind starts to pick up , which leads Lisa to find out that a hurricane is on the way . Lisa warns Homer , but he is skeptical since there has been no record of a hurricane ever hitting Springfield . Lisa reminds her father that the records only go back to 1978 , " when the Hall of Records was mysteriously blown away " . The evening news confirms that " Hurricane Barbara " is close , resulting in panicked citizens storming the Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart and Homer attempting to secure the Simpson home . The hurricane strikes and after a few treacherous hours , the storm ends and the family cautiously leaves the basement . Initially , they are thankful to see that their home is untouched and Marge comments that everything works out if one has a little faith . 
 Meanwhile , next door Ned emerges from a heap of rubble and sees that his house was destroyed , along with everything else he owned except the family gravestones , while all the houses around his are intact . Ned is relieved that his family escaped serious injury , but it turns out to be little solace since he does not have home insurance , as he considers insurance a form of gambling . The Flanders family is forced to move into the Rescue Center in the church basement , although they appear to be the only family to be affected to that extent . Ned is further discouraged after learning that his business , the Leftorium , was looted following the hurricane . Distraught with annoyance , Ned begins to believe that God is punishing him and , seeking answers , he goes to read the Bible in the church but receives a paper cut . Interpreting it as further punishment , he sits down and laments that he is falling apart , even after doing everything the Bible says , " even the stuff that contradicts the other stuff . " 
 The following day , Marge arrives at the church and takes the Flanders family back to their house , completely rebuilt by the people of Springfield . Overjoyed , Ned inspects the house , but becomes increasingly dismayed as he discovers its extremely shoddy construction . Immediately after the inspection , the house collapses . Ned tries to calm down , knowing that the townspeople tried their best , but is unable to contain his rage and finally snaps , lashing out at all the residents of Springfield , and directing his most vehement invective at Homer ( who believes he got off easy because he wasn 't yelled at ) . Ned then drives himself to <unk> Mental Hospital to seek psychotherapy . 
 While in the asylum , Ned is visited by his childhood psychiatrist , Dr. Foster , who tells Ned about his childhood life - as a completely out @-@ of @-@ control brat raised by beatnik parents who did not believe in discipline . As a result , the young Ned went through the University of Minnesota <unk> Protocol , which involved eight months of continuous spanking . The treatment worked so well that it rendered him unable to express any anger at all , and all Ned 's repressed anger built up inside him until he erupted . 
 Dr. Foster enlists Homer to help Ned learn how to appropriately express emotions , as he is the person who Flanders harbors the most resentful feelings towards . After several failed scripted insults , Homer manages to get Ned to open up about some of his repressed dislikes , finally admitting he hates his parents , after which he immediately feels better . Upon hearing this , Dr. Foster declares Flanders cured and he is immediately released . Outside the hospital , Ned is greeted by the townsfolk of Springfield including the rest of the Simpsons and his family , who cheer him . Ned promises that from now on , if anyone does something he does not like , they will hear about it , which Dr. Foster tells him is very healthy . Ned then adds , " And if you really tick me off , I 'm gonna run you down with my car . " Homer responds by laughing and saying , " Ned , you so <unk> @-@ <unk> ! " as he and Ned begin to laugh , before the end credits begin with a crazy clockwork version of The Simpsons theme . 
 = = Production = = 
 Steve Young , a writer for the Late Show with David Letterman , was brought in as a freelance writer to write this episode . The writers wanted to explore what made Flanders tick and examine what made him act the way he does . The original idea came from George Meyer , who had also wanted an episode about Flanders ' faith being tested . One of the key story points came from his friend Jack <unk> , a writer for Saturday Night Live who wanted to do a sketch about a down @-@ on @-@ his @-@ luck shoemaker who is visited by a bunch of elves who help him , but make very bad shoes . Likewise , it inspired the idea that the neighbors would rebuild Flanders ' house , but do a bad job and provoke an outburst . 
 A caricature of John Swartzwelder can be seen shutting the door of a room in <unk> Mental Hospital . Later in the episode , during the scene where the townsfolk are welcoming Ned back , someone can be seen holding a sign that says " Free John Swartzwelder . " During the sequence where Flanders yells at the town , a man with a ponytail and wearing a white shirt who is a caricature of Bob Anderson can be seen . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The scene at the beginning of the episode , in which the people of Springfield mob the Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart , is based on the events of the 1992 Los Angeles riots . Todd is wearing a Butthole Surfers shirt ; however the censors only allowed " <unk> Surfers " . Jay Sherman from The Critic , who had previously appeared in " A Star Is Burns " , can also be seen in the mental hospital repeatedly saying his catchphrase , " It stinks " . The small door at the end of the hallway in Flanders ' rebuilt house echoes the improbably small hallway in the film Willy Wonka & the Chocolate Factory . Several scenes from the mental hospital were taken from the 1975 movie , One Flew Over the Cuckoo 's Nest . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Hurricane Neddy " finished 18th in ratings for the week of December 23 – 29 , 1996 , with a Nielsen rating of 8 @.@ 7 , equivalent to approximately 8 @.@ 4 million viewing households . It was the second highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , following The X @-@ Files . 
 Marge 's line , " Dear God , this is Marge Simpson . If You stop this hurricane and save our family , we will be forever grateful and recommend You to all our friends , " was cited by journalist Mark Pinsky as an example of how " Simpson family members are both defined and circumscribed by religion . " Journalist Ben Rayner speculated that some fans , whom he called " nerds , " would want an explanation of " how Barney fit through that tiny door to the ' master bedroom ' in the rebuilt Flanders family home . " 
 = Invincible @-@ class battlecruiser = 
 The three Invincible @-@ class battlecruisers were built for the Royal Navy and entered service in 1908 as the world 's first battlecruisers . They were the brainchild of Admiral Sir John ( " Jacky " ) Fisher , the man who had sponsored the construction of the world 's first " all big gun " warship , HMS Dreadnought . He visualised a new breed of warship , somewhere between the armoured cruiser and battleship ; it would have the armament of the latter , but the high speed of the former . This combination would allow it to chase down most ships , while allowing it to run from more powerful designs . 
 This design philosophy would prove to be most successful when the Invincibles were able to use their speed to run down smaller and weaker ships . The classic example was the Battle of the Falkland Islands where Invincible and Inflexible sank the German armoured cruisers SMS Scharnhorst and SMS Gneisenau virtually without loss to themselves despite numerous hits by the German ships . They were least successful when standing in the main line of battle where they faced enemy battleships . An example is the loss of Invincible to a magazine explosion during the Battle of Jutland , although this explosion owed more to flaws in British ammunition handling practices that exposed numerous cordite charges to the fire in ' Q ' turret than any flaws in the design of the ship . 
 The two surviving ships had an uneventful time for the rest of the war conducting patrols of the North Sea as the High Seas Fleet was forbidden to risk any more losses . They were put into reserve in early 1919 and sold for scrapping on 1 December 1921 . 
 = = Design = = 
 After Admiral Fisher was appointed First Sea Lord on 21 October 1904 he pushed through the Board of Admiralty in early December 1904 a decision to arm the next armoured cruiser with 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) guns and that it would have a speed no less than 25 @.@ 5 knots ( 29 @.@ 3 mph ; 47 @.@ 2 km / h ) . Shortly afterwards he convened a " Committee on Designs " to investigate and report on requirements for future ships . While nominally independent it served to validate decisions already made and to deflect criticism of Fisher and the Board of Admiralty as it had no ability to consider options other than those already decided upon by the Admiralty . Fisher appointed all of the members of the Committee and himself as President of the Committee . During its last meeting on 22 February 1905 it decided on the outline design of the fast armoured cruiser . This , in turn , was approved by the Board on 16 March with only minor changes , such as the reduction in the anti @-@ torpedo boat armament from twenty to eighteen 12 @-@ pdr guns . 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 The Invincible @-@ class ships were formally known as armoured cruisers until 1911 when they were redesignated as battlecruisers by an Admiralty order of 24 November 1911 . Unofficially a number of designations were used until then , including cruiser @-@ battleship , dreadnought cruiser and battle @-@ cruiser . 
 The Invincibles were significantly larger than their armoured cruiser predecessors of the Minotaur class . They had an overall length of 567 ft ( 173 m ) , a beam of 78 @.@ 5 ft ( 23 @.@ 9 m ) , and a draft of 30 ft ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) at deep load . They displaced 17 @,@ 250 long tons ( 17 @,@ 530 t ) at load and 20 @,@ 420 long tons ( 20 @,@ 750 t ) at deep load , nearly 3 @,@ 000 long tons ( 3 @,@ 050 t ) more than the earlier ships . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 Early in the design process the " Committee on Designs " had thought to power these ships with the traditional reciprocating vertical triple @-@ expansion steam engines , but were persuaded to adopt Parsons steam turbines as they required fewer boilers for the same amount of power , were easier to protect from damage as they were more compact than reciprocating engines and could be kept below the waterline . In addition they were significantly lighter and more reliable than the older design . The direct drive turbines then in use did have one significant drawback in that they ran at a relatively high speed which required small @-@ diameter , fine @-@ pitch propellers of a large blade area which adversely affected manoeuvrability at low speeds . Parsons alleviated this problem by his suggestion of fitting more powerful astern turbines on all four shafts which could increase manoeuvrability by reversing the turbines as needed . 
 An additional solution was to fit twin balanced rudders behind each inner shaft in contrast to the single central rudder used on earlier ships . This greatly increased the effectiveness of the rudder and substantially decreased the turning circle of the Invincibles in comparison to earlier ships of their size . 
 The Invincibles had two paired sets of Parsons turbines housed in separate engine @-@ rooms . Each set consisted of a high @-@ pressure ahead and astern turbine driving an outboard shaft , and a low @-@ pressure ahead and astern turbine driving an inner shaft . A cruising turbine was also coupled to each inner shaft , although these were not used often and were eventually disconnected . Each shaft drove a propeller 11 feet ( 3 @.@ 4 m ) in diameter . The turbines were designed to produce a total of 41 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 30 @,@ 600 kW ) , but reached nearly 47 @,@ 000 shp ( 35 @,@ 000 kW ) during trials in 1908 . Designed speed was 25 knots ( 46 @.@ 3 km / h ) , but all three bettered 26 knots ( 48 @.@ 2 km / h ) during trials . Indomitable maintained an average speed of 25 @.@ 3 knots ( 46 @.@ 9 km / h ) for three days during a passage of the North Atlantic in August 1908 . 
 The steam plant consisted of 31 Yarrow ( Invincible and Inflexible ) or Babcock & Wilcox ( Indomitable ) large @-@ tube boilers , arranged in four boiler rooms . Maximum bunkerage was approximately 3 @,@ 000 long tons ( 3 @,@ 050 t ) of coal , with an additional 725 long tons ( 737 t ) of fuel oil to be sprayed on the coal to increase its burn rate . At full fuel capacity , the ships could steam for 3 @,@ 090 nautical miles ( 5 @,@ 720 km ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ) . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Each carried eight BL 12 @-@ inch Mk X guns in four hydraulically powered BVIII twin turrets , except for Invincible which mounted her guns in two <unk> and two BX electrically driven turrets . Two turrets were mounted fore and aft on the centreline , identified as ' A ' and ' X ' respectively . Two turrets were mounted amidships between the second and third funnels , identified as ' P ' and ' Q ' . ' P ' turret was mounted on the port side and normally faced forward , ' Q ' turret was mounted on the starboard side and normally faced aft ( rearwards ) . ' P ' and ' Q ' turrets were staggered — ' P ' was forward of ' Q ' , enabling ' P ' to fire in a limited arc to the starboard side and ' Q ' to likewise fire in a limited arc towards the port side . These were the same guns as those mounted in the British HMS Dreadnought , the Lord Nelson class and the Bellerophon class , and for a brief period the Invincibles equalled the firepower of any other nations ' battleships . 
 The guns could initially be depressed to − 3 ° and elevated to 13 @.@ 5 ° , although the turrets were modified to allow 16 ° of elevation during World War I. They fired 850 @-@ pound ( 390 kg ) projectiles at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 725 ft / s ( 831 m / s ) ; at 13 @.@ 5 ° , this provided a maximum range of 16 @,@ 450 m ( 17 @,@ 990 yd ) with armour @-@ piercing ( AP ) 2 crh shells . At 16 ° elevation , the range was extended to 20 @,@ 435 yd ( 18 @,@ 686 m ) using the more aerodynamic , but slightly heavier 4 crh AP shells . The rate of fire of these guns was 1 – 2 rounds per minute . The ships had a total of 880 rounds during wartime for 110 shells per gun . 
 The ships ' secondary armament initially was intended to consist of eighteen 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) 12 @-@ pdr guns , but firing trials against the old destroyer Skate in 1906 showed that the 12 @-@ pdr gun had little chance of stopping a destroyer or torpedo boat before it got close enough to fire its torpedoes . 
 The originally intended 12 @-@ pounder guns were exchanged for sixteen 4 in QF Mk III guns early in the construction process . They were positioned in the superstructure and on turret roofs in open mounts as they were not expected to be manned in a ship @-@ to @-@ ship engagement during daylight . During 1914 – 15 the turret roof guns were transferred to the superstructure and the total number of guns was reduced to twelve . All of the remaining guns were enclosed in casemates and given blast shields at that time to better protect the gun crews from weather and enemy action . 
 The guns on their PI * mounts had a maximum depression of 10 ° and a maximum elevation of 20 ° . They fired 25 @-@ pound ( 11 kg ) projectiles at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 300 – 2 @,@ 370 ft / s ( 700 – 720 m / s ) ; at 20 ° , this provided a maximum range of 9 @,@ 600 yd ( 8 @,@ 800 m ) using Common pointed shells . Their rate of fire was 8 – 10 rounds per minute . 
 These guns were replaced by twelve 4 @-@ inch BL MK IX guns on CPI mountings on Inflexible during 1917 . They could depress 10 ° and elevate to 30 ° . They fired 31 @-@ pound ( 14 kg ) shells at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 625 ft / s ( 800 m / s ) to a maximum range of 13 @,@ 500 yd ( 12 @,@ 300 m ) at a rate of fire of 10 – 12 rounds per minute . 
 The QF Mk III guns were replaced by twelve 4 @-@ inch BL MK VII guns on <unk> mountings on Indomitable during 1917 . These guns could depress 7 ° and elevate to 15 ° . They fired 31 @-@ pound ( 14 kg ) shells at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 864 ft / s ( 873 m / s ) which gave a maximum range of 11 @,@ 600 yd ( 10 @,@ 600 m ) . Their rate of fire was 6 – 8 rounds per minute . An additional gun was fitted on Indomitable in April 1917 as an anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) gun . It was mounted on a MK II high @-@ angle mounting with a maximum elevation of 60 ° . It had a reduced propellant charge with a muzzle velocity of only 2 @,@ 864 ft / s ( 873 m / s ) . 
 Earlier anti @-@ aircraft guns included a 3 @-@ pounder Hotchkiss gun on a high @-@ angle Mk Ic mounting with a maximum elevation of 60 ° . Both Invincible and Indomitable carried theirs from November 1914 to August 1917 . It fired 3 @.@ 3 @-@ pound ( 1 @.@ 5 kg ) projectiles at a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 873 ft / s ( 571 m / s ) at a rate of fire of 20 rounds per minute . This provided a maximum range of 7 @,@ 600 yd ( 6 @,@ 900 m ) at 45 ° , but the maximum effective anti @-@ aircraft range was only 1 @,@ 200 yd ( 1 @,@ 100 m ) . 
 Each of the Invincibles was also fitted with a single QF 3 @-@ inch 20 cwt AA gun on a high @-@ angle MKII mount at the aft end of the superstructure . This had a maximum depression of 10 ° and a maximum elevation of 90 ° . It fired a 12 @.@ 5 @-@ pound ( 5 @.@ 7 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 500 ft / s ( 760 m / s ) at a rate of fire of 12 – 14 rounds per minute . They had a maximum effective ceiling of 23 @,@ 500 ft ( 7 @,@ 200 m ) . 
 Gardiner and Gray quote an additional seven Maxim guns , but this cannot be confirmed . Five 18 @-@ inch ( 450 @-@ mm ) submerged torpedo tubes were mounted on the Invincibles , two on each side and one in the stern and fourteen torpedoes were carried . 
 = = = Fire control = = = 
 The spotting tops at the head of the fore and main masts controlled the fire of the Invincibles ' main guns . Data from a 9 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) Barr and Stroud rangefinder was input into a Dumaresq mechanical computer and electrically transmitted to Vickers range clocks located in the Transmitting Station located beneath each spotting top where it was converted into range and deflection data for use by the guns . The target 's data was also graphically recorded on a plotting table to assist the gunnery officer in predicting the movement of the target . Each gun turret had its own transmission equipment and the turrets , Transmitting Stations , and spotting tops could be connected in almost any combination . Firing trials against Hero in 1907 revealed this system 's vulnerability to gunfire as the spotting top was hit twice and a large splinter severed the voice pipe and all wiring running along the mast . To guard against this possibility ' A ' turret was fitted with a 9 @-@ foot rangefinder at the rear of the turret roof and it was equipped to control the entire main armament during refits between 1911 and 1914 . 
 Fire control technology advanced quickly during the years immediately preceding World War I and the development of the Dreyer Fire Control Table was one such advance . It combined the functions of the Dumaresq and the range clock and a simplified version , the Mk I , was fitted to the Invincibles during refits in 1915 – 16 . The more important development was the director firing system . This consisted of a fire control director mounted high in the ship which electrically provided gun data to the turrets via pointers , which the turret crewmen only had to follow . The director officer fired the guns simultaneously which aided in spotting the shell splashes and minimised the effects of the roll on the dispersion of the shells . Invincible was the first battlecruiser to receive this system during her refit from April to August 1914 , but its installation was interrupted by the outbreak of the war and it was not fully working until after the Battle of the Falkland Islands in November . Indomitable and Inflexible didn 't receive their systems until May 1916 , immediately before the Battle of Jutland . 
 = = = Protection = = = 
 The armour protection given to the Invincibles the waterline belt measured 6 inches ( 152 mm ) amidships was only slightly more than half the thickness of Dreadnought 's 11 inches ( 279 mm ) . The belt was six inches thick roughly between the fore and aft twelve @-@ inch gun turrets , but was reduced to four inches from the fore turret to the bow , but did not extend aft of the rear turret . A six @-@ inch bulkhead met the barbette of X turret to fully enclose the armoured citadel . The gun turrets and barbettes were protected by 7 in ( 178 mm ) of armour , except for the turret roofs which used 3 in ( 76 mm ) of Krupp non @-@ cemented armour ( KNC ) . The thickness of the main deck was 1 in ( 25 mm ) around the base of barbettes and the crown of the base of the rear conning tower . It was 2 in ( 51 mm ) over the crown of the base of the forward conning tower . The lower deck armour was 1 @.@ 5 in ( 38 mm ) on the flat and two inches thick on the slope , except aft of the rear turret where it was increased to 2 @.@ 5 in ( 64 mm ) to protect the steering gear . The front and sides of the forward conning tower were 10 in ( 254 mm ) thick while its rear was 7 in ( 178 mm ) . The walls of the rear conning tower were six inches thick . The roof and floor of both conning towers were KNC armour 2 inches thick while their communication tubes were 3 in ( 76 mm ) of KNC . The signal tower immediately aft of the forward conning tower also had three inches of KNC . Mild steel torpedo bulkheads of 2 @.@ 5 @-@ inch thickness were fitted abreast the magazines and shell rooms . Krupp cemented armour was used throughout , unless otherwise mentioned . 
 = = = Aircraft = = = 
 By 1918 the two surviving Invincibles carried a Sopwith Pup and a Sopwith 1 ½ Strutter on flying @-@ off ramps fitted on top of ' P ' and ' Q ' turrets . Each platform had a canvas hangar to protect the aircraft during inclement weather . 
 = = Construction = = 
 The three Invincibles were ordered at the same time as Dreadnought as part of the 1905 – 06 Naval Programme . The following table gives the build details and purchase cost of the members of the Invincible class . Whilst standard British practice at that time was for these costs to exclude armament and stores , for some reason the cost quoted in The Naval Annual for this class includes armament . 
 * = estimated cost , including guns 
 = = Early career = = 
 All three ships entered service from the second half of 1908 . Initially , Invincible and Inflexible were assigned to the Home Fleet , while Indomitable took the Prince of Wales ( later King George V ) to the <unk> celebrations in Canada , before also joining the Home Fleet . Invincible 's electrically driven turrets proved to be a failure despite two lengthy refits in 1909 and 1911 and were converted to hydraulic power during her refit in early 1914 at the enormous cost of £ 151 @,@ 200 . The situation was so bad during her gunnery trials in October 1908 that the captain of HMS Excellent , the Royal Navy 's gunnery school described their operation thusly : " When the order was given to train the turret , elevate or run a gun in or out , it was only necessary to push a button , or move a switch , but the result was often a flash of blue flame which seemed to fill the turret . " 
 In 1914 , Invincible was refitting in England , while Inflexible and Indomitable , together with the newer Indefatigable formed the nucleus of the Mediterranean Fleet , where Inflexible served as flagship from November 1912 . It was in the Mediterranean that the first naval action of the First World War took place , when the British pursued the German warships Goeben and Breslau upon the outbreak of war . 
 = = World War I = = 
 = = = Pursuit of Goeben and Breslau = = = 
 Indomitable , accompanied by Indefatigable , under the command of Admiral Sir Archibald Berkeley Milne encountered the battlecruiser Goeben and the light cruiser Breslau on the morning of 4 August 1914 headed east after a cursory bombardment of the French Algerian port of Philippeville , but Britain and Germany were not yet at war so Milne turned to shadow the Germans as they headed back to Messina to recoal . All three battlecruisers had problems with their boilers , but Goeben and Breslau were able to break contact and reached Messina by the morning of the 5th . By this time war had been declared , after the German invasion of Belgium , but an Admiralty order to respect Italian neutrality and stay outside a six @-@ mile ( 10 km ) limit from the Italian coast precluded entrance into the passage of the Strait of Messina where they could observe the port directly . Therefore , Milne stationed Inflexible and Indefatigable at the northern exit of the Straits of Messina , still expecting the Germans to break out to the west where they could attack French troop transports , the light cruiser Gloucester at the southern exit and sent Indomitable to recoal at Bizerte where she was better positioned to react to a German sortie into the Western Mediterranean . 
 The Germans sortied from Messina on 6 August and headed east , towards Constantinople , trailed by Gloucester . Milne , still expecting Rear Admiral Wilhelm Souchon to turn west , kept the battlecruisers at Malta until shortly after midnight on 8 August when he set sail for Cape Matapan at a leisurely 12 knots ( 22 km / h ) , where Goeben had been spotted eight hours earlier . At 2 : 30 p.m. he received an incorrect signal from the Admiralty stating that Britain was at war with Austria – war would not be declared until 12 August and the order was countermanded four hours later , but Milne followed his standing orders to guard the Adriatic against an Austrian break @-@ out attempt , rather than seek Goeben . Finally on 9 August Milne was given clear orders to " chase Goeben which had passed Cape Matapan on the 7th steering north @-@ east . " Milne still did not believe that Souchon was heading for the Dardanelles , and so he resolved to guard the exit from the Aegean , unaware that the Goeben did not intend to come out . Indomitable remained in the Mediterranean to blockade the Dardanelles , but Inflexible was ordered home on 18 August . 
 On 3 November 1914 , Churchill ordered the first British attack on the Dardanelles following the opening of hostilities between Turkey and Russia . The attack was carried out by Indomitable and Indefatigable , as well as the French pre @-@ dreadnought battleships Suffren and Vérité . The intention of the attack was to test the fortifications and measure the Turkish response . The results were deceptively encouraging . In a twenty @-@ minute bombardment , a single shell struck the magazine of the fort at Sedd el Bahr at the tip of the Gallipoli peninsula , displacing ( but not destroying ) 10 guns and killing 86 Turkish soldiers . The most significant consequence was that the attention of the Turks was drawn to strengthening their defences , and they set about expanding the mine field . This attack actually took place before a formal declaration of war had been made by Britain against the Ottoman Empire which didn 't happen until 6 November . Indomitable was ordered to return to England in December where she joined the 2nd Battlecruiser Squadron ( BCS ) . 
 = = = Battle of Heligoland Bight = = = 
 Invincible 's first action was as part of the battlecruiser force under the command of Admiral Beatty during the Battle of Heligoland Bight operation on 28 August 1914 . Beatty 's ships had originally been intended as distant support of the British cruisers and destroyers closer to the German coast in case large units of the High Seas Fleet sortied in response to the British attacks . They turned south at full speed at 11 : 35 am when the British light forces failed to disengage on schedule and the rising tide meant that German capital ships would be able to clear the bar at the mouth of the Jade estuary . The brand @-@ new light cruiser Arethusa had been crippled earlier in the battle and was under fire from the light cruisers Strassburg and Cöln when Beatty 's battlecruisers loomed out of the mist at 12 : 37 pm . Strassburg was able to duck into the mists and evade fire , but Cöln remained visible and was quickly crippled by fire from the squadron . But Beatty was distracted from the task of finishing her off by the sudden appearance of the elderly light cruiser Ariadne directly to his front . He turned in pursuit , but reduced her to a flaming hulk in only three salvos at a range under 6 @,@ 000 yards ( 5 @.@ 5 km ) . At 1 : 10 pm Beatty turned north and made a general signal to retire . At this time , Invincible , trailing the main body of battlecruisers , opened fire on Cöln . She fired 18 rounds , all misses , before Beatty 's main body encountered the crippled Cöln shortly after turning north and she was sunk by two salvos from Lion . 
 = = = Battle of the Falklands = = = 
 The West Indies Squadron of Rear Admiral Christopher Cradock was destroyed by the German German East Asia Squadron commanded by Admiral Graf von Spee during the Battle of Coronel on 1 November 1914 . In response , the Admiralty ordered that a squadron be sent to destroy the Germans . The squadron , under the command of Admiral Sir Doveton Sturdee , consisted of Invincible ( flag ) and Inflexible . They departed on 11 November and rendezvoused with several other cruisers under Rear Admiral Stoddard at Abrolhos Rocks , off the coast of Brazil on the 26th . They departed the following day and reached Port Stanley on the morning of 7 December . 
 Spee , making a leisurely voyage back to the Atlantic , wished to destroy the radio station at Port Stanley and sent the armoured cruiser SMS Gneisenau and the light cruiser Nürnberg to see if the harbour was clear of British warships on the morning of 8 December . They were spotted at 7 : 30 am , although the pre @-@ dreadnought Canopus , grounded in Stanley Harbour to defend the town and its wireless station , didn 't receive the signal until 7 : 45 . It mattered little because Sturdee was not expecting an engagement and most of his ships were coaling . Furthermore , the armoured cruiser Cornwall and the light cruiser Bristol had one or both of their engines under repair . The armed merchant cruiser Macedonian was patrolling the outer harbour entrance while the armoured cruiser Kent was anchored in the outer harbour , scheduled to relieve the Macedonian at 8 : 00 am . The Germans weren 't expecting any resistance and the first salvo from Canopus 's guns at 9 : 20 caused them to sheer off from their planned bombardment of the wireless station and fall back on Spee 's main body . 
 Sturdee 's ships didn 't sortie from the harbour until 9 : 50 , but they could see the retreating German ships on the southwest horizon . The Invincibles , fresh out of dry dock , had a 5 knots ( 5 @.@ 8 mph ; 9 @.@ 3 km / h ) advantage over Spee 's ships which all had fouled bottoms that limited their speeds to 20 knots ( 23 mph ; 37 km / h ) at best . The light cruiser SMS Leipzig was lagging behind the other ships and Inflexible opened fire on her when the range dropped to 17 @,@ 500 yards ( 16 @.@ 0 km ) at 12 : 55 pm . Invincible opened fire shortly afterwards and both ships began straddling Leipzig as the range closed to 13 @,@ 000 yards ( 12 km ) . At 1 : 20 Spee ordered his squadron to separate and ordered his light cruisers to turn to the southwest while his armoured cruisers turned to the north east to cover their retreat . The German ships opened fire first at 1 : 30 and scored their first hit at 1 : 44 when SMS Scharnhorst hit Invincible , although the shell burst harmlessly on the belt armour . Both sides fired rapidly during the first half @-@ hour of the engagement before Sturdee opened up the range a little to put his ships outside the effective range of the German guns . British gunnery was very poor during this period , scoring only four hits out of 210 rounds fired . The primary cause was the smoke from the guns and funnels as the British were downwind of the Germans , although one gun of Invincible 's ' A ' turret jammed at 1 : 42 and was out of action for thirty minutes . 
 Spee turned to the south in the hope of disengaging while the British had their vision obscured , but only opened the range to 17 @,@ 000 yards ( 16 km ) before the British saw his course change . This was futile as the British battlecruisers gave chase at 24 knots ( 28 mph ; 44 km / h ) . Forty minutes later the British opened fire again at 15 @,@ 000 yards ( 14 km ) . Eight minutes later Spee turned again to the east to give battle . This time his strategy was to close the range on the British ships so he could bring his 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) secondary armament into play . In this he was successful and the 15 cm guns were able to open fire at 3 : 00 at maximum elevation . On this course the smoke bothered both sides , but multiple hits were made regardless . Those made by the Germans either failed to detonate or hit in some insignificant area . On the contrary <unk> had her starboard engine room put out of action . Sturdee ordered his ships at 3 : 15 back across their own wakes to gain the windward advantage . Spee turned to the northwest , as if to attempt to cross the British T , but actually to bring Scharnhorst 's undamaged starboard guns to bear as most of those on his port side were out of action . The British continued to hit Scharnhorst and Gneisenau regularly during this time and Scharnhorst ceased fire at 4 : 00 before capsizing at 4 : 17 with no survivors . Gneisenau had been slowed by earlier damage and was battered for another hour and a half by Inflexible and Invincible at ranges down to 4 @,@ 000 yards ( 3 @.@ 7 km ) . Despite the damage her crew continued to fire back until she ceased firing at 4 : 47 . Sturdee was ready to order ' Cease fire ' at 5 : 15 when an ammunition hoist was freed up and she made her last shot . The British continued to pound her until 5 : 50 , after her captain had given the order to scuttle her at 5 : 40 . She slowly capsized at 6 : 00 and the British were able to rescue 176 men . Invincible and Inflexible fired 513 and 661 12 @-@ inch shells respectively during the battle , but Inflexible had been hit only three times and Invincible had been hit twenty @-@ two times . Two of her bow compartments were flooded and one hit on her waterline abreast ' P ' turret had flooded a coal bunker and temporarily given her a 15 ° list . Only one man was killed and five wounded aboard the battlecruisers during the battle . 
 = = = Battle of Dogger Bank = = = 
 On 23 January 1915 , a force of German battlecruisers under the command of Admiral Franz von Hipper sortied to clear the Dogger Bank of any British fishing boats or small craft that might be there to collect intelligence on German movements . But the British were reading their coded messages and sailed to intercept them with a larger force of British battlecruisers under the command of Admiral Beatty , which included Indomitable . Contact was initiated at 7 : 20 am on the 24th when the British light cruiser Arethusa spotted the German light cruiser SMS Kolberg . By 7 : 35 the Germans had spotted Beatty 's force and Hipper ordered a turn to the south at 20 knots ( 23 mph ; 37 km / h ) , believing that this would suffice if the ships that he saw to his northwest were British battleships and that he could always increased speed to Blücher 's maximum speed of 23 knots ( 26 mph ; 43 km / h ) if they were British battlecruisers . 
 Beatty ordered his battlecruisers to make all practicable speed to catch the Germans before they could escape . Indomitable managed to exceed 26 knots ( 30 mph ; 48 km / h ) and Beatty recognised her performance with a signal at 8 : 55 " Well done , Indomitable " Despite this achievement Indomitable was the slowest of Beatty 's ships and gradually fell behind the newer and faster battlecruisers . By 10 : 48 Blücher had been heavily damaged by fire from all the other battlecruisers and her speed had dropped to 17 knots ( 20 mph ; 31 km / h ) and her steering gear had been jammed ; Beatty ordered Indomitable to attack her . But due to a combination of a mistake by Beatty 's flag lieutenant in signalling , and heavy damage to Beatty 's flagship Lion which had knocked out her radio and caused enough smoke to obscure her signal halyards so that Beatty couldn 't communicate with his ships , the rest of the battlecruisers turned away from Hipper 's main body and engaged Blücher . Indomitable fired 134 shells at Blücher before she capsized and sank at 12 : 07 pm . After the end of the battle Indomitable was ordered to tow Lion back to port as one of her engines had been knocked out , the other was failing and she 'd been hulled a number of times beneath the waterline . It took over a day and a half at speeds of 7 – 10 knots ( 13 – 19 km / h ) . 
 = = = Dardanelles Campaign = = = 
 After the Battle of the Falklands Invincible and Inflexible were repaired and refitted at Gibraltar . Invincible sailed to England and joined the 3rd Battlecruiser Squadron while Inflexible arrived at the Dardanelles on 24 January 1915 where she replaced Indefatigable as the flagship of the Mediterranean Fleet . She bombarded Turkish fortifications on 19 February , the start of the Battle of Gallipoli , to little effect , and again on 15 March , with the same results . She was part of the first line of British ships on 18 March as they attempted to suppress the Turkish guns so the minefields could be swept . She was moderately damaged by Turkish gunfire , but was seriously damaged by a mine , probably about 100 kg ( 220 lb ) in size , that blew a large hole in her starboard bow and flooded the forward torpedo flat , drowning 39 men . She had to be beached at the island of <unk> ( Tenedos ) to prevent her sinking , as she 'd taken in some 1 @,@ 600 long tons ( 1 @,@ 600 t ) of water , but she was temporarily repaired with a cofferdam over the 30 by 26 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m × 7 @.@ 9 m ) hole . She sailed to Malta , escorted by Canopus and Talbot on 6 April . She nearly foundered when her cofferdam worked loose in heavy weather en route and had to be towed stern @-@ first by Canopus for six hours while the cofferdam was repaired . She was under repair at Malta until early June before she sailed for home . She reached the UK on 19 June where she joined the 3rd BCS . 
 Towards the end of the year , the British battlecruiser force was organised into three squadrons , with the 3rd BCS consisting of the three Invincible @-@ class ships under the command of Rear Admiral <unk> Hood in Invincible . The 1st and 3rd BCS had sortied in response to the German bombardment of Yarmouth and Lowestoft on 24 – 25 April 1916 , but failed to locate the German ships in heavy weather . During the return home , Invincible was rammed by the patrol yacht Goissa at 11 : 07 pm . Goissa 's bow was embedded in Invincible 's side which partially <unk> @-@ in . Invincible 's speed was reduced to 12 knots ( 14 mph ; 22 km / h ) through flooding and she was forced to haul out of line and proceed independently to Rosyth for repairs which lasted until 22 May 1916 . 
 = = = Battle of Jutland = = = 
 At the end of May 1916 , the 3rd Battlecruiser Squadron was temporarily assigned to the Grand Fleet for gunnery practice . On 30 May , the entire Grand Fleet , along with Admiral Beatty 's battlecruisers , had been ordered to sea to prepare for an excursion by the German High Seas Fleet . To support Beatty , Rear Admiral Hood took his three battlecruisers ahead of the Grand Fleet . At about 2 : 30 pm Invincible intercepted a radio message from the British light cruiser Galatea , attached to Beatty 's Battlecruiser Force , reporting the sighting of two enemy cruisers . This was amplified by other reports of seven enemy ships steering north . Hood interpreted this as an attempt to escape through the Skagerrak and ordered an increase in speed to 22 kn ( 41 km / h ) at 3 : 11 and steered East @-@ Southeast to cut off the fleeing ships . Twenty minutes later Invincible intercepted a message from Beatty reporting five enemy battlecruisers in sight and later signals reporting that he was engaging the enemy on a south @-@ easterly course . At 4 : 06 Hood ordered full speed and a course of south @-@ southeast in an attempt to converge on Beatty . At 4 : 56 , with no British ships in sight , Hood requested Beatty 's course , position and speed , but never received a reply . 
 Hood continued on course until 5 : 40 when gunfire was spotted in the direction to which his light cruiser Chester had been dispatched to investigate other gunfire flashes . Chester encountered four light cruisers of Hipper 's 2nd Scouting Group and was badly damaged before Hood turned to investigate and was able to drive the German cruisers away from Chester . At 5 : 53 Invincible opened fire on Wiesbaden and the other two Invincibles followed two minutes later . The German ships turned for the south after fruitlessly firing torpedoes at 6 : 00 and attempted to find shelter in the mist . As they turned Invincible hit Wiesbaden in the engine room and knocked out her engines while Inflexible hit Pillau once . The 2nd Scouting Group was escorted by the light cruiser Regensburg and 31 destroyers of the 2nd and 9th Flotillas and the 12th Half @-@ Flotilla which attacked the 3rd BCS in succession . They were driven off by Hood 's remaining light cruiser Canterbury and the five destroyers of his escort . In a confused action the Germans only launched 12 torpedoes and disabled the destroyer Shark with gunfire . Having turned due west to close on Beatty 's ships , the Invincibles were broadside to the oncoming torpedoes , but Invincible turned north , while Inflexible and Indomitable turned south to present their narrowest profile to the torpedoes . All the torpedoes missed although one passed underneath Inflexible without detonating . As Invincible turned north , her helm jammed and she had to come to a stop to fix the problem , but this was quickly done and the squadron reformed heading west . 
 At 6 : 21 , with both Beatty and the Grand Fleet converging on him , Hood turned south to lead Beatty 's battlecruisers . Hipper 's battlecruisers were 9 @,@ 000 yards ( 8 @.@ 2 km ) away and the Invincibles almost immediately opened fire on Hipper 's flagship Lützow and Derfflinger . Indomitable hit Derfflinger three times and Seydlitz once , while the Lützow quickly took 10 hits from Lion , Inflexible and Invincible , including two hits below the waterline forward by Invincible that would ultimately doom her . But at 6 : 30 Invincible abruptly appeared as a clear target before Lützow and Derfflinger . The two German ships then fired three salvoes each at Invincible , and sank her in 90 seconds . A 305 mm ( 12 @-@ inch ) shell from the third salvo struck Invincible 's midships ' Q ' turret , flash detonated the magazines below , and the ship blew up and broke in two , killing all but six of her crew of 1 @,@ 032 officers and men , including Rear @-@ Admiral Hood . 
 Inflexible and Indomitable remained in company with Beatty for the rest of the battle . They encountered Hipper 's battlecruisers only 10 @,@ 000 yards ( 9 @.@ 1 km ) away as the sun was setting about 8 : 19 and opened fire . Seydlitz was hit five times before the battlecruisers were rescued by the pre @-@ dreadnought battleships of Rear Admiral Mauve and the British shifted fire to the new threat . Three of the predreadnoughts were hit before they too were able to turn into the gloom . 
 = = = Post @-@ Jutland career = = = 
 The loss of three battlecruisers at Jutland ( the others were Queen Mary and Indefatigable ) led to the force being reorganised into two squadrons , with Inflexible and Indomitable in the 2nd BCS . However , after Jutland there was little significant naval activity , for the Invincibles , other than routine patrolling , thanks to the Kaiser 's order that his ships should not be allowed to go to sea unless assured of victory . The end of the war saw the end for many of the older vessels , not least the two remaining Invincible @-@ class ships . Both were sent to the Reserve Fleet in 1919 , and were paid off in March 1920 . 
 After the end of the war , Chile began seeking additional ships for its navy . In April 1920 , Chile bought Canada and four destroyers , all of which had been ordered by Chile prior to the war 's outbreak and requisitioned by the British for the war . Further planned expansion included Inflexible and Indomitable , but when the secret negotiations to acquire them were leaked to the press , a major uproar erupted in Chile . The most visible dissension came from a block of officers in the navy , who publicly opposed any possible purchase and instead promoted a " New Navy " which would acquire submarines and aircraft . They argued that these weapons would cost less and give the country , and its lengthy coastline , better protection from external threats . The ships were not bought for reasons of cost , but neither were the aircraft its supporters had been hoping for . Both were sold for scrap on 1 December 1921 . 
 = Crawley = 
 Crawley ( pronunciation ) is a town and borough in West Sussex , England . It is 28 miles ( 45 km ) south of Charing Cross ( London ) , 18 miles ( 29 km ) north of Brighton and Hove , and 32 miles ( 51 km ) northeast of the county town of Chichester , covers an area of 17 @.@ 36 square miles ( 44 @.@ 96 km2 ) and had a population of 106 @,@ 597 at the time of the 2011 Census . 
 The area has been inhabited since the Stone Age , and was a centre of ironworking in Roman times . Crawley developed slowly as a market town from the 13th century , serving the surrounding villages in the Weald ; its location on the main road from London to Brighton brought a passing trade , encouraging the development of coaching inns . It was connected to London by the railway in 1841 . 
 Gatwick Airport , now one of Britain 's busiest international airports , opened on the edge of the town in the 1940s , encouraging commercial and industrial growth . After the Second World War , the British Government planned to move large numbers of people and jobs out of London and into new towns around South East England . The New Towns Act 1946 designated Crawley as the site of one of these . A master plan was developed for the establishment of new residential , commercial , industrial and civic areas , and rapid development greatly increased the size and population of the town in a few decades . 
 The town comprises thirteen residential neighbourhoods radiating out from the core of the old market town , and separated by main roads and railway lines . The nearby communities of Ifield , Pound Hill and Three Bridges were absorbed into the new town at different stages of its development . As of 2009 , expansion is planned in the west and northwest of the town , in co @-@ operation with Horsham District Council . Economically , the town has developed into the main centre of industry and employment between London and the south coast of England . A large industrial area supports industries and services , many of which are connected with the airport , and the commercial and retail sectors continue to expand . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 The area may have been settled during the Mesolithic period : locally manufactured flints of the Horsham Culture type have been found to the southwest of the town . Tools and burial mounds from the Neolithic period , and burial mounds and a sword from the Bronze Age , have also been discovered . Crawley is on the western edge of the High Weald , which produced iron for more than 2 @,@ 000 years from the Iron Age onwards . Goffs Park — now a recreational area in the south of the town — was the site of two late Iron Age furnaces . <unk> and mineral extraction continued throughout Roman times , particularly in the Broadfield area where many furnaces were built . 
 In the 5th century , Saxon settlers named the area Crow 's Leah — meaning a crow @-@ infested clearing , or Crow 's Wood . This name evolved over time , and the present spelling appeared by the early 14th century . By this time , nearby settlements were more established : the Saxon church at Worth , for example , dates from between 950 and 1050 AD . 
 Although Crawley itself is not mentioned in the Domesday Book of 1086 , the nearby settlements of Ifield and Worth are recorded . The first written record of Crawley dates from 1202 , when a licence was issued by King John for a weekly market on Wednesdays . Crawley grew slowly in importance over the next few centuries , but was boosted in the 18th century by the construction of the turnpike road between London and Brighton . When this was completed in 1770 , travel between the newly fashionable seaside resort and London became safer and quicker , and Crawley ( located approximately halfway between the two ) prospered as a coaching halt . 
 By 1839 it offered almost an hourly service to both destinations . The George , a timber @-@ framed house dating from the 15th century , expanded to become a large coaching inn , taking over adjacent buildings . Eventually an annexe had to be built in the middle of the wide High Street ; this survived until the 1930s . The original building has become the George Hotel , with conference facilities and 84 bedrooms ; it retains many period features including an iron <unk> . 
 Crawley 's oldest church is St John the Baptist 's , between the High Street and the Broadway . It is said to have 13th @-@ century origins , but there has been much rebuilding ( especially in the 19th century ) and the oldest part remaining is the south wall of the nave , which is believed to be 14th century . The church has a 15th @-@ century tower ( rebuilt in 1804 ) which originally contained four bells cast in 1724 . Two were replaced by Thomas Lester of London in 1742 ; but in 1880 a new set of eight bells were cast and installed by the Croydon @-@ based firm Gillett , Bland & Company . 
 = = = Railway age and Victorian era = = = 
 The Brighton Main Line was the first railway line to serve the Crawley area . A station was opened at Three Bridges ( originally known as East Crawley ) in the summer of 1841 . Crawley railway station , at the southern end of the High Street , was built in 1848 when the Horsham branch was opened from Three Bridges to Horsham . A line was built eastwards from Three Bridges to East Grinstead in 1855 . Three Bridges had become the hub of transport in the area by this stage : one @-@ quarter of its population was employed in railway jobs by 1861 ( mainly at the London , Brighton and South Coast Railway 's railway works near the station ) . The Longley company — one of South East England 's largest building firms in the late 19th century , responsible for buildings including Christ 's Hospital school and the King Edward VII Sanatorium in Midhurst — moved to a site next to Crawley station in 1881 . In 1898 more than 700 people were employed at the site . 
 There was a major expansion in housebuilding in the late 19th century . An area known as " New Town " ( unrelated to the postwar developments ) was created around the railway level crossing and down the Brighton Road ; the West Green area , west of the High Street on the way to Ifield , was built up ; and housing spread south of the Horsham line for the first time , into what is now Southgate . The population reached 4 @,@ 433 in 1901 , compared to 1 @,@ 357 a century earlier . In 1891 , a racecourse was opened on farmland at Gatwick . Built to replace a steeplechase course at Waddon near Croydon in Surrey , it was used for both steeplechase and flat racing , and held the Grand National during the years of the First World War . The course had its own railway station on the Brighton Main Line . 
 In the early 20th century , many of the large country estates in the area , with their mansions and associated grounds and outbuildings , were split up into smaller plots of land , attracting haphazard housing development and small farms . By the outbreak of the First World War in 1914 Crawley had grown into a small but prosperous town , serving a wide rural area and those passing through on the A23 London – Brighton road . Three @-@ quarters of the population had piped water supplies , all businesses and homes had electricity , and piped gas and street lighting had been in place for 50 years . An airfield was opened in 1930 on land near the racecourse . This was a private concern until the Second World War when it was claimed by the Royal Air Force . 
 = = = New Town = = = 
 In May 1946 , the New Towns Act of 1946 identified Crawley as a suitable location for a New Town ; but it was not officially designated as such until 9 January 1947 . The 5 @,@ 920 acres ( 2 @,@ 396 ha ) of land set aside for the new town were split across the county borders between East Sussex , West Sussex and Surrey . Architect Thomas Bennett was appointed chairman of Crawley Development Corporation . A court challenge to the designation order meant that plans were not officially confirmed until December 1947 . By this time , an initial plan for the development of the area had been drawn up by Anthony Minoprio . This proposed filling in the gaps between the villages of Crawley , Ifield and Three Bridges . Bennett estimated that planning , designing and building the town , and increasing its population from the existing 9 @,@ 500 to 40 @,@ 000 , would take 15 years . 
 Work began almost immediately to prepare for the expansion of the town . A full master plan was in place by 1949 . This envisaged an increase in the population of the town to 50 @,@ 000 , residential properties in nine neighbourhoods radiating from the town centre , and a separate industrial area to the north . The neighbourhoods would consist mainly of three @-@ bedroom family homes , with a number of smaller and larger properties . Each would be built around a centre with shops , a church , a public house , a primary school and a community centre . Secondary education was to be provided at campuses at Ifield Green , Three Bridges and Tilgate . Later , a fourth campus , in Southgate , was added to the plans . 
 At first , little development took place in the town centre , and residents relied on the shops and services in the existing high street . The earliest progress was in West Green , where new residents moved in during the late 1940s . In 1950 the town was visited by the then heir to the throne , Princess Elizabeth , when she officially opened the Manor Royal industrial area . Building work continued throughout the 1950s in West Green , Northgate and Three Bridges , and later in Langley Green , Pound Hill and Ifield . In 1956 , land at " Tilgate East " was allocated for housing use , eventually becoming the new neighbourhood of Furnace Green . 
 Expectations of the eventual population of the town were revised upwards several times . The 1949 master plan had allowed for 50 @,@ 000 people , but this was amended to 55 @,@ 000 in 1956 after the Development Corporation had successfully resisted pressure from the Minister for Town and Country Planning to accommodate 60 @,@ 000 . Nevertheless , plans dated 1961 anticipated growth to 70 @,@ 000 by 1980 , and by 1969 consideration was given to an eventual expansion of up to 120 @,@ 000 . 
 Extended shopping facilities to the east of the existing high street were provided . The first stage to open was The Broadwalk in 1954 , following by the opening of the Queen 's Square development by Her Majesty The Queen in 1958 . Crawley railway station was moved eastwards towards the new development . 
 By April 1960 , when Thomas Bennett made his last presentation as chairman of the Development Corporation , the town 's population had reached 51 @,@ 700 ; 2 @,@ 289 @,@ 000 square feet ( 212 @,@ 700 m2 ) of factory and other industrial space had been provided ; 21 @,@ 800 people were employed , nearly 60 % of whom worked in manufacturing industry ; and only seventy people were registered as unemployed . The corporation had built 10 @,@ 254 houses , and private builders provided around 1 @,@ 500 more . Tenants were by then permitted to buy their houses , and 440 householders had chosen to do so by April 1960 . 
 A new plan was put forward by West Sussex County Council in 1961 . This proposed new neighbourhoods at Broadfield and Bewbush , both of which extended outside the administrative area of the then Urban District Council . Detailed plans were made for Broadfield in the late 1960s ; by the early 1970s building work had begun . Further expansion at Bewbush was begun in 1974 , although development there was slow . The two neighbourhoods were both larger than the original nine : together , their proposed population was 23 @,@ 000 . Work also took place in the area now known as Ifield West on the western fringes of the town . 
 By 1980 , the council identified land at Maidenbower , south of the Pound Hill neighbourhood , as being suitable for another new neighbourhood , and work began in 1986 . However , all of this development was undertaken privately , unlike the earlier neighbourhoods in which most of the housing was owned by the council . 
 In 1999 , plans were announced to develop a 14th neighbourhood on land at Tinsley Green to the northeast of the town . However , these were halted when proposals for possible expansion at Gatwick Airport were announced . As of 2008 , discussions were underway with Horsham District Council concerning the possible future provision of new housing on Crawley 's western fringes , to be named <unk> vale ; much of the land proposed for development currently lies within Horsham 's administrative boundaries . Development of the neighbourhood began in 2012 . 
 = = Governance = = 
 = = = Local government = = = 
 Crawley Urban District Council was formed in May 1956 from the part of the Horsham Rural District which covered the new town . The Local Government Act 1972 led to the district being reformed as a borough in April 1974 , gaining a mayor for the first time . 
 The Urban District Council received its coat of arms from the College of Heralds in 1957 . After the change to borough status a modified coat of arms , based on the original , was awarded in 1976 , and presented to the council on 24 March 1977 . It features a central cross on a shield , representing the town 's location at the meeting point of north – south and east – west roads . The shield bears nine <unk> representing both the county of Sussex and the new town 's original nine neighbourhoods . Supporters , of an eagle and a winged lion , relate to the significance of the airport to the locality . The motto featured is I Grow and I Rejoice — a translation of a phrase from the <unk> of Seneca the Younger . 
 Initially the district ( and then borough ) council worked with the Commission for New Towns on many aspects of development ; but in 1978 many of the commission 's assets , such as housing and parks , were surrendered to the council . The authority 's boundaries were extended in 1983 to accommodate the Bewbush and Broadfield neighbourhoods . 
 The borough remains part of the local two @-@ tier arrangements , with services shared with West Sussex County Council . The authority is divided into 15 wards , each of which is represented by two or three local councillors , forming a total council of 37 members . Most wards are coterminous with the borough 's neighbourhoods , but two neighbourhoods are divided : Broadfield into North and South wards , and Pound Hill into " Pound Hill North " and " Pound Hill South and Worth " . The council is elected in thirds . 
 As of the May 2016 local elections , the authority is Labour @-@ controlled , with seats allocated as follows : 
 The Conservative party gained control in May 2006 for the first time since the borough was created . Previously the authority had always been Labour controlled . 
 = = = United Kingdom government = = = 
 Crawley Borough is coterminous with the parliamentary constituency of Crawley . Henry Smith won the seat at the 2010 general election and was re @-@ elected at the 2015 general election . Laura Moffatt , a member of the Labour Party , was the MP for Crawley from 1997 to 2010 ; she was the Parliamentary Private Secretary to the Secretary of State for Health , Alan Johnson . In the 2005 general election , the winning margin was the slimmest of any UK constituency : Moffatt won by just 37 votes . 
 Brook House and Tinsley House Immigration Removal Centres , operated by UK Visas and Immigration , are within the grounds of Gatwick Airport in Crawley . 
 Data from the Home Office 's national identity database at Doncaster , South Yorkshire , was backed up to servers in Crawley for disaster recovery and business continuity purposes . The Identity Documents Bill 2010 , proposed in May 2010 and passed in September 2010 , authorised the destruction of all data stored for the identity card scheme brought about by the Identity Cards Act 2006 . 
 = = Geography = = 
 At 51 ° 6 ′ 33 ″ N 0 ° 11 ′ 14 ″ W ( 51 @.@ 1092 , − 0 @.@ 1872 ) , Crawley is in the northeastern corner of West Sussex in South East England , 28 miles ( 45 km ) south of London and 18 miles ( 29 km ) north of Brighton and Hove . It is surrounded by smaller towns including Horley , Redhill , Reigate , Dorking , Horsham , Haywards Heath and East Grinstead . The borough of Crawley is bordered by the West Sussex local government areas of Mid Sussex and Horsham districts , and the Mole Valley and <unk> districts and the Borough of Reigate and <unk> in the county of Surrey . 
 Crawley lies in the Weald between the North and South Downs . Two beds of sedimentary rock meet beneath the town : the eastern neighbourhoods and the town centre lie largely on the sandstone Hastings Beds , while the rest of the town is based on Weald Clay . A geological fault running from east to west has left an area of Weald Clay ( with a ridge of limestone ) jutting into the Hastings Beds around Tilgate . The highest point in the borough is 486 feet ( 148 m ) above sea level . The town has no major waterways , although a number of smaller brooks and streams are tributaries for the River Mole which rises near Gatwick Airport and flows northwards to the River Thames near Hampton Court Palace . There are several lakes at Tilgate Park and a mill pond at Ifield which was stopped to feed the Ifield Water Mill . 
 In 1822 Gideon Mantell , an amateur fossil collector and palaeontologist , discovered teeth , bones and other remains of what he described as " an animal of the lizard tribe of enormous magnitude " , in Tilgate Forest on the edge of Crawley . He announced his discovery in an 1825 scientific paper , giving the creature the name Iguanodon . In 1832 he discovered and named the Hylaeosaurus genus of dinosaurs after finding a fossil in the same forest . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Crawley lies within the Sussex Weald , an area of highly variable terrain , so that many microclimates of frost hollows , sun traps and windswept hilltops will be encountered over a short distance . During calm , clear periods of weather this allows for some interesting temperature variations , although most of the time , when mobile westerly airstreams persist , the weather is typically Oceanic like the rest of the British Isles . Gatwick is the nearest weather station that publishes long @-@ term averages that give an accurate description of the climate of the Crawley area , although more recently the Met Office has also published data for its nearby weather station at Charlwood . Both weather stations are about 3 miles north of Crawley town centre and at similar altitudes . 
 Generally , Crawley 's inland and southerly position within the UK means temperatures in summer are amongst the highest in the British Isles , Charlwood recording <unk> ( <unk> ) and Gatwick recording <unk> ( <unk> ) on 19 July 2006 , just <unk> and <unk> lower , respectively , than the UK monthly record for that day set at Wisley , 20 miles to the west . The overall maximum stands at <unk> ( <unk> ) at Charlwood , set on 10 August 2003 . The absolute record for Gatwick is the aforementioned <unk> Before this , the highest temperature recorded at Gatwick was <unk> ( <unk> ) , also in August 2003 . The maximum temperature was <unk> ( <unk> ) or higher on 15 @.@ 9 days of the year on average ( 1971 @-@ 00 ) and the warmest day will typically rise to <unk> ( <unk> ) . 
 The overall minimum for Gatwick Airport for the period from 1960 is − <unk> ( <unk> ) , set in January 1963 . More recently , Charlwood fell to − <unk> ( <unk> ) and Gatwick − <unk> ( <unk> ) on 20 December 2010 . Typically the coldest night at Gatwick will fall to − <unk> ( <unk> ) . Air frost is recorded on 58 @.@ 2 nights at Gatwick ( 1971 @-@ 00 ) 
 Sunshine totals in Crawley are higher than many inland areas due to its southerly location : Gatwick averaged 1 @,@ 574 hours per year over 1961 – 90 . No data is available for 1971 @-@ 00 , but given increases at comparable sites nearby , annual averages are likely to be over 1 @,@ 600 hours . 
 Snowfall is often heavier in the Sussex Weald than in many other low @-@ lying parts of central and southern England due to the proximity of moisture @-@ laden southerly tracking low pressure systems bringing easterly winds and snow to areas from South London southwards . However , again due to the southerly location of the area , with warmer air from the nearby English Channel , the snow is often temporary as low pressure systems track north bringing in milder air ; areas immediately north of London tend to have less accumulation , but lying for a longer duration . 
 Rainfall is lower than the English average , but higher than many other areas of the South East . 1mm of rain or more falls on 116 @.@ 7 days of the year . 
 = = = Neighbourhoods and areas = = = 
 There are 13 residential neighbourhoods , each with a variety of housing types : terraced , semi @-@ detached and detached houses , low @-@ rise flats and bungalows . There are no residential tower blocks , apart from the 8 storey Milton Mount Flats at the North end of Pound Hill . Many houses have their own gardens and are set back from roads . The hub of each neighbourhood is a shopping parade , community centre and church , and each has a school and recreational open spaces as well . Crawley Development Corporation 's intention was for neighbourhood shops to cater only to basic needs , and for the town centre to be used for most shopping requirements . The number of shop units provided in the neighbourhood parades reflected this : despite the master plan making provision for at least 20 shops in each neighbourhood , the number actually built ranged from 19 in the outlying Langley Green neighbourhood to just seven in West Green , close to the town centre . 
 Each of the 13 residential neighbourhoods is identified by a colour , which is shown on street name signs in a standard format throughout the town : below the street name , the neighbourhood name is shown in white text on a coloured background . 
 There are areas which are not defined as neighbourhoods but which are closely associated with Crawley : 
 The Manor Royal industrial estate is in the north of the town . Although it is part of the Northgate ward , it is allocated a colour : its street name signs feature the word " Industrial " on a black background . 
 Crawley 's town centre is in the southernmost part of Northgate . Its street name signs do not follow the standard format of the neighbourhood signs , but display only the street name . 
 Gatwick Airport was built on the site of a manor house , Gatwick Manor , close to the village of Lowfield Heath . Most of the village was demolished when the airport expanded , but the Grade II * -listed St Michael and All Angels Church , remains . The site of Lowfield Heath village , now occupied by warehouses and light industrial units , is on the airport 's southern boundary , between the perimeter road and the A23 close to Manor Royal . 
 Worth was originally a village with its own civil parish , lying just beyond the eastern edge of the Crawley urban area and borough boundary ; but development of the Pound Hill and Maidenbower neighbourhoods has filled in the gaps , and the borough boundary has been extended to include the whole of the village . The civil parish of Worth remains , albeit reduced in size , as part of the Mid Sussex district . 
 Tinsley Green , a hamlet in Worth parish , is now within the Pound Hill neighbourhood . Its houses , farms and public house , the Greyhound ( at which the British and World Marbles Championship has been held annually since 1932 ) , lie on or around an east – west minor road running from the main Balcombe – Horley road to the Manor Royal estate . 
 The hamlet of Fernhill is 1 1 ⁄ 2 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) east of Gatwick Airport and the same distance south of Horley . It has been wholly within the borough since 1990 , when the borough and county boundary was moved eastwards to align exactly with the M23 motorway . Until then , its houses and farms straddled the boundary . Fernhill was the site of a fatal aeroplane crash in 1969 : 50 people ( including two residents ) died when Ariana Afghan Airlines Flight 701 crashed into a house on Fernhill Road . 
 = = = Proposed neighbourhoods = = = 
 Since the completion of Maidenbower , Crawley 's thirteenth neighbourhood , two other sites in the borough have been considered as potential sites for new residential areas . A proposal to build a neighbourhood in the Tinsley Green area was first made in January 1998 , and in December 2009 the Government allowed an appeal to be heard against the latest refusal of planning permission . A new planning application was registered in July 2012 , and in November of that year details of the proposals were published . Forge Wood is intended to have 1 @,@ 900 houses , commercial and industrial buildings , a shopping area , a community centre and hall , a primary school and areas of " recreational open space " . Pegasus Planning Group Ltd presented the application on behalf of <unk> Persimmon Homes and Taylor Wimpey . The application proposes 5 @,@ 000 square metres ( 54 @,@ 000 sq ft ) of commercial and industrial floorspace and 2 @,@ 500 square metres ( 27 @,@ 000 sq ft ) of floorspace for retail use as well as the housing . It was reported in 2012 , before it was approved , that the four @-@ phase " North East Sector " development was expected to start in 2013 and last for 12 years . The name Forge Wood was decided upon in December 2013 . Work on the first phase was scheduled to start in 2014 , and the first houses are due to be completed by the end of that year . 
 Meanwhile , Crawley Borough Council began discussions with neighbouring Horsham District Council in 2006 in connection with a proposed neighbourhood west of Bewbush ; such development would straddle the boundary of the two local authorities . Planning permission was granted in March 2011 , the name <unk> Vale was adopted , and in October 2011 Crawley Borough Council sold for £ 3 million some areas of land required for the construction of access roads . Work on the five @-@ phase scheme started in October 2012 . Up to 2 @,@ 500 houses , a school , library , supermarket and other facilities will be provided . 
 = = Demography = = 
 At the census in 2001 the population of Crawley was recorded as 99 @,@ 744 . This accounted for 13 @.@ 2 % of the population of the county of West Sussex . The growth in population of the new town — around 1 @,@ 000 % between 1951 and 2001 — has outstripped that of most similar @-@ sized settlements . For example , in the same period , the population of the neighbouring district of Horsham grew by just 99 % . 
 Approximately 64 @.@ 5 % of the population is aged below 45 , compared to 55 % of the population of West Sussex . White British account for 84 @.@ 5 % of the population and 15 @.@ 5 % of people are from other ethnic backgrounds . People of Indian and Pakistani origin account for 4 @.@ 5 % and 3 % of the population respectively . Many inhabitants of Crawley work locally at Gatwick Airport as either air or ground crew . 
 The borough has a population density of around 22 persons per hectare ( 54 persons per acre ) , making it the second most densely populated district in West Sussex , after Worthing . The social mix is similar to the national norm : around 50 % are in the ABC1 social category , although this varies by ward , with just 44 % in Broadfield North compared to 75 % in Maidenbower . 
 The proportion of people in the borough with higher education qualifications is lower than the national average . Around 14 % have a qualification at level 4 or above , compared to 20 % nationally . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Crawley originally traded as a market town . The Development Corporation intended to develop it as a centre for manufacturing and light engineering , with an industrial zone . The rapid growth of Gatwick Airport provided opportunities for businesses in the aviation , transport , warehousing and distribution industries . The significance of the airport to local employment and enterprise was reflected by the formation of the Gatwick Diamond partnership . This venture , supported by local businesses , local government and <unk> , South East England 's Regional Development Agency , aims to maintain and improve the Crawley and Gatwick area 's status as a region of national and international economic importance . 
 Since the Second World War , unemployment in Crawley has been low : the rate was 1 @.@ 47 % of the working @-@ age population in 2003 . During the boom of the 1980s the town boasted the lowest level of unemployment in the UK . Continuous growth and investment have made Crawley one of the most important business and employment centres in the South East England region . 
 = = = Manufacturing industry = = = 
 Crawley was already a modest industrial centre by the end of the Second World War . Building was an important trade : 800 people were employed by building and joinery firms , and two — Longley 's and Cook 's — were large enough to have their own factories . In 1949 , 1 @,@ 529 people worked in manufacturing : the main industries were light and precision engineering and aircraft repair . Many of the jobs in these industries were highly skilled . 
 Industrial development had to take place relatively soon after the new town was established because part of the Corporation 's remit was to move people and jobs out of an overcrowded and war @-@ damaged London . Industrial jobs were needed as well as houses and shops to create a balanced community where people could settle . The Development Corporation wanted the new town to support a large and mixed industrial base , with factories and other buildings based in a single zone rather than spread throughout the town . A 267 @-@ acre ( 108 ha ) site in the northeastern part of the development area was chosen . Its advantages included flat land with no existing development ; proximity to the London – Brighton railway line , the A23 and the planned M23 ; space for railway sidings ( which were eventually built on a much smaller scale than envisaged ) ; and an adjacent 44 @-@ acre ( 18 ha ) site reserved for future expansion , on the other side of the railway line ( again , not used for this purpose in the end ) . Princess Elizabeth ( later Queen Elizabeth II ) opened the first part of the industrial area on 25 January 1950 ; its main road was named Manor Royal , and this name eventually came to refer to the whole estate . 
 The Corporation stipulated that several manufacturing industries should be developed , rather than allowing one sector or firm to dominate . It did not seek to attract companies by offering financial or other incentives ; instead , it set out to create the ideal conditions for industrial development to arise naturally , by providing large plots of land with room for expansion , allowing firms to build their own premises or rent ready @-@ made buildings , and constructing a wide range of building types and sizes . 
 Despite the lack of direct incentives , many firms applied to move to the Manor Royal estate : it was considered such an attractive place to relocate to that the Development Corporation was able to choose between applicants to achieve the ideal mix of firms , and little advertising or promotion had to be undertaken . One year after Manor Royal was opened , eighteen firms were trading there , including four with more than 100 employees and one with more than 1 @,@ 000 . By 1964 , businesses which had moved to the town since 1950 employed 16 @,@ 000 people ; the master plan had anticipated between 8 @,@ 000 and 8 @,@ 500 . In 1978 there were 105 such firms , employing nearly 20 @,@ 000 people . 
 The Thales Group opened a new manufacturing and office complex in Crawley in 2009 . The site consolidated manufacturing and offices in the Crawley area and the south @-@ east of England . 
 = = = Service industry and commerce = = = 
 While most of the jobs created in the new town 's early years were in manufacturing , the tertiary sector developed strongly from the 1960s . The Manor Royal estate , with its space , proximity to Gatwick and good transport links , attracted airport @-@ related services such as logistics , catering , distribution and warehousing ; and the Corporation and private companies built offices throughout the town . Office floorspace in the town increased from 55 @,@ 000 square feet ( 5 @,@ 100 m2 ) in 1965 to a conservative estimate of 453 @,@ 000 square feet ( 42 @,@ 100 m2 ) in 1984 . Major schemes during that period included premises for the Westminster Bank ( later part of NatWest ) , British Caledonian , and The Office of the Paymaster @-@ General — a government ministry within the remit of HM Treasury . The five @-@ storey <unk> House above the railway station , completed in 1968 , is used by Crawley 's NHS Primary Care Trust and various other companies . 
 Companies headquartered in Crawley include Doosan Babcock Energy , <unk> , Virgin Atlantic Airways , Virgin Atlantic 's associated travel agency Virgin Holidays , William Reed Business Media , <unk> and the Office of the Paymaster @-@ General . Danish company Novo Nordisk , which manufactures much of the world 's insulin supply , has its UK headquarters at the Broadfield Business Park , and BDO International has an office in Crawley . In addition the registered offices of <unk> UK and Thomson Airways are located in Crawley . 
 British Airways took over British Caledonian 's former headquarters near the Manor Royal estate , renamed it " Astral Towers " and based its British Airways Holidays and <unk> divisions there . Other companies formerly headquartered in Crawley include Astraeus Airlines , British United Airways , CityFlyer Express , CP Ships , First Choice Airways , GB Airways , Laker Airways , Tradewinds Airways , and Air Europe . 
 Crawley has numerous hotels , including The George Hotel , dated to 1615 . It is reputedly haunted . 
 = = = Shopping and retail = = = 
 Even before the new town was planned , Crawley was a retail centre for the surrounding area : there were 177 shops in the town in 1948 , 99 of which were on the High Street . Early new town residents relied on these shopping facilities until the Corporation implemented the master plan 's designs for a new shopping area on the mostly undeveloped land east of the High Street and north of the railway line . The Broadwalk and its 23 shops were built in 1954 , followed by the Queen 's Square complex and surrounding streets in the mid @-@ 1950s . Queen 's Square , a pedestrianised plaza surrounded by large shops and linked to the High Street by The Broadwalk , was officially opened in 1958 by Queen Elizabeth II . The town centre was completed by 1960 , by which time Crawley was already recognised as an important regional , rather than merely local , shopping centre . 
 In the 1960s and 1970s , large branches of Tesco , Sainsbury 's and Marks & Spencer were opened ( the Tesco superstore was the largest in Britain at the time ) . The shopping area was also expanded southeastwards from Queen 's Square : although the original plans of 1975 were not implemented fully , several large shop units were built and a new pedestrianised link — The Martlets — was provided between Queen 's Square and Haslett Avenue , the main road to Three Bridges . The remaining land between this area and the railway line was sold for private development by 1982 ; in 1992 a 450 @,@ 000 square feet ( 41 @,@ 800 m2 ) shopping centre named County Mall was opened there . Its stores includes major retailers such as Debenhams , Boots , W H Smith and British Home Stores as well as over 80 smaller outlets . The town 's main bus station was redesigned , roads including the main A2220 Haslett Avenue were rerouted , and some buildings at the south end of The Martlets were demolished to accommodate the mall . 
 A regeneration strategy for the town centre , " Centre Vision 2000 " , was produced in 1993 . Changes brought about by the scheme have included 50 @,@ 000 square feet ( 4 @,@ 600 m2 ) of additional retail space in Queen 's Square and The Martlets , and a mixed @-@ use development at the southern end of the High Street on land formerly occupied by Robinson Road ( which was demolished ) and Spencers Road ( shortened and severed at one end ) . An ASDA superstore , opened in September 2003 , forms the centrepiece . Robinson Road , previously named Church Road , had been at the heart of the old Crawley : a century before its demolition , its buildings included two chapels , a school , a hospital and a post office . 
 There are plans to expand Crawley 's central shopping area northwards on to land occupied by the Town Hall and office buildings . The borough council 's premises would be moved to a new site — possibly the land occupied by Sussex House on the High Street — and The Boulevard would become a large pedestrianised shopping area . The scheme , named " Town Centre North " , is designed to make Crawley a major regional shopping destination . 
 = = Public services = = 
 Policing in Crawley is provided by Sussex Police ; the British Transport Police are responsible for the rail network . The borough is the police headquarters for the North Downs division , and is itself divided into three areas for the purposes of neighbourhood policing : Crawley East , Crawley West , and Crawley Town Centre . A separate division covers Gatwick Airport . There is a police station in the town centre ; it is open 24 hours a day , and the front desk is staffed for 16 hours each day except Christmas Day . Statutory emergency fire and rescue services are provided by the West Sussex Fire and Rescue Service which operates a fire station in the town centre . The South East Coast Ambulance Service is responsible for ambulance and paramedic services . 
 Crawley Hospital in West Green is operated by West Sussex Primary Care Trust . Some services are provided by the Surrey and Sussex Healthcare NHS Trust , including a 24 @-@ hour Urgent Treatment Centre for semi @-@ life @-@ threatening injuries . The Surrey and Sussex was judged as " weak " by the Healthcare Commission in 2008 , however in 2015 both the hospital and the Surrey and Sussex Trust were rated good by the Care Quality Commission . 
 Thames Water is responsible for all waste water and sewerage provision . Residents in most parts of Crawley receive their drinking water from Southern Water ; areas in the north of the town around Gatwick Airport are provided by Sutton & East Surrey Water ; and South East Water supplies Maidenbower . 
 UK Power Networks is the Distribution Network Operator responsible for electricity . Gas is supplied by Southern Gas Networks who own and manage the South East Local Distribution Zone . 
 The provision of public services was made in co @-@ operation with the local authorities as the town grew in the 1950s and 1960s . They oversaw the opening of a fire station in 1958 , the telephone exchange , police station and town centre health clinic in 1961 and an ambulance station in 1963 . Plans for a new hospital on land at The <unk> were abandoned , however , and the existing hospital in West Green was redeveloped instead . Gas was piped from Croydon , 20 miles ( 32 km ) away , and a gasworks at Redhill , while the town 's water supply came from the Weir Wood reservoir south of East Grinstead and another at Pease Pottage . 
 In December 2008 , a new three @-@ storey library was opened in new buildings at Southgate Avenue , replacing the considerably undersized establishment formerly at County Buildings . 
 The Civil Aviation Authority Regulation Safety Group is in the Aviation House in Gatwick Airport in Crawley . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Crawley 's early development as a market town was helped by its location on the London – Brighton turnpike . The area was joined to the railway network in the mid @-@ 19th century ; and since the creation of the new town , there have been major road upgrades ( including a motorway link ) , a guided bus transit system and the establishment of an airport which has become one of Britain 's largest and busiest . 
 = = = Road = = = 
 The London – Brighton turnpike ran through the centre of Crawley , forming the High Street and Station Road . When Britain 's major roads were classified by the British government 's Ministry of Transport between 1919 and 1923 , it was given the number A23 . It was bypassed by a new dual carriageway in 1938 ( which forms the A23 's current route through the town ) , and then later to the east side of the town by the M23 motorway , which was opened in 1975 . This connects London 's orbital motorway , the M25 , to the A23 at Pease Pottage , at the southern edge of Crawley 's built @-@ up area . The original single @-@ carriageway A23 became the <unk> . 
 The M23 has junctions in the Crawley area at the <unk> / A264 ( Junction 10 ) and Maidenbower ( area of Crawley ) ( Junction 10A ) . The end of the motorway at Pease Pottage is Junction 11 . The <unk> , another dual @-@ carriageway , joins the A23 in West Green and provides a link , via the <unk> , to the town centre . The A2220 follows the former route of the A264 through the town , linking the A23 directly to the A264 at Copthorne , from where it then runs to East Grinstead . 
 = = = Rail = = = 
 The first railway line in the area was the Brighton Main Line , which opened as far as Haywards Heath on 12 July 1841 and reached Brighton on 21 September 1841 . It ran through Three Bridges , which was then a small village east of Crawley , and a station was built to serve it . 
 A line to Horsham , now part of the Arun Valley Line , was opened on 14 February 1848 . A station was provided next to Crawley High Street from that date . A new station was constructed slightly to the east , in conjunction with the <unk> House commercial development , and replaced the original station which closed on 28 July 1968 . The ticket office and Up ( London @-@ bound ) platform waiting areas form the ground floor of the office building . 
 The urban area of Crawley is served by a total of three rail stations including Ifield railway station . Due to Crawley 's expansion this station is now surrounded by the town 's western areas . Opened as Lyons Crossing Halt on 1 June 1907 to serve the village of Ifield , it was soon renamed Ifield Halt , dropping the " Halt " suffix in 1930 . 
 Regular train services run from Crawley , and also Ifield , to London Victoria and London Bridge stations , Gatwick Airport , East Croydon , Horsham , Bognor Regis , Chichester , Portsmouth and Southampton . Three Bridges has direct " Thameslink " trains to Bedford & Brighton . 
 = = = Bus and <unk> = = = 
 Crawley was one of several towns where the boundaries of Southdown Motor Services and London Transport bus services met . In 1958 the companies reached an agreement which allowed them both to provide services in all parts of the town . When the National Bus Company was formed in 1969 , its London Country Bus Services subsidiary took responsibility for many routes , including Green Line Coaches cross @-@ London services which operated to distant destinations such as Watford , Luton and Amersham . A coach station was opened by Southdown in 1931 on the A23 at County Oak , near Lowfield Heath : it was a regular stopping point for express coaches between London and towns on the Sussex coast . This traffic started to serve Gatwick when the airport began to grow , however . When the National Bus Company was broken up , local services were provided by the new South West division of London Country Bus Services , which later became part of the Arriva group . Metrobus acquired these routes from Arriva in March 2001 , and is now Crawley 's main operator . It provides local services between the neighbourhoods and town centre , and longer @-@ distance routes to Horsham , Redhill , Tunbridge Wells , Worthing and Brighton . 
 In September 2003 a guided bus service , <unk> , began operating between Bewbush and Gatwick Airport . A second route , from Broadfield to the <unk> area of Horley , north of Gatwick Airport , was added on 27 August 2005 . 
 = = = Gatwick Airport = = = 
 Gatwick Airport was licensed as a private airfield in August 1930 . It was used during the Second World War as an RAF base , and returned to civil use in 1946 . There were proposals to close the airport in the late 1940s , but in 1950 the government announced that it was to be developed as London 's second airport . It was closed between 1956 and 1958 for rebuilding . Her Majesty The Queen reopened it on 9 June 1958 . A second terminal , the North Terminal , was built in 1988 . An agreement exists between BAA and West Sussex County Council preventing the building of a second runway before 2019 . Nevertheless , consultations were launched in 2002 by the Department for Transport , at which proposals for additional facilities and runways were considered . It was agreed that there would be no further expansion at Gatwick unless it became impossible to meet growth targets at London Heathrow Airport within existing pollution limits . 
 = = Sport and leisure = = 
 Crawley Town F.C. is Crawley 's main football team . Formed in 1896 , it moved in 1949 to a ground at Town Mead adjacent to the West Green playing fields . Demand for land near the town centre led to the club moving in 1997 to the new Broadfield Stadium , now owned by the borough council . As of the 2012 / 2013 season , Crawley Town play in League One , the third tier of league football in England . Perhaps the pinnacle of the club 's history was in February 2011 when they played against Manchester United at Old Trafford in the fifth round of the F.A. Cup , a match which saw 9 @,@ 000 Crawley fans make the trip to Manchester . Three other local teams play in the Sussex County Football League : Three Bridges F.C. , Oakwood F.C. and Ifield Edwards F.C .. Crawley Rugby Club is based in Ifield , and a golf course was constructed in 1982 at Tilgate Park . Crawley Hockey Club plays their home matches at Hazelwick School , Three Bridges 
 The new town 's original leisure centre was in Haslett Avenue in the Three Bridges neighbourhood . Building work started in the early 1960s , and a large swimming pool opened in 1964 . The site was extended to include an athletics arena by 1967 , and an additional large sports hall was opened by the town mayor , Councillor Ben Clay and Prime Minister Harold Wilson in 1974 . However , the facilities became insufficient for the growing town , even though an annexe was opened in Bewbush in 1984 . Athlete Zola Budd had been asked to take part in a 1 @,@ 500 @-@ metre race as part of the opening celebrations , but her invitation was withdrawn at short notice because of concerns raised by council members about possible " political connotations and anti @-@ apartheid demonstrators " . 
 In 2005 , Crawley Leisure Centre was closed and replaced by a new facility , the K2 Leisure Centre , on the campus of Thomas Bennett Community College near the Broadfield Stadium . Opened to the public on 14 November 2005 , and officially by Lord Coe on 24 January 2006 , the centre includes the only Olympic @-@ sized swimming pool in South East England . In March 2008 the centre was named as a training site for the 2012 Olympics in London . 
 Crawley Development Corporation made little provision for the arts in the plans for the new town , and a proposed arts venue in the town centre was never built . Neighbourhood community centres and the Tilgate Forest Recreational Centre were used for some cultural activities , but it was not until 1988 that the town had a dedicated theatre and arts venue , at the <unk> Theatre . ( The name derives from a local corruption of the word " heath " , which came to refer specifically to the expanse of wooded land , south of the town centre , in which the theatre was built . ) Crawley 's earliest cinema , the Imperial Picture House on Brighton Road , lasted from 1909 until the 1940s ; the Embassy Cinema on the High Street ( opened in 1938 ) replaced it . A large Cineworld cinema has since opened in the Crawley Leisure Park , which itself also includes ten @-@ pin bowling , various restaurants and bars and a fitness centre . The Liquid nightclub on Station Way can accommodate 1 @,@ 900 people . 
 Each neighbourhood has self @-@ contained recreational areas , and there are other larger parks throughout the town . The Memorial Gardens , on the eastern side of Queen 's Square , feature art displays , children 's play areas and lawns , and a plaque commemorating those who died in two Second World War bombing incidents in 1943 and 1944 . Goffs Park in Southgate covers 50 acres ( 20 ha ) , and has lakes , boating ponds , a model railway and many other features . Tilgate Park and Nature Centre has walled gardens , lakes , large areas of woodland with footpaths and bridleways , a golfing area and a collection of animals and birds . 
 = = Heritage = = 
 Crawley Museum is based in Goffs Park . Stone Age and Bronze Age remains discovered in the area are on display , as well as more recent artefacts including parts of Vine Cottage , an old timber @-@ framed building on the High Street which was once home to former Punch editor Mark Lemon and which was demolished when the ASDA development was built . 
 Crawley has three Grade I listed buildings ( the parish church of St Margaret in Ifield , the parish church of St Nicholas , Worth , and the Friends Meeting House in Langley Lane , Ifield ) , 12 Grade II * listed buildings and 85 Grade II listed buildings . The borough council has also awarded locally listed building status to 58 buildings . 
 = = Education = = 
 Maintained primary and secondary schools were reorganised in 2004 following the Local Education Authority 's decision to change the town 's three @-@ tier system of first , middle and secondary schools to a more standard primary / secondary divide . Since the restructuring , Crawley has had 17 primary schools ( including two Church of England and two Roman Catholic ) and four pairs of infant and junior Schools . Most of these were opened in 2004 ; others changed their status at this date ( for example , from a middle to a junior School ) . Secondary education is provided at one of six secondary schools : 
 Ifield Community College 
 Hazelwick School 
 Holy Trinity Church of England School 
 Oriel High School 
 St Wilfrid 's Catholic School 
 Thomas Bennett Community College 
 All six of these have a sixth form , the newest opening at Oriel High in September 2008 . 
 There is also a Primary / Secondary School called The Gatwick School , which is a Free School that opened in 2014 . It currently has 4 years , R , 1 , 7 and 8 . 
 The schools at Ifield and Thomas Bennett are also bases for the Local Authority 's adult education programmes . Pupils with special needs are educated at the two special schools in the town , each of which covers the full spectrum of needs : Manor Green Primary School and Manor Green College . 
 The Discovery New School , based in Broadfield House , was opened in September 2011 . It was one of the first free schools in the country , set up as a result of changes to the legislation on school funding by the Conservative @-@ Liberal Democrat Coalition government . The school was a Montessori school , the first state funded Montessori school in the UK , quoted as having a Christian ethos in the Anglican tradition . The school closed to children for the last time on 3 April 2014 , following a series of inspection failures and withdrawal of its funding . 
 Further education is provided by Central Sussex College . Opened in 1958 as Crawley Technical College , it merged with other local colleges to form the new institute in August 2005 . The college also provides higher education courses in partnership with the universities at Chichester and Sussex . In 2004 , a proposal was made for an additional campus of the University of Sussex to be created in Crawley , but as of 2008 no conclusion has been reached . 
 = = Media = = 
 Crawley has three local newspapers , of which two have a long history in the area . The Crawley Observer began life in 1881 as <unk> Weekly Advertiser , became the Sussex & Surrey Courier and then the Crawley and District Observer , and took its current name in 1983 . The newspaper is now owned by Johnston Press . The Crawley News was first published in 1979 , and later took over the operations of the older Crawley Advertiser which closed in 1982 . The newspaper is now owned by the Trinity Mirror group and is a free publication . In September 2008 Johnston Press launched a new weekly broadsheet newspaper called the Crawley Times based on the companies paper produced in Horsham , the West Sussex County Times . 
 The town is served by the London regional versions of BBC and ITV television from the Crystal Palace or Reigate transmitters — although some terrestrial aerials in the town may pick up BBC South and ITV Meridian signals from the Midhurst transmitter . 
 Radio Mercury began broadcasting on 20 October 1984 from Broadfield House in Broadfield . The station , now owned by Global Radio , broadcasts as Heart from Brighton , with the studios in Kelvin Way in Crawley closed in August 2010 . On 1 February 2011 , the local Gold transmitter on 1521 AM closed and listeners were advised to retune to 1548 AM ( Gold London ) or 1323 AM ( Gold Sussex ) . Local BBC radio was provided by BBC Radio Sussex from 1983 ; this became part of BBC Southern Counties Radio following a merger with BBC Radio Surrey in 1994 . From March 2009 , BBC Southern Counties Radio became BBC Sussex on <unk> & BBC Surrey on <unk> . Due to the positioning of their transmitters , when broadcasting separately both stations cover Crawley stories . 
 = = Twin town = = 
 Dorsten , Germany , since 1973 
 = = Notable people = = 
 Patrick Allen ( music educator ) , an award @-@ winning author and teacher , lives and works in the town . 
 Tony Barrell , a journalist for The Sunday Times and other publications , was born in the town . 
 Jerzy Braun , a Polish rower who competed in the 1932 Summer Olympics and in the 1936 Summer Olympics , died in Crawley . 
 Simon Calder , a journalist for The Independent , was born in the town . 
 Matt <unk> , playwright , was born in Crawley . 
 Rebecca Cooke , freestyle swimmer and Commonwealth Games gold medallist , was born in Crawley . 
 Sir Charles Court , the 21st Premier of Western Australia , was born in Crawley , but migrated to Australia with his family before his first birthday . 
 John George Haigh , the " Acid Bath Murderer " , carried out some of his murders at a workshop in the West Green area . 
 Simon Jeffes , classically trained guitarist , composer , arranger and founder of the Penguin Cafe Orchestra , was born here . 
 Philip Lawson , first baritone with The King 's Singers was born and raised in Crawley . 
 Mark Lemon , first editor of Punch , lived on the High Street from 1858 until his death in 1870 . A blue plaque outside the George Hotel commemorates his time in the town . 
 Alan Minter , who won bronze at the 1972 Munich Olympic Games in the light middleweight boxing category and in 1980 became the WBC world middleweight champion , was born in the town in 1951 . 
 Kevin Muscat , a footballer who has played for Australia since 1994 and had a nine @-@ year spell in Britain , playing for four different clubs , was born in the town . 
 Craig Pickering , an Olympic sprinter and <unk> , was born in the town . 
 Gareth Southgate ( who was manager of Middlesbrough F.C. and a former England international ) attended the town 's Hazelwick School . 
 Daley Thompson used facilities in Crawley to train for the Olympics in 1980 and 1984 . 
 Peter Vaughan , the actor , who starred in the TV show Porridge , used to live in the town . 
 Tom Wort , sophomore All @-@ American linebacker with the Oklahoma Sooners , lived in Crawley until age 14 . 
 The Cure were formed in Crawley in 1976 by Robert Smith , Michael Dempsey and Lol Tolhurst , all of whom attended St Wilfrid 's RC School . 
 The Feeling 's drummer Paul Stewart , guitarist Kevin Jeremiah and keyboard player Ciaran Jeremiah were also at St Wilfrid 's . 
 2D , the fictional character from Damon Albarn 's virtual band Gorillaz , comes from Crawley , according to the back @-@ story created for them . 
 <unk> " Chico " <unk> , who had a number one UK hit , was a Hazelwick pupil and spent his teenage years in Crawley . 
 Dan Walker , the British sports presenter , was born and raised in Crawley . 
 = Earle C. Clements = 
 Earle Chester Clements ( October 22 , 1896 – March 12 , 1985 ) was an American farmer and politician . He represented the state of Kentucky in both the U.S. House of Representatives and the U.S. Senate and was its 47th Governor , serving from 1947 to 1950 . For three decades , he was the leader of a faction of the state 's Democratic Party that stood in opposition to the faction led by two @-@ time governor and senator A. B. " Happy " Chandler . 
 After following his father into the local politics of his home county , Clements agreed to chair the gubernatorial campaign of Thomas Rhea in 1935 . Already committed to Rhea , he turned down an offer from Happy Chandler to chair his campaign , beginning the rift between the two men . Clements went on to the Kentucky Senate in 1941 . In 1944 , he was selected as Democratic floor leader of the senate and successfully campaigned for a larger budget than that proposed by Republican governor Simeon Willis . His stand against Willis made him popular in the Democratic Party , and he went on to serve two terms in the U.S. House of Representatives from 1944 to 1948 . 
 In 1947 , Clements succeeded Willis as governor , defeating Harry Lee Waterfield , Chandler 's preferred candidate , in the Democratic primary . As governor , Clements raised taxes and used the revenue to increase funding for the state park system and construct and maintain more roads . He also achieved advancements in education , including some progress toward desegregation . In 1950 , Clements was elected to the U.S. Senate . He resigned as governor to accept his Senate seat . While in the Senate , he served as chairman of the Senate Democratic Reelection Committee and as Democratic party whip under party leader Lyndon Johnson . He was defeated by Thruston Morton in his re @-@ election bid in 1956 ; a lack of support from Chandler ( then serving his second term as governor ) contributed to Clements ' defeat . At Johnson 's insistence , Clements resumed chairing the Senate Democratic Reelection Committee in 1957 and 1959 . 
 Clements had supported Bert T. Combs for governor against Chandler in 1955 , and did so again against Harry Lee Waterfield in 1959 . Combs defeated Waterfield and rewarded Clements by appointing him state highway commissioner . In 1961 , Clements and Combs split over a proposed deal to lease dump trucks from a Louisville car dealer . State newspapers charged that the deal was payback to the dealer , a Combs supporter . When Combs canceled the deal Clements took it as a public rebuke and soon after resigned to work on the presidential campaign of his friend , Lyndon Johnson . Following his split with Combs , Clements allied himself with the Chandler faction , opposing Combs ' lieutenant governor , Wilson Wyatt in his bid to unseat Senator Thruston Morton . Clements ' influence declined rapidly after the split with Combs , and by the 1963 gubernatorial race , he was unable to deliver his home county for Chandler in the primary against Edward T. Breathitt . Clements died in his hometown of Morganfield , Kentucky on March 12 , 1985 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Earle C. Clements was born in Morganfield , Kentucky on October 22 , 1896 . He was the youngest of two sons and four daughters born to Aaron Waller and Sallie Anna ( <unk> ) Clements . His father was a popular county judge and sheriff in Union County , but Clements at first shunned a political career . He obtained his early education in the public schools , and graduated from Morganfield High School in 1915 . Later in 1915 , he enrolled at the University of Kentucky 's College of Agriculture . In 1915 and 1916 , he played center on the football team , and was named to the " All @-@ Southern Team " in 1916 . He was also a member of the Pi Kappa Alpha fraternity . 
 Clements ' studies were interrupted by World War I. On July 9 , 1917 , he enlisted as a private in Company M of the Kentucky National Guard . The company was ordered to Camp Taylor near Louisville , Kentucky where they were mustered into the infantry of the U.S. Army . Clements first served as a guard at Camp Taylor and later entered the Officers Training School at Fort Benjamin Harrison near Indianapolis , Indiana . He graduated with the rank of first lieutenant and remained stateside as a professor of military science . He served for a total of 28 months , attaining the rank of captain , and was discharged on September 12 , 1919 . 
 After the war , Clements worked as a rigger in the oil fields of east Texas . In 1921 , however , his father 's health began to fail , and he returned to Kentucky to help him on the farm and served as his deputy sheriff . As a hobby , he also coached football at his high school alma mater . One of his assistant coaches , Rodes K. Myers , would go on to be lieutenant governor under Keen Johnson . On January 18 , 1927 , Clements married Sara M. Blue . Their only child , Elizabeth ( Bess ) Hughes Clements Abell , became social secretary to Lady Bird Johnson and Walter Mondale . 
 = = Political career = = 
 In 1922 , Clements ' father died , and Clements was appointed to serve out the remainder of his term . He was subsequently elected to the office ; his term ended in 1925 . In 1926 , he was elected county clerk . He served two terms in that office , with his tenure ending January 1 , 1934 . Later in 1934 , he was elected county judge . During his two terms , which lasted until 1941 , he ordered the paving of 123 miles of road in the county — more than all the previous county judges combined — despite the financial hardships of the Great Depression . 
 In 1935 , Thomas Rhea asked Clements to serve as his campaign chairman for the 1935 gubernatorial race . Clements accepted , and consequently had to refuse a later request from his boyhood friend , A. B. " Happy " Chandler , to fill the same position for his campaign . Chandler won the Democratic primary , and for decades following , Clements and Chandler led opposite factions of the Kentucky Democratic Party . Chandler claimed that Clements bolted the party and supported Republican candidate King Swope in the general election ; Clements denied this , but admitted that he gave Chandler 's campaign only minimal support . 
 Clements was elected to the Kentucky Senate in 1941 , representing Union , Webster , and Henderson counties . By 1944 , he had risen to the post of majority leader in that body and played a central role in writing the state 's budget that year . Due to Clements ' efforts , educational appropriations were increased far above what had been called for by Republican governor Simeon Willis . 
 Clements ' face @-@ off with Willis won him popularity and helped him win a seat in the U.S. House of Representatives , representing Kentucky 's second district , in 1944 . He was re @-@ elected in 1946 . A New Deal Democrat , Clements voted to increase funding to the Rural Electrification Administration and advocated for the 1945 National School Lunch Act . He supported expansion of agricultural research and reorganization of the Farm Security Administration . He endorsed conservation and wildlife programs and additional funding to federal parks . He supported civil rights legislation , including bans on lynching and poll taxes . He opposed the Taft @-@ Hartley Act and voted to disband the House Un @-@ American Activities Committee . His service on the Select House Committee on Food Shortages gave him the chance to interact closely with President Harry S. Truman . 
 = = = Governor = = = 
 Though encouraged to run for a seat in the Senate in 1946 , Clements instead made the race for governor in 1947 . In the Democratic primary , he faced Harry Lee Waterfield , a former Speaker of the Kentucky House of Representatives . Not known for his oratory or personality , Clements was a masterful campaign organizer . He secured the support of western Kentucky Democrats by allying himself with Logan County political boss Emerson " Doc " Beauchamp . He chose Lexington Herald @-@ Leader editor Tom Underwood as his campaign manager , strengthening his influence in central Kentucky . He befriended Lawrence Wetherby of Jefferson County which helped him with the urban vote and Carl D. Perkins of Knott County which helped him in rural eastern Kentucky . 
 During the primary campaign , two major issues surfaced . First , Waterfield favored a tax on parimutuel betting , while Clements opposed it . Second , Waterfield supported the development of electric power generation through public utilities , while Clements favored private development ( which won him the support of the Kentucky Utilities company ) . The Clements campaign also attacked Waterfield for being deemed physically unfit for military service . Clements received a late boost when he gained the endorsement of John Y. Brown , Sr. , garnering added support from organized labor . Ultimately , Clements defeated Waterfield by over 30 @,@ 000 votes . 
 In the general election , Clements faced Republican state attorney general Eldon S. Dummit . While Clements managed to keep the Democrats united following the primary , Dummit had fractured the Republicans by attacking the administration of sitting Republican governor Simeon S. Willis and his preferred successor during the Republican primary . Dummit mounted a meager challenge by citing Clements ' opposition to the Taft @-@ Hartley Act , but this was not very effective . Dummit had replaced his campaign manager from the primary election , and when the ousted manager turned against him in the general election , it sounded the death knell for his campaign . Clements won the election by a vote of 387 @,@ 795 to 287 @,@ 756 . He resigned his seat in the U.S. House to accept the governorship . 
 As governor , Clements enjoyed a three @-@ to @-@ one Democratic majority in both houses of the state legislature . As a result , much of his proposed legislative agenda was passed . In the 1948 legislative session , the General Assembly attracted new businesses by lowering taxes on stocks and bonds and the inheritance tax , but offset these cuts by approving Clements ' proposals to increase taxes on gasoline and distilled spirits . Clements also reversed his campaign stance against a tax on parimutuel betting , reportedly proposing a three percent tax because he feared a higher rate would be proposed if he did not take the initiative . With this new revenue , Clements authorized $ 6 million to improve and expand the state park system . The improvement program included twelve large parks and several smaller ones , with Kentucky Dam Park being the centerpiece . To oversee the developments , he appointed Henry Ward as commissioner of conservation . Between 1948 and 1950 , New York was the only state that spent more than Kentucky on its park system . Clements was one of several people who have been referred to as the " father of Kentucky 's state parks " . Although the park system was started in 1926 by Willard Rouse <unk> , Clements did much to develop them during his administration . 
 Clements authorized significant road building projects . During his administration , the state funded or built 3 @,@ 800 miles of rural roads and 4 @,@ 000 miles of primary roads . Further , he initiated construction of the Kentucky Turnpike and the Western Kentucky Parkway . The state also assumed maintenance of 6 @,@ 000 miles of county roads under Clements . During Clements ' tenure , only Texas spent more money on developing its roads . Besides improving the roadways themselves , Clements replaced the Kentucky Highway Patrol , which had become a corrupt vehicle of political patronage , with the Kentucky State Police . Clements also used some of the revenue generated from his tax increases to raise the salaries of the state 's public school teachers . He approved a 15 % increase in funding to the Minimum Foundation Program which provided funding for poor school districts . This was not enough , however , to stave off a 1950 protest march on his office by teachers demanding that he raise another $ 10 million for education . Clements ' lieutenant governor and successor , Lawrence Wetherby , was able to meet this demand in 1951 by using increased tax revenue resulting from the Korean War . 
 Leading national accreditation groups attempted to <unk> many of Kentucky 's public colleges during Clements administration in order to end longstanding political interference in the higher education system . Clements worked to help these colleges maintain their accreditation and to secure re @-@ accreditation for Morehead State Teachers College . In 1948 , he weakened Kentucky 's Day Law — which enforced segregation of the state 's education system — by providing an exception for black medical personnel to take post @-@ graduate courses in white public hospitals . He also supported a 1948 bill that allowed blacks to pursue medical training at the University of Louisville . His efforts to secure a similar arrangement at the University of Kentucky were not successful , despite the governor 's status as ex @-@ officio chairman of the Board of Trustees . In 1949 , the federal district court in Lexington granted blacks admission to programs at the University of Kentucky if an equivalent program was not available at Kentucky State College , the state 's historically black college . 
 Clements also created or reorganized several government agencies . In cooperation with Pennsylvania governor James H. Duff , he created the Ohio River Sanitation Commission ( <unk> ) to combat pollution in the Ohio River and its tributaries . He curbed fraud in the insurance industry by reorganizing the state Insurance Commission and hiring a national prominent expert to rewrite the state 's entire insurance code . To assist the General Assembly in writing more effective and efficient legislation , Clements created the non @-@ partisan Legislative Research Commission , stocked with professionals from various disciplines , to conduct governmental research . He created the Kentucky Agriculture and Industrial Board ( the predecessor of the current Kentucky Department of Commerce ) , which attracted 250 new industries to the state and created 40 @,@ 000 new jobs during its first three years . He also created the Kentucky Building Commission to manage and plan all new state buildings . Among the commission 's first projects were a new $ 6 million capitol annex and the construction of a new state fairgrounds . To retain the most qualified government employees , he supported a constitutional amendment that quadrupled the minimum annual salary for state employees from $ 5 @,@ 000 to $ 20 @,@ 000 . 
 Though a strong governor with many successes , Clements was not able to enact his full legislative agenda . In 1948 , his proposal to create a centralized board that governed all Kentucky colleges failed in the General Assembly . In both the 1948 and 1950 legislative sessions , Clements failed to convince the General Assembly to regulate strip mining . He also failed in his attempts to establish statewide pension and civil service programs , and was unable to enact a merit system for state employees . Attempts to fund a veterans ' bonus passed the two houses of the General Assembly in different forms and were unable to be reconciled . 
 = = = Senator = = = 
 When Alben Barkley resigned his Senate seat to assume the office of vice president in 1948 , Clements had appointed Garrett L. Withers to fill the vacancy . Barkley 's term was to expire in 1950 , and near the end of the term , Withers resigned , allowing Clements to run in a special election to fill both the remainder of Withers ' term and a full six @-@ year term simultaneously . He won the election over Republican Charles I. Dawson by a vote of 300 @,@ 276 to 256 @,@ 876 . On November 27 , 1950 , he resigned as governor to assume the seat . 
 The Democrats lost seats in the Senate in the 1950 election cycle , and party leader Ernest McFarland removed Clinton Anderson as chairman of the Senate Democratic Reelection Committee , replacing him with Clements for the 1952 election cycle . Clements advocated better cooperation between his committee and the Democratic National Committee in 1952 . However , Republicans won the presidency and both houses of Congress in 1952 , and the Democratic National Committee talked openly of disbanding the Reelection Committee . Clements instead advised that his committee 's responsibilities be expanded and that its activities become year @-@ round rather than seasonal . 
 In 1953 , Clements was appointed Democratic party whip , serving under party leader Lyndon B. Johnson . In addition , he retained his chairmanship of the Senate Democratic Reelection Committee for the 1954 election cycle . He and Democratic National Committee chair Stephen Mitchell agreed that the two committees should conduct separate fund @-@ raising operations in order to maximize donations for Democratic candidates . Democrats regained control of the Senate in 1954 , and Clements instituted the practice of having his committee provide transition services for freshman senators . That practice continues today . 
 Clements remained active in state politics , leading a faction of the Democratic party that opposed Happy Chander . As the 1955 gubernatorial election grew closer , Chandler announced he would seek a second term in office , having previously served from 1935 to 1939 . With Clements ' former lieutenant governor , Lawrence Wetherby , ineligible to succeed himself as governor , the Clements faction scrambled to find a candidate to challenge Chandler . The most likely choice was Wetherby 's lieutenant governor , Emerson " Doc " Beauchamp , but his uninspiring persona and ties to boss @-@ dominated Logan County made him unacceptable to Clements . Instead , Clements threw his support to Bert T. Combs , a Court of Appeals judge nominated by Wetherby . Since Combs had little in the way of a political record to run against , Chandler focused his campaign attacks on factional leaders Clements and Wetherby , who he nicknamed " Clementine and Wetherbine " . These attacks , combined with a poorly run campaign by Combs , allowed Chandler to win the Democratic primary by a margin of 18 @,@ 000 votes . He went on to win the general election and a second gubernatorial term . 
 Clements began his campaign for re @-@ election in 1956 by defeating Joe Bates , the candidate favored by Chandler , in the Democratic senatorial primary . On April 30 , 1956 , Kentucky senator Alben Barkley died suddenly of a heart attack . With the Democratic primary already over , the Democratic State Central Committee was charged with selecting a candidate to run for Barkley 's seat . They chose Wetherby , Clements ' former lieutenant governor . Journalist John Ed Pearce later recorded that Clements had favored Chandler 's choice , Joseph Leary , as a candidate rather than Wetherby . Clements didn 't think Leary had a very good chance of winning , but he felt Leary 's selection would keep Chandler from throwing his support to the Republican candidates . 
 Republican president Dwight D. Eisenhower convinced John Sherman Cooper , a former senator and ambassador who was immensely popular in Kentucky , to challenge Wetherby , hoping his presence on the ticket would aid his own re @-@ election bid . In the Republican primary , voters chose Thruston B. Morton to challenge Clements . With two of his factional enemies as candidates for the Senate , Governor Chandler bolted the party and supported the Republican candidates . Further complicating Clements ' campaign was the fact that Senate majority leader Lyndon Johnson suffered a heart attack in 1956 , and as majority whip , Clements had to spend much of his time in Washington , D.C. covering Johnson 's duties in the Senate . What time he was in Kentucky was usually devoted to Wetherby 's campaign , since the Democrats believed Clements would be re @-@ elected easily while Wetherby faced much stiffer odds . These factors , combined with the landslide of support for Eisenhower , the Republican presidential candidate , contributed to the defeat of both Wetherby and Clements . Cooper defeated Wetherby by 65 @,@ 000 votes , while Clements lost to Morton by a margin of 7 @,@ 000 votes out of more than 1 million that were cast in the election . It was Clements ' first defeat for elected office in a career that spanned thirty years . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Clements never again sought an elected office after his defeat by Morton , though he remained active in state politics and continued to lead the anti @-@ Chandler faction of his party . From 1957 to 1959 , at the insistence of Lyndon Johnson , he served as executive director of the United States Senate Democratic Campaign Committee and helped ensure the election of a fourteen @-@ seat Democratic majority in the Senate . He considered running for governor again in 1959 , but ultimately decided against it . Without Clements in the race , the anti @-@ Chandler faction was unable to unite behind either former candidate Bert T. Combs or former Louisville mayor Wilson Wyatt . Clements united the faction behind Combs , making Wilson Wyatt their candidate for lieutenant governor and promising him support for later races . Combs defeated the Chandler candidate , Harry Lee Waterfield in the Democratic primary and went on to win the general election . 
 In 1960 , Combs appointed Clements as state highway commissioner . Some state newspapers charged that Clements had demanded this post at the head of the state 's largest executive department in exchange for supporting Combs , a charge Combs denied . Others wondered if Clements took the post in order to organize the state political machinery for his friend Lyndon Johnson , who was rumored to be considering a run for president . Still others believed that , from his powerful post , Clements would be the real governor and Combs only a puppet . 
 Scandal continued to plague Clements as highway commissioner . In March 1960 , news broke that the highway department was about to lease 34 used dump trucks at a very favorable price from Louisville Ford dealer Thurston Cooke , who had served as finance chairman for Combs ' gubernatorial campaign . Some charged that this amounted to a political payoff by Clements . Combs , already under fire for appointing Clements , canceled the lease bid on April 19 . Clements was offended by this action and considered it a public rebuke . The incident caused a rift between Combs and Clements that never fully healed , although Clements did not resign immediately . 
 In August 1960 , Clements met with Combs and told him he wanted to resign to work for the vice @-@ presidential campaign of Lyndon Johnson . Combs called a press conference and announced that Clements ' resignation would be effective September 1 and that he would be replaced by Henry Ward . The resignation was the end of the Clements faction of the state Democratic party . His split with Combs was so severe that he allied with his longtime foe , Happy Chandler , against the new Combs faction of the party . In the 1962 senatorial race , Clements opposed Wilson Wyatt 's challenge to Senator Thruston Morton . Morton won re @-@ election , ending Wyatt 's political career . Chandler again sought the Democratic gubernatorial nomination in 1963 . Clements appeared on stage with Chandler at a rally where Chandler claimed that Combs had arranged the truck deal to discredit Clements . Chandler hoped to damage Combs ' reputation and , by extension , that of his hand @-@ picked successor Edward T. Breathitt . His strategy was unsuccessful ; Breathitt carried the primary and went on to win the general election . Clements ' waning influence was evidenced by the fact that Breathitt carried Union County by a vote of 2 @,@ 528 to 1 @,@ 913 . 
 From 1961 to 1963 , Clements was a consultant for the American Merchant Marine Institute . He then returned to Washington as a lobbyist and as an executive with the Tobacco Institute . In 1981 , he retired to his hometown of Morganfield . After several years of illness , he died March 12 , 1985 and was buried at the Odd Fellows Cemetery in Morganfield . In 1980 , the Breckinridge Job Corps Center in Morganfield was renamed the Earle C. Clements Job Corps Center . 
 = Ryugyong Hotel = 
 The Ryugyong Hotel ( Chosŏn 'gŭl : <unk> ; sometimes anglicised as Ryu @-@ <unk> Hotel or Yu @-@ Kyung Hotel ) is an unfinished 105 @-@ story pyramid @-@ shaped skyscraper in Pyongyang , North Korea . Its name ( " capital of willows " ) is also one of the historical names for Pyongyang . The building is also known as the 105 Building , a reference to its number of floors . The building has been planned as a mixed @-@ use development , which would include a hotel . 
 Construction began in 1987 but was halted in 1992 as North Korea entered a period of economic crisis after the fall of the Soviet Union . After 1992 the building stood topped out , but without any windows or interior fittings . In 2008 construction resumed , and the exterior was completed in 2011 . It was planned to open the hotel in 2012 , the centenary of Kim Il @-@ sung 's birth , but this did not happen . A partial opening was announced for 2013 , but this was also cancelled . As of 2016 , the building remains unopened . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The Ryugyong Hotel has a height of 330 metres ( 1 @,@ 080 ft ) , making it the most prominent feature of Pyongyang 's skyline and by far the tallest structure in North Korea . Construction of the Ryugyong Hotel was intended to be completed in time for the 13th World Festival of Youth and Students in June 1989 ; had this been achieved , it would have held the title of world 's tallest hotel . The unfinished building was not surpassed in height by any new hotel until the 2009 completion of the spire atop the Rose Tower in Dubai , United Arab Emirates . The Ryugyong Hotel is the world 's 49th tallest building ( tied with the China World Trade Center Tower III ) in terms of total height and has the seventh most floors . It is also the tallest unoccupied building in the world . 
 The building consists of three wings , each measuring 100 metres ( 330 ft ) long , 18 metres ( 59 ft ) wide , and sloped at a 75 ‑ degree angle , which converge at a common point to form a pinnacle . The building is topped by a truncated cone 40 metres ( 130 ft ) wide , consisting of eight floors that are intended to rotate , topped by a further six static floors . The structure was originally intended to house five revolving restaurants , and either 3 @,@ 000 or 7 @,@ 665 guest rooms , according to different sources . According to Orascom 's Khaled <unk> in 2009 , the Ryugyong will not be just a hotel , but rather a mixed @-@ use development , including " revolving restaurant " facilities along with a " mixture of hotel accommodation , apartments and business facilities " . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 = = = = First start = = = = 
 The plan for a large hotel was reportedly a Cold War response to the completion of the world 's tallest hotel , the Westin Stamford Hotel in Singapore , in 1986 by the South Korean company <unk> Group . North Korean leadership envisioned the project as a channel for Western investors to step into the marketplace . A firm , the Ryugyong Hotel Investment and Management , was established to attract a hoped @-@ for $ 230 million in foreign investment . A representative for the North Korean government promised relaxed oversight , allowing " foreign investors [ to ] operate casinos , nightclubs or Japanese lounges " . North Korean construction firm <unk> Architects & Engineers ( also known as Baekdu Mountain Architects and Engineers ) began construction on a pyramid ‑ shaped hotel in 1987 . 
 = = = = First halt = = = = 
 The hotel was scheduled to open in June 1989 for the 13th World Festival of Youth and Students , but problems with building methods and materials delayed completion . Had it opened on schedule , it would have surpassed the Westin Stamford Hotel to become the world 's tallest hotel , and would have been the seventh @-@ tallest building in the world . 
 In 1992 , after the building had reached its full architectural height , work was halted due to the economic crisis in North Korea following the collapse of the Soviet bloc . Japanese newspapers estimated the cost of construction was $ 750 million , consuming 2 percent of North Korea ’ s GDP . For over a decade , the unfinished building sat vacant and without windows , fixtures , or fittings , appearing as a massive concrete shell . A rusting construction crane remained at the top , which the BBC called " a reminder of the totalitarian state 's thwarted ambition " . According to Marcus Noland , in the late 1990s , the European Union Chamber of Commerce in Korea inspected the building and concluded that the structure was irreparable . Questions were raised regarding the quality of the building 's concrete and the alignment of its elevator shafts , which some sources said were " crooked " . 
 In a 2006 article , ABC News questioned whether North Korea had sufficient raw materials or energy for such a massive project . A North Korean government official told the Los Angeles Times in 2008 that construction was not completed " because [ North Korea ] ran out of money " . 
 The halt in construction , the rumours of problems and the mystery about its future led foreign media sources to dub it " the worst building in the world " , " Hotel of Doom " and " Phantom Hotel " . 
 = = = = Second start = = = = 
 In April 2008 , after 16 years of inactivity , work on the building was restarted by the Egyptian company Orascom Group . Orascom , which has entered into a US $ 400 million deal with the North Korean government to build and run a 3G mobile phone network , said that their telecommunications deal was not directly related to the Ryugyong Hotel work . In 2008 North Korean officials stated that the hotel would be completed by 2012 , coinciding with the 100th anniversary of the birth of the " Eternal President " , Kim Il @-@ sung . In 2009 , Orascom 's Chief Operating Officer Khaled <unk> noted that they " had not had too many problems " resolving the reported structural issues of the building , and that a revolving restaurant will be located at the top of the building . 
 In July 2011 , it was reported that the exterior work was complete . Features that Orascom has installed include exterior glass panels and telecommunications antennas . In 2012 , photographs taken by Koryo Tours were released , showing the interior for the first time . There were few fixtures or furnishings . In November 2012 , international hotel operator Kempinski announced it would be running the hotel which was expected to partially open in mid ‑ 2013 . 
 = = = = Second halt = = = = 
 In March 2013 , plans to reopen the hotel were suspended . Kempinski clarified its earlier statements saying that only “ initial discussions ” had ever occurred , but that no agreement had been signed because “ market entry is not currently possible ” . Kempinski gave no reasons , but commentators suggested that international tensions related to the 2013 North Korean nuclear test , economic risks , and delays in construction probably played a part . 
