 = = = Progression of construction work = = = 
 = Who Killed Archie ? = 
 " Who Killed Archie ? " is a storyline from the BBC soap opera EastEnders , which began on 25 December 2009 , Christmas Day , when the character Archie Mitchell , played by Larry Lamb , was murdered by an unseen person . Events leading up to and following the murder put several characters in the frame , in the style of a whodunnit mystery . The culprit was kept a tight secret within the production crew as well , with only seven people knowing the identity of the killer . The murderer was revealed as Stacey Branning ( Lacey Turner ) during a live episode titled " EastEnders Live " , broadcast on 19 February 2010 , the show 's 25th anniversary . Turner was told thirty minutes before the broadcast that Stacey was the killer , and actors rehearsed several possible endings . Finally , a two @-@ hander episode between Stacey and Max on 26 March 2010 explained how she killed Archie . 
 = = Storyline creation and development = = 
 The storyline was created in spring 2009 during a story conference , where executive producer Diederick Santer , <unk> Dominic Treadwell @-@ Collins , series consultant and lead writer Simon Ashdown , series producer Lorraine Newman , script producer Sharon Batten , and Controller of BBC Drama Production John Yorke were considering what to do for the Christmas Day 2009 and 25th anniversary episodes . They discussed the character Archie Mitchell and how everyone hated him , and decided on a storyline with characters ' hatred and anger towards Archie building up before Christmas , with a peak on Christmas Day when he is killed and another for the reveal on the 19 February 2010 anniversary . They decided to keep the killer 's identity a secret within the small group and decided to reveal it during a live episode so that the secret could be kept for as long as possible , and managed the story on a need @-@ to @-@ know basis . The live episode 's director , Clive Arnold , became the seventh person to discover the identity of the murderer . They went through the characters to decide who would create a " shiver " moment , and decided against Janine , even though she could have done it , because she has killed before . The killer was going to be Archie 's wife Peggy Mitchell ( Barbara Windsor ) , until producers discovered Windsor had planned to leave the show , so they decided on Stacey . Although scripts initially diverted attention away from Stacey , Santer realised that drawing attention away from her too much might make it more apparent . 
 Santer said there were three big clues to the killer 's identity , " one in the Christmas Day episode , one more recently than Christmas and there 's another one that , if I were to tell you where it was , would perhaps give it away too easily , " however , in a chat with Sharon Marshall shown on This Morning on 18 February 2010 , he said the second clue was about halfway through the investigation and the third was " on screen but not necessarily in the programme " . He also said that the outcome would be " surprising " , " satisfying " and " in retrospect , inevitable " , adding that " it makes sense " . Santer confirmed the clues in an interview on the EastEnders website : on Christmas Day Stacey disappears and it is never explained why , and then reappears on Boxing Day appearing " not quite with it " ; Stacey is the only character still sufficiently angry enough to spit on Archie 's grave at his funeral ; and Stacey is the first character to feature in the Christmas Day trailers . 
 Plans to broadcast the first ever live episode of EastEnders were announced by the BBC on 15 September 2009 . Santer initially refrained from discussing the episode 's plot , but commented that it would resolve a " big storyline " which would " keep the audience ( as well as the cast and crew ) guessing until the very last moment . " Santer confirmed that Archie 's killer would be revealed in the live episode , and that their identity would be kept secret until the night of broadcast , even from the cast member playing them . The EastEnders cast and crew had two weeks to rehearse the episode prior to its live transmission . The script was issued on the afternoon of 5 February 2010 , written by Simon Ashdown . The first read @-@ through took place on 8 February 2010 , though producers held back the part of the script revealing Archie 's true killer . Ten different possible endings were scripted and rehearsed , each showing one character confessing to the murder . The ten characters were Janine Butcher ( Charlie Brooks ) , Jack Branning ( Scott Maslen ) , Ronnie Mitchell ( Samantha Womack ) , Max Branning ( Jake Wood ) , Ian Beale ( Adam Woodyatt ) , Phil Mitchell ( Steve McFadden ) , Billy Mitchell ( Perry Fenwick ) , Ryan Malloy ( Neil McDermott ) , Peggy and Stacey . Santer reiterated that the actor playing the killer would only be told so thirty minutes before the broadcast . He explained that the killer " may be revealed to the audience rather than the Square " , preserving secrecy as the crew began filming episodes to be transmitted after the live broadcast . Brooks , who plays Archie 's former lover Janine , found the secrecy difficult to work with , explaining : " In the episodes to be shown afterwards , you 're being told to look or speak a certain way , but not why . " Santer confirmed that the cast found the episode challenging , stating : " They are as desperate to know who did it as the viewers . " Actor Charlie Clements , who played Bradley Branning , announced in November 2009 that he would be leaving the soap in 2010 . It was later revealed that Bradley would make his last appearance in " EastEnders Live " , urged to flee Walford by his father Max and uncle Jack after becoming the prime suspect in the investigation into Archie 's murder . 
 The moment Turner was told Stacey was the killer was filmed for a live reaction show broadcast immediately after " EastEnders Live " on BBC Three , though it was not broadcast . EastEnders Live : The Aftermath was presented by Lamb 's son George and included other behind @-@ the @-@ scenes material . Turner received a call to see Santer about 20 minutes before the broadcast , where she was told that Stacey was the killer . She explained that she had no idea her character was the murderer , even after receiving the call . She hoped viewers would sympathise with the character as she not only has to deal with the guilt of killing Archie but was also inadvertently responsible for Bradley 's death . Wood was also told as he supported Turner in the final scene in which she was revealed as the killer . Santer also brought in Maslen and McDermott as decoys in case other cast and crew members realised . Following the live episode , a two @-@ hander episode featuring Max and Stacey was announced . The episode , broadcast on 26 March 2010 , explains how and why Stacey killed Archie . 
 = = = Later development = = = 
 Although the true identity of Archie 's killer is kept a secret between Max and Stacey for several months , Max 's daughter Lauren Branning ( Jacqueline Jossa ) becomes suspicious in November 2010 when Max tells her Bradley was innocent . Lauren suspects Max killed Archie as she becomes paranoid about his anger . Jossa said in an interview with website Digital Spy : " [ Lauren ] ' s thinking about Archie 's murder and realising that if Bradley didn 't do it , it must have been someone else . As far as she knows , her dad is the only person who knows that Bradley didn 't do it , so she 's trying to put this puzzle together and it 's all adding up to Max being the killer , because everything he does seems to lead to a lot of aggression . " However , Lauren soon works out that Stacey is the murderer after speaking to her . Jossa said she was excited that her character was one of only a select few to know the true identity of Archie 's killer . 
 = = Suspects and motives = = 
 There were officially ten suspects for the murder , though the ten were not known to viewers or cast members , who speculated about the identity of the killer . On Christmas Eve , storylines showed Archie evicting his wife Peggy , daughters Ronnie and Roxy , Peggy 's son Phil and Phil 's son Ben ( Charlie Jones ) from their home , The Queen Victoria public house , after he became the landlord . Ronnie had a further motive as Archie had caused her to suffer a miscarriage and she blamed him for the death of her daughter Danielle Jones ( Lauren Crace ) earlier in 2009 . Peggy discovered that Archie had paid her daughter Sam Mitchell ( Danniella Westbrook ) to skip bail , thus plunging the Mitchells into debt , and Sam returned on Christmas Day to discover she had been manipulated . Phil was also a suspect after failing to kill Archie on Peggy 's request earlier in 2009 . Simons explained that the killer was likely to be the most unsuspecting person , and stated that Roxy was " pretty much the only non @-@ suspect , " but said she felt the character would not go so far as to kill her father , even though she had seen his true colours . Woodyatt said his character , Ian Beale , would have done anything to stop his wife Jane ( Laurie Brett ) from finding out that he had sex with Janine , so it would be plausible if it turned out that Ian had killed Archie . Archie had a laptop recording of Ian and Janine together that he had threatened to give to Jane . Janine , who was engaged to Archie , also had a motive as Archie had been using her to gain ownership of The Queen Victoria and threw her out on Christmas Day . She was seen holding a knife before Archie was killed . 
 McDermott said his character , Ryan Malloy , " probably would have the balls to kill Archie " and it would be a possibility due to the character 's past , although he accused Janine of the murder , making it unlikely unless he was " quite conniving . " He stated Ryan 's only motive would be out of love for Janine . Glynis Barber , who plays Archie 's first wife Glenda Mitchell and was not seen in the programme until after the murder , said her instinct was that Glenda did not kill Archie , even though she had been told it was possible . Bradley Branning 's motive came from the discovery that Archie raped his partner Stacey , and Clements said that if other characters knew , it would give Bradley a motive and the fact that Bradley punched Archie would make him a prime suspect . He stated that he hoped Bradley was not the killer , though in an interview with daytime television show This Morning , he stated it would be " quite historical to go down as the one who killed Archie Mitchell " . The rape also gave Stacey a motive , and before she was sectioned in 2009 for bipolar disorder she accused Archie of trying to kill her . Jack Branning 's motive came from his love for Ronnie and hatred of Archie , and he threatened Archie on Christmas Day . Maslen said it would be " great " if Jack was the murderer , but added that he may have taken the blame if Ronnie was guilty . Other possible suspects included Peggy 's son Grant Mitchell ( Ross Kemp ) , Billy Mitchell and Tracey the barmaid ( Jane Slaughter ) . Slaughter said Tracey 's only motive would be to protect The Queen Victoria or one of the Mitchells . 
 Odds on the killer 's identity changed frequently in the fortnight preceding the transmission of " EastEnders Live " . On 5 February , the clear favourite was Stacey Slater , with odds at Bodog of 2 / 1 . By 9 February , Stacey 's odds had shortened to 6 / 4 , though the character dropped into third place by 12 February , usurped by her brother Sean Slater ( Robert Kazinsky ) , who was last seen in the soap on 1 January 2009 , at odds of 9 / 4 , and Ben Mitchell at 7 / 2 . On 14 February , the unlikely favourite became Tracey the barmaid , a background character whose odds shortened considerably from 40 / 1 to 11 / 4 . Sean moved back into first place on 16 February , with odds of 2 / 1 , and remained there until the eve of broadcast . Stacey Slater 's odds fell to 16 / 1 . William Hill had Sean as the favourite on 18 February with odds of 4 / 7 , though on the morning of 19 February , Ben became the bookmakers ' favourite . Polls on both the BBC website and on Digital Spy that ran in the week leading up to the live episode showed Bradley Branning as the person viewers most expected to be the killer , followed by Jack Branning , Ben Mitchell , Sean Slater and Sam Mitchell . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Events leading up to the murder = = = 
 On Archie Mitchell ( Larry Lamb ) and Peggy Mitchell 's ( Barbara Windsor ) wedding day , the true identity of Danielle Jones ( Lauren Crace ) as Ronnie Mitchell 's ( Samantha Womack ) daughter is revealed . Archie has told Ronnie that her daughter , whom he gave up for adoption as a baby , has died . Moments after Ronnie realises the truth , Danielle is hit by a car and passes away . 
 Peggy throws Archie out and asks her son Phil Mitchell ( Steve McFadden ) to kill him , but Phil just forces him to leave . The Mitchells also form a new rivalry with Janine Butcher ( Charlie Brooks ) , as she was the one responsible for hitting Danielle with her car and causing her death . 
 Ronnie is the most hurt about this and struggles to cope . She starts another relationship with Jack Branning ( Scott Maslen ) , leading to their engagement . However , upon realising she wants another baby , she leaves Walford for a while , selling her portion of the club to Jack , who in turn gives it to Archie . After returning , Ronnie sleeps with Ryan Malloy ( Neil McDermott ) and Owen Turner ( Lee Ross ) , and becomes pregnant with Owen 's child . 
 Stacey Branning ( Lacey Turner ) , Danielle 's best friend in Walford , is also deeply affected by the incident , which triggers her bipolar disorder . She becomes non @-@ compliant with her medication , has sex with Ryan , and is raped and attacked by Archie at the launderette . She believes both men are planning to kill her and is involuntarily committed to hospital , where she befriends Becca Swanson ( Simone James ) . Upon her return to Walford along with Becca , Stacey restarts a relationship with Bradley Branning ( Charlie Clements ) when he rejects his girlfriend Syd Chambers ( Nina Toussaint @-@ White ) for her . 
 When Archie returns , he attempts to reconcile with Peggy , but comes up with a plan to steal the Mitchells ' business , The Queen Victoria public house , with Janine 's help . However , Janine , along with Ryan , whom she is dating , plans to steal it from Archie at the last minute . Peggy 's daughter Sam Mitchell ( Danniella Westbrook ) , who has been in Brazil on the run from police due to her involvement in the murder of Den Watts ( Leslie Grantham ) , returns to Walford , thinking the charges have been dropped . She is subsequently arrested , and the Mitchells put up £ 250 @,@ 000 bail to have her released . Archie convinces Sam to leave again , paying for her to go . Phil is then forced to take out a loan from Ian Beale ( Adam Woodyatt ) . Ian accepts , on the condition that if the loan is not paid back within a certain time , he becomes owner of The Queen Victoria . Archie and Janine learn of this and try to get Ian to sell the loan to them . When Ian 's wife Jane Beale ( Laurie Brett ) leaves him , Janine gets him drunk and has sex with him , making an audio recording of them together . Archie and Janine blackmail Ian into selling them the loan and Archie tells the Mitchells they are trespassing . Once Archie finds out that Janine plans to fleece him , he proposes to her to keep her from going astray . Ryan is hurt by this setback and ends his relationship with her . Ronnie stands up to Archie and he pushes her into the bar , not knowing she is pregnant , though Roxy Mitchell ( Rita Simons ) then reveals it . Ronnie has a miscarriage and Peggy tells Archie he has killed another of Ronnie 's children , warning him to stay away from her . Peggy eventually hands over the keys and the family of Peggy , Phil , Ronnie , Roxy , Ben Mitchell ( Charlie Jones ) and Roxy 's baby Amy Mitchell leave on 24 December 2009 . They end up being taken in by Jack , who vows revenge on Archie . 
 On Christmas Day , Archie tells Ian the CD of the recording is under Ian 's Christmas tree for Jane , but Ian fails to find it . Archie tells Janine that they should skip Christmas dinner as he has made a surprise treasure hunt for her . Janine eventually finds an envelope containing a one @-@ way ticket to Poland and Archie throws her out onto the street telling her he knows how she and Ryan tried to double @-@ cross him . Archie is visited by Jack who threatens to kill him if he hurts Ronnie again . Archie finds Ian searching his living room for the CD and Archie says it is on his laptop and he can make copies at any time , threatening Ian with a phone call to Jane , before ejecting him from the pub . Sam returns and attempts to confront Archie but he shuts the door on her . Ronnie then arrives and tells him with no emotion that he will not make her care for him and she would not care if he died . Archie throws her out onto the street reminding her that it was the exact spot she pushed Danielle onto the night she died . 
 Archie is visited by Peggy and he pleads with her to come home to him as she is the woman he loves . Peggy says she is not just a sweet and innocent old lady and that he has no idea whom he is messing with . She tells Archie if he does not leave the pub that night he will regret every cruel and evil act he has ever done . He tells her that unless she returns he will have the pub converted to flats . He then becomes emotional as he tells Peggy that he will be waiting for her as she walks out on him . Bradley walks in and punches Archie in the face twice but accidentally punches the bar as well , cutting his hand . He tells Archie to stay away from his girlfriend Stacey because she has said Archie raped her three months previously , and Bradley leaves . As Archie picks up his <unk> from the floor , the bust of Queen Victoria is pushed from the bar and hits him over the head . 
 = = = After the murder = = = 
 Ronnie finds Archie on the floor of The Queen Victoria and he apologises to her before he dies . When the police are notified of the death they arrest Ronnie , but later release her without charge . DCI Jill Marsden ( Sophie Stanton ) investigates the rest of the Mitchell family . Phil is given a false alibi by his friend Shirley Carter ( Linda Henry ) , who finds a blood @-@ stained shirt amongst his belongings . Phil explains that he found Archie dead and lost his balance , falling into the blood , but did not call the police because he panicked . They burn the shirt , and when Marsden visits them again , asking to see the clothes Phil was wearing at Christmas , Shirley produces a freshly laundered one . Shirley 's flatmate Heather Trott ( Cheryl Fergison ) reveals that Phil was not really with Shirley on Christmas Day , prompting Shirley to make an anonymous call stating she saw Janine enter The Queen Victoria on the day of the murder , deflecting suspicion from Phil . Peggy and Phil attempt to pin the murder on Sam , who retaliates by blaming Peggy . Both are questioned by Marsden at the police station , and though Peggy is released without charge , Sam is arrested for breaking her bail . 
 Ian has Archie 's laptop , and though he deletes the audio file of him and Janine from it , it later comes to light , and he and Jane throw the laptop into the canal . Janine attempts to blackmail Ian , and when he rebuffs her , she tells the police about the recording and the laptop , leading to his arrest . Ian admits to stealing the laptop from The Queen Victoria on Christmas Day , but denies murder . The police charge him with murder , but when Janine admits the truth , the charges are dropped . 
 Marsden and her colleague DC Wayne Hughes ( Jamie Treacher ) attend Archie 's funeral , but do not see Stacey spit on Archie 's grave . Jack , a former police officer , tells Hughes he can help out with any " local information " they might need . After the funeral , Bradley proposes to Stacey at the car lot , and she accepts . Jack later learns that Archie raped Stacey , that she is now pregnant with what she believes is Archie 's baby , and that Bradley punched him on Christmas Day . Jack urges Bradley to tell the police what he did , desiring to keep Ronnie out of trouble . Marsden reveals she has a new forensic profile and a DNA screening process will begin . She asks all white males to volunteer for DNA screening , and when Bradley complies , Jack bribes Hughes to make the samples disappear . 
 A ring Roxy inherited from Archie , which went missing at Christmas , is planted in Janine 's flat . Marsden receives an anonymous tip @-@ off and Janine is arrested after the ring is found in her teapot . She is interviewed , but is released due to lack of evidence . She realises that Peggy planted the ring in an attempt to frame her . When Shirley thinks Phil is seeing another woman , she accuses him of only being interested in her for her alibi . He says it is not true , but she drunkenly threatens to withdraw the alibi , and walks to the police station . 
 Becca becomes hurt upon realising that Bradley and Stacey are getting married . While they are away at their own wedding , Becca steals a hairbrush with Archie 's hair from The Queen Victoria , intending to have a DNA test done on Stacey 's baby to prove if it is really Archie 's . However , she has doubts and goes back with Stacey to return the brush , but is caught by Ronnie . Becca coerces Stacey to confess Archie raped her and the baby is his . However , Ronnie tells Stacey that Archie underwent an operation a few years back that left him infertile , meaning that Stacey 's baby isn 't his . Roxy accuses Ronnie of murdering Archie . Ronnie denies it , but tells her she found out about the rape , and that Archie once raped her . Peggy tells the two of them that when Archie was murdered , she found him lying on the floor , took her divorce papers from the bar and left him to die . Phil tells Peggy about his alibi , the shirt and that he found Archie dead on Christmas Day . Shirley then returns and says Phil has got away with it as she has not told the police anything . Meanwhile , Becca anonymously reports to the police that Bradley had a motive for the murder . 
 Jack receives a call from Hughes to say that Bradley is about to be arrested and urges Bradley to leave Walford as quickly as possible . Bradley and Stacey quickly pack their bags at home . Max Branning ( Jake Wood ) says an emotional goodbye to his son and Jack agrees to help them escape . They leave via the back door as Max delays the police at the front , and hide a few streets away . Jack also leaves by the back door but Marsden sees him and he is unable to meet Bradley and Stacey , who are nervously waiting . Bradley says they should go without Jack , but when they go to get a taxi , Bradley realises he has left the passports at home and goes back to get them , leaving Stacey to wait . However , Stacey grows impatient and phones him . The police notice him when his phone rings , and in a bid to escape them , he runs up a fire escape and crawls across the roof of The Queen Victoria with an officer following him . He shouts at Stacey to run , but stumbles and falls backwards from the roof to his death . Max and Stacey are devastated , and he pulls her away from the body . She tells him it is her fault , as Bradley did not kill Archie , she did . The following day , Marsden says the police will no longer be pursuing the investigation . Stacey then goes missing , and on the day of Bradley 's funeral , Jack receives news that a court has found Bradley guilty of Archie 's murder . 
 Max tracks down Stacey to a flat where Stacey explains that she was angry at Archie and was worried about what Bradley would do to him after he found out about the baby . A minute after Bradley confronted Archie , she found Archie on the floor and pushed the bust onto his head , but ran after his fingers twitched , fearing he would call the police . Max eventually tells Stacey that nobody else needs to know that she killed Archie and sends her home . Becca continues to live with Stacey , and tries to exclude Stacey 's mother Jean Slater ( Gillian Wright ) from her life . However , when Jean reveals Becca 's involvement in Bradley 's death , Stacey slaps Becca , which causes her to have a meltdown leading to getting kicked out by Jean as Stacey tells her mother she can trust her again . Later , Stacey figures out that Ryan must be her baby 's father but decides not to tell him so as to not complicate his rekindled relationship with Janine , even when he is with her in the hospital as she gives birth to her daughter Lily . Several months later , at Janine and Ryan 's wedding reception , Stacey confesses her fear about Archie still being alive to Peggy , who tells Stacey that Archie is dead and that Bradley killed him , accidentally causing Stacey to confess the truth to her . Peggy wants to call the police but after a fire at The Queen Victoria , Peggy tries to convince Stacey to admit to arson as the sentence would be a lot less than that for murder . She leaves Walford while letting Stacey take care of Lily who needs her . Stacey also tells Ryan that he is Lily 's father , and although he initially refuses to acknowledge her , he later bonds with her and gets used to the idea of being a father while Janine and Stacey are arrested on a night out . Upset with this , Janine attempts to sabotage his relationship with Stacey , but her actions inadvertently cause them to realise their growing attraction to each other . 
 Max 's daughter Lauren Branning ( Jacqueline Jossa ) becomes angry at Max for never mentioning Bradley , leading to his confessing that he knows Bradley did not kill Archie . Lauren starts to suspect Max as he has become violent towards other people , but he tells her he promised to look after the real killer , who is no longer a danger . When Lauren sees Stacey dancing with Max , she accuses her of trying flirting with Max , but Stacey says they are just friends and he promised he would always look out for her . Lauren realises that Stacey is the killer and tells Max she knows this . She confronts Stacey , who confesses , and Lauren records it on her mobile phone . Lauren later hands the recording to Janine as Stacey and Ryan have begun having an affair . Max wipes the recording so on Christmas Eve , Janine publicly announces in the pub after trying to play the recording that Stacey killed Archie . Outside , Stacey privately tells Ryan that Janine is telling the truth . 
 As Christmas Day runs through , Stacey experiences numerous upsetting thoughts about her role in Archie 's death , and tells Jean about this . Upset , Jean takes Lily away from her , and things are made worse when Janine attempts to frame Stacey by stabbing herself while placing the knife in Stacey 's hands and convincing Jean to call the police . Stacey considers suicide , but Max offers to help her flee the country . On the way , Stacey convinces Jean that Janine has framed her for the stabbing , and breaks off her romance with Ryan when he offers to come with her . Stacey and Max are left to leave Walford with Lily , not before Ronnie and Roxy confront Stacey about the truth . Although Roxy wants her jailed , Ronnie quickly tells Stacey to go , feeling that she has suffered enough . Max drives Stacey to the airport , and tells her that he still loves her , offering to leave the country with her . Stacey tells him that the only man she 's ever loved is Bradley . They share a teary and emotional goodbye with each other as Max watches Stacey leave for her flight . Stacey is last seen holding Lily in her arms while on the plane . 
 In 2014 , Stacey is found living in London using a false name . Her cousin Kat Moon ( Jessie Wallace ) brings her back to Walford . Stacey is wanted by the police for stabbing Janine , though in fact Janine had stabbed herself in order to frame Stacey . She is eventually seen by Ronnie and Roxy . Roxy threatens to call the police but Ronnie convinces her not to . However , after Janine drops the charges , Stacey decides that she needs to clear Bradley 's name , so tells the police she killed Archie . She is subsequently sentenced to five years in prison , but she decides to appeal the sentence , taking her bipolar disorder into account . The appeal is successful and Stacey is released . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Overnight figures showed that Archie 's murder on 25 December 2009 was watched by 45 @.@ 9 % of the viewing audience for that time , an average of 10 @.@ 9 million and a peak of 11 @.@ 9 million . It was the most watched TV show on Christmas Day 2009 in the UK . The following episode where the murder was discovered was also the most watched show of the day , with overnight ratings of 8 @.@ 1 million , representing a 37 @.@ 9 % audience share . The investigation storyline helped EastEnders become the most watched soap opera on British television for the first time in three years , with average viewing figures for January 2010 of 10 @.@ 8 million ( 40 @.@ 4 % audience share ) compared to Coronation Street 's 10 @.@ 4 million ( 38 @.@ 2 % ) . Overnight figures for the live episode indicated that it averaged 14 @.@ 91 million viewers and a 54 @.@ 6 % audience share , peaking at 16 @.@ 58 million with a 59 @.@ 4 % share in the final five minutes of broadcast when Stacey was revealed as the killer . The 10 : 30 pm repeat of the episode on BBC Three drew a further 1 @.@ 42 million viewers , attaining a 7 @.@ 7 % share . EastEnders Live : The Aftermath drew 4 @.@ 3 million viewers and a 15 @.@ 9 % audience share , becoming BBC Three 's highest rated programme ever , as well as the most @-@ watched multichannel programme of the day . The documentary attained a further 1 @.@ 21 million viewers and a 9 @.@ 4 % share upon its repeat at 11 pm . Santer was delighted by the viewing figures , stating : " To get this incredible response from the audience is truly remarkable – these numbers go far beyond what we ever hoped for . I am so proud of our cast and crew for their incredible performance last night . This rating is the icing on our silver anniversary cake . " Jay Hunt , controller of BBC One commented : " [ The ] extraordinary live episode was a fitting celebration of 25 magnificent years for EastEnders . The audience were clearly gripped by one of the greatest soap <unk> ever . " Discussing the ratings for EastEnders Live : The Aftermath , controller of BBC Three Danny Cohen appraised : " It is an amazing testament to the EastEnders team and the brave and brilliant drama they provided . " 
 Archie 's murder was compared to that of Den Watts in EastEnders in 2005 by Polly Hudson of the Daily Mirror , while Nancy Banks @-@ Smith of The Guardian called it a rip @-@ off of Citizen Kane . Andrew Grimes from Manchester Evening News said the Christmas Day episode was " in every sense compelling , and to my utter astonishment , a complete and utter joy " , and John Gibson of Edinburgh Evening News gave the murder discovery episode on 26 December 2009 a negative review , saying " Hard to tell what was most horrific ... the murder , which was bloody , the acting , which was dire , or the script , which was torture . " Tim Teeman of The Times called the revelation of Stacey as Archie 's killer a " genuine surprise " , while Pat Stacey of the Evening Herald felt that revealing Stacey as Archie 's killer was " a slight let @-@ down " and " a little bit predictable " . The storyline was nominated in the Killer Secret category at the 2010 All About Soap Bubble Awards . It also received a nomination in the Best Storyline category at the 2010 British Soap Awards and the Best Soap Storyline category at the 2010 <unk> Awards . Real life police detectives criticised the portrayal of detectives in the show , saying that viewers who see them talking to residents about the case and accepting bribes may believe they operate that way in reality . The BBC insisted that a police consultant was used , adding that " this is heightened fiction and all the things that we show might not always represent real life . " The storyline was referenced by Prime Minister Gordon Brown when referring to allegations of bullying , saying " The only thing I haven 't been accused of is murdering that guy Archie Mitchell in EastEnders . " 
 Bookmakers estimated that over £ 1 million would be spent gambling on the outcome of the storyline . Ladbrokes experienced its busiest ever 24 hours of gambling on a television series ahead of the episode 's transmission , taking £ 100 @,@ 000 in bets on 30 different characters , while William Hill took £ 500 @,@ 000 , surpassing the amount placed on Dallas 's Who shot J. R. ? storyline in 1980 . Spokesman Rupert Adams commented : " The BBC were amazing keeping this quiet . We have broken even which in a market like this is amazing . We have had a roller @-@ coaster but have enjoyed every minute . " 
 = Albert Kesselring = 
 Albert Kesselring ( 30 November 1885 – 16 July 1960 ) was a German Luftwaffe Generalfeldmarschall during World War II . In a military career that spanned both World Wars , Kesselring became one of Nazi Germany 's most skilful commanders , and one of the most highly decorated , being one of 27 soldiers awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves , Swords and Diamonds . Nicknamed " Smiling Albert " by the Allies and " Uncle Albert " by his troops , he was one of the most popular generals of World War II with the rank and file . 
 Kesselring joined the Bavarian Army as an officer cadet in 1904 , and served in the artillery branch . He completed training as a balloon observer in 1912 . During World War I , he served on both the Western and Eastern fronts and was posted to the General Staff , despite not having attended the War Academy . Kesselring remained in the Army after the war but was discharged in 1933 to become head of the Department of Administration at the Reich Commissariat for Aviation , where he was involved in the re @-@ establishment of the aviation industry and the laying of the foundations for the Luftwaffe , serving as its chief of staff from 1936 to 1938 . 
 During World War II he commanded air forces in the invasions of Poland and France , the Battle of Britain and Operation Barbarossa . As Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief South , he was overall German commander in the Mediterranean theatre , which included the operations in North Africa . Kesselring conducted an uncompromising defensive campaign against the Allied forces in Italy until he was injured in an accident in October 1944 . In the final campaign of the war , he commanded German forces on the Western Front . He won the respect of his Allied opponents for his military accomplishments , but his record was marred by massacres committed by troops under his command in Italy . 
 After the war , Kesselring was tried for war crimes and sentenced to death . The sentence was subsequently commuted to life imprisonment . A political and media campaign resulted in his release in 1952 , ostensibly on health grounds . He was one of only three <unk> to publish his memoirs , entitled Soldat bis zum letzten Tag ( A Soldier to the Last Day ) . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Albert Kesselring was born in Marktsteft , Bavaria , on 30 November 1885 , the son of Carl Adolf Kesselring , a schoolmaster and town councillor , and his wife Rosina , who was born a Kesselring , being Carl 's second cousin . Albert 's early years were spent in Marktsteft , where relatives had operated a brewery since 1688 . 
 <unk> from the Christian <unk> Secondary School in Bayreuth in 1904 , Kesselring joined the German Army as an Fahnenjunker ( officer cadet ) in the 2nd Bavarian Foot Artillery Regiment . The regiment was based at Metz and was responsible for maintaining its forts . He remained with the regiment until 1915 , except for periods at the Military Academy from 1905 to 1906 , at the conclusion of which he received his commission as a Leutnant ( lieutenant ) , and at the School of Artillery and Engineering in Munich from 1909 to 1910 . 
 Kesselring married Luise Anna Pauline ( Liny ) <unk> , the daughter of an apothecary from Bayreuth , in 1910 . The couple honeymooned in Italy . Their marriage was childless , but in 1913 they adopted Rainer , the son of Albert 's second cousin Kurt Kesselring . In 1912 , Kesselring completed training as a balloon observer in a dirigible section – an early sign of an interest in aviation . Kesselring 's superiors considered posting him to the School of Artillery and Engineering as an instructor because of his expertise in " the interplay between tactics and technology " . 
 = = World War I = = 
 During World War I , Kesselring served with his regiment in Lorraine until the end of 1914 , when he was transferred to the 1st Bavarian Foot Artillery , which formed part of the Sixth Army . On 19 May 1916 , he was promoted to Hauptmann ( captain ) . In 1916 he was transferred again , to the 3rd Bavarian Foot Artillery . He distinguished himself in the Battle of Arras , using his tactical acumen to halt a British advance . For his services on the Western Front , he was decorated with the Iron Cross 2nd Class and 1st Class . 
 In 1917 , he was posted to the General Staff , despite having not attended the Bavarian War Academy . He served on the Eastern Front on the staff of the 1st Bavarian Landwehr Division . In January 1918 , he returned to the Western Front as a staff officer with the II and III Bavarian Corps . 
 = = Between the wars = = 
 At the conclusion of the war , Kesselring was involved in the demobilisation ( as mandated by the Treaty of Versailles ) of III Bavarian Corps in the Nuremberg area . A dispute with the leader of the local Freikorps led to the issuance of an arrest warrant for his alleged involvement in a putsch against the command of III Bavarian Corps and Kesselring was thrown into prison . He was soon released but his superior , Major Hans Seyler , censured him for having " failed to display the requisite discretion " . 
 From 1919 to 1922 , Kesselring served as a battery commander with the 24th Artillery Regiment . He joined the Reichswehr on 1 October 1922 and was posted to the Military Training Department at the Reichswehr Ministry in Berlin . He remained at this post until 1929 , when he returned to Bavaria as commander of Wehrkreis VII in Munich . In his time with the Reichswehr Ministry , Kesselring was involved in the organisation of the army , trimming staff overheads to produce the best possible army with the limited resources available . He helped reorganise the Ordnance Department , laying the groundwork for the research and development efforts that would produce new weapons . He was involved in secret military manoeuvres held in the Soviet Union in 1924 and in the so @-@ called Great Plan for a 102 @-@ division army , which was prepared in 1923 and 1924 . After another brief stint at the Reichswehr Ministry , Kesselring was promoted to Oberstleutnant ( lieutenant colonel ) in 1930 and spent two years in Dresden with the 4th Artillery Regiment . 
 Against his wishes , Kesselring was discharged from the army on 1 October 1933 and appointed head of the Department of Administration at the Reich Commissariat for Aviation ( Reichskommissariat für die <unk> ) , the forerunner of the Reich Air Ministry ( Reichsluftfahrtministerium ) , with the rank of Oberst ( colonel ) . Since the Treaty of Versailles forbade Germany from establishing an air force , this was nominally a civilian agency . The Luftwaffe would formally be established in 1935 . As chief of administration , he had to assemble his new staff from scratch . He was involved in the re @-@ establishment of the aviation industry and the construction of secret factories , forging alliances with industrialists and aviation engineers . He was promoted to Generalmajor ( major general ) in 1934 and Generalleutnant ( lieutenant general ) in 1936 . Like other generals of Nazi Germany , he received personal payments from Adolf Hitler ; in Kesselring 's case , RM 6 @,@ 000 , a considerable sum at the time . 
 At the age of 48 , he learned to fly . Kesselring believed that first @-@ hand knowledge of all aspects of aviation was crucial to being able to command airmen , although he was well aware that latecomers like himself did not impress the old pioneers or the young aviators . He qualified in various single and multi @-@ engined aircraft and continued flying three or four days per week until March 1945 . At times , his flight path took him over the concentration camps at Oranienburg , Dachau , and Buchenwald . 
 Following the death of Generalleutnant Walther Wever in an air crash , Kesselring became Chief of Staff of the Luftwaffe on 3 June 1936 . In that post , Kesselring oversaw the expansion of the Luftwaffe , the acquisition of new aircraft types such as the Messerschmitt Bf 109 and Junkers Ju 87 , and the development of paratroops . 
 Like many ex @-@ Army officers , he tended to see air power in the tactical role , providing support to land operations . In the historiography of the Luftwaffe Kesselring and Hans @-@ Jürgen <unk> are usually blamed for neglecting strategic bombing while over @-@ focusing on close air support for the army . However the two most prominent enthusiasts for the focus on ground @-@ support operations ( direct or indirect ) were actually Hugo Sperrle and Hans Jeschonnek . The two men were long @-@ time professional airmen involved in German air services since their early careers . The Luftwaffe was not pressured into ground support operations because of pressure from the army , or because it was led by ex @-@ army personnel like Kesselring . Interdiction and close air support were operations that suited the Luftwaffe 's pre @-@ existing approach to warfare ; a culture of joint inter @-@ service operations , rather than independent strategic air campaigns . Moreover , many in the Luftwaffe command believed medium bombers to be sufficient in power for use in strategic bombing operations against Germany 's most likely enemies ; Britain and France . 
 Kesselring 's main operational task during this time was the support of the Condor Legion in the Spanish Civil War . However , his tenure was marred by personal and professional conflicts with his superior , General der Flieger Erhard Milch , and Kesselring asked to be relieved . The head of the Luftwaffe , Hermann Göring , acquiesced and Kesselring became the commander of Air District III in Dresden . On 1 October 1938 , he was promoted to General der Flieger ( air general ) and became commander of Luftflotte 1 , based in Berlin . 
 = = World War II = = 
 = = = Poland = = = 
 In the Polish campaign that began World War II , Kesselring 's Luftflotte 1 operated in support of Army Group North , commanded by Generaloberst Fedor von Bock . Although not under von Bock 's command , Kesselring worked closely with Bock and considered himself under Bock 's orders in all matters pertaining to the ground war . Kesselring strove to provide the best possible close air support to the ground forces and used the flexibility of air power to concentrate all available air strength at critical points , such as during the Battle of the Bzura . He attempted to cut the Polish communications by making a series of air attacks against Warsaw , but found that even 1 @,@ 000 kg ( 2 @,@ 200 lb ) bombs could not guarantee that bridges would be destroyed . 
 Kesselring was himself shot down over Poland by the Polish Air Force . In all , he would be shot down five times during World War II . For his part in the Polish campaign , Kesselring was personally awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross by Adolf Hitler . 
 = = = Western Europe = = = 
 Kesselring 's Luftflotte 1 was not involved in the preparations for the campaigns in the west . Instead it remained in the east on garrison duty , establishing new airbases and an Air Raid Precautions network in occupied Poland . However , after the Mechelen Incident , in which an aircraft made a forced landing in Belgium with copies of the German invasion plan , Göring relieved the commander of Luftflotte 2 , General der Flieger Hellmuth Felmy , of his command , and appointed Kesselring in his place . Kesselring flew to his new headquarters at Münster the very next day , 13 January 1940 . As Felmy 's chief of staff , Generalmajor Josef Kammhuber , had also been relieved , Kesselring brought his own chief of staff , Generalmajor Wilhelm Speidel , with him . 
 Arriving in the west , Kesselring found Luftflotte 2 operating in support of von Bock 's Army Group B. He inherited from Felmy a complex air plan requiring on @-@ the @-@ minute timing for several hours , incorporating an airborne operation around Rotterdam and The Hague to seize airfields and bridges in the " fortress Holland " area . The paratroopers were General der Flieger Kurt Student 's airborne forces that depended on a quick link up with the mechanised forces . To facilitate this , Kesselring promised von Bock the fullest possible close air support . Air and ground operations , however , were to commence simultaneously , so there would be no time to suppress the defending Royal Netherlands Air Force . 
 The Battle of the Netherlands commenced on 10 May 1940 . While initial air operations went well , and the German fighters and bombers soon gained the upper hand against the small Dutch air force , the paratroopers ran into fierce opposition in the Battle for The Hague and the Battle of Rotterdam . On 14 May 1940 , responding to a call for assistance from Student , Kesselring ordered the bombing of Rotterdam city centre . Fires raged out of control , destroying much of the city . 
 After the surrender of the Netherlands on 14 May 1940 , Luftflotte 2 attempted to move forward to new airfields in Belgium while still providing support for the fast moving ground troops . The Battle of France was going well , with General der Panzertruppe Heinz Guderian forcing a crossing of the River Meuse at Sedan on 13 May 1940 . To support the breakthrough , Kesselring transferred Generalleutnant Wolfram von Richthofen 's VIII . Fliegerkorps to Luftflotte 3 . By 24 May , the Allied forces had been cut in two , and the German Army was only 15 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) from Dunkirk , the last channel port remaining in Allied hands . However , that day Generaloberst Gerd von Rundstedt ordered a halt . In his memoirs , Kesselring described that decision as a " fatal error " . It left the burden of preventing the Allied evacuation of Dunkirk to the air force , hampered by poor flying weather and staunch opposition from the Royal Air Force . For his role in the campaign in the west , Kesselring was promoted to Generalfeldmarschall ( field marshal ) during the 1940 Field Marshal Ceremony . 
 Following the campaign in France , Kesselring 's Luftflotte 2 was committed to the Battle of Britain . Luftflotte 2 was initially responsible for the bombing of southeastern England and the London area but as the battle progressed , command responsibility shifted , with Generalfeldmarschall Hugo Sperrle 's Luftflotte 3 taking more responsibility for the night @-@ time Blitz attacks while Luftflotte 2 conducted the main daylight operations . Kesselring was involved in the planning of numerous raids , including the Coventry Blitz of November 1940 . Kesselring 's fleet failed to achieve a decisive victory . Instead , the Luftwaffe employed the inherent flexibility of air power to switch targets . 
 = = = Invasion of the Soviet Union = = = 
 Although earmarked for operations against the Soviet Union , Luftflotte 2 remained in the west until May 1941 . This was partly as a deception measure , and partly because new airbases in Poland could not be completed by 1 June 1941 target date , although they were made ready in time for the actual commencement of Operation Barbarossa on 22 June 1941 . Kesselring established his new headquarters at Bielany , a suburb of Warsaw . 
 Luftflotte 2 operated in support of Army Group Centre , commanded by Fedor von Bock , continuing the close working relationship between the two . Kesselring 's mission was to gain air superiority , and if possible air supremacy , as soon as possible while still supporting ground operations . For this he had a fleet of over 1 @,@ 000 aircraft , about a third of the Luftwaffe 's total strength . 
 The German attack caught large numbers of Soviet Air Force aircraft on the ground . Faulty tactics – sending unescorted bombers against the Germans at regular intervals in tactically unsound formations – accounted for many more . Kesselring reported that in the first week of operations Luftflotte 2 had accounted for 2 @,@ 500 Soviet aircraft in the air and on the ground . Even Göring found these figures hard to believe and ordered them to be re @-@ checked . As the ground troops advanced , the figures could be directly confirmed and were found to be too low . Within days , Kesselring was able to fly solo over the front in his Focke @-@ Wulf Fw 189 . 
 With air supremacy attained , Luftflotte 2 turned to support of ground operations , particularly guarding the flanks of the armoured spearheads , without which the rapid advance was not possible . When enemy counterattacks threatened , Kesselring threw the full weight of his force against them . Now that the Army was convinced of the value of air support , units were all too inclined to call for it . Kesselring now had to convince the Army that air support should be concentrated at critical points . He strove to improve army – air cooperation with new tactics and the appointment of Colonel Martin Fiebig as a special close air support commander . By 26 July , Kesselring reported the destruction of 165 tanks , 2 @,@ 136 vehicles and 194 artillery pieces . 
 In late 1941 , Luftflotte 2 supported the final German offensive against Moscow , codenamed Operation Typhoon . Raids on Moscow proved hazardous , as Moscow had good all @-@ weather airfields and opposition from both fighters and anti @-@ aircraft guns was similar to that encountered over Britain . The bad weather that hampered ground operations from October on impeded air operations even more . Nonetheless , Luftflotte 2 continued to fly critical reconnaissance , interdiction , close air support and air supply missions . 
 = = = Mediterranean and North Africa = = = 
 In November 1941 , Kesselring was appointed Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief South and was transferred to Italy along with his Luftflotte 2 staff , which for the time being also functioned as his Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief South staff . Only in January 1943 did he form his headquarters into a true theatre staff and create a separate staff to control Luftflotte 2 . As a theatre commander , he was answerable directly to the Oberkommando der Wehrmacht ( OKW ) and commanded ground , naval and air forces , but this was of little importance at first as most German units were under Italian operational control . 
 Kesselring strove to organise and protect supply convoys in order to get the German @-@ Italian Panzer Army the resources it needed . He succeeded in establishing local air superiority and neutralising Malta , which provided a base from which British aircraft and submarines could interdict Axis convoys headed for North Africa . Without the vital supplies they carried , particularly fuel , the Axis forces in North Africa could not conduct operations . Through various expedients , Kesselring managed to deliver an increased flow of supplies to Generaloberst Erwin Rommel 's Afrika Korps in Libya . With his forces thus strengthened , Rommel prepared an attack on the British positions around Gazala , while Kesselring planned Operation Herkules , an airborne and seaborne attack on Malta with the 185 Airborne Division Folgore and Ramcke Parachute Brigade . Kesselring hoped to thereby secure the Axis line of communication with North Africa . 
 For the Battle of Gazala , Rommel divided his command in two , taking personal command of the mobile units of the Deutsches Afrika Korps and Italian XX Motorized Corps , which he led around the southern flank of Lieutenant @-@ General Neil Ritchie 's British Eighth Army . Rommel left the infantry of the Italian X and XXI Corps under General der Panzertruppe Ludwig Crüwell to hold the rest of the Eighth Army in place . This command arrangement went awry on 29 May 1942 when Crüwell was taken prisoner . Lacking an available commander of sufficient seniority , Kesselring assumed personal command of Gruppe Crüwell . Flying his Fieseler Fi 156 Storch to a meeting , Kesselring was fired upon by a British force astride Rommel 's line of communications . Kesselring called in an air strike by every available Stuka and Jabo . His attack was successful ; the British force suffered heavy losses and was forced to pull back . 
 Kesselring and Rommel had a disagreement over the latter 's conduct in the Battle of Bir Hakeim . Rommel 's initial infantry assaults had failed to capture this vital position , the southern pivot of the British Gazala Line , which was held by the 1st Free French brigade , commanded by General Marie Pierre Koenig . Rommel had called for air support but had failed to break the position , which Kesselring attributed to faulty coordination between the ground and air attacks . Bir Hakeim was evacuated on 10 June 1942 . Kesselring was more impressed with the results of Rommel 's successful assault on Tobruk on 21 June , for which Kesselring brought in additional aircraft from Greece and Crete . For his part in the campaign , Kesselring was awarded the Knight 's Cross with oak leaves and swords . 
 In the wake of the victory at Tobruk , Rommel persuaded Hitler to authorise an attack on Egypt instead of Malta , over Kesselring 's objections . The parachute troops assembled for Operation Herkules were sent to Rommel . Things went well at first , with Rommel winning the Battle of Mersa Matruh , but just as Kesselring had warned , the logistical difficulties mounted and the result was the disastrous First Battle of El Alamein , Battle of Alam el Halfa and Second Battle of El Alamein . Kesselring considered Rommel to be a great general leading fast @-@ moving troops at the corps level of command , but felt that he was too moody and changeable for higher command . For Kesselring , Rommel 's nervous breakdown and hospitalisation for depression at the end of the African Campaign only confirmed this . 
 Kesselring was briefly considered as a possible successor to Generalfeldmarschall Wilhelm Keitel as Chief of Staff of the OKW in September 1942 , with General der Panzertruppe Friedrich Paulus replacing Generaloberst Alfred Jodl as Chief of the Operations Staff at OKW . The consideration demonstrated the high regard in which Kesselring was held by Hitler . Nevertheless , Hitler decided that neither Kesselring nor Paulus could be spared from their current posts . In October 1942 , Kesselring was given direct command of all German armed forces in the theatre except Rommel 's German @-@ Italian Panzer Army in North Africa , including General der <unk> <unk> von Rintelen , the German liaison officer at Commando Supremo , who spoke fluent Italian . Kesselring 's command also included the troops in Greece and the Balkans until the end of the year , when Hitler created an army group headquarters under Generalfeldmarschall Wilhelm List , naming him List Oberbefehlshaber <unk> . 
 = = = Tunisia = = = 
 Operation Torch , the Allied invasion of French North Africa , precipitated a crisis in Kesselring 's command . He ordered Walther Nehring , the former commander of the Afrika Korps who was returning to action after recovering from wounds received at the Battle of Alam el Halfa , to proceed to Tunisia to take command of a new corps ( XC Corps ) . Kesselring ordered Nehring to establish a bridgehead in Tunisia and then to press west as far as possible so as to gain freedom to manoeuvre . By December , the Allied commander , General Dwight D. Eisenhower , was forced to concede that Kesselring had won the race ; the final phase of Torch had failed and the Axis could only be ejected from Tunisia after a prolonged struggle . 
 With the initiative back with the Germans and Italians , Kesselring hoped to launch an offensive that would drive the Allies out of North Africa . At the Battle of the Kasserine Pass his forces gave the Allies a beating , but ; in the end strong Allied resistance and a string of Axis errors stopped the advance . Kesselring now concentrated on shoring up his forces by moving the required tonnages of supplies from Sicily but his efforts were frustrated by Allied aircraft and submarines . An Allied offensive in April finally broke through , leading to a collapse of the Axis position in Tunisia . Some 275 @,@ 000 German and Italian prisoners were taken . In return , Kesselring had , however , held up the Allies in Tunisia for six months , forcing a postponement of the Allied invasion of Northern France from the middle of 1943 to the middle of 1944 . 
 = = = Italian Campaign = = = 
 = = = = Sicily = = = = 
 Kesselring expected that the Allies would next invade Sicily , as a landing could be made there under fighter cover from Tunisia and Malta . He reinforced the six coastal and four mobile Italian divisions there with two mobile German divisions , the 15th Panzergrenadier Division and the Hermann Göring Panzer Division , both rebuilt after being destroyed in Tunisia . Kesselring was well aware that while this force was large enough to stop the Allies from simply marching in , it could not withstand a large scale invasion . He therefore pinned his hopes on repelling the Allied invasion of Sicily on an immediate counterattack , which he ordered Colonel Paul <unk> of the Hermann Göring Panzer Division to carry out the moment the objective of the Allied invasion fleet was known , with or without orders from the island commander , Generale d <unk> Alfredo <unk> . 
 Kesselring hoped that the Allied invasion fleet would provide good targets for U @-@ boats , but they had few successes . U @-@ 953 sank two American LSTs and with U @-@ 375 sank three vessels from a British convoy on 4 – 5 July , while U @-@ 371 sank a Liberty ship and a tanker on 10 July . Pressure from the Allied air forces forced Luftflotte 2 , commanded since June by von Richthofen , to withdraw most of its aircraft to the mainland . 
 The Allied invasion of Sicily on 10 July 1943 was stubbornly opposed . A Stuka attacked and sank the USS Maddox ; a Bf 109 destroyed an LST ; and a Liberty ship filled with ammunition was bombed by Ju 88s and caught fire , later exploding without loss of life . Unaware that <unk> had already ordered a major counterattack on 11 July , Kesselring bypassed the chain of command to order the Hermann Göring Panzer Division to attack that day in the hope that a vigorous attack could succeed before the Americans could bring the bulk of their artillery and armoured support ashore . Although his troops gave the Americans " quite a battering " , they failed to capture the Allied position . 
 Kesselring flew to Sicily himself on 12 July to survey the situation and decided that no more than a delaying action was possible and that the island would eventually have to be evacuated . Nonetheless , he intended to fight on and he reinforced Sicily with the 29th Panzergrenadier Division on 15 July . Kesselring returned to Sicily by flying boat on 16 July to give the senior German commander , General der Panzertruppe Hans @-@ Valentin Hube , his instructions . Unable to provide much more in the way of air support , Kesselring gave Hube command of the heavy flak units on the island , although this was contrary to Luftwaffe doctrine . In all , Kesselring managed to delay the Allies in Sicily for another month and the Allied conquest of the Sicily was not complete until 17 August . 
 Kesselring 's evacuation of Sicily , which began a week earlier on 10 August , was perhaps the most brilliant action of the campaign . In spite of the Allies ' superiority on land , at sea , and in the air , Kesselring was able to evacuate not only 40 @,@ 000 men , but also 96 @,@ 605 vehicles , 94 guns , 47 tanks , 1 @,@ 100 tons of ammunition , 970 tons of fuel , and 15 @,@ 000 tons of stores . He was able to achieve near @-@ perfect coordination among the three services under his command while his opponent , Eisenhower , could not . 
 = = = = Allied invasion of Italy = = = = 
 With the fall of Sicily , OKW feared that Italy would withdraw from the war , but Kesselring remained confident that the Italians would continue to fight . OKW regarded Kesselring and von Rintelen as too pro @-@ Italian and began to bypass him , sending Rommel to northern Italy , and Student to Rome , where his I Parachute Corps was under OKW orders to occupy the capital in case of Italian defection . Benito Mussolini was removed from power on 25 July 1943 and Rommel and OKW began to plan for the occupation of Italy and the disarmament of the Italian Army . Kesselring remained uninformed of these plans for the time being . 
 On the advice of Rommel and Jodl , Hitler decided that the Italian Peninsula could not be held without the assistance of the Italian Army . Kesselring was ordered to withdraw from southern Italy and consolidate his Army Group C with Rommel 's Army Group B in Northern Italy , where Rommel would assume overall command . Kesselring was slated to be posted to Norway . Kesselring was appalled at the prospect of abandoning Italy . It would expose southern Germany to bombers operating from Italy ; risk the Allies breaking into the Po Valley ; and was completely unnecessary , as he was certain that Rome could be held until the summer of 1944 . This assessment was based on his belief that the Allies would not conduct operations outside the range of their air cover , which could only reach as far as Salerno . Kesselring submitted his resignation on 14 August 1943 . 
 SS Obergruppenführer Karl Wolff , the highest SS and police Führer in Italy , intervened on Kesselring 's behalf with Hitler . Wolff painted Rommel as " politically unreliable " and argued that Kesselring 's presence in southern Italy was vital to prevent an early Italian defection . On Wolff 's advice , Hitler refused to accept Kesselring 's resignation . 
 Italy withdrew from the war on 8 September . Kesselring immediately moved to secure Rome , where he expected an Allied airborne and seaborne invasion . He ordered the 3rd Panzergrenadier Division and 2nd Parachute Division to close on the city , while a detachment made an unsuccessful attempt to seize the Italian Army staff at <unk> in a coup de main . Kesselring 's two divisions were faced by five Italian divisions , two of them armoured , but he managed to overcome the opposition , disperse the Italian forces and secure the city in two days . 
 All over Italy , the Germans swiftly disarmed Italian units . Rommel deported Italian soldiers , except for those willing to serve in German units , to Germany for forced labour , whereas Italian units in Kesselring 's area were initially disbanded and their men permitted to go home . One Italian commander , General Gonzaga , refused German demands that his 222nd Coastal Division disarm , and was promptly shot . A significant part of the 184 Airborne Division Nembo went over to the German side , eventually becoming the basis of the 4th Parachute Division . On the Greek island of Kefalonia – outside Kesselring 's command – some 5 @,@ 000 Italian troops of the 33 Mountain Infantry Division <unk> were massacred . Mussolini was rescued by the Germans in Operation Oak ( Unternehmen <unk> ) , a raid planned by Kurt Student and carried out by Obersturmbannführer Otto Skorzeny on 12 September . The details of the operation were deliberately , though unsuccessfully , kept from Kesselring . " Kesselring is too honest for those born traitors down there " was Hitler 's assessment . 
 Italy now effectively became an occupied country , as the Germans poured in troops . Italy 's decision to switch sides created contempt for the Italians among both the Allies and Germans , which was to have far @-@ reaching consequences . 
 = = = = Salerno = = = = 
 Although his command was already " written off " , Kesselring intended to fight . At the Battle of Salerno in September 1943 , he launched a full @-@ scale counterattack against the U.S. Fifth Army landings there with Generaloberst Heinrich von Vietinghoff 's Tenth Army . The counterattack inflicted heavy casualties on the Allied forces , forced them back in several areas , and , for a time , made Allied commanders contemplate evacuation . The short distance from German airfields allowed Luftflotte 2 to put 120 aircraft over the Salerno area on 11 September 1943 . Using Fritz X anti @-@ ship missiles , hits were scored on the battleship HMS Warspite and cruisers HMS Uganda and USS Savannah , while a Liberty ship was sunk on 14 September and another damaged the next day . The offensive ultimately failed to throw the Allies back into the sea because of the intervention of Allied naval gunfire which decimated the advancing German units , stubborn Allied resistance and the advance of the British Eighth Army . On 17 September 1943 , Kesselring gave Vietinghoff permission to break off the attack and withdraw . 
 Kesselring had been defeated but gained precious time . Already , in defiance of his orders , he was preparing a series of successive fallback positions on the Volturno Line , the Barbara Line and the Bernhardt Line . Only in November 1943 , after a month of hard fighting , did the Allies reach Kesselring 's main position , the Gustav Line . According to his memoirs , Kesselring felt that much more could have been accomplished if he had access to the troops held " uselessly " under Rommel 's command . 
 In November 1943 , Kesselring met with Hitler . Kesselring gave an optimistic assessment of the situation in Italy and gave reassurances that he could hold the Allies south of Rome on the Winter Line . Kesselring further promised that he could prevent the Allies reaching the Northern Apennines for at least six months . As a result , on 6 November 1943 , Hitler ordered Rommel and his Army Group B headquarters to move to France to take charge of the Atlantic Wall and prepare for the Allied attack that was expected there in the spring of 1944 . On 21 November 1943 , Kesselring resumed command of all German forces in Italy , combining Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief South , a joint command , with that of Army Group C , a ground command . " I had always blamed Kesselring " , Hitler later explained , " for looking at things too optimistically ... events have proved Rommel wrong , and I have been justified in my decision to leave Field Marshal Kesselring there , whom I have seen as an incredible political idealist , but also as a military optimist , and it is my opinion that military leadership without optimism is not possible . " 
 The Luftwaffe scored a notable success on the night of 2 December 1943 when 105 Ju 88 bombers struck the port of Bari . <unk> using chaff to confuse the Allied radar operators , they found the port packed with brightly lit Allied shipping . The result was the most destructive air raid on Allied shipping since the attack on Pearl Harbor in December 1941 . Hits were scored on two ammunition ships and a tanker . Burning oil and exploding ammunition spread over the harbour . Some 16 ships were sunk and eight damaged , and the port was put out of action for three weeks . Moreover , one of the ships sunk , SS John Harvey , had been carrying mustard gas , which enveloped the port in a cloud of poisonous vapours . 
 = = = = Cassino and Anzio = = = = 
 The first Allied attempt to break through the Gustav Line in the Battle of Monte Cassino in January 1944 met with early success , with the British X Corps breaking through the line held by the 94th Infantry Division and imperilling the entire Tenth Army front . At the same time , Kesselring was receiving warnings of an imminent Allied amphibious attack at Anzio . Kesselring rushed his reserves , the 29th and 90th Panzergrenadier Divisions , to the Cassino front . They were able to stabilise the German position there but left Rome poorly guarded . 
 Kesselring felt that he had been out @-@ <unk> when the Allies landed at Anzio . Although taken by surprise , Kesselring moved rapidly to regain control of the situation , summoning Generaloberst Eberhard von Mackensen 's Fourteenth Army headquarters from northern Italy , the 29th and 90th Panzergrenadier Divisions from the Cassino front , and the 26th Panzer Division from Tenth Army . OKW chipped in some divisions from other theatres . By February , Kesselring was able to take the offensive at Anzio but his forces were unable to crush the Allied beachhead , for which Kesselring blamed himself , OKW and von Mackensen for avoidable errors . 
 Meanwhile , costly fighting at Monte Cassino in February 1944 , brought the Allies close to a breakthrough into the Liri Valley . To hold the bastion of Monte Cassino , Kesselring brought in the 1st Parachute Division , an " exceptionally well trained and conditioned " formation , on 26 February . Despite heavy casualties and the expenditure of enormous quantities of ammunition , an Allied offensive in March 1944 failed to break the Gustav Line position . 
 On 11 May 1944 General Sir Harold Alexander , commanding the Allied Armies in Italy , launched Operation Diadem , which finally broke through the Gustav Line and forced the Tenth Army to withdraw . In the process , a gap opened up between the Tenth and Fourteenth Armies , threatening both with encirclement . For this failure , Kesselring relieved von Mackensen of his command , replacing him with General der Panzertruppe Joachim Lemelsen . Fortunately for the Germans , Lieutenant General Mark W. Clark , commander of the U.S. Fifth Army , obsessed with the capture of Rome , failed to take advantage of the situation and the Tenth Army was able to withdraw to the next line of defence , the Trasimene Line , where it was able to link up with the Fourteenth Army and then conduct a fighting withdrawal . 
 For his part in the campaign , Kesselring was awarded the Knight 's Cross with oak leaves , swords and diamonds by Hitler at the Wolfsschanze near Rastenburg , East Prussia on 19 July 1944 . The next day , Hitler was the target of the 20 July plot . Informed of this event that evening by Göring , Kesselring , like many other senior commanders , sent a telegram to Hitler reaffirming his loyalty . 
 Throughout July and August 1944 , Kesselring fought a stubborn delaying action , gradually retreating to the formidable Gothic Line north of Florence . There , he was finally able to halt the Allied advance . Casualties of the Gothic Line battles in September and October 1944 included Kesselring himself . On 25 October 1944 , his car collided with an artillery piece coming out of a side road . Kesselring suffered serious head and facial injuries and did not return to his command until January 1945 . 
 = = = = Actions impacting population and cultural objects = = = = 
 Kesselring , during the campaign , attempted to avoid the physical destruction of many artistically important Italian cities , including Rome , Florence , Siena and Orvieto . In some cases , historic bridges – such as the Ponte Vecchio ( literally " Old Bridge " ) – were booby trapped rather than blown up . However , other historic Florentine bridges were destroyed on his orders and , in addition to booby @-@ trapping the old bridge , he ordered the demolition of the ancient historical central borough at its two ends , in order to delay the Allied advance across the River Arno . Kesselring supported the Italian declaration of Rome , Florence and Chieti as open cities . In the case of Rome , this was in spite of there being considerable tactical advantages to be had from defending the Tiber bridges . These declarations were never agreed to by the Allies as the cities were not demilitarised and remained centres of government and industry . Despite the repeated declarations of " open city " , Rome was bombed more than fifty times by the Allies , whose air forces hit Florence as well . In practice , the open city status was rendered meaningless . 
 Kesselring tried to preserve the monastery of Monte Cassino by avoiding its military occupation even though it offered a superb observing point over the battlefield . Ultimately this was unsuccessful , as the Allies believed the monastery would be used to direct the German artillery against their lines . On the morning of 15 February 1944 , 142 B @-@ 17 Flying Fortress , 47 B @-@ 25 Mitchell and 40 B @-@ 26 Marauder medium bombers deliberately dropped 1 @,@ 150 tons of high explosives and incendiary bombs on the abbey , reducing the historic monastery to a smoking mass of rubble . Kesselring was aware that some artworks taken from Monte Cassino for safekeeping wound up in the possession of Hermann Göring . Kesselring had some German soldiers shot for looting . German authorities avoided giving the Italian authorities control over artworks because they feared that " entire collections would be sold to Switzerland " . A 1945 Allied investigation reported that Italian cultural treasures had suffered relatively little war damage . Kesselring received regular updates on efforts to preserve cultural treasures and his personal interest in the matter contributed to the high proportion of art treasures that were saved . 
 = = = = War crimes = = = = 
 On 22 – 23 March 1944 , a 15 @-@ man American Office of Strategic Services ( OSS ) Operational Group landed in inflatable boats from US Navy PT boats on the Ligurian coast as part of Operation Ginny II , a mission to blow up the entrances of two vital railway tunnels . Their boats were discovered and they were captured by a smaller group of Italian and German soldiers . On 26 March , they were executed under Hitler 's " Commando Order " , issued after German soldiers had been shackled during the Dieppe Raid . 
 In Rome on 23 March 1944 , 33 policemen of the SS Police Regiment <unk> from the German @-@ speaking population of the Italian province of South Tyrol and three Italian civilians were killed by a bomb blast and the subsequent shooting . In response , Hitler approved the recommendation of von Mackensen , who was responsible for the sector including Rome , that ten Italians should be shot for each policeman killed . The task fell to SS Obersturmbannführer Herbert Kappler who , finding there were not enough condemned prisoners available , made up the numbers using Jewish prisoners and even civilians taken from the streets . The result was the Ardeatine massacre . 
 The fall of Rome on 4 June 1944 placed Kesselring in a dangerous situation as his forces attempted to withdraw from Rome to the Gothic Line . That the Germans were especially vulnerable to Italian partisans was not lost on the British General Harold Alexander , who appealed in a radio broadcast for Italians to kill Germans " wherever you encounter them " . Kesselring responded by authorising the " massive employment of artillery , grenade and mine throwers , armoured cars , flamethrowers and other technical combat equipment " against the partisans . He also issued an order promising indemnity to soldiers who " exceed our normal restraint " . Subsequently , massacres were carried out by the Hermann Göring Panzer Division at <unk> in April , Civitella in Val di Chiana in June and <unk> in July 1944 , by the 26th Panzer Division at <unk> di Fucecchio on 23 August 1944 , and by the 16th SS Panzergrenadier Division Reichsführer @-@ SS at Sant 'Anna di Stazzema in August 1944 and Marzabotto in September and October 1944 . 
 In August 1944 Kesselring was informed by Rudolf Rahn , the German ambassador to the RSI , that Mussolini had filed protests about the killing of Italian citizens . In response , Kesselring issued another edict to his troops on 21 August , deploring incidents that had " damaged the German Wehrmacht 's reputation and discipline and which no longer have anything to do with reprisal operations " and launched investigations into specific cases that Mussolini cited . Between 21 July and 25 September 1944 , 624 Germans were killed , 993 wounded and 872 missing in partisan operations , while some 9 @,@ 520 partisans were killed . 
 Kesselring used the Jews of Rome as slave labour on the construction of fortifications – as he had earlier done with those of Tunis . When ordered to deport the Roman Jews , Kesselring resisted . He announced that no resources were available to carry out such an order . Hitler then transferred responsibility to the SS . About 2 @,@ 000 Roman Jews were ultimately deported between October 1943 and June 1944 , half of them on 16 October 1943 . During the German occupation of Italy , the Germans were believed to have killed some 46 @,@ 000 Italian civilians , including 7 @,@ 000 Jews . 
 = = = Central Europe = = = 
 After he recovered from the car accident , Kesselring was summoned by Hitler to relieve Generalfeldmarschall Gerd von Rundstedt as OB West on 10 March 1945 , following the disastrous loss of the still @-@ intact Ludendorff Bridge over the Rhine during the Battle of Remagen . On arrival , he told his new staff , " Well , gentlemen , I am the new V @-@ 3 " , referring to the <unk> ( " vengeance " weapons ) . Given the desperate situation of the Western Front , this was another sign of Kesselring 's proverbial optimism . Kesselring still described as " lucid " Hitler 's analysis of the situation , according to which the Germans were about to inflict a historical defeat upon the Soviets , after which the victorious German armies would be brought west to crush the Allies and sweep them from the continent . Therefore , Kesselring was determined to " hang on " in the west until the " decision in the East " came . 
 Kesselring endorsed Hitler 's order that deserters should be hanged from the nearest tree . When a staff officer sought to make him aware of the hopelessness of the situation , Kesselring told him that he had driven through the entire army rear area and not seen a single hanged man . 
 The Western Front at this time generally followed the River Rhine with two important exceptions : the American bridgehead over the Rhine at Remagen , and a large German salient west of the Rhine , the Saar – Palatinate triangle . Consideration was given to evacuating the triangle , but OKW ordered it held . When Kesselring paid his first visit to the German First and Seventh Army headquarters there on 13 March 1945 , the army group commander , Oberst @-@ <unk> Paul Hausser , and the two army commanders all affirmed the defence of the triangle could only result in heavy losses or complete annihilation of their commands . General der Infanterie Hans Felber of the Seventh Army considered the latter the most likely outcome . Nonetheless , Kesselring insisted that the positions had to be held . 
 The triangle was already under attack from two sides by Lieutenant General George Patton 's Third Army and Lieutenant General Alexander Patch 's Seventh Army . The German position soon crumbled and Hitler reluctantly sanctioned a withdrawal . The First and Seventh Armies suffered heavy losses : around 113 @,@ 000 Germans casualties at the cost of 17 @,@ 000 on the Allied side . Nonetheless , they had avoided encirclement and managed to conduct a skilful delaying action , evacuating the last troops to the east bank of the Rhine on 25 March 1945 . 
 As Germany was cut in two , Kesselring 's command was enlarged to include Army Groups Centre , South and South @-@ East on the Eastern Front , and Army Group C in Italy , as well as his own Army Group G and Army Group Upper Rhine . On 30 April , Hitler committed suicide in Berlin . On 1 May , Karl Dönitz was designated German President ( Reichspräsident ) and the Flensburg government was created . One of the new president 's first acts was the appointment of Kesselring as Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of Southern Germany , with plenipotentiary powers . 
 = = = Chaotic surrender = = = 
 Meanwhile , Wolff and von Vietinghoff , now commander of Army Group C , had almost concluded a preliminary surrender agreement with the OSS chief in Switzerland , Allen Dulles . Known as Operation Sunrise , these secret negotiations had been in progress since early March 1945 . Kesselring was aware of them , having previously consented to them , although he had not informed his own staff . He did , however , later inform Hitler . 
 At first he did not accept the agreement and , on 30 April , relieved both Vietinghoff and his Chief of Staff , Generalleutnant Hans <unk> , putting them at the disposition of the OKW for a possible court martial . They were replaced by General Friedrich Schulz and Generalmajor Friedrich Wenzel respectively . The next morning , 1 May , <unk> reacted by placing both Schulz and Wenzel under arrest , and summoning Lemelsen to take Schulz 's place . Lemelsen initially refused , as he was in possession of a written order from Kesselring which prohibited any talks with the enemy without his explicit authorization . By this time , Vietinghoff and Wolff had concluded an armistice with the Allied Commander in Chief of the Mediterranean Theatre , Field Marshal Alexander , which became effective on 2 May at 14 : 00 . Lemelsen reached Bolzano , and Schulz and Wenzel regained control , this time agreeing with the officers pushing for a quick surrender . The German armies in Italy were now utterly defeated by the Allies , who were rapidly advancing from Garmisch towards Innsbruck . Kesselring remained stubbornly opposed to the surrender , but was finally won over by Wolff on the late morning of 2 May after a two @-@ hour phone call to Kesselring at his headquarters at <unk> . 
 North of the Alps , Army Group G followed suit on 6 May . Kesselring now decided to surrender his own headquarters . He ordered Hausser to supervise the SS troops to ensure that the surrender was carried out in accordance with his instructions . Kesselring then surrendered to an American major at <unk> , near Salzburg , in Austria on 9 May 1945 . He was taken to see Major General Maxwell D. Taylor , the commander of the 101st Airborne Division , who treated him courteously , allowing him to keep his weapons and field marshal 's baton , and to visit the Eastern Front headquarters of Army Groups Centre and South at Zeltweg and Graz unescorted . Taylor arranged for Kesselring and his staff to move into a hotel at Berchtesgaden . Photographs of Taylor and Kesselring drinking tea together created a stir in the United States . Kesselring met with Lieutenant General Jacob L. Devers , commander of the Sixth United States Army Group , and gave interviews to Allied newspaper reporters . 
 In his post @-@ war memoirs , Kesselring claimed he envisioned making a start on the rehabilitation of Germany following the end of the war . Instead , he was arrested . On 15 May 1945 , Kesselring was taken to Mondorf @-@ les @-@ Bains where his baton and decorations were taken from him and he was incarcerated . He was held in a number of American POW camps before being transferred to British custody in 1946 . He testified at the Nuremberg trial of Hermann Göring , but his offers to testify against Soviet , American , and British commanders were declined . 
 = = Post @-@ war = = 
 = = = Trial = = = 
 By the end of the war , for many Italians the name of Kesselring , whose signature appeared on posters and printed orders announcing draconian measures adopted by the German occupation , had become synonymous with the oppression and terror that had characterised the German occupation . Kesselring 's name headed the list of German officers blamed for a long series of atrocities perpetrated by the German forces . 
 The Moscow Declaration of October 1943 promised that " those German officers and men and members of the Nazi party who have been responsible for or have taken a consenting part in the above atrocities , massacres and executions will be sent back to the countries in which their abominable deeds were done in order that they may be judged and punished according to the laws of these liberated countries and of free governments which will be erected therein . " However , the British , who had been a driving force in moulding the war crimes trial policy that culminated in the Nuremberg Trials , explicitly excluded high @-@ ranking German officers in their custody . Thus , Kesselring 's conviction became " a legal prerequisite if perpetrators of war crimes were to be found guilty by Italian courts " . 
 The British held two major trials against the top German war criminals who had perpetrated crimes during the Italian campaign . For political reasons it was decided to hold the trials in Italy , but a request by Italy to allow an Italian judge to participate was denied on the grounds that Italy was not an Allied country . The trials were held under the Royal Warrant of 18 June 1945 , thus essentially under British Common Military Law . The decision put the trials on a shaky legal basis , as foreign nationals were being tried for crimes against foreigners in a foreign country . The first trial , held in Rome , was of Mackensen and Mälzer for their part in the Ardeatine massacre . Both were sentenced to death on 30 November 1946 . 
 Kesselring 's own trial began in Venice on 17 February 1947 . The British Military Court was presided over by Major General Sir Edmund <unk> @-@ Smith , assisted by four lieutenant colonels . Colonel Richard C. Halse – who had already obtained the death penalty for von Mackensen and Kurt Mälzer – was the prosecutor . Kesselring 's legal team was headed by Hans <unk> , a skilful German lawyer who specialised in Anglo @-@ Saxon law , had represented several defendants at the Nuremberg Trials , and would later go on to represent Generalfeldmarschall Erich von Manstein . Kesselring 's ability to pay his legal team was hampered because his assets had been frozen by the Allies , but his legal costs were eventually met by friends in South America and relatives in Franconia . 
 Kesselring was arraigned on two charges : the shooting of 335 Italians in the Ardeatine massacre and incitement to kill Italian civilians . Kesselring did not invoke the " Nuremberg defence " . Rather , he maintained that his actions were lawful . On 6 May 1947 the Court found him guilty of both charges and sentenced him to death by firing squad , which was considered more honourable than hanging . The court left open the question of the legality of killing innocent persons in reprisals . 
 The planned major trial for the campaign of reprisals never took place , but a series of smaller trials was held instead in Padua between April and June 1947 for SS Brigadeführer Willy <unk> , Kapitänleutnant Waldemar <unk> , the 26th Panzer Division 's Generalleutnant Eduard <unk> and SS Gruppenführer Max Simon of the 16th SS Panzergrenadier Division Reichsführer @-@ SS . <unk> was acquitted ; <unk> was sentenced to 10 years ; and Simon was sentenced to death , but his sentence was commuted . Simon 's trial was the last held in Italy by the British . By 1949 , British military tribunals had sentenced 230 Germans to death and another 447 to custodial sentences . None of the death sentences imposed between the end of 1946 and 1948 were carried out . A number of officers , all below the rank of General , including Kappler , were transferred to the Italian courts for trial . These applied very different legal standards to the British – ones which were often more favourable to the defendants . Ironically , in view of the repeated attempts by many senior Wehrmacht commanders to shift blame for atrocities onto the SS , the most senior SS commanders in Italy , Karl Wolff and Heinrich Himmler 's personal representative in Italy , SS Standartenführer Eugen Dollmann , escaped prosecution . 
 = = = Commutation , pardon and release from prison = = = 
 The death verdict against Kesselring unleashed a storm of protest in the United Kingdom . Former British Prime Minister Winston Churchill immediately branded it as too harsh and intervened in favour of Kesselring . Field Marshal Alexander , now Governor General of Canada , sent a telegram to Prime Minister Clement Attlee in which he expressed his hope that Kesselring 's sentence would be commuted . " As his old opponent on the battlefield " , he stated , " I have no complaints against him . Kesselring and his soldiers fought against us hard but clean . " Alexander had expressed his admiration for Kesselring as a military commander as early as 1943 . In his 1961 memoirs Alexander paid tribute to Kesselring as a commander who " showed great skill in extricating himself from the desperate situations into which his faulty intelligence had led him " . Alexander 's sentiments were echoed by Lieutenant General Sir Oliver Leese , who had commanded the British Eighth Army in the Italian campaign . In a May 1947 interview , Leese said he was " very sad " to hear of what he considered " British victor 's justice " being imposed on Kesselring , an " extremely gallant soldier who had fought his battles fairly and squarely " . Lord de L 'Isle , who had been awarded the Victoria Cross for gallantry at Anzio , raised the issue in the House of Lords . 
 The Italian government refused to carry out death sentences , as the death penalty had been abolished in Italy in 1944 and was regarded as a relic of Mussolini 's Fascist regime . The Italian decision was very disappointing to the British government because the trials had partly been intended to meet the expectations of the Italian public . The War Office notified Lieutenant General Sir John Harding , who had succeeded Alexander as commander of British forces in the Mediterranean in 1946 , that there should be no more death sentences and those already imposed should be commuted . Accordingly , Harding commuted the death sentences imposed on von Mackensen , Mälzer and Kesselring to life imprisonment on 4 July 1947 . Mälzer died while still in prison in February 1952 , while von Mackensen , after having his sentence reduced to 21 years , was set free in October 1952 . Kesselring was moved from Mestre prison near Venice to Wolfsberg , Carinthia , in May 1947 . In October 1947 he was transferred for the last time , to Werl Prison , in Westphalia . 
 In Kesselring 's memoirs , he said that in Wolfsberg he was approached by a former SS major who had an escape plan prepared . According to Kesselring , he declined the offer on the grounds that it would be seen as a confession of guilt . Other senior Nazi figures did manage to escape from Wolfsberg to South America or Syria . 
 Kesselring resumed his work on a history of the war that he was writing for the US Army 's Historical Division . This effort , working under the direction of Generaloberst Franz Halder in 1946 , brought together a number of German generals for the purpose of producing historical studies of the war , including Gotthard Heinrici , Heinz Guderian , Lothar Rendulic , Hasso von Manteuffel and Georg von Küchler . Kesselring contributed studies of the war in Italy and North Africa and the problems faced by the German high command . Kesselring also worked secretly on his memoirs . The manuscript was smuggled out by Irmgard Horn @-@ Kesselring , Rainer 's mother , who typed it at her home . 
 An influential group assembled in Britain to lobby for his release from prison . Headed by Lord Hankey , the group included politicians Lord de L 'Isle and Richard Stokes , Field Marshal Alexander and Admiral of the Fleet The Earl of Cork and Orrery , and military historians Basil Liddell Hart and J. F. C. Fuller . Upon re @-@ gaining the prime ministership in 1951 , Winston Churchill , who was closely associated with the group , gave priority to the quick release of the war criminals remaining in British custody . 
 Meanwhile , in Germany , the release of military prisoners had become a political issue . With the establishment of West Germany in 1949 , and the advent of the Cold War between the former Allies and the Soviet Union , it became inevitable that the Wehrmacht would be revived in some form , and there were calls for amnesty for military prisoners as a condition for German military participation in the Western Alliance . A media campaign gradually gathered steam in Germany . Westdeutsche Allgemeine Zeitung published an interview with Liny Kesselring and Stern ran a series about Kesselring and von Manstein entitled " Justice , Not Clemency " . The pressure on the British government was increased in 1952 , when the German Chancellor Konrad Adenauer made it clear that West German ratification of the European Defence Community Treaty was dependent on the release of German military figures . 
 In July 1952 , Kesselring was diagnosed with a cancerous growth in the throat . During World War I , he had frequently smoked up to twenty cigars per day but he quit smoking in 1925 . Although the British were suspicious of the diagnosis , they were concerned that he might die in prison like Mälzer , which would be a public relations disaster . Kesselring was transferred to a hospital , under guard . In October 1952 , Kesselring was released from his prison sentence on the grounds of ill @-@ health . 
 = = = Later life = = = 
 In 1952 , while still in the hospital , Kesselring accepted the honorary presidency of three veterans ' organisations . The first was the <unk> , consisting of Luftwaffe veterans . The Verband deutsches Afrikakorps , the veterans ' association of the Afrika Korps , soon followed . More controversial was the presidency of the right @-@ wing veterans ' association , the Stahlhelm , Bund der Frontsoldaten . Leadership of this organisation tarnished his reputation . He attempted to reform the organisation , proposing that the new German flag be flown instead of the old Imperial Flag ; that the old Stahlhelm greeting Front <unk> ! be abolished ; and that members of the Social Democratic Party of Germany be allowed to join . The response was very unenthusiastic . 
 Kesselring 's memoirs were published in 1953 , as Soldat bis zum letzten Tag ( A Soldier to the Last Day ) . They were reprinted in English as A Soldier 's Record a year later . Although written while he was in prison , without access to his papers , the memoirs formed a valuable resource , informing military historians on topics such as the background to the invasion of the Soviet Union . When the English edition was published , Kesselring 's contentions that the Luftwaffe was not defeated in the air in the Battle of Britain and that Operation Sea Lion — the invasion of Britain — was thought about but never seriously planned were controversial . In 1955 , he published a second book , Gedanken zum <unk> Weltkrieg ( Thoughts on the Second World War ) . 
 Interviewed by the Italian journalist Enzo Biagi soon after his release in 1952 , Kesselring defiantly described the Marzabotto massacre — in which almost 800 innocent Italian civilians had been killed — as a " normal military operation " . Since the event was considered to be the worst massacre of civilians committed in Italy during World War II , Kesselring 's definition caused outcry and indignation in the Italian Parliament . Kesselring reacted provocatively , claiming that he had " saved Italy " and that the Italians ought to build him " a monument " . In response , on 4 December 1952 , Piero Calamandrei , an Italian jurist , soldier , university professor , and politician , who had been a leader of the Resistance , penned an <unk> poem , Lapide ad <unk> ( " A Monument to <unk> " ) . In the poem , Calamandrei stated that if Kesselring returned he would indeed find a monument , but one stronger than stone , composed of Italian Resistance fighters who " willingly took up arms , to preserve dignity , not to promote hate , and who decided to fight back against the shame and terror of the world " . Calamandrei 's poem appears in monuments in the towns of Cuneo , Montepulciano and Sant 'Anna di Stazzema . 
 After release from prison , Kesselring protested against what he regarded as the " unjustly <unk> reputation of the German soldier " . In November 1953 , testifying at a war crimes trial , he warned that " there won 't be any volunteers for the new German army if the German government continues to try German soldiers for acts committed in World War II " . He enthusiastically supported the European Defence Community , and suggested that the " war opponents of yesterday must become the peace comrades and friends of tomorrow " . On the other hand , he also declared that he found " astonishing " those who believe " that we must revise our ideas in accordance with democratic principles ... That is more than I can take . " 
 In March 1954 , Kesselring and Liny toured Austria ostensibly as private citizens . He met with former comrades @-@ in @-@ arms and prison @-@ mates , some of them former SS members , causing embarrassment to the Austrian government , which ordered his deportation . He ignored the order and completed his tour before leaving a week later , as per his original plan . His only official service was on the Medals Commission , which was established by President Theodor Heuss . Ultimately , the commission unanimously recommended that medals should be permitted to be worn — but without the swastika . He was an expert witness for the " Generals ' Trials " . The Generals ' Trials were trials of German citizens before German courts for crimes committed in Germany , the most prominent of which was that of Generalfeldmarschall Ferdinand Schörner . 
 Kesselring died in a sanatorium in Bad Nauheim in West Germany , on 16 July 1960 at the age of 74 , following a heart attack . He was given a quasi @-@ military Stahlhelm funeral and buried in <unk> Cemetery in Bad Wiessee . Members of Stahlhelm acted as his pall bearers and fired a rifle volley over his grave . His former chief of staff , Siegfried Westphal , spoke for the veterans of North Africa and Italy , describing Kesselring as " a man of admirable strength of character whose care was for soldiers of all ranks " . Josef Kammhuber spoke on behalf of the Luftwaffe and Bundeswehr , expressing the hope that Kesselring would be remembered for his earlier accomplishments rather than for his later activities . Also present were the former SS @-@ Oberst @-@ Gruppenführer Sepp Dietrich , the ex @-@ Chancellor Franz von Papen , Generalfeldmarschall Ferdinand Schörner , Grossadmiral and former Reichspräsident Karl Dönitz , Otto Remer , SS Standartenführer Joachim Peiper , and former Ambassador Rudolf Rahn . 
 In 2000 , a memorial event was held in Bad Wiessee marking the fortieth anniversary of Kesselring 's death . No representatives of the Bundeswehr attended , on the grounds that Kesselring was " not worthy of being part of our tradition " . Instead , the task of remembering the Generalfeldmarschall fell to two veterans groups , the Deutsche Montecassino Vereinigung ( German Monte Cassino Association ) and the Bund Deutscher Fallschirmjäger ( Association of German Paratroopers ) . To his ageing troops , Kesselring remained a commander to be commemorated . 
 = Bruce Kingsbury = 
 Bruce Steel Kingsbury , VC ( 8 January 1918 – 29 August 1942 ) was an Australian soldier of the Second World War . Serving initially in the Middle East , he later gained renown for his actions during the Battle of Isurava , one of many battles forming the Kokoda Track Campaign in New Guinea . His bravery during the battle was recognised with the Victoria Cross , the highest decoration for gallantry " in the face of the enemy " that can be awarded to members of the British and Commonwealth armed forces . The first serviceman to receive the VC for actions in Australian territory , Kingsbury was a member of the 2 / 14th Infantry Battalion . 
 On 29 August 1942 , during the Battle of Isurava , Kingsbury was one of the few survivors of a platoon that had been overrun by the Japanese . He immediately volunteered to join a different platoon , which had been ordered to counter @-@ attack . Rushing forward and firing his Bren gun from the hip , he cleared a path through the enemy and inflicted several casualties . Kingsbury was then seen to fall , shot by a Japanese sniper and killed instantly . His actions , which delayed the Japanese long enough for the Australians to fortify their positions , were instrumental in saving his battalion 's headquarters and he was posthumously awarded the Victoria Cross as a result . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Born in the Melbourne suburb of Preston on 8 January 1918 , Kingsbury was the second son of Philip Blencowe Kingsbury , an estate agent , and his wife Florence Annie , née Steel . Growing up in Prahran , Kingsbury became friends with Allen Avery when he was five years old . The two often raced <unk> down the hilly streets , and would remain lifelong friends . Kingsbury attended Windsor State School as a child , and his results were good enough to earn a scholarship at Melbourne Technical College . Avery began an agricultural course in <unk> . Although qualified as a printer , Kingsbury began working at his father 's real estate business , a job he disliked . 
 Unhappy in the estate agency , Kingsbury took up the position of caretaker on a farm at Boundary Bend , not far from where Avery was working . After three months , the pair decided that they would go on an adventure – walking through western Victoria and New South Wales . In February 1936 , Kingsbury and Avery left their jobs and began travelling north , working on various farms and estates . The pair eventually arrived in Sydney several months later , and returned to Melbourne on the first train back . Kingsbury resumed working as a real estate agent , while Avery worked as a nurseryman . They spent their free time at dances and parties . During this time , Kingsbury met and became close to Leila Bradbury . As the war in Europe escalated , Kingsbury and Avery made up their minds to enlist . Despite his parents ' disapproval , Kingsbury signed up to the Australian Imperial Force on 29 May 1940 . 
 = = Middle East = = 
 Kingsbury was originally assigned to the 2 / 2nd Pioneer Battalion , but requested a transfer to the 2 / 14th Infantry Battalion to join Avery who had , coincidentally , enlisted on the same day at a different recruitment centre . The pair undertook basic training at Puckapunyal , where they were assigned to the same section ( 7 Section of 9 Platoon ) and were given drill instruction , rifle drill and mock battle training . After 7 Section learned they would be sent overseas , Kingsbury informed Avery that he planned to propose to Leila . The pair went to Melbourne to try to organise the wedding . Although Kingsbury gave Leila a wristwatch as an engagement present , they could not arrange a marriage licence before he left , and the marriage never took place . 
 Kingsbury , along with the rest of the 7th Division , was shipped to the Middle East in late 1940 . Spending time in Tel Aviv and the surrounding areas , the 7th Division continued training and awaited further orders . On 9 April , the division was sent forward to Mersa Matruh in Egypt to support the Commonwealth force 's defences . It replaced a Scottish unit and took up positions in the garrison . On 23 May , Kingsbury 's brigade was sent back to Palestine , en route to battle in Syria and Lebanon . The 2 / 14th fought against the Vichy French on the Lebanese mountain ranges , as part of a three @-@ pronged attack on Beirut . During this time , the division fought in many towns , including a major battle in Jezzine , where Avery was wounded by a grenade — which drove metal splinters into his spine — and awarded the Military Medal for his " cool courage and devotion " . As the war with the Vichy French was winding down , on 11 July Kingsbury and Avery were selected for a contingent to collect and bury the dead . The battalion stayed in Beirut for a few months , until setting up a semi @-@ permanent camp at Hill 69 , outside Jerusalem . 
 On 30 January 1942 , the 7th Division left Egypt for Australia , sailing via Bombay , as the division was needed to fight against the Japanese . Kingsbury 's battalion made landfall at Adelaide and continued to Melbourne by rail . The battalion arrived on 16 March , and was given a week 's leave . After this , the battalion underwent training in Glen Innes , before camping in <unk> , Queensland . On 5 August , the battalion moved north to Brisbane , boarding a ship to Port Moresby to join the fighting in New Guinea , where a force of mostly Militia personnel were engaged in a desperate defensive action . 
 = = Kokoda Track Campaign = = 
 Following the Battle of the Coral Sea , the Japanese abandoned the attempt to capture Port Moresby from the sea and , on 21 July , landed ground forces at Buna in north @-@ east Papua . After capturing the town of Kokoda for the second time on 9 August , the Japanese began advancing along the Kokoda Track towards Port Moresby . The 2 @,@ 500 @-@ strong Japanese force met the 39th and 53rd Infantry Battalions , at the town of Isurava . As the battle was beginning to develop , on 26 August , members of the 2 / 14th , including Kingsbury , arrived at Isurava to reinforce the exhausted 39th Battalion . 
 = = = Battle of Isurava = = = 
 The two combined battalions began digging in around Isurava . A headquarters had been set up at the top of the hill , which was vital to the defence of the position . While the Australians dug themselves in , the Japanese , led by Japanese Major General Tomitarō Horii , prepared to attack . On 28 August , the Japanese launched their offensive . The Australians , who had initially been outnumbered but were now roughly equal in strength , resisted in the face of heavy machine @-@ gun fire and hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat . On 29 August , the Japanese broke through the right flank , pushing the Australians back with heavy fire , threatening to cut off their headquarters . The Australians began to prepare a counter @-@ offensive , and men volunteered to join an attack party . Kingsbury , one of the few survivors of his platoon , ran down the Track with the group . 
 You could see his Bren gun held out and his big bottom swaying as he went with the momentum he was getting up , followed by Alan Avery . They were cheerful . They were going out on a picnic almost . 
 Using a Bren gun he had taken from wounded Corporal Lindsay Bear , Kingsbury , alongside Avery and the rest of the group , engaged the nearby Japanese . The fire was so heavy that the undergrowth was completely destroyed within five minutes . It was then that Kingsbury , firing from his hip , charged straight at the Japanese . 
 He came forward with this Bren and he just mowed them down . He was an inspiration to everybody else around him . There were clumps of Japs here and there and he just mowed them down . 
 His actions demoralised the Japanese , killing several and forcing others to find cover . The rest of the Australian group , inspired by Kingsbury 's actions , forced the Japanese further back into the jungle . Kingsbury was then seen to fall to the ground , shot by a Japanese sniper . The sniper fired one shot before disappearing . Avery , who had been about 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) from Kingsbury , briefly chased after the sniper but returned to carry Kingsbury to the regimental aid post ; Kingsbury was dead by the time he arrived there . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Kingsbury 's actions were a turning point in the battle . The Japanese had begun to gather momentum in their attack , and were threatening to overrun the 2 / 14th 's headquarters . His attack inflicted damage to the Japanese force , temporarily halting their advance . This allowed the Australian troops to stabilise their positions , eventually regaining control and defending the battalion 's headquarters . His act of bravery served as an inspiration to the troops . However , the battle ended in defeat for the Australians , with elements of the 2 / 14th breaking during the afternoon of 29 August . The remainder of the battalion managed to withdraw during the night , but suffered heavy casualties and another defeat during fighting the next day at positions around the Isurava Guest House . 
 Authors and military analysts have speculated that had Kingsbury not attacked , the Japanese might have destroyed the battalion . The Japanese had been attacking in waves , and had started to climb a steep hill to outflank the Australians , in an effort to win the battle . The Australians were low on supplies and the Japanese were on the verge of breaking through the Australian line . Had they broken through , they would have been able to isolate the battalion 's headquarters from the soldiers on the flanks . This would have prevented the Australians from retreating to Alola , allowing the Japanese to overrun them . 
 For his actions , Kingsbury was awarded the Victoria Cross , which was gazetted on 9 February 1943 . His citation read : 
 War Office , 9th February , 1943 . 
 The KING has been graciously pleased to approve the posthumous award of the VICTORIA CROSS to : — 
 No . VX <unk> Private . Bruce Steel Kingsbury , Australian Military Forces . 
 In New Guinea , the Battalion to which Private Kingsbury belonged had been holding a position in the Isurava area for two days against continuous and fierce enemy attacks . On the 29th August , 1942 , the enemy attacked in such force that they succeeded in breaking through the Battalion 's right flank , creating a serious threat both to the rest of the Battalion and to its Headquarters . To avoid the situation becoming more desperate , it was essential to regain immediately the lost ground on the right flank . 
 Private Kingsbury , who was one of the few survivors of a Platoon which had been overrun and severely cut about by the enemy , immediately volunteered to join a different platoon which had been ordered to counter @-@ attack . 
 He rushed forward firing his Bren Gun from the hip through terrific machine @-@ gun fire and succeeded in clearing a path through the enemy . Continuing to sweep the enemy positions with his fire and inflicting an extremely high number of casualties on them , Private Kingsbury was then seen to fall to the ground shot dead , by the bullet from a sniper hiding in the wood . 
 Private Kingsbury displayed a complete disregard for his own safety . His initiative and superb courage made possible the recapture of the position which undoubtedly saved Battalion Headquarters , as well as causing heavy casualties amongst the enemy . His coolness , determination and devotion to duty in the face of great odds was an inspiration to his comrades . 
 Kingsbury was the first Australian soldier to be awarded the Victoria Cross for actions in the South Pacific and also the first on Australian territory . Kingsbury 's section remains the most highly decorated section in the British Empire , its members having received a Victoria Cross , one Distinguished Conduct Medal and four Military Medals by war 's end ; the platoon also suffered the highest proportional losses in the Kokoda Campaign . Kingsbury 's platoon sergeant , Sergeant Robert Thompson , later commented that when he was recommending Kingsbury for the Victoria Cross , he was asked several times would he " please write it up a bit more with a bit more action and such " and 
 On the same day or the next day there was another chap named Charlie McCarthy [ sic , McCallum ] , who really did something , probably far more deserving but they were only going to award one VC , so Bruce got it . I 'm not decrying it . He was worded up and Charlie unfortunately was worded down … 
 Kingsbury 's Rock , the rock next to which Kingsbury died , stands within sight of where the 2 / 14th Battalion 's headquarters had been established , and has been incorporated as part of the Isurava Memorial . His body now rests in the Bomana Cemetery , Port Moresby , and his Victoria Cross is on display at the Australian War Memorial , Canberra . The Melbourne suburb of Kingsbury was named in his honour , as was a rest area on the Remembrance Driveway and a street in the Canberra suburb of Gowrie . Kingsbury 's story was featured in the History Channel production For Valour . 
 = Toyota Aurion ( XV40 ) = 
 The Toyota Aurion ( XV40 ) / <unk> / is the original series of the Toyota Aurion , a mid @-@ size car produced by Toyota in Australia and parts of Asia . Designated " XV40 " , Toyota manufactured the first generation Aurion between 2006 and 2012 until it was fully replaced by the <unk> series . While Asian production of the <unk> series began in late @-@ 2011 , Toyota 's Australian operations did not take on production of the new model until 2012 . 
 Although marketed as a separate model , the XV40 series Aurion is essentially a Toyota Camry ( XV40 ) with revised <unk> and rear @-@ end treatment , along with changes to the interior . In lieu of the " Aurion " nameplate , the majority of East and Southeast Asian markets received the Camry @-@ based Aurion under the name Toyota Camry . However , in Australasia and the Middle East , Toyota sold the original version of the Camry alongside the Aurion . In these markets , the Aurion replaced the Avalon ( <unk> ) model , which could trace its roots back to 1994 . 
 In the Australasian and Middle Eastern markets , to further differentiate the Aurion from its Camry sibling , Toyota equipped the Aurion exclusively with a 3 @.@ 5 @-@ litre V6 engine . With the Camry , the company only offered the 2 @.@ 4 @-@ litre four @-@ cylinder version . Previously in these markets , prior to the introduction of the Camry XV40 , Toyota had offered both four- and a six @-@ cylinder powerplants . Along with the naturally aspirated version , Toyota produced an Australia @-@ only supercharged TRD Aurion between 2007 and 2009 as tuned by Toyota Racing Development ( TRD ) . At its release , Toyota claimed this performance variant to be the world 's most powerful front @-@ wheel drive car . The powertrains used in the Asian specification Camry vary slightly from those of the Aurion . As well as the 3 @.@ 5 @-@ litre V6 , two four @-@ cylinder engines are offered in either <unk> or a 2 @.@ 4 @-@ litre form . These engines are teamed with a six- , four- and five @-@ speed automatic transmissions , respectively . 
 = = History of development = = 
 Before commencing production of the Aurion , Toyota Australia manufactured the full @-@ size Avalon model at its Altona plant in Melbourne until June 2005 . Production of the Avalon had begun in 2000 , taking much of its basic design and mechanical features from the then six @-@ year @-@ old Avalon model sold in North America . The Avalon was offered as a larger , more upmarket car than the Toyota Camry , which it was built alongside . The original sales predictions were not met , with the Avalon failing to challenge rivals such as the Holden Commodore and the Ford Falcon . The reasoning behind this has been widely attributed to the Avalon 's older design and styling , which has been widely described as " bland " , as well as the front @-@ wheel drive configuration and smaller engine displacement . In its best year , the Avalon only managed to reach half of Toyota 's projected sales target , with many potential buyers opting for the slightly smaller sized V6 Camry , featuring the same engine as the Avalon . 
 Toyota , discovering that the Australian public wanted something that was modern and designed with consideration to the Australian market , began full @-@ scale planning work on its Avalon replacement in 2002 . Toyota Australia realised that no other model being developed at the time for Japan or North America was going to be suitable , and due to the size limitations of the Australian market , a completely indigenous model was unrealisable . However , at that time , Toyota Australia did not have any designers of its own . As a result , the company recruited Paul Beranger in August 2002 to set up Toyota Style Australia ( TSA ) in an industrial complex located in Dingley Village , Victoria . TSA first developed the X @-@ Runner and Sportivo Coupe concepts , and in 2003 , Nick Hogios , who had previously worked for Ford Australia on designing the XR performance models of the BA Falcon , was appointed chief designer . TSA 's next venture was more significant — a privately developed model based on the Camry <unk> — a car that signalled the beginning of the Aurion programme . Codenamed " 380L " and developed during the course of 2003 , this one @-@ off model was forged by stripping panels and interior components from the donor Camry , and substituting these for TSA @-@ developed versions . Total cost was approximately A $ 1 million . Focus groups conducted by Toyota in early 2003 had ranked the Avalon at the bottom of the list when compared to the competing Holden Commodore , Ford Falcon , and Mitsubishi Magna . Later on in the year , the same focus groups were called back and the Avalon was exchanged for the 380L . Overall , the groups ranked the Toyota as their first preference , and according to Beranger , " didn 't see the car as a Camry " . As such , Toyota Australia deduced that if the 380L was available for purchase there and then , they could sell it alongside the regular Camry as a six @-@ cylinder car under a different name . 
 During the 380L development , TSA had regular discussions with Toyota Japan on how its Avalon replacement would eventually turn out . Because TSA were an unknown quantity , having never designed a production vehicle , it took the division some time to convince Japan that they could indeed design a car themselves . When the 380L was consigned to a presentation with Japanese Toyota officials , TSA 's lead designer Nick Hogios was requested to tender a proposal for the next @-@ generation " <unk> " Camry design competition . While his submission was not chosen , Hogios was summoned to work on what would become the Aurion , then exclusively referred to as the " Asian " or " prestige " Camry , and codenamed " <unk> " . Due to the success of TSA 's earlier concepts and the 380L , Toyota Australia was given the authorisation to manufacture both the regular <unk> and <unk> <unk> and sell them side @-@ by @-@ side . In Australia however , the regular Camry was to be limited to the four @-@ cylinder engine , and the prestige Camry ( later to become the Aurion ) to the six . Hogios worked in Japan for nine months during 2004 designing the prestige Camry , and his final design was a collaborative effort between Japanese and Taiwanese designers , but the car 's front @-@ end styling is largely Hogios 's own work . While the work in Japan was being undertaken , TSA began to make changes for the Australian Aurion variants . After the design stage was completed , Toyota Australia then commenced work on the development of the car , concurrently developing both the Australian car and the version for Asia . Beranger proclaims that the entire engineering undertaking , " is probably one of the most significant jobs that any subsidiary of Toyota Japan has done anywhere in the world . " The Australian variant of the car was codenamed " <unk> " . Despite both cars being essentially identical , Australia was given a different code due to the car occupying a broader range in that market — from a fleet vehicle to a sports @-@ oriented model . In Asia , the car 's role is much narrower , being a high @-@ end luxury car . 
 On 9 February 2006 , Toyota Australia unveiled the Aurion alongside the Aurion Sportivo concept at the Melbourne International Motor Show at an official press conference . Toyota dropped the Avalon tag for their new large car , as it had gained a reputation to be an uninspiring car , both in the flesh and to drive . Toyota made use of the " Aurion " name to give the car a fresh start . Aurion means " tomorrow " in Ancient Greek , and Aurora translates to " the dawn " in Latin . The name was chosen after consumer research on more than 30 potential names . This gives implications of a completely new car and ties in with Toyota 's advertising slogan , " Can 't wait for tomorrow " . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 Aurion takes its doors , windows , roof panels , body sides ( except front quarters ) from the Camry XV40 . However , the other panels are unique from the regular Camry . This component sharing also means that Aurion has the same wheelbase , front and rear axle tracks , and interior dimensions . Interior design also largely parallels the Camry . Notable differences include the redesigned upper dashboard portion and restyled centre console , plus the substitution of the Australian Camry 's hand @-@ operated parking brake with a foot @-@ operated equivalent ( as shared with the Camry for Japan and North America ) . The reasoning behind this component sharing strategy was to reduce costs and to allow the car to be built alongside the Camry , thus simplifying the manufacturing process . 
 Toyota claims that the Aurion is designed to Australian tastes , although it has been designed with markets such as Asia in mind . Hogios states that the Aurion follows the traits of current Australian styling , with a tendency to look towards European designs for inspiration . In addition , like its other vehicles of similar vintage , Toyota designed the Aurion within the realm of its " vibrant clarity " design language . According to chief designer Hogios , the car makes particular use of the " vibrant clarity " theory known as " perfect imbalance " . This involves body features that act as a counterpoint to other body features . Examples of this include intersecting concave and convex surfaces and vertical sculpted features on the front fascia , which are balanced by the horizontal headlamps . The front @-@ end 's " double concave architecture " can also be characterised by its protruding bonnet crease line and deep grille . The same architecture is applied at the rear , with a deep bumper , a clamshell @-@ shaped boot lid that envelops over the flanks , dual exhaust pipes and tail lamps . Design patents were filed on 27 December 2005 at the United States Patent and Trademark Office . 
 For certain markets like China , where Camry sits right below similar @-@ sized Mercedes @-@ Benz cars as a luxury model , it is important for the Aurion to exemplify the traits of such vehicles . With the development of the Aurion , designers produced two separate philosophies , each pitched at a specific niche of the market . The base model AT @-@ X , and luxury Prodigy and Presara variants employ the comfort design , with the more aggressive sports @-@ oriented style found on the Sportivo versions . To meet this requirement , the Sportivo variants feature unique 17 @-@ inch alloy wheels , a rear spoiler , body kit appendages , and a three @-@ spoke steering wheel . The high @-@ performance TRD models offer a similar sports @-@ oriented design , but are distinguishable by the use of unique body parts . These include a redesigned Formula One @-@ inspired front bumper , with integrated foglamps , a unique rear bumper with fixed tailpipes . 
 = = = Facelift = = = 
 Toyota of Thailand unveiled a reworked version of the East and Southeast Asian @-@ market Camry in June 2009 equipped with a hybrid drivetrain . The revised Aurion @-@ based Camry previewed the Australian Aurion 's then upcoming facelift . The updated car features new headlamp and <unk> lens clusters with integrated foglamps , along with a redesigned front bumper , grille insert , and revised interior trim details . The design registrations for the facelifted hybrid version , noting changes made to the original were filed on 19 December 2008 at the US Patent and Trademark Office . Toyota Australia later revealed the updated car as its Aurion on 21 September . While the front @-@ end of the original Aurion was designed with a " double @-@ concave " architecture , the revised version abandons this for an " X @-@ Form " design philosophy , characterised by a lower and wider trapezoidal shaped grille . 
 Like the original version , the Aurion continues to offer differing frontal design treatments across the range . From side , the rehashed design is identified by the deletion of <unk> moulding strips and a range of new wheels designs , including the standard fitment of alloy wheels on the base @-@ line AT @-@ X. Interior upgrades in the form of new colour combinations are featured , along with upgraded instruments and gauges giving greater turn signal and warning @-@ signal clarity . Revised audio systems , lighting and in @-@ cabin storage are also featured . Prodigy and Presara versions receive a new " linear satin " wood grain finish . 
 = = = Safety = = = 
 Safety was a key aspect in the development of the Aurion . All safety features are standard across the entire range and there are no optional safety devices . Features such as dual front , side and curtain airbags , traction control , brake assist , electronic brakeforce distribution and Vehicle Stability Control come standard . In tests conducted by Australasian New Car Assessment Program ( ANCAP ) , the base model scored a four @-@ star rating , with 30 @.@ 03 out of 37 points . Toyota caused controversy by not providing a third test vehicle for ANCAP to use for the optional " side @-@ pole impact test " . This third test , allows tested vehicles to be eligible for a five @-@ star rating if the initial score is high enough . Toyota cited the additional expense of A $ 75 @,@ 000 – $ 100 @,@ 000 including the car as being unjustifiable , and that they did not agree with the nature of the pole test . The scores given without the optional test indicate that the maximum two points that could have been earned would have been slightly less than needed to give the Aurion a five @-@ star rating anyway . Due to Toyota 's decision to fit a driver and front passenger seat belt reminder , along with their decision to fund the optional pole test , the Aurion 's safety rating was upgraded to a full five stars from August 2009 production , with a score of 33 @.@ 03 out of 37 . 
 = = Powertrains = = 
 The Aurion employs a version of Toyota 's 2GR @-@ FE V6 engine that also powers the V6 Camry outside of Australasia . With an engine displacement of 3 @.@ 5 @-@ litres , the 2GR @-@ FE engine is capable of outputting 200 kW ( 268 hp ) and 336 N · m ( 248 lb · ft ) of torque . Power rises by 4 kW ( 5 hp ) with the use of 95 RON " premium " unleaded petrol . Acceleration figures for the car have been recorded at 7 @.@ 4 seconds from standstill to 100 km / h ( 62 mph ) , and Toyota claims a top speed of 228 km / h ( 142 mph ) . The Aurion , which is Euro IV emissions compliant , is rated at 9 @.@ 9 L / 100 km ( 23 @.@ 8 mpg @-@ US ) under the Australian ADR 81 / 01 fuel consumption test . The dual VVT @-@ i 3 @.@ 5 @-@ litre 2GR @-@ FE engine paired to Toyota 's six @-@ speed <unk> automatic transmission . This same transmission is also utilised by the supercharged TRD variants . These produce 241 kW ( 323 hp ) and 400 N · m ( 295 lb · ft ) , combined with a combined fuel consumption of 10 @.@ 9 L / 100 km ( 21 @.@ 6 mpg @-@ US ) . 
 In some Asian countries where the Aurion is sold as the Toyota Camry , both <unk> and 2 @.@ 4 @-@ litre powerplants are offered . The naturally aspirated 3 @.@ 5 @-@ litre engine is also available in some of these markets . The 2 @.@ 0 @-@ litre <unk> @-@ FE inline @-@ four has a maximum output of 108 kW ( 145 hp ) of power and 190 N · m ( 140 lb · ft ) of torque . These figures rise to 127 kW ( 170 hp ) and 224 N · m ( 165 lb · ft ) when the 2 @.@ 4 @-@ litre 2AZ @-@ FE unit is fitted . Of the two four @-@ cylinder motors , the latter is teamed with Toyota 's five @-@ speed <unk> automatic , with the <unk> four @-@ speed unit reserved for the 2 @.@ 0 @-@ litre model . From circa 2009 , Toyota began offering a new 2 @.@ 0 @-@ litre <unk> @-@ FE inline @-@ four petrol engine in some markets . Producing 102 kW ( 137 hp ) and 189 N · m ( 139 lb · ft ) , the <unk> @-@ FE was available with the four @-@ speed <unk> automatic , or in some markets with a six @-@ speed manual . 
 = = Market = = 
 = = = Australasia = = = 
 Toyota launched the Aurion in Australasia , where it competes with the rear @-@ wheel drive Ford Falcon , Holden Commodore , and the now discontinued front @-@ wheel drive Mitsubishi 380 . The TRD variants were pitched to compete with the Subaru Liberty GT and Mazda 6 MPS . Since its introduction , the Aurion has received numerous awards and positive reviews . In particular , the car has been praised for its good performance mated with comparatively low fuel consumption , and the inclusion of safety and comfort features that are optional on competitor vehicles . 
 Prior to its introduction , a target of 24 @,@ 000 annualised sales were predicted for the Australian market , double that of the Avalon 's eventual sales rate . A further 8 @,@ 000 vehicles were forecast to be sent abroad to the Middle East and New Zealand . Starting from 2007 , Toyota received a contract to deliver 10 @,@ 000 export <unk> to the Middle East . 
 The Aurion was also judged best large car in the Drive Car of the Year competition for both 2006 , 2007 and 2009 . 
 Specification levels 
 AT @-@ X : Marketed primarily towards fleets buyers , the entry @-@ level AT @-@ X features air conditioning , power windows and mirrors , among others . The Aurion AT @-@ X was awarded the Australia 's Best Large Car award in 2006 and 2007 ; judges described the Aurion as " ... a terrific well @-@ rounded package of technology and refinement . Toyota has produced a big six that has continued to outstrip traditional rivals in the Australian market . " 
 Sportivo : Available in two flavours for the Australian market , the Sportivo is the Aurion 's sports oriented variant . The introductory Sportivo <unk> features a specially designed sports body kit , sports suspension , sports seats and 17 @-@ inch alloy wheels and tinted sports headlights . The Sportivo <unk> also shares the same " Sportivo " exterior design , but is specified high , with electrically adjustable leather sports seats , parking sensors and dual @-@ zone climate control air conditioning . 
 Prodigy : Building onto what the AT @-@ X offers , the semi @-@ luxury Prodigy , branded the Touring in New Zealand and the Middle East , features an electrically adjustable driver 's seat , dual @-@ zone climate control air conditioning , parking sensors , wood grain interior and full leather upholstery . The Prodigy also sees a chrome grille , and 16 @-@ inch alloy wheels along with front fog lamps as standard . 
 Presara : the luxury @-@ oriented Presara features a lavishly appointed interior with features such as electric seats with a two @-@ memory setting , a moonroof , push @-@ start engine operation , a reversing camera , and satellite navigation . The Presara , marketed under the Grande moniker in New Zealand and the Middle East , also features high @-@ intensity discharge headlamps with auto levelling front lighting system . When reversing , the side mirrors face down towards the ground ( unless the mirror adjustment switch is in the off position ) to assist the driver when parking in places where space is compromised . 
 Toyota Australia released the special edition " Touring SE " in October 2007 , based on the AT @-@ X. Features gained over the AT @-@ X comprised 16 @-@ inch alloy wheels , a rear spoiler , six CD stacker , a trip computer , dual zone climate control air @-@ conditioning and a leather steering wheel and selection lever . Front and rear parking sensors , and dual @-@ zone air conditioning were also fitted . The Touring SE was reintroduced in identical form in April 2008 , again in October 2008 , and then finally in April 2009 . These 2009 versions differed slightly , with 17- in lieu of 16 @-@ inch wheels , the Sportivo grille , and sports front and rear lights . The price remains unchanged from the 2007 original . At the same time , a Touring SE variant of the Camry sedan was released with similar upgrades . 
 In 2011 , a special edition of the Aurion , called the " White LE " was released with only 250 built . The model is based on the Prodigy , however , features a unique exterior and interior combination . The White LE is painted white and has unique alloy wheels , similar to those found on the Australian version Camry Grande . The <unk> is from the Sportivo <unk> and the model has unique badging . The interior is a mixture of black and off white on the leather seats and interior panels . 
 = = = = TRD Aurion = = = = 
 Toyota unveiled the Aurion Sports Concept at the 2006 Australian International Motor Show , held in Sydney . The A $ 8 million concept car was a styling exercise previewing the TRD Aurion , which was subsequently released in August 2007 . TRD 's first experiment with supercharger technology was with the Toyota Camry @-@ based 2005 TS @-@ 01 concept . 
 The project 's exterior design manager was Lee Moran , a former Ford Australia designer . He was chosen by Toyota Styling Australia chief Paul <unk> in 2005 . One of Moran 's focuses was to reduce the size of the grille and add emphasis to the front bumper line below it . This was done so the car had more of a Formula One oriented look . In the Toyota wind tunnel in Japan , the vehicle 's drag coefficient was confirmed at 0 @.@ 30 , meaning that the car would operate better aerodynamically than its non @-@ TRD variants . The TRD also features bold exterior additions that differentiate it with the standard Aurion range , such as exhaust pipes integrated into the bumper , tinted <unk> lenses , and a unique <unk> . Along with the supercharged 3 @.@ 5 @-@ litre V6 engine outputting 241 kW ( 323 hp ) of power and 400 N · m ( 295 lb · ft ) of torque , the TRD also incorporates an upgraded suspension system and tyres over the standard Aurion models to improve car handling . 
 Toyota Australia planned to sell 50 to 70 TRD Aurion units per month with the majority of the sales coming from Australia . However , the project was unsuccessful , and as of 31 March 2009 , TRD Australia halted production of the Aurion TRD ( and TRD Hilux ) , and the division was shut down . When available , the range comprised two variants , the <unk> and <unk> . The former features performance <unk> , 19 @-@ inch alloy wheels , red <unk> leather seats with black <unk> fabric bolsters and other high @-@ performance upgrades . The range @-@ topping <unk> adds clearance and reverse parking sensors , dual @-@ zone climate control air conditioning , a colour @-@ coded transmission selection lever , and an eight @-@ way adjustable driver 's seat . Furthermore , the SL gains an aluminium rear bumper reinforcement addition , and is the first production car in the world to use the Eaton twin @-@ vortices supercharger . This substantially reduces engine noise while bringing gains to power and torque . 
 = = = Asia = = = 
 Toyota also manufactures and markets the Aurion in parts of East and Southeast Asia , where it is marketed under the Toyota Camry branding . This model gets a redesigned grille and is marketed under different trim levels to their Australasian counterparts . Although these vary from country to country , the range consists of the following models in some markets : 2 @.@ 0 E , 2 @.@ 0 G , 2 @.@ 4 E , 2 @.@ 4 G , 2 @.@ 4 Sportivo , 2 @.@ 4 V , 3 @.@ 5 V , and 3 @.@ 5 Q. The decimal in the nomenclature denotes the engine displacement , with the letter representing the level of luxury . 
 In China , the Camry was unveiled in late April 2006 and commenced production in May . The Camry is sold in two variants — the 200 and 240 . The 200 variant is mated to the 2 @.@ 0 @-@ litre <unk> @-@ FE while 240 variant gets the 2 @.@ 4 @-@ litre 2AZ @-@ FE . The range consisted of the <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , 240V , <unk> and the <unk> . Transmission choices were the four @-@ speed automatic transmission for the 200 models and the five @-@ speed automatic for the 240 models . The Camry Hybrid was introduced in April 2010 . 
 In Thailand , the 2 @.@ 0 @-@ litre models are available in two trim packages : the 2 @.@ 0 E and 2 @.@ 0 G. The 2 @.@ 4 variant is also available in Malaysia , utilizing the 2AZ @-@ FE engine model . The output of this 2 @.@ 4 V model is 123 kW ( 165 hp ) at 6000 rpm with 224 N · m ( 165 lb · ft ) of torque at 4000 rpm . 
 In Indonesia , the Camry is offered with two engines , the four @-@ cylinder mated to a five @-@ speed automatic transmission . This engine is offered in G and V trims . The other engine is the V6 engine mated to a six @-@ speed automatic transmission . This engine is only offered in the top @-@ of @-@ the @-@ line Q trim . The Camry has enjoyed success in Indonesia , being the best selling car in its class . The 2 @.@ 4 V and 3 @.@ 5 Q models have been used extensively by the Indonesian government , owning thousands of <unk> in their fleet . 
 The Camry in the Philippines offers three grades : the base G , offering a 2 @.@ 4 @-@ litre engine mated to a five @-@ speed automatic transmission , has 2 SRS airbags , has fabric seats and has a foot @-@ type parking brake . The 2 @.@ 4 V is almost the same as the G variant , however , it has a 4 @-@ spoke steering wheel with wood grain , 2 SRS airbags , and has a leather @-@ wrapped wood grain with chrome shift lever and knob . The 3 @.@ 5 Q is the top @-@ of @-@ the @-@ line segment , offering a 3 @.@ 5 2GR @-@ FE V6 , 24V , <unk> and dual VVT @-@ i . It is mated to a six @-@ speed gate @-@ type automatic transmission , adaptive front lighting system , automatic rain sensor , dual exhaust tail pipe , tri @-@ color / <unk> with multi @-@ information display , 2 SRS front airbags , side SRS airbags , and a push start system . All of the variants has an integrated type / tuner / in @-@ dash 6 CD changer / MP3 / WMA . All of the variants use a foot @-@ type parking brake , welcome the driver whenever the ignition is set to " ON " , displaying on the central console " Welcome to Camry " . All of the variants also have 4 front and 2 rear speakers . 
 In Thailand , the hybrid Camry has been available since 2009 . Its unique and differs it from other Camry hybrids because the petrol version of the Thai Camry is built using the Aurion fascia , the hybrid version also makes use of the same body . 
 In Vietnam , the Toyota Aurion was introduced in 2006 and has been available only in sedan form with two different trims : Camry 2 @.@ 4 G and 3 @.@ 5 Q. The 2 @.@ 4 G trim comes with the 2 @.@ 4 @-@ litre engine rated 165 hp ( 123 kW ) and a 5 @-@ speed automatic gear box while the 3 @.@ 5 Q trim is equipped with a <unk> 2GR @-@ FE engine rated 273 @.@ 5 hp ( 204 kW ) ( SAE net ) and a 6 @-@ speed automatic transmission standard . The two trims come with many safety features including brake assist system , Electronic brake @-@ force distribution ( EBD ) , vehicle stability control ( <unk> ) and front and side airbags The Vietnamese Camry is produced at the Toyota production plant in Phúc Yên , Vĩnh Phú . 
 = HMS Cyclops ( 1871 ) = 
 HMS Cyclops was the lead ship of the Cyclops @-@ class breastwork monitors built for the Royal Navy during the 1870s . The ships were ordered to satisfy demands for local defence during the war scare of 1870 , but the pace of construction slowed down tremendously as the perceived threat of war declined . The ship spent most of her career in reserve ; her only sustained period in commission was four months in Portland Harbour , during the Russo @-@ Turkish War in 1878 when the British were trying to force the Russians to end the war without allowing them to seize Constantinople . Cyclops was sold for scrap in 1903 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The Cyclops @-@ class ships were modified versions of the Cerberus class . The ships had a length between perpendiculars of 225 feet ( 68 @.@ 6 m ) , a beam of 45 feet ( 13 @.@ 7 m ) , and a draught of 16 feet 3 inches ( 4 @.@ 95 m ) at deep load . They displaced 3 @,@ 480 long tons ( 3 @,@ 540 t ) . Their crew consisted of 156 officers and men . The ships had two 4 @-@ cylinder inverted compound steam engines , each driving a single propeller shaft . The engines produced a total of 1 @,@ 528 indicated horsepower ( 1 @,@ 139 kW ) on 30 December 1871 during the ship 's sea trials which gave her a maximum speed of 10 @.@ 79 knots ( 19 @.@ 98 km / h ; 12 @.@ 42 mph ) . Cyclops carried 250 long tons ( 250 t ) of coal , enough to steam 3 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 5 @,@ 600 km ; 3 @,@ 500 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 The ships mounted four 10 @-@ inch rifled muzzle @-@ loading guns in twin @-@ gun turrets fore and aft of the superstructure . The guns could fire both solid shot and explosive shells . They were mounted on carriages that used hydraulic jacks to elevate and depress the guns . 
 The Cyclops class had a complete waterline belt of wrought iron that was 8 inches ( 203 mm ) thick amidships and thinned to 6 inches ( 152 mm ) at the ends . The superstructure and conning tower was fully armoured , the reason it was called a breastwork , with 8 – 9 inches ( 203 – 229 mm ) of wrought iron . The gun turrets had 10 inches on their faces and 9 inches on the sides and rear . All of the vertical armour was backed by 9 – 11 inches ( 229 – 279 mm ) of teak . The decks were 1 @.@ 5 inches ( 38 @.@ 1 mm ) thick . 
 = = Construction = = 
 HMS Cyclops was laid down on 10 September 1870 by the Thames Ironworks in London . She was launched on 18 July 1871 and commissioned in January 1872 . The ship was towed to <unk> that same month for what proved to be a very lengthy fitting out period that was not completed until 4 May 1877 . Cyclops cost £ 156 @,@ 782 to build . 
 = = = Refit = = = 
 Although a recommendation had been made while the ships were still under construction to extend the superstructure out to the sides of the ship to improve their stability and habitability , this was not acted upon until they were refitted during the 1880s . This refit also strengthened the breastwork and upper decks , added another watertight bulkhead as well as a false keel . Four quick @-@ firing 3 @-@ pounder Hotchkiss guns were added on the breastwork for torpedo boat defence as well as five machine guns and several searchlights . This increased their crew to approximately 191 men and added 80 long tons ( 81 t ) to their displacement . 
 = = Service = = 
 HMS Cyclops was the third ship to be completed , although she was the lead ship of the class . She was placed in 1st Class Reserve after her completion . The ship , along with her sisters , was commissioned between April and August 1878 during the Russo @-@ Turkish War for service with Admiral Sir Cooper Key 's Particular Service Squadron in Portland Harbour . Cyclops was paid off at Chatham in August 1878 and refitted in 1887 – 89 . All four ships of the class participated in the annual fleet manoeuvers in 1887 , 1889 – 90 and 1892 ; in between times they were in Fleet Reserve . HMS Cyclops , like all of her sisters , was placed on the non @-@ effective list in January 1902 , transferred to the E Division of the Dockyard Reserve at Sheerness in May 1902 , and sold on 7 July 1903 for £ 8 @,@ 400 . 
 = Warburton , Greater Manchester = 
 Warburton is a village and civil parish within the Metropolitan Borough of Trafford in Greater Manchester , England . Historically in Cheshire , Warburton lies on the south bank of the River Mersey between the borough of Warrington and Greater Manchester . In the 21st century , the village remains predominantly rural . Altrincham is the nearest town . According to the 2001 census , the parish had a population of 286 . 
 Warburton has a history of settlement stretching back to the 11th century , with the possibility of earlier habitation . There are 17 listed buildings in the village , including the timber framed Grade I Church of St Werburgh , which is at least 700 years old . Among the other listed buildings are examples of architect John Douglas ' work , including the second Church of St Werburgh , built in 1883 . In 2006 , Time Team excavated in the lands of Moss Brow Farm in Warburton , looking for a Roman fortlet . 
 = = History = = 
 Some limited evidence has been found of activity on the site of Warburton dating from the Bronze Age , through the Iron Age and Roman periods ; these include a flint blade , six Mesolithic tools , pieces of <unk> , and a snake bracelet . Archaeological evidence indicates that the area around Warburton has been used agriculturally since at least the Roman times . In the Domesday Book , the name was <unk> which name has evolved to today 's ' Warburton ' . The suffix – ton means a settlement or farmstead in Old English , indicating that the settlement has pre @-@ Conquest origins . It has been suggested that Warburton was the site of an Anglo @-@ Saxon burgh or defended settlement , possibly either called " <unk> " <unk> byrig , established by <unk> , Queen of the Mercians , in 915 during the wars with the Vikings . However , it now seems likely that site lay on the Wales – Cheshire border . 
 The first documented reference to Warburton occurs in the Domesday Book , where the two manors of Warburton were recorded ; the manors were united by the late 12th century . Before the Norman conquest , the area was controlled by the Anglo @-@ Saxon thegn Aelfward . Although the Domesday Book records no church in Warburton , it is possible that the church dedicated to Saint Werburgh is pre @-@ Conquest . The omission of the church may not be significant , as not all pre @-@ Conquest churches or chapels were recorded in the Domesday survey . The first documented evidence of a church in Warburton was in a deed of 1187 , when it was a chapel of ease for the parish of Lymm . Warburton became a separate parish in the 13th century . The church is surrounded by a ditch and bank , probably dating to at least the 14th century . Warburton is also the site of a medieval priory , near the Church of St Werburgh ; although the priory was only formed in the 13th century , it was dissolved in 1270 . 
 Warburton was predominantly a farming village during the medieval period . The north western corner of the township was used as a deer park . Warburton grew as an agricultural town during the medieval period , and it remained almost untouched by the Industrial Revolution ; this is reflected in the population change between 1801 and 1901 , dropping from 466 to 403 , with little variation at a time when the rest of Trafford was expanding rapidly . 
 = = Governance = = 
 The civil parish of Warburton was created in 1894 , under the Local Government Act 1894 and has its own parish council . Warburton became part of the Metropolitan Borough of Trafford in 1974 upon the borough 's creation , but was previously in Bucklow Rural District . The village is part of the Bowdon electoral ward ; as of the 2012 local elections the councillors for the Bowdon ward are all Conservative . Warburton lies in the Altrincham and Sale West constituency , and in the North West England constituency of the European Parliament . Since the formation of the Altrincham and Sale West constituency in 1997 it had been represented in the House of Commons by the Conservative MP Graham Brady . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The village of Lymm lies to the south west of Warburton in the borough of Warrington , with the River Bollin forming the border between the two villages . The Bollin joins the River Mersey in the village ; however the Mersey in Warburton has dried up , as it was diverted into the Manchester Ship Canal further upstream . To the east lie Dunham Town , Dunham Massey , Bowdon and Altrincham , with Little Bollington to the south , and Partington and Urmston to the north . The local geology is lower <unk> marl , with a ridge of sand and gravel running from Warburton to Dunham . 
 = = Transport = = 
 The main roads running through Warburton are the A6144 and <unk> . Two local bus services , 5 ( operated by Warrington Borough Transport ) and 38 ( operated by Warrington <unk> ) link Warburton with Warrington and Altrincham . 
 = = Demography = = 
 At the 2001 UK census , Warburton had a total population of 286 . For every 100 females , there were 121 @.@ 7 males . The average household size was 2 @.@ 44 . Of those aged 16 – 74 in Warburton , 43 @.@ 2 % had no academic qualifications or one GCSE , similar to the figures for all of Trafford ( 40 @.@ 8 % ) and in England ( 45 @.@ 5 % ) . According to the census , 1 @.@ 40 % were unemployed and 33 @.@ 49 % were economically inactive . 16 @.@ 43 % of the population were under the age of 16 and 6 @.@ 64 % were aged 75 and over ; the mean age of the people of Warburton was 43 @.@ 03 . 69 @.@ 34 % of residents described their health as ' good ' . 
 = = = Population change = = = 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 = = = Churches = = = 
 Warburton has two churches of note . St Werburgh 's ( grid reference <unk> ) is a timber framed church and a Grade I Listed Building , one of six in Trafford . Of the 29 timber framed churches that survive in England and Wales , St <unk> 's is one of the oldest . The church dates to at least the 14th century , and may be built on the site of an earlier Saxon chapel . It is rarely used for worship but is accessible to visitors . The church features an early @-@ 17th @-@ century font , a Jacobean pulpit , and a 1645 altar . Nearby are the remains of the old village cross , complete with stocks whose wooden restraints are modern , though the supporting pillars are much older . The other church in Warburton , also dedicated to St Werburgh , was built in 1883 by John Douglas and is a Grade II Listed Building . The church is made of red sandstone with a clay tile roof . 
 = = = Grade II listed buildings = = = 
 As well as the two churches dedicated to Saint Werburgh , there are 15 other Grade II listed buildings . The parish rooms and caretaker 's house were built in 1889 , and designed by John Douglas . Also built in the village by Douglas was the post office in 1893 , and Warburton School in 1871 – 72 ; this has been converted to a residence but still features crucks supporting the roof . Some farm buildings in Warburton are also listed , including the farmhouse on Moss Lane . The barn is 18th @-@ century but features crucks which may be 17th @-@ century or earlier . The timber framed farm building on Park Road is 17th @-@ century in origin ; the late @-@ 18th @-@ century farmhouse on Warburton Lane was made with Flemish bond brick and has a slate roof . The barn on Paddock Lane dates from the 17th century . Also on Paddock Lane are two farmhouses : one was built in 1717 by Thomas Egerton and features an inglenook fireplace ; the other is <unk> Farmhouse which was originally built in the 17th century with later additions , including a 19th @-@ century porch . The building on Warburton Lane near Villa Farmhouse was originally a timber framed building from the 16th or early 17th century . The house features late @-@ 16th- or early @-@ 17th @-@ century frescos of a woman , possibly St Werburgh , with two geese and a rose . 
 There is the base of a stone cross on <unk> Lane , and wooden stocks nearby , probably dating from the 17th century . One of the more unusual listed structures in Warburton is the 25 m stretch of wall constructed from flagstones , probably built in the 18th or 19th century . There are two listed structures in the grounds of the old Church of St Werburgh : a lychgate from the late 19th century , and a sundial from 1765 . 
 = = = Warburton Toll Bridge = = = 
 Warburton Bridge is a privately owned statutory tolled undertaking which incorporates a public highway road length . The high @-@ level cantilever bridge crosses the Manchester Ship Canal on the <unk> road , connecting the A57 with the A6144 , and was commissioned under the Rixton & Warburton Bridge Act 1863 . The original stone bridge spanned the River Mersey prior to its later diversion into the Manchester Ship Canal . Both bridges and the <unk> approach roads are privately maintained . It is one of the few remaining pre @-@ motorway toll bridges in the United Kingdom , and the only one in Greater Manchester . 
 = = Time Team in Warburton = = 
 Since 1998 , archaeological techniques such as field walking have led to the discovery of finds ranging in age from prehistoric flints and Bronze Age axe heads to Roman and late medieval finds . Featuring prominently amongst these finds were Roman artefacts including coins , broaches and a snake bracelet . At the invitation of local historian Jim Balme , Time Team excavated in Warburton in September 2006 . They were searching for a Roman fortlet that previous archaeological digs by South Trafford Archaeological Group ( STAG ) indicated might be present . Though no evidence of a Roman fortlet was found , the discovery of strip <unk> indicates that there was a Romano @-@ British farm in Warburton . The presence of Roman finds was explained as rubbish , mixed in with manure to be spread on the crops . 
 = What Lies Ahead = 
 " What Lies Ahead " is the first episode of the second season of the post @-@ apocalyptic horror television series The Walking Dead . It originally aired on AMC in the United States on October 16 , 2011 . It was written by series developer Frank Darabont ( under the pseudonym Ardeth Bey ) and series creator Robert Kirkman , and directed by Gwyneth Horder @-@ Payton and Ernest Dickerson . In this episode , Rick Grimes ( Andrew Lincoln ) leads his group toward Fort Benning , Georgia , but during an encounter with a herd of zombies , colloquially referred to as " walkers " , Sophia Peletier ( Madison Lintz ) goes missing , and a search group is formed . 
 " What Lies Ahead " was the last episode written by Darabont , who had been fired from the show in July 2011 . It was first previewed at the San Diego Comic @-@ Con International in San Diego on July 22 , 2011 . Production commenced in June 2011 . Unlike the first season , most of the principal photography for " What Lies Ahead " took place outside the city limits of Atlanta , Georgia ; filming took place in Smyrna and Henry County , Georgia . Before its first airing , several segments were announced and broadcast , including a six @-@ part internet series and a live after @-@ show hosted by Chris Hardwick . 
 " What Lies Ahead " was well received by television critics , who said it made a strong start to the season . Ratings were similarly positive : in the United States , it broke the record for the most @-@ watched drama in the history of basic cable , attaining 7 @.@ 3 million viewers . Worldwide , it averaged a 2 @.@ 0 rating in most television markets . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After the destruction of the Center for Disease Control ( CDC ) in Atlanta , Rick Grimes ( Andrew Lincoln ) and the survivors decide to travel to Fort Benning . Their group consists of Rick , his wife Lori Grimes ( Sarah Wayne Callies ) , his son Carl Grimes ( Chandler Riggs ) , Carol Peletier ( Melissa McBride ) and her daughter Sophia ( Madison Lintz ) , Shane Walsh ( Jon Bernthal ) , Dale Horvath ( Jeffrey DeMunn ) , Andrea ( Laurie Holden ) , Glenn Rhee ( Steven Yeun ) , Theodore " T @-@ Dog " Douglas ( IronE Singleton ) , and Daryl Dixon ( Norman Reedus ) . Before leaving Rick tries one last time to contact Morgan Jones ( Lennie James ) and tells him to be safe but doesn 't reach him . The group encounters a blockade of abandoned vehicles , and Dale 's RV breaks down . Dale and Glenn try to repair the vehicle , while the rest search for food , water , and clothing . 
 A large herd of walkers appears in the distance , prompting the survivors to seek shelter under abandoned vehicles . Andrea is trapped in the bathroom of an RV , where a walker discovers her . Dale hands her a screwdriver through an opening in the truck 's roof , and Andrea uses it to vanquish the walker . Meanwhile , T @-@ Dog slices his arm , attracting walkers to his trail of blood . Daryl rescues him by stabbing a walker , and they hide under nearby corpses , whose scent protects them . Two walkers spot Sophia hiding under a car and chase her into the woods . Rick pursues them , catches Sophia , and urges her to seek refuge in a hole near the riverbed while he distracts the walkers . Once Rick does so , Sophia escapes . While the others continue to clear the blockade of cars , Shane tells Lori he plans to leave the group on his own accord . Daryl and Rick fail to track Sophia down and the search is temporarily called off . A frantic and distraught Carol blames Rick for losing Sophia , exacerbating the guilt he already feels . 
 The search for Sophia resumes the next morning . Andrea argues with Dale , requesting her gun for the search , and claiming his decision to stay with her at the CDC deprived her of the choice to end her life on her own terms . The group arrives at a church and kills the three walkers inside . Afterward , Lori and Carol go inside to pray . Carol begs for forgiveness and for Sophia 's safe recovery . Andrea overhears Shane arguing with Lori about his plans to leave , and Andrea tells him she is willing to go with him . As the tension heightens , Rick questions his position as leader of the group . He also decides to go into the church to pray . At the altar , where a statue of Jesus stands , Rick asks God to give him a sign that he is making the right decisions . 
 Rick , Carl , and Shane discover a deer in the woods . Rick is initially in awe and takes this rare sighting as the sign he 'd petitioned God for , but as Carl approaches the deer a gun is fired and the bullet passes through the deer and hits Carl 's stomach . With his tenuous faith shattered , Rick frantically rushes to his severely injured son . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 An early concept for the season premiere by Frank Darabont never materialized , allegedly as a result of budget cuts . 
 This initial idea would have been an episode @-@ long flashback , illustrating the fall of Atlanta and centering on the mission of a doomed soldier who loses his team . Darabont was influenced by the American war film Black Hawk Down ( 2001 ) . " All they have to do is travel maybe a dozen blocks " , he said , " a simple journey , but what starts as a no @-@ brainer scenario goes from ' the city is being secured ' to ' holy shit , we 've lost control , the world is ending ' . " The episode would have introduced several characters , including Andrea , Dale , and Amy ( Emma Bell ) . 
 The concluding scene would have tied into the pilot episode , " Days Gone Bye " . Darabont says that the episode shows a soldier dying , hidden in a tank , after which there is a " shot @-@ for @-@ shot reprise from the first episode of the first season " . The idea was to tell the soldier 's story , because " every zombie has a story " . Samuel Witwer , who was cast as the soldier in the pilot for this backstory that would eventually unfold , was frustrated by the story 's rejection and questioned the need for such a budget cut . 
 Ultimately , the premiere written and filmed would begin after the events of Season 1 , although a brief flashback scene of Shane and Lori witnessing the fall of Atlanta from a distance would appear during the season . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 At PaleyFest 2011 , it was announced that the second season of The Walking Dead would mainly be produced outside the city limits of Atlanta , Georgia . Most of the principal photography for " What Lies Ahead " took place in unincorporated Henry County , Georgia on June 5 – 9 , 2011 , using a stretch of Georgia State Route 20 that was closed to traffic for the purpose . On June 8 , 2011 , the first promotional image was released . Darabont described the scene : " At this moment , I ’ m standing on a stretch of post @-@ apocalypse interstate in Georgia , littered with abandoned cars ... " . 
 Principal photography for the episode resumed at the Cobb Energy Performing Arts Centre in Smyrna , Georgia , which was depicted as the headquarters of the CDC . Several neighboring roads were closed for 4 hours for it . Production then moved to a nearby office park , where it commenced over a period of sixteen hours . The scene was later cut from the season premiere prior to its broadcast . In an interview with Entertainment Weekly , series creator Robert Kirkman said that after editing " there were certain things that just got left on the cutting room floor " . 
 = = = Editing = = = 
 " What Lies Ahead " is an extended premiere , the result of a decision to combine what were originally designed to be the first two episodes of the season . This led to much of the original first episode , titled " Miles Behind Us , " to be discarded , and is also the reason that the premiere contains dual credits for both writer and director . 
 " Miles Behind Us , " which was written by then @-@ showrunner Frank Darabont and directed by Gwyneth Horder @-@ Payton ( an alumnus from the first season ) , began immediately where the Season 1 finale left off , with the group departing the destroyed CDC . Soon after , Shane finds himself left behind when one of the tires of his jeep is punctured . Frantically trying to catch up on foot , he is nearly overrun by a multitude of walkers when he is rescued in the nick of time by the rest of the group , Daryl having noticed Shane 's absence in the convoy . Shane reveals to Rick that despite their slow gait , the walkers do not seem to ever tire , knowledge that informs Rick 's fateful decision to temporarily leave Sophia . 
 The group decides to look for refuge with Guillermo 's gang at the Atlanta nursing home , last encountered in the episode " Vatos , " but arrive to find the location overrun with walkers and the entire group dead . After clearing out the area to spend the night , the group observes that the people were not killed by walkers , but execution @-@ style by human <unk> , in what was likely intended to be foreshadowing of The Governor . 
 Resolving that they will never again let their guard down , the group decides that they will try to reach Fort Benning , the alternative to the CDC proposed by Shane in the prior season . As in the final version of the episode , a narration scene with Rick speaking to Morgan on the walkie @-@ talkie was included , but was re @-@ shot with modified dialog that served to replace the above material , allowing the premiere to begin with the group putting Atlanta behind them . Rick sports his full sheriff 's wardrobe in the reshoot , whereas in the original version he is wearing the white undershirt he was wearing in the Season 1 finale . 
 " Miles Behind Us " was likely meant to end with Rick returning to the highway to break the news to Carol that Sophia went missing , while in the final version the group is informed by implication , with a search in the woods underway following a commercial break . It is estimated that only about fifteen minutes of the original first episode appears in the final cut , with the balance of the premiere consisting of the " second " episode that was written by Robert Kirkman and directed by Ernest Dickerson . 
 Many of the deleted scenes from " Miles Behind Us " appear as bonus material on the Season 2 DVD , though it does not include the events leading up to Shane 's rescue nor the original rooftop walkie @-@ talkie monologue . Footage can also be seen in the Comic @-@ Con trailer . The original title was seen on early marketing material for the season before the decision was made to " cannibalize " the original premiere into what would become " What Lies Ahead . " Following in the tradition established by the pilot , " Miles Behind Us " was taken from the title of the first issue of the second volume of the graphic novel . 
 In the Season 2 DVD commentary , Robert Kirkman and Glen Mazzara described the decision to retool the premiere in such a dramatic way as an amicable decision agreed upon between both the producers and AMC to make the premiere more of an " event " as well as to push the story forward . However , reports at the time had suggested that the situation was the result of strife between Frank Darabont and AMC , who deemed footage from the first episode " unusable , " with some speculating that the network was looking for a " pretense " to oust Darabont due to its ongoing conflict with the showrunner over budget cuts . Darabont was ultimately fired from the show only a few episodes into production ( " Ardeth Bey , " as he is credited as co @-@ writer on the premiere , is a pseudonym ) , and Horder @-@ Payton has directed no further episodes of the series . 
 Not knowing at the time that he would be referring to deleted scenes , Andrew Lincoln told Entertainment Weekly , " I remember going on set for the season premiere and seeing a couple of the prop guys , and they just looked at me as they gave me my gun and they went , ' You know , in this episode we kill more zombies than in the whole of Season 1 . ' They actually counted the kills ! And when it came time for the taking @-@ of @-@ the @-@ courtyard scene , that was just carnage . " He added , " It really wasn 't that well plotted . We just got sent zombies towards us and we had to improvise stabbing , so it was a bit touch @-@ and @-@ go from time to time . " 
 Similarly , Neil Brown Jr . , the actor who plays Guillermo , gave an interview where he obliquely referred to possible participation in the Season 2 premiere . This ultimately never made it to the screen . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 " What Lies Ahead " was heavily promoted in the months before its premiere . A four @-@ minute trailer was released at San Diego Comic @-@ Con International on July 22 , 2011 , and a one @-@ minute preview was broadcast on July 27 , 2011 , during the season @-@ 4 premiere of Breaking Bad , in which Grimes kills two zombies with a rock . A six @-@ part internet series was broadcast on AMC on October 3 , 2011 . It showed the events before the zombie outbreak from the perspective of a woman named Hannah , who appeared in the first episode . On the same day , a screening of " What Lies Ahead " commenced at the Nokia Theatre in Los Angeles . After the premiere of the episode , a live after @-@ show titled Talking Dead was broadcast , hosted by Chris Hardwick . 
 This is one of the last episodes of The Walking Dead to feature Darabont as an executive producer and the showrunner . In July 2011 he stepped down as showrunner . Initial reports suggested that he was unable to adjust to the schedule of running a television series , but it was later confirmed that he was fired because of the show 's reduced budget and his strained relationship with the executives of AMC . In addition to the main cast , Melissa McBride reprised her role as Carol Peletier , IronE Singleton reprised his role as T @-@ Dog , and Madison Lintz reprised her role as Sophia Peletier . All three were promoted to the recurring cast , as was Norman Reedus . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " What Lies Ahead " was first broadcast in the United States on October 16 , 2011 , on AMC . It received 7 @.@ 3 million viewers and attained a <unk> rating , breaking the record for the most @-@ watched drama in the history of cable television . It received the second highest viewership of the week ending October 16 , scoring higher than Jersey Shore but less than a 2011 NFL season game between the Detroit Lions and the Chicago Bears . " What Lies Ahead " achieved similar feats , attaining a 3 @.@ 8 rating — translating to 4 @.@ 8 million viewers — in the 18 – 49 demographic , according to Nielsen ratings . In the 25 – 54 demographic , it garnered 4 @.@ 2 million viewers . Total viewership after two encore presentations was 11 million viewers , an increase of 38 % over the series premiere , " Days Gone Bye " , which got 5 @.@ 35 million viewers on its initial airing . Viewership in the 18 – 49 demographic showed similar increases , having nearly doubled from the series premiere . 
 The episode received a similar response in international markets . It premiered in 122 countries in thirty @-@ five languages , with a total viewership of 10 million and an average rating of 2 @.@ 0 in most metered television markets . It was first broadcast in Spain on October 17 , 2011 , to an estimated 432 @,@ 000 viewers , nearly 73 % of them in the 18 – 49 demographic . Total viewership increased 411 % from the previous season 's premiere . The episode 's first UK broadcast received 693 @,@ 300 viewers and achieved a 2 @.@ 204 rating in the 18 – 34 demographic . An estimated 439 @,@ 800 viewers were in the 18 – 49 demographic , making it the second highest rated show of the week on FX . Total viewership in Mexico increased by 30 % from the previous season 's premiere , translating to 296 @,@ 090 . It became the highest @-@ rated program of the night on pay television . It was also the highest @-@ rated pay television program of the night in its timeslot in Colombia , attaining 296 @,@ 950 viewers and achieving a 2 @.@ 57 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , or 92 @,@ 240 viewers . In Italy , it was the highest @-@ rated program amongst men in the 18 – 49 demographic and the second most viewed program in its timeslot . 
 The episode 's performance sparked reactions from several executives of the series ' broadcasting affiliates . Hernan Lopez , CEO of Fox International Channels ( FIC ) , commented , " The Walking Dead has gone from phenomenon to pandemic . The numbers that came in [ that ] week combined with the astounding launch results in the US [ told ] us that the virus is now out of control . " Charlie Collier , president of AMC , felt that The Walking Dead was a rarity that successfully reached its core audience as well as broadening its fanbase , saying , " That The Walking Dead is now the most watched drama in the history of basic cable is staggering , just like our zombies . " 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 " What Lies Ahead " was met with general acclaim from television critics . Gina McIntyre of the Los Angeles Times felt it was the series ' best installment , calling it " thrilling " and " heart @-@ wrenching " . Similar sentiments were echoed by Josh Jackson of Paste , who gave the episode an 8 @.@ 8 out of 10 — a " commendable " rating . Darren Franich of Entertainment Weekly liked what he called the " casual " atmosphere of the opening scene and described the ending as " daring " . IGN 's Eric Goldman felt the episode got the second season off to a strong start ; he gave the episode 8 out of 10 — a " great " rating . 
 Hank Stuever of The Washington Post found the pace of this episode " sleeker " than that of previous ones , adding , " This has the subtle but immediate effect of making The Walking Dead less predictable and more frightening . " Derek <unk> of Daily Nexus commended the episode , deeming it " frighteningly good " . He praised the performances of Holden and Reedus and described the former as one of the show 's strongest characters . David Chute of Indiewire approved of the special effects and commended the highway sequence , saying , " a sequence in which the humans hide under the wrecked cars in a freeway pileup , able to see only the feet of the flesh eaters shuffling past , is a classic nail @-@ biter . " David <unk> of Daily News gave " What Lies Ahead " three out of five stars and expressed the view : " The Walking Dead may be under new management , but it seems to have kept its rhythm , moving easily between bursts of intense violence and long stretches of psychological sparring . " The Hollywood Reporter writer Tim Goodman concurred . " It 's 90 minutes of skill " , he wrote , " bringing viewers back into the story without missing a beat , adding immediate depth to characters , ratcheting up suspense [ ... ] , plus expanding the emotional palette of the series . " In his 3 @.@ 5 @-@ star review , John Griffiths of Us Weekly liked the personal dynamics almost as much as the <unk> . 
 Some critics were less enthusiastic about the episode . Zack Handlen of The A.V. Club gave it a B + grade ; he praised the horror sequences in the episode , but called the character development " tepid " . " At the very least " , he wrote , " the show does a fine job working within its restrictions . There are a handful of absolutely top @-@ notch set pieces in [ ' What Lies Ahead ' ] , starting with an attack on the highway that seems to go on forever . " Alex Hanno of The Tufts Daily felt that , although entertaining , the plot lacked " a much needed rush of energy " . He gave it 3 @.@ 5 out of 5 stars . Likewise , Nick Venable of Cinema Blend wrote : " I won 't say I got bored , but much of the episode left me unmoved , and far less tense than I should have been . " 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 This episode won a Creative Arts Emmy Award on the 64th Primetime Emmy Awards , for Outstanding Prosthetic Makeup for a Series , Miniseries , Movie or a Special . It was the second award in this category for the series , after Gregory Nicotero and his team were awarded for the first season premiere , " Days Gone Bye " . 
 = Skaði = 
 In Norse mythology , Skaði ( sometimes anglicized as Skadi , Skade , or <unk> ) is a jötunn and goddess associated with <unk> , skiing , winter , and mountains . Skaði is attested in the Poetic Edda , compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional sources ; the Prose Edda and in Heimskringla , written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson , and in the works of skalds . 
 In all sources , Skaði is the daughter of the deceased Þjazi , and Skaði married the god Njörðr as part of the compensation provided by the gods for killing her father Þjazi . In Heimskringla , Skaði is described as having split up with Njörðr and as later having married the god Odin , and that the two produced many children together . In both the Poetic Edda and the Prose Edda , Skaði is responsible for placing the serpent that drips venom onto the bound Loki . Skaði is alternately referred to as <unk> ( Old Norse " ski god " ) and <unk> ( Old Norse " ski dís " , often translated as " lady " ) . 
 The etymology of the name Skaði is uncertain , but may be connected with the original form of Scandinavia . Some place names in Scandinavia , particularly in Sweden , refer to Skaði . Scholars have theorized a potential connection between Skaði and the god Ullr ( who is also associated with skiing and appears most frequently in place names in Sweden ) , a particular relationship with the jötunn Loki , and that Scandinavia may be related to the name Skaði ( potentially meaning " Skaði 's island " ) or the name may be connected to an Old Norse noun meaning " harm " . Skaði has inspired various works of art . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The Old Norse name Skaði , along with <unk> ( n ) <unk> and <unk> , may be related to Gothic <unk> , Old English <unk> , Old Saxon <unk> , and Old High German <unk> ( meaning " shadow " ) . Scholar John McKinnell comments that this etymology suggests Skaði may have once been a personification of the geographical region of Scandinavia or associated with the underworld . 
 Georges Dumézil disagrees with the notion of <unk> @-@ <unk> as etymologically " the island of the goddess Skaði . " Dumézil comments that the first element <unk> must have had — or once had — a connection to " darkness " " or something else we cannot be sure of " . Dumézil says that , rather , the name Skaði derives from the name of the geographical region , which was at the time no longer completely understood . In connection , Dumézil points to a parallel in Ériu , a goddess personifying Ireland that appears in some Irish texts , whose name he says comes from Ireland rather than the other way around . 
 Alternatively , Skaði may be connected with the Old Norse noun <unk> ( " harm " ) , source of the Icelandic and Faroese <unk> ( “ harm , damage ” ) and cognate with obsolete English <unk> , which survives in unscathed and scathing . 
 = = Attestations = = 
 Skaði is attested in poems found in the Poetic Edda , in two books of the Prose Edda and in one Heimskringla book . 
 = = = Poetic Edda = = = 
 In the Poetic Edda poem Grímnismál , the god Odin ( disguised as Grímnir ) reveals to the young Agnarr the existence of twelve locations . Odin mentions the location Þrymheimr sixth in a single stanza . In the stanza , Odin details that the jötunn Þjazi once lived there , and that now his daughter Skaði does . Odin describes Þrymheimr as consisting of " ancient courts " and refers to Skaði as " the shining bride of the gods " . In the prose introduction to the poem Skírnismál , the god Freyr has become heartsick for a fair girl ( the jötunn Gerðr ) he has spotted in Jötunheimr . The god Njörðr asks Freyr 's servant Skírnir to talk to Freyr , and in the first stanza of the poem , Skaði also tells Skírnir to ask Freyr why he is so upset . Skírnir responds that he expects harsh words from their son Freyr . 
 In the prose introduction to the poem Lokasenna , Skaði is referred to as the wife of Njörðr and is cited as one of the goddesses attending Ægir 's feast . After Loki has an exchange with the god Heimdallr , Skaði interjects . Skaði tells Loki that he is " light @-@ hearted " and that Loki will not be " playing [ ... ] with [ his ] tail wagging free " for much longer , for soon the gods will bind Loki to a sharp rock with the ice @-@ cold entrails of his son . Loki responds that , even if this is so , he was " first and foremost " at the killing of Þjazi . Skaði responds that , if this is so , " baneful advice " will always flow from her " sanctuaries and plains " . Loki responds that Skaði was more friendly in speech when Skaði was in his bed — an accusation he makes to most of the goddesses in the poem and is not attested elsewhere . Loki 's flyting then turns to the goddess Sif . 
 In the prose section at the end of Lokasenna , the gods catch Loki and bind him with the innards of his son Nari , while they turn his son Narfi into a wolf . Skaði places a venomous snake above Loki 's face . Venom drips from the snake and Loki 's wife Sigyn sits and holds a basin beneath the serpent , catching the venom . When the basin is full , Sigyn must empty it , and during that time the snake venom falls on to Loki 's face , causing him to writhe in a tremendous fury , so much so that all earthquakes stem from Loki 's <unk> . 
 In the poem Hyndluljóð , the female jötunn Hyndla tells the goddess Freyja various mythological genealogies . In one stanza , Hyndla notes that Þjazi " loved to shoot " and that Skaði was his daughter . 
 = = = Prose Edda = = = 
 In the Prose Edda , Skaði is attested in two books : Gylfaginning and Skáldskaparmál . 
 = = = = Gylfaginning = = = = 
 In chapter 23 of the Prose Edda book Gylfaginning , the enthroned figure of High details that Njörðr 's wife is Skaði , that she is the daughter of the jötunn Þjazi , and recounts a tale involving the two . High recalls that Skaði wanted to live in the home once owned by her father called Þrymheimr . However , Njörðr wanted to live nearer to the sea . Subsequently , the two made an agreement that they would spend nine nights in Þrymheimr and then the next three nights in Njörðr 's sea @-@ side home Nóatún ( or nine winters in Þrymheimr and another nine in Nóatún according to the Codex Regius manuscript ) . However , when Njörðr returned from the mountains to Nóatún , he said : 
 " Hateful for me are the mountains , 
 I was not long there , 
 only nine nights . 
 The howling of the wolves 
 sounded ugly to me 
 after the song of the swans . " 
 Skaði responded : 
 " Sleep I could not 
 on the sea beds 
 for the screeching of the bird . 
 That gull wakes me 
 when from the wide sea 
 he comes each morning . " 
 The sources for these stanzas are not provided in the Prose Edda or elsewhere . High says that afterward Skaði went back up to the mountains and lived in Þrymheimr , and there Skaði often travels on skis , wields a bow , and shoots wild animals . High notes that Skaði is also referred to as " ski god " ( Old Norse <unk> ) or <unk> and the " ski lady " ( <unk> ) . In support , the above @-@ mentioned stanza from the Poetic Edda poem Grímnismál is cited . In the next chapter ( 24 ) , High says that " after this " , Njörðr " had two children " : Freyr and Freyja . The name of the mother of the two children is not provided here . 
 At the end of chapter 51 of Gylfaginning , High describes how the gods caught and bound Loki . Skaði is described as having taken a venomous snake and fastening it above the bound Loki , so that the venom may drip on to Loki 's face . Loki 's wife Sigyn sat by his side and held a bowl out . The bowl catches the venom , but when the bowl becomes full Loki writhes in extreme pain , causing the earth to shake and resulting in what we know as an earthquake . 
 = = = = Skáldskaparmál = = = = 
 In chapter 56 of the Prose Edda book Skáldskaparmál , Bragi recounts to Ægir how the gods killed Þjazi . Þjazi 's daughter , Skaði , took a helmet , a coat of mail , and " all weapons of war " and traveled to Asgard , the home of the gods . Upon Skaði 's arrival , the gods wished to atone for her loss and offered compensation . Skaði provides them with her terms of settlement , and the gods agree that Skaði may choose a husband from among themselves . However , Skaði must choose this husband by looking solely at their feet . Skaði saw a pair of feet that she found particularly attractive and said " I choose that one ; there can be little that is ugly about Baldr . " However , the owner of the feet turned out to be Njörðr . 
 Skaði also included in her terms of settlement that the gods must do something she thought impossible for them to do : make her laugh . To do so , Loki tied one end of a cord around the beard of a nanny goat and the other end around his testicles . The goat and Loki drew one another back and forth , both squealing loudly . Loki dropped into Skaði 's lap , and Skaði laughed , completing this part of her atonement . Finally , in compensation to Skaði , Odin took Þjazi 's eyes , plunged them into the sky , and from the eyes made two stars . 
 Further in Skáldskaparmál , a work by the skald Þórðr Sjáreksson is quoted . The poem refers to Skaði as " the wise god @-@ bride " and notes that she " could not love the Van " . Prose below the quote clarifies that this is a reference to Skaði 's leaving of Njörðr . In chapter 16 , names for Loki are given , including " wrangler of Heimdall and Skadi " . In chapter 22 , Skaði is referenced in the 10th century poem Haustlöng where the skald Þjóðólfr of Hvinir refers to an ox as " bow @-@ string @-@ Var 's [ Skaði 's ] whale " . In chapter 23 , the skald Bragi Boddason refers to Þjazi as the " father of the ski @-@ dis " . In chapter 32 , Skaði is listed among six goddesses who attend a party held by Ægir . In chapter 75 , Skaði is included among a list of 27 ásynjur names . 
 = = = Heimskringla = = = 
 In chapter 8 of the Heimskringla book Ynglinga saga , Skaði appears in an <unk> account . This account details that Skaði had once married Njörðr but that she would not have sex with him , and that later Skaði married Odin . Skaði and Odin had " many sons " . Only one of the names of these sons is provided : <unk> , a king of Norway . Two stanzas are presented by the skald Eyvindr skáldaspillir in reference . In the first stanza , Skaði is described as a jötunn and a " fair maiden " . A portion of the second stanza is missing . The second stanza reads : 
 Of sea @-@ bones , 
 and sons many 
 the ski @-@ goddess 
 gat with <unk> 
 Lee Hollander explains that " bones @-@ of @-@ the @-@ sea " is a kenning for " rocks " , and believes that this defective stanza undoubtedly referred to Skaði as a " dweller of the rocks " in connection with her association with mountains and skiing . 
 = = Theories = = 
 = = = Völsunga saga = = = 
 Another figure by the name of Skaði who appears in the first chapter of Völsunga saga . In the chapter , this Skaði — who is male — is the owner of a thrall by the name of Breði . Another man , Sigi — a son of Odin — went hunting one winter with the thrall . Sigi and the thrall Breði hunted throughout the day until evening , when they compared their kills . Sigi saw that the thrall 's kills outdid his own , and so Sigi killed Breði and buried Breði 's corpse in a <unk> ( 1990 : 35 ) . 
 That night , Sigi returned home and claimed that Breði had ridden out into the forest , that he had lost sight of Breði , and that he furthermore did not know what became of the thrall . Skaði doubted Sigi 's explanation , suspected that Sigi was lying , and that Sigi had instead killed Breði . Skaði gathered men together to look for Breði and the group eventually found the corpse of Breði in a snowdrift . Skaði declared that henceforth the snowdrift should be called " Breði 's drift , " and ever since then people have referred to large snow drifts by that name . The fact that Sigi murdered Breði was evident , and so Sigi was considered an outlaw . Led by Odin , Sigi leaves the land , and Skaði is not mentioned again in the saga . 
 Scholar Jesse Byock notes that the goddess Skaði is also associated with winter and hunting , and that the episode in Volsunga saga involving the male Skaði , Sigi , and Breði has been theorized as stemming from an otherwise lost myth . 
 = = = Other = = = 
 Scholar John Lindow comments that the episode in Gylfaginning detailing Loki 's antics with a goat may have associations with castration and a ritual involving making a goddess laugh . Lindow notes that Loki and Skaði appear to have had a special relationship , an example being Skaði 's placement of the snake over Loki 's face in Lokasenna and Gylfaginning . 
 Due to their shared association with skiing and the fact that both place names referring to Ullr and Skaði appear most frequently in Sweden , some scholars have proposed a particular connection between the two gods . On the other hand , Skaði may potentially be a masculine form and , as a result , some scholars have theorized that Skaði may have originally been a male deity . 
 Scholar Hilda Ellis Davidson proposes that Skaði 's cult may have thrived in Hålogaland , a province in northern Norway , because " she shows characteristics of the Sami people , who were renowned for skiing , shooting with the bow and hunting ; her separation from Njord might point to a split between her cult and that of the Vanir in this region , where Scandinavians and the Sami were in close contact . " 
 = = Modern influence = = 
 Modern works of art depicting Skaði include Skadi und Niurd ( illustration , 1883 ) by K. Ehrenberg and Skadi ( 1901 ) by E. Doepler d . J. Skaði also appears in A. Oehlenschläger 's poem ( 1819 ) <unk> <unk> . Art deco depictions of both the god Ullr ( 1928 ) and Skaði ( 1929 ) appear on covers of the Swedish ski annual På <unk> , both skiing and wielding bows . E. John B. Allen notes that the deities are portrayed in a manner that " give [ s ] historical authority to this most important of Swedish ski journals , which began publication in 1893 " . A moon of the planet Saturn ( <unk> ) takes its name from that of the goddess . 
 Taking her name from that of the goddess , Skadi is the main character in a web comic by Katie Rice and Luke <unk> on the weekly webcomic site Dumm Comics . 
 The Eye of Skadi is a purchasable item in Dota 2 , a real time action strategy game , by Valve Corporation . 
 Skadi can be summoned as a persona in the Empress Arcana of the Persona series , a JRPG series by Atlus . 
 Skadi is an unlockable huntress in the MOBA <unk> . 
 The Rowing Club of Rotterdam is named after Skadi . 
 The Skadi Mons , a mountain on Venus , is named after the goddess . 
 The skiing and alpine club of the Te Ra Waldorf primary school Kapiti New Zealand is named " Te Ra , Skadi " ( after the Maori god of the sun ; and Skadi Ski goddess ) . 
 = Ohio State Route 701 = 
 State Route 701 ( SR 701 , OH 701 ) is a 8 @.@ 96 @-@ mile ( 14 @.@ 42 km ) east – west state highway in western Ohio , a U.S. state . The state highway 's western terminus is at a T @-@ intersection with SR 309 nearly 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) southeast of Ada . The eastern terminus of State Route 701 is at U.S. Route 68 ( US 68 ) approximately 3 @.@ 50 miles ( 5 @.@ 63 km ) southeast of Dunkirk . 
 Established in the late 1930s , SR 701 is a two @-@ lane route that serves as an eastward continuation of SR 309 , which runs due east out of Lima . SR 701 picks up along the same east – west alignment when SR 309 turns southeasterly in the direction of Kenton . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The entirety of SR 701 runs within rural territory in the northern half of Hardin County . It begins at a T @-@ intersection with SR 309 in the extreme northern portion of Marion Township . The highway runs northeast a short distance before turning due east onto the boundary between Marion and Liberty Townships . For its entire distance , SR 701 passes through vast farmland . In addition , small patches of woods and a number of houses appear along the highway as well . SR 701 intersects County Road 65 ( CR 65 ) and then CR 75 , at which point it becomes the border between Cessna and Washington Townships . As it straddles the boundary between these two townships , SR 701 successively intersects Township Road 85 ( TR 85 ) and TR 87 , followed by split intersections with CR 95 , TR 105 , CR 115 and TR 125 . Upon intersecting CR 135 , SR 701 becomes the separation between Pleasant and Blanchard Townships . The highway crosses a CSX railway line , after which it meets TR 145 prior to arriving at its endpoint at US 68 . Continuing to the east of US 68 following the end of SR 701 is CR 70 . 
 Maintenance of SR 701 falls under the jurisdiction of the Ohio Department of Transportation ( ODOT ) . As a part of its responsibilities maintaining this highway , ODOT conducts surveys to identify the amount of traffic using this and other routes throughout the state highway system . This measurement of traffic volume is known as the average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) . The AADT identifies the amount of traffic using a particular stretch of highway on any average day of the year . As determined in a 2010 survey by ODOT , an average of 430 passenger vehicles and 90 commercial vehicles travel the length of SR 701 on a daily basis . SR 701 is not included within the National Highway System ( NHS ) . The NHS is a network of routes that are determined to be most important for the economy , mobility and defense of the nation . 
 = = History = = 
 The SR 701 designation was applied in 1937 . Throughout its history , SR 701 has utilized the same alignment through in the northern half of Hardin County . It has been paved since it was first established . The only change to have taken place related to SR 701 is that the route that it met at its western terminus when first designated was the predecessor to SR 309 , US 30S . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Hardin County . 
 = Jabari Parker = 
 Jabari Ali Parker ( born March 15 , 1995 ) is an American professional basketball player for the Milwaukee Bucks of the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) . He was taken with the second overall pick in the 2014 NBA draft . He ended his college career after one season of playing for Duke University . Parker was a standout high school athlete , helping his team win four straight state championships for Simeon Career Academy , and was named the National High School Player of the Year by Gatorade and McDonald 's . In his freshman year for the 2013 – 14 Duke Blue Devils , he was named a consensus first @-@ team All @-@ American , the USBWA National Freshman of the Year , and the runner @-@ up for the John R. Wooden Award ( College Player of the Year ) . Parker is a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints , a native of Chicago , Illinois , and the son of former NBA player , Sonny Parker . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Parker 's family has lived on Chicago 's South Side since before Jabari was born , and he was raised in the South Shore community area . Parker 's father , Sonny , has served hundreds of Chicago metropolitan area children as youth foundation director since 1990 . Parker discovered basketball in one of his father 's many leagues , although his father has never coached one of his teams . He honed his basketball skills with his brother Christian on the basketball court at his local LDS Church meetinghouse in the Hyde Park community area in order to avoid the hazards of urban playgrounds . By second grade his basketball skills were superior to those of the fifth @-@ graders he played with , and he competed in middle school leagues as a fifth grader . He credits his cousin Jay Parker who grew up with him for pushing him to be better going back to when Jabari was in third grade and Jay was in fifth grade . Sometimes , Jabari and Christian played basketball all through the night at the church . Jabari actually made the eighth @-@ grade team as a fourth @-@ grader , but could not play until fifth grade for insurance reasons . In fifth grade , he had five Division I scholarship offers as a 6 @-@ foot ( 1 @.@ 83 m ) guard . In sixth grade , when he stood at 6 feet 2 inches ( 1 @.@ 88 m ) , he visited Simeon for a day and <unk> with Derrick Rose . Parker attended Robert A. Black Magnet Elementary and made headlines when he made Simeon Career Academy his high school choice , just like Rose , Nick Anderson , Ben Wilson , Bobby Simmons and Deon Thomas before him . Parker has two older sisters who had attended Simeon . However , he has claimed that the reason he chose Simeon was due to his perception of the likelihood that he could achieve team success on the basketball court ( as measured in championships ) . During the summer after finishing middle school , he received an National Basketball Players Association Top 100 Camp invitation , which he accepted . By this time , he stood at 6 feet 4 inches ( 1 @.@ 93 m ) . 
 = = High school career = = 
 = = = Freshman year = = = 
 Parker was the first freshman to start on the Simeon varsity team in school history . Over the course of the season , he contributed 19 @.@ 3 points per game , 5 @.@ 0 rebounds per game and 3 @.@ 0 assists per game , while his team won the IHSA Class 4A state championship with a 25 – 9 record . By the end of the season , he had received numerous scholarship offers , including those from Illinois , Kansas , DePaul , Pittsburgh , Northwestern , Florida , Washington , BYU and Oregon State as well as significant interest from Kentucky , Duke and North Carolina . He earned the ESPN HS 2010 Freshman of the Year . He was a MaxPreps.com second team 2009 @-@ 10 Boys Basketball Freshman All @-@ American Team selection . 
 = = = Sophomore year = = = 
 As a sophomore , Parker helped his team spend much of the season ranked nationally in the top five . That season , he averaged 15 @.@ 3 points and 5 @.@ 9 rebounds per game , while his team won the IHSA Class 4A state championship with a 30 – 2 record . He earned second team All @-@ State recognition from the Chicago Tribune , while the Chicago Sun @-@ Times listed him as a Class 4A All @-@ State first @-@ team selection with Ryan Boatright , Tracy Abrams , David <unk> and Frank Kaminsky . The 12 @-@ man Illinois Basketball Coaches Association Class 3A / 4A boys ' all @-@ state first team included these five and Wayne Blackshear , Johnny Hill , Mike Shaw , <unk> <unk> , Sam Thompson , Anthony Davis and <unk> Henry . He earned the ESPN HS 2011 Sophomore of the year . He was a MaxPreps.com first team 2010 @-@ 11 Boys Basketball Sophomore All @-@ American Team selection . 
 = = = Junior year = = = 
 During his junior year preseason , Parker participated in the July 2011 LeBron James Skill Academy , and he was one of a handful of juniors invited to the August 5 – 7 , 2011 5th annual Nike Global Challenge , where he earned tournament MVP honors . 
 During the season , Parker established the Simeon single @-@ game scoring record with 40 points in 21 minutes of play to go along with 16 rebounds and 6 blocked shots against Perspectives High School . As a junior in high school , he received offers from Duke , Kansas , BYU , Kentucky , UNC and others . On February 17 , Parker and Simeon won the Public League championship by defeating Curie Metropolitan High School 53 – 49 . Both the semifinals and finals were broadcast on ESPN3 . Coaches Izzo , Krzyzewski , Matta and Weber as well as Mayor Emanuel and cadres of their assistants were among those in attendance to see this March 6 IHSA sectional semifinal against Young won by Simeon 52 – 42 in which Parker led the way with 18 points and 6 rebounds . In the days prior to the state final four , Parker stated that although Coach Weber had been fired , he remained interested in Illinois and other in @-@ state schools such as DePaul and Northwestern . Parker had 15 points in the March 17 championship game 50 – 48 victory over Proviso East High School , resulting in a 33 – 1 junior year record for Simeon . The state semifinals and the finals were broadcast live on ESPN3 . For the season , Parker averaged 19 @.@ 5 points , 8 @.@ 9 rebounds , 4 @.@ 9 assists , 3 @.@ 3 blocks and 1 @.@ 4 steals per game or 20 @.@ 4 points , 9 @.@ 2 rebounds , 5 @.@ 1 assists , 3 @.@ 4 blocks and 1 @.@ 5 steals per game , depending on the source , while shooting 55 percent from the field , 39 percent from 3 @-@ point range and 72 percent from the free @-@ throw line . Following the season , he was featured in a May cover story in Sports Illustrated with the title " The Best High School Basketball Player Since LeBron James is ... Jabari Parker But There 's Something More Important To Him Than Instant NBA Stardom : His Faith " . The story presented his humility and noted that he is conflicted on his decision to serve as an LDS missionary . Parker announced that he anticipated trimming his potential schools to a list of five by the end of the summer so that he could plan official visits . 
 For his efforts during his junior year , Parker earned several accolades . The Chicago Sun @-@ Times named him to the Class 4A All @-@ State first team along with Jahlil Okafor , Keith Carter , Darius Paul and Fred VanVleet . He was also a first team ( unanimous ) All @-@ State selection by the Associated Press along with VanVleet , Carter , Taylor , and Malcolm Hill . The Chicago Tribune named him first team All @-@ State along with Carter , Aaron Simpson , Taylor , and VanVleet . He was named the 2012 Illinois boys ' basketball Gatorade Player of the Year . He became the first non @-@ senior honoree in the 32 @-@ year history of Illinois Mr. Basketball , which is awarded by the Chicago Tribune in conjunction with the Illinois Basketball Coaches Association . On April 12 , he was announced as the winner of the national boys ' basketball Gatorade Player of the Year , which was presented to him by ex @-@ NBA player Alonzo Mourning who greeted him at his school in a special assembly . Parker was the fourth junior to win the award ( LeBron James , Greg Oden and Brandon Knight ) . Parker finished second to Muhammad in ESPN HS 's Mr. Basketball USA voting . They were the only two players to appear on every ballot . However , Parker was selected as the ESPN HS National Junior of the Year and the MaxPreps.com National Junior of the Year . He was selected as a first team ESPN HS boys ' high school basketball All @-@ American along with Kyle Anderson , Marcus Smart , Shabazz Muhammad and Nerlens Noel by ESPN HS . He was also a first team All @-@ USA selection by USA Today with the same four players . SLAM Magazine selected him to its first team along with Anderson , Muhammad , Noel and Isaiah Austin . 
 = = = Senior year = = = 
 Parker entered the summer of 2012 as the consensus number one player in the country until he was sidelined with a foot injury , which caused him to miss some games during the 2012 FIBA Under @-@ 17 World Championship . Parker was one of ten USA Today preseason All @-@ USA selections , and his team was ranked No. 1 preseason nationally by <unk> On December 20 , 2012 he chose to play for Duke . 
 Over the course of his senior season , Parker and Simeon played in six showcase games that required travel outside of the region . Three of the showcase games were broadcast nationally on one of the ESPN networks . 
 Parker led Simeon to its fourth consecutive IHSA class 4A state championship with a 58 – 40 victory over Stevenson High School , matching Manual High School 's IHSA record of four consecutive IHSA basketball championships . In the process , Parker , who scored 20 points and had 8 rebounds , became the second player ( Sergio McClain ) in IHSA history to start for four consecutive state basketball champions . Simeon finished with a 30 – 3 record . 
 Several more accolades followed his senior year performance . USA Basketball selected Parker as a member of the 2013 USA Junior National Select Team for the April 20 , 2013 Nike Hoop Summit at the Rose Garden . On February 12 , Parker was recognized as a 2013 All @-@ Public League first team selection by the Chicago Sun @-@ Times . That same day , Parker was selected to play in the April 13 Jordan Brand Classic at the Barclays Center . On March 18 , Parker earned the Morgan Wootten Male Player of the Year , which recognizes " the McDonald 's All @-@ American who demonstrates outstanding character , exhibits leadership and exemplifies the values of being a student @-@ athlete in the classroom and the community " . On March 21 , Parker was named the Gatorade Illinois Boys Basketball Player of the Year , and on March 25 , he repeated as Illinois Mr. Basketball . On April 9 , he earned another National Player of the Year recognition , this time by <unk> On April 17 , he was a first team All @-@ USA selection by USA Today , and on May 18 , he was named a 2013 first @-@ team Parade All @-@ American . 
 During the McDonald 's All @-@ star game played at the United Center in his hometown , Parker scored 10 points on 4 @-@ for @-@ 13 shooting and added 8 rebounds , 3 assists , 2 steals and 2 blocks , contributing to a 110 – 99 West victory . At the April 13 Jordan Brand Classic played at the Barclays Center , Parker was co @-@ MVP along with Julius Randle . He had 16 points , 7 rebounds and 2 assists to help lead the West team to a 102 – 98 victory . At the April 20 Nike Hoops Summit held in Portland , Oregon , Parker had a team high 22 points and 7 rebounds as the U.S Junior National Select Team was defeated 112 – 98 by the World Select team . 
 Parker concluded his high school career as the fourth rated player in the class of 2013 according to Rivals , behind Wiggins , Randle and Aaron Gordon . 
 = = College career = = 
 During the summer prior to matriculating at Duke , Parker participated in the Nike sponsored Chi @-@ League , a 9 @-@ weekend 10 @-@ team Chicago summer pro @-@ am league , During this time , Parker was projected by the press as a true freshman starter for the 2013 – 14 Blue Devils , and he was assigned to wear number 1 , a number only previously worn at Duke by Kyrie Irving . Preseason honors includes preseason All @-@ American first team listings by Sporting News and USA Today , and being named the preseason ACC Rookie of the Year . Parker was also one of nine freshmen named to the 50 @-@ man Wooden Award preseason watchlist . 
 Parker debuted for Duke on November 8 with 22 points , 6 rebounds , 2 assists and 1 block against Davidson — becoming Krzyzewski 's fifth freshman to debut with 20 points and was part of Duke 's first game with four 20 @-@ point scorers ( along with Hood , Cook and Sulaimon ) in school history . For his efforts , on November 11 Parker earned his first ACC Rookie of the Week recognition . On November 13 , Parker earned his second Sports Illustrated cover as part of a four @-@ version set of regional covers depicting college basketball 's greatest rivalries on the College Basketball Preview Issue . On November 12 in the Champions Classic at his hometown United Center , Parker posted 27 points , 9 rebounds , 1 assist , 2 steals , and 1 block in a losing effort against Wiggins 's Kansas Jayhawks . On January 18 , Parker scored 23 against NC State , tying him with Gene Banks for most 20 @-@ point games by a Duke freshman . On January 25 , Parker tallied 14 points , 3 steals and 14 rebounds against Florida State to help Mike Krzyzewski win his 900th game at Duke . On March 8 , in the second Carolina – Duke rivalry game of the season , Parker had a career high 30 points . On March 10 , he earned a record @-@ tying ( Kenny Anderson and Tyler Hansbrough ) tenth ACC rookie of the week honor in the final week of the regular season . 
 In postseason play , Parker yielded a 20 @-@ point performance in the semifinals of the 2014 ACC Men 's Basketball Tournament against NC State on March 15 , which marked his 17th such effort and moved him into sole possession of second place on the ACC freshman list , ahead of Marbury . In the March 16 championship game against Virginia , Parker posted his 18th 20 @-@ point game , which was one short of Anderson 's ACC freshman record . Parker and the team , ranked No. 3 in the Midwest region , ended the season in the first round of the NCAA Tournament with a loss to No. 14 Mercer . Parker set the Duke record for freshman scoring average ( 19 @.@ 1 ) and became the first freshman to lead the team in both scoring and rebounding . 
 = = = College statistics = = = 
 Parker has received much recognition for his freshman year performance . He was unanimously selected to both the Atlantic Coast Sports Media Association ( <unk> ) All @-@ ACC first team and the Coaches All @-@ ACC Freshman Team . He was also selected to the Coaches All @-@ ACC Basketball first team with the most points . Parker was voted the ACC Freshman of the Year receiving 72 of 77 votes and placed second for the ACC Player of the Year award , trailing Warren 48 – 25 . Parker was a 2014 NCAA Men 's Basketball All @-@ American first @-@ team selection by The Associated Press , The Sporting News , Sports Illustrated , NBC Sports , Bleacher Report , United States Basketball Writers Association ( USBWA ) , National Association of Basketball Coaches ( NABC ) , and USA Today . Parker was USBWA National Freshman of the Year and named to the 2013 Freshman All @-@ American . He was selected to the first team All @-@ ACC Tournament team . Parker also earned John R. Wooden Award All @-@ American Team recognition . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Milwaukee Bucks ( 2014 – present ) = = = 
 On April 17 , Parker declared for the 2014 NBA draft in an exclusive autobiographical story in Sports Illustrated . According to Bleacher Report , he signed with sports agent Rich Paul , who is LeBron James 's agent , but other sources , such as SLAM Magazine , suggest that he signed with BJ Armstrong , who is Derrick Rose 's agent . Parker ( along with other top prospects Andrew Wiggins and Joel <unk> ) decided to decline the invitation to participate in the NBA Draft Combine . On June 26 , Parker was selected no . 2 overall by the Milwaukee Bucks . Just prior to the draft , Parker became the second member of the 2014 draft class to sign a shoe contract when he signed an endorsement deal with the Jordan Brand . 
 On July 9 , 2014 , Parker signed with the Bucks and joined them for the 2014 NBA Summer League . In the 2014 – 15 NBA.com Rookie Survey at the annual Rookie Photo Shoot on August 6 , Parker was named by his peers as both the most likely to be Rookie of the Year and the most likely to have the best NBA career . 
 On October 29 , 2014 , Parker made his NBA debut in the Bucks ' season opener against the Charlotte Hornets . In just under 37 minutes of action as a starter , he recorded 8 points , 4 rebounds , 1 assist and 1 steal in a 106 – 108 overtime loss . Two nights later in his first home game , he posted a double @-@ double with 11 points and 10 rebounds against the Philadelphia 76ers . On November 19 , he posted a season @-@ high 23 points in a triple @-@ overtime win over the Brooklyn Nets . Parker was selected as the October / November Eastern Conference Rookie of the Month . On December 15 , Parker suffered a season @-@ ending injury by tearing his anterior cruciate ligament ( ACL ) against the Phoenix Suns . 
 Parker 's injury extended into the beginning of the 2015 – 16 NBA season . He returned to action on November 4 against Okafor and the Philadelphia 76ers in the fifth game of the season for the Bucks but struggled , posting just two points in 16 minutes as a starter . As he ramped up his activity , he was rested on the second of back @-@ to @-@ back games . Nonetheless , after five games , he endured a sprain in his <unk> joint in the right mid @-@ foot causing him to be expected to miss several games . He only missed one game . The following week , he began to come off the bench while O. J. Mayo took his starting spot . On December 12 , Parker had a 19 @-@ point , 7 @-@ rebound , 2 @-@ steal performance against the Golden State Warriors to help end their 24 @-@ game win streak . On January 27 , 2016 , he was named to the 2016 NBA All @-@ Star Game weekend Rising Stars Challenge lineup . On February 19 , he tied his career @-@ high with 23 points in a loss to the Charlotte Hornets . He surpassed that total the following night , recording career @-@ highs of 28 points and 13 rebounds in a 117 – 109 double @-@ overtime win over the Atlanta Hawks . On February 29 , Parker set a new career @-@ high with 36 points in a 128 – 121 Bucks victory over the Houston Rockets . 
 = = NBA career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season = = = 
 = = International career = = 
 In October 2010 , Parker was among the 18 players who participated in the 2011 @-@ 12 USA Developmental National Team mini @-@ camp giving him an automatic invitation to the June 10 – 18 , 2011 tryouts for FIBA U16 competition at the United States Olympic Training Center in Colorado Springs , Colorado . Parker was one of four Chicago products to emerge from the 27 @-@ man tryouts as part of the 12 @-@ man team . He was MVP of the 2011 FIBA Americas U16 Championship , where Team USA won a gold medal . This qualified the United States for the 2012 FIBA U17 World Championship . The team , which was coached by Don Showalter of Mid @-@ Prairie High School , scored over 100 points in each outing . Parker set the USA U16 single @-@ game scoring record of 27 points . In December 2011 , he was named USA Basketball 's Male Athlete of the Year based on his FIBA Americas performance , which made him the youngest winner ever . While on the stage to accept the award from Chicago Mayor Rahm Emanuel , he claims that he told the mayor " I hope they don 't boo me . " 
 He was selected for the USA team that competed in the 2012 FIBA Under @-@ 17 World Championship in Kaunas , Lithuania from June 29 – July 8 , 2012 along with Simeon teammate Kendrick Nunn and Whitney Young rival Okafor . The team won the gold medal , although Parker missed some games , including the semifinal , with an ankle injury . 
 = = Player profile = = 
 Parker was frequently compared to Derrick Rose in high school . According to Chicago Sun @-@ Times writer Michael O 'Brien , as of November 2011 , Rose had a 3 – 0 advantage in defining moments : " the back @-@ to @-@ back dunks against Washington in the city championship at the United Center , the game @-@ winning shot in overtime to give Simeon the state championship against Peoria <unk> and the dismantling of Oak Hill , the top @-@ ranked team in the country . " Rose 's game against the Oak Hill team with Brandon Jennings , Nolan Smith and Alex Legion on ESPN is described as Rose 's national introduction . Although there are comparisons to Rose , his game is most often compared to Grant Hill and Paul Pierce . Dime Magazine describes him as " Grant Hill with a jump shot " . Parker claims to model his game after Paul Pierce and Carmelo Anthony . He hopes to be regarded as the best high school basketball player in the history of the city of Chicago and has stated that " being compared to Derrick also drives me . I know if I get better than him or break the records he broke I could be one of the best players to come out of Chicago . I look forward to being one of those players . " 
 Because of the title of the Sports Illustrated story that compared Parker to LeBron James , Mike DeCourcy of Sporting News stated that " Jabari Parker is , rather , the best [ high school basketball player ] since Greg Oden . " In addition , Parker was considered to have a much less developed physique than James at the same stage of development . CBS Sports ' Jeff <unk> also contested the proclamation , pointing out that since James 's 2003 class both Dwight Howard ( 2004 ) and Oden ( 2006 ) were consensus top players in their classes and that Parker might not be any better than the most recent consensus , Oden . In addition , CBS noted that Parker " might not even be the best high school basketball player in the country , given the development of class of 2014 's Andrew Wiggins . " Chicago Tribune writer Mike Helfgot described the Sports Illustrated comparison as " incredibly irresponsible journalism " , noting he had once worked for the Star @-@ Ledger when it described Derrick <unk> as the next James . 
 Following his four consecutive championships with Simeon , Parker ( and Chicago 's Simeon ) were compared to McClain ( and Peoria 's Manual ) . Peoria 's Journal Star emphasized that McClain was 32 – 0 as a starter in IHSA play because in the 1994 – 97 time period the IHSA was only divided into two classes . Thus , Manual had to wade through an 8 @-@ round tournament instead of the 7 @-@ round modern 4 @-@ class format . However , Simeon won 6 of its 7 games in its final championship by more than 10 points , while Manual only won 3 of its 8 by such a margin . In the postgame press conference , Simeon Coach Smith emphasized that his team had to endure the pressure of playing a national schedule that included games against elite teams in distant venues . Note , that with the 4 @-@ class system rather than the 2 @-@ class system of the past , the 2013 Class 3A IHSA champion was CPL runner @-@ up Morgan Park , who split 2 neutral court 2013 games with Simeon . As noted above , Rose @-@ era Simeon teams only won 2 championships in the 2 @-@ class era . Adding Parker 's 55 @-@ 11 start to a 33 – 1 junior year and a 30 – 3 senior season gives him a 118 – 15 legacy compared to Rose 's 120 – 12 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Parker is of Tongan and African American descent . His parents are <unk> " Lola " <unk> @-@ Parker and Sonny Parker . His father , Sonny , a Chicago native , played for the Texas A & M Aggies before becoming a 1976 NBA Draft first round selection ( 17th overall ) by the Golden State Warriors . He played in the NBA for six seasons . Sonny was an NBA teammate of Washington Huskies men 's basketball head coach Lorenzo <unk> . In 2013 he developed a kidney disease that requires dialysis , making it difficult for him to attend Jabari 's games . His mother , Lola , a Polynesian native of Tonga , is a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints ( LDS Church ) and emigrated to Salt Lake City at age three . Her grandfather was the second Tongan baptized by LDS missionaries . Several of Lola 's cousins are National Football League athletes , including Harvey Unga , Haloti Ngata and Tony Moeaki , and one of her first cousins once removed , Tony <unk> , made his PGA Tour debut in October 2014 . His parents met at a mall when she was a student at Brigham Young University and he was playing for the Warriors . After helping him find a dress shirt , Sonny left her tickets to his game . After he retired and she served her mission , they married and settled in Chicago . The family lives in the South Shore community area where his parents settled after marrying and has turned down two movie offers . 
 Parker has six siblings . His older brothers are named Darryl and Christian , while his older sisters are named Iman and <unk> . Darryl lettered two years for the Oregon Ducks basketball team , starting for the team in the 1995 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament . Christian played basketball for Brigham Young University – Hawaii . 
 Jabari grew up ( and remains ) an active member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints . While attending Simeon Career Academy , Parker attended LDS Seminary two mornings a week , according to ESPN , and three days a week , according to The New York Times , Sports Illustrated and Chicago Sun @-@ Times . At the time of his sixteenth birthday , he became a LDS priest ( as is customary in his faith ) . He has both performed baptisms and administered the weekly sacrament . In addition , he regularly traveled with his bishop during his monthly visitations to comfort the sick , the poor and the elderly . 
 Parker worked out with basketball trainer Tim Grover . Jabari prefers individual training sessions with his brother Darryl instead of playing pick @-@ up games . Following his sophomore year , ESPN reported that he had a 3 @.@ 4 grade point average . By the end of the first semester of his junior year , The New York Times reported his GPA was 3 @.@ 7 . By April of his junior year , his GPA was 3 @.@ 63 , ranking 18th in his class of 377 and his extracurricular activities includes service as the principal @-@ appointed president of student representatives to the local school council , a youth basketball instructor , and a volunteer for Operation PUSH , The Salvation Army and the New Beginnings Church . In high school , he was known for carrying a backpack filled with basketball equipment , along with an iPod , and a copy of the Book of Mormon . 
 = Throwdown ( Glee ) = 
 " Throwdown " is the seventh episode of the American television series Glee . The episode premiered on the Fox network on October 14 , 2009 . It was directed by series creator Ryan Murphy and written by Brad Falchuk . The episode includes a clash between glee club director Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) and cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester ( Jane Lynch ) when she is named co @-@ director of the glee club . As Sue tries to divide the club by turning the students against Will , his wife Terri ( Jessalyn Gilsig ) blackmails her OB / GYN into colluding with her over her fake pregnancy . 
 The episode features covers of five songs . Studio recordings of four of the songs performed were released as singles , available for digital download , and were also included on the album Glee : The Music , Volume 1 . " Throwdown " was watched by 7 @.@ 65 million US viewers and received mixed reviews from critics . The pregnancy storyline was criticized by both Ken Tucker of Entertainment Weekly and Shawna Malcom of the Los Angeles Times . Raymund Flandez of The Wall Street Journal was unimpressed by Quinn 's solo performance of The Supremes ' " You Keep Me Hangin ' On " , though the group performance of " Keep Holding On " was generally better received by reviewers . Lynch as Sue in particular was widely praised , with Flandez and Zap2it 's Liz Pardue both writing that Lynch gave an Emmy @-@ worthy performance . 
 = = Plot = = 
 When cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester ( Jane Lynch ) is named co @-@ director of the McKinley High glee club , she divides the group in two , hoping to turn the students against director Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) . Sue takes the minority students — Santana ( Naya Rivera ) , Artie ( Kevin McHale ) , Kurt ( Chris Colfer ) , Tina ( Jenna Ushkowitz ) , Mike ( Harry Shum , Jr . ) , Mercedes ( Amber Riley ) and Matt ( Dijon Talton ) — for her group , leaving Will with only Finn ( Cory Monteith ) , Rachel ( Lea Michele ) , Quinn ( Dianna Agron ) , Puck ( Mark Salling ) and Brittany ( Heather Morris ) in his group . Sue names her part of the club " Sue 's Kids " and tries to convince them that Will is discriminating against the students by making them sing backup . Will retaliates by failing all of Sue 's cheerleaders in Spanish , which only exacerbates their hostilities . 
 Quinn and Finn go together for her ultrasound appointment , and they learn that she is expecting a girl . Finn , trying to be supportive , suggests they name the baby <unk> , but Quinn is adamant she is having it adopted and is annoyed at his lack of understanding . Will , tired of his wife Terri 's ( Jessalyn Gilsig ) refusal to let him participate in the pregnancy , sets up an appointment with Terri 's OB / GYN so he can see their own baby on the ultrasound . With the help of her sister Kendra ( Jennifer Aspen ) , Terri blackmails her doctor into faking the sonogram using Quinn 's ultrasound DVD , in order to continue hiding the fact she isn 't really pregnant . Meanwhile , Quinn angrily confronts Rachel about her relationship with Finn and threatens her . Rachel confronts Quinn about being a spy in the glee club for Sue and tells her that she will be kicked of the Cheerios once Sue finds out about her pregnancy . 
 School reporter Jacob Ben Israel ( Josh Sussman ) uncovers news of Quinn 's pregnancy . To protect Quinn and ensure Jacob will not release the story , Rachel agrees to give him her underwear . When both sections of the glee club stage a walkout in protest against Sue and Will 's constant arguing , the two make amends and Sue steps down as co @-@ director . Sue discovers the underwear in Jacob 's locker and the reason for it , and makes him run the story about Quinn 's pregnancy . She reveals her knowledge of the pregnancy to the club , and tells them that the whole school will soon know . Quinn breaks down in tears in the hallway , and New Directions does a performance of " Keep Holding On " to show their support for her . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by series creator Brad Falchuk and directed by co @-@ creator Ryan Murphy . Recurring characters who appear in " Throwdown " are Principal Figgins ( Iqbal Theba ) , Terri 's sister Kendra Giardi , her OB / GYN Dr. Wu ( Ken Choi ) , school reporter Jacob Ben Israel , and glee club members Santana Lopez , Brittany Pierce , Matt Rutherford and Mike Chang . Amy Hill guest stars as Dr. Wu 's rival OB / GYN , Dr. Chin . 
 " Throwdown " features cover versions of " Hate on Me " by Jill Scott , " No Air " by Jordin Sparks , " You Keep Me Hangin ' On " by The Supremes , " Keep Holding On " by Avril Lavigne , and " Ride wit Me " by Nelly . Studio recordings of " Hate on Me " , " No Air " , " You Keep Me Hangin ' On " and " Keep Holding On " were released as singles , available for digital download , and are also included on the album Glee : The Music , Volume 1 . " No Air " charted at number 52 in Australia , and 65 in America and Canada , while " Keep Holding On " reached number 56 in Australia and America , and 58 in Canada . " Ride with Me " was recorded live in the episode , as , according to Shum , Jr . , Murphy " wanted to get the chill vibe , that spur @-@ of @-@ the @-@ moment singing . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Throwdown " was watched by 7 @.@ 65 million US viewers and attained a 3 @.@ 4 / 9 rating / share in the 18 @-@ 49 demographic . It was the 26th most watched show of the week in Canada , with 1 @.@ 4 million viewers . In the UK , the episode was watched by 2 @.@ 066 million viewers ( 1 @.@ 674 million on E4 , and 388 @,@ 000 on E4 + 1 ) , becoming the most @-@ watched show on E4 and E4 + 1 for the week , and the most @-@ watched show on cable for the week , as well as the most @-@ watched episode of the series at the time . The episode received mixed reviews from critics . Mike Hale of the New York Times felt that " Throwdown " : " emphasized the show 's increasingly dual nature " whereby " the students are in a pretty good musical , and the adults are in a below @-@ average dramedy . " Wendy Mitchell of Entertainment Weekly deemed the episode " welcome light relief " , while Shawna Malcom of the Los Angeles Times called it " perhaps Glee 's sharpest episode yet " , describing it as " chock @-@ full of standout scenes " . Eric Goldman for IGN rated the episode 8 @.@ 8 / 10 , criticizing it for " overly earnest , saccharine moments " but commenting that it was a " great example " of Glee " just being damn funny " . 
 Lynch 's performance as Sue attracted praise , with Raymund Flandez of The Wall Street Journal and Liz Pardue of Zap2it both calling her portrayal Emmy @-@ worthy . Entertainment Weekly writer Ken Tucker called her " the greatest Broadway @-@ musical villain to ever co @-@ star in a TV series " , deeming " Throwdown " " possibly the best showcase yet for Jane Lynch " , while Malcom praised the interaction between Lynch and Morrison , writing that their scenes " <unk> with electric wit " . The pregnancy storyline drew criticism , with Tucker opining that it " nearly derailed an otherwise @-@ excellent episode " and writing : " there 's got to be a better way to ground the series in a serious plot @-@ line that doesn 't make you wish the pregnancy plot was all just a non @-@ musical dream sequence . " Malcom also criticized the storyline , asking if it could " please just go away already ? " and writing that her patience with it was running out . 
 Musical performances received mixed reviews . Flandez deemed the cover of " Keep Holding On " an " emotionally satisfying showstopper " , however was critical of Quinn 's cover of " You Keep Me Hangin On " , which he called " thin and jarring " . Mitchell enjoyed the " No Air " duet , however felt it would be nice to see characters besides Finn and Rachel take the lead on the majority of songs . Reviewing musical performances in the series so far on October 21 , 2009 , Denise Martin for the Los Angeles Times rated " Hate On Me " the fourth best performance to date , writing that Riley : " blew [ her ] away . " In December 2012 , TV Guide also named the rendition one of Glee 's best performances , describing it as " a real Beyoncé moment " . Aly Semigran of MTV observed that Quinn spontaneously bursting into song brought Glee " dangerously close to High School Musical territory " . 
 = David L. Cook = 
 David L. Cook ( born November 11 , 1968 ) is an American Christian country music singer @-@ songwriter , comedian and a multiple Emmy ® and Telly Awards winner . 
 Born to Donnell and June ( née Mercer ) Cook , David is the oldest of six children . He has written more than 2 @,@ 500 songs , including Drop that Rock , which was featured on his album In the Middle of It All and garnered a Dove Award nomination for Christian Country Album of the Year in 1999 . 
 In all of Cook 's overseas recordings his surname is Cooke to distinguish it from his work in the United States . The male members of The Cook Family Singers have always used just their middle initials as a trademark , a trait beginning back in 1885 when the first such group was formed . 
 In 1990 Cook was diagnosed with a dissociative disorder and psychogenic amnesia reportedly brought on by an abusive father . In 1999 Cook 's story was used as a lead story with The 700 Club . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Cook was born in Pascagoula , Mississippi ; after two years , his family moved to Fort Lauderdale , Florida . Cook began his musical career at age five , singing with his family 's group , The Cook Family Singers . After his parents ' divorce , the group continued without Donnell , but in 1980 , the group disbanded because of June 's health issues . He continued singing both gospel and secular music . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Early in life , Cook was abused by his father , who had a severe drinking problem . While intoxicated , Cook 's father reportedly became violent towards his family . After many years of this abuse Cook developed many psychological problems that ended up following him through to his life as an adult . He developed a severe dissociative disorder and psychogenic amnesia . He recalled having periods of " missing time " but never really understood the cause . In 1990 , doctors finally diagnosed the disorders after Cook experienced what they thought was a severe stroke and was rushed to the Coral Springs Medical Hospital in Fort . Lauderdale . 
 He checked himself out of the hospital and disappeared from his Florida home and was found five months later in a Charlotte , North Carolina , hospital with similar health complaints . Cook had been around Charlotte for five months and no one realized there was anything wrong until he started developing stroke symptoms again . Doctors diagnosed his problems , which were not organic , and referred him to see the proper specialists . He claims to have had no recollection of leaving Florida , nor what he had done during his five months in Charlotte . When asked , he stated that , " It was like someone switching off a light and then switching it back on . " Cook 's story has been told through different media . The 700 Club did a full @-@ length documentary about his life , which aired worldwide . Cook wrote a religious self @-@ help book , Inspirational Words about the issues he overcame . 
 = = Health = = 
 On November 11 , 2009 , Cook was diagnosed with a parathyroid tumor in his neck . Doctors assessed that the tumor was pressing against his vocal cords making it virtually impossible for him to perform . He was treated at Vanderbilt University Medical Center . 
 = = Music = = 
 Cook 's first solo Christian album , Come Follow Me , was released in 1985 . The album was written and produced by singer / producer Frank X. <unk> , a former member of the group Lane Brothers . In 1986 , he signed with the American Musical Academy of Arts Association ( <unk> ) , and released another album , Personal Feelings . 
 In 1997 , Mountainview Records released Cook 's album , In the Middle of it All , which earned him a Gospel Music Association Dove Award nomination for Christian Country Album of the Year in 1999 . However , after a fallout with Mountainview records in 1999 , he started his own record label , DLC Records . During this period Cook created a comedy character , named <unk> Crabbottom , in the tradition of comedic Southern characters like Gomer Pyle . 
 Cook recorded an album in character , Split Personality , based on the life and times of <unk> Crabbottom growing up in fictional Crabbottom USA . In 1999 , the Country Gospel Music Association inducted Cook into its Hall of Fame , along with Loretta Lynn , Barbara Mandrell , Andy Griffith , Jody Miller and Lulu Roman . 
 In 2012 Cook co @-@ wrote " Hands of Hope " with David <unk> and Bruce Carroll . The song was fashioned along the same lines as " We Are the World " , which featured many famous voices from the music industry . The song went number one on the charts and remained there for two weeks . The song was used as the theme song for Turning Point Centers for Domestic Violence . On May 5 , 2012 NATAS announced that the song Hands of Hope garnered Cook , <unk> and Carroll the Emmy ® nomination for best Arrangement / Composer of a television theme song . 
 = = Television = = 
 In August 2007 , Cook joined in partnership with the Firebird Arts Alliance . He was asked by David Tang , the president of Firebird , to write and produce a theme song for the television series New South Crossings . The theme song was " Meet Me at the Crossroads " . Cook won an Emmy Award ® on January 24 , 2009 for his work on the series audio and soundtrack . 
 Cook appeared in an episode , " Master Class " , in which Cook worked with younger artists . He shows them the ins and outs of working together musically , and during the episode they perform the actual theme song for the series . On June 27 , 2010 , Cook won another Emmy ® award , this time for writing and singing the theme song , Meet Me At the Crossroads 
 In August 2013 , Cook began working on his new television series , Written N Black & White . He is listed as one of the stars of the show along with fellow comedian , Trina <unk> . The two play an interracial newlywed couple who are comedians and their parents are clueless of the marriage . Although the series is said to take place in New York , the actual taping is done in Fort Mill , South Carolina at the former PTL Studios , which had housed the Jim and Tammy Faye Bakker PTL network back in the 1980s . 
 = = Awards ( Partial listing from 1997 to present ) = = 
 In July 2006 , the International Country Gospel Music Association inducted Cook and fellow artists , Mike Manuel , Gayla Earlene , Doug <unk> and <unk> Wilkin into the Hall of Fame . 
 In January 2009 , Cook won his 5th Emmy Award for his work on the series , New South Crossings and he took home his sixth Emmy for the composing and arranging of " Meet Me At The Crossroads " in June 2010 . 
 Cook was nominated on May 6 , 2011 for three Emmy ® Awards for the documentary , The Award Goes To : A Look Back at the Legends , and at the June 18 telecast , he won his 7th Emmy ® for Outstanding Excellence in a Live Event 
 In 2015 Cook hosted the Mississippi Music Awards and was given the prestigious Mississippi Marvel Award for all of his work with new artists coming up in the business . During the 2015 AMG Heritage Awards , Cook was presented with a " Citation of Excellence " from the North Carolina Secretary of State , Elaine Marshall . The citation was given to Cook for the development of continued arts programing and mentoring he has implemented across the country . 
 = = Entrepreneurship = = 
 In 1988 , Cook had incorporated Cook 's Car Care Company in his native Fort Lauderdale . Eventually he transferred his interests to certain family members . The company is still in business today under different ownership . He incorporated Cook Productions International in 1989 with his business partner Edward Cook . Cook sold his interests in 1992 , which dissolved the Florida division . 
 In 1999 Cook started DLC Records after leaving Mountainview Records due to contractual and other disputes . While on the label Cook took his 1999 project , In The Middle of it All , up the charts garnering several # 1 singles , a Dove Award nomination and became the number one selling Christian country artists of all time . He incorporated Cook Enterprises to administer his contracts and personal business affairs , which included a children 's television show development agreement with his management group , Five Star Music which produced a weekly show called , Crabbottom USA , taped at local television station , <unk> TV @-@ 39 , a Nashville Tennessee based station . 
 In 2004 , Cook was presented with the opportunity to become the CEO and controlling partner for the International Academy of Music Arts and Sciences ( IAMAS Corporation ) . Years earlier , the company merged with its daughter company , The American Musical Academy of Arts Association , which proved profitable as there was an upswing in demand for Christian @-@ based music and distribution opportunities . This was profitable as IAMAS was able to use its history in the entertainment industry as a door to help boost other smaller companies into existence . In 2004 , the entertainment industry took a huge hit with the incoming markets of Napster , iTunes , and Amazon.com. IAMAS , no longer able to compete , decided to sell off only its American division and retain its overseas holdings . Since IAMAS Corporation had handled Cook 's contracts since 1980 , Cook offered to buy the company for an undisclosed amount . His offer was accepted and he officially filed for corporation status on November 24 , 2004 . 
 Cook became the president and CEO of the Charlotte Civic Orchestra in 2005 and although he retired as CEO in 2011 , Cook remains on the board as an adviser . The organization is a 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) company , and is entirely composed of volunteers . In January 2011 , Cook and several others launched the Artists Music Guild , a network based company that connects artists with industry professionals who advise them and lead them in the proper course for career mapping . Cook is listed as the executive board president . 
 After the retirement of longtime manager Mickey <unk> , Cook signed with Pink Hammer Entertainment out of Los Angeles , California in August 2012 . 
 = = Artists Music Guild = = 
 Cook and other entertainment industry insiders started the Artists Music Guild in January 2011 to reduce the risks of artists being taken advantage of in a predatory industry . On November 11 , 2011 , The Artists Music Guild held its inaugural convention at the historic Heritage USA complex . The inaugural convention was filmed for a PBS special , A Walk Through the History of Music in the United States , with more than 2000 people in attendance . Cook has stated that his main goal for making the Heritage USA the official home of the Artists Music Guild 's convention was to heal the broken people who were affected by the fall of PTL . The convention reunited several of the former PTL Singers , including Toni Bogart , Brian Keith , Lee Young and Sandy and Russell Hosey . Also in attendance were many of the employees who lost their jobs amid the sexual and financial scandal which caused the fall of the Bakker 's ministry . Cook posited that " by reuniting these individuals who have not performed together in over twenty plus years it would allow them to come together on their own terms and walk out of the complex without someone telling them they could never come back . It was the ultimate form of healing the hurts from the past . " In 2015 the Guild became the parent company for the Mississippi Music Foundation in an effort to build a youth orchestra and a better outreach to educating and developing young and upcoming artists . Cook was added to the advisory board and became the official spokesperson and face of the foundation . 
 = = Rumor of Cook 's death = = 
 On October 3 , 2012 , mainstream media reported that Cook had been killed in Winston @-@ Salem , North Carolina after being struck by a car . Web crawlers picked up the story and the rumors went nationwide . The story was later confirmed to be that of a David Lee Cook who worked as a Department of Transportation worker who had been killed while removing a tree from the road during hazardous conditions . The original news organization released an explanation story after finding out of their mistake . 
 = Canterbury Mounted Rifles Regiment = 
 The Canterbury Mounted Rifles Regiment was a mounted infantry regiment from New Zealand , raised for service during the First World War . It was assigned to the New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade , and formed part of the New Zealand Expeditionary Force . 
 The regiment , with an establishment of twenty @-@ six officers , 523 other ranks and 600 horses , was formed from three squadrons belonging to pre @-@ war Territorial Force regiments : the 1st Mounted Rifles ( Canterbury Yeomanry Cavalry ) , the 8th ( South Canterbury ) Mounted Rifles and the 10th ( Nelson ) Mounted Rifles . It also included a small headquarters and , until 1916 , a Maxim machine @-@ gun section . The Maxim guns were withdrawn but the regiment 's fire @-@ power increased during the war , and by the end of the conflict each squadron had four Hotchkiss machine @-@ guns , one per troop . 
 Being mounted infantry the regiment rode into battle on their horses , but were expected to dismount and fight on foot . The regiment fought predominantly against the forces of the Ottoman Turkish Empire . Their first involvement came in the Gallipoli Campaign between May and December 1915 , during which they participated in the largest battle of that theatre at Chunuk Bair and the fighting for Hill 60 . Evacuated to Egypt , they then took part in the Sinai and Palestine Campaign from 1916 to 1918 . The early battles they were involved in included those at Romani , Gaza and Beersheba . Later in the war they were part of the force that occupied the Jordan Valley , and took part in the raids on Amman and Es Salt . Their final wartime operation was in connection with the capture of the Turkish Fourth Army . During the four years of war the regiment lost 334 men dead from all causes , while another 720 were wounded or debilitated . After the war , the regiment played a minor role in the Egyptian Revolution of 1919 , before being disbanded in June 1919 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation = = = 
 Raised on 12 August 1914 , at the start of the First World War , the Canterbury Mounted Rifles Regiment came from the Canterbury Region on the South Island of New Zealand . Commanded by Lieutenant @-@ Colonel John Findlay , it was composed of a headquarters , a machine @-@ gun section and three squadrons , formed from Territorial Force regiments . The New Zealand Territorial Force included a compulsory training system , and the four Military Districts were required to supply a mounted regiment for the New Zealand Expeditionary Force . To meet that obligation , the Territorial Force regiments each provided a squadron , which kept their own regimental badges and traditions . The regiment 's squadrons came from the 1st Mounted Rifles ( Canterbury Yeomanry Cavalry ) ( 1st Squadron ) , the 8th ( South Canterbury ) Mounted Rifles ( 8th Squadron ) and the 10th ( Nelson ) Mounted Rifles ( 10th Squadron ) . The establishment was fixed at twenty @-@ six officers and 523 other ranks , who used 528 riding horses , seventy @-@ four draught horses and six pack horses . Each squadron , of 158 men , had a field headquarters and four troops . The Machine @-@ Gun Section , with two Maxim Guns , had one officer , twenty @-@ six other ranks , twenty riding horses and sixteen draught horses . Even though the regiment used horses , they were not cavalry but mounted infantry , and expected to ride to the battlefield , dismount and then fight as traditional infantry . Attached to , but not part of , the regiment were medical and veterinary officers , an artificer , three more other ranks and another eighteen horses . The regiment was assigned to the New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade , serving alongside two other regiments : the Auckland Mounted Rifles and the Wellington Mounted Rifles . 
 = = = Embarkation = = = 
 On 23 September the regiment left their camp for Lyttelton and embarked on the transport ships HMNZT Tahiti and HMNZT <unk> . Leaving the same day , they arrived at Wellington the next afternoon , and disembarked the troops . On 14 October they boarded the transports again and set sail . With a short stop at Hobart , on 28 October they arrived at Albany , and anchored waiting to be joined by the Australian contingent . The combined convoy sailed on 1 November and reached Colombo on 15 November . Two days later it sailed into the Red Sea , and the Suez Canal . Docking at Port Said on 2 December and Alexandria the next day , the regiment disembarked on 4 December and boarded a train for their camp in the Cairo suburb of Zeitoun where they started a training programme , using the desert for manoeuvres , during both day and night . 
 = = Gallipoli = = 
 In Egypt the regiment continued its training programme , working from reveille at 05 : 00 to 17 : 30 when they stabled their horses at the end of the working day . Every third or fourth night the soldiers performed guard duty or looked after the horses . It was in Egypt that the regiment , and brigade , came under command of the newly formed New Zealand and Australian Division which , along with the 1st Division , made up the Australian and New Zealand Army Corps ( ANZAC ) . In April 1915 , the division 's infantry units left Egypt for an undisclosed destination , and it was not until 1 May that the regiment learned about the Gallipoli landings . Four days later the regiment received news that it would also deploy to Gallipoli , but in a dismounted role without their horses . On 7 May , twenty @-@ six officers and 482 other ranks ( some men remaining behind to look after their horses ) boarded trains for Alexandria to board their transports . They arrived off the Gallipoli peninsula on 12 May , and started to disembark , landing at Anzac Cove . By now the troops had been re @-@ equipped for their dismounted role , and carried a rifle with two hundred rounds of ammunition , a small pack , a haversack , mess tins , a bayonet , and an entrenching tool . Once ashore , the regiment camped that night behind the front line . 
 The next day , they moved to the left flank in the north to relieve the Royal Naval Brigade . Their trenches stretched from the sea to Walkers Ridge and included two outposts , No.1 Post and No.2 Post . The regiment took over on the extreme right , with one squadron in the front line , one squadron in the support trench and the third squadron as the reserve . Next in line to their right , was the Auckland Mounted Rifles , and then the Wellington Mounted Rifles on the left . However , the regiment had to wait until it got dark before sending men forward to man the two outposts . 
 = = = First combat = = = 
 The regiment 's first experience of combat started at midnight on 18 / 19 March when their Turkish opponents opened fire on their trenches . The main assault , in the brigade 's sector , was against the Auckland Mounted Rifles ; to support them the regiment sent two troops from the 1st and 10th Squadrons and one troop from the 8th Squadron to form their reserve . At daylight , the men manning No.1 Post could see a group of Turks concentrating around " The Nek " and opened fire on them with a machine @-@ gun , forcing them to withdraw . The Turkish attack continued until that afternoon , when it gradually petered out . It was later estimated that 42 @,@ 000 Turkish troops had been involved in the attack on the ANZAC beach @-@ head , and by the end of the day 10 @,@ 000 of them had become casualties . Later that day white flags were observed over the Turkish trenches , and some of their men wandered into no man 's land . This was considered a ruse to retrieve arms and ammunition off the dead and to bring forward reinforcements , so the Turks were warned to return to their trenches as the New Zealanders were going to open fire again . A real armistice was arranged for 24 May , between 07 : 30 and 16 : 30 , when the wounded were brought to safety and the dead buried . Squadrons settled into a routine with twenty @-@ four hours in No.1 and No.2 Posts , twenty @-@ four hours in the main trenches and twenty @-@ four hours in support , then back to the outposts . Their first offensive action came on 28 May , when it was still dark . The Turks had built an outpost only 450 yards ( 410 m ) from No.2 Post , so the 1st Squadron charged and captured the position . Once it was secured , the 6th Squadron from the Wellington Mounted Rifles provided the garrison for what was now called No.3 Post . They had some difficulties defending it , as the Turks launched a counter @-@ attack to recapture it . After a battle lasting until the next day the 10th Squadron and two troops from the 8th Squadron managed to relieve the Wellington Regiment 's survivors and take over the defence of the post . Shortly after the relief , it was decided that the position was untenable and it was abandoned . Casualties gradually mounted and the regiment 's first replacements , three officers and forty @-@ four other ranks , arrived at the end of June . 
 = = = Chunuk Bair = = = 
 The objective of the British August offensive was to seize Chunuk Bair , a high point in the Sari Bair mountain range . The New Zealand and Australian Division would provide the attacking force . The initial attack was to clear the Turks from the foothills ; this task was given to the New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade , reinforced by the Maori Pioneer Battalion . The regiment , together with the Otago Mounted Rifles , was to clear <unk> Dere valley , then advance to <unk> Dere in the north . They also had to capture Taylor 's Hollow and Walden 's Point , then turn east to capture <unk> Hill . To reduce noise and maintain stealth , they were ordered to use only their bayonets . At 20 : 00 on 5 August , the 296 men of the regiment moved forward to No.2 Post in preparation for the attack , which was due to start at 21 : 00 the next night . Their assault started on time , with the 1st and 10th Squadrons forward , followed by the 8th Squadron and Machine @-@ Gun Section in reserve . The leading men met and killed four Turks in an observation post . Then with still around two hundred yards ( 180 m ) to go , a destroyer 's searchlight beam lit up the advancing men , and a Turkish machine @-@ gun opened fire on them . The 10th Squadron charged straight into the Turkish trench , while the 1st Squadron managed to manoeuvre around and attack the machine @-@ gun from the rear . They achieved this without firing a shot or making a sound , and then advanced towards their last objective , <unk> Hill . The hill was also captured , and the survivors started to dig in . Although it had taken all its objectives , the regiment had around forty per cent casualties , including the commanding officer , who was wounded , and the second in command , Major Overton , who had been killed . While digging in they were able to observe the rest of the battle , which did not seem to be going well . By the next day , 7 August , Turkish reinforcements were arriving at Chunuk Bair and the attack had failed . Since the start of the battle they had lost twenty @-@ four men dead and sixty men wounded . Now commanded by Major Hutton , from the 10th Squadron , the regiment remained on Bauchop Hill in defence until 15 August , when they moved back to the entrance of <unk> Dere , then later moved forward two hundred yards ( 180 m ) and occupied an old Turkish trench . 
 = = = Hill 60 = = = 
 At 15 : 30 on 21 August the Battle for Hill 60 began . Charging straight at the hill , the regiment suffered sixty per cent casualties , among them Hutton in command . He was replaced by Major Hurst , from the 1st Squadron , and they succeeded in capturing the Turkish trench within fifteen minutes of going over the top . But on either side of them the rest of the attack had failed , leaving the regiment and the Otago Mounted Rifles isolated from the rest of the force . Not having the manpower to continue the assault , they were ordered to dig in and hold the position . They held on until 23 August when they were relieved by the Auckland and Wellington Mounted Rifles . 
 Three days later the regiment returned to their previous position to continue the assault . The attack began at 17 : 00 on 27 August with the regiment leading the brigade . They charged across the sixty yards ( 55 m ) of open ground and into the first Turkish trench . Within minutes they were up and on their way again , and captured the second and third trenches , which they defended all night and through the next day . Casualties had been high ; from the 119 men who had started the assault there were now only eighteen left , commanded by the only officer , Captain Gibbs . The brigade 's other regiments were in a similar state , but they remained in the trenches until they were relieved after dark on 29 August . 
 = = = Lemnos = = = 
 On 13 September , the brigade , less its machine gunners , was relieved by the 5th Australian Brigade and sailed to the island of Lemnos to rest and recuperate . The regiment 's strength was now just one officer and thirty @-@ nine other ranks , twelve of whom were machine @-@ gunners who had to remain at Gallipoli . By now , including the original contingent and their replacements , a total of thirty @-@ two officers and 645 other ranks had served with the regiment at Gallipoli . On arrival the regiment came under the command of Lieutenant @-@ Colonel George Stewart . By early October , replacements started arriving to bring the regiment back up to almost full strength . At the end of the month Stewart was evacuated sick , and Major John Studholme , the senior officer with the replacements , assumed temporary command of the regiment . On 10 November they returned to Gallipoli , camping that first night at Bauchop Hill . 
 = = = Evacuation = = = 
 The regiment spent their time building winter quarters , and tunnelling into the hillside to provide protection against shellfire , doing so until 27 November when they moved back into the front line . On 9 December , Major Christopher Powles , the Brigade @-@ Major , took over command of the regiment , with Studholme as the second in command . Three days later , the order for the complete evacuation of the peninsula was issued . Men with minor ailments left first , followed by one regiment or battalion from each brigade . The Auckland Mounted Rifles were chosen as the first regiment to leave from the New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade , which meant that the Canterbury Mounted Rifles had to extend its lines to cover for the Aucklanders . The last men were due to leave over the night of 19 / 20 December . 
 The regiment now numbered fourteen officers and 290 other ranks , which was to be reduced to nine officers and 163 men , the rest being among the first batch to be evacuated on 18 December . The remainder were divided in three groups . The first group , of three officers and ninety men , left the front for the embarkation beach at 17 : 30 the next day . They were followed by the second smaller group of three officers and forty @-@ two men at 21 : 35 . The last group , three officers and thirty @-@ one men , had to cover for the whole regiment , keeping up a steady rate of fire and moving their one Maxim @-@ gun around the position to support the deception that all defences were fully manned . This last group was also divided into three parts , the first of which left at 01 : 45 on 20 December . They were followed by the next group who waited ten minutes before withdrawing . The last small group of men left at 02 : 05 , and reached the beach , without incident , at 03 : 30 . The regiment sailed again to Lemnos , and on 22 December to Egypt , arriving at Alexandria on 26 December , and eventually returned to their old camp at Zeitoun . 
 = = Sinai = = 
 In Egypt reinforcements brought the regiment back up to full strength plus an added ten per cent , and the Machine @-@ Gun Section was doubled in size from two to four guns . Another change was the appointment of Major James Whyte of the Wellington Mounted Rifles as commanding officer . On 23 January 1916 the regiment left Zeitoun to take up a new defensive post on the Suez Canal eighty @-@ seven miles ( 140 km ) to the east . While there , Findlay , having recovered from his wounds , returned as commanding officer on 19 February . By 7 March the regiment was once more ready for operations and moved into the front line , at <unk> <unk> on the canal . Later that month , the brigade was assigned to the ANZAC Mounted Division . 
 = = = Katia = = = 
 Without any notice the regiment , and brigade , was ordered to Kantara , thirty @-@ two miles ( 51 km ) away on the Suez Canal , at 20 : 00 on 23 April . The reason was not then known by the troopers , but it later transpired that a Turkish force in the Sinai Desert had attacked British yeomanry positions at Katia and Oghratina . They reached Kantara at 07 : 00 and an hour later moved into the desert , camping at Hill 70 for the night . They sent reconnaissance patrols out into the desert , and manned observation posts . On 10 May the regiment was ordered to Romani and the next day to El Maler . Patrol activity was kept up , most of the time at troop strength , but sometimes involving the complete brigade . On 15 May the regiment carried out a reconnaissance of Oghratina and Bir el Abd , and for the first time sighted a hostile force in the desert ; they did not manage to engage them . The next day several men had to be evacuated , suffering from heat exhaustion , as temperatures reached 129 ° F ( 72 ° C ) . This convinced Findlay to cut their patrol short , and travelling overnight they arrived back at Maler early on 17 May . Over the next weeks their patrols continued , to acclimatise the men to desert travel and conditions . Early in July , the regiment lost its machine @-@ gun section when it was transferred to form the brigade Machine @-@ Gun Squadron . On 19 July reconnaissance aircraft spotted a large Turkish force moving west across the desert . 
 = = = Romani = = = 
 Just after midnight on 4 August the 1st and 2nd Light Horse Brigades were attacked at Romani . At 08 : 00 , the regiment , acting as the brigade vanguard , advanced towards Dueidar ; at the same time they could hear firing in the distance from Romani . By 10 : 30 they were approaching the Turkish position on Mount Royston , and the regiment opened out to attack , with the 8th Squadron positioned on the left , the 1st in the centre , and the 10th on the right , with the Auckland Mounted Rifles following in support . The 5th Light Horse Regiment , who were supposed to be to the left of the 8th Squadron , had not yet arrived . The assault commenced at 15 : 00 , supported by the Somerset Battery Royal Horse Artillery , and by 17 : 30 they had driven the Turks off Mount Royston . The brigade captured an artillery battery and over 1 @,@ 000 prisoners . The regiment 's casualties during the battle were one dead and fifteen wounded . The next day at 03 : 30 they moved to Katia , which was believed to be occupied by a large Turkish force . On arrival , the brigade galloped forward , attacking from the south . When they got close the regiment dismounted and continued on foot . Fighting all day , they waited in vain for the 3rd Light Horse Brigade to support the assault . Still holding their ground at 20 : 00 , they had to retire and return to Bir et Maler to water their horses . Their casualties were two dead and fifteen wounded . 
 The Turkish force withdrew towards Katia , which by the time the regiment 's reconnaissance patrol got there had been abandoned ; the Turks were heading towards Oghratina . Once the enemy were located , the regiment kept patrols in contact with them overnight and all during the next day while the Turks withdrew to <unk> . By 8 August the enemy had reached Bir el Abd , where they established defences and were waiting for the New Zealanders . 
 = = = Abd = = = 
 Before dawn on 9 August the regiment was behind the Auckland Mounted Rifles heading towards Abd . The brigade was to attack head on , while the rest of the division circled around to attack the flanks . At 05 : 30 the Aucklands were engaged by the Turkish defenders , so the 8th Squadron was sent forward on their left to assist , and immediately came under fire . To support them the 1st and 10th Squadrons moved up on the left . The 8th Squadron advanced and captured a ridge line facing east , followed soon after by the other squadrons occupying the high ground to the west of Abd . From there they could see the Turkish defences , which consisted of trenches and redoubts , supported by artillery that kept up a steady rate of fire on the regiment . At 06 : 00 the Turks left their trenches to counter @-@ attack the regiment , but were stopped by small arms fire and the attached Somerset Battery Royal Horse Artillery . The regiment then moved downhill towards Abd , but were faced with heavy Turkish artillery fire , which by 10 : 30 had stopped the 1st and 2nd Light Horse Brigades to their left . At noon a second Turkish counter @-@ attack came in waves towards the regiment 's lines . They managed to fight them off , with heavy casualties . By 14 : 00 the Turks were attacking all the division 's brigades in strength . The 1st and 2nd Light Horse in the north and the 3rd in the south began to retire , leaving the New Zealanders ' position exposed on the flanks . Only by keeping up a heavy rate of small arms and artillery fire did they hold off the enemy . At 17 : 30 , the divisional commander Harry Chauvel called off the attack and ordered a withdrawal , but as the New Zealanders were in danger of being overrun the withdrawal was postponed until dark , with the regiment forming a rearguard . The battle cost the regiment nine dead , twenty @-@ two wounded and six men missing in action . 
 The brigade withdrew to Debabis , caring for their wounded and resting for the next two days . On 12 August , they moved back to Abd , which had been evacuated by the Turks . Sending out reconnaissance patrols , they located the Turkish rearguard two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) west of <unk> . Not being in a position to attack , they observed them until dusk , when the Turks moved further east to El Arish . 
 = = = Magdhaba = = = 
 On 20 December , in response to reports that the Turks had evacuated El Arish , the regiment started moving overnight towards the village . Advance patrols discovered that the Turks had withdrawn along the Wadi el Arish to Magdhaba . By dawn 23 December the regiment reached the wadi and joined up with the rest of the division , now heading towards Magdhaba . 
 By 05 : 00 they could see the Turkish position ; the brigade was ordered to move around and approach it from the north . Five hours later the brigade had reached a position to start their attack , with the Canterbury regiment on the brigade 's left . Dismounted , the squadrons advanced in turn , covered by their machine @-@ guns . At 15 : 00 , when they were within five hundred yards ( 460 m ) of the Turkish lines , they were able to charge , with bayonets fixed , and captured the Turkish trench . One by one the Turkish redoubts were captured , before nightfall . The regiment 's casualties were light , at two dead and eleven wounded . 
 = = = Rafa = = = 
 By the end of the year the Turkish forces had been pushed out of the Sinai , and in January 1917 , orders were given for the division to attack Rafa on the Egyptian – Palestine border . By dawn on 9 January , the regiment and division had reached the border , and the brigade manoeuvred to attack Rafa from the north @-@ east . The 8th Squadron , leading the regiment , was moving around to the north of village , when the Turkish defenders opened fire on them . The regiment galloped forward , and one of their troops captured fifty prisoners at a police post . The remainder captured an uncompleted trench system , and another 171 prisoners , six of them German officers . The regiment was now position to block the Turkish withdrawal east , and were also able to observe the main Turkish defences . 
 The regiment started advancing towards the village , the 8th Squadron on the left , and the 10th with the 1st Squadron on the right . Covered by their machine @-@ guns , but under heavy Turkish fire , they gradually moved forward on foot . Troops took turns to run forward while the rest of the squadron covered them . The intensity of the battle was demonstrated by the Inverness Battery Royal Horse Artillery , which was supporting the brigade and ran out of ammunition at 14 : 00 . Two hours later the division 's covering force reported Turkish reinforcements approaching , and Lieutenant @-@ General Philip Chetwode , who was commanding the attack , decided to call it off . Almost simultaneously Edward Chaytor , commanding the brigade , ordered another attack . Covered by their machine @-@ guns the men carried out a bayonet charge and the Turks to their front surrendered . By this time the other brigades had started to withdraw , but seeing what had happened , they turned back and also charge , capturing the position . The battle cost the regiment six dead and nineteen wounded . 
 = = Palestine = = 
 = = = Gaza = = = 
 The British plan for Gaza required the ANZAC Mounted Division to circle around by night and block Turkish reinforcements getting to the town . On 26 March at 02 : 30 , the brigade left camp in a heavy fog and crossed the Wadi Ghuzze two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) south @-@ east of Gaza . They soon reached their positions with the brigade , between the 2nd Light Horse and 22nd Mounted Brigades , and waited for the infantry divisions to assault the town . At 14 : 00 , as the infantry were having problems , the brigade were ordered to attack . The regiment galloped towards the town , with the Wellington Mounted Rifles on their right and the Auckland Mounted Rifles in reserve . Once there , the regiment moved south along a ridge and attacked the garrison at Ali Muntar . This hilltop could command the approaches into Gaza . They soon captured the outlying Turkish trenches , forcing the defenders back towards the town . At 18 : 40 the 10th Squadron reached the hill top at the same time as the 53rd ( Welsh ) Division , who had been trying all day to take the position from the other side . Despite having captured a commanding position , both the regiment and the infantry division were ordered to withdraw . Turkish reinforcements had been reported en route , and the overall commander did not believe they could hold what they had captured . The regiment retired back the way they had come , and reached Belah just after midnight the next day . Casualties for the day were one dead and six wounded . 
 = = = Wadi Ghuzee line = = = 
 On 3 April the squadrons were issued Hotchkiss machine @-@ guns , one per troop . After the British withdrawal , the Turks built a defensive line of trenches and redoubts , from the sea south of Gaza to Beersheba , following the route of the road . The British plan for the second attack involved the ANZAC Mounted Division providing flank protection , intercepting any reinforcements , and pursuing the retreating Turkish forces if required . 
 The regiment moved out at 18 : 30 on 16 April , forming the vanguard for the division . At 04 : 30 the next morning the 10th Squadron , in the lead , crossed the Wadi Ghuzee at Shellal . Their only opposition came from enemy aircraft which bombed the division . Breaking out into an extended line , they reconnoitred towards Sharia and Beersheba , reporting on Turkish movements . At nightfall they withdrew back to Shellal . The next day was a repeat of the previous day . Then , after dark , the division was ordered to march overnight to support the Imperial Mounted Division . The regiment set out at 23 : 00 , and by 09 : 00 on 18 April were the brigade reserve for their assault on " Sausage Ridge " . At 14 : 30 the regiment was called upon , and galloped forward under an artillery bombardment . Dismounting , a machine @-@ gun section set up just in time to stop a Turkish counter @-@ attack . However , the British attack all along the line had faltered and was called off that night , and they withdrew back behind the Wadi Ghuzee . The three days of fighting cost the regiment three dead and twenty @-@ eight wounded . 
 = = = Beersheba = = = 
 The regiment 's involvement in the attack on Beersheba began at 18 : 00 on 30 October , when the ANZAC Mounted Division set off along the Wadi el Imshash towards the village . By 08 : 00 the brigade had reached its starting position at Bir Salim Irgeig , ready to begin their assault on Tel el Saba . Moving around the open Turkish flank they managed to approach the mound from the east . The regiment were to the right of the brigade line with the Auckland Mounted Rifles on their left . The regiment intended to move around and outflank the Turkish position from the north . Once the assault started they slowly moved up the hill , and eventually they passed the Wadi Khalil and were able to engage the rear of the Turkish position . Confronted by Turkish artillery and machine @-@ gun fire coming from their north , they could advance no further . At 15 : 00 the Aucklanders managed to charge and capture the hill top . Elsewhere , Beersheba was captured following a mounted charge by the 4th Light Horse Brigade . The regiment 's casualties during the battle were one dead and six wounded . 
 = = = Khuweilfe = = = 
 The next day , 1 November , the brigade moved north @-@ east following the withdrawing Turks . The regiment , forming the vanguard , came under machine @-@ gun fire so the 10th Squadron charged directly at the position while the 1st Squadron moved around and attacked from the flank . The position was quickly captured with thirteen prisoners and a machine @-@ gun taken . That night , they returned to Beersheba for water . Following two days of rest , they moved out on 4 November , to relieve the 5th Mounted Brigade in the Ras el Nagb mountains . Turkish artillery fired on them en route , wounding five men . Once in position , they were attacked at 03 : 00 the next morning by a small Turkish force , which was forced to retire . Then a Turkish cavalry force was sighted assembling in a valley , which the regiment opened fire on ; they galloped away . At 11 : 00 the Turkish returned to the attack , supported by artillery and machine @-@ gun fire , and managed to get to within two hundred yards ( 180 m ) of the regiment 's lines before being stopped . Turkish artillery continued to bombard the regiment for the rest of the day , only stopping after dark . The day 's fighting cost the regiment six dead and forty @-@ nine wounded . As there was no trace of their relief , and the horses had not been watered for forty @-@ eight hours , they were sent back to Beersheba . Eventually relieved , on 6 November , by the Imperial Camel Corps Brigade , the men set out to the rear on foot , meeting their returning horses at Kh el Ras . 
 = = = Ayun Kara = = = 
 On 11 November , the brigade was ordered to move to the western flank and rejoin the division . It was not an easy task due to the difficult terrain , and one stage of thirty @-@ one miles ( 50 km ) took them thirty hours to cross . They eventually met with the division at <unk> the next day and had to rest and recuperate until moving out again on 13 November and camping for the night at <unk> . 
 The next morning , 14 November , the regiment crossed the River Rubin , and at 12 : 30 located a Turkish position at Ayun Kara . The regiment was on the left front of the brigade advance , with the Wellington Mounted Rifles on their left and the Aucklanders in reserve . As the regiment advanced through orange groves , they were engaged by the Turkish defenders . The regiment then held a fire support position while the other two regiments attacked on the left . Fighting off several counter @-@ attacks the brigade eventually , at nightfall , won the battle and held their ground overnight . Not being involved in the main assault , the regiment 's casualties were rather light at one dead and six wounded . The next day the Turkish force had withdrawn , and the regiment advanced first to Beit Dejan , and then occupied the port of Jaffa on 17 November , where the commanding officer established the regimental headquarters in the German Consulate . 
 = = = River Auja = = = 
 Around four miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) to the north of Jaffa is the River Auja , along which the withdrawing Turkish Fourth Army had formed a defence line . The only crossing points were a bridge at Khurbet Hadrah , and three fords . One of these was about two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) to the east of Hadrah , another was at <unk> and the third at the river mouth . 
 The brigade was ordered to assault the river and capture a crossing . On 24 November the regiment , with the 8th Squadron leading , crossed the ford at the river mouth . Taken by surprise , the Turkish defenders retired , and were followed by the regiment , who galloped into the nearby foothills and captured the village of Sheikh Muannis . The rest of the brigade continued the attack along the river , capturing the other crossings . To support their defence , the 161st ( Essex ) Brigade moved to the north of the river and dug in . The regiment sent mounted patrols forward to observe the surrounding country . 
 The next day the Turkish counter @-@ attacked the bridge @-@ head at Khurbet Hadrah in force . Their first attempt failed , but after being reinforced they tried again the same day . Eventually the Essex Brigade were forced to withdraw back across the river . The regiment , to assist them , crossed at the river mouth and attacked the Turkish right , with the 10th Squadron heading , on foot , for Sheikh Muannis to assist the Wellington Mounted Rifles . Now defended by the 10th Squadron , the village 's defenders withdrew across the river , and once clear they were followed by the squadron . Meanwhile , the 1st and 8th Squadrons , which had moved into the northern hills , were heavily attacked by the advancing Turks . They managed to hold a line , supported by their machine @-@ guns , as they slowly retired , troop covering troop , back to the river . The Turkish force , now back in control of the northern river bank , made no attempt to force a crossing . Despite the nature of the battle , with the regiment withdrawing in daylight , their casualties were again rather light at two dead and four wounded . 
 = = Jordan Valley = = 
 = = = Jericho = = = 
 The British captured Jerusalem in December , but the Turkish forces still held the Jordan Valley and the area around the Dead Sea , putting the British right flank in danger of a counter @-@ attack . As a result , the regiment 's next operation involved the capture of Jericho in the east . 
 On 16 February the regiment started their move towards Bethlehem , arriving there the next day . Two days later the brigade started over the hills towards the River Jordan , marching overnight . The tracks forced them into single file , but by daylight they were at El Muntar . From there the terrain dropped three thousand feet ( 910 m ) to the Jordan Valley . As soon as the brigade 's vanguard appeared they were engaged by the Turkish defences . It was not until 07 : 00 that the regiment came into the open to assist the attack . The regiment was sent against a Turkish strong point at Hill 288 , the 8th and 10th Squadrons leading with the 1st in reserve . The 10th Squadron had problems continuing their attack so the 1st was sent forward by a different route , and by noon the Turkish defenders were withdrawing to Nebi Musa . Here , using their artillery and machine @-@ guns , the Turks held up the regiment 's advance along a narrow defile until nightfall . The next morning the 10th Squadron were sent forward again , but the Turks had withdrawn during the night . At 05 : 30 on 21 February the regiment formed the brigade 's vanguard as it started out again , reaching the Jordan Valley at 09 : 00 . The regiment pushed ahead towards Jericho , leaving the 8th Squadron behind to repair the road they were using . Jericho was occupied by the 1st Light Horse Brigade , so the regiment deployed along the River Jordan , from the Dead Sea to a pontoon bridge at Ghoraniyeh , which was still held by the Turks . The next day was spent patrolling the vicinity of the river , and at 15 : 00 on 22 February the western side was declared clear of all Turkish forces . The brigade did not linger in the valley , and at 18 : 00 the same day they started back to Jerusalem . 
 = = = Amman = = = 
 A raid on Amman was the next operation for the regiment . The ANZAC Mounted Division , 60th ( London ) Division and the Imperial Camel Corps Brigade would all take part . On 13 March the regiment started back to the Jordan Valley through heavy rain . Orders for the raid were issued ; the brigade would advance on mountain tracks , via the village of Ain Es Sir , then to Amman . The rains postponed the raid , and it was not until 01 : 30 on 24 March that the brigade crossed the river Jordan , by a pontoon bridge at Hajlah . At 09 : 30 the regiment , the Wellington Mounted Rifles and the 181st ( 2 / 6th London ) Brigade started clearing the area between the river and the foothills . The vanguard , formed by the 1st Squadron and the Auckland Mounted Rifles , had by 16 : 30 left the Wadi Jeria and started up into the hills . In the wet and cold weather progress was slow . The narrow tracks meant that all wheeled transport , including artillery and supply wagons , had to be left behind . They reached Ain Es Sir at 14 : 00 , two hours behind the vanguard . Out of contact with the division , they remained at the village for the remainder of that day and the next . Patrols checked the area between the village and Amman , which was around six miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) away . The remainder of the division , which had travelled by a different route , arrived later that day . They were in no physical condition to attack , so the advance was postponed until the next day . 
 The assault began at daylight on 27 March ; the 8th Squadron moved across the plain to <unk> , where their progress was stopped by heavy Turkish small arms fire . The squadron formed a defensive line , while the 1st Squadron moved past them on the right and captured a small hill . Turkish artillery and machine @-@ gun fire grew heavier all day , and another attempt by the 8th Squadron to move forward at 16 : 00 also failed . At 19 : 25 the Turks counter @-@ attacked the 1st Squadron , but were forced to retire . That night patrols were sent to reconnoitre the Turkish positions , so they could be more easily attacked the next day . At dawn on 28 March the entire division tried another attack . The 1st Squadron managed to capture a small trench , but without their artillery support they were unable to move any further forward in the face of heavy Turkish machine @-@ gun fire . All that day and night they managed to hold onto what they had won , waiting for reinforcement to continue the attack . 
 The next day it was decided to make a dismounted attack on Hill 3039 , outside Amman . The regiment , while still holding its own lines , provided eleven officers and 102 other ranks to take part in the assault . At 02 : 00 they formed up and started forward , the regiment 's contingent forming the second line with the Wellington Mounted Rifles . The assault was successful , the first line capturing their objectives . The second line passed through them onto their objectives . With around three hundred yards ( 270 m ) to go , Turkish machine @-@ guns opened fire on them , but they pressed on , capturing a machine @-@ gun and fourteen prisoners . Then the 8th Squadron moved forward with the 4th ( ANZAC ) Battalion , Imperial Camel Corps Brigade , and captured the last Turkish position on the hill . The brigade settled in to defend the hill , the regiment located between the brigade 's other two units . At dawn Turkish artillery targeted the hill , and at 09 : 30 the Turks counter @-@ attacked the New Zealanders . They were stopped by the brigade , using captured machine @-@ guns in addition to their own weapons . Turkish artillery continued to bombard the hill until 16 : 00 , when another counter @-@ attack began , mostly to the regiment 's left ; this was driven off . The third counter @-@ attack came an hour later but was also defeated . Elsewhere the rest of the division had been trying to reach Amman but could not make any progress . 
 Unable to continue the attack , and with a shortage of ammunition and rations , the division was ordered to withdraw back to the River Jordan . The brigade was ordered at 18 : 00 to retire back to Ain Es Sir . On arrival the 1st Squadron formed a defensive line , while the rest of the regiment rested . However , the 1st Squadron were soon engaged by a Turkish force , and the regiment and the Auckland Mounted Rifles moved up to support them . For the remainder of the night , the division retired through the line held by the regiment , until 04 : 00 on 1 April when the Wellington Mounted Rifles took over from the regiment , which then followed the division back to the river . They reached the Jordan Valley at dusk and moved back across the river . During the operation , the regiment lost eighteen dead , thirty @-@ seven wounded and one man missing in action . 
 The brigade crossed the Jordan and the regiment camped two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) to the south @-@ east of Jericho . Not all of the ANZAC Mounted Division moved west of the river ; the 1st Light Horse Brigade remained on the eastern bank forming a bridge @-@ head . On 19 April the regiment crossed back over the river to conduct a reconnaissance of Shunet Nimrin . Advancing through Turkish artillery fire they got to within one thousand yards ( 910 m ) of the Turkish lines in the foothills , and remained there all day , before returning to the western bank at 21 : 00 . 
 = = = Es Salt = = = 
 On 30 April the second raid across the Jordan began , their objective to capture Es Salt . This time a much larger force was involved under command of the Desert Mounted Corps . The regiment and brigade were part of the force assigned to attack Shunet Nimrin . Once again they advanced through Turkish artillery fire , and confronted by Turkish strong points in the foothills , were unable to make any progress . That night they moved back across the Jordan , having suffered three dead and eleven wounded . 
 On 1 May the brigade became the corps reserve and at noon were ordered to assist the 179th ( 2 / 4th London ) Brigade in their attack on El Haud . The regiment crossed the bridge and started forward , through artillery fire , first walking then increasing their pace to a canter , until they reached cover . But then they were ordered back and had to return to Umm Es Shert , so they headed back through the shellfire until they reached the village . They remained there overnight until ordered forward to support the 4th Light Horse Brigade defending the road from the Ed Damieh ford to Es Salt , which was the only route back for the rest of the force attacking Es Salt . For the next day the regiment held a defensive position along the road , and then moved , dismounted , into the mountains to help the Australian Mounted Division extricate themselves . On 3 May , once the Australians had moved past them , the regiment walked back down the track behind them , shelled by Turkish artillery . They then moved into the lines held by the infantry until the other forces had reached safety , before forming the rearguard back to Ghoraniyeh , arriving at 16 : 00 on 5 May . 
 = = = Chaytor 's Force = = = 
 The next months were spent training and refitting , until August when the brigade formed the divisional reserve located around Jericho . In September they moved forward to form the left ( northern ) flank of the Jordan Valley defences . At the same time , the regiment took command of the 1st and 2nd Battalions British West Indies Regiment and the 38th and 39th Battalions Royal Fusiliers , which were part of a larger deception force commanded by the divisional commander , Chaytor . They were tasked with convincing the Turks that the next British attack would be from the Jordan Valley , while the forces were actually being realigned to attack in the west . The regiment was heavily involved in the deception , carrying out offensive patrolling , constructing dummy camps , and moving back and forwards behind the lines to give the impression of a much larger force than was actually present . 
 The main British attack started in the west on 19 September ; the regiment remained in the Jordan Valley keeping patrols close to the Turkish positions to watch for any withdrawal . The first evidence of that was observed the next day , when the Turks retired from their forward positions . The regiment then moved to join the rest of the brigade at <unk> Fusail on the western bank of the Jordan . 
 The next day the brigade started towards their first objective , the bridge at Damieh . At 10 : 30 the Auckland Mounted Rifles , assisted by the 1st Squadron , assaulted and captured the Damieh bridge with a bayonet charge . The 10th Squadron arrived after the bridge was secured , and followed the <unk> pursuing the withdrawing Turks into the hills . That night the regiment moved back across the bridge , leaving the 1st Squadron behind to guard it . The next day the brigade was ordered to resume the advance , so with the regiment as the vanguard , overcame the first obstacle , a Turkish machine @-@ gun post . At 15 : 30 they reached Es Salt , passed through the town to the east , and formed a defensive position in the hills for the night . During the day they had captured 250 men , three artillery pieces and several machine @-@ guns . The next day , 24 September , the regiment continued their advance , heading towards <unk> where they were joined by the 1st and 2nd Light Horse Brigades . The next day about two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) north @-@ west of Amman they came upon two Turkish redoubts covering the road to the town . While the brigade 's other regiments deployed to attack them , the regiment , with a section from the Machine @-@ Gun Squadron , were ordered to manoeuvre around to assault them from the rear . At midday they were confronted by around two hundred Turkish troops defending a ridge line . The regiment , through artillery and machine @-@ gun fire , assaulted and captured the ridge . Not stopping to consolidate the position , they continued forward towards Amman . Once there the 10th Squadron , and part of the 8th Squadron , assaulted the Citadel in a bayonet charge , capturing 119 German prisoners and six machine @-@ guns . The regiment then charged through the town , capturing the railway station at 16 : 30 . All told the regiment took 1 @,@ 200 prisoners , fourteen machine @-@ guns , and other military stores . Their own casualties were one dead and two wounded . Casualties and illness had reduced the regiment 's strength to only 350 men , many of whom were struck down with malaria . The regiment remained in the Amman area until the night of 29 / 30 September when they moved south to Kastel and secured a large number of prisoners from the Turkish II Corps . On 3 October they were relieved by the 3rd Light Horse Regiment , and started back towards the Jordan Valley . By 9 October they had crossed the valley and had reached Jerusalem ; they then went back to Ayun Kara , their part in the war being over . 
 = = Post war = = 
 The war in the Middle East ended on 31 October 1918 , following the signing of the Armistice of Moudros . In November the regiment was selected to be part of the Allied force of occupation for the Dardanelles peninsula . They would again be going in a dismounted role , but only twenty @-@ five officers and 464 other ranks were involved . Leaving Egypt on 28 November they disembarked on 5 December and moved into their camps at Maidos and Kilid Bahr . On 19 January 1919 , the majority of the regiment returned to Egypt , rejoining the brigade at Kantara . 
 On 17 March the whole brigade was ordered to deploy to assist the civil authorities dealing with growing unrest among the Egyptian civilian population . The regiment moved to the Nile Delta on 23 March , forming a column with four armoured cars and an armoured train . Any one found rioting was arrested and tried in front of a court headed by the commanding @-@ officer , who also imposed sentences . Within weeks the rioting was quelled and the regiment returned to their camp , remaining there until 17 June when they were ordered to send their horses to the remount depot and move to Ismailia on the Suez Canal . On 30 June they embarked on the transport ship HMNZT Ulimaroa for New Zealand and the regiment was disbanded . 
 = = = Casualties = = = 
 During the war 334 men from the regiment died from all causes . In the seven months of the Gallipoli Campaign they had 127 dead ; fourteen of those died of illness and 113 were killed in action . Another forty @-@ six , not included in that total , were reported missing believed dead . The two years of the Sinai and Palestine Campaign accounted for another 127 dead . At the same time 466 men were debilitated or wounded in action at Gallipoli , and another 254 were wounded during the later campaign , a total of 720 wounded for both campaigns . 
 Many of the Gallipoli dead have no known grave ; the Commonwealth War Graves Commission Chunuk Bair Cemetery , constructed on the site where the Turks buried Allied war dead following the evacuation , has 632 graves of which only ten men have been identified . At the nearby Hill 60 Cemetery , which has another 788 graves , only seventy @-@ six were identified . 
 = = = Honours = = = 
 Several men of the regiment were recognised for their service by the British Empire awards system . Captain Robin Harper , later commander of the brigade machine @-@ gun squadron , was perhaps the most decorated , being awarded the Distinguished Service Order ( DSO ) , Military Cross ( MC ) , Distinguished Conduct Medal ( DCM ) and being mentioned in despatches three times . Findlay was invested as a Companion of the Order of the Bath and awarded a DSO , alongside six other officers who were also invested with the DSO . One officer was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire , and another a Member of the Order of the British Empire . Another eleven officers were awarded the MC , while the other ranks received a total of twelve DCMs and twenty @-@ three Military Medals . There were also a total of sixty mentions in despatches , some men being mentioned more than once . 
 = Étienne Hastrel de Rivedoux = 
 Étienne d 'Hastrel de Rivedoux was a general of the First French Empire who fought in the French Revolutionary Wars and the Napoleonic Wars . He was born 4 February 1766 at Pointe @-@ aux @-@ Trembles in Quebec , which was then the British colony , Province of Québec , the son of an officer in the French military . His father had served in India during the Seven Years ' War , and later in Quebec . 
 The son of rural nobility , he attended the Royal Military School in Paris as a gentleman @-@ cadet . After his graduation , Hastrel occupied several junior positions . During the French Revolution in 1789 , and its subsequent political and social upheavals , he affirmed his loyalty to France . Described by his colleagues as naturally talented , quickly moved into the ranks of the general staff , filling increasingly important positions in several French field armies , including the Army of the Rhine , the Army of the Danube , the Army of Helvetia , and the Grande Armée . He also managed an autonomous division of engineers and sappers during the Peninsular War . 
 After the Bourbon Restoration , he retained his titles and honors . He was recalled from retirement in 1830 , during the July Revolution . He died 19 September 1846 at Versailles . 
 = = Family = = 
 Étienne d 'Hastrel descended from a family of rural notables . He was the son of Christophe Claude d 'Hastrel of Rivedoux , a second son of the Lord of Rivedoux , Pierre Bruno d 'Hastrel . His mother , Marie Anne <unk> de <unk> married his father , Christophe Claude d 'Hastrel , a gentleman from the Île de Ré , a small island off the coast of France near La Rochelle , on 12 February 1760 in Neuville . The senior d 'Hastrel was a captain in the Languedoc Regiment , in a company of grenadiers . He participated in the Siege of Pondicherry in the Seven Years ' War . Etienne d 'Hastrel 's elder brother , Jacques Bruno D 'Hastrel , <unk> ( equerry ) , Chevalier , and Lord of Rivedoux , was a Knight of the Order of Saint Louis . Upon their father 's death in 1782 , he inherited the family estates and titles . 
 Etienne Hastrel was married twice , first in 1796 to his cousin Marie @-@ <unk> d 'Hastrel Rivedoux ( b . 1767 ) , who died 18 January 1801 . He married later to an Alsatian , Louise <unk> or <unk> , the sister of Henri Jacques Guillaume Clarke . He and his second wife had a son , Adolphe Hastrel de Rivedoux ( 1805 – 1875 ) , artillery captain and traveler , but best known as a painter and print maker . 
 = = Military career = = 
 Étienne d 'Hastrel was admitted to the Royal Military School in Paris as a gentleman @-@ cadet , with the rank of sous @-@ lieutenant on 11 September 1781 . When he graduated on 8 May 1784 , he joined the Artois Regiment — later the 48th Infantry Regiment — as a lieutenant . He was present at Rennes during the turmoil immediately following the Revolution , particularly divisive in the military . Some of soldiers , and indeed of some of the officers , suspected the loyalty of fellow officers remained with the old regime . Hastrel worried that the officers could no longer command the obedience of the troops , and recounted in his journal : 
 " The reception of the tri @-@ color occasioned a scene of insubordination , which deprived us of several officers and served as a pretext to the revolutionaries to inspire defiance among the soldiers . At the moment when the flag was blessed and given to the battalion , the commander gave the orders to leave the church , but the soldiers would not budge . Stirred up by the youths who had assisted with the ceremony , they declared that they would not leave the old flag to be hung from the church vaults .... We could not enforce our commands .... Seeing his authority ignored , the commander left the church and was followed by six or seven other officers . Then Capitaine <unk> , who had stayed , took the flag and gave it to the priest to be hung in the church .... [ T ] he battalion ... returned to the barracks in order . " 
 He was promoted to captain with the campaign of the Vosges on 13 April 1792 . He participated in the engagements at Frankfurt am Main and <unk> and Siege of Mainz ( 1793 ) , and a small engagement at Bingen . Subsequently he was named adjutant staff major of the Army of the Rhine on 11 July 1793 . 
 In 1799 , he was appointed to Jean @-@ Baptiste Jourdan 's general staff of the Army of the Danube , garrisoned initially in Strasbourg . After crossing the Rhine in early March , the Army engaged Archduke Charles ' Austrian troops at the battles of Ostrach and Stockach . Following defeat at Ostrach , the army was reorganized with the Army of Helvetia , under command of André Masséna . Hastrel received a staff appointment in Milan . 
 François Antoine Louis Bourcier served with Hastrel in the Army of the Danube . In 1800 , he described Hastrel to François Nicolas <unk> : 
 " The talents he has received from nature have been expanded by a careful education . His activities and services as the deputy of the general staff should make him eligible for promotion to a superior rank . " 
 In 1804 , Etienne Hastrel became a member of the Legion of Honor . For the campaigns of 1805 against Austria , of 1806 against Prussia , and of 1807 against Poland , he served on the staffs of Antoine @-@ François <unk> . While in Warsaw in 1807 , he was promoted to general of brigade . Upon his return to Germany , Hastrel was appointed to the staff of the Prince of Ponte @-@ Corvo , Jean @-@ Baptiste Bernadotte , on 20 August 1809 and , later , to the staff of Nicolas Oudinot in Holland . Etienne Hastrel also served as the military governor of Neumarkt , in <unk> , Pomerania , 15 February 1807 to May 1807 , and in the military government of Hamburg . In 1809 , Napoleon sent Etienne Hastrel to Spain , to command the engineer park attached to French army . This included three companies of miners , nine companies of sappers , a battalion of mariners , another of sailors , four companies of <unk> ( bridge builders ) , four companies of pioneers ( engineers ) , two companies of artillery , and park 's own medical detachment , close to 5 @,@ 000 men . In June 1810 , he was rewarded as Commander of the Legion of Honor . 
 As chief of general staff of the Provisional Army of Germany , and later major general ( after 1811 ) he was appointed 13 March 1812 as director @-@ general of military conscription , a position which he held until the peace of 1814 . 
 = = Bourbon restoration = = 
 Louis XVIII named him a Knight of Order of Saint Louis upon the restoration and placed him command of the military of the Vosges in October . During the Hundred Days , Napoleon appointed him as director of the Ministry of War . 
 In 1816 , the King appointed him to various inspector <unk> from 1816 to 1823 , and he retired in 1825 . During the July Revolution of 1830 , he was recalled to the general staff , but he retired permanently in 1832 . He became a grand officer of the Legion of Honor on 8 May 1835 . During his retirement , he wrote his memoires , which were published in 1833 . 
 He died 19 September 1846 at his home in Versailles and is buried at Cemetery of Notre Dame , at Versailles . Sixty @-@ one of his letters , written between 1806 and 1841 , are preserved at the Public Library of France , under the title Belgique , Les <unk> de Bruges . 
 = = = Genealogical information = = = 
 = TouchWave = 
 TouchWave , Inc . ( now WebCom ) , was a privately held Palo Alto , California IP @-@ telephony network switch provider founded in 1997 . TouchWave developed a product line called WebSwitch that was designed to replace traditional private telephone exchange systems in small @-@ to @-@ medium @-@ sized companies . WebSwitch was part of a phone system that incorporates communication features provided by the Internet . The rapid success of TouchWave was memorialized with awards and an acquisition by Ericsson Communications for $ <unk> two years after TouchWave was founded . Ericsson continued the TouchWave product line under the name WebCom , but its efforts have been viewed as less than successful . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1997 , TouchWave was a privately held , venture @-@ backed startup company in Palo Alto , California , with future entrepreneur Oliver <unk> as its marketing director . Co @-@ founded by CEO Bo Larsson , Jeff Snider , David F. <unk> , and Jesper <unk> , TouchWave released its first product , WebSwitch , in 1997 . WebSwitch , a Web @-@ based phone switch , provided telephony over IP and targeted small to medium @-@ sized businesses and branch networks of larger organizations . The WebSwitch was designed to deliver significantly lower costs for communications , ease of management and administration and offered services on a single IP @-@ based network platform . The timing of TouchWave 's late 1997 release of its phone switch product matched Level 3 's development of its first <unk> , a method to connect calls from one phone line to another without a need to use traditional hardware . 
 TouchWave made significant business and technology advances in 1998 and quickly became a recognized contributor to the VoIP industry . In March 1998 , TouchWave received the Best of Show Award at both at the Microsoft Network Telephony Forum and the Computer Telephony Expo ( Los Angeles ) for its WebSwitch product . In April , Communications Convergence magazine identified TouchWave 's WebSwitch as " [ hinting ] at the future , where voice and data will live together on a single network . " In July , TouchWave entered into a partnership agreement with British Telecom , the dominant fixed line telecommunications and broadband Internet provider in the United Kingdom . The partnership brought TouchWave access to technical recommendations and product feedback from British Telecom to be used to develop WebSwitch . In August , Computer Telephony awarded TouchWave its Editor 's Choice Award for the WebSwitch product . In September , TouchWave introduced a new version of WebSwitch . In October 1998 , TouchWave entered into an agreement with <unk> Networks to include <unk> 's embedded communications software in WebSwitch in order to improve the quality of its sound transmission . By the end of 1998 , TouchWave had improved its product line to where it could replace traditional private telephone exchange systems in small @-@ to @-@ medium @-@ sized companies throughout the world . 
 By early April 1999 , TouchWave had upgraded their WebSwitch 1608 local area network distributed phone system to a product called WebSwitch 2000 . On April 13 , 1999 , Swedish telecommunication company Ericsson announced that it had purchased TouchWave for $ 46 million . In exchange for the $ <unk> , TouchWave provided Ericsson with Internet Protocol centric network products such as business phone and private business exchanges . The acquisition of TouchWave came at a time when multibillion @-@ dollar companies were acquiring other relatively small Internet @-@ connected companies , such as <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and Summa Four . Some employees from TouchWave eventually followed serial entrepreneur and former TouchWave president and CEO Samir <unk> to <unk> , Inc . , a provider of voicemail majordomo services . TouchWave co @-@ founder Jeff Snider would go on to be vice president of enterprise sales at Ericsson and then a CEO co @-@ founder of <unk> in 1999 . 
 = = WebCom = = 
 With Ericsson 's 1999 purchase , TouchWave became a subsidiary of Ericsson and was renamed WebCom . In April 2000 , Ericsson WebCom , now based in Menlo Park , California , expanded TouchWave 's WebSwitch product line with the WebSwitch 100 Phone Gateway and IP Extension Gateway . In January 2003 , Business Communications Review magazine stated that Ericsson 's acquisition of TouchWave " turned out to be of little consequence . " A year later , that same magazine asserted that Ericsson 's acquisition of TouchWave had not produced a desired result , writing that it had " borne little fruit . " 
 = Mark Henry = 
 Mark Jerrold Henry ( born June 12 , 1971 ) is an American powerlifter , Olympic weightlifter , strongman , and professional wrestler who is currently signed to WWE on the Raw brand . He was a two @-@ time Olympian in 1992 and 1996 and a Gold , Silver and Bronze Medalist at the Pan American Games in 1995 . As a powerlifter , he was WDFPF World Champion ( 1995 ) and a two @-@ time U.S. National Champion ( 1995 and 1997 ) as well as an all @-@ time raw world record holder in the squat and deadlift . Currently , he still holds the WDFPF world records in the squat , deadlift and total and the USAPL American record in the deadlift since 1995 . He is credited for the biggest raw squat and raw powerlifting total ever performed by a drug tested athlete , regardless of weight class , as well as the greatest raw deadlift by an American citizen . 
 In weightlifting , Henry was a three @-@ time U.S. National Weightlifting Champion ( 1993 , 1994 , 1996 ) , an American Open winner ( 1992 ) , a two @-@ time U.S. Olympic Festival Champion ( 1993 and 1994 ) and a NACAC champion ( 1996 ) . He holds all three Senior US American weightlifting records of 1993 – 1997 . In 2002 he won the first annual Arnold Strongman Classic . 
 Since joining the World Wrestling Federation ( now WWE ) in 1996 , he has become a one @-@ time WWF European Champion and a two @-@ time world champion , having held the ECW Championship in 2008 , and the World Heavyweight Championship in 2011 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Henry was born in Silsbee , Texas . As a child , he was a big wrestling fan and André the Giant was his favorite wrestler . While attending a wrestling show in Beaumont , Texas , young Henry tried to touch André as he was walking down the aisle , but tripped over the barricade . André picked him up out of the crowd and put him back behind the barricade . Henry played football in high school until his senior year , when he strained ligaments in his wrist during the first game of the year and scored below 700 on the SAT . When Henry was 12 years old , his father , Ernest , died of complications from diabetes . When he was 14 years old , Henry was diagnosed with dyslexia . 
 Henry comes from a family in which almost all of the men are larger than average , especially his great uncle <unk> , who was 6 ft 7 in , weighed approximately 500 lb , never had a pair of manufactured shoes , and was known as the strongest man in the Piney Woods of East Texas . 
 = = Powerlifting career = = 
 By the time Mark Henry was in the fourth grade , he was 5 ' 5 " and weighed 225 lb ( 102 kg ) . His mother bought a set of weights for him when he was 10 years old . During Henry 's freshman year at Silsbee High School , he was already able to squat 600 lb ( 270 kg ) , which was well over school record . As an 18 @-@ year @-@ old high school senior , Henry was called " the world 's strongest teenager " by the Los Angeles Times , and made it into the headlines in early 1990 for winning the National High School Powerlifting Championships and setting teenage lifting world records in the squat 832 lb ( 377 kg ) and total 2 @,@ 033 lb ( 922 kg ) . By the time Henry finished high school , he was a three @-@ time Texas state champion with state and national records in all four powerlifting categories — the squat at 832 lb ( 377 kg ) , bench press at 525 lb ( 238 kg ) and deadlift at 815 lb ( 370 kg ) as well as the total at 2 @,@ 033 lb ( 922 kg ) . 
 At the Texas High School Powerlifting Championships in April 1990 , Terry Todd , a professor of kinesiology at the University of Texas at Austin and former weightlifter , spotted Henry and persuaded him to go to Austin after he graduated to train in the Olympic style of weightlifting . In July 1990 at the <unk> Senior National Powerlifting Championships , 19 @-@ year @-@ old Henry came second only to the legendary six @-@ time World Powerlifting Champion Kirk <unk> . While powerlifting relies primarily on brute strength and power , which Henry obviously possessed , Olympic weightlifting is considered more sophisticated , involving more agility , timing , flexibility and technique . There have been few lifters in history who have been able to be successful in both lifting disciplines . Mastering the technique of weightlifting usually takes many years of practice . But Henry broke four national junior records in weightlifting after only eight months of training . In April 1991 , he won the United States National Junior Championships ; 20 days later he placed fourth at the U.S. Senior National Championships , and finished sixth at the Junior World Weightlifting Championships in Germany two months later . Only few weeks afterwards , he became 1991 's International Junior Champion in <unk> as well . In Henry 's first year in competitive weightlifting , he broke all three junior ( 20 and under ) American records 12 times , and became the United States ' top <unk> , surpassing Mario Martinez . 
 At the age of 19 , Henry had already managed to qualify for the weightlifting competition at the 1992 Summer Olympics , where he finished tenth in the <unk> Heavyweight class . Ten months before the 1992 Olympics , Henry had begun training with Dragomir <unk> , a bronze medalist at the 1984 Summer Olympics , who said that he had " never seen anyone with Mark 's raw talent " . After the Olympics , Henry became more determined to focus on weightlifting and began competing all over the world . In late 1992 he took the win at the USA Weightlifting American Open and further proved his dominance on the American soil by winning not only the U.S. National Weightlifting Championships , but also the U.S. Olympic Festival Championships in 1993 and 1994 . At the 1995 Pan American Games Henry won a gold , silver and bronze medal . 
 Having reached the pinnacle of weightlifting on a National and continental level , he competed again in powerlifting and shocked the world by winning the ADFPA U.S. National Powerlifting Championships in 1995 with a 2314 @.@ 8 lb raw Powerlifting Total . Despite competing without supportive equipment in contrast to the other competitors , Henry managed to outclass the lifter in second place by 286 lbs defeating not only 5 time IPF World Powerlifting Champion and 12 time USAPL National Powerlifting Champion Brad Gillingham , but also America 's Strongest Man of 1997 Mark Philippi . In the process he set all @-@ time world records in the raw deadlift at 903 @.@ 9 lbs ( 410 kg ) and the squat without a squat suit at 948 @.@ 0 lbs ( 430 kg ) as well as the all @-@ time drug tested raw total at 2314 @.@ 8 lb ( 1050 kg ) . Later that same year in October , he competed in the drug @-@ free Powerlifting World Championships and won again , even though he trained on the <unk> only sparingly — due his main focus still being on the two Olympic lifts . He not only become World Champion by winning the competition but also bettered his previous all @-@ time squat world record to 953 @.@ 5 lbs ( 432 @.@ 5 kg ) and his all @-@ time drug tested world record total to 2336 @.@ 9 lbs ( 1060 kg ) . 
 In 1996 Henry became the North America , Central America , Caribbean Islands ( NACAC ) Champion . He earned the right to compete at the Olympics by winning the U.S. National Weightlifting Championships in the Spring of 1996 for a third time . During his victory Henry became Senior US American record holder ( 1993 – 1997 ) in the Snatch at 180 @.@ 0 kg ( 396 @.@ 8 lbs ) , Clean and jerk at 220 @.@ 0 kg ( 485 @.@ 0 lbs ) , and Total at 400 @.@ 0 kg ( 881 @.@ 8 lbs ) , improving all of his three previous personal bests . This 400 kg total , in the opinion of many experts in track field of international lifting — including Dragomir <unk> , the ' <unk> coach of the U.S. team — was the highest ever made by an athlete who had never used anabolic steroids — who was lifetime <unk> . By that time , at the age of 24 , Henry was generally acknowledged as the strongest man in the world , even by many of the Eastern Block athletes who outrank him in weightlifting . No one in the history of the sports had ever lifted as much as him in the five competitive lifts — the snatch and the clean and jerk in weightlifting — the squat , bench press and deadlift in powerlifting . To this day , his five lift total is still the greatest in history by a fair amount — making him arguably one of the strongest men that ever lived and stamp him , according to lifting statistician Herb <unk> , as history ’ s greatest lifter . 
 In the months prior to the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta , Georgia , Henry received more attention and publicity than any lifter in recent US history . He guested at Jay Leno , Conan O 'Brien and Oprah Winfrey Show and was featured on HBO Inside Sports and The Today Show . He was also featured in dozens of magazines including U.S. News & World Report , People Vanity Fair , ESPN The Magazine and Life where he was photographed nude by famed artist Annie <unk> . During this period he connected with WWE owner Vince McMahon for the first time , which led to him signing a 10 @-@ year deal as professional wrestler . 
 Henry improved his lifts to 407 lb in the snatch and 507 lb in the clean and jerk during his final eight weeks of preparation for the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta . Henry at 6 @-@ foot @-@ 4 @-@ inches tall and 414 lbs bodyweight , became the largest athlete in Olympic history and was voted captain of the Olympic weightlifting team . Unfortunately , he suffered a back injury during the competition and was unable to approach his normal performance level . Due to the injury he had to drop out after his first clean and jerk attempt and finished with a disappointing 14th place . His appearance at the Olympics proved to be his last official competition in Olympic weightlifting , as he retired from weightlifting , vowing never to return unless the sport is " cleaned up " of anabolic steroid use . 
 Since his career start as a professional wrestler shortly after the Olympics , he broke his leg in the Fall of 1996 . But by the summer of the following year he had <unk> it enough to be able to compete at the USAPL National Powerlifting Championships 1997 , where he won the competition to become the U.S National Powerlifting Champion in the Super Heavyweight class again . He had planned to continue heavy training in powerlifting , although his travel schedule as a professional wrestler with the WWF ( now WWE ) has made sustained training difficult . Mark ’ s WWF contract was unique in many ways , allowing him at least three months off each year from wrestling , so he can train for the national and world championships in weightlifting or powerlifting . Barring injury , Mark had originally hoped to return to the platform in late 1998 , to lift for many more years , and to eventually squat at least 1100 lbs without a “ squat suit ” and to deadlift 1000 lbs . 
 Although in early 1998 he was still able to do five reps in the bench press with 495 lbs , three reps in the squat with 855 lbs ( with no suit and no knee wraps ) , and three reps in the standing press with 405 lbs in training , while traveling with the World Wrestling Federation , he never returned to compete again in official championships in favor of his wrestling career . He weighed 380 lbs at that time , and his right upper arm was measured at 24 ” by Terry Todd . By basically ending his lifting career at the age of 26 , it is probable that he never reached his full physical potential as a professional lifter . Henry remains the youngest man in history to squat more than 900 pounds without a squat suit as well as the youngest to total more than 2 @,@ 300 pounds raw – he 's the only person ever to have accomplished any of these feats at under 25 years of age . 
 = = = Personal powerlifting records = = = 
 Powerlifting Competition Records : done in official Powerlifting full meets 
 Squat – 432 @.@ 5 kg ( 953 @.@ 5 lbs ) raw with knee wraps ( done on October 29 , 1995 WDFPF ) 
 → former all @-@ time unequipped squat world record for over a decade in SHW class until 2010 ( + regardless of weight class until 2007 ) 
 → current WDFPF world record squat in SHW class ( + regardless of weight class and equipment ) since 1995 
 → current drug tested all @-@ time world record squat without a suit in SHW class ( + regardless of weight class ) since 1995 
 → currently heaviest walked @-@ out raw squat of all time ( without a <unk> ) regardless of weight class or federation since 1995 
 <unk> – 410 kg ( 903 @.@ 9 lbs ) raw ( done on July 16 , 1995 ADFPA ( USAPL ) ) 
 → former all @-@ time raw world record deadlift in SHW class until 2010 ( + regardless of weight class until 2009 ) 
 → current all @-@ time highest raw deadlift ever pulled by an American in SHW class ( + regardless of weight class ) since 1995 
 → current Open Men American record deadlift in SHW class ( + regardless of weight class and equipment ) since 1995 
 → current all @-@ time US national championship record deadlift in SHW class ( + regardless of weight class and equipment ) since 1995 
 → current USAPL American record deadlift in SHW class ( + regardless of weight class and equipment ) since 1995 
 → current drug tested raw world record deadlift ( in SHW class only ) since 1995 
 Powerlifting Total – 1060 kg ( 432 @.@ 5 / 235 @.@ 0 / 392 @.@ 5 ) / 2336 @.@ 9 lbs ( 953 @.@ 5 / 518 @.@ 1 / 865 @.@ 3 ) raw with wraps ( done on October 29 , 1995 WDFPF ) 
 → current WDFPF world record in SHW class ( + regardless of weight class and equipment ) since 1995 
 → current drug tested all @-@ time world record unequipped powerlifting total in SHW class ( + regardless of weight class ) 
 Career aggregate Powerlifting Total ( best official lifts ) – 1108 @.@ 0 kg ( 432 @.@ 5 + 265 @.@ 5 + 410 ) / 2442 @.@ 7 lbs ( 953 @.@ 5 + 585 @.@ 3 + 903 @.@ 9 ) 
 Powerlifting Gym Records ( unofficial ) : 
 Squat – 1006 lbs ( 456 @.@ 5 kg ) 
 Bench press – 585 lbs – 600 lbs ( 265 kg – 272 kg ) 
 <unk> – 925 lbs ( 420 kg ) 
 Career aggregate Powerlifting Total ( best unofficial lifts ) – 2531 lbs ( 1006 + 600 + 925 ) 
 Front Squat – 770 lbs ( 350 kg ) 
 Behind @-@ the @-@ neck @-@ press – over 400 lbs ( > 181 kg ) 
 = = = Personal weightlifting records = = = 
 Weightlifting Competition Records : 
 done in official competition 
 Snatch : 180 @.@ 0 kg ( 396 @.@ 8 lbs ) ( done at 1996 's U.S. Nationals ) 
 → Senior US American snatch record 1993 – 1997 in SHW class ( + regardless of weight class ) 
 Clean & jerk : 220 @.@ 0 kg ( 485 @.@ 0 lbs ) ( done at 1996 's U.S. Nationals ) 
 → Senior US American clean & jerk record 1993 – 1997 in SHW class 
 Weightlifting Total : 400 @.@ 0 kg ( 881 @.@ 8 lbs ) – snatch : 180 @.@ 0 kg ( 396 @.@ 8 lbs ) / clean & jerk : 220 @.@ 0 kg ( 485 @.@ 0 lbs ) ( done at 1996 's U.S. Nationals ) 
 → Senior US American weightlifting total record 1993 – 1997 in SHW class ( + regardless of weight class ) 
 Weightlifting Gym Records ( unofficial ) : 
 all three done in training after the 1996 's U.S. Nationals , but prior to the Olympics ' 96 
 Snatch : 184 @.@ 6 kg ( 407 lbs ) 
 Clean & jerk : 230 @.@ 0 kg ( 507 lbs ) 
 Weightlifting Total : 414 @.@ 6 kg ( 914 lbs ) 
 = = = Combined lifting records = = = 
 official weightlifting total + official powerlifting total 
 = Combined <unk> : 
 400 @.@ 0 kg + 1060 @.@ 0 kg = 
