 Key briefly returned to international cricket for the 2009 ICC World Twenty20 competition . On 5 June 2009 , he made his only appearance in the competition , against the Netherlands at Lords as a replacement for the injured Kevin Pietersen . Coming in during the 18th over , with England at 144 / 4 , he managed to knock 10 from 11 balls however could not find the boundary . The Netherlands successfully chased down the target from the final ball . 
 = = Career records and statistics = = 
 = = = Test matches = = = 
 Records : 
 Lord 's Cricket Ground second wicket partnership record : 291 with Andrew Strauss , 2004 v West Indies 
 Wanderers Stadium second wicket partnership record : 182 with Andrew Strauss , 2004 – 05 v South Africa 
 Test centuries : 
 Career performances : 
 = = = One Day Internationals = = = 
 Career performances : 
 = = = Career Best Performances = = = 
 as of 10 August 2014 
 = Emma Watson = 
 Emma Charlotte <unk> Watson ( born 15 April 1990 ) is a British actress , model , and activist . Born in Paris and brought up in Oxfordshire , Watson attended the Dragon School as a child and trained as an actress at the Oxford branch of Stagecoach Theatre Arts . She rose to prominence after landing her first professional acting role as Hermione Granger in the Harry Potter film series , appearing in all eight Harry Potter films from 2001 to 2011 , previously having acted only in school plays . The franchise earned Watson worldwide fame , critical accolades , and more than £ 10 million . She continued to work outside of the Harry Potter films , first lending her voice to The Tale of Despereaux and appearing in the television adaptation of the novel Ballet Shoes . Since then , she has taken on starring roles in The Perks of Being a Wallflower and The Bling Ring , made a brief appearance as an " exaggerated " version of herself in This Is the End , and portrayed the title character 's adopted daughter in Noah . 
 From 2011 to 2014 , Watson split her time between working on film projects and continuing her education , studying at Brown University and Worcester College , Oxford and graduating from Brown with a bachelor 's degree in English literature in May 2014 . Her modelling work has included campaigns for Burberry and Lancôme . As a fashion consultant , she helped create a line of clothing for People Tree . She was honoured by the British Academy of Film and Television Arts in 2014 , winning for British Artist of the Year . That same year , she was appointed as a UN Women Goodwill Ambassador and helped launch the UN Women campaign HeForShe , which calls for men to advocate gender equality . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Watson was born in Paris , France , the daughter of English lawyers Jacqueline <unk> and Chris Watson . Watson lived in Paris until the age of five . Her parents separated when she was young ; following their divorce , Watson moved back to England to live with her mother in Oxfordshire while spending weekends at her father 's house in London . Watson has stated that she speaks some French , though " not as well " as she used to . After moving to Oxford with her mother and brother , she attended the Dragon School in Oxford , remaining there until 2003 . From the age of six , she wanted to become an actress , and trained at the Oxford branch of Stagecoach Theatre Arts , a part @-@ time theatre school where she studied singing , dancing , and acting . 
 By the age of ten , Watson had performed in various Stagecoach productions and school plays , including Arthur : The Young Years and The Happy Prince , but she had never acted professionally before the Harry Potter series . Following the Dragon School , Watson moved on to Headington School . While on film sets , she and her peers were tutored for up to five hours a day . In June 2006 , she took GCSE school examinations in ten subjects , achieving eight A * and two A grades . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = 1999 – 2003 : Beginnings and breakthrough = = = 
 In 1999 , casting began for Harry Potter and the Philosopher 's Stone ( released as Harry Potter and the Sorcerer 's Stone in the United States ) , the film adaptation of British author J. K. Rowling 's best @-@ selling novel . Casting agents found Watson through her Oxford theatre teacher , and producers were impressed by her confidence . After eight auditions , producer David Heyman told Watson and fellow applicants Daniel Radcliffe and Rupert Grint that they had been cast for the roles of the schoolfriends Hermione Granger , Harry Potter and Ron Weasley , respectively . Rowling supported Watson from her first screen test . 
 The release of Harry Potter and the Philosopher 's Stone in 2001 was Watson 's debut screen performance . The film broke records for opening @-@ day sales and opening @-@ weekend takings and was the highest @-@ grossing film of 2001 . Critics praised the performances of the three leads , often singling out Watson for particular acclaim ; The Daily Telegraph called her performance " admirable " , and IGN said she " stole the show " . Watson was nominated for five awards for her performance in Philosopher 's Stone , winning the Young Artist Award for Leading Young Actress . 
 A year later , Watson again starred as Hermione in Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets , the second instalment of the series . Reviewers praised the lead actors ' performances . The Los Angeles Times said Watson and her peers had matured between films , while The Times criticised director Chris Columbus for " under @-@ employing " Watson 's hugely popular character . Watson received an Otto Award from the German magazine Bravo for her performance . 
 = = = 2004 – 2011 : Continued success with Harry Potter and other roles = = = 
 In 2004 , Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban was released . Watson was appreciative of the more assertive role Hermione played , calling her character " charismatic " and " a fantastic role to play " . Although critics panned Radcliffe 's performance , labelling him " wooden " , they praised Watson ; The New York Times lauded her performance , saying " Luckily Mr. Radcliffe 's blandness is offset by Ms. Watson 's spiky impatience . Harry may show off his expanding <unk> skills ... but Hermione ... earns the loudest applause with a decidedly <unk> punch to Draco Malfoy 's deserving nose . " Although Prisoner of Azkaban proved to be the lowest @-@ grossing Harry Potter film of the entire series , Watson 's personal performance won her two Otto Awards and the Child Performance of the Year award from Total Film . 
 With Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire ( 2005 ) , both Watson and the Harry Potter film series reached new milestones . The film set records for a Harry Potter opening weekend , a non @-@ May opening weekend in the US , and an opening weekend in the UK . Critics praised the increasing maturity of Watson and her teenage co @-@ stars ; The New York Times called her performance " touchingly earnest " . For Watson , much of the humour of the film sprang from the tension among the three lead characters as they matured . She said , " I loved all the arguing . ... I think it 's much more realistic that they would argue and that there would be problems . " Nominated for three awards for Goblet of Fire , Watson won a bronze Otto Award . Later that year , Watson became the youngest person to appear on the cover of Teen Vogue , an appearance she reprised in August 2009 . In 2006 , Watson played Hermione in The Queen 's <unk> , a special mini @-@ episode of Harry Potter in celebration of Queen Elizabeth II 's 80th birthday . 
 The fifth film in the Harry Potter franchise , Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix , was released in 2007 . A huge financial success , the film set a record worldwide opening @-@ weekend gross of $ 332 @.@ 7 million . Watson won the inaugural National Movie Award for Best Female Performance . As the fame of the actress and the series continued , Watson and fellow Harry Potter co @-@ stars Daniel Radcliffe and Rupert Grint left imprints of their hands , feet and wands in front of Grauman 's Chinese Theater in Hollywood on 9 July 2007 . 
 By July 2007 , Watson 's work in the Harry Potter series was said to have earned her more than £ 10 million , and she acknowledged she would never have to work for money again . In March 2009 , she was ranked 6th on the Forbes list of " Most Valuable Young Stars " , and in February 2010 , she was named as Hollywood 's highest paid female star , having earned an estimated £ 19 million in 2009 . 
 Despite the success of Order of the Phoenix , the future of the Harry Potter franchise became surrounded in doubt , as all three lead actors were hesitant to sign on to continue their roles for the final two episodes . Radcliffe eventually signed for the final films on 2 March 2007 , but Watson was considerably more hesitant . She explained that the decision was significant , as the films represented a further four @-@ year commitment to the role , but eventually conceded that she " could never let [ the role of ] Hermione go " , signing for the role on 23 March 2007 . 
 Watson 's first non @-@ Potter role was the 2007 BBC film Ballet Shoes , an adaptation of the novel of the same title by Noel Streatfeild . The film 's director , Sandra <unk> , commented that Watson was " perfect " for the starring role of aspiring actress Pauline Fossil : " She has a piercing , delicate aura that makes you want to gaze and gaze at her . " Ballet Shoes was broadcast in the UK on Boxing Day 2007 to an audience of 5 @.@ 7 million viewers , to mixed reviews . 
 Watson also lent her voice to the role of Princess Pea in the animated film The Tale of Despereaux , a children 's comedy starring Matthew Broderick , with Harry Potter co @-@ star Robbie Coltrane ( Rubeus Hagrid ) also starring in the film . The Tale of Despereaux was released in December 2008 and grossed $ 87 million worldwide . 
 Principal photography for the sixth Harry Potter film began in late 2007 , with Watson 's part being filmed from 18 December to 17 May 2008 . Harry Potter and the Half @-@ Blood Prince premiered on 15 July 2009 , having been delayed from November 2008 . With the lead actors now in their late teens , critics were increasingly willing to review them on the same level as the rest of the film 's all @-@ star cast , which the Los Angeles Times described as " a comprehensive guide to contemporary UK acting " . The Washington Post felt Watson to have given " [ her ] most charming performance to date " , while The Daily Telegraph described the lead actors as " newly liberated and energised , eager to give all they have to what 's left of the series " . In December 2008 , Watson stated she wanted to go to university after she completed the Potter series . 
 Watson 's filming for the final instalment , Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows , began on 18 February 2009 and ended on 12 June 2010 . For financial and scripting reasons , the original book was divided into two films which were shot consecutively . Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 1 was released in November 2010 while the second film was released in July 2011 . 
 She also appeared in a music video for One Night Only , after meeting lead singer George Craig at the 2010 Winter / Summer Burberry advertising campaign . The video , " Say You Don 't Want It " , was screened on Channel 4 on 26 June 2010 and released on 16 August . 
 In her first post @-@ Harry Potter film , Watson appeared in 2011 's My Week with Marilyn as Lucy , a wardrobe assistant who is flirted with by the main character , Colin Clark , and has a few dates with him . 
 = = = 2012 – present = = = 
 In May 2010 , Watson was reported to be in talks to star in a film adaptation of The Perks of Being a Wallflower . Filming began in summer 2011 , and the film was released in September 2012 . 
 In The Bling Ring ( 2013 ) , Watson stars as Nicki . The film is based on the real @-@ life Bling Ring robberies , with Watson playing a fictionalised version of Alexis <unk> , a television personality who was one of seven teenagers involved in the robberies . While the film mostly received mixed reviews , critics gave almost unanimous praise for Watson 's portrayal of Nicki in the film . Watson also had a supporting role in the apocalyptic comedy This Is the End ( 2013 ) , in which she , Seth Rogen , James Franco and many others played " exaggerated versions of themselves " and Watson memorably dropped the " f @-@ bomb " . She said she could not pass up the opportunity to make her first comedy and " work with some of the best comedians ... in the world right now " . 
 In June 2012 , Watson was confirmed for the role of Ila in Darren Aronofsky 's Noah , which began filming the following month , and was released in March 2014 . In March 2013 , it was reported that Watson was in negotiations to star as the title character in a live @-@ action Disney adaptation of Cinderella . Kenneth Branagh was attached to direct the adaptation , while Cate Blanchett had reportedly agreed to play the evil stepmother . Watson was offered the role , but turned it down . 
 Watson was attached in 2012 to the role of Emma Forrest in a film adaptation of her memoir Your Voice in My Head . At the time , Harry Potter director David Yates was attached . In a May 2013 interview , it appeared that Watson was no longer attached as the film 's star . Stanley Tucci stated that the role would instead be played by Emily Blunt . However , by September 2013 , it was confirmed that Watson was once again involved in the production in the role of Forrest and that filming would begin in November that year with a new director , Francesca Gregorini . 
 As of June 2013 , Watson is set to work with Harry Potter producer David Heyman for her next film Queen of the <unk> , based on a yet @-@ to @-@ be @-@ released book trilogy . She will lead the film as heroine Kelsea Glynn as well as being an executive producer . Warner Bros. will distribute the film . 
 It was reported in September 2013 that Watson would star in While We 're Young , the film adaptation of Adena Halpern 's 2010 novel 29 , which focuses on a young @-@ at @-@ heart grandmother who would rather spend time with her granddaughter ( Watson ) than her daughter . The film was directed by Stephen Chbosky , with whom Watson had collaborated on The Perks of Being a Wallflower . Watson also has been cast opposite Ethan Hawke in thriller Regression . Alejandro Amenábar wrote and directed the film , which was released in 2015 . 
 In October 2013 , Watson was chosen as the Woman of the Year by British GQ . That same month she was one of two British actors to land atop a readers ' poll of the sexiest movie stars of 2013 , beating Scarlett Johansson and Jennifer Lawrence for the actresses ' title in an online poll of more than 50 @,@ 000 film fans . Benedict Cumberbatch took the men 's vote . 
 Watson joined Judi Dench , Robert Downey Jr . , Mike Leigh , Julia Louis @-@ Dreyfus and Mark Ruffalo as recipients of the 2014 Britannia Awards , presented on 30 October in Los Angeles . Watson won for British Artist of the Year and dedicated her award to Millie , her pet hamster who died as Watson filmed Philosopher 's Stone . 
 2015 releases in which Emma stars include Colonia , a thriller co @-@ starring Daniel Brühl and Michael <unk> . Watson will play Belle in a 2017 live @-@ action adaptation of Beauty and the Beast opposite Dan Stevens as the Beast . She will sing in a film for the first time , which she called " terrifying in and of itself " . She also starred in Regression , a thriller released in August 2015 , alongside Ethan Hawke and her Harry Potter colleague David <unk> and has signed up to star opposite Tom Hanks in the film adaptation of The Circle . 
 In February 2016 , Watson announced she was taking a year @-@ long break from acting . She planned to spend the time on her " personal development " and her women 's rights work . 
 = = Modelling and fashion = = 
 In 2005 , Watson began her modelling career with a photo shoot for Teen Vogue and was the youngest star to grace its cover . Three years later , the British press reported that Watson was to replace Keira Knightley as the face of the fashion house Chanel , but this was denied by both parties . In June 2009 , following several months of rumours , Watson confirmed that she would be partnering with Burberry as the face of their Autumn / Winter 2009 campaign , for which she received an estimated six @-@ figure fee . She also appeared in Burberry 's 2010 Spring / Summer campaign alongside her brother Alex , musicians George Craig and Matt Gilmour , and model Max Hurd . In February 2011 , Watson was awarded the Style Icon award from British Elle by Dame Vivienne Westwood . Watson continued her involvement in fashion advertising when she announced she had been chosen as the face of Lancôme in March 2011 . 
 In September 2009 , Watson announced her involvement with People Tree , a Fair Trade fashion brand . Watson worked as a creative advisor for People Tree to create a spring line of clothing , which was released in February 2010 ; the range featured styles inspired by southern France and London . The collection , described by The Times as " very clever " despite their " quiet hope that [ she ] would become tangled at the first hemp @-@ woven hurdle " , was widely publicised in magazines such as Teen Vogue , Cosmopolitan , and People . Watson , who was not paid for the collaboration , admitted that competition for the range was minimal , but argued that " Fashion is a great way to empower people and give them skills ; rather than give cash to charity you can help people by buying the clothes they make and supporting things they take pride in " ; adding , " I think young people like me are becoming increasingly aware of the humanitarian issues surrounding fast fashion and want to make good choices but there aren 't many options out there . " Watson continued her involvement with People Tree , resulting in the release of a 2010 Autumn / Winter collection . 
 Watson was awarded Best British Style at the 2014 British Fashion Awards . The competition included David Beckham , Amal Clooney , Kate Moss and Keira Knightley . 
 = = Education = = 
 After leaving school , Watson took a gap year to film Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows beginning in February 2009 , but said she intended to continue her studies and later confirmed that she had chosen Brown University in Providence , Rhode Island . In March 2011 , after 18 months at the university , Watson announced that she was deferring her course for " a semester or two " , though she attended Worcester College , Oxford during the 2011 – 12 academic year as a " visiting student " . 
 Watson told Ellen DeGeneres just before graduation that it took five years to finish instead of four because , due to her acting work , she " ended up taking two full semesters off " . On 25 May 2014 , she graduated from Brown University with a bachelor 's degree in English literature . In 2013 , she became certified to teach yoga and meditation . As part of this certification , she attended a week @-@ long meditation course at a Canadian facility , in which residents are not allowed to speak , in order " to figure out how to be at home with myself " . She told Elle Australia that an uncertain future meant finding " a way to always feel safe and at home within myself . Because I can never rely on a physical place . " 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Watson met and started dating fellow Oxford student Will Adamowicz in 2011 , during her first year at the university . He accompanied her to the 2013 MTV Movie Awards , where she was given the Trailblazer Award . The couple split up in early 2014 . Later in 2014 , Watson began dating Oxford rugby player Matthew Janney . The relationship ended in November ; a spokesman for Watson said the split was due to her " unrelenting work schedule " . 
 While working on the film Noah , Watson was questioned about her faith , and she described herself as a spiritual Universalist . 
 = = Women 's rights work = = 
 Watson has promoted education for girls , visiting Bangladesh and Zambia to do so . In July 2014 , she was appointed as a UN Women Goodwill Ambassador . In September that year , an admittedly nervous Watson delivered an address at UN Headquarters in New York City to launch the UN Women campaign HeForShe , which calls for men to advocate for gender equality . In that speech she said she began questioning gender @-@ based assumptions at age eight when she was called " bossy " ( a trait she has attributed to her being a " perfectionist " ) whilst boys were not , and at 14 when she was " sexualised by certain elements of the media " . Watson 's speech also called feminism " the belief that men and women should have equal rights and opportunities " and declared that the perception of " man @-@ hating " is something that " has to stop " . Watson later said she received threats within 12 hours of making the speech , which left her " raging . ... If they were trying to put me off [ of doing this work ] , it did the opposite " . In 2015 , Malala Yousafzai told Watson she decided to call herself a feminist after hearing Watson 's speech . 
 Also in September , Watson made her first country visit as a UN Women Goodwill Ambassador to Uruguay where she gave a speech highlighting the need for women 's political participation . In December , the Ms. Foundation for Women named Watson its Feminist Celebrity of 2014 following an online poll . Watson also gave a speech about gender equality in January 2015 , at the World Economic Forum 's annual winter meeting . 
 Watson took the top spot on the AskMen " Top 99 Outstanding Women 2015 " list on the strength of having " thrown her back " into women 's rights issues . The day after she turned 25 , Watson placed number 26 on the TIME 100 list of the world 's most influential people ; her first @-@ ever appearance on the list . For its recap , former New York Times editor Jill Abramson noted Watson 's " gutsy , smart take on feminism " and called the effort to get men involved " refreshing " . 
 In January 2016 , Emma Watson started a feminist Goodreads book club : Our Shared Shelf . The goal of the club is to share feminist ideas and encourage discussion on the topic . One book is selected per month and is discussed in the last week of that month . The first book to be selected was My Life on the Road by Gloria Steinem , who Emma Watson would later interview on February 24th at the How to : Academy in London . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = Neoromicia malagasyensis = 
 Neoromicia malagasyensis is a vespertilionid bat of Madagascar in the genus Neoromicia . It is known only from the vicinity of the Isalo National Park in the southwestern part of the island , where it has been caught in riverine habitats . After the first specimen was caught in 1967 , it was described as a subspecies of Eptesicus somalicus ( now Neoromicia somalica ) in 1995 . After four more specimens were collected in 2002 and 2003 , it was recognized as a separate species . Because of its small distribution and the threat of habitat destruction , it is considered " Endangered " in the IUCN Red List . 
 Neoromicia malagasyensis is a relatively small species , with a forearm length of 30 to 32 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 to 1 @.@ 3 in ) and a body mass of 3 @.@ 9 to 9 g ( 0 @.@ 1 to 0 @.@ 3 oz ) . The fur is dark brown above and mixed buff and gray below . The ears are translucent and the tibia is short . The baculum ( penis bone ) resembles that of N. melckorum , but is smaller . The duration of the echolocation call , which consists of a component with rapidly falling frequency and one showing more stable frequency , averages 4 @.@ 9 ms and the interval between calls averages 69 @.@ 1 ms . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 In their 1995 review of Malagasy bats , Randolph Peterson and colleagues established Eptesicus somalicus malagasyensis , a new subspecies of Eptesicus somalicus ( currently Neoromicia somalica ) . They had only a single specimen and noted that further material was needed to assess the new form 's relationship with E. somalicus . Studies in 2001 and 2002 provided evidence that E. somalicus and related species are not closely related to Eptesicus ( nor to Pipistrellus , where they have also been placed ) , so that these species were allocated to the separate genus Neoromicia . In 2004 , Steven Goodman and Julie Ranivo reviewed the Malagasy subspecies after collecting two more specimens and concluded that it was distinct enough to be classified as a separate species , Neoromicia malagasyensis . Two years later , Paul Bates and colleagues reported on two more specimens and showed that the bacula ( penis bones ) of N. malagasyensis and N. somalica are different , providing further evidence that they are distinct species . However , they recommended that further research assess the degree of difference between N. malagasyensis and N. matroka ( formerly in Eptesicus , but placed in Neoromicia by Bates and colleagues ) , which occurs further east in Madagascar . The IUCN Red List currently again classifies the species in Eptesicus , as Eptesicus malagasyensis . 
 Neoromicia malagasyensis is one of at least six species of small vespertilionid bats ( " pipistrelles " ) on Madagascar , in addition to N. matroka , N. melckorum , Pipistrellus <unk> , P. raceyi , and Hypsugo anchietae . The classification of these bats has historically been controversial , leading to many changing identifications and generic assignments . The genus Neoromicia is exclusively African and included 11 species in the 2005 third edition of Mammal Species of the World ; more species , like N. malagasyensis and N. matroka , have been added since . Common names proposed for this species include " Isalo <unk> " and " Peterson 's ' pipistrelle ' " . 
 = = Description = = 
 Neoromicia malagasyensis is a relatively small " pipistrelle " , but larger than N. somalica . The fur on the back is long and dark brown and the underparts contain both gray and dark buff hairs ; there , the fur becomes lighter towards the tail . The fur is darker than in N. somalica , but paler than in N. matroka . The brown ears are translucent . The tragus ( a projection on the inner side of the outer ear ) is similar to that of N. somalica , but may be a little narrower . Relative to the two other Malagasy Neoromicia species , the tibia is short . A single baculum ( penis bone ) , 2 @.@ 2 mm long , has been studied . It resembles the baculum of N. melckorum , but is smaller . As in N. matroka , the distal ( far ) end is flat and displaced downwards , but the N. malagasyensis baculum has a smaller area and less well @-@ developed flanges at the sides and a smaller vertical extension of the bone . 
 The skull is somewhat smaller than that of N. matroka and the braincase and palate are narrower . Compared to N. somalica , the skull is broader . The ridge on the lacrimal bone is better developed , the palate is broader , the frontal bones contain a depression and are swollen at the sides , the mastoid bones are smaller , and the coronoid and angular processes of the mandible ( lower jaw ) are more prominent . 
 The echolocation call of this species was reported in a 2007 study that consists of a component with rapidly falling frequency followed by one with more slowly changing frequency . The call takes 3 @.@ 6 to 6 @.@ 3 ms , averaging 4 @.@ 9 ms , and the period between two calls is 34 @.@ 2 to 94 @.@ 4 ms , averaging 69 @.@ 1 ms . The maximum frequency averages 79 @.@ 8 kHz , the minimum frequency averages 40 @.@ 5 kHz , and the call emits the most energy at a frequency of 45 @.@ 7 kHz . 
 = = Distribution and ecology = = 
 Neoromicia malagasyensis is known only from the vicinity of Isalo National Park , an area of about 2000 km2 ( 800 sq mi ) , in interior southwestern Madagascar . The holotype was caught in 1967 in a <unk> set in a row of palms along a river in dry savannah habitat . Peterson and colleagues reported that it had been collected near the village of <unk> , but Goodman and Ranivo suggested that it may instead have come from near <unk> . Two specimens , a male and a female , were collected at different localities in Isalo National Park in early December 2002 , both in <unk> near rivers . The male had enlarged testes and the female had recently stopped lactating and had large mammae . Two others followed in 2003 , also from the national park , and caught in woodland near rivers . A 2009 study on echolocation described the call of six individuals of N. malagasyensis from an unspecified site within the national park . In view of its small known range and the threat of habitat destruction , the IUCN Red List assesses the species as " Endangered " ; further research is recommended on its roosting and dietary habits . 
 = SeaCity Museum = 
 The SeaCity Museum is a museum in Southampton , England , which opened on 10 April 2012 to mark the centenary of RMS Titanic 's departure from the city . It is housed within a part of the Grade II * listed civic centre building which previously housed the magistrates ' court and police station . The museum contains two permanent exhibitions , one dedicated to Southampton 's connection with RMS Titanic , and the other to the city 's role as gateway to the world . A third space for temporary exhibitions is housed in a purpose built pavilion extension to the civic centre . Further phases of development may yet add to the exhibition space . 
 The museum was designed by Wilkinson Eyre with Kier Southern serving as the main contractor . The budget for the museum was £ 15M , approximately £ 5M of which came from the Heritage Lottery Fund , with Southampton City Council and Southampton Cultural Development Trust providing the remainder . The council had planned on selling works from their municipal art collection to fund the museum , but backed down after encountering significant opposition from both within and outside the city . 
 = = Background = = 
 Plans for a heritage centre in Southampton began to emerge in 2002 , with the city council 's formation of the Heritage Working Group to explore options and to outline the way forward for such a scheme . In 2004 , the following locations were shortlisted as potential sites for the then named " Story of Southampton " heritage centre – 
 Lower High Street 50 @.@ <unk> ° N 1 @.@ <unk> ° W ﻿ / 50 @.@ <unk> ; <unk> ﻿ ( Lower High Street ) 
 Mayflower Park 50 @.@ <unk> ° N 1 @.@ <unk> ° W ﻿ / 50 @.@ <unk> ; <unk> ﻿ ( Mayflower Park ) 
 Berth 101 at the Port of Southampton 50 @.@ <unk> ° N 1 @.@ <unk> ° W ﻿ / 50 @.@ <unk> ; <unk> ﻿ ( Berth 101 ) 
 The former Vosper Thornycroft shipyard , Woolston 50 @.@ <unk> ° N 1 @.@ <unk> ° W ﻿ / 50 @.@ <unk> ; <unk> ﻿ ( Former Vosper Thornycroft shipyard ) 
 All of the shortlisted sites were deemed too costly and unworkable . Following these developments , in 2006 Southampton Police announced their intention to vacate their civic centre headquarters due to a lack of space . With the magistrates ' court having left the building in 2001 , this would leave an entire block of the civic centre vacant . And so the civic centre became a candidate to host the heritage centre , and by 2007 was considered the front runner . 
 Plans were unveiled for the civic centre heritage centre in 2008 . The original plans included a 3 @-@ storey extension to the building , and a water feature running from nearby Watts Park , both of which were scrapped to reduce the cost by £ 10M to £ <unk> . The project was split into two phases . The focus of phase one was to be Southampton 's Titanic connection , and the Sea City name was attached . Phase one had a budget of £ 15M and a completion date due in 2012 . 
 = = Funding = = 
 Southampton City Council sought Heritage Lottery Funding towards the museum ; it was awarded £ 0.5M in 2009 for the development phase , and a further £ <unk> in 2010 for the construction . 
 To raise the rest of the £ 15M , in 2009 , Southampton City Council proposed selling off works from their municipal art collection . The council selected two works to be sold , an oil painting by Alfred Munnings , After the Race ( 1937 ) , and one of two bronzes by Auguste Rodin , either Eve ( 1880 ) or Crouching Woman ( 1882 ) . The council believed that these works were not core to the gallery 's focus on British modern and contemporary 20th and 21st century art . Due to space constraints at Southampton City Art Gallery , only 200 of the 3 @,@ 500 works in the collection can ever be displayed there at one time ; the council believed that the sale of the two works would allow space to be created in the new museum for the display of 100 further works from the collection . It was hoped that the sale would generate £ 5M towards the museum . 
 The proposed sale of the artwork had backing from the local paper , the Daily Echo , which had campaigned for three years for the deaccessioning of pieces from the " overflowing " municipal collection . There were voices of dissent from within the city however , in spite of Alec Samuels , the then Conservative council leader 's assertion that , " If we don 't sell some paintings we don 't get a heritage centre . " Councillors from opposition Liberal Democrat and Labour camps described the proposed sale as a " betrayal of public trust " which would damage the reputation of the city 's museum . Alan Whitehead , MP for neighbouring Southampton Test described the proposed sale as an " outstandingly bad idea " , which would discourage future donations and bequests to the city and destroy the national standing of its gallery . Labour politicians proposed borrowing funds as an alternative to the proposed sale , but the ruling Conservative faction dismissed this plan , arguing that it would lead to either cuts in front @-@ line services , or increases in council tax , to cover interest and repayments . 
 Opponents formed the " Save our Collection " group to campaign against the proposed art sale ; they protested outside the civic centre and handed a petition with over 2 @,@ 500 signatories opposing the proposed sale to the council . Nonetheless , the council voted to proceed with its plans , and in September 2009 , they formally approached Baroness Scotland of <unk> , then Attorney General for England and Wales to approve the sale . Criticism came from further afield when the Museums Association stated that the proposed sale would be in breach of the association 's code of ethics as Southampton City Council had not fully explored alternate sources of funding . The Munnings forms part of the Chipperfield bequest to the city , over which the Tate held an advisory responsibility . They joined in the criticism , stating that " the sale of works acquired through the Chipperfield bequest to raise funds towards a capital project is not advisable and , indeed , not in the spirit of the bequest . " The Art Fund , which had previously provided funding towards the acquisition of Bridget Riley 's Red Movement ( 2005 ) by the city , expressed concern at the proposed sale , wary that it would " set an uncomfortable precedent , stretching the sector 's guidelines and effectively sanctioning the disposal of works of art from publicly @-@ owned collections to support other areas of public sector cultural provision " . 
 In November 2009 , due to the strong opposition , Southampton City Council placed the proposed art sale on hold to re @-@ evaluate their funding possibilities . By February 2010 , the council had cancelled the proposed art sale . The council stated that movements in the property markets had allowed it to consider selling off assets that were previously seen as unviable for sale . The council also looked to other organisations to provide funding , such as partnerships with neighbouring Hampshire County Council through a loan of artworks scheme . And if these efforts were to fail , the council stated that any shortfall would be met through borrowing . 
 A charity , the Southampton Cultural Development Trust was formed in 2010 to raise funds towards the project . The museum further received a grant from the Department for Culture , Media and Sport in conjunction with the Wolfson Foundation , and another from the Garfield Weston Foundation . 
 Over its first two years of operations income was £ 468 thousand ( 23 % ) lower than expected . Visitor numbers were 10 thousand lower than expected at 240 thousand . Visitor numbers have continued to fall in subsequent years raising concerns over ongoing funding and long term viability . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Southampton City Council appointed the design team in July 2009 , naming Wilkinson Eyre as lead . A year later , Kier Southern were named as main contractor . Despite reservations over the appearance of the new pavilion , English Heritage gave their approval for the designs , and final planning permission was granted in September 2010 . Work began in October . There were some obstacles to the build , contractors discovered significant corrosion to the original building 's steel frame which had to be repaired . Adding the necessary security elements to cover museum exhibits in a listed building also proved challenging . Features from the original building were preserved in the design , the former prison cells were kept intact and used as toilet facilities , and a court room was preserved as an exhibition space . 
 By August 2011 , contractors had reached the top of the pavilion , and a topping out ceremony was held . The pavilion was designed as three interlocking bays to negotiate the irregular site upon which it sits , which rises two metres from South to North . Stone aggregate was used on the pavilion 's exterior to maintain consistency with the original civic centre building 's <unk> stone exterior . Wilkinson Eyre described the pavilion as a " bold architectural addition " which signalled " the presence of a new important cultural attraction within the city " . Oliver Green , writing for Museums Journal described the shape of the pavilion as echoing the " <unk> of ocean liners cutting through art deco waves " . The completed museum provides 2 @,@ 000 m2 of exhibition and learning space . The museum opened on time on 10 April 2012 , marking the centenary of RMS Titanic 's departure from the city . Southampton City Council forecast that the museum would receive over 150 @,@ 000 visitors per year , but these numbers were only achieved in the first year , and annual totals have subsequently fallen consistently . 
 Work on the SeaCity Museum attracted positive attention from industry bodies . The Institution of Structural Engineers shortlisted <unk> 's structural design work for their 2012 Structural Awards ; Architects ' Journal shortlisted Wilkinson Eyre and interior fitters <unk> for their 2012 <unk> Awards . 
 = = Exhibits = = 
 There are three exhibitions at SeaCity , all of which were designed by Urban Salon . Two permanent exhibitions are housed in the former police station and magistrates ' court . 
 Gateway to the World examines Southampton 's history , and its role as a hub for human migration . Exhibits include a one tonne , seven @-@ metre long replica of RMS Queen Mary , rehoused from Southampton Maritime Museum . Both Southampton Maritime Museum and Southampton Museum of Archaeology closed permanently in September 2011 to allow their exhibits to be rehoused at SeaCity and Tudor House Museum . 
 Southampton 's Titanic Story explores the Titanic tragedy through the eyes of its crew , the majority of whom listed Southampton as their address . A preserved court room uses audiovisual elements to re @-@ enact scenes from the British inquiry into the sinking and to explore its ramifications . The civic centre clock tower , approximately the height of a funnel on the Titanic can be viewed through a roof light as visitors enter the exhibition , giving them an impression of the scale of the ship . The story incorporates audio recordings given by the survivors and features interactive elements allowing visitors to steer the virtual ship and to stoke its engines . 
 The pavilion plays host to temporary exhibitions . The first of which , to coincide with the Titanic centenary , is Titanic : The Legend which explores the public 's enduring fascination with the ship through its portrayal in popular culture . The exhibition hosts screens playing back scenes from films such as 1912 's In Nacht und <unk> and 1997 's Titanic . Titanic memorabilia collected include Steiff " mourning bears " , beers from the Titanic Brewery , jigsaw puzzles and many other such kitsch that SeaCity scoured the internet to find . 
 Catherine Roberts , reviewing Southampton 's Titanic Story for <unk> described the comparison between the height of the civic centre and the height of the Titanic as inspired . She praised the graphics for making the story digestible for children and adults . And while she mentioned that the motif of following several crew members through the story never quite pans out , she concluded that it was a well @-@ conceived exhibition and that " there can be no better place than Southampton to remember both those who died and those who survived the Titanic ’ s first and final voyage . " 
 Oliver Green , writing in Museums Journal welcomed the new building , comparing it favourably to Southampton Maritime Museum 's former home at The Wool House , which he described as being " completely unsuitable for telling the story of 20th century Southampton " . Green praised the use of multimedia as " creative but restrained " , and highlighted their careful integration with the museum 's collections . He finished his review on a hopeful note , eyeing the still undeveloped spaces available in the civic centre building for further expansion . He concluded that it would be " a real shame if the project were to falter at this stage " , and that further phases of expansion " must surely be good for the city and its future success . " 
 = Kanye West = 
 Kanye Omari West ( / <unk> / ; born June 8 , 1977 ) , is an American rapper , songwriter , record producer , fashion designer , and entrepreneur . Raised in Chicago , West first became known as a producer for Roc @-@ A @-@ Fella Records in the early 2000s , producing hit singles for artists such as Jay Z and Alicia Keys . Intent on pursuing a solo career as a rapper , West released his debut album The College Dropout in 2004 to widespread critical and commercial success . He went on to explore a variety of different musical styles on subsequent albums that included the baroque @-@ inflected Late Registration ( 2005 ) , the arena @-@ inspired Graduation ( 2007 ) , and the polarizing 808s & Heartbreak ( 2008 ) . In 2010 , he released his critically acclaimed fifth album My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy , and the following year he collaborated with Jay Z on the joint LP Watch the Throne ( 2011 ) . West released his sixth album , Yeezus , to further critical praise in 2013 . West 's seventh album , The Life of Pablo , was released in 2016 . 
 West 's outspoken views and life outside of music have received significant mainstream attention . He has been a frequent source of controversy and public scrutiny for his conduct at award shows , on social media , and in other public settings . His more publicized comments include his unscripted denunciation of President George W. Bush during a live 2005 television broadcast for Hurricane Katrina relief and his interruption of country music singer Taylor Swift at the 2009 MTV Video Music Awards . West 's efforts as a fashion designer include collaborations with Nike , Louis Vuitton , and <unk> on both clothing and footwear , and have most prominently resulted in the <unk> collaboration with Adidas beginning in 2013 . He is the founder and head of the creative content company DONDA . His 2014 marriage to television personality Kim Kardashian has also been subject to widespread media coverage . 
 West is among the most acclaimed musicians of the 21st century , and is one of the best @-@ selling artists of all time , having sold more than 32 million albums and 100 million digital downloads worldwide . He has won a total of 21 Grammy Awards , making him one of the most awarded artists of all time and the most Grammy @-@ awarded artist to have debuted in the 21st century . Three of his albums have been included and ranked on Rolling Stone 's 2012 update of the " 500 Greatest Albums of All Time " list . He has also been included in a number of Forbes annual lists . Time named him one of the 100 most influential people in the world in 2005 and 2015 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Kanye Omari West was born on June 8 , 1977 in Atlanta , Georgia . His parents divorced when he was three years old . After the divorce , he and his mother moved to Chicago , Illinois . His father , Ray West , is a former Black Panther and was one of the first black photojournalists at The Atlanta Journal @-@ Constitution . Ray West was later a Christian counselor , and in 2006 , opened the Good Water Store and Café in Lexington Park , Maryland with startup capital from his son . West 's mother , Dr. Donda C. ( Williams ) West , was a professor of English at Clark Atlanta University , and the Chair of the English Department at Chicago State University before retiring to serve as his manager . West was raised in a middle @-@ class background , attending Polaris High School in suburban Oak Lawn , Illinois after living in Chicago . 
 At the age of 10 , West moved with his mother to Nanjing , China , where she was teaching at Nanjing University as part of an exchange program . According to his mother , West was the only foreigner in his class , but settled in well and quickly picked up the language , although he has since forgotten most of it . When asked about his grades in high school , West replied , " I got A 's and B 's . And I 'm not even <unk> ' . " 
 West demonstrated an affinity for the arts at an early age ; he began writing poetry when he was five years old . His mother recalled that she first took notice of West 's passion for drawing and music when he was in the third grade . Growing up in Chicago , West became deeply involved in its hip hop scene . He started rapping in the third grade and began making musical compositions in the seventh grade , eventually selling them to other artists . At age thirteen , West wrote a rap song called " Green Eggs and Ham " and began to persuade his mother to pay $ 25 an hour for time in a recording studio . It was a small , crude basement studio where a microphone hung from the ceiling by a wire clothes hanger . Although this wasn 't what West 's mother wanted , she nonetheless supported him . West crossed paths with producer / DJ No I.D. , with whom he quickly formed a close friendship . No I.D. soon became West 's mentor , and it was from him that West learned how to sample and program beats after he received his first sampler at age 15 . 
 After graduating from high school , West received a scholarship to attend Chicago 's American Academy of Art in 1997 and began taking painting classes , but shortly after transferred to Chicago State University to study English . He soon realized that his busy class schedule was detrimental to his musical work , and at 20 he dropped out of college to pursue his musical dreams . This action greatly displeased his mother , who was also a professor at the university . She later commented , " It was drummed into my head that college is the ticket to a good life ... but some career goals don 't require college . For Kanye to make an album called College Dropout it was more about having the guts to embrace who you are , rather than following the path society has carved out for you . " 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = 1996 – 2002 : Early work and Roc @-@ A @-@ Fella Records = = = 
 Kanye West began his early production career in the mid @-@ 1990s , making beats primarily for burgeoning local artists , eventually developing a style that involved speeding up vocal samples from classic soul records . His first official production credits came at the age of nineteen when he produced eight tracks on Down to Earth , the 1996 debut album of a Chicago rapper named <unk> . For a time , West acted as a ghost producer for Deric " D @-@ Dot " <unk> . Because of his association with D @-@ Dot , West wasn 't able to release a solo album , so he formed and became a member and producer of the Go @-@ <unk> , a late @-@ 1990s Chicago rap group composed of him , GLC , Timmy G , Really Doe , and <unk> . His group was managed by John " Monopoly " Johnson , Don Crowley , and Happy Lewis under the management firm Hustle Period . After attending a series of promotional photo shoots and making some radio appearances , The Go @-@ <unk> released their first and only studio album World Record Holders in 1999 . The album featured other Chicago @-@ based rappers such as Rhymefest , Mikkey Halsted , Miss Criss , and <unk> G. Meanwhile , the production was handled by West , <unk> , <unk> , and Brian " All Day " Miller . 
 West spent much of the late @-@ 1990s producing records for a number of well @-@ known artists and music groups . The third song on Foxy Brown 's second studio album Chyna Doll was produced by West . Her second effort subsequently became the very first hip @-@ hop album by a female rapper to debut at the top of the U.S. Billboard 200 chart in its first week of release . West produced three of the tracks on Harlem World 's first and only album The Movement alongside Jermaine Dupri and the production duo Trackmasters . His songs featured rappers Nas , Drag @-@ On , and R & B singer Carl Thomas . The ninth track from World Party , the last Goodie Mob album to feature the rap group 's four founding members prior to their break @-@ up , was co @-@ produced by West with his manager Deric " D @-@ Dot " <unk> . At the close of the millennium , West ended up producing six songs for Tell ' Em Why U Madd , an album that was released by D @-@ Dot under the alias of The Madd Rapper ; a fictional character he created for a skit on The Notorious B.I.G. ' s second and final studio album Life After Death . West 's songs featured guest appearances from rappers such as Ma $ e , Raekwon , and Eminem . 
 West got his big break in the year 2000 , when he began to produce for artists on Roc @-@ A @-@ Fella Records . West came to achieve recognition and is often credited with revitalizing Jay @-@ Z 's career with his contributions to the rap mogul 's influential 2001 album The Blueprint . The Blueprint is consistently ranked among the greatest hip @-@ hop albums , and the critical and financial success of the album generated substantial interest in West as a producer . Serving as an in @-@ house producer for Roc @-@ A @-@ Fella Records , West produced records for other artists from the label , including Beanie Sigel , Freeway , and Cam 'ron . He also crafted hit songs for Ludacris , Alicia Keys , and Janet Jackson . 
 Despite his success as a producer , West 's true aspiration was to be a rapper . Though he had developed his rapping long before he began producing , it was often a challenge for West to be accepted as a rapper , and he struggled to attain a record deal . Multiple record companies ignored him because he did not portray the ' gangsta image ' prominent in mainstream hip hop at the time . After a series of meetings with Capitol Records , West was ultimately denied an artist deal . 
 According to Capitol Record 's A & R , Joe Weinberger , he was approached by West and almost signed a deal with him , but another person in the company convinced Capitol 's president not to . Desperate to keep West from defecting to another label , then @-@ label head Damon Dash reluctantly signed West to Roc @-@ A @-@ Fella Records . Jay @-@ Z later admitted that Roc @-@ A @-@ Fella was initially reluctant to support West as a rapper , claiming that many saw him as a producer first and foremost , and that his background contrasted with that of his labelmates . 
 West 's breakthrough came a year later on October 23 , 2002 , when , while driving home from a California recording studio after working late , he fell asleep at the wheel and was involved in a near @-@ fatal car crash . The crash left him with a shattered jaw , which had to be wired shut in reconstructive surgery . The accident inspired West ; two weeks after being admitted to the hospital , he recorded a song at the Record Plant Studios with his jaw still wired shut . The composition , " Through The Wire " , expressed West 's experience after the accident , and helped lay the foundation for his debut album , as according to West " all the better artists have expressed what they were going through " . West added that " the album was my medicine " , as working on the record distracted him from the pain . " Through The Wire " was first available on West 's Get Well Soon ... mixtape , released December 2002 . At the same time , West announced that he was working on an album called The College Dropout , whose overall theme was to " make your own decisions . Don 't let society tell you , ' This is what you have to do . ' " 
 = = = 2003 – 06 : The College Dropout and Late Registration = = = 
 Carrying a Louis Vuitton backpack filled with old disks and demos to the studio and back , West crafted much of his production for his debut album in less than fifteen minutes at a time . He recorded the remainder of the album in Los Angeles while recovering from the car accident . Once he had completed the album , it was leaked months before its release date . However , West decided to use the opportunity to review the album , and The College Dropout was significantly remixed , remastered , and revised before being released . As a result , certain tracks originally destined for the album were subsequently retracted , among them " Keep the Receipt " with Ol ' Dirty Bastard and " The Good , the Bad , and the Ugly " with Consequence . West meticulously refined the production , adding string arrangements , gospel choirs , improved drum programming and new verses . West 's perfectionism led The College Dropout to have its release postponed three times from its initial date in August 2003 . 
 The College Dropout was eventually issued by Roc @-@ A @-@ Fella in February 2004 , shooting to number two on the Billboard 200 as his debut single , " Through the Wire " peaked at number fifteen on the Billboard Hot 100 chart for five weeks . " Slow Jamz " , his second single featuring Twista and Jamie Foxx , became an even bigger success : it became the three musicians ' first number one hit . The College Dropout received near @-@ universal critical acclaim from contemporary music critics , was voted the top album of the year by two major music publications , and has consistently been ranked among the great hip @-@ hop works and debut albums by artists . " Jesus Walks " , the album 's fourth single , perhaps exposed West to a wider audience ; the song 's subject matter concerns faith and Christianity . The song nevertheless reached the top 20 of the Billboard pop charts , despite industry executives ' predictions that a song containing such blatant declarations of faith would never make it to radio . The College Dropout would eventually be certified triple platinum in the US , and garnered West 10 Grammy nominations , including Album of the Year , and Best Rap Album ( which it received ) . During this period , West also founded GOOD Music , a record label and management company that would go on to house affiliate artists and producers , such as No I.D. and John Legend . At the time , the focal point of West 's production style was the use of sped @-@ up vocal samples from soul records . However , partly because of the acclaim of The College Dropout , such sampling had been much copied by others ; with that overuse , and also because West felt he had become too dependent on the technique , he decided to find a new sound . 
 Beginning his second effort that fall , West would invest two million dollars and take over a year to craft his second album . West was significantly inspired by Roseland NYC Live , a 1998 live album by English trip hop group Portishead , produced with the New York Philharmonic Orchestra . Early in his career , the live album had inspired him to incorporate string arrangements into his hip @-@ hop production . Though West had not been able to afford many live instruments around the time of his debut album , the money from his commercial success enabled him to hire a string orchestra for his second album Late Registration . West collaborated with American film score composer Jon Brion , who served as the album 's co @-@ executive producer for several tracks . Although Brion had no prior experience in creating hip @-@ hop records , he and West found that they could productively work together after their first afternoon in the studio where they discovered that neither confined his musical knowledge and vision to one specific genre . Late Registration sold over 2 @.@ 3 million units in the United States alone by the end of 2005 and was considered by industry observers as the only successful major album release of the fall season , which had been plagued by steadily declining CD sales . 
 While West had encountered controversy a year prior when he stormed out of the American Music Awards of 2004 after losing Best New Artist , the rapper 's first large @-@ scale controversy came just days following Late Registration 's release , during a benefit concert for Hurricane Katrina victims . In September 2005 , NBC broadcast A Concert for Hurricane Relief , and West was a featured speaker . When West was presenting alongside actor Mike Myers , he deviated from the prepared script . Myers spoke next and continued to read the script . Once it was West 's turn to speak again , he said , " George Bush doesn 't care about black people . " West 's comment reached much of the United States , leading to mixed reactions ; President Bush would later call it one of the most " disgusting moments " of his presidency . West raised further controversy in January 2006 when he posed on the cover of Rolling Stone wearing a crown of thorns . 
 = = = 2007 – 09 : Graduation and 808s & Heartbreak = = = 
 Fresh off spending the previous year touring the world with U2 on their Vertigo Tour , West felt inspired to compose anthemic rap songs that could operate more efficiently in large arenas . To this end , West incorporated the synthesizer into his hip @-@ hop production , utilized slower tempos , and experimented with electronic music and influenced by music of the 1980s . In addition to U2 , West drew musical inspiration from arena rock bands such as The Rolling Stones and Led Zeppelin in terms of melody and chord progression . To make his next effort , the third in a planned tetralogy of education @-@ themed studio albums , more introspective and personal in lyricism , West listened to folk and country singer @-@ songwriters Bob Dylan and Johnny Cash in hopes of developing methods to augment his wordplay and storytelling ability . 
 West 's third studio album , Graduation , garnered major publicity when its release date pitted West in a sales competition against rapper 50 Cent 's Curtis . Upon their September 2007 releases , Graduation outsold Curtis by a large margin , debuting at number one on the U.S. Billboard 200 chart and selling 957 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . Graduation once again continued the string of critical and commercial successes by West , and the album 's lead single , " Stronger " , garnered the rapper his third number @-@ one hit . " Stronger " , which samples French house duo Daft Punk , has been accredited to not only encouraging other hip @-@ hop artists to incorporate house and electronica elements into their music , but also for playing a part in the revival of disco and electro @-@ infused music in the late 2000s . Ben Detrick of XXL cited the outcome of the sales competition between 50 Cent 's Curtis and West 's Graduation as being responsible for altering the direction of hip @-@ hop and paving the way for new rappers who didn 't follow the hardcore @-@ gangster mold , writing , " If there was ever a watershed moment to indicate hip @-@ hop 's changing direction , it may have come when 50 Cent competed with Kanye in 2007 to see whose album would claim superior sales . " 
 West 's life took a different direction when his mother , Donda West , died of complications from cosmetic surgery involving <unk> and breast reduction in November 2007 . Months later , West and fiancée Alexis Phifer ended their engagement and their long @-@ term intermittent relationship , which had begun in 2002 . The events profoundly affected West , who set off for his 2008 Glow in the Dark Tour shortly thereafter . Purportedly because his emotions could not be conveyed through rapping , West decided to sing using the voice audio processor Auto @-@ Tune , which would become a central part of his next effort . West had previously experimented with the technology on his debut album The College Dropout for the background vocals of " Jesus Walks " and " Never Let Me Down . " Recorded mostly in Honolulu , Hawaii in three weeks , West announced his fourth album , 808s & Heartbreak , at the 2008 MTV Video Music Awards , where he performed its lead single , " Love Lockdown " . Music audiences were taken aback by the uncharacteristic production style and the presence of Auto @-@ Tune , which typified the pre @-@ release response to the record . 
 808s & Heartbreak , which features extensive use of the eponymous Roland TR @-@ 808 drum machine and contains themes of love , loneliness , and heartache , was released by Island Def Jam to capitalize on Thanksgiving weekend in November 2008 . Reviews were positive , though slightly more mixed than his previous efforts . Despite this , the record 's singles demonstrated outstanding chart performances . Upon its release , the lead single " Love Lockdown " debuted at number three on the Billboard Hot 100 and became a " Hot Shot Debut " , while follow @-@ up single " Heartless " performed similarly and became his second consecutive " Hot Shot Debut " by debuting at number four on the Billboard Hot 100 . While it was criticized prior to release , 808s & Heartbreak had a significant effect on hip @-@ hop music , encouraging other rappers to take more creative risks with their productions . 
 In 2012 , Rolling Stone journalist Matthew Trammell asserted that the record was ahead of its time and wrote , " Now that popular music has finally caught up to it , 808s & Heartbreak has revealed itself to be Kanye 's most vulnerable work , and perhaps his most brilliant . " 
 West 's controversial incident the following year at the 2009 MTV Video Music Awards was arguably his biggest controversy , and led to widespread outrage throughout the music industry . During the ceremony , West crashed the stage and grabbed the microphone from winner Taylor Swift in order to proclaim that , instead , Beyoncé 's video for " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " , nominated for the same award , was " one of the best videos of all time " . He was subsequently withdrawn from the remainder of the show for his actions . West 's tour with Lady Gaga was cancelled in response to the controversy , and it was suggested that the incident was partially responsible for 808s & Heartbreak 's lack of nominations at the 52nd Grammy Awards . 
 = = = 2010 – 12 : My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy and collaborations = = = 
 Following the highly publicized incident , West took a brief break from music and threw himself into fashion , only to hole up in Hawaii for the next few months writing and recording his next album . Importing his favorite producers and artists to work on and inspire his recording , West kept engineers behind the boards 24 hours a day and slept only in increments . Noah Callahan @-@ Bever , a writer for Complex , was present during the sessions and described the " communal " atmosphere as thus : " With the right songs and the right album , he can overcome any and all controversy , and we are here to contribute , challenge , and inspire . " A variety of artists contributed to the project , including close friends Jay @-@ Z , Kid Cudi and Pusha T , as well as off @-@ the @-@ wall collaborations , such as with Justin Vernon of Bon Iver . 
 My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy , West 's fifth studio album , was released in November 2010 to rave reviews from critics , many of whom described it as his best work that solidified his comeback . In stark contrast to his previous effort , which featured a minimalist sound , Dark Fantasy adopts a maximalist philosophy and deals with themes of celebrity and excess . The record included the international hit " All of the Lights " , and Billboard hits " Power " , " Monster " , and " Runaway " , the latter of which accompanied a 35 @-@ minute film of the same name . During this time , West initiated the free music program GOOD Fridays through his website , offering a free download of previously unreleased songs each Friday , a portion of which were included on the album . This promotion ran from August 20 - December 17 , 2010 . Dark Fantasy went on to go platinum in the United States , but its omission as a contender for Album of the Year at the 54th Grammy Awards was viewed as a " snub " by several media outlets . 
 Following a headlining set at Coachella 2011 that was described by The Hollywood Reporter as " one of greatest hip @-@ hop sets of all time " , West released the collaborative album Watch the Throne with Jay @-@ Z. By employing a sales strategy that released the album digitally weeks before its physical counterpart , Watch the Throne became one of the few major label albums in the Internet age to avoid a leak . " Niggas in Paris " became the record 's highest charting single , peaking at number five on the Billboard Hot 100 . In 2012 , West released the compilation album Cruel Summer , a collection of tracks by artists from West 's record label GOOD Music . Cruel Summer produced four singles , two of which charted within the top twenty of the Hot 100 : " Mercy " and " Clique " . West also directed a film of the same name that premiered at the 2012 Cannes Film Festival in custom pyramid @-@ shaped screening pavilion featuring seven screens . 
 = = = 2013 – 15 : Yeezus and Adidas collaboration = = = 
 Sessions for West 's sixth solo effort begin to take shape in early 2013 in his own personal loft 's living room at a Paris hotel . Determined to " undermine the commercial " , he once again brought together close collaborators and attempted to incorporate Chicago drill , dancehall , acid house , and industrial music . Primarily inspired by architecture , West 's perfectionist tendencies led him to contact producer Rick Rubin fifteen days shy of its due date to strip down the record 's sound in favor of a more minimalist approach . Initial promotion of his sixth album included worldwide video projections of the album 's music and live television performances . Yeezus , West 's sixth album , was released June 18 , 2013 to rave reviews from critics . It became the rapper 's sixth consecutive number one debut , but also marked his lowest solo opening week sales . Def Jam issued " Black Skinhead " to radio in July 2013 as the album 's lead single . On September 6 , 2013 , Kanye West announced he would be headlining his first solo tour in five years , to support Yeezus , with fellow American rapper Kendrick Lamar accompanying him along the way . 
 In June 2013 , West and television personality Kim Kardashian announced the birth of their first child , North . In October 2013 , West and Kardashian announced their engagement to widespread media attention . November 2013 , West stated that he was beginning work on his next studio album , hoping to release it by mid @-@ 2014 , with production by Rick Rubin and Q @-@ Tip . In December 2013 , Adidas announced the beginning of their official apparel collaboration with West , to be premiered the following year . In May 2014 , West and Kardashian were married in a private ceremony in Florence , Italy , with a variety of artists and celebrities in attendance . West released a single , " Only One " , featuring Paul McCartney , on December 31 , 2014 . 
 " <unk> " , a single jointly produced with Rihanna and McCartney , was released in January 2015 . West also appeared on the Saturday Night Live 40th Anniversary Special , where he premiered a new song entitled " Wolves " , featuring Sia Furler and fellow Chicago rapper , Vic Mensa . In February 2015 , West premiered his clothing collaboration with Adidas , entitled Yeezy Season 1 , to generally positive reviews . This would include West 's Yeezy Boost sneakers . In March 2015 , West released the single " All Day " featuring Theophilus London , Allan Kingdom and Paul McCartney . West performed the song at the 2015 BRIT Awards with a number of US rappers and UK grime MC 's including : Skepta , Wiley , Novelist , <unk> , <unk> & Konan , <unk> , Allan Kingdom , Theophilus London and Vic Mensa . He would premiere the second iteration of his clothing line , Yeezy Season 2 , in September 2015 at New York Fashion Week . 
 = = = 2015 – present : The Life of Pablo and Turbo <unk> 16 = = = 
 Having initially announced a new album entitled So Help Me God slated for a 2014 release , in March 2015 West announced that the album would instead be tentatively called SWISH . Later that month , West was awarded an honorary doctorate by the School of the Art Institute of Chicago for his contributions to music , fashion , and popular culture , officially making him an honorary DFA . The next month , West headlined at the Glastonbury Festival in the UK , despite a petition signed by almost 135 @,@ 000 people against his appearance . Toward the end of the set , West proclaimed himself : " the greatest living rock star on the planet . " Media outlets , including social media sites such as Twitter , were divided on his performance . NME stated , " The decision to book West for the slot has proved controversial since its announcement , and the show itself appeared to polarise both Glastonbury goers and those who tuned in to watch on their TVs . " The publication added that " he 's letting his music speak for and prove itself . " The Guardian said that " his set has a potent ferocity – but there are gaps and stutters , and he cuts a strangely lone figure in front of the vast crowd . " In December 2015 , West released a song titled " Facts " . 
 West announced in January 2016 that SWISH would be released on February 11 , and that month released new songs " Real Friends " and a snippet of " No More Parties in L.A. " with Kendrick Lamar . This also revived the GOOD Fridays initiative in which Kanye releases new singles every Friday . On January 26 , 2016 , West revealed he had renamed the album from SWISH to Waves , and also announced the premier of his Yeezy Season 3 clothing line at Madison Square Garden . In the weeks leading up to the album 's release , West became embroiled in several Twitter controversies and released several changing iterations of the tracklist for the new album . Several days ahead of its release , West again changed the title , this time to The Life of Pablo . On February 11 , West premiered the album at Madison Square Garden as part of the presentation of his Yeezy Season 3 clothing line . Following the preview , West announced that he would be modifying the track list once more before its release to the public , and further delayed its release to finalize the recording of the track " Waves " at the behest of co @-@ writer Chance the Rapper . He released the album exclusively on Tidal on 14 February 2016 following a performance on SNL . Following its official streaming release , West continued to tinker with mixes of several tracks , describing the work as " a living breathing changing creative expression " and proclaiming the end of the album as a dominant release form . Although a statement by West around Life of Pablo 's initial release indicated that the album would be a permanent exclusive to Tidal , the album was released through several other competing services starting in April . 
 On February 24 , 2016 , West stated on Twitter that he was planning to release another album in the summer of 2016 , tentatively called Turbo <unk> 16 in reference to the 1980s video game console of the same name . 
 On June 3 , 2016 , West premiered the first single " Champions " off the GOOD Music album Cruel Winter , which was six minutes and featured Travis Scott , Big Sean , Gucci Mane , <unk> , Yo Gotti , <unk> , and 2 Chainz . He told the radio host , Big Boy , that the beat had been in works for a year and a half . 
 = = Musical style = = 
 = = = Influences and early work = = = 
 West 's musical career has been defined by frequent stylistic shifts , and has seen him develop and explore a variety of different musical approaches and genres . When asked about his early musical inspirations , he has named artists such as A Tribe Called Quest , Stevie Wonder , Michael Jackson , George Michael , LL Cool J , Phil Collins and Madonna . West has named Puff Daddy as the " most important cultural figure " in his life , and he has also described David Bowie as one of his " most important inspirations . " West was <unk> mentored by Chicago producer No I.D. , who introduced him to hip hop production in the early 1990s , allowing a teenage West to sit in on recording sessions . Early in his career , West pioneered a style of production dubbed " chipmunk soul " which utilized pitched @-@ up vocal samples , usually from soul and R & B songs , along with his own drums and instrumentation . His first major release featuring his trademark soulful vocal sampling style was " This Can 't Be Life " , a track from Jay @-@ Z 's The Dynasty : Roc La Familia . West has said that Wu @-@ Tang Clan producer RZA influenced him in his style , and has named Wu @-@ Tang rappers Ghostface Killah and Ol ' Dirty Bastard as inspirations . RZA spoke positively of the comparisons , stating in an interview for Rolling Stone , " I got super respect for Kanye [ ... ] [ he ] is going to inspire people to be like him . " West further developed his style on his 2004 debut album , The College Dropout . After a rough version was leaked , he meticulously refined the production , adding string arrangements , gospel choirs , and improved drum programming . 
 For his second album , Late Registration ( 2005 ) , he collaborated with film score composer Jon Brion and drew influence from non @-@ rap influences such as English trip hop group Portishead . Blending West 's primary soulful hip hop production with Brion 's elaborate chamber pop orchestration , the album experimentally incorporated a wide array of different genres and prominent orchestral elements , including string arrangements , piano chords , brass flecks , and horn riffs among other symphonic instrumentation . It also incorporated a myriad of foreign and vintage instruments not typical in popular music , let alone hip hop , such as a celesta , harpsichord , Chamberlin , CS @-@ 80 analog synthesizer , Chinese bells and berimbau , vibraphones , and marimba . Rolling Stone described Late Registration as West claiming " the whole world of music as hip @-@ hop turf " chronicling the album as " his mad quest to explode every cliché about hip @-@ hop identity . " Critic Robert Christgau wrote that " there 's never been hip @-@ hop so complex and subtle musically . " For a period of time , Kanye West stood as the sole current pop star to tour with a string section , as audible on his 2006 live album Late Orchestration . 
 = = = Middle period = = = 
 With his third album , Graduation ( 2007 ) , West moved away from the soulful sound of his previous releases and towards a more atmospheric , rock @-@ tinged , electronic @-@ influenced soundscape . Under the belief that Late Registration had been too indulgent and poorly arranged , he fashioned Graduation to contain less ornate production , made the album completely devoid of skits , and attempted to sequence it as a tighter , more cohesive package . The musical evolution arose from him listening to music genres encompassing European Britpop and Euro @-@ disco , American alternative and indie @-@ rock , and his native Chicago house . Towards this end , West retracted much of the live instrumentation that characterized his previous album and replaced it with heavy , gothic synthesizers , distorted synth @-@ chords , rave stabs , house beats , electro @-@ disco rhythms , and a wide array of modulated electronic noises and digital audio @-@ effects . In addition , West drew musical inspiration from arena rock bands such as The Rolling Stones , U2 , and Led Zeppelin in terms of melody and chord progression . Similar to its predecessor , the album wasn 't confined to the conventional looping techniques typical of contemporary hip @-@ hop and instead continued to implement sudden musical shifts within its multi @-@ layered song structures and express intricately composed introductions , bridges , and codas . 
 Conceived in the wake of several distressing personal events , West 's fourth studio album , 808s & Heartbreak ( 2008 ) , marked a radical departure from his previous releases , largely abandoning rap and hip hop stylings in favor of a stark electropop sound composed utilizing the Roland TR @-@ 808 drum machine , the Auto @-@ Tune vocal processor , and virtual synthesis technology . The album 's music features austere production and elements such as droning synthesizers , dense drums , lengthy strings , and somber piano , and drew comparisons to the work of 1980s post @-@ punk and new wave groups ; West would confess an affinity with artists such as Joy Division , Gary Numan , TJ Swan and Boy George , and later described 808s as " the first black new wave album . " Maintaining a " minimal but functional " approach towards the album 's studio production , West explored the electronic feel produced by his explicitly Auto @-@ Tuned vocals and manipulated the sounds created by the 808 , modulating its pitch to produce a distorted , electronic sound ; he then sought to juxtapose mechanical sounds with the traditional sounds of taiko drums and choir monks . Rolling Stone journalist Matthew Trammell asserted that the record was ahead of its time and wrote in a 2012 article , " Now that popular music has finally caught up to it , 808s & Heartbreak has revealed itself to be Kanye 's most vulnerable work , and perhaps his most brilliant . " 
 West recorded his fifth album , My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy ( 2010 ) , with a wide range of collaborators . It has been noted by writers for its maximalist aesthetic and its incorporation of elements from West 's previous four albums . Entertainment Weekly 's Simon Vozick @-@ Levinson noted that such elements " all recur at various points " , namely " the luxurious soul of 2004 's The College Dropout , the symphonic pomp of Late Registration , the gloss of 2007 's Graduation , and the emotionally exhausted electro of 2008 's 808s & Heartbreak . " AllMusic 's Andy Kellman views it as the " culmination " of those albums , while noting that " it does not merely draw characteristics from each one of them . The 13 tracks ... sometimes fuse them together simultaneously . Consequently , the sonic and emotional layers are often difficult to pry apart and enumerate " . Kellman emphasized the track " All of the Lights " as most representative of the album 's " contrasting elements and maniacal extravagance . " Robert Christgau , writing for MSN Music , commented that the music eschews the " grace " of The College Dropout and Late Registration for " grandiosity " and " sonic luxuries . " 
 = = = Recent work = = = 
 Describing his sixth studio album Yeezus ( 2013 ) as " a protest to music , " West embraced an abrasive style that incorporated a variety of unconventional influences . Music critic Greg Kot described it as " a hostile , abrasive and intentionally off @-@ putting " album that combines " the worlds of " 1980s acid @-@ house and contemporary Chicago drill music , 1990s industrial music , and the " avant @-@ rap " of Saul Williams , Death Grips and Odd Future . The album also incorporates elements of trap music , as well as dancehall , punk , and electro . Inspired by the minimalist design of Le Corbusier and primarily electronic in nature , the album features distorted drum machines and " synthesizers that sound like they 're malfunctioning , low @-@ resolution samplers that add a pixelated digital aura to the most analog sounds . " To this end , the album incorporates glitches reminiscent of CD skips or corrupted MP3 's , and Auto @-@ Tuned vocals are modulated to a point in which they are difficult to decipher . It also continues West 's practice of eclectic samples : he employs a sample of Nina Simone 's " Strange Fruit , " an obscure Hindi sample on " I Am a God " , and a sample of 1970s Hungarian rock group Omega on " New Slaves " . " On Sight " interpolates a melody from " Sermon ( He 'll Give Us What We Really Need ) " by the Holy Name of Mary Choral Family . Rolling Stone called the album a " brilliant , obsessive @-@ compulsive career auto @-@ correct " . 
 Released in 2016 after several years of delays , West 's seventh album The Life of Pablo was noted for its " raw , occasionally even intentionally messy , composition " in distinction to West 's previous albums . Rolling Stone wrote that " this is a messy album that feels like it was made that way on purpose , after the laser @-@ sharp intensity of Yeezus , " stating that " It 's designed to sound like a work in progress . " Carl Wilson of Slate characterized the album as creating " strange links between Kanye 's many iterations — soul @-@ sample enthusiast , heartbroken Auto @-@ Tune crooner , hedonistic avant @-@ pop composer , industrial @-@ rap shit @-@ talker , " suggesting that " the point is that in the context of all this sonic landscaping , in West 's kamikaze , mood @-@ swinging way , Pablo now seems undeniably ( not half @-@ <unk> , as I 'd been about to conclude ) like an album of struggle . " He also noted the album 's use of auto @-@ tune , a cappella , as well as bass and percussion lines " that are only the tail @-@ end decay of some lost starting place , some vanished rhythmic Eden . " West initially characterized the release as " a gospel album . " Greg Kot of the Chicago Tribune wrote in his review of The Life of Pablo , " West 's version of gospel touches on some of those sonic cues — heavy organ , soaring choirs — but seems more preoccupied with gospel text and the notion of redemption . " 
 = = Other ventures = = 
 = = = Fashion = = = 
 Early in his career , West made clear his interest in fashion and desire to work in the clothing design industry . In September 2005 , West announced that he would release his <unk> Clothing line in spring 2006 , claiming " Now that I have a Grammy under my belt and Late Registration is finished , I am ready to launch my clothing line next spring . " The line was developed over the following four years – with multiple pieces teased by West himself – before the line was ultimately cancelled in 2009 . In 2009 , West collaborated with Nike to release his own shoe , the Air <unk> , with a second version released in 2012 . In January 2009 , West introduced his first shoe line designed for Louis Vuitton during Paris Fashion Week . The line was released in summer 2009 . West has additionally designed <unk> for <unk> and Italian shoemaker Giuseppe Zanotti . 
 On October 1 , 2011 , Kanye West premiered his women 's fashion label , DW Kanye West at Paris Fashion Week . He received support from DSquared2 duo Dean and Dan Caten , Olivier <unk> , Jeremy Scott , Azzedine Alaïa , and the Olsen twins , who were also in attendance during his show . His debut fashion show received mixed @-@ to @-@ negative reviews , ranging from reserved observations by Style.com to excoriating commentary by The Wall Street Journal , The New York Times , the International Herald Tribune , <unk> , The Daily Telegraph , Harper 's Bazaar and many others . On March 6 , 2012 , West premiered a second fashion line at Paris Fashion Week . The line 's reception was markedly improved from the previous presentation , with a number of critics heralding West for his " much improved " sophomore effort . 
 On December 3 , 2013 , Adidas officially confirmed a new shoe collaboration deal with West . After months of anticipation and rumors , West confirmed the release of the Adidas Yeezy Boosts with a Twitter announcement directing fans to the domain <unk> In 2015 , West unveiled his Yeezy Season clothing line , premiering Season 1 in collaboration with Adidas early in the year . The line received positive critical reviews , with Vogue observing " a protective toughness , a body @-@ conscious severity that made the clothes more than a simple accessory . " The release of the Yeezy Boosts and the full Adidas collaboration was showcased in New York City on February 12 , 2015 , with free streaming to 50 cinemas in 13 countries around the world . An initial release of the Adidas Yeezy Boosts was limited to 9000 pairs to be available only in New York City via the Adidas smartphone app ; the Adidas Yeezy Boosts were sold out within 10 minutes . The shoes released worldwide on February 28 , 2015 , were limited to select boutique stores and the Adidas UK stores . He followed with Season 2 later that year at New York Fashion Week . On February 11 , West premiered his Yeezy Season 3 clothing line at Madison Square Garden in conjunction with the previewing of his album The Life of Pablo . 
 = = = Business ventures = = = 
 West founded the record label and production company GOOD Music in 2004 , in conjunction with Sony BMG , shortly after releasing his debut album , The College Dropout . John Legend , Common , and West were the label 's inaugural artists . The label houses artists including West , Big Sean , Pusha T , Teyana Taylor , <unk> Bey / Mos Def , D <unk> and John Legend , and producers including Hudson Mohawke , Q @-@ Tip , Travis Scott , No I.D. , Jeff Bhasker , and S1 . GOOD Music has released ten albums certified gold or higher by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . In November 2015 , West appointed Pusha T the new president of GOOD Music . 
 In August 2008 , West revealed plans to open 10 <unk> restaurants in the Chicago area ; the first was set to open in September 2008 in Orland Park . The second followed in January 2009 , while a third location is yet to be revealed , although the process is being finalized . His company , KW Foods LLC , bought the rights to the chain in Chicago . Ultimately , in 2009 , only two locations actually opened . In February 2011 , West shut down the <unk> located in Orland Park . Later that year , the remaining Beverly location also was shuttered . 
 On January 5 , 2012 , West announced his establishment of the creative content company DONDA , named after his late mother Donda West . In his announcement , West proclaimed that the company would " pick up where Steve Jobs left off " ; DONDA would operate as " a design company which will galvanize amazing thinkers in a creative space to bounce their dreams and ideas " with the " goal to make products and experiences that people want and can afford . " West is notoriously secretive about the company 's operations , maintaining neither an official website nor a social media presence . In stating DONDA 's creative philosophy , West articulated the need to " put creatives in a room together with like minds " in order to " simplify and aesthetically improve everything we see , taste , touch , and feel . " . Contemporary critics have noted the consistent minimalistic aesthetic exhibited throughout DONDA creative projects . 
 On March 30 , 2015 , it was announced that West is a co @-@ owner , with various other music artists , in the music streaming service Tidal . The service specialises in lossless audio and high definition music videos . Jay Z acquired the parent company of Tidal , <unk> , in the first quarter of 2015 . Including Beyoncé and Jay @-@ Z , sixteen artist stakeholders ( such as Rihanna , Beyoncé , Madonna , Chris Martin , Nicki Minaj and more ) co @-@ own Tidal , with the majority owning a 3 % equity stake . The idea of having an all artist owned streaming service was created by those involved to adapt to the increased demand for streaming within the current music industry , and to rival other streaming services such as Spotify , which have been criticised for their low payout of royalties . " The challenge is to get everyone to respect music again , to recognize its value " , stated Jay @-@ Z on the release of Tidal . 
 On June 6 , 2016 , West announced the Yeezy Season 2 Zine and the Adidas Yeezy Boost 750 will be released to retailers on June 11 . They are high @-@ top shoes with a glow in the dark sole . 
 = = = Philanthropy = = = 
 West , alongside his mother , founded the " Kanye West Foundation " in Chicago in 2003 , tasked with a mission to battle dropout and illiteracy rates , while partnering with community organizations to provide underprivileged youth access to music education . In 2007 , the West and the Foundation partnered with Strong American Schools as part of their " Ed in ' 08 " campaign . As spokesman for the campaign , West appeared in a series of PSAs for the organization , and hosted an inaugural benefit concert in August of that year . 
 In 2008 , following the death of West 's mother , the foundation was rechristened " The Dr. Donda West Foundation . " The foundation ceased operations in 2011 . 
 Kanye West and friend , Rhymefest , also founded " Donda 's House , Inc " . Got Bars is the Donda 's House signature music / lyric composition and performance program . Participants are selected through an application and audition process . Got Bars is a free music writing program with the goal of helping at @-@ risk Chicago youth . It is aimed at students between 15 and 24 , and includes lessons on how to write and record music . Their curriculum is based on the teaching philosophy and pedagogy of Dr. Donda West with a focus on collaborative and experiential learning . 
 West has additionally appeared and participated in many fundraisers , benefit concerts , and has done community work for Hurricane Katrina relief , the Kanye West Foundation , the Millions More Movement , 100 Black Men of America , a Live Earth concert benefit , World Water Day rally and march , Nike runs , and a MTV special helping young Iraq War veterans who struggle through debt and PTSD a second chance after returning home . 
 = = Controversies = = 
 = = = General media = = = 
 West has been an outspoken and controversial celebrity throughout his career , receiving both criticism and praise from many , including the mainstream media , other artists and entertainers , and two U.S. presidents . On September 2 , 2005 , during a benefit concert for Hurricane Katrina relief on NBC , A Concert for Hurricane Relief , West ( a featured speaker ) accused President George W. Bush of not " car [ ing ] about black people " . When West was presenting alongside actor Mike Myers , he deviated from the prepared script to criticize the media 's portrayal of hurricane victims , saying : 
 I hate the way they portray us in the media . You see a black family , it says , ' They 're looting . ' You see a white family , it says , ' They 're looking for food . ' And , you know , it 's been five days [ waiting for federal help ] because most of the people are black . And even for me to complain about it , I would be a hypocrite because I 've tried to turn away from the TV because it 's too hard to watch . I 've even been shopping before even giving a donation , so now I 'm calling my business manager right now to see what is the biggest amount I can give , and just to imagine if I was down there , and those are my people down there . So anybody out there that wants to do anything that we can help — with the way America is set up to help the poor , the black people , the less well @-@ off , as slow as possible . I mean , the Red Cross is doing everything they can . We already realize a lot of people that could help are at war right now , fighting another way — and they 've given them permission to go down and shoot us ! 
 Myers spoke next and continued to read the script . Once it was West 's turn to speak again , he said , " George Bush doesn 't care about black people . " At this point , telethon producer Rick Kaplan cut off the microphone and then cut away to Chris Tucker , who was unaware of the cut for a few seconds . Still , West 's comment reached much of the United States . 
 Bush stated in an interview that the comment was " one of the most disgusting moments " of his presidency . In November 2010 , in a taped interview with Matt Lauer for the Today show , West expressed regret for his criticism of Bush . " I would tell George Bush in my moment of frustration , I didn 't have the grounds to call him a racist " , he told Lauer . " I believe that in a situation of high emotion like that we as human beings don 't always choose the right words . " The following day , Bush reacted to the apology in a live interview with Lauer saying he appreciated the rapper 's remorse . " I 'm not a hater " , Bush said . " I don 't hate Kanye West . I was talking about an environment in which people were willing to say things that hurt . Nobody wants to be called a racist if in your heart you believe in equality of races . " Reactions were mixed , but some felt that West had no need to apologize . " It was not the particulars of your words that mattered , it was the essence of a feeling of the insensitivity towards our communities that many of us have felt for far too long " , argued Def Jam co @-@ founder Russell Simmons . Bush himself was receptive to the apology , saying , " I appreciate that . It wasn 't just Kanye West who was talking like that during Katrina , I cited him as an example , I cited others as an example as well . You know , I appreciate that . " 
 In September 2013 , West was widely rebuked by human rights groups for performing in Kazakhstan at the wedding of authoritarian President Nursultan Nazarbayev 's grandson . He traveled to Kazakhstan , which has one of the poorest human rights records in the world , as a personal guest of Nazarbayev . Other notable Western performers , including Sting , have previously cancelled performances in the country over human rights concerns . West was reportedly paid US $ 3 million for his performance . West had previously participated in cultural boycotts , joining Shakira and Rage Against The Machine in refusing to perform in Arizona after the 2010 implementation of stop and search laws directed against potential illegal aliens . 
 Later in 2013 , West launched a tirade on Twitter directed at talk show host Jimmy Kimmel after his ABC program Jimmy Kimmel Live ! ran a sketch on September 25 involving two children re @-@ enacting West 's recent interview with Zane Lowe for BBC Radio 1 in which he calls himself the biggest rock star on the planet . Kimmel reveals the following night that West called him to demand an apology shortly before taping . 
 During a November 26 , 2013 radio interview , West explained why he believed that President Obama had problems pushing policies in Washington : " Man , let me tell you something about George Bush and oil money and Obama and no money . People want to say Obama can 't make these moves or he 's not executing . That 's because he ain 't got those connections . Black people don 't have the same level of connections as Jewish people ... We ain 't Jewish . We don 't got family that got money like that . " In response to his comments , the Anti @-@ Defamation League stated : " There it goes again , the age @-@ old canard that Jews are all @-@ powerful and control the levers of power in government . " On December 21 , 2013 , West backed off of the original comment and told a Chicago radio station that " I thought I was giving a compliment , but if anything it came off more ignorant . I don 't know how being told you have money is an insult . " 
 In February 2016 , West again became embroiled in controversy when he posted a tweet seemingly asserting Bill Cosby 's innocence in the wake of over 50 women making allegations of sexual assault directed at Cosby . That same month , West became embroiled in a short @-@ lived social media altercation with rapper Wiz Khalifa on Twitter that eventually involved their mutual ex @-@ partner , Amber Rose , who protested to West 's mention of her and Khalifa 's child . The feud involved allegations by Rose concerning her sexual relationship with West , and received significant media attention . As of February 2 , 2016 , West and Khalifa had reconciled . 
 = = = Award shows = = = 
 In 2004 , West had his first of a number of public incidents during his attendance at music award events . At the American Music Awards of 2004 , West stormed out of the auditorium after losing Best New Artist to country singer Gretchen Wilson . He later commented , " I felt like I was definitely robbed [ ... ] I was the best new artist this year . " After the 2006 Grammy nominations were released , West said he would " really have a problem " if he did not win the Album of the Year , saying , " I don 't care what I do , I don 't care how much I stunt – you can never take away from the amount of work I put into it . I don 't want to hear all of that politically correct stuff . " On November 2 , 2006 , when his " Touch the Sky " failed to win Best Video at the MTV Europe Music Awards , West went onto the stage as the award was being presented to Justice and Simian for " We Are Your Friends " and argued that he should have won the award instead . Hundreds of news outlets worldwide criticized the outburst . On November 7 , 2006 , West apologized for this outburst publicly during his performance as support act for U2 for their Vertigo concert in Brisbane . He later spoofed the incident on the 33rd season premiere of Saturday Night Live in September 2007 . 
 On September 9 , 2007 , West suggested that his race had something to do with his being overlooked for opening the 2007 MTV Video Music Awards ( VMAs ) in favor of Britney Spears ; he claimed , " Maybe my skin 's not right . " West was performing at the event ; that night , he lost all five awards that he was nominated for , including Best Male Artist and Video of the Year . After the show , he was visibly upset that he had lost at the VMAs two years in a row , stating that he would not come back to MTV ever again . He also appeared on several radio stations saying that when he made the song " Stronger " that it was his dream to open the VMAs with it . He has also stated that Spears has not had a hit in a long period of time and that MTV exploited her for ratings . 
 On September 13 , 2009 , during the 2009 MTV Video Music Awards while Taylor Swift was accepting her award for Best Female Video for " You Belong with Me " , West went on stage and grabbed the microphone to proclaim that Beyoncé 's video for " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " , nominated for the same award , was " one of the best videos of all time " . He was subsequently removed from the remainder of the show for his actions . When Beyoncé later won the award for Best Video of the Year for " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " , she called Swift up on stage so that she could finish her acceptance speech . West was criticized by various celebrities for the outburst , and by President Barack Obama , who called West a " jackass " . In addition , West 's VMA disruption sparked a large influx of Internet photo memes with blogs , forums and " tweets " with the " Let you finish " photo @-@ jokes . He posted a Tweet soon after the event where he stated , " Everybody wanna <unk> me but I 'm a fan of real pop culture ... I 'm not crazy y 'all , I 'm just real . " He then posted two apologies for the outburst on his personal blog ; one on the night of the incident , and the other the following day , when he also apologized during an appearance on The Jay Leno Show . After Swift appeared on The View two days after the outburst , partly to discuss the matter , West called her to apologize personally . Swift said she accepted his apology . 
 In September 2010 , West wrote a series of apologetic tweets addressed to Swift including " Beyonce didn 't need that . MTV didn 't need that and Taylor and her family friends and fans definitely didn 't want or need that " and concluding with " I 'm sorry Taylor . " He also revealed he had written a song for Swift and if she did not accept the song , he would perform it himself . However , on November 8 , 2010 , in an interview with a Minnesota radio station , he seemed to recant his past apologies by attempting to describe the act at the 2009 awards show as " selfless " and downgrade the perception of disrespect it created . In " Famous , " a track from his 2016 album The Life of Pablo , West implies that this incident led to Swift 's stardom , rapping , " I feel like me and Taylor might still have sex / Why ? I made that bitch famous . " After some media backlash about the reference , West posted on Twitter " I did not diss Taylor Swift and I 've never dissed her ... First thing is I 'm an artist and as an artist I will express how I feel with no censorship . " He continued by adding that he had asked both Swift and his wife , Kim Kardashian , for permission to publish the line . 
 On February 8 , 2015 , at the 57th Annual Grammy Awards , West walked on stage as Beck was accepting his award for Album of the Year and then walked off stage , leaving the audience to think he was joking . After the awards show , West stated in an interview that he was not joking and that " Beck needs to respect artistry , he should have given his award to Beyoncé " . On February 26 , 2015 , he publicly apologized to Beck on Twitter . 
 On August 30 , 2015 , West was presented with the Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award at the MTV Video Music Awards . In his acceptance speech , he stated , " Y 'all might be thinking right now , ' I wonder did he smoke something before he came out here ? ' And the answer is : ' Yes , I rolled up a little something . I knocked the edge off . ' " At the end of his speech , he announced , " I have decided in 2020 to run for president . " 
 = = = Petitions = = = 
 Music fans have turned to Change.org around the globe to try and block West 's participation at various events . The largest unsuccessful petition has been to the Glastonbury Festival 2015 with 133 @,@ 000 + voters stating they would prefer a rock band to headline . On July 20 , 2015 , within five days of West 's announcement as the headlining artist of the closing ceremonies of the 2015 Pan American Games , Change.org user XYZ collected over 50 @,@ 000 signatures for West 's removal as headliner , on the grounds that the headlining artist should be Canadian . In his Pan American Games Closing Ceremony performance , close to the end of his performance , West closed the show by tossing his faulty microphone in the air and walked off stage . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Relationships = = = 
 West began an on @-@ and @-@ off relationship with designer Alexis Phifer in 2002 , and they became engaged in August 2006 . The pair ended their 18 @-@ month engagement in 2008 . West subsequently dated model Amber Rose from 2008 until the summer of 2010 . West began dating reality star and longtime friend Kim Kardashian in April 2012 . West and Kardashian became engaged in October 2013 , and married on May 24 , 2014 at Fort di Belvedere in Florence , Italy . Their private ceremony was subject to widespread mainstream coverage , with West taking issue with the couple 's portrayal in the media . They have two children : daughter North " Nori " West ( born June 15 , 2013 ) and son Saint West ( born December 5 , 2015 ) . In April 2015 , West and Kardashian traveled to Jerusalem to have North baptized in the Armenian Apostolic Church at the Cathedral of St. James . The couple 's high status and respective careers have resulted in their relationship becoming subject to heavy media coverage ; The New York Times referred to their marriage as " a historic blizzard of celebrity . " 
 = = = Mother 's death = = = 
 On November 10 , 2007 , at approximately 7 : 35 pm , paramedics responding to an emergency call transported West 's mother , Donda West , to the nearby Centinela Freeman Hospital in Marina del Rey , California . She was unresponsive in the emergency room , and after resuscitation attempts , doctors pronounced her dead at approximately 8 : 30 pm , at age 58 . The Los Angeles County coroner 's office said in January 2008 that West had died of heart disease while suffering " multiple post @-@ operative factors " after plastic surgery . She had undergone liposuction and breast reduction . Beverly Hills plastic surgeon Andre Aboolian had refused to do the surgery because West had a health condition that placed her at risk for a heart attack . Aboolian referred her to an internist to investigate her cardiac issue . She never met with the doctor recommended by Aboolian and had the procedures performed by a third doctor , Jan Adams . 
 Adams sent condolences to Donda West 's family but declined to publicly discuss the procedure , citing confidentiality . West 's family , through celebrity attorney Ed McPherson , filed complaints with the Medical Board against Adams and Aboolian for violating patient confidentiality following her death . Adams had previously been under scrutiny by the medical board . He appeared on Larry King Live on November 20 , 2007 , but left before speaking . Two months later , he appeared again , with his attorney , stating he was there to " defend himself " . He said that the recently released autopsy results " spoke for themselves " . The final coroner 's report January 10 , 2008 , concluded that Donda West died of " coronary artery disease and multiple post @-@ operative factors due to or as a consequence of liposuction and <unk> " . 
 The funeral and burial for Donda West was held in Oklahoma City on November 20 , 2007 . West played his first concert following the funeral at The O2 in London on November 22 . He dedicated a performance of " Hey Mama " , as well as a cover of Journey 's " Don 't Stop Believin ' " , to his mother , and did so on all other dates of his Glow in the Dark tour . 
 At a December 2008 press conference in New Zealand , West spoke about his mother 's death for the first time . " It was like losing an arm and a leg and trying to walk through that " , he told reporters . 
 California governor Arnold Schwarzenegger signed the " Donda West Law " , legislation which makes it mandatory for patients to provide medical clearance for elective cosmetic surgery . 
 = = = Legal issues = = = 
 In December 2006 , Robert " Evel " Knievel sued West for trademark infringement in West 's video for " Touch the Sky " . Knievel took issue with a " sexually charged video " in which West takes on the persona of " Evel <unk> " and attempts flying a rocket over a canyon . The suit claimed infringement on Knievel 's trademarked name and likeness . Knievel also claimed that the " vulgar and offensive " images depicted in the video damaged his reputation . The suit sought monetary damages and an injunction to stop distribution of the video . West 's attorneys argued that the music video amounted to satire and therefore was covered under the First Amendment . Just days before his death in November 2007 , Knievel amicably settled the suit after being paid a visit from West , saying , " I thought he was a wonderful guy and quite a gentleman . " 
 On September 11 , 2008 , West and his road manager / bodyguard Don " Don C. " Crowley were arrested at Los Angeles International Airport and booked on charges of felony vandalism after an altercation with the paparazzi in which West and Crowley broke the photographers ' cameras . West was later released from the Los Angeles Police Department 's Pacific Division station in Culver City on $ 20 @,@ 000 bail bond . On September 26 , 2008 , the Los Angeles County District Attorney 's Office said it would not file felony counts against West over the incident . Instead the case file was forwarded to the city attorney 's office , which charged West with one count of misdemeanor vandalism , one count of grand theft and one count of battery and his manager with three counts of each on March 18 , 2009 . West 's and Crowley 's arraignment was delayed from an original date of April 14 , 2009 . 
 West was arrested again on November 14 , 2008 at the Hilton hotel near Gateshead after another scuffle involving a photographer outside the famous Tup Tup Palace nightclub in Newcastle upon Tyne . He was later released " with no further action " , according to a police spokesperson . 
 On July 19 , 2013 , West was leaving LAX as he was surrounded by dozens of paparazzi . West became increasingly agitated as a photographer , Daniel Ramos , continued to ask him why people were not allowed to speak in his presence . West then says , " I told you don 't talk to me , right ? You trying to get me in trouble so I steal off on you and have to pay you like $ 250 @,@ 000 and shit . " Then he allegedly charged the man and grabbed him and his camera . The incident captured by TMZ , took place for a few seconds before a female voice can be heard telling West to stop . West then released the man , and his camera , and drove away from the scene . Medics were later called to the scene on behalf of the photographer who was grabbed . It was reported West could be charged with felony attempted robbery behind the matter . However , the charges were reduced to misdemeanor criminal battery and attempted grand theft . In March 2014 , West was sentenced to serve two years ' probation for the misdemeanor battery conviction and required to attend 24 anger management sessions , perform 250 hours of community service and pay restitution to Ramos . 
 = = = Religious beliefs = = = 
 After the success of his song " Jesus Walks " from the album The College Dropout , West was questioned on his beliefs and said , " I will say that I 'm spiritual . I have accepted Jesus as my Savior . And I will say that I fall short every day . " In a 2008 interview with The Fader , West stated that " I 'm like a vessel , and God has chosen me to be the voice and the connector . " 
 In a 2009 interview with online magazine <unk> , West clarified that he believed in God , but " would never go into a religion , " explaining that " I feel like religion is more about separation and judgment than bringing people together and understanding . That 's all I 'm about . " More recently , in September 2014 , West referred to himself as a Christian during one of his concerts . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 West is among the most critically acclaimed artists of the twenty @-@ first century , receiving praise from music critics , fans , fellow musicians , artists , and wider cultural figures for his work . AllMusic editor Jason Birchmeier writes of his impact , " As his career progressed throughout the early 21st century , West shattered certain stereotypes about rappers , becoming a superstar on his own terms without adapting his appearance , his rhetoric , or his music to fit any one musical mold . " Jon Caramanica of The New York Times said that West has been " a frequent lightning rod for controversy , a bombastic figure who can count rankling two presidents among his achievements . " Village Voice Media senior editor Ben Westhoff dubbed him the greatest hip hop artist of all time , writing that " he 's made the best albums and changed the game the most , and his music is the most likely to endure , " while Complex called him the 21st century 's " most important artist of any art form , of any genre . " In 2016 , The Guardian compared West to the late David Bowie within the " modern mainstream " , arguing that " there is nobody else who can sell as many records as West does [ ... ] while remaining so resolutely experimental and capable of stirring things up culturally and politically . " 
 = = = Influence = = = 
 Rolling Stone credited West with transforming hip hop 's mainstream , " establishing a style of introspective yet glossy rap [ ... ] " , and called him " as interesting and complicated a pop star as the 2000s produced — a rapper who mastered , upped and moved beyond the hip @-@ hop game , a producer who created a signature sound and then abandoned it to his imitators , a flashy , free @-@ spending <unk> with insightful things to say about college , culture and economics , an egomaniac with more than enough artistic firepower to back it up . " West 's middle @-@ class background , flamboyant fashion sense and outspokenness have set him apart from other rappers . Early in his career , he was among the first rappers to publicly criticize the preponderance of homophobia in hip hop . The sales competition between rapper 50 Cent 's Curtis and West 's Graduation altered the direction of hip hop and helped pave the way for new rappers who did not follow the hardcore @-@ gangster mold . Rosie Swash of The Guardian viewed the sales competition as a historical moment in hip @-@ hop , because it " highlighted the diverging facets of hip @-@ hop in the last decade ; the former was gangsta rap for the noughties , while West was the thinking man 's alternative . " 
 West 's 2008 album 808s & Heartbreak polarized both listeners and critics upon its release , but was commercially successful and impacted hip hop and pop stylistically , as it laid the groundwork for a new wave of artists who generally eschewed typical rap braggadocio for intimate subject matter and introspection , including Frank Ocean , The Weeknd , Drake , Future , Kid Cudi , Childish Gambino , Lil Durk , Chief Keef , and Soulja Boy . According to Ben Detrick of XXL magazine , West effectively led a new wave of artists , including Kid Cudi , Wale , Lupe Fiasco , Kidz in the Hall , and Drake , who lacked the interest or ability to rap about gunplay or drug @-@ dealing . In 2013 , Julianne Escobedo Shepherd of Spin described West as fronting a " new art @-@ pop era " in contemporary music , in which musicians draw widely on the visual arts as a signifier of both creative exploration and extravagant wealth . 
 Drake , Nicki Minaj and Casey Veggies have acknowledged being influenced directly by West . Non @-@ rap artists such as English singer @-@ songwriters Adele and Lily Allen , New Zealand artist Lorde , English rock band Arctic Monkeys , American pop singer Halsey , American pop rock singer Andy Grammar , Sergio Pizzorno of English rock band Kasabian and the American indie rock bands MGMT and Yeah Yeah Yeahs have cited West as an influence . Experimental and electronic artists such as James Blake Daniel Lopatin , and Tim Hecker have also cited West 's work as an inspiration . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 A substantial number of artists and other figures have professed admiration for West 's work , including hip hop artists Rakim , RZA of Wu @-@ Tang Clan , Chuck D of Public Enemy , and DJ Premier of Gang Starr . Experimental rock pioneer and Velvet Underground founder Lou Reed said of West that " the guy really , really , really is talented . He 's really trying to raise the bar . No one 's near doing what he 's doing , it 's not even on the same planet . " Musicians such as Paul McCartney and Prince have also commended West 's work . Famed Tesla Motors CEO and inventor Elon Musk complimented West in a piece for Time Magazine 's 100 most influential people list , writing that : 
 " Kanye West would be the first person to tell you he belongs on this list . The dude doesn 't believe in false modesty , and he shouldn 't [ ... ] He fought for his place in the cultural pantheon with a purpose . In his debut album , over a decade ago , Kanye issued what amounted to a social critique and a call to arms ( with a beat ) : " We rappers is role models : we rap , we don 't think . " But Kanye does think . Constantly . About everything . And he wants everybody else to do the same : to engage , question , push boundaries . Now that he 's a pop @-@ culture juggernaut , he has the platform to achieve just that . He 's not afraid of being judged or ridiculed in the process . Kanye 's been playing the long game all along , and we 're only just beginning to see why . " 
 West 's first six solo studio albums , all of which have gone platinum , have received numerous awards and critical acclaim . All of his albums have been commercially successful , with Yeezus , his sixth solo album , becoming his fifth consecutive No. 1 album in the U.S. upon release . West has had six songs exceed 3 million in digital sales as of December 2012 , with " Gold Digger " selling 3 @,@ 086 @,@ 000 , " Stronger " selling 4 @,@ 402 @,@ 000 , " Heartless " selling 3 @,@ 742 @,@ 000 , " E.T. " selling over 4 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 , " Love Lockdown " selling over 3 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 , and " Niggas in Paris " selling over 3 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 , placing him third in overall digital sales of the past decade . He has sold over 30 million digital songs in the United States making him one of the best @-@ selling digital artists of all @-@ time . 
 As of 2013 , West has won a total of 21 Grammy Awards , making him one of the most awarded artists of all @-@ time . About.com ranked Kanye West No. 8 on their " Top 50 Hip @-@ Hop Producers " list . On May 16 , 2008 , Kanye West was crowned by MTV as the year 's No. 1 " Hottest MC in the Game . " On December 17 , 2010 , Kanye West was voted as the MTV Man of the Year by MTV . Billboard ranked Kanye West No. 3 on their list of Top 10 Producers of the Decade . West ties with Bob Dylan for having topped the annual Pazz & Jop critic poll the most number of times ever , with four number @-@ one albums each . West has also been included twice in the Time 100 annual lists of the most influential people in the world as well as being listed in a number of Forbes annual lists . 
 In its 2012 list of " 500 Greatest Albums of All Time , Rolling Stone included three of West 's albums — The College Dropout at number 298 , Late Registration at number 118 , and My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy at number 353 . 
 The Pitchfork online music publication ranked My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy as the world 's best album of the decade " so far " — between 2010 and 2014 — on August 19 , 2014 , while Yeezus was ranked in the eighth position of a list of 100 albums . During the same week , the song " Runaway " ( featuring Pusha T ) was ranked in the third position in the publication 's list of the 200 " best tracks " released since 2010 . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Studio albums 
 The College Dropout ( 2004 ) 
 Late Registration ( 2005 ) 
 Graduation ( 2007 ) 
 808s & Heartbreak ( 2008 ) 
 My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy ( 2010 ) 
 Watch the Throne ( with <unk> @-@ Z ) ( 2011 ) 
 Yeezus ( 2013 ) 
 The Life of Pablo ( 2016 ) 
 = = Videography = = 
 The College Dropout Video Anthology ( 2004 ) 
 Late Orchestration ( 2006 ) 
 VH1 Storytellers ( 2010 ) 
 = = Tours = = 
 Touch The Sky Tour ( 2005 ) 
 Glow in the Dark Tour ( 2008 ) 
 Fame Kills : Starring Kanye West and Lady Gaga ( Cancelled ) ( 2009 – 10 ) 
 Watch the Throne Tour ( With <unk> @-@ Z ) ( 2011 – 12 ) 
 The Yeezus Tour ( 2013 – 14 ) 
 Saint Pablo Tour ( 2016 ) 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = Driving Emotion Type @-@ S = 
 Driving Emotion Type @-@ S ( <unk> ・ <unk> ・ <unk> ) is a racing game developed by Escape , a subsidiary of Square . It was published in Japan on March 30 , 2000 and was Square 's first release for the PlayStation 2 console . After criticisms of the game 's handling , the European and North American versions of the game feature revised controls and additional contents , and were released on January 26 , 2001 and January 29 , 2001 respectively . 
 The game features officially licensed cars from international manufacturers . Several modes of playing are present , including a training mode and a two @-@ player mode . The game 's music , primarily composed by Shinji Hosoe , was published as a soundtrack in Japan . Sales for the game were low and professional reviews very mixed , with either praises or criticism of the game 's graphics , controls and sounds . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The gameplay of Driving Emotion Type @-@ S follows general conventions of racing games . The game 's physics and controls intend to be realistic and are based on vehicular weight . The player competes in races with other computer controlled cars in order to unlock new cars and tracks . Car settings can be customized , as well as their colors , before each course . The game includes 43 officially licensed cars from thirteen Japanese and European manufacturers , including BMW , Toyota , Nissan , Mazda , Porsche , Subaru , Mitsubishi , TVR , Alfa Romeo , Ferrari , Which Was First Game to include The All New Ferrari 360 and Lexus Which Was exclusive to the Western versions of the game . Fourteen courses are available in total , including two fictional circuit and real circuit like The Home of Formula One Circuit in Japan Suzuka Circuit and the home of Super Lap in Japan Tsukuba Circuit , and one exclusive to the Western versions of the game called West Coast . 
 There are four game modes . The " Arcade Type @-@ S " mode is the main part of the game , and allows the play to immediately join a race . Only four cars are available at the beginning of the game , but as the player wins more races , more cars and tracks are unlocked . The " Line Training " mode enables the player to try out any of the tracks and improve their driving techniques , without any computer @-@ controlled car . An ideal racing line is shown in red on the track and becomes jagged when the suggested braking points are approached . This mode features four <unk> tracks that do not feature in the other modes . A " Time Attack " and split @-@ screen two @-@ player " Vs Mode " fill out the gameplay . 
 = = Development = = 
 Announced in January 2000 under the working title of Type @-@ S , Driving Emotion Type @-@ S was developed by Escape , a subsidiary of Square . Its development team had previously worked with <unk> on Ehrgeiz and the Tobal series for the PlayStation . The announcement was later followed by a four @-@ page advertisement in the Japanese gaming magazine Weekly Famitsu , which stated that the game would be Square 's first release for the PlayStation 2 . 
 In Japan , a playable version of the game was showcased at Square 's " Millennium Event " , a show held on January 29 , 2000 in Yokohama . Television advertisements of the game were among the first ones to air in Japan for the PlayStation 2 . The game was also showcased in the United States at the Electronic Entertainment Expo of Los Angeles , from May 11 to May 13 of the same year . This demonstration was not playable however , as focus groups were revising the game to improve upon the Japanese version . According to the American website GameSpot , the level of body details and shading was also refined . The European and North American versions of the game were eventually released ten months after the Japanese one . 
 = = Audio = = 
 The music of the game was primarily composed by Shinji Hosoe , with contributions by Ayako Saso and Takayuki Aihara . The soundtrack was published in Japan by Hosoe 's label Super Sweep Records , on December 29 , 2001 , and was sold bundled with the soundtrack of the video game Bushido Blade . The music is mostly techno @-@ based , with rock and jazz elements . According to the game music website Chudah 's Corner , one of the more varied track is the opener " Rush About " , which features electronic beats , a duet of saxophone and electric guitar , and a piano . The site also mentions the synth @-@ influenced " Best Tone " and its bass solo as Ayako Saso 's most enjoyable contribution , while Takayuki Aihara 's is the catchy 80s rock tune " F @-@ Beat " . Finally , the site cites the piano @-@ based " Recollections of Sepia " as the calmest track of the album . 
 All songs written and composed by Shinji Hosoe , except where noted . 
 = = Reception = = 
 A week after its Japanese release , Driving Emotion Type @-@ S had sold 46 @,@ 600 copies . The game made a more mediocre start outside Japan , with only 2 @,@ 500 copies sold in the United States a week after its North American release . The American website Allgame noted that while the game sold poorly , it nevertheless benefited commercially from having been released before Gran Turismo 3 : A @-@ Spec , a better title according to the site as well as GamePro , GameSpot , GameZone and IGN . 
 The game received very mixed reviews from gaming publications . The Japanese magazine Weekly Famitsu gave the title a score of 28 out of 40 , praising its graphics , usage of real cars and innovative driver 's view perspective . The American magazine Game Informer and website GameZone also lauded the game 's realistic car interiors and highly detailed environments , putting them on par with those of Ridge Racer V and Gran Turismo 3 : A @-@ Spec . Still , Allgame noted the presence of a subtle shimmering effect in the graphics , an effect typically seen on early PlayStation 2 titles , while the American website Game Revolution found the graphics " severely jagged " . The shimmering and <unk> were also noted by GameSpot and the American website IGN , which did not feel they were that irritating . 
 Concerning the game 's playability , the Japanese release was judged " impossible to play " by GameSpot and IGN , which both felt the Western versions were an improvement , even though the game was still " far more sensitive than it ought to be " . Still , Game Revolution found the car default settings unbalanced and hard to re @-@ adjust properly , and criticized the game 's inconsistent AI , like Allgame and IGN . Famitsu reported long load times and a high difficulty level , noting that the game was aimed more toward fans of sim racing than fans of arcade @-@ style gameplay , due to the difficulty of steering . Game Informer and GameZone echoed Famitsu 's review , stating that the load times quickly become a " game @-@ ending nightmare " , and calling the game 's handling " touchy " , " intense " and " revolutionary " , but acknowledging that most players would simply find it too challenging and frustrating to be fun . While Game Informer alleged that " there is a masterpiece for driving simulator buffs buried in here " , Allgame was much more negative , stating that the cars " seem overly light on their tires " and that it " feels like you 're driving on ice " . 
 Reviews for the game 's audio were also mixed . The music was praised by Chudah 's Corner , which called it the game 's " saving grace " and " a marvel of its own " , while Game Informer called it " decent " but felt Square should have enlisted big bands to match the music of the competitor series Gran Turismo . GameSpot called the music " solid , albeit imperfect " and also thought that it lacked impact compared to that of Gran Turismo 2 , R4 : Ridge Racer Type 4 or Ridge Racer V. While the site praised the game 's ambient sound effects as realistic and detailed , IGN and GameZone felt they were too muted and " nothing special " . GameZone , Game Revolution and the American magazine GamePro felt the music was " intolerable " and " out @-@ of @-@ tune " , " cheesy and annoying " , and sounded like " a flock of seagulls being maimed and tortured " . 
 = 2008 NHL Winter Classic = 
 The 2008 NHL Winter Classic ( known via corporate sponsorship as the AMP Energy NHL Winter Classic ) an outdoor regular season National Hockey League ( NHL ) game played on January 1 , 2008 , at Ralph Wilson Stadium in Orchard Park , New York . The Pittsburgh Penguins defeated the Buffalo Sabres , 2 – 1 , in a shootout , on a goal by captain Sidney Crosby . It was the first outdoor regular @-@ season professional ice hockey game to be played in the United States , and was sponsored by AMP Energy . It was the successor to the 2003 Heritage Classic , the NHL 's first regular @-@ season outdoor game , played in Edmonton , Alberta , Canada . The game was televised in the United States on NBC and in Canada on CBC and RDS . Due to the snowy conditions , the game was at the time colloquially referred to as the " Ice Bowl " by residents of the area and Sabres fans . 
 The game , which was played at a temporary ice rink built on the football field , set an NHL attendance record of 71 @,@ 217 . The Sabres held a Winter Classic " house party " at HSBC Arena during the game where another 11 @,@ 000 fans saw the game shown live on the arena 's video scoreboard with synched @-@ up audio from the team 's radio coverage . The Buffalo Sabres Alumni Hockey Team played a pre @-@ game at the HSBC Arena as part of the house party festivities . Buffalo Sabres anthem singer Doug Allen sang the Canadian national anthem , as is customary at Sabres home games . Irish tenor Ronan Tynan performed " God Bless America " before the game at the stadium . 
 The success of the event has led to subsequent outdoor hockey games being scheduled and helped establish the Winter Classic as an annual NHL tradition . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Construction of the outdoor rink began on December 24 , the day after the Buffalo Bills played their last home game of the 2007 NFL season . It was built between the 16 @-@ yard lines of the football field , under the supervision of NHL facilities operations manager Dan Craig . Initially , six inches ( 150 mm ) of the nine @-@ inch ( 230 mm ) crown of the football field had to be leveled using styrofoam insulation . On top of the newly created flat surface , three inches ( 75 mm ) of plywood with plastic covering were laid as a base for the necessary piping . At the same time the boards were being put in place , an inch of sand was spread amongst the piping and was then wet by a combination of hoses and timely rain so it could freeze into a rink overnight and be painted four days before the game . Another ¾ of an inch of ice was added to complete the playing surface . 
 After this experience , Commissioner Gary Bettman stated that the League would like more time to prepare the site for the next outdoor game . He also wanted to ensure that not too many outdoor games are held so the event can remain special . 
 = = Attendance = = 
 71 @,@ 217 people attended the game , setting an NHL attendance record . The former NHL record of 57 @,@ 167 was set at the Heritage Classic between the Montreal Canadiens and Edmonton Oilers in Edmonton , Alberta , on November 22 , 2003 . Georges <unk> and Ty Conklin are the only two players who have played in both the Heritage Classic and Winter Classic games . They both played for the Oilers and Penguins , respectively , for each game . 
 While it was the record for a professional game , it fell short of the then all @-@ time number of 74 @,@ 554 , which was set in " The Cold War " between the University of Michigan and Michigan State University on October 6 , 2001 . Sabres goaltender Ryan Miller and Penguins forward Adam Hall both played for Michigan State in that game . 
 Approximately 41 @,@ 000 tickets to the game were made available to the general public , selling out within 30 minutes of being made available on September 18 , 2007 . In the face of controversy about the quickness of ticket sales , an official spokesperson for the Sabres called it " a testament to how popular the Sabres are and how many people want to be part of the event . " However , many Penguins fans were left out by not having the opportunity to purchase the tickets after they were made available to the city hosting the event , and they were frustrated by the lack of exclusivity for Penguins season @-@ ticket holders . 
 Terrence <unk> , who would go on to purchase the Sabres three years later , was among those in attendance . Also in attendance was game show host Pat Sajak , who spoke positively of his experience ( although admitting that Ralph Wilson Stadium 's size was somewhat of a distraction from the game itself ) . 
 = = Television and radio coverage = = 
 The game was televised in the United States on NBC and in Canada on CBC and RDS . Westwood One broadcast the game on radio , and XM Satellite Radio aired the game , as well . Some NBC affiliates in the United States decided instead to play the game on secondary channels often used for weather service . Therefore , in some markets , fans with satellite service with DirecTV or DISH Network were unable to watch the game . Despite this , and competing with broadcasts of college football bowl games ( this was particularly noted in the Detroit , Michigan market , usually a strong market for hockey ratings , where the Wolverines were playing in the Capital One Bowl ) , the game garnered a 2 @.@ 6 rating and 5 share , the highest rating for a regular season NHL game since 1996 , and the highest share since Wayne Gretzky 's final game in 1999 , in a near tie with second @-@ place CBS 's 2 @.@ 7 rating for Gator Bowl coverage . The production earned a 38 @.@ 1 rating in Buffalo and 17 @.@ 7 rating in Pittsburgh , to lead all markets . 
 Westwood One carried a nationwide radio broadcast of the game , as did each team 's local announcing team for local networks ( Rick Jeanneret and Harry Neale for Buffalo , Mike Lange and Phil Bourque for Pittsburgh ) . 
 NBC had an airplane flying overhead to provide bird 's @-@ eye views of the rink , including a live <unk> from its camera throughout the game . The announcers stood in a constructed perch on the penalty box side of the rink , in front of the stadium stands . Mike Emrick , Eddie Olczyk and Darren Pang comprised the TV broadcast team for NBC , while Jim Hughson , Craig Simpson and Greg Millen called the game on CBC . 
 = = Pregame = = 
 Doug Allen sang the Canadian national anthem ( O Canada ) and Irish tenor Ronan Tynan performed " God Bless America " before the game . The U.S. national anthem ( " The Star @-@ Spangled Banner " ) was not performed . 
 = = Rule changes = = 
 The NHL also announced that several rule changes were in effect for this game , to nullify advantages to either team due to the weather conditions . The teams switched ends halfway through the third period . Play was interrupted exactly at the 10 : 00 minute mark , similar to the end of a period with a horn sounding , a Zamboni resurfacing the ice , and a faceoff following at center ice . The overtime period was similarly divided into two 2 : 30 segments . In the shootout , each goaltender was permitted to choose which goal to defend , and they each chose the same goal , towards the west side of the stadium . 
 = = Game summary = = 
 The teams wore vintage jerseys for the event , with the Penguins wearing powder blue jerseys for the first time since 1973 . The Sabres wore their old white jerseys , which they wore from 1978 to 1996 . The game was part of the regular 2007 – 08 NHL season schedule , replacing a game that would have been held at HSBC Arena , the Sabres ' regular home . In addition , the goaltenders also dressed in vintage style , with Ty Conklin and Ryan Miller both wearing retro @-@ painted masks . Ryan Miller also wore a hockey sock on top of his mask , which he changed during each intermission so he could auction all three of them off for charity along with his mask . Penguins backup Dany Sabourin wore a set of vintage @-@ styled pads but did not play . 
 Weather for the game was appropriate to the winter setting it was intended to evoke , with game @-@ time temperatures around the freezing mark and snow falling for much of the time , especially during the third period . The weather conditions made play somewhat more difficult for players but were well received by fans . 
 The Penguins registered 25 shots on goal , and the Sabres had 37 , dominating the second and overtime periods , leading those 14 – 2 and 7 – 0 , respectively . Each goalie allowed one goal in playing time not including the shootout , giving Conklin 36 saves for the Penguins , and Miller 24 for the Sabres . 
 = = = Scoring summary = = = 
 Number in parenthesis represents the player 's total in goals or assists to that point of the season 
 = = = Penalty summary = = = 
 = = = Three star selections = = = 
 = = Team rosters = = 
 ^ Jocelyn Thibault dressed for the Buffalo Sabres as the back @-@ up goalie and did not enter the game . ^ Dany Sabourin dressed for the Pittsburgh Penguins as the back @-@ up goalie and did not enter the game . 
 = = = Scratches = = = 
 Pittsburgh Penguins : # 10 Gary Roberts ( injured ) 
 Buffalo Sabres : # 4 Nolan Pratt ( healthy ) , # 21 Drew Stafford ( concussion ) 
 = = = Officials = = = 
 Referees — Marc <unk> , Don <unk> 
 Linesmen — Brad <unk> , Tim Nowak 
 = = Future games = = 
 Due to the success of the Winter Classic and its predecessor , outdoor games have been held during subsequent seasons , and the Winter Classic has become an annual NHL tradition . The next Winter Classic was held on January 1 , 2009 , at Wrigley Field in Chicago , matching the Detroit Red Wings against the Chicago Blackhawks . Winter Classics have been held in every year since , except for 2013 , which was interrupted by the 2012 – 2013 NHL lockout . Two Heritage Classics , one in 2011 and 2014 , have been held since . The league expanded its offerings of outdoor games with the introduction of the NHL Stadium Series in 2014 . Since the inaugural Winter Classic , the NHL has held 12 additional outdoor games . 
 = Kim Possible ( character ) = 
 Kimberly Ann " Kim " Possible is a fictional character who appears in the animated television series Kim Possible , voiced by American actress Christy Carlson Romano . Created by Bob Schooley and Mark McCorkle , the character debuted in the show 's pilot , " Crush " , which premiered on June 7 , 2002 . After starring in each of the show 's 84 episodes , Kim made her final appearance in the series finale " Graduation , Part 2 " , which originally aired on September 7 , 2007 . A high school cheerleader who moonlights as a crime @-@ fighter , aided by her best friend Ron <unk> , the majority of Kim 's world @-@ saving missions require her to thwart the evil plans of her <unk> Dr. Drakken and his sidekick Shego , a mad scientist and supervillain duo , all the while coping with everyday challenges commonly associated with adolescence , including maintaining good grades and dating . 
 Inspired by their own daughters , Schooley and McCorkle conceived Kim as a teenage girl who can do anything , basing the character on their own fictional childhood hero James Bond . Upon noticing that female leads were lacking in children 's animated television , they decided to reverse traditional gender roles by making Kim the show 's action hero with a comedic male sidekick . Devoid of both superpowers and a secret identity unlike traditional superheroes , the character 's crime @-@ fighting abilities are drawn from her experience as both a cheerleader and gymnast , making her more relatable to young audiences . Originally designed as a bombshell based on video game character Lara Croft , Kim 's appearance was ultimately altered to closer resemble that of a teenage girl . The character is known for her atypical teenage slang and outfits . 
 When Kim Possible premiered in 2002 , Kim was instantly well @-@ liked by both female and male audiences . The character has since been very positively received by critics , who hailed her as a positive role model for young women , while heavily comparing her to similar crime @-@ fighting television heroines Buffy Summers from Buffy the Vampire Slayer and Sydney Bristow from Alias , both of whom preceded her . Kim has also earned the respect of feminist critics , who appreciated the character for both defying gender roles and challenging negative stereotypes commonly associated with cheerleaders . A fashion trendsetter , the character 's wardrobe is also believed to have helped popularize the wearing of crop tops and cargo pants during the early 2000s . The success of the show inspired the release of two television films , Kim Possible : A <unk> in Time ( 2003 ) and Kim Possible Movie : So the Drama ( 2005 ) , as well as a video game series , in all of which Kim stars . 
 = = Role in Kim Possible = = 
 High school student Kim Possible ( Christy Carlson Romano ) fights crime alongside her best friend and sidekick Ron <unk> ( Will Friedle ) , aided by his pet naked mole @-@ rat Rufus ( Nancy Cartwright ) and computer genius Wade ( <unk> Mowry ) . The character lives in fictional Middleton , USA with her parents James ( Gary Cole ) and Ann ( Jean Smart ) , a rocket scientist and neurosurgeon respectively , and her younger brothers , identical twins Jim and Tim . Kim goes on extraordinary missions to save the world from danger at the hands of various supervillains and evil geniuses . Her most consistent adversaries are mad scientist Dr. Drakken and his sidekick Shego , the latter of whom is a former superheroine who has the ability to generate powerful energy blasts , and thus poses as her main combatant and threat . 
 Kim becomes a crime @-@ fighter unintentionally . In need of a job , the character creates her own website , on which she promotes her own babysitting and lawn mowing services , using the slogan " I can do anything . " When a wealthy entrepreneur accidentally contacts Kim Possible instead of Team Impossible when he becomes trapped by his own laser security system , Kim rushes to his aid , using her gymnastic abilities to disable the device . As news of Kim 's heroism spreads and requests for her help increase , the character finally decides to pursue it as a career . Although hardly a normal teenager , Kim insists that she is just an " basic average girl " and must nonetheless cope with usual adolescent affairs , such as maintaining good grades in school , pleasing her parents , learning how to drive , dating and relationships , and attending cheerleading practice . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Conception and writing = = = 
 Long @-@ time co @-@ workers and writing partners , television writers Bob Schooley and Mark McCorkle explained that the idea for Kim Possible arrived from " out of the blue " when they realized that there were few animated shows starring female leads . Both McCorkle and Schooley had worked as writers on the male @-@ led animated series Aladdin and Hercules for several years , but longed to do " something original " , and had just recently learned that young people were beginning to crave shows that depicted " ordinary kids in extraordinary circumstances . " Thus , Schooley and McCorkle conceived Kim as a " girl who can do anything " ; Kim Possible provided the writers with a first @-@ time opportunity to create an entirely new character " from scratch " , which Schooley described as a " refreshing " experience in comparison to writing for characters who had already been established . 
 Both Schooley 's and McCorkle 's own daughters inspired them to conceive Kim as " a character that our daughters and other girls can look up to " , aware of the " ancient truism " that while girls would seldom hesitate to watch a show about a male lead , boys are usually less willing to do the opposite . Thus , the writers decided to reverse traditional gender roles by making Kim the show 's competent action hero and Ron her " fumbling " sidekick , longing to provide young girls with " a character that they can pretend to be " , similar to their own childhood heroes , fictional spy James Bond and Captain Kirk from Star Trek . According to McCorkle , Kim has much more in common with James Bond than she does with comic book superheroes . The " weird dynamic " between Kim 's enemies Dr. Drakken and Shego was deliberately written so that it mirrors Kim and Ron 's relationship . Meanwhile , the recurring character Monique was created because Schooley and McCorkle felt that it would be more realistic if Kim were to have a female best friend in addition to Ron . The writers also penned fast , " sitcom @-@ style dialogue " for Kim and the other characters to say in order to attract both children and adults . 
 After three years , production on Kim Possible had virtually ceased following the premiere of the film So the Drama because the writers felt that finally establishing Kim and Ron as a couple would serve as " great wrap @-@ up to the series " , and thus had long abandoned creating new " outlets " for the character during the show 's third season . Schooley and McCorkle had always wanted Kim and Ron to eventually end up a couple , but avoided this storyline for as long as possible in fear of " paint [ ing ] [ themselves ] into a corner " . When the show was surprisingly renewed for a fourth season by popular demand , Schooley and McCorkle realized that pursuing Kim and Ron 's relationship provided the series with " new story ideas " and " opportunities for comedy " , and ultimately learned to appreciate the characters ' " new dynamic . " To prevent Kim and Ron 's relationship from becoming " soap @-@ opera @-@ ish " , the writers strove to maintain the basics of their friendship , with Kim continuing to save the world with Ron as her sidekick . In terms of character development , the show 's main titles were finally adjusted to reflect the grade in which Kim is currently enrolled , changing it from high school sophomore to high school senior . Additionally , Kim finally gets her own car , which she inherits from her father , while her younger brothers Jim and Tim begin enrollment at Middleton High School , having skipped several grades due to their genius @-@ level intellect , much to Kim 's chagrin . 
 = = = Design , personality and abilities = = = 
 Aware of what does and does not work in television animation , Schooley and McCorkle knew that Kim needed to be a physically attractive character . Kim 's appearance evolved dramatically over the course of three months . The character was originally designed to look like " a pretty standard @-@ looking athletic blonde " , which was gradually changed in favor of a more distinctive appearance . At one point , Kim 's design was based on that of video game character Lara Croft from Tomb Raider . However , the Disney Channel eventually determined that Lara " is ... not a very real character . " Finally , the creators decided to give Kim a more realistic appearance akin to that of a 14 @-@ year @-@ old girl as opposed to a bombshell , concluding , " She has a nice , very appealing design , but we just wanted to keep it out of that realm of video game heroine . " The creators admitted that Kim would have been their " dream girl " in high school , joking , " She would have been way out of our class though . " Director Chris Baily wanted Kim to be designed with " graphic sensibilities " similar to those of the show 's backgrounds , creating a 3D character " whose feet can be planted on the ground and communicate a sense of space . " For example , when the character is dressed in all @-@ black , Kim was drawn without a white outline so that she virtually disappears when she moves in front of a black background , yet her " simple design " and flesh allows audiences to " fill in where her body is " naturally . The show 's female characters are the only characters drawn with lips , only the upper of which is visible . Describing Kim as " a mostly graphic heroine " , Animation : A World History : Volume III : Contemporary Times author <unk> Bendazzi agreed that the character 's " limited animation " was intentional . In the fourth season , the character 's signature crop top and cargo pants are replaced by a T @-@ shirt and pants because the former outfit was damaged during a fight with Shego . Kim was animated by Rough Draft Korea . 
 The creators wanted to make Kim as believable as possible . Schooley 's and McCorkle 's own daughters inspired them to conceive Kim as a " character with dimension ... that girls could watch and appreciate . " McCorkle was quick in deciding very early on that Kim does not belong to a spy organization , nor does she possess any superpowers . Although admitting that the character 's accomplishments are generally " implausible , " Schooley and McCorkle wanted Kim to remain relatable to young viewers , and avoided making her " impervious " like superheroes by giving her " real problems and teen issues . " McCorkle described Kim as " incredibly competent in the action world but challenged in the real world by all the things we all have trouble with " , including embarrassment , school work and family . Schooley explained that " What makes Kim effective in the action world is gymnastics , cheerleading , physical activity , something that any kid , any girl , in the world could do . " Additionally , the character is skilled in 17 different types of kung fu . Elaborating on her role in the pilot , Schooley believes that " Kim 's mix of tenacity , intelligence and heart makes for a very strong female role model for kids , " however , " Sure she can save the world , but that doesn 't help her a bit when she comes face @-@ to @-@ face with her latest school crush . " Furthermore , the writers envisioned the character having her own website and hand @-@ held communicator – named the " Kimmunicator " after the character – with video chat , both of which were considered revolutionary back in 2000 , a time when few young people owned cellphones . Kim 's use of advanced technology represents her ability to " effortlessly hop around the world and get back in time for dinner . Which is pretty unrealistic , but it ’ s what kids can do on the internet now . They can talk to somebody anywhere " . 
 " Ms. Possible , when not solving the typical dilemmas facing high school youth , faced off against a bevy of ( occasionally competent ) do @-@ <unk> using her smarts , courage , acrobatic martial @-@ arts skills and sundry cool gadgets . Kim , Ron and Rufus spring into action when alerted by Wade , a comrade of comparable age who somehow manipulates a computer surveillance system the Pentagon might envy . <unk> it may not be , but popular it surely is . " 
 Kim 's main goal in the series is simply to help those in need regardless of money or rewards , which Schooley and McCorkle deliberately instilled in the character 's personality . One of her trademark gags involves her thanking people for providing her with transportation , to which they respond " No , thank you , for saving us " . Although primarily writers , Schooley and McCorkle remained thoroughly involved in determining the overall appearance of the series , as well as the design of its characters . However , they accredit the majority of the series ' aesthetics to season one director Chris Baily and artistic director Alan <unk> . Cartoonist Stephen Silver served as a character animator on the show . 
 = = = Voice = = = 
 Kim is voiced by American actress Christy Carlson Romano , who was only 16 years old when she was first cast as the character . The titular role was originally offered to actress Anneliese van der Pol , who turned it down in favor of co @-@ starring as Chelsea Daniels in the Disney Channel Original Series That 's so Raven . Before being cast as Kim , Romano had already been well @-@ known for starring as Ren Stevens in the Disney Channel sitcom Even Stevens . The actress was finally introduced to the show 's creators by Disney Channel executives after Schooley and McCorkle had already auditioned several people for the role . According to McCorkle , Romano " nailed " her audition , which he described as " just fantastic . " 
 Kim was Romano 's first voice @-@ acting role . Upon being cast as Kim , Romano immediately identified with the character because they were " both dealing with teenage issues " at the time . During the show 's first season , Romano and the rest of the Kim Possible cast recorded at different locations . Like her character , Romano also balanced her acting profession with schoolwork , and agreed that they are both confident in their endeavors . Because the actress was enrolled in high school in New York at the time , she was often required to participate in cast meetings and table reads via telephone ; Romano was actually unable to attend her own senior prom because she was working on Kim Possible . Occasionally , the actress herself would serve as creative inspiration for the writers ; one episode in particular , " Blush " , was based on the fact that Romano is a shy and easily embarrassed person who tends to " blush at even the slightest compliment / awkward situation . " The writers also gave Kim several interests that are similar to Romano 's own . Schooley enthused that the actress " add [ s ] something to [ her character ] that makes it more than a typical gag @-@ oriented cartoon " , crediting both her and co @-@ star Will Friedle , voice of Ron , among reasons fans connected with the characters . 
 Romano described Kim as a " very ambitious , very skilled , very smart " character , and attempted to make her as much of a role model as possible . The actress also described the character as " a really confident , sweet girl who everybody loves . And she is a heroine who little girls look up to . ... She is a typical role model , perfect in every way . How could you not like Kim ? " Romano initially doubted that the show would be successful , but eventually admitted that " the animation was great and the writing was amazing . It 's done so that kids and adults can enjoy it ; families can share an amazing experience together . " Additionally , Romano 's character greatly influenced her own career , and considers Kim to be a positive role model for young girls . Romano identified the season one episode " Mind Games " in which Kim and Ron switch bodies as her favorite . By the end of the series , Romano was 21 years old and attending Columbia University for political science . Kim 's final line in the series is " <unk> ... huh ? " , which Romano recorded tearfully due to the series ending . Writing for 7M Pictures , Kevin Carr considered the fact that Kim is only a voice @-@ acted role beneficial to the series because " they could always get someone else to mimic her original voice " should Romano depart , unlike Lizzie McGuire 's Hilary Duff . 
 = = Characterization and themes = = 
 A pun , the character 's name " Kim Possible " alludes to the word " impossible " . Kim is referred to by several nicknames by various characters throughout the series , including K.P. ( Ron ) ; Kimmy Cub ( James ) ; K , Miss Perfect , Tin Teeth ( Bonnie ) ; Princess , Pumpkin , Cupcake , Miss <unk> , Miss <unk> ( Shego ) ; and Kimmie by miscellaneous . Unlike traditional superheroes and secret agents , Kim lacks a secret identity ; the character is known simply as " Kim Possible , and everyone who knows her knows what she does . " Kadeen Griffiths of Bustle observed that Kim " never put on spandex or acquired a secret identity ; instead , she had her own website where people could book her for jobs with a tagline that promised that she could do anything " , a claim reinforced by the fact that she is capable of fighting crime while continuing to perform well in high school and remaining captain of her school 's cheerleading squad . Writing for Women Write About Comics , Jamie Kingston observed that Middleton High School " ignores her as a heroine unless something happens on school grounds where she has to do her thing . " Thus , Kim rarely receives attention for her work from her family and peers , although her customers remain extremely grateful . However , while describing Kim as a " power fantasy " , Stealing <unk> believes that Kim is simply " preventing regime change " and " Preserving the status quo rather than doing any real world saving . " According to Metacritic , Kim " is stubborn , strong @-@ willed , and has a fuse shorter than a grenade with a three second delay " but remains " extremely humble , refusing to take credit for her truly amazing actions . " Meanwhile , David Horiuchi of Amazon.com wrote that the character is " tough , witty , and refreshingly free of any saucy teen attitude . " 
 UGO.com described Kim as a " cheery and upbeat " character who " settl [ es ] for nothing less than excellence " . Described as a " goody @-@ goody , " Kim is also a perfectionist . Despite her high school popularity – the character is the second most popular girl at Middleton High School , behind rival Bonnie <unk> – Kim is not stuck up and remains very much devoted to her academics , being a straight @-@ A student . However , her reputation as " a brainiac " does not harm her popularity . The character 's intellect counters negative stereotypes commonly associated with cheerleaders ; she often incorporates her cheerleading routines into battle . Meanwhile Bonnie , who is described as " Kim 's polar opposite " , is depicted as " a typical cheerleader " , reflecting what Kim " could have become " . A running gag , Bonnie constantly complains about Kim 's tardiness for cheerleading practice due to her tasking job . Described by Tracey <unk> of PopMatters as " clever , as well as graceful and physically fit " , the character also disproves the belief that brawn is superior to brains in battle . However , Kim is not a tomboy , and exhibits personality traits and interests typically associated with teenage girls , including shopping and <unk> over popular trends . Flawed , the character also has a tendency to come off as judgmental , jealous and overly competitive at times . Her best female friend Monique represents " Kim ’ s bridge between the world of super @-@ spy , superhero action , and the world of high school , and stuff teen girls care about " , keeping the character " grounded " . Despite her confidence as a young woman , Kim remains very much concerned about her love life , which is sometimes treated as one of her weaknesses . Mike McDaniel of the Houston Chronicle joked that " Nothing 's impossible with Kim Possible -- except maybe landing a date . " Feminist Fairytales observed that Kim " contain [ s ] a [ w ] ide range of differences in one person " . Much of the character 's dialogue consists of " not @-@ so @-@ typical teen slang " including " So not the drama " and " No big " , as well as her signature catchphrase " What 's the <unk> ? " . 
 Kim 's unconventional relationship with her inept , unpopular best friend Ron ultimately unveils the best in both characters , " with Kim keeping Ron out of trouble and Ron keeping Kim from over @-@ stressing . " Kim Possible : A <unk> in Time further demonstrates how much Kim actually depends on Ron . Ron helps remove negative qualities from Kim that would otherwise cause others to perceive the character as a " bitch " . Reminiscent of the romantic comedy When Harry Met Sally ( 1989 ) , their relationship heavily explores the idea of the friend zone , as Kim and Ron remain platonic friends for the majority of the series , although their romantic interests in each other is hinted at throughout , more @-@ so Ron 's feelings for Kim . While Kim has been jealous of Ron 's girlfriends at times , Ron values their friendship too much to jeopardize it by confessing his true feelings for her until the third season , at the end of which they finally start dating . Sarah Freymiller of Bustle described Ron as " the Joker to [ Kim 's ] Batman ; he is the intelligent , kind chaos in her highly @-@ organized life . " Meanwhile , Priya Krishna of BuzzFeed observed , " At the end of the day , Kim needs Ron , and Ron is always there for her and never feels emasculated by the fact his friend / girlfriend is clearly better than him at everything . " 
 Kim was among several fictional characters and pop culture icons to debut towards the " end of the ' Girl Power ' era " and third @-@ wave feminism . Thus , some critics perceive the character as a combination of Buffy Summers from Buffy the Vampire Slayer , Sydney Bristow from Alias , and The Powerpuff Girls . As an animated series , Kim Possible was revolutionary for its diverse cast of strong female characters , namely Kim and Shego . Many of the character 's typically " girly " belongings double as powerful weapons , namely her lip gloss and compact mirror . In his book Dangerous Curves : Action Heroines , Gender , Fetishism , and Popular Culture , author Jeffrey A. Brown believes that " Kim may be the epitome of a Girl Power @-@ derived heroine " , while reinforcing " that there is a lot to be learned from female elders . " Like Kim herself , her grandmother Nana Possible also fought crime when she was young , from whom Kim is believed to have inherited her abilities . Kim 's entire family is very intelligent , and constantly reiterate the phrase " anything is possible for a Possible " . Therefore , the character is spared " the burden of being the only brain on the show . " The character 's relationship with her parents is atypically healthy for a teenager . Kim 's father James " views women as equals " , and thus has a good relationship with Kim although he struggles to come to terms with the reality that she is growing up and dating . Her mother Ann is essentially a " grown up " version of Kim . At one point , Ann insists that Kim invite her on one of her missions as her Mother 's Day present , and Kim also admits to being impressed by her mother 's work as a brain surgeon . The <unk> observed that Kim and Shego are strikingly similar in appearance . <unk> believes that Shego is essentially " Kim 's dark reflection . " Both characters are smart , athletic and attractive with green eyes , but Shego chooses to use her powers for evil instead . According to Metacritic , Kim 's " fiery " red hair symbolizes " her attitude that is best summed up by the phrase , ' I can do anything . ' " The character is infamous for her puppy dog pout , which she often uses to get her way . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 Kim Possible was very successful , running for a total of five years from June 7 , 2002 to September 7 , 2007 and spanning four seasons , becoming the longest @-@ running Disney Channel Original Series until eventually being surpassed by Phineas and Ferb . The series comprised 84 episodes , with Kim starring in each one . Kim also made an appearance in the Lilo & Stitch : The Series crossover episode " Rufus " . 
 = = = Epcot theme park attraction = = = 
 In 2009 , a theme park attraction entitled the Kim Possible World Showcase Adventure premiered at Walt Disney World 's Epcot . Upon arrival , visitors were allowed to partake in an alternate reality game ( ARG ) inspired by the television series in which they entered into the world of Kim Possible and ventured on a " high @-@ tech scavenger hunt " in a simulated country of their choice . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Kim has garnered very positive reviews from entertainment critics . Jacqueline Cutler of the Sun @-@ Sentinel hailed the character as " as close to a role model as an animated cheerleader trying to save the world can be . " Similarly , Rob Owen of the Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette joked , " Though a heroine who dresses like Britney Spears ... Kim 's got the same insecurities as all adolescents , making her a character kids will identify with " , while comparing the character to Buffy Summers from Buffy the Vampire Slayer and Sydney Bristow from Alias . Tracey <unk> of PopMatters believes that the show 's " merit lies primarily in heroine Kim Possible " , observing that she is a " more self @-@ assured " character than both Buffy and Sydney . Levi Buchanan of IGN described Kim as a " well @-@ flashed out " character . Scott D. Pierce of the Deseret News dubbed Kim " a teenage Powerpuff Girl " , while Betsy Wallace of Common Sense Media also drew further similarities between the character and The Powerpuff Girls , as well as Buffy and Sydney . In review of the film Kim Possible : So the Drama , the premiere of which was originally intended to conclude the series , David Horiuchi of Amazon.com praised Kim as " a teen heroine that appeals to both youngsters and <unk> " , citing the character among several other reasons the show will be missed . Meanwhile , reviewing the film Kim Possible : The Secret Files , Horiuchi described Kim as " An Alias @-@ type heroine for the tween @-@ age set " whose " school @-@ girl awkwardness can prove appealing to grown @-@ up kids as well . " Netflix crowned Kim the " ultimate crime @-@ fighting teenager " . 
 Writing for The Huffington Post , Carly <unk> credited Kim with teaching the importance of maintaining a healthy work @-@ life balance : " She paid an appropriate amount of attention to her schoolwork , and worked hard , but didn 't slave over it to the extent that she didn 't have any time left to save the world . " The character has also received positive attention from feminist critics ; in her article " 12 Life Lessons ' Kim Possible ' Taught Us That Are Still Pretty Relevant " , Kadeen Griffiths of Bustle described Kim as an " amazingly feminist " character " that taught girls that it was okay to overachieve , that worrying about boys didn 't make you any less of a hero , and that you could invent your own slang and still sound ( sort of ) cool . " Griffiths went on to hail the character as " our cartoon idol when it came to reaching for the stars and pulling it off flawlessly " , concluding , " at the end of the day Kim Possible could do anything . And so can all of us . " BuzzFeed ranked Kim ninth on its list of " 17 Characters From Your Childhood That Were More Feminist Than You Remember " , with author Ellie Bate crediting the character with " break [ ing ] the sexist stereotype that all cheerleaders are nothing but bimbos " . Bustle writer Sarah Freymiller agreed that " Kim offers a model for femininity that both bolsters and works against the typical ' high school cheerleader ' stereotype . " Pride ranked Kim 11th on its list of " 13 Cartoon Characters Who <unk> Gender Stereotypes " . In her article " Power feminism , mediated : Girl power and the commercial politics of change " , Rebecca C. Hains of Salem State College cited Kim among several " strong powerful girl [ television ] heroes " who are responsible for " breaking the mold by placing girls at the center of narratives with active agency and unfettered power " during the early 2000s . MTV compared the character to American spy Virginia Hall in their article " 9 Cartoon Feminists Who Remind Us of Real @-@ life Badass Women " . While ranking Kim Possible : So the Drama the 12th most feminist Disney Channel Original Movie , Priya Krishna of BuzzFeed described Kim as " obviously great " . Comparing Kim to comic book superheroine Wonder Woman , Kathryn Shattuck of The New York Times wrote , " MOVE over , boy wonders . The newest superhero on the block doesn 't need a gimmicky mask or a jolt of testosterone to get the job done ... Kim Possible is ready and able to rescue humankind from evildoers without sacrificing her interest in boys and clothes . " However , in her book <unk> : Betrayal and Rejection , author Lyn Mikel Brown dismissed Kim as both a feminist and role model because of her alleged reliance on Ron 's intelligence , as well as the observation that " Her biggest threat is not evil , in fact , but the head cheerleader " . Since her debut , Kim has proven herself a popular character among both girls and boys , although McCorkle admitted that " whenever you have a girl in the lead doing all the action stuff , there ’ s a certain age group of boys who won ’ t admit they like the stuff . They really want to see the boy in that role . " McCorkle recalled an incident in which a fan of the show was very much surprised to learn that the writers were actually men upon meeting them ; the fan had always just assumed that they were both young women because of the way in which they characterized Kim . 
 MTV 's Deepa <unk> predicted that Kim " will live on in our hearts forever " . UGO.com ranked Kim 59th on the website 's list of the 75 " hottest " animated characters , hailing her as the " Disney Channel queen " . In 2015 , MTV published an article entitled " 13 Reasons Kim Possible is the Only Role Model You Need " , citing the character 's " great friends , a great boyfriend and a kick @-@ ass career " . In Oh My Disney 's article " Why We Want To Be Kim Possible " , the character was hailed as " the best " because " Who else could be a straight @-@ A student , captain of the cheerleading team , AND protect the world from bad guys ? The answer is no one , because she ’ s Kim <unk> @-@ ib @-@ le . " The same website also included the character in its article " Disney Redheads : An Appreciation Post " . Kim is also regarded as a fashion trendsetter , with Charmaine Simmons of Bustle crediting the character with popularizing " all of the stylish looks that we never knew we 'd be in love with over 10 years later " , including crop tops , cargo pants and bodysuits . Also writing for Bustle , Sarah Freymiller penned , " Her commitment to action is notable , even if she never wears a shirt longer than mid @-@ lung , and she fights crime in her cheerleader uniform when she needs to . " Freymiller concluded , " In the early 2000s , as Limited Too dominated the tween fashion scene , it was refreshing to see a girl decked out in functional black and army green attire . " The character 's Kimmunicator ringtone is commonly associated with the series , and is also frequently imitated by fans . The Kimmunicator 's inception preceded the creation of smartphones by several years . Upon Apple 's release of the Apple Watch , several critics drew similarities between the real @-@ life device and the Kimmunicator , especially when Kim 's device was downsized to a wristwatch during the final season . 
 = Ron Hamence with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 = 
 Ron Hamence was a member of Donald Bradman 's famous Australian cricket team of 1948 , which toured England and was undefeated in its 34 matches . As a result of this unprecedented feat by a Test side touring England , the team earned the nickname The Invincibles . 
 A right @-@ handed middle @-@ order batsman , Hamence was not instrumental in the team 's success . Regarded as the last batsman to be chosen for the team , his selection was the subject of controversy because many batsmen who had scored more runs in the preceding Australian season had been overlooked . Hamence and Colin McCool were the only squad members who did not play a Test on tour . Hamence was used in non @-@ Test tour matches so that the leading batsmen could conserve energy for the Tests , as play was scheduled for six days a week . Along with Doug Ring , Hamence and McCool called themselves " ground staff " because of their scant playing duties in the major matches , and they often created and sang ironic songs about their lack of opportunities . Bradman was reluctant to risk the team 's unbeaten record and as a result , Hamence did not receive many opportunities to bat high in the order , something that was the subject of criticism . 
 Hamence scored 582 runs at a batting average of 32 @.@ 33 , with a top @-@ score of 99 . He was the only frontline Australian batsman not to score a century . The remaining eight frontline batsmen each scored at least 973 runs and all averaged no less than 47 @.@ 30 . Hamence also occasionally opened the bowling in the tour matches with his gentle medium pace , allowing the team 's leading bowlers to recuperate between Tests . 
 = = Background = = 
 During the preceding 1947 – 48 season in Australia , Hamence was dropped from the national team . He had played sporadically in the Test team , being selected in three of the ten matches in the previous two seasons . In those three Tests he scored a total of 81 runs at an average of 27 @.@ 00 . Returning to domestic cricket following his omission , Hamence scored 85 and 66 against Queensland , a performance which kept him in the running for a place in the national team . His selection for the 1948 tour of England under Bradman was the subject of considerable controversy , as many other batsmen were overlooked despite being more productive during the Australian summer . For his part , Bradman described his middle @-@ order — Hamence among them — as " an array of batsmen who could scarcely fail " . From the start , Hamence was on the outer with regards to selection in the Tests . He was not selected for any of the Tests during the English campaign , but in a 2008 interview , emphasised that he felt no resentment over his omission . Hamence was a popular member of the touring party and his cheerful nature and splendid tenor voice added to the good spirits of the team . His roommate during the tour was the seamer Ernie Toshack . 
 = = Early tour = = 
 Australia traditionally fielded its first @-@ choice team in the tour opener , which was customarily against Worcestershire . Being a fringe member of the squad and having made only sporadic Test appearances in previous seasons , Hamence was not selected . Australia promptly crushed the hosts by an innings . 
 Hamence made his debut on English soil in the second tour match against Leicestershire . Batting at No. 6 , he came in at 4 / 344 and made only seven . His dismissal triggered a collapse of 5 / 38 as Australia were bowled out for 448 before winning by an innings . The next match against Yorkshire , on a damp pitch that suited slower bowling , was the closest Australia came to defeat on the tour . Batting at No. 4 , Hamence made 12 in the first innings as Australia replied to Yorkshire 's 71 with 101 . He batted slowly , coming in at 2 / 24 before departing at 7 / 74 . After Australia dismissed the hosts for 89 in their second innings , Australia collapsed to 3 / 13 in pursuit of 60 for victory . Hamence came in and scored one before he was run out after being slow to set off for a quick single ; Australia collapsed to 6 / 31 . To make matters worse , Sam Loxton was injured and could not bat , so Australia effectively had only three wickets in hand and faced their first loss to an English county since 1912 . However , Australia scraped home by four wickets after a counterattack by Neil Harvey and Don Tallon , aided by a dropped catch and missed stumping . 
 Hamence was rested as the Australians travelled to London to defeat Surrey at The Oval by an innings . He returned for the next match against Cambridge University . Elevated to No. 3 by stand @-@ in captain Lindsay Hassett , Hamence came in at 1 / 64 and put on a partnership of 176 with Bill Brown , ending with 92 as Australia piled on 4 / 414 and won by an innings . Hamence scored mainly from the back foot , and Jack Fingleton opined " a nice innings it was , too , in its neat strokemaking " . Hamence also bowled for the first time on tour , sending down three overs for seven runs in the second innings without taking a wicket . 
 In the following match , Australia crushed Essex by an innings and 451 runs , their largest winning margin for the summer . On the first day , Australia set a world record by scoring 721 , the most first @-@ class runs added in one day . Halfway through the day , at 2 / 364 , all rounder Keith Miller came to the crease . A cavalier and carefree character , Miller resented Bradman 's ruthless attitude towards annihilating the opposition and often refused to try when Australia were in an unassailable position . He deliberately let the ball hit the stumps and was out for a golden duck . Hamence came in and struck 46 , adding 146 runs for the fifth wicket with Sam Loxton . The partnership took only an hour , and Australia went on to win by an innings . Miller later said that one of his reasons for gifting his wicket was to protest the lack of opportunities given to Hamence and other fringe batsmen . Batting at No. 5 in the next match against Oxford University , Hamence made only three as Australia made 431 and proceeded to another innings victory . 
 The next match was against the Marylebone Cricket Club ( MCC ) at Lord 's . The MCC fielded seven players who would represent England in the Tests , N- and were basically a full strength Test team , while Australia fielded their first @-@ choice team . It was a chance to gain a psychological advantage . Given Hamence 's early struggles in the English conditions , which saw him make only 161 runs at 26 @.@ 83 in his first six innings , while all of Australia 's first @-@ choice top six had made centuries , N- he was not selected ; Australia amassed 552 and won by an innings . 
 Recalled for the next match , against Lancashire at Old Trafford in Manchester , Hamence scored two while batting at No. 7 in the first innings and an unbeaten 49 at No. 6 in the second , putting on an unbeaten century partnership with Harvey as the match ended in a draw after the entire first day 's play was lost to rain . His second innings was praised for the aesthetic quality . It was the first match on tour that Australia had failed to win . Hamence was rested for the following match against Nottinghamshire , which was again drawn , before returning against Hampshire . He made five as Australia were dismissed for 117 in reply to the home side 's 195 , the first time the tourists had conceded a first innings lead during the season . He did not get another chance with the bat as Australia recovered to win by eight wickets . 
 Hamence had one last chance to make his case for Test selection in the match against Sussex at Hove , the last county fixture before the First Test at Trent Bridge . He came to the crease at 4 / 453 and made 34 in a stand of 96 with Harvey . His dismissal and Harvey reaching his 100 prompted Australia to declare at 5 / 549 . Bradman said that Hamence was " the unlucky player of the match " and that he was standing on the balcony ready to declare when Hamence fell on the last ball of the over . Australia went on to complete an innings victory . In the second innings , Hamence opened the bowling with Ray Lindwall . He took an early wicket before ending the innings by claiming the last man to fall , a stumping by Ron Saggers standing up to the stumps . 
 = = Test omission = = 
 Since World War II , the first five positions in Australia 's Test batting order had regularly consisted of Arthur Morris , Sid Barnes , Bradman , Hassett and Miller , while the sixth position saw many occupants . All of the first five were selected for the matches against Worcestershire and the MCC , and retained their positions for the First Test . 
 This left one position for the remaining batsmen in the squad . Up to this point , Brown had scored 800 runs on tour at an average of 72 @.@ 72 , with four centuries , and was on his third tour of England . Brown had played in the first @-@ choice team in the matches against Worcestershire and the MCC . Harvey had accumulated 296 runs at 42 @.@ 29 , all rounder Loxton had 310 runs at 51 @.@ 66 , but was injured , while Hamence had made only 251 runs at 27 @.@ 88 and was the only one of the four to not have scored a century . Hamence was overlooked while Brown gained selection in the First Test at Trent Bridge , batting out of position in the middle @-@ order while Barnes and Morris were preferred as the first @-@ choice opening pair , whereas Harvey was dropped despite making a century in Australia 's most recent Test against India . This was the exact situation that had unfolded in the Worcestershire and MCC matches where Australia fielded their first @-@ choice team ; Brown batted in the middle order . Bradman explained the decision in his memoirs : " Hamence was not in good enough form and Harvey scarcely ready " . During the opening stages of the tour , Bradman spent little time talking to Hamence at practice sessions , leading analysts to conclude that the Australian skipper viewed Hamence as being highly unlikely to play in the Tests . Australia went on to defeat England by eight wickets , although Brown struggled and made only 17 . 
 Between Tests , Hamence earned selection for the match against Northamptonshire , batting at No. 4 and scoring 34 ; he partnered acting captain Hassett in a stand of 104 for the third wicket . He took 1 / 11 in the second innings as Australia won by an innings . In the second match before the Second Test , which was against Yorkshire , Hamence made 48 and six not out , and took a total of 1 / 17 as the game ended in a draw . He batted slowly and cautiously ; Bradman gave him few opportunities , so he had to make the most of them . The first innings 48 was a determined performance on a sticky wicket that helped Australia to 249 ; Bradman felt that Hamence 's grit was a notable factor in Australia managing to pass 200 . Harvey made 49 and 56 while Brown made 19 and 113 as an opener . This was enough for Brown to retain his middle @-@ order position for the Second Test at Lord 's , where Australia fielded an unchanged team . Australia went on to a crushing win by 409 runs but Brown made only 24 and 32 . 
 The next match was against Surrey and started the day after the Second Test . As the Test players were tired , Bradman gave them a lighter workload and assigned Hamence and Loxton to open the bowling . Both took two wickets and Hamence snared opposing captain Laurie Fishlock and Eric Bedser to end with 2 / 24 . Brown injured a finger while fielding , so he was not able to bat in Australia 's first innings . Hamence was thus elevated to open the batting . Hamence made a duck , but Australia nevertheless took a 168 @-@ run lead . Hamence opened the bowling for the second time , although he was unable to take a wicket and ended with 0 / 30 . In the second innings , Harvey volunteered to play as a makeshift opener alongside Loxton and they chased down the 122 runs for victory in less than an hour to complete a 10 @-@ wicket win . 
 For the following match against Gloucestershire before the Third Test , Brown and Hamence did not play . Harvey made 95 and Loxton ended on 159 not out as Australia reached 7 / 774 declared , its highest of the tour , underpinning an innings victory . As a result of the performance , Loxton seized Brown 's middle @-@ order position for the Third Test at Old Trafford . 
 During the drawn Third Test , opening batsman Sid Barnes was injured . This opened up a vacancy for the Fourth Test . Hamence made 30 as Australia defeated Middlesex by ten wickets in their only county match before the Fourth Test at Headingley . Hamence was overlooked for the vacancy as Harvey was called in . Australia scored 3 / 404 to set a world record for the highest successful Test run chase ; Harvey scored a century . 
 Immediately after the Test , Hamence made 21 at No. 6 as Australia amassed 456 and defeated Derbyshire by an innings . In the next match against Glamorgan , Hamence was yet to bat when rain ended the match at 3 / 215 in Australia 's first innings . He was rested as Australia defeated Warwickshire by nine wickets . Hamence was recalled as Australia faced and drew with Lancashire for the second time on the tour . He made 14 in the first innings and was unbeaten on 10 in the second when Australia declared , having batted at No. 5 both times . In the last match before the Fifth Test , a non @-@ first @-@ class fixture against Durham , Hamence scored 24 batting at No. 6 in Australia 's 282 . The match was a rain @-@ affected draw that did not reach the second innings . Hamence was overlooked for the Fifth Test , as Australia won by an innings to seal the series 4 – 0 ; the drawn Third Test was Australia 's only non @-@ victory . 
 = = Later tour matches = = 
 Seven matches remained on Bradman 's quest to go through a tour of England without defeat . Australia batted first against Kent and Hamence made 38 . Hamence was the ninth man to fall as partners ran out and Australia lost their last seven wickets for 89 to end at 361 . Despite this , they completed an innings victory . In the next match against the Gentlemen of England , Hamence batted at No. 7 and only had a limited opportunity to contribute , coming in at 5 / 532 and scoring 24 before Bradman declared at 5 / 610 when Hassett reached 200 . Hamence bowled in both innings for a total of 1 / 41 as Australia won by an innings . In the next match against Somerset , Hamence put on 195 for the fifth wicket with Ian Johnson to take Australia to 4 / 501 with his score on 99 . The other batsmen had all made centuries , and the Australian players were keen to see Hamence do the same . With his score on 99 , the rest of the team left their card games in readiness to applaud his impending milestone . However , Hamence hit two balls from the middle of the bat , only to see them travel directly to the fielder , yielding no runs . Anxious to reach his century , Hamence then charged down the pitch and was then stumped for 99 , his highest score for the season . According to Bradman , Hamence " fell to what everyone said was the best ball all day " . Nevertheless , Australia won by an innings and 374 runs . In the following match against the South of England , Hamence made seven as Australia declared at 7 / 522 . The match was washed out ; Hamence bowled three overs without success in the hosts ' only innings . 
 Australia 's biggest challenge in the post @-@ Test tour matches was the fixture against Leveson @-@ Gower 's XI . During the last tour in 1938 , this team was effectively a full @-@ strength England outfit , but this time Bradman insisted that only six players currently in England 's Test team be allowed to play for the hosts . Bradman then fielded a full @-@ strength team , so Hamence was left out . Australia led by 312 on the first innings and were well in control , but the match ended in a draw after multiple rain delays . The tour ended with two non @-@ first @-@ class matches against Scotland . Hamence batted once in each match , scoring six and 15 as Australia ended the tour with two innings victories . 
 = = Role = = 
 During the tour , Hamence played 19 first @-@ class matches and scored 582 runs at an average of 32 @.@ 33 . An occasional bowler who delivered 56 @.@ 3 overs of medium pace during the tour , he took seven wickets at 21 @.@ 42 and completed nine catches . He was the most successful of the specialist batsmen with the ball , occasionally opening the bowling in the tour matches , such as in both innings of the second match against Surrey and the second innings of the second match against Yorkshire . This allowed Bradman to rest his first @-@ choice bowlers to keep them fresh for the Tests . Hamence 's primary role was to allow the leading batsmen an opportunity to conserve energy for the Tests ; the Australians generally had six days of play scheduled every week . In most of the matches , Hamence batted in the middle order at Nos. 5 , 6 and 7.N- Along with Loxton , he was given 22 first @-@ class opportunities with the bat , whereas the other eight frontline batsmen had at least 26 innings . Loxton scored 973 runs , while the others all scored more than 1 @,@ 000 . All of the batsmen other than Loxton averaged at least 47 @.@ 30 @.@ and as Australia won many of their matches by an innings or by eight or more wickets , he seldom batted in the second innings . On four occasions , he was unbeaten when Australia either declared , reached their target or time ran out . 
 Teammate Sid Barnes criticised the omission of Hamence from much meaningful cricket on the tour . Referring to the match against the Gentlemen of England , Barnes criticised the fact that Bradman , Hassett and himself all made centuries , while Hamence was only given a short innings in the lower order and was not out on 24 when Australia declared . As the tourists were already in a strong position , Barnes reasoned that Hamence " could have been sent in [ at ] first wicket down , where he batted with his interstate team ... Despite this , Hassett still went in before Hamence in the next game , against Somerset ... Hamence batted No. 6 ... but he should have been sent in No. 3 . " 
 Barnes reported that Hamence , along with the other frequent omissions Colin McCool and Doug Ring , termed themselves the " ground staff " . He added : " In the dressing room during county games they would break out into ironic song about the few chances they got . " Loxton reported that these songs included the " odd risque limerick " . Bradman did later state that " because of the strong array of batsman ahead of him , [ Hamence ] seldom had an opportunity to make big scores " but " was an extremely useful reserve who could have been played in the Tests with confidence " . Following the 1948 tour , Bradman described Hamence as " a fine batsman of the strictly orthodox type . Very sound and reliable with his game based on driving " and a " very safe fieldsman " . Bradman added that Hamence had few opportunities because of Australia 's batting strength but " always batted well and often at a critical moment made valuable runs " . Bradman said that Hamence " could have been played in the Tests with confidence " and praised his contributions to team morale . Fingleton said " there was criticism of his selection in this side , but had the war not intervened he undoubtedly would have made a [ n ] [ Ashes ] trip before " . 
 = = = Statistical notes = = = 
 = = = General notes = = = 
 = Eurasian nuthatch = 
 The Eurasian nuthatch or wood nuthatch ( Sitta europaea ) is a small passerine bird found throughout temperate Asia and in Europe , where its name is the nuthatch . Like other nuthatches , it is a short @-@ tailed bird with a long bill , blue @-@ grey upperparts and a black eye @-@ stripe . It is a vocal bird with a repeated loud <unk> call . There are more than 20 subspecies in three main groups ; birds in the west of the range have orange @-@ buff underparts and a white throat , those in Russia have whitish underparts , and those in the Far East have a similar appearance to European birds , but lack the white throat . 
 The preferred habitat is mature deciduous or mixed woodland with large , old trees , preferably oak . Pairs hold permanent territories , and nest in tree holes , usually old woodpecker nests , but sometimes natural cavities . If the entrance to the hole is too large , the female plasters it with mud to reduce its size , and often coats the inside of the cavity too . The 6 – 9 red @-@ speckled white eggs are laid on a deep base of pine or other wood chips . 
 The Eurasian nuthatch eats mainly insects , particularly caterpillars and beetles , although in autumn and winter its diet is supplemented with nuts and seeds . The young are fed mainly on insects , with some seeds , food items mainly being found on tree trunks and large branches . The nuthatch can forage when descending trees head first , as well as when climbing . It readily visits bird tables , eating fatty man @-@ made food items as well as seeds . It is an inveterate <unk> , storing food year @-@ round . Its main natural predator is the Eurasian sparrowhawk . 
 Fragmentation of woodland can lead to local losses of breeding birds , but the species ' range is still expanding . It has a large population and huge breeding area , and is therefore classified by the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) as being of least concern . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The nuthatches are a family of similar @-@ looking birds with short tails and wings , compact bodies and longish pointed bills . They have grey or bluish upperparts , a black eyestripe and strong feet . All are in the single genus Sitta . Within the genus , the Eurasian nuthatch forms a superspecies with the chestnut @-@ vented , Indian , chestnut @-@ bellied and Kashmir nuthatches and has in the past been considered conspecific with all of these . 
 The Eurasian nuthatch was described by Linnaeus in his Systema naturae in 1758 under its current scientific name . Sitta is derived from the Ancient Greek name for this bird , σιττη , sittē , and the species name , europaea , is Latin for " European " . " Nuthatch " , first recorded in 1350 , is derived from " nut " and a word probably related to " hack " , since these birds hack at nuts they have wedged into crevices . 
 The fossil record for nuthatches is sparse , and in Europe is limited to the extinct Sitta <unk> from the Lower Miocene in Italy and somewhat later material from France ; the family appears to be of relatively recent origin . 
 = = = Subspecies = = = 
 There are more than 20 subspecies , but the precise number is disputed . These taxa can be divided into three main groups ; these may have been geographically isolated from each other until relatively recently . Birds of intermediate appearance occur where the group ranges overlap . 
 The large , white @-@ breasted S. e. arctica of north east Siberia is distinctive in appearance and genetically , and may be another subspecies group or even a separate species . 
 = = Description = = 
 The adult male of the nominate subspecies , S. e. europaea is 14 cm ( 5 @.@ 5 in ) long with a 22 @.@ 5 – 27 cm ( 8 @.@ 9 – 10 @.@ 6 in ) wingspan . It weighs 17 – 28 g ( 0 @.@ 6 – 1 oz ) . It has blue @-@ grey upperparts , a black eye @-@ stripe and whitish throat and underparts . The flanks and lower belly are orange @-@ red , mottled with white on the undertail . The stout bill is dark grey with a paler area on the base of the lower mandible , the iris is dark brown and the legs and feet are pale brown or greyish . Most other members of the S. e. europaea group differ only in detail from the nominate form , often with respect to the hue of the underparts , but S. e. arctica is quite distinctive . It is large , pale , has a white forehead and a reduced eye @-@ stripe , and it has more white in the tail and wings than any other subspecies . Nuthatches move on trees with short leaps , and do not use their tails for support . In flight , they have a characteristic appearance , with a pointed head , round wings and a short , square tail . Their flight is fast , with wings closed between beats , and is usually of short duration . 
 S. e. caesia , the most widespread of the western subspecies , has orange @-@ buff underparts except for a white throat and cheeks . The other western forms mainly differ in the exact shade of the underparts , although some southeastern forms also show a white forehead and supercilium . S. e. sinensis and S. e. <unk> , of China and Taiwan respectively , have buff underparts like the western races , but have buff , instead of white , throats . 
 The female is similar in appearance to the male , but may be identified by her slightly paler upperparts , a browner eyestripe and a more washed @-@ out tone to the flanks and lower belly . In the eastern form , S. e. asiatica , some males have buff underparts like the female , and birds with this appearance are difficult to sex in the field . Young birds resemble the female , although their plumage is duller and they have paler legs . Individuals can be reliably sexed as female from about 12 days old by their paler and buffer flanks , or , in some white @-@ breasted subspecies , by the creamier hue of their underparts . 
 Adults have a complete moult after breeding which takes about 80 days , starting from late May onwards and finishing by late September . The moult period for Siberian birds is more compressed , running from June to mid @-@ September . Fledged juveniles moult some of their wing coverts when they are about eight weeks old . 
 In much of its range , Eurasian is the only nuthatch present . In southeast Europe and southwest Asia , the western and eastern rock nuthatches are larger and paler than the Eurasian species . They also lack white spots in the tail and are usually found in a different , stony habitat , and Krüper 's nuthatch is small and has a black cap and reddish breast patch . In southwest China , the chestnut @-@ vented nuthatch is very similar to the European bird , but is darker above , has less white on the face and has greyer underparts . 
 = = = Voice = = = 
 The Eurasian nuthatch calls frequently , usually with a loud , sharp <unk> normally repeated twice , sometimes more often if excited . It has a shrill <unk> or tsi @-@ si @-@ si alarm call , and a thin tsit pre @-@ flight call . The song is a slow whistled pee @-@ pee @-@ pee with many variants , including a faster version , and may be intermingled with the call . 
 The song of the distinctive S. e. arctica is said to be noticeably different from that of its relatives , which would help to establish whether it is a full species , but there has been insufficient research into its vocalizations . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The Eurasian nuthatch 's breeding range extends across temperate Eurasia from Great Britain ( but not Ireland ) to Japan . It is found between the 16 – 20 ° C ( 61 – 68 ° F ) July isotherms , north to about latitude 64 ° N in western Russia and 69 ° N in Siberia . It breeds south to the Mediterranean in Europe , although it is absent from the islands , other than Sicily , and in most of Russia the southern boundary is around 54 – 55 ° N. In the east , the range includes most of China and Taiwan and much of Korea . It has occurred as a vagrant in Lebanon and the Channel Islands , and the nominate race has been recorded a few times in Finland where S. e. asiatica is the normal form . 
 Most populations are sedentary , apart from some post @-@ breeding dispersal of young birds , and there is a reluctance to cross even short stretches of open water . Northern and eastern breeders are dependent on the cones of the Siberian stone pine , and if the crop fails many birds of the S. e. asiatica subspecies may move west into northern Sweden and Finland in autumn , sometimes staying to breed . Siberian S. e. arctica may make more limited movements south and east in winter , and S. e. <unk> , from southeast Russia , is regular in winter in Korea . 
 The preferred habitat is mature woodland with large , old trees , which provide extensive growth for foraging and nesting holes . In Europe , deciduous or mixed forest is favoured , particularly when containing oak . Parks , old orchards and other wooded habitats may be occupied as long as they have at least a 1 ha ( 2 @.@ 5 acres ) block of suitable trees . Particularly in mountains , old spruce and pine forests are used , and pine is also favoured in Taiwan . In most of Russia , conifers are used for nesting , but population densities are relatively low . Moroccan birds nest in oak , Atlas cedar and fir . Unusual habitats include dwarf juniper in Mongolia and rocky terrain in a limited part of southern Siberia . 
 The Eurasian nuthatch is primarily a lowland bird in the north of its range , but reaches the tree @-@ line in Switzerland , at 1 @,@ 200 m ( 3 @,@ 900 ft ) or higher , and breeds occasionally at 1 @,@ 800 – 2 @,@ 100 m ( 5 @,@ 900 – 6 @,@ 900 ft ) in Austria . It breeds at similar levels in the mountains of Turkey , the Middle East and Central Asia . It is mainly a mountain bird in southern Japan , 760 – 2 @,@ 100 m ( 2 @,@ 490 – 6 @,@ 890 ft ) , and Taiwan , 800 – 3 @,@ 300 m ( 2 @,@ 600 – 10 @,@ 800 ft ) , but in southern China , the chestnut @-@ vented nuthatch is the highland species , with the Eurasian species at lower levels . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 Nuthatches are monogamous , and a pair occupies a breeding territory in which it spends the winter as well . Territory sizes range from 2 – 10 ha ( 5 – 25 acres ) in Europe to an average of 30 @.@ 2 ha ( 75 acres ) in the sub @-@ optimal conifer forests of Siberia . The male sings to defend his territory and attract a mate . Both sexes have a courtship display with a floating , quivering flight , and the male will also make circular flights with a spread tail and raised head . He will also feed the female while courting her . Despite the lifelong pairing , genetic research in Germany showed that at least 10 % of the young in the study area were fathered by another male , usually from an adjacent territory . 
 The nest is in a tree cavity , usually an old woodpecker hole , but sometimes of natural origin . Occasionally the female will enlarge an existing hole in rotten wood . The nest site is typically 2 – 20 m ( 7 – 66 ft ) above the ground and has a deep base of pine bark or chips of other wood , rarely supplemented with dry plant material . If the entrance to the hole is too large , it is plastered with mud , clay and sometimes dung to make it smaller . A small entrance and large interior , together with the use of a deep layer of wood chips in which to bury the eggs and small young when the adults leave the nest , may be adaptations to reduce the chance of predation . Nests with small entrance holes are most successful . Locally , a small entrance may make it less likely that the nest will be taken over by common starlings . The female undertakes most of the work , and often plasters the inside of the cavity too , taking up to four weeks to complete the construction . A nest is often re @-@ used in subsequent years . 
 The clutch is usually 6 – 9 red @-@ speckled white eggs , although up to 13 eggs are sometimes laid . They average 19 @.@ 5 mm × 14 @.@ 4 mm ( 0 @.@ 77 in × 0 @.@ 57 in ) and weigh 2 @.@ 3 g ( 0 @.@ 081 oz ) of which 6 % is shell . The female incubates the eggs for 13 – 18 days to hatching , and broods the altricial downy chicks until they fledge 20 – 26 days later . Both adults feed the chicks in the nest and continue after they fledge until they become independent in about 8 – 14 days . Normally only one brood is raised each year . When nest boxes are used , the clutch size and number of fledglings are greater in larger boxes . For reasons that are unclear , there is no link between cavity size and nesting outcomes for natural holes . 
 The sedentary nature of this species means that juveniles can only acquire a territory by finding a vacant area or replacing a dead adult . In Europe , young birds almost always move to unoccupied habitat , but in the larger territories of Siberia most live within the breeding range of an adult pair . 
 The adult annual survival rate across most of the range is around 51 % , and a small Belgian study found a 25 % local survival rate for juveniles . The typical lifespan is two years and the maximum known age for a wild bird is 12 years 11 months in the UK . There is also a Swiss longevity record of a 10 years 6 months . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 The Eurasian nuthatch eats mainly insects , particularly caterpillar and beetles . In autumn and winter , the diet is supplemented with nuts and seeds , hazel nuts and beech mast being preferred . The young are fed mainly on the insects favoured by their parents , with some seeds . Food items are found mainly on tree trunks and large branches , but smaller branches may also be investigated , and food may be taken from the ground , especially outside the breeding season . Nuthatches can forage when descending trees head first , as well as when climbing . Some prey is caught in flight , and a nuthatch will remove bark or rotten wood to reach insects , although it cannot chisel into healthy wood like a woodpecker . A pair may temporarily join a mixed @-@ species foraging flock as it passes near their territory . The Eurasian nuthatch readily visits bird tables and bird feeders in winter , eating human @-@ made food items such as fat , cheese , butter and bread . It has even been recorded as taking slaughterhouse offal . Sizeable hard food items like nuts or large insects are wedged into crevices in tree bark and smashed with the strong bill . 
 Plant food is stored year @-@ round , but mainly in autumn . Individual seeds are hidden in cracks in bark , occasionally in walls or in the ground . The food item is usually concealed with lichen , moss or small pieces of bark . The cached food is retrieved in cold weather . Siberian birds store the seeds of the Siberian stone pine , sometimes hoarding enough to last a whole year . <unk> food may sometimes include non @-@ plant material such as pieces of bread , caterpillars and grubs , the larvae being incapacitated by battering . <unk> is a long @-@ term strategy , stored food items only being consumed when fresh food is hard to find , sometimes up to three months after caching . Birds with good stored food supplies are fitter that those with more limited resources . Beech mast crops vary widely from year to year . Where beech mast is an important part of the diet , adult survival rates are largely unaffected in years with a poor mast crop , but the number of juvenile birds falls in the autumn as they are lost through starvation or emigration . In areas where common hazel is the prevalent tree species , there is a similar pattern of adult survival and loss of juvenile birds in years with poor nut production . 
 = = Predators and parasites = = 
 Across most of its European range , the most important predator of the Eurasian nuthatch is the sparrowhawk . Other species known to prey on this nuthatch include the northern goshawk , hobby , tawny owl , pygmy owl and least weasel . A Swedish study showed that 6 @.@ 2 % of the nuthatch nests in their study area were raided by predators . The perpetrators were not identified , but the main single predator of tit nests in the same study was the great spotted woodpecker . 
 Common starlings will take over Eurasian nuthatch nest holes , reducing their breeding success . This is most likely to occur if the nest is high in a tree and there is a good local breeding density of the nuthatch . Introduced ring @-@ necked parakeets may also compete with Eurasian nuthatches for nesting holes . The parakeets tend to occur in fragmented urban woodlands , while nuthatches prefer large old oak woodlands , which reduces the level of competition . Ornithologists conducting a 2010 Belgian study suggested that the problem was not so severe as to warrant culling of the parakeets . 
 Mites of the genus Ptilonyssus , such as P. <unk> , have been found in the Eurasian nuthatch 's nasal cavities . Intestinal worms include the nematodes <unk> <unk> and <unk> <unk> . Small studies in Slovakia and Spain found no blood parasites , but a larger Spanish survey found some evidence of Plasmodium infection . 
 = = Status = = 
 The European population of the Eurasian nuthatch has been estimated as 22 @.@ 5 – 57 million birds , suggesting a global total of 45 @.@ 9 – 228 million individuals . China , Taiwan , Korea , Japan and Russia each have between 10 @,@ 000 and 100 @,@ 000 breeding pairs . The known breeding area is about 23 @.@ 3 million km2 ( 9 million sq mi ) , which is a large proportion of the potential suitable habitat , and the population appears to be stable . The large numbers and huge breeding range mean that this species is classified by the International Union for Conservation of Nature as being of least concern . 
 The Eurasian nuthatch is common throughout much of its range , although densities are lower in the far north and in coniferous forests . Annual numbers in Siberia fluctuate depending on the availability of pine cones from year to year . In recent decades the nuthatch has colonised Scotland and the Netherlands , and expanded its range in Wales , northern England , Norway and the High Atlas mountain range in North Africa . S. e. asiatica breeds intermittently in Finland and northern Sweden following irruptions . Because large trees are essential , felling or fragmentation of old woodland can lead to local declines or losses . 
 = Pokémon Ruby and Sapphire = 
 Pokémon Ruby Version and Sapphire Version ( ポケットモンスター <unk> & <unk> , Poketto Monsutā <unk> & <unk> , " Pocket Monsters : Ruby & Sapphire " ) are the third installments of the Pokémon series of role @-@ playing video games , developed by Game Freak and published by Nintendo for the Game Boy Advance . The games were first released in Japan in late 2002 and internationally in 2003 . Pokémon Emerald , a special edition version , was released two years later in each region . These three games ( Pokémon Ruby , Sapphire , and Emerald ) are part of the third generation of the Pokémon video game series , also known as the " advanced generation " . Remakes of the two games , titled Omega Ruby and Alpha Sapphire , were released for the Nintendo 3DS onward worldwide on November 21 , 2014 , exactly twelve years to the date of the original Ruby and Sapphire release date , with the exception of Europe , where it was released on November 28 , 2014 . 
 The gameplay is mostly unchanged from the previous games ; the player controls the main character from an overhead perspective , and the controls are largely the same as those of previous games . As with previous games , the main objectives are to catch all of the Pokémon in the games and defeat the Elite Four ( a group of Pokémon trainers ) ; also like their predecessors , the games ' main subplot involves the main character defeating a criminal organization that attempts to take over the region . New features , such as double battles and Pokémon abilities along with 135 new Pokémon , have been added . As the Game Boy Advance is more powerful than its predecessors , four players may be connected at a time instead of the previous limit of two . Additionally , the games can be connected to an e @-@ Reader or other advanced generation Pokémon games . 
 Ruby and Sapphire received mostly positive reviews , though critics were divided in their assessment of the games , especially on the gameplay and graphics . Most of the complaints focused on the fact that the gameplay had not changed much since previous generations . With the popularity of Pokémon on the decline at the time , the games sold less than previous generations . However , they were still commercial successes ; with around 16 million copies sold according to IGN , they are the best @-@ selling games for the Game Boy Advance . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The basic mechanics of Ruby and Sapphire are largely the same as their predecessors ' . As with all Pokémon games for hand @-@ held consoles , gameplay is in third @-@ person , overhead perspective and consists of three basic screens : a field map , in which the player navigates the main character ; a battle screen ; and the menu , in which the player configures his party , items , or gameplay settings . The player begins the game with one Pokémon , and can capture more using Poké Balls . The player can also use his / her Pokémon to battle other Pokémon . When the player encounters a wild Pokémon or is challenged by a trainer to a battle , the screen switches to a turn @-@ based battle screen where the Pokémon fight . During battle , the player may fight , use an item , switch his / her active Pokémon , or flee ( the last is not an option in battles against trainers ) . All Pokémon have hit points ( HP ) ; when a Pokémon 's HP is reduced to zero , it faints and cannot battle until it is revived . If the player 's Pokémon defeats the opposing Pokémon ( causes it to faint ) , it receives experience points . After accumulating enough experience points , it may level up ; most Pokémon evolve into a new species of Pokémon when they reach a certain level . 
 Apart from battling , capturing Pokémon is the most essential element of Pokémon gameplay . During battle with a wild Pokémon ( other trainers ' Pokémon cannot be captured ) , the player may use a Poké Ball on the wild Pokémon . If successful , the Pokémon will be added to the player 's active party ( or stored if the player already has the maximum six Pokémon in his / her party ) . Factors in the success rate of capture include the HP ( and / or status effects such as Paralysis or Sleep , ) of the target Pokémon and the strength of the Poké Ball used : the lower the target 's HP and the stronger the Poké Ball , the higher the success rate of capture is . 
 = = = New gameplay features = = = 
 The most prominent change in the battle mechanics is the introduction of double battles , in which the opposing parties each use two Pokémon at the same time . Consequently , certain Pokémon moves can affect multiple combatants at once . Multi battles were added alongside double battles . They are identical to double battle , but there are two trainers to a side , each controlling one of the two Pokémon sent out . Also new to the games are innate abilities and natures ; the former is shared by every Pokémon of a certain species , while the latter may vary among a particular species . Abilities grant their holders certain powers in battle , such as immunity against certain types of moves or strengthening a certain type of move . Natures , like innate abilities , affect the strength of Pokémon in battle ; however , they affect the stats of the Pokémon rather than directly affecting the strength of the moves . Another stat introduced in Pokémon Ruby and Sapphire is Condition , an important factor in Pokémon Contests , mini @-@ games in which participants perform moves before a judge . Both Pokémon and their moves have a Condition , which is increased by using <unk> ( candies made from berries ) . Ruby and Sapphire were the first games to have different weather conditions ( sunny , rain , hail , and sandstorm ) , and these affected battle in unique ways . Secret bases were added as a one off feature where players could open up a hole in the world and customize the place with various items picked up in game . Players who linked up with others who set up secret bases were able to battle an NPC version of that trainer within their secret base . 
 Like Pokémon Gold , Silver , and Crystal , Ruby and Sapphire keep track of real @-@ life time ; this influences events like tides and berry plant growth . However , unlike their predecessors , Ruby and Sapphire do not differentiate between day and night . Also , due to the differences in the technical specifications of Game Boy link cables and Game Boy Advance link cables , Ruby and Sapphire cannot be linked with Pokémon games of previous generations ; one cannot battle with or trade to the previous generations . 
 = = = Connectivity with other devices = = = 
 Ruby and Sapphire have limited e @-@ Reader support . Nintendo released Battle @-@ e Cards , a set of e @-@ Reader cards that contained trainer battles in which the player could see previously @-@ hidden Pokémon . A special e @-@ Reader card called the Eon Ticket was also released ; obtained through the Mystery Gift function , the Ticket allows the player to reach a place called Southern Island . There , the player faces either <unk> or <unk> , depending on which version the player is using . 
 Ruby and Sapphire are also able to connect to the GameCube games Pokémon Colosseum , Pokémon XD : Gale of Darkness and Pokémon Box . In the former two , once players reach a certain point in the game , they are able to transfer Pokémon between Colosseum / XD and Ruby / Sapphire . Additionally , those who pre @-@ ordered Colosseum were able to access the Pokémon Jirachi and see a preview of the movie Pokémon : Jirachi Wish Maker . Box , a so @-@ called Pokémon " Microsoft Office " , allows players to store and organize their Pokémon on the GameCube . Also , in the European version of Pokémon Channel , players could receive a Jirachi at a certain point in the game , which they could then transfer over to Ruby / Sapphire . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Pokémon Ruby and Sapphire take place in the Hoenn region , located some distance from the Kanto and Johto regions featured in previous games . The design of Hoenn was based on the Japanese island and region of Kyushu ; however Hoenn is rotated 90 ° relative to Kyushu , as Junichi Masuda felt that it would provide a better gameplay balance . Like Kyushu , Hoenn possesses many smaller islands , and part of the region is dominated by sea routes , several of which contain areas where the player can dive underwater . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 Like other Pokémon games , Ruby and Sapphire 's gameplay is linear ; the main events occur in a fixed order . The protagonist of Pokémon Ruby and Sapphire is a child who has recently moved to <unk> Town . At the beginning of the games , the player chooses either <unk> , <unk> , or <unk> as his or her starter Pokémon from Professor Birch . His or her friend , the protagonist 's rival , is also a Pokémon Trainer and occasionally battles the player . The games ' two main goals are defeating the eight Gym Leaders , proving oneself worthy of challenging the Elite Four and Champion to become the new Champion and completing the Pokédex by capturing , evolving , and trading to obtain all 202 Pokémon ( It is possible to obtain all 386 Pokémon , but this requires trading with Pokémon FireRed and LeafGreen ) . 
 In addition to the main quest of defeating the Gym Leaders , there are side quests in which the player can aid NPCs by fulfilling tasks ( usually obtaining items ) ; other side quests involve catching legendary Pokémon . The most prominent subplot involves Team Aqua and Team Magma , crime syndicates who want to use Pokémon to alter the climate of Hoenn . In Ruby , the villains , Team Magma , want to use the legendary Pokémon Groudon to dry up the oceans of Hoenn and increase the region 's landmass ; in Sapphire , the Team Aqua are the villains and they try to use Groudon 's counterpart , Kyogre , to increase the region 's water levels . The player 's father also introduces the player to Wally , a sickly young boy whom the player helps capture a Pokémon to be his companion as he moves away from the big city . Wally eventually overcomes his illness and becomes a successful Pokémon trainer , ultimately becoming the final challenger the player must face before the Elite Four . 
 Shortly before approaching the town of the first Gym Leader , the protagonist first encounters the Team Magma / Aqua in the <unk> Woods , where he or she rescues a worker from Devon ( a company that manufactures Pokéballs ) and recovers Devon merchandise . Upon arriving in <unk> Town ( after defeating the third Gym Leader ) , the protagonist discovers that Professor <unk> , an astronomer , has been kidnapped by Magma / Aqua . The protagonist traces them to a cave , Meteor Falls , but is too late to stop them from escaping to Mt . Chimney with a meteorite . The protagonist follows Magma / Aqua to Mt . Chimney where they are preparing to use the meteorite to alter the climate of the region . The protagonist defeats the Team 's leader , however , and returns the meteorite to Professor <unk> . Shortly after the protagonist defeats the fifth Gym Leader ( the protagonist 's father , the first time such a character appears ) , Magma / Aqua again attempts to change the region 's climate by stealing a <unk> , a Pokémon with the ability to change the weather , from the Weather Institute . After the protagonist defeats the sixth Gym Leader , Magma / Aqua steals an orb with the ability to control a legendary Pokémon ( Groudon in Ruby , Kyogre in Sapphire ) . Magma / Aqua then steals a submarine from Captain Stern in <unk> City ; the protagonist , however , infiltrates the team 's hideout , but fails to prevent the submarine from being used . Magma / Aqua , then travel with the orb to the Seafloor Cavern , where Groudon or Kyogre resides ; the team then uses the orb to awaken the legendary Pokémon , but they have chosen the wrong one and have instead enraged the Pokémon instead of putting it under their thrall . Once awakened , the Pokémon travels to the Cave of Origin and causes a region @-@ wide drought ( Ruby ) or severe rainstorms ( Sapphire ) . When the protagonist defeats ( or captures ) the Pokémon , the region 's weather returns to normal . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 Pokémon Ruby and Sapphire were developed by Game Freak and Nintendo under the direction of Junichi Masuda . As with its predecessors , Ken Sugimori was the art director , although these were the first games in which he did not single @-@ handedly produce all of the art . When asked where his design team came up with the ideas for all of the new Pokémon , Sugimori stated that they got their ideas from past experiences in their childhood involving nature , animals , and the media and then base them on insects . Even looking at the world in a different perspective sometimes provided inspiration for the creatures . " First we select an insect and after that we add essential elements to the insects to make it more like Pokemon , such as adding some hard shape to it , to be more like steel , " Sugimori said , describing the process of creating a Pokémon . 
 As the Game Boy Advance was able to handle newer , enhanced graphics , Ruby and Sapphire were the first games in the series that allowed up to four people to share information at one time , as opposed to the previous limit of two . However , the development team used a more basic graphics engine in order to keep the game simple and not overly confusing . The team wanted the games to appeal to a large audience , so the software was designed to be easy enough for younger generations of children to play , but new features were added to bring the veteran gamers back . 
 Masuda stated that the basic philosophy of all Pokémon games is communication ; in the Pokémon series , this is manifested in trading and battling with other people . When asked about the new concept of double battles , the developers noted that they tried to focus more on the original one @-@ on @-@ one battles as the main type of competition and only added the double battles as a " new challenge " . They stated that if they receive positive feedback about the double battles , the feature may appear more in future generations . 
 The games were the first in the series that did not contain all of the Pokémon from previous generations . Sugimori stated that the team tried to include all the new Pokémon as well as some from previous generations . When asked about any features that could not be included due to technical restrictions , Masuda noted that he wanted each individual Pokémon to make up to three different cries depending on its mood . 
 Nintendo did not promote Ruby and Sapphire at the 2002 E3 convention ; however , it launched a USD $ 7 million promotional campaign that lasted from March to May 2003 . In addition to rewarding pre @-@ orders of the games with merchandise , Nintendo held a contest in which participants submitted videos of themselves singing the Pokémon theme song with their own re @-@ written lyrics ; the grand prize for that event was a Lugia PT Cruiser . Later that year , Nintendo launched the EON Ticket Summer Tour , in which 125 Toys ' R ' Us stores across the United States offered the Eon Ticket e @-@ Card in stores from July 19 to September 1 . Nintendo aired two television advertisements , " Faces " and " Names " , on prime @-@ time network , cable , and syndication . " Faces " featured Pokémon juxtaposed with human look @-@ alikes ; " Names " featured people shouting out the names of Pokémon and emphasized the fact that the games introduced 100 new Pokémon . Additionally , Nintendo collaborated with United Kingdom beverage brand <unk> to promote the games . 
 = = Audio = = 
 The audio of Ruby and Sapphire consists entirely of game music ; all dialogue is on @-@ screen . The music , composed by Junichi Masuda , Go Ichinose and Morikazu Aoki , is completely instrumental except for two tracks with vocals , " Trick Master " and " <unk> City " . The soundtrack of the game was released under the <unk> label in Japan on April 26 , 2003 ; the album reached # 297 on the Oricon charts and charted for one week . Junichi Masuda wrote only battle tunes , Go Ichinose wrote most of the town , route , fanfare & ' Spotted ' tunes , whereas Morikazu Aoki did the remainder . 
 The soundtrack is noted for its heavy use of trumpets . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The games met with mostly positive reviews . IGN gave them an " Amazing " 9 @.@ 5 out of 10 rating and awarded them the Editor 's Choice Award ; in 2007 , the games were collectively named the tenth best Game Boy Advance game of all time in an IGN article . GameZone also gave the games a 9 @.@ 5 out of 10 rating and gave the games an Outstanding Award . GamePro gave the games 5 out of 5 stars and named them Editor 's Choices . ComputerAndVideoGames.com gave the games a 9 of 10 , and GameSpot gave the games 8 @.@ 1 out of 10 . Eurogamer and 1UP.com were less enthusiastic about the games , however ; Eurogamer gave the games 7 out of 10 , and 1UP gave the games a B- . 
 Reviewers were divided in their critiques of the games , especially concerning the gameplay and graphics . IGN praised the " deep design " and noted that the addition of features such as double battles greatly increased the strategic aspect of the games . GamePro also thought that the addition of double battles " add [ ed ] challenge " and " made the harder battles far more strategic than before — the way the game should be " . Likewise , ComputerAndVideoGames.com called the gameplay " incredibly compelling and addictive " . GameZone noted that the gameplay was more refined and challenging than that of previous titles . However , GameSpot called the games " a cakewalk from start to finish " and claimed that Ruby and Sapphire " don 't offer much of a challenge " . Eurogamer also felt that the mechanics " [ get ] very tired , very fast " . 1UP.com also felt that the games were formulaic and that double battles were underused . 
 ComputerAndVideoGames.com was enthusiastic over the graphics , calling them " gorgeous " . Other reviewers were less enthusiastic , however . GamePro felt that the graphics were only " a fair bit prettier " than those of the Game Boy color games ; GameZone said that the games " still [ use ] the simple animations and basic character designs that were created for the original , color @-@ less Game Boy " . IGN and 1UP.com noted that the graphics had received only a minor upgrade , and Eurogamer felt that the graphics had been upgraded to a " functional level at best " . The audio was generally well @-@ received : GameZone and GameSpot both felt the audio was catchy ; GameZone gave the audio an 8 out of 10 score , saying that while the music " was annoying at times , [ ... ] it 's also very good . [ ... ] I found myself humming the music when I wasn 't playing " . Other complaints included the removal of the time system of Gold and Silver and the inability to import Pokémon from the games of previous generations . 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 Pokémon Ruby and Sapphire were highly anticipated . In Japan , they sold 1 @.@ 25 million units within the first four days of release and were the best @-@ selling games of the 2002 holiday season ; sales totaled around 4 @.@ 4 million within six weeks of release . They also became the first games to sell 2 million copies in Japan since 2001 's Final Fantasy X and the first games for a hand @-@ held console to do so since 2000 's Yu @-@ Gi @-@ Oh ! Duel Monsters 4 . In North America , Nintendo sold 2 @.@ 2 million units by April 2003 ( within one month of the games ' North American release ) in the region alone . Ruby and Sapphire were the second and third best @-@ selling games , respectively , of 2003 . The games enjoyed success in Europe as well . They were the second best @-@ selling games of the holiday season in 2002 ; even before release , European retailers imported cartridges from the United States to meet the high demand for the games . With around 16 million units sold worldwide , the games are the best @-@ selling titles ever for the Game Boy Advance . However , analysts noted that with " young kids ... gravitating toward Yu @-@ Gi @-@ Oh ! " at the time , Pokémon 's popularity was waning . This was reflected in the games ' sales compared to those of previous generations : Red and Blue sold nearly 27 million units worldwide , and Gold and Silver sold over 14 million units . 
 = = Related games = = 
 = = = Pokémon Emerald = = = 
 Pokémon Emerald ( ポケットモンスター <unk> , Poketto Monsutā <unk> , lit " Pocket Monsters : Emerald " ) , featuring Rayquaza on the box art , is the twelfth game in the Pokémon video game series in Japan , and the eleventh in North America and Europe . The game , an updated version of Ruby and Sapphire , was released in Japan on September 16 , 2004 ; it was released in North America on May 1 , 2005 ; Australia on June 9 , 2005 ; and Europe on October 21 , 2005 . 
 Although the gameplay is as that of Ruby and Sapphire , Emerald introduces new features . The plot is modified ; both Team Magma and Aqua are villains who are locked in a constant gang war and awaken Groudon and Kyogre , respectively . When the two legendary Pokémon begin to battle each other , the protagonist must unleash the legendary Pokémon Rayquaza ( pictured on the box cover ) to calm them . Some of the game mechanics are changed as well . Though double battles were clearly marked in Ruby and Sapphire , in Emerald , two separate trainers might unite to battle as a pair . After the Elite Four is defeated , the player may re @-@ battle Gym Leaders in a double battle if they are called on their <unk> . Also , Pokémon sprites are animated in battle like they were in Pokémon Crystal . Probably the most significant addition is the Battle Frontier , an expanded version of the Battle Tower in Ruby and Sapphire . 
 Another change made in Emerald is the addition of Team Magma 's base on the side of Mt . Chimney ; moreover , the legendary Pokémon Groudon is found here , rather than in the Cave of Origin . Even though the locations of the legendary Pokémon are different , Team Magma still makes the mistake of taking the blue orb to Groudon , while Team Aqua still makes the mistake of taking the red orb to Kyogre . A new character named Scott is also introduced in this game . Unknown to the player , he is the creator of the Battle Frontier . He follows the player throughout the game , watching them battle each Gym Leader and even meeting up with them when they get to the Battle Frontier . 
 Emerald has been generally well received . The game has an aggregate rating of 77 % on Game Rankings . GameSpot gave it a 7 @.@ 5 out of 10 ; IGN gave it an " Impressive " rating of 8 @.@ 0 out of a possible 10 . Eurogamer , however , gave Emerald a score of 6 out of 10 . Though it praised Emerald for looking better than either Ruby or Sapphire and for having harder and longer gameplay , it criticized the game for not even being a " half changed update [ ... ] but more of a director 's cut " . Emerald was the second best @-@ selling game in the United States of 2005 ; it sold 6 @.@ 32 million copies , making it the third @-@ best selling game for the Game Boy Advance . 
 In 2011 , it was reported that the game was still selling in Japan in 2010 with approximately 7 @,@ 724 sold that year . 
 = = = Pokémon Box : Ruby and Sapphire = = = 
 Pokémon Box : Ruby and Sapphire , or simply Pokémon Box , is a spin @-@ off Pokémon game for the Nintendo GameCube console , bundled with a Nintendo GameCube – Game Boy Advance link cable and a Memory Card 59 . It was released in Japan on May 30 , 2003 and in North America on July 11 , 2004 , but only through the New York Pokémon Center and its online store . It is no longer available in either location . The game was released in some parts of Europe as Pokémon Memory Magic due to translation problems , and Europeans only could get the game by using points from Nintendo of Europe 's loyalty program , or by buying the Pokémon Colosseum Mega Pack . 
 The game is essentially a storage system for the Game Boy Advance Pokémon games that allows players to trade and store Pokémon that they have caught in Ruby , Sapphire , Emerald , FireRed , and LeafGreen onto a GameCube memory card . Players can then organize and interact with their Pokémon on the GameCube , such as allowing them to breed . Unique Pokémon can also be acquired . Another feature allows the games to be played on the television via the GameCube Game Boy Advance Cable . Options such as taking screenshots of the game are available in this mode . Another addition is the " Showcase " , where players can create and display game pieces of Pokémon . 
 Nintendo referred to the game as " the most exclusive Pokémon software ever offered to North American Pokémon fans , " but it was generally considered to be unnecessary , receiving a score of 50 % on Game Rankings from 1 review . Craig Harris of IGN gave the game a " Meh " rating of 5 @.@ 0 out of 10 , praising the interface , which makes the organization of Pokémon much easier as compared to the Game Boy Advance interface , as well as the emulator which allows Ruby and Sapphire to be played on the GameCube . He also stated that the game was a good deal due to the inclusion of a Memory Card and Cable . However , Harris cited the " Showcase " as " entirely unnecessary and completely out of place , " and said that overall the game lacked much to do . He wrote , " It 's targeted specifically for the truly die @-@ hard Pokemon fan , but it requires so many specific elements to actually be useful to anyone . " Allgame gave the game three and a half out of five stars . 
 = = = Pokémon Omega Ruby and Pokémon Alpha Sapphire = = = 
 On May 7 , 2014 , Nintendo announced that a remake of Ruby and Sapphire , titled Omega Ruby and Alpha Sapphire , and it was released for the Nintendo 3DS on November 21 , 2014 Worldwide , with the exclusion of Europe , where it was released on November 28 , 2014 . 
 = = = General = = = 
 = Brabham BT49 = 
 The Brabham BT49 / ˈbræbəm / is a Formula One racing car designed by South African Gordon Murray for the British Brabham team . The BT49 competed in the 1979 to 1982 Formula One World Championships and was used by Brazilian driver Nelson Piquet to win his first World Championship in 1981 . 
 The car was initially designed in 1979 as a short notice replacement for the team 's Alfa Romeo @-@ engined BT48 , after Brabham team owner Bernie Ecclestone decided to end his relationship with the Italian engine manufacturer . The BT49 was created in only six weeks using elements of the BT48 chassis together with the widely used Cosworth DFV engine . It is a single seater with an open cockpit and exposed wheels . The monocoque chassis is made from aluminium alloy and carbon fibre composites . The car was fitted with controversial hydropneumatic suspension and water @-@ cooled brakes at different points in its life . 
 The BT49 was updated over four seasons taking a total of seven wins , six poles and 135 points . Seventeen were eventually built , most of which survive today . Some are used successfully in historic motorsport ; Christian <unk> won the 2005 FIA Historic Formula One Championship driving a BT49D . 
 = = Concept = = 
 The BT49 was created by South African designer Gordon Murray for the Brabham team during the 1979 season of the Formula One motor racing World Championship . The Brabham team had been competing in partnership with engine supplier Alfa Romeo since 1976 and won races in the 1978 season . However , the team 's 1979 car , the BT48 , was not a great success . Alfa Romeo entered their own Type 177 and Type 179 cars in Formula One Grands Prix that summer , helping to convince the Brabham team owner Bernie Ecclestone that the partnership was over . Motorsport author Alan Henry writes that Ecclestone did not want his team to take second place to an Alfa Romeo works team , and that the team designing Alfa Romeo 's cars was drawing on Brabham knowledge . 
 Alfa 's engines were powerful , but had proved troublesome and according to Henry , " the days during which pure power was the main criterion had temporarily vanished by the start of 1979 " . Instead aerodynamic ground effect , as brought to Formula One by the Lotus 78 two years earlier , was the most important factor . To allow them to focus on this , the Brabham team reverted to a known quantity , the reliable and widely used Ford Cosworth DFV engine that it had last used in 1975 . Three BT49s were designed and built in only six weeks for the Canadian Grand Prix on 30 September 1979 ; two of them were converted BT48 chassis and one was newly built . 
 = = Chassis and suspension = = 
 Like all of its Formula One contemporaries , the BT49 chassis is a monocoque structure . It is built from sheet aluminium alloy with reinforcement from carbon fibre composite panels and is one of the first Formula One chassis to incorporate this material structurally . The chassis is slightly longer than that of the BT48 , and is new from the cockpit back with revised sidepods and a structural fuel tank reduced from 45 to 38 imperial gallons ( 205 to 173 L ) capacity to match the reduced fuel consumption requirements of the DFV compared to the Alfa Romeo . This allowed a reduction in dry weight over the BT48 of 35 pounds ( 15 @.@ 9 kg ) and of 95 lb ( 43 @.@ 1 kg ) when fully fuelled . 
 The underside of the BT49 is shaped to create downforce through ground effect : air is accelerated under the car , reducing the air pressure beneath it and pushing the tyres down harder onto the track . This provides more grip and thus higher cornering speeds , but compared to conventional wings creates less of the drag that slows the car in a straight line . In its original form , the reduced pressure area under the car was sealed off with sliding skirts which rose and fell with the movement of the car to ensure no air could leak under it . According to Murray , the aerodynamics were the car 's great strength : " It had more [ downforce ] than any other car and it all came from the ground effect . We ran the car with no front wing at all and scarcely any at the back . " 
 The suspension , which controls the relative motion of the chassis and the wheels , is similar to that of the BT48 : it features double wishbones front and rear , with the springs and dampers mounted on the chassis out of the airflow and activated by <unk> . Anti @-@ roll bars are fitted front and rear . The BT49 's disc brakes are mounted outboard , within the wheel hubs , and are activated by a single four piston brake caliper for each wheel . For most of the BT49 's career , it used conventional steel brakes . Lighter reinforced carbon @-@ carbon discs and pads , a technology that Brabham had introduced to Formula One in 1976 , were used in 1981 and 1982 ; The wheels are of 13 @-@ inch ( 330 mm ) diameter , although occasionally 15 in ( 381 mm ) wheels were used at the front . The car initially raced on Goodyear tyres , but the team had to adapt the BT49 to Michelin 's new radial tyres for part of the 1981 season when Goodyear temporarily withdrew from Formula One . Slick tyres were used in dry conditions and treaded tyres in the wet . 
 Three chassis , included the two modified BT48 units , were built for the end of the 1979 season . Two of these were re @-@ used during the 1980 Formula One season , alongside seven new chassis . 
 = = Engine and transmission = = 
 The Ford Cosworth DFV was produced by Cosworth in Northampton and had been used in Formula One since 1967 . It is a 2 @,@ 993 cc ( 183 cu in ) normally aspirated four @-@ stroke engine with two banks of four cylinders at 90 degrees to each other in a ' V8 ' configuration . It has an aluminium alloy engine block with cylinder liners . Each of its <unk> cylinder heads has a single spark plug and four valves , activated by gear @-@ driven double overhead camshafts . This , combined with the flat @-@ plane crankshaft , provides a relatively simple exhaust layout , in which the exhaust pipes exit on the outer side of the block . The engine is water @-@ cooled , with water and oil radiators mounted in the left and right sidepods respectively . In 1980 , a revised version of the DFV was introduced in which ancillaries such as the water and oil pumps were reduced in size and grouped further forwards on the flanks of the engine to provide more clearance for ground effect tunnels under the cars . 
 Like its contemporaries , the BT49 uses the engine as a fully stressed structural component , carrying all loads between the front and rear of the car : the front of the engine bolts directly to the integral fuel tank and the back of the engine attaches to the car 's rear suspension and gearbox . The Ford Cosworth engine integrated into the car much more easily than Alfa Romeo 's large , heavy and inconsistently sized units : Murray described returning to the DFV as being " like having a holiday " . 
 By the time the DFV was used in the BT49 , it weighed roughly 340 lb ( 154 kg ) and produced around 500 brake horsepower ( 373 kW ) at about 11 @,@ 000 revolutions per minute ( rpm ) . Peak torque was 270 pound @-@ feet ( 366 N · m ) at 9 @,@ 000 rpm . After his first test session with the car , Brazilian driver Nelson Piquet commented that he had always believed " that the DFV was quite a rough , coarse engine , but it felt quite the opposite to me . After those Alfa <unk> it felt smooth and willing to rev. " In 1979 , when the BT49 first raced , all but three teams - Ferrari , Alfa Romeo and Renault - used the DFV , and the most powerful alternative ( Alfa Romeo 's V12 ) produced 525 bhp ( 391 kW ) . By 1982 , most teams still used the DFV , but BMW , Ferrari and Hart had joined Renault in employing turbocharged engines : Ferrari 's 1982 turbocharged V6 engine produced around 580 bhp ( 433 kW ) , while the DFV 's output had remained at around 500 bhp . 
 The BT49 was initially fitted with the same gearbox the team had been using since 1977 : a six @-@ speed unit designed by Brabham using internal components from Hewland and a casing cast by Alfa Romeo . 
 = = Variants = = 
 BT49B 
 A BT49B specification appeared early in the 1980 season ; it was conceived around a new transverse gearbox designed by American gearbox specialist Pete Weismann . The new unit could be fitted with five or six gears and was tall and narrow , allowing a clearer airflow from under the car to the rear , with the intent of improving the ground effect . An alternative rear suspension layout was designed to go with this gearbox . It replaced the standard <unk> with rocker arms that activated vertical coil springs mounted behind the gearbox . The Weismann unit proved difficult to make reliable and was used alongside the original gearbox , mainly on a spare chassis , until the Dutch Grand Prix , after which it was put to one side . 
 <unk> 
 A modified BT49 , dubbed <unk> , was used to test the earliest versions of BMW 's turbocharged Formula One engine between the 1980 and 1981 Formula One seasons . This was a 1 @,@ 499 cc ( 92 cu in ) inline four @-@ cylinder engine , with a single KKK turbocharger mounted in the left hand sidepod of the car . The first version of the engine was said to produce 557 bhp ( 415 kW ) . 
 BT49C 
 For the 1981 season , a BT49C specification was produced with a chassis lightened through increased use of carbon composite materials . Five of this variant were built and two of the previous year 's cars converted to this specification . That year a minimum ride height of 60 millimetres ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) was introduced and sliding skirts were banned , with the intention of limiting ground effect and slowing the cars . The BT49C regained its front wings to compensate in part for the downforce lost . More significantly , Murray devised a hydropneumatic suspension system for the BT49C in which soft air springs supported the car at the regulation height for checks while stationary . At speed , where the ride height could not be measured , downforce compressed the air and the car settled to a much lower height , creating more downforce . Because the skirts now had to be fixed , the suspension had to be very stiff to allow them to consistently seal around the sides of the car : by the end of the 1981 season , total suspension movement was only 1 @.@ 5 inches ( 38 mm ) , half of which came from the compression of the tyres . A lightweight qualifying chassis was produced , featuring a small fuel tank and lighter reinforced carbon @-@ carbon brake discs and pads . 
 BT49D 
 Three new BT49D chassis were built for the 1982 season , featuring a still lighter chassis and one @-@ piece bodywork . By this stage , the cars had to be ballasted to bring them up to the minimum weight limit of 580 kg ( 1 @,@ 279 lb ) specified in the rules . The BT49D used the carbon @-@ carbon brakes as standard and was one of several DFV @-@ powered cars to be fitted with large water tanks , ostensibly for " water @-@ cooled brakes " . In practice , the water was dumped early in the race , allowing the cars to race as much as 50 kg ( 110 lb ) under the weight limit ; the regulations stated coolant could be topped up at the end of the race before the weight was checked . In the view of the DFV teams , this practice met the letter of the regulations and equalised their performance with that of the more powerful turbocharged cars . The 60 mm ground clearance rule was removed for the 1982 season , but the fixed skirts and very stiff suspension remained . 
 = = Racing history = = 
 The BT49 's racing career got off to an unsettled start when Brabham 's lead driver , Niki Lauda , abruptly quit the sport after 10 laps of the first practice session at the penultimate race of the 1979 season , the Canadian Grand Prix . The car soon showed promise : Piquet ran third in the race on the high speed Circuit Île Notre @-@ Dame before retiring with a broken gearbox . Lauda 's replacement , Argentine novice Ricardo Zunino , was seventh of the nine who completed the race . At the season finale in wet conditions at the Watkins Glen International circuit , Zunino spun off although Piquet set the fastest lap before a driveshaft failed , putting his car out of the race . 
 Early in the 1980 season , Piquet 's car scored points finishes at the Argentine and South African Grands Prix , behind Alan Jones ' Williams FW07 @-@ DFV and the turbocharged Renault <unk> of René Arnoux . At the fourth race of the season , the United States Grand Prix West , Piquet qualified on pole by over a second in a BT49 featuring some updates to the sidepods , bodywork and suspension , before leading the race , held on the streets of Long Beach , California , from start to finish . BT49s in Piquet 's hands scored in seven of the ten remaining rounds of the championship . Towards the end of the season , the suspension was reworked for the Dutch Grand Prix on the high speed Circuit Park Zandvoort , lengthening the wheelbase by three inches and allowing the car to run in a lower drag configuration . Piquet won after Jones destroyed his FW07 's skirts on kerbs . Piquet also won the next race , the Italian Grand Prix to give himself a one @-@ point lead over Williams driver Jones . By the end of the season the BT49 was " arguably the fastest Cosworth @-@ powered car " , but Piquet lost the title to Jones at the penultimate race of the year , the Canadian Grand Prix , when a development engine failed while he was leading the race . The BT49s driven by the team 's second drivers — Zunino and then from mid @-@ season Mexican Héctor <unk> — either retired or finished outside the points , with the exception of <unk> 's sixth place at the Canadian race . The team finished third in the constructors ' championship behind Williams and Ligier , unable to compete with only one car scoring points . 
 Disagreement between the teams and the sport 's administrators over the technical regulations for the 1981 Formula One season contributed to Goodyear 's temporary withdrawal from Formula One and meant that the 1981 South African Grand Prix was run by the teams to 1980 regulations using cars with sliding skirts . Piquet finished second in a BT49B , but the race did not count towards the championship . The season proper opened with the United States Grand Prix West , at which the BT49C was introduced . To the team 's surprise , it was the only car to exploit the " obvious " loophole in the new ground clearance regulation by lowering itself , but the <unk> raced with conventional suspension after the hydropneumatic system repeatedly jammed . The team revised the system continuously over the next three races and used it to set pole position at the Brazilian and Argentine Grands Prix and win the Argentine and San Marino races while continuing to suffer from the system not rising or lowering correctly . 
 Frank Williams led an abortive protest against the car at the Argentine Grand Prix , objecting to the flexibility of the fixed skirts used to seal the underside of the car , which allowed them to replicate the effect of a sliding skirt . At the following race , the scrutineers rejected the flexible skirts . Brabham replaced them with stiffer material from one of the other teams for the race , which Piquet won . As the season progressed , other teams developed their own lowering systems — a front spring and cylinder were stolen from the Brabham garage in Argentina — but after a rule clarification from FISA many cars were lowered by the driver pressing a switch , a development that Murray found frustrating in light of Brabham 's efforts to develop a system that he considered legal . The cars ran on Goodyear tyres again from the sixth round of the championship ; motorsport author Doug Nye believes this cost the BT49s good results at several races while the American company adapted to the latest Formula One developments . Despite the virtually solid suspension now required to maintain a consistent ride height , which put components under greater strain , Piquet built a championship challenge on the back of consistent reliability : by the end of the season , his <unk> had finished 10 of 15 races , with only one mechanical failure . Piquet finished fifth at the final race of the season — the Caesars Palace Grand Prix — to take the title from Carlos Reutemann in a Williams FW07 by one point . 
 Brabham had been working with the German engine manufacturer BMW since 1980 on the development of a turbocharged engine for Formula One . The BMW @-@ powered BT50 made its debut at the start of the 1982 season , taking advantage of the high @-@ altitude Kyalami circuit in South Africa , which favoured turbocharged cars . However , the as yet unreliable BMW @-@ powered cars were dropped for the next two races . Piquet finished first at the Brazilian Grand Prix in a BT49D , but was disqualified after a protest from Renault and Ferrari on the grounds that the car had raced underweight due to its water @-@ cooled brakes . FISA ruled that in future all cars must be weighed before coolants were topped up , resulting in a boycott of the fourth race of the season by most of the DFV @-@ powered teams , including Brabham . Under threat from BMW , Brabham did not use its Ford @-@ powered BT49s again until the sixth race of the season , the Monaco Grand Prix , where one was entered for Riccardo Patrese alongside Piquet in a BT50 . Patrese won the race after a chaotic final lap on which several other cars stopped . Patrese used the BT49 for the next two races , taking a second place behind Piquet 's BMW @-@ powered car in the BT49 's final Formula One race , the 1982 Canadian Grand Prix . 
 = = Historic racing = = 
 Since 1995 , BT49s have competed regularly in the FIA Historic Formula One Championship . The championship is open to cars that competed in Formula One in the DFV era , between 1967 and 1985 , in several classes to allow for equal competition . The BT49 competes in class C , for post 1971 ground effects cars . In 1999 , Motor Sport magazine tested a BT49D from the series featuring 530 bhp ( 395 kW ) from its developed DFV at 11 @,@ 200 rpm , but the championship has since introduced rules to restrict engines to 10 @,@ 500 rpm to keep costs down . While the cars ' original skirts can be kept , they must be set up such that there is 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) clearance beneath the car , a rule that removes most of the advantage of ground effect . The hydropneumatic suspension employed during 1981 is not permitted . The carbon @-@ carbon brakes originally used in 1981 and 1982 are also banned and the cars must run with conventional brake pads and steel brakes . The cars use Avon slick tyres . Christian <unk> won the 2005 FIA Historic Formula One Championship driving a BT49D and Joaquin <unk> won the 2012 championship in a BT49C . 
 = = Complete Formula One World Championship results = = 
 ( key ) ( Results in bold indicate pole position ; results in italics indicate fastest lap ) 
 ^ 1 <unk> in the constructors ' championship are for chassis @-@ engine combinations . Brabham used both Alfa Romeo and Ford @-@ powered cars during this season : the BT49 @-@ Fords scored no points and Brabham @-@ Ford was not classified . 
 ^ 2 Brabham used both Ford and BMW @-@ powered cars during this season : Brabham @-@ Ford was classified 9th . 
 = Thomas Hines = 
 Thomas Henry Hines ( October 8 , 1838 – January 23 , 1898 ) was a Confederate cavalryman who was known for his spying activities during the last two years of the American Civil War . A native of Butler County , Kentucky , he initially worked as a grammar instructor , mainly at the Masonic University of La Grange , Kentucky . During the first year of the war , he served as a field officer , initiating several raids . He was an important assistant to John Hunt Morgan , doing a preparatory raid ( Hines ' Raid ) in advance of Morgan 's Raid through the states of Indiana and Ohio , and after being captured with Morgan , organized their escape from the Ohio Penitentiary . He was later involved in espionage and tried to stir up insurrections against the Federal government in selected Northern locales . 
 On several occasions during the war , Hines was forced to make narrow , seemingly impossible , escapes . At one point , he concealed himself in a mattress that was being used at the time ; on another occasion , he was confused for the actor and assassin John Wilkes Booth , a dangerous case of mistaken identity that forced him to flee Detroit in April 1865 by holding a ferry captain at gunpoint . Union agents viewed Hines as the man they most needed to apprehend , but apart from the time he served at the Ohio Penitentiary in late 1863 , he was never captured . 
 After the war , once it was safe for him to return to his native Kentucky , he settled down with much of his family in Bowling Green . He started practicing law , which led him to serve on the Kentucky Court of Appeals , eventually becoming its Chief Justice . Later , he practiced law in Frankfort , Kentucky , until his death in 1898 , keeping many of the secrets of Confederate espionage from public knowledge . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Hines was born in Butler County , Kentucky , on October 8 , 1838 , to Judge Warren W. and Sarah Carson Hines and was raised in Warren County , Kentucky . While his education was largely informal , he spent some time in common schools . He was 5 feet 9 inches ( 1 @.@ 75 m ) tall , and weighed a mere 140 pounds ( 64 kg ) . With his slender build , Hines was described as rather benign in appearance , and a friend observed that he had a voice resembling that of a " refined woman " . He was said to have a fondness not only for women , but also music and horses . 
 He became an adjunct professor at the Masonic University , a school established by the Grand Lodge of Kentucky Freemasons for teaching the orphans of Kentucky Masons in La Grange in 1859 . He was the principal of its grammar school , but with the advent of the war , he joined the Confederate Army in September 1861 . 
 = = Civil War = = 
 = = = Early war experiences = = = 
 Hines joined the Confederate army , as did at least eleven of his cousins . Hines initially led " Buckner 's Guides " , which were attached to Albert Sidney Johnston 's command , as his fellow guides recognized his " coolness and leadership " . In November 1861 , he was given a lieutenant 's commission . On December 31 , 1861 , he led a successful mission to Borah 's Ferry , Kentucky , to attack a Union outpost there . 
 The Guides were disbanded in January 1862 after the Confederate government of Kentucky fled Bowling Green , as Hines did not want to fight anywhere except in Kentucky . He traveled to Richmond , Virginia , and missed the Battle of Shiloh as a result . In April , he decided to join Brig. Gen. John Hunt Morgan , and he re @-@ enlisted in the army as a private in the 9th Kentucky Cavalry in May 1862 . Morgan recognized Hines ' talents and commissioned him as a captain on June 10 , 1862 . Afterward , Hines spent most of his time engaged in secret missions in his beloved Kentucky . Dressed in civilian clothes , he usually operated alone to avoid drawing attention to himself , not wanting to be executed as a spy . 
 On many of his forays in Kentucky , Hines made special trips to see loved ones . Often it was to visit Nancy Sproule , his childhood sweetheart and future bride , in Brown 's Lock , near Bowling Green . On other occasions he visited his parents in Lexington , Kentucky . In both places , Union spies attempted to capture Hines , but he always escaped , even after his father had been captured and his mother was sick in bed . 
 = = = 1863 = = = 
 In June 1863 , Hines led an invasion into Indiana with 25 Confederates posing as a Union unit in pursuit of deserters . Their goal was to see if the local Copperheads would support the invasion of John Hunt Morgan planned for July 1863 . Traveling through Kentucky for eight days to obtain supplies for their mission , they crossed the Ohio River to enter Indiana , near the village of Derby , on June 18 , 1863 . Hines visited the local Copperhead leader , Dr. William A. Bowles , in French Lick , and learned that there would be no formal support for Morgan 's Raid . On his way back to Kentucky , Hines and his men were discovered in <unk> , Indiana , leading to a small skirmish near Leavenworth , Indiana , on Little Blue Island . Hines had to abandon his men as he swam across the Ohio River under gunfire . 
 After wandering around Kentucky for a week , Hines rejoined General Morgan at Brandenburg , Kentucky . Colonel Basil W. Duke made a disparaging comment in his memoirs about how Hines appeared on the Brandenburg riverfront , saying Hines was " apparently the most listless inoffensive youth that was ever imposed upon " ; despite being Morgan 's second @-@ in @-@ command , Colonel Duke was usually not told of all the espionage Hines was carrying out , causing some to believe that Hines and Duke did not like each other , which was not the case . 
 It was due to Hines that the riverboats Alice Dean and the John T. McCombs were captured for the purpose of transporting Morgan 's 2000 + men force across the Ohio River . It was Hines ' reports that encouraged Morgan to be rough with anyone posing as a Confederate sympathizer in Indiana , as Morgan had been relying on support from sympathizers in Indiana to be successful on his raid . Hines stayed with Morgan until the end of the Raid , and was with John Hunt Morgan during their imprisonment , first at Johnson 's Island , and later at the Ohio Penitentiary just outside downtown Columbus , Ohio , where , despite the rules of war dictating that prisoners of war should go to military prison , they were put in with common criminals . 
 = = = = Escape = = = = 
 Hines discovered a way to escape from the Ohio Penitentiary . He had been reading the novel Les Misérables and was said to be inspired by Jean Valjean and Valjean 's escapes through the passages underneath Paris , France . Hines noticed how dry the lower prison cells felt and how they were lacking in mold , even though sunlight never shined there . This caused him to believe that escape by tunneling down was possible . After discovering an air chamber underneath them , which he had deduced , Hines begun the tunneling effort . The tunnel was only eighteen inches wide , which was just large enough for him to enter the four foot by four foot air chamber that was surrounded by heavy masonry . As Hines and the six others who accompanied Hines and John Hunt Morgan worked on the tunnel , a thin crust of dirt was used to hide the tunneling from the prison officials . They tunneled for six weeks , with the tunnel 's exit coming between the inner and the 25 @-@ foot ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) outer prison walls , near a coal pile . On the day of escape , November 26 , 1863 , Morgan switched cells with his brother , Colonel Richard Morgan . The day was chosen as a new Union military commander was coming to Columbus , and Morgan knew that the prison cells would be inspected at that time . Together , after the daily midnight inspection , Hines , John Hunt Morgan and five captains under Morgan 's command used the tunnel to escape . Aided by the fact that the prison sentries sought shelter from the raging storm occurring at the time , the Confederate officers climbed the 25 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) wall effortlessly , using metal hooks to effect their escape . 
 Hines had even left a note for the warden . It read : " Warden N. Merion , the Faithful , the Vigilant " as follows : " Castle Merion , Cell No. 20 . November 27 , 1863 . Commencement , November 4 , 1863 . Conclusion , November 20 , 1863 . Hours for labor per day , three . Tools , two small knives . La patience est <unk> , mais son fruit est doux . By order of my six honorable confederates . " Those left behind were strip searched and moved to different cells in the Ohio State Penitentiary . Two of the officers who escaped with Hines and Morgan , Captain Ralph Sheldon and Captain Samuel Taylor , were captured four days later in Louisville , Kentucky , but the other three ( Captain Jacob Bennett , Captain L. D. <unk> , and Captain Augustus Magee ) made good their escape to Canada and the South . 
 Hines led John Hunt Morgan back to Confederate lines . First , they arrived at the train station in downtown Columbus , where they bought tickets to Cincinnati , Ohio . The duo jumped off the train before it entered the Cincinnati train station . They continued to evade capture in Cincinnati , staying for one night at the Ben Johnson House in Bardstown , Kentucky . In Tennessee , Hines diverted the Union troops ' attention away from John Hunt Morgan , and was himself recaptured and sentenced to death by hanging . He escaped that night by telling stories to the soldier in charge of him and subdued him when given the chance . A few days later he again escaped Union soldiers who intended to hang him . 
 = = = Northwest Conspiracy = = = 
 Hines went to the Confederate capital of Richmond , Virginia , after his escape in January 1864 . He convinced Confederate President Jefferson Davis of a plan to instill mass panic in the Northern states , by means of freeing prisoners and causing arson in larger Northern cities . Impressed by Hines ' plan , Davis agreed to back him . Davis urged Hines to tell Secretary of State Judah P. Benjamin and Secretary of War James Seddon his plan . Both men agreed to the plan , and encouraged Hines to proceed , with the only hesitation by Davis , Benjamin and Sheldon being the effect on public opinion on such a plan , including what Great Britain and France would think of Hines ' actions . 
 Hines thought it would be easier to enter the North from Canada and traveled there during the winter . Hines led the Northwest Conspiracy from Canada in the fall of 1864 . Colonel Benjamin Anderson was involved in the plot , along with other Confederate soldiers . It was hoped that Hines and his men would be able to free the Confederate prisoners held at Camp Douglas in Chicago , Illinois . 
 Hines led sixty men from Toronto , Ontario , on August 25 , 1864 . They arrived during the Democratic Party National Convention held in Chicago that year . The Copperheads had told Hines to wait until that time , as they said that 50 @,@ 000 Copperheads would be there for the event . However , encountering Copperhead hesitation to assist Hines and his force , and with Federal authorities apparently knowledgeable of the plot , Hines and his men were forced to flee Chicago on August 30 , 1864 . Many of the men thought Anderson may have been a double agent , forcing him to leave the group . A second attempt to free the Camp Douglas Confederate prisoners occurred during the United States Presidential Election of 1864 , but that plan was also foiled . 
 In the same year he tried to free Confederate prisoners of war by recruiting former members of Morgan 's Raiders who had escaped to Canada , including John Hunt Morgan 's telegrapher George " Lightning " Ellsworth , who was a native of Canada . On his last day in Chicago , Hines had to avoid discovery by Union soldiers inspecting the home he was hiding in by crawling into a mattress upon which the homeowner 's wife lay ill with delirium . The Union soldiers inspected the house he was in , and even checked to see if Hines was the one lying on the bed , but did not discover Hines in the mattress . The soldiers established a guard by the door of the house . As it rained the next day , visitors were encouraged to visit the sick woman . The soldiers never looked at the faces under the umbrellas , and as a result , Hines sneaked out of the house and left Chicago . 
 = = = Late war = = = 
 In October 1864 , Hines again went to Cincinnati , after crossing covertly through Indiana , where Union troops had again sought him . This time , with the help of friends whose home he hid in , Hines concealed himself in an old closet obscured by mortar and red bricks , where he avoided detection by the Union troops who inspected the house . Hines learned there that his beloved Nancy Sproule was in an Ohio convent . He decided to " spirit " her from it , and on November 10 , 1864 , at St. Mary 's Catholic Church in Covington , Kentucky , they were married , despite her father 's wishes that they wait until the war was over , due to Hines ' wartime activities . They spent a week 's honeymoon in Kentucky , after which Hines returned to his clandestine activities in Canada . 
 Two days after Lincoln 's assassination , on April 16 , 1865 , Hines was in Detroit , Michigan , when he was mistaken for John Wilkes Booth , who was then the subject of a massive manhunt . After finding himself in a fight , Hines jumped several fences and made his way to Detroit 's wharf . He waited for a ferryboat to empty its passengers and then forced the captain at gunpoint to take him across the Detroit River to Canada . On arrival , Hines apologized to the captain and gave him five dollars . Hines ' exploit led to the mistaken rumor that Booth had escaped into Canada . 
 = = Post @-@ war = = 
 After his escape from Detroit , Hines went to Toronto where several other former Confederates lived . Not expecting to return to the United States , he sent for his wife Nancy . While in Toronto he studied law with General John C. Breckinridge , a former Vice President of the United States . Once U.S. President Andrew Johnson declared a pardon for most former Confederates , Hines went back to Detroit on July 20 , 1865 , to sign a loyalty oath to the United States . However , knowing that Union officials in Kentucky would consider him an exception to the pardon , he remained in Canada until May 1866 . 
 After sending his wife to Kentucky , where their first child was born , Hines began living in Memphis , Tennessee , passing the bar exam on June 12 , 1866 , with high honors . During his stay in Memphis he also edited the Daily Appeal . Hines moved to Bowling Green , Kentucky , in 1867 , where many of his family lived , and practiced law there . Basil W. Duke appointed Hines a colonel in the Soldiers of the Red Cross . Hines later became the County Judge for Warren County , Kentucky . 
 Hines was elected to the Kentucky Court of Appeals in 1878 and served there until 1886 . From 1884 to 1886 , he served as Chief Justice . He was said to be " exceptionally free from all judicial bias " . Hines was a witness to the assassination of fellow judge John Milton Elliott on March 26 , 1879 , while the two were leaving the Kentucky State House , by Colonel Thomas Buford , a judge from Henry County , Kentucky . Buford , enraged by Elliott 's failure to rule in favor of his late sister in a property dispute , shot Elliott with a double @-@ barreled twelve gauge shotgun filled with buckshot after Hines had turned and walked away from Elliott . Hines inspected the body as Buford surrendered to a deputy sheriff who had come to investigate the turmoil . 
 After his time on the Kentucky Court of Appeals , Hines returned to practicing law in Frankfort , Kentucky . In 1886 , Hines began writing a series of four articles discussing the Northwest Conspiracy for Basil W. Duke 's Southern Bivouac magazine . The magazine was dedicated to the memory of the Lost Cause of the Confederacy , but was less adversarial than similar Southern magazines , gaining a larger Northern readership than similar journals . The first of the articles was printed in the December 1886 issue . However , after consulting with former Confederate president Jefferson Davis at Davis ' home in Mississippi , Hines did not name anybody on the Northern side who assisted in the conspiracy . After writing the first article , Hines was attacked for not being more forthcoming regarding all the participants from both newspapers ' reviewers ( particularly from the Louisville Times ) and Southern readers , which discouraged Hines from publishing any more accounts of the Northwest Conspiracy . 
 Hines died in 1898 in Frankfort , and was buried in Fairview Cemetery in Bowling Green , Kentucky , in the Hines series of plots . Also among the Hines family plots is the grave site of Duncan Hines , a second cousin twice removed . 
 = = Misinformation = = 
 Historical markers concerning Hines ' exploits have occasionally included mistaken information . The historical marker placed by the Indiana Civil War Centennial Commission in 1963 in the vicinity of Derby , Perry County , Indiana , to memorialize Hines ' entry into Indiana states that Hines invaded Indiana in 1862 , although he actually did so in 1863 . In addition , a marker by the Confederate Monument of Bowling Green in Bowling Green 's Fairview Cemetery says that Hines died before he could go to the dedication ceremony in 1876 , when in reality he died in 1898 and is buried a few hundred feet away . 
 = Lavoy Allen = 
 Lavoy Allen ( born February 4 , 1989 ) is an American professional basketball player for the Indiana Pacers of the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) . He was selected in the 2nd Round , 50th overall pick in the 2011 NBA draft by the Philadelphia 76ers . Allen is the son of a truck driver , and did not play much basketball until eighth grade . He attended Pennsbury High School , where he was coached by Frank <unk> . Rivals.com ranked him the 14th best center in his class , and Scout.com named him the 110th overall prospect . Allen committed to Temple University and coach Fran Dunphy . 
 Temple reached the NCAA Tournament in all four seasons that Allen played there . He was a three @-@ time All @-@ Atlantic 10 Defensive Team honoree and a two @-@ time All @-@ Atlantic 10 First Team recipient . In his junior year , he became the first Temple player to average a double @-@ double since Ollie Johnson accomplished the feat in 1970 @-@ 71 . Allen declared for early entry in the 2010 NBA draft , but withdrew prior to the May 8 <unk> . As a senior , Allen surpassed Johnny Baum as the all @-@ time leading rebounder in Temple history . He was the recipient of the Robert V. <unk> Trophy honoring the Philadelphia Big Five Player of the Year . Dunphy has said that Allen " might be the smartest player I 've ever coached . " 
 = = Early life = = 
 Allen was born in Trenton , New Jersey on February 4 , 1989 . His mother is Paula Allen and his father , Dave Allen , is a truck driver . When he was nine years old , Lavoy moved to Morrisville , Pennsylvania , and struggled to make friends in his new surroundings . He did not play much organized basketball until eighth grade . In an interview , Allen admitted he was not very good in the beginning , and focused on passing the ball to a better teammate . His initial motivation was how schoolchildren mocked him for his height yet not being able to dunk . " I could barely jump over the Sunday paper , " he said . 
 = = High school career = = 
 He attended Pennsbury High School , where he was coached by Frank <unk> . Former Temple player Dalton Pepper was his high school teammate . In ninth grade , Allen decided that he wanted to be great , and put in much more practice time . He became a starter on the varsity team in his sophomore year . As a junior , he averaged 12 points and nine rebounds per game , and was named a Top 150 player in his class by Hoop Scoop . 
 In his senior season , Allen posted per @-@ game averages of 13 points , 9 @.@ 6 rebounds , 3 @.@ 2 assists , 3 blocks , and 2 steals . Under Allen , Pennsbury reached the second round of the PIAA playoffs before losing to Harrisburg High School . He was named to the Second Team all @-@ Southeastern Pennsylvania at the conclusion of the season . Allen tried out for the USA U @-@ 19 basketball team , but did not make the final cut . Rivals.com ranked him the 14th best center in his class , and Scout.com named him the 110th overall prospect . He worked at a day care facility to earn enough money to bring his date to the senior prom . On November 8 , 2006 , Allen committed to Temple , over Division I scholarship offers from Rutgers , Saint Joseph 's , and La Salle . Along with Dayton signee Chris Wright , Allen was one of two ESPN 100 prospects in the class of 2008 to sign with an Atlantic 10 program . 
 = = College career = = 
 = = = Freshman = = = 
 Coming into his freshman season , Allen was selected to the Preseason All @-@ Atlantic 10 Rookie Team . He was seen as an answer for Temple 's rebounding and interior scoring struggles from the previous 12 @-@ 18 season . In his first college basketball game , Allen scored eight points and grabbed nine rebounds in a loss to # 7 Tennessee . From November 18 through December 9 , 2007 , he scored in double figures in six consecutive games . On February 10 , 2008 , Allen 's season @-@ high 20 points led Temple to an 80 @-@ 70 overtime victory over the UMass Minutemen . Allen was benched in the February 17 game against Dayton due to missing a study assignment . 
 The Owls finished the season 21 – 13 , and made the NCAA Tournament for the first time since 2001 , receiving a 12 seed by the selection committee . In the first round , they bowed out to fifth @-@ seeded Michigan State 72 @-@ 61 . In that game , Allen notched his first double @-@ double of 13 points and 11 rebounds , and also drained his first two collegiate three @-@ pointers . He led the team in blocks with a total of 52 , and finished second in field goal percentage ( .558 ) , third in rebounds per game ( 5 @.@ 7 ) , and fourth in points per game ( 8 @.@ 1 ) . Allen was selected to the All @-@ Atlantic 10 Rookie Team . 
 = = = Sophomore = = = 
 As a sophomore , Allen increased his scoring average to 10 @.@ 9 points per game , second on the team , and again led the team in blocks with 1 @.@ 56 per game . He shot a team @-@ best <unk> from the floor , and his .618 field goal percentage in league games led the Atlantic 10 . In addition , he led the team and finished third in the Atlantic 10 in rebounding with 9 @.@ 0 rebounds per game . He had 14 double @-@ doubles on the season . In the Owls ' game against Lafayette , Allen broke his thumb and was forced to miss the next game against Buffalo . His season @-@ high 23 points came on February 8 , when the Owls defeated the Rhode Island Rams 68 @-@ 62 ; Allen also had 13 rebounds . The following day , Allen received his first Philadelphia Big 5 player of the week honors . He would again be honored as Big 5 player of the week on February 23 , following a 20 @-@ point and season @-@ high 18 rebound performance against St. Bonaventure . 
 At the end of the regular season , Allen was named to the All @-@ Atlantic 10 Third Team and All @-@ Atlantic 10 Defensive Team . He helped Temple to its second consecutive Atlantic 10 Tournament title and NCAA Tournament appearance . In the championship game over Duquesne , Allen contributed 10 points and 14 rebounds . He posted 10 points and 11 rebounds against Arizona State in an 2009 NCAA Tournament Round of 64 loss . 
 = = = Junior = = = 
 Allen was a Preseason All @-@ Atlantic 10 First Team selection in his junior year . He averaged 11 @.@ 5 points and 10 @.@ 7 rebounds per game , becoming the first Temple player to average a double @-@ double since Ollie Johnson accomplished the feat in 1970 @-@ 71 . Allen 's 10 @.@ 9 rebounds per game average in Atlantic 10 conference games was bested only by Fordham 's Chris Gaston and Duquesne 's Damian Saunders . In addition , he led Temple in field goal percentage at <unk> . He scored 10 points and snatched 17 rebounds in the Owls ' upset of # 3 Villanova on December 19 . In a 65 @-@ 53 win over La Salle on February 28 , 2010 , Allen scored 17 points and grabbed 21 rebounds , a career high and the most by an Owl since Joe Newman pulled down 24 on February 5 , 1973 . With the victory , Temple clinched the Philadelphia Big Five title with a perfect 4 – 0 record . Allen became the 46th Temple player to score 1 @,@ 000 points in his career in a game against George Washington . This earned him Atlantic 10 ( co- ) player of the week honors for the week of March 7 . 
 Led by Allen , Temple enjoyed a 29 – 5 season , captured a share of the Atlantic 10 conference regular season championship with a 14 – 2 record , and culminated in a third consecutive Atlantic 10 conference tournament title and an automatic bid to the NCAA Tournament . In the NCAA Tournament , Temple was seeded fifth and matched up with 12 seed Cornell in the first round . Allen had 11 points , but his Owls were upset by the Big Red 78 @-@ 65 . Following the season , Allen was selected to the All @-@ Atlantic 10 First Team and All @-@ Atlantic 10 Defensive Team . He was recognized as an All @-@ Fourth District first @-@ team selection by the National Association of Basketball Coaches making him eligible for the State Farm Division I All @-@ America teams . Since the Atlantic 10 Conference was its own district , this is equivalent to being named first team All @-@ Atlantic 10 by the NABC . The U.S. Basketball Writers Association named Allen to the 10 @-@ man All @-@ District II team covering college basketball players in the states of New York , New Jersey , <unk> the District of Columbia , Pennsylvania , and West Virginia . 
 Allen briefly flirted with the 2010 NBA draft . He declared for early entry in the draft , but did not hire an agent . After one workout with the Portland Trail Blazers , Allen was told to return to school to work on his offensive game . On May 8 , Allen officially pulled his name out of consideration for the draft . He did so on the final day allowed by the NCAA to ensure collegiate eligibility . 
 = = = Senior = = = 
 Allen was named to the 20 @-@ man USA Select team , which played with and against the USA National team from July 19 @-@ 24 . Prior to his senior campaign , he was on the preseason John R. Wooden Award and Naismith College Player of the Year watchlists . He was a preseason All @-@ Atlantic 10 First Team and Defensive Team selection . On December 6 , Allen was named Atlantic 10 co @-@ player of the week after recording back @-@ to back double @-@ doubles against Central Michigan and Maryland , both Temple victories . He sprained his ankle in a game against Fordham on February 9 , 2011 , and was forced to miss the following game versus the Dayton Flyers . In the February 20 game against Saint Joseph 's , Allen became Temple 's all time leader in rebounds . Allen snatched 12 boards to pass Temple radio analyst Johnny Baum 's career 1 @,@ 042 rebounds . He received conference player of the week honors for the week of February 28 . Allen scored a career @-@ high 24 points to top La Salle in the regular season finale , earning him Atlantic 10 Player of the Week recognition on March 6 . 
 Temple finished with a 26 – 8 record in Allen 's senior season and earned a berth to the 2011 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament . This time , they defeated Penn State in the Round of 64 before falling to San Diego State in double overtime . Allen had 12 points and 11 rebounds in his final game as a Temple Owl . He was named to the All @-@ Atlantic 10 First Team and Defensive Team at the conclusion of the regular season . Allen was the recipient of the Robert V. <unk> Trophy honoring the Philadelphia Big Five Player of the Year . 
 Behind Chris Gaston of Fordham , Allen finished second in conference in rebounding average with an 8 @.@ 4 mark in league play , and was fifth in the Atlantic 10 in blocks . In addition , he averaged 11 @.@ 6 points per game , second on the team . For his career , he pulled down 1 @,@ 147 rebounds and scored 1 @,@ 421 points , 24th in Temple history . Temple coach Fran Dunphy has said that Allen " might be the smartest player I 've ever coached in terms of positioning and understanding the game – just his knowledge . " 
 = = = College statistics = = = 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = 2011 NBA draft = = = 
 On April 1 , 2011 , Allen participated in the 2011 Reese 's College All @-@ Star Game held at the Reliant Center in Houston , Texas . He contributed 11 points and eight rebounds as his East team lost to the West 113 – 108 . Chad Ford of ESPN said that Allen was the 99th best prospect in the 2011 NBA draft . Allen sprained his ankle in a workout with his hometown Philadelphia 76ers and was forced to miss the next workout with the New Jersey Nets . The Sixers were not overly concerned with the injury , as they drafted him in the second round with the 50th pick on June 23 . Allen became the 32nd Temple product to be drafted and the first since the New York Knicks selected Mardy Collins with the 29th pick in 2006 . 
 = = = Strasbourg IG = = = 
 On July 15 , 2011 , he signed a contract with Strasbourg IG of France 's <unk> Pro A. The contract included an opt @-@ out clause when the NBA settled its lockout , set to expire on January 30 , 2012 . Allen joined former Richmond foes Kevin Anderson and Justin Harper on Strasbourg IG . He made his debut on October 7 , scoring 10 points and pulling down four rebounds in a 77 – 74 victory over Cholet Basket . The following game , against <unk> Nancy Basket , he grabbed a season @-@ high 13 rebounds and also added 12 points . Allen 's season @-@ high 19 points came on November 10 , when Strasbourg IG defeated Chorale Roanne Basket 93 – 80 . In nine games , Allen averaged 10 @.@ 1 points and 7 @.@ 2 rebounds per game . 
 = = = Philadelphia 76ers = = = 
 = = = = Rookie season = = = = 
 When the NBA ended its lockout , Allen opted @-@ out of his French contract to sign a contract with the Philadelphia 76ers on December 9 , the first day of training camp . Allen made his NBA debut during the 76ers ' 97 – 62 win over the Toronto Raptors on January 7 , 2012 , and grabbed two rebounds . He first saw significant playing time on the January 23 game against the Washington Wizards due to injuries to centers Spencer Hawes and Nikola <unk> . Allen responded by scoring 10 points on 5 – 5 shooting and pulling down six rebounds en route to a 103 – 83 victory . He recorded a season @-@ high 15 points on February 1 against the Chicago Bulls , and a season @-@ high 12 rebounds against the Milwaukee Bucks on April 25 . In 41 regular season games and 15 as a starter , Allen averaged 4 @.@ 1 points and 4 @.@ 2 rebounds per game . 
 Allen raised his averages in the playoffs to 6 @.@ 3 points and 4 @.@ 9 rebounds per game . Coach Doug Collins named him the starting center in the playoff opener against the Bulls . In his first playoff game , Allen sprained his thumb , but the injury was not considered severe . In Game 2 of the series , he nearly posted a double double with 11 points and nine rebounds . The 76ers advanced past the Bulls to face the Boston Celtics in the conference semifinals . Allen hit the " shot of [ his ] life " to help the 76ers defeat the Celtics 82 – 81 in the second game of the series . With the score tied and four minutes left , Andre Iguodala passed the ball to Allen , who hit a 22 foot jumper as the shot clock expired . He earned his postseason minutes partially because of his ability to guard Celtics star Kevin Garnett . The Sixers pushed the series to seven games , but ultimately lost to the Celtics . 
 = = = = 2012 – 13 season = = = = 
 On July 11 , 2012 , Allen re @-@ signed with the Philadelphia 76ers to a reported two @-@ year , $ 6 million contract . He missed two days of training camp to attend to his girlfriend , who gave birth to his son Kai on October 4 . He started the majority of games for the 76ers in his sophomore season at center due to the absence of Andrew Bynum . Allen averaged 5 @.@ 8 points and 5 @.@ 0 rebounds in his second season with the 76ers . 
 = = = = 2013 – 14 season = = = = 
 Allen missed an exhibition game due to a knee injury . He was criticized for missing a practice in October 2013 due to oversleeping . He mainly played backup power forward during the season . Allen missed four games in January 2014 due to a strained right calf . In 51 games , Allen posted averages of 5 @.@ 2 points and 5 @.@ 4 rebounds per game . 
 = = = Indiana Pacers = = = 
 On February 20 , 2014 , Allen and Evan Turner were traded to the Indiana Pacers in exchange for Danny Granger and a second @-@ round draft pick . In eight minutes per game , Allen averaged 2 @.@ 9 points and 2 @.@ 4 rebounds per game . Allen scored 13 points in a match against the 76ers on March 14 and contributed 12 points and 11 rebounds last game of the regular season versus the Orlando Magic . He got married in the summer of 2014 . 
 On July 11 , 2014 , Allen re @-@ signed with the Pacers . He was most effective earlier in the season due to injuries of other players . He missed a January 31 , 2015 game against the Sacramento Kings due to a sore knee . Allen mainly played as a backup power forward and averaged 5 @.@ 0 points and 5 @.@ 1 rebounds in his first full season with the Pacers . 
 On July 27 , 2015 , Allen re @-@ signed once again with the Pacers . 
 = = NBA career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season = = = 
 = = = Playoffs = = = 
 = Edward Pulsford = 
 Edward Pulsford ( 29 September 1844 – 29 September 1919 ) was an English @-@ born Australian politician and free @-@ trade campaigner . 
 Pulsford established a successful business with his father as commission agents in Yorkshire before moving his interests to New South Wales in 1883 . There he became a vigorous campaigner for free trade , and was a co @-@ founder of the Free Trade and Liberal Association in that colony , the body that would later become the machine behind the Free Trade Party . Although his attempts to enter the New South Wales Legislative Assembly were abortive , he was appointed to the Legislative Council in 1895 and served until 1901 , when he was elected to the Senate . An uncompromising opponent of all forms of protectionism , following the 1909 Fusion of the anti @-@ Labour forces he joined the Liberal Party only with reluctance . 
 Pulsford is also remembered for his avid opposition to the White Australia policy and other forms of racial discrimination . Whilst financial editor of the Daily Telegraph he attacked restrictive immigration laws , and he fought against the policy in the state parliament and later in the Senate , where he was one of the few to oppose the 1901 Immigration Restriction Act . This racial tolerance , combined with his opposition to women 's suffrage , has led the economist John Hawkins to describe him as " probably the least racist but perhaps the most sexist member of the Australian Senate in its first decade " . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Edward Pulsford was born at Burslem in Staffordshire on 29 September 1844 . His mother was Mary Ann , née Cutler , and his father , James Eustace Pulsford , was a Baptist minister and businessman . He received a private education and worked with his father as a commission agent ; together they worked in Hull , Yorkshire , from 1870 to 1884 . On 23 February 1870 , he married Mary Charlotte Stainforth at Hull ; she would predecease him . In 1883 Edward embarked for New South Wales , while his father travelled to New York to become resident secretary of the Liverpool , London & Globe Insurance Company . After his arrival in Sydney , Pulsford immediately became involved in the free trade cause , and in 1885 he co @-@ founded the Free Trade and Liberal Association of New South Wales ( <unk> , a forerunner of the Free Trade Party ) with Bernhard Wise . His campaigning on behalf of free trade led to his becoming an honorary member of the Cobden Club . 
 = = Colonial politics = = 
 From its foundation until 1891 , Pulsford was secretary of the <unk> , and became an organiser and ferocious pamphleteer . He received a prize for an essay on " The Beneficial Influence of a Free Trade Policy upon the Colony of New South Wales " , written as a contribution to the 1887 centennial edition of the Year @-@ Book of Australia . He became actively involved in journalism as proprietor of the Armidale Chronicle and financial editor of the Daily Telegraph from 1890 to 1898 . While focusing overwhelmingly on free trade , actively denigrating the neighbouring colony of Victoria 's protectionist policies , he also worked on the compilation of an Australian biographical supplement to Webster 's International Dictionary and supported Federation . 
 Pulsford was a leading proponent of the free @-@ trade cause , although an intended candidacy for the New South Wales Legislative Assembly in 1891 did not eventuate . He had contested a by @-@ election for East Sydney earlier that year , losing to protectionist candidate Walter Bradley . He was nevertheless nominated to the New South Wales Legislative Council in 1895 by the Free Trade Premier , George Reid . He continued his support of free trade policies , but differentiated himself from his colleagues by firmly opposing restrictions on Asian immigration . He had expressed regret concerning the fate of the Australian Aborigines in a Telegraph article in 1888 and also opposed Sir Henry Parkes 's poll tax on the Chinese , and now opposed the continuing restrictive measures passed in 1896 and 1898 . He served as president of the Australian Free Trade and Liberal Association 's New South Wales branch in 1900 and was deputy president of the federal election campaign committee , standing himself for the Senate in New South Wales . 
 = = Federal politics = = 
 At the first federal election in March 1901 , Pulsford was elected as a senator for New South Wales in the sixth and final position , narrowly defeating fellow Free Trader John Gray . He continued his fervent support of free trade and was one of the few senators to oppose the White Australia policy , describing " the whole of the inhabitants of Asia as [ his ] friends " . He opposed the 1901 Immigration Restriction Act , supported Asians ' eligibility for the old @-@ age pension , and decried the treatment of Kanaka labourers as " cattle " . In his opposition to immigration restriction he highlighted the diplomatic insult to Japan and other Asian nations , and published a pamphlet in 1905 supporting the protestations of the Japanese government against the policy . 
 Pulsford spoke for five hours in the debate on the 1902 Customs Tariff Bill , although he later supported time limits for speeches . Missing out on a frontbench portfolio when the Free Traders were briefly in government from 1904 to 1905 , he was absent from parliament for most of 1907 . Described by the Tribune as " the best living authority on Australia 's tariff question " , his pamphlet to the Cobden Club in 1907 attracted a favourable reception . He opposed women 's suffrage on the grounds that it would put Australia " in advance of public opinion throughout the world " , believing it would lead to the " <unk> of women " . 
 The Fusion in 1909 between the Free Trade and Protectionist parties to form the Liberal Party was difficult for Pulsford , who had " no faith in either the old Protection or the new Protection " , and although he did join the new party , his support of any protectionist legislation would be " in order to show that all such legislation must be a failure " . He was defeated at the 1910 election when the Labour Party won all the Senate seats in New South Wales . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Pulsford continued his support for the free @-@ trade cause outside Parliament , and in May 1914 planned to establish a free @-@ trade paper to be circulated around Australia , New Zealand and South Africa , a scheme that was abandoned following the outbreak of World War I. He revised his book Commerce and the Empire ( originally published in 1903 ) in 1917 , arguing that free trade was central to the freedoms the Empire was fighting for , and calling for free trade with Germany after the war . On 2 March 1919 he married Blanche Elspeth Brown at Neutral Bay , but he died later that year on his seventy @-@ fifth birthday , 29 September 1919 . Survived by his second wife and the three sons of his first marriage , Pulsford was buried at Gore Hill cemetery after an Anglican service . 
 = History of slavery in Indiana = 
 Slavery in Indiana occurred between the time of French rule during late seventeenth century and 1826 , with a few traces of slavery afterward . When the United States first forcibly removed the Native Americans from the region , slavery was accepted as a necessity to keep peace with the Indians and the French . When the Indiana Territory was established in 1800 , William Henry Harrison , a former slaveholder , was appointed governor and slavery continued to be tolerated through a series of laws enacted by the appointed legislature . 
 Opposition against slavery began to organize in Indiana around 1805 , and in 1809 abolitionists took control of the territorial legislature and overturned many of the laws permitting retaining of slaves . By the time Indiana was granted statehood in 1816 , the abolitionists were in firm control and slavery was banned in the constitution . In 1820 , an Supreme Court of Indiana ruling in Polly v. Lasselle freed all the remaining slaves in the state . An additional Supreme Court ruling in 1821 freed indentured servant Mary Bateman Clark , helping to bring an end to indentured servitude . 
 With the end of slavery in the state , Indiana became a border state with the southern slave states . Hoosiers like Levi Coffin came to play an important role in the Underground Railroad that helped many slaves escape from the South . Indiana remained anti @-@ slavery and in the American Civil War remained with the Union and contributed men to the war . 
 = = Early existence = = 
 In 1783 , at the end of the American Revolution , the territory that would become Indiana was annexed to the United States . Slavery was already a present institution – the French who had controlled the area only 20 years earlier , and their allies among the Native American Population , had been practicing slavery in the region for at least one hundred and fifty years before the Americans took control . René @-@ Robert Cavelier , Sieur de La Salle , first began explorations in Indiana in the late 1660s . He was accompanied by a Shawnee slave on several of his expeditions . In 1787 Congress organized the territory under the Northwest Ordinance , which prohibited slavery by stating " that there shall be neither slavery nor involuntary servitude in the said territory " . It would later be decided that anyone who purchased a slave outside of the territory could enter and reside there with their slaves . The Ordinance also allowed for preexisting French – Indian slave arrangements . 
 Many Virginian natives living in the territory interpreted the Ordinance as allowing them to have slaves . The Ordinance stated that the Virginians " shall have their possessions and titles confirmed to them , and be protected in the enjoyment of their rights and liberties . " Many decided to keep slaves . Fear of French rebellion kept the courts from acting against slavery , as did the violent actions of those who would kidnap escaped slaves . A court ruling in the Michigan Territory in 1807 stated that preexisting slavery could still exist under the Northwest Ordinance , validated Hoosier slaveholding in the opinions of the slaveholders . 
 = = = Southern influence = = = 
 Many of the territory 's early settlers came from the South . Southern immigrants who were anti @-@ slavery settled in Ohio where a strong anti @-@ slavery movement was underway . The immigrants in favor of slavery generally moved to Indiana where the government was friendly to slaveholders . When they relocated to the Indiana Territory , they brought what few slaves they owned with them . An 1810 census recorded 393 free blacks and 237 slaves in the Indiana Territory . Knox County , where the territorial capital of Indiana , Vincennes , was located , was the center of Indiana slavery . A young Army officer named Charles Larrabee , who was serving in Governor William Henry Harrison ’ s army , summed the Vincennes populace as “ chiefly from Kentucky and Virginia … slavery is tolerated here . ” 
 Most of the initial immigration was attributed to the Revolutionary War and the War of 1812 . After the Revolutionary War , George Rogers Clark and his soldiers , all Virginians , were given land grants in southern Indiana . Many settled in Indiana bringing their Southern ideals with them . After the War of 1812 many veterans of the Western theater were granted land in central Indiana . These soldiers were mostly from Kentucky and the South . They also moved into Indiana , bringing more Southern influence to the state . 
 Southerners of all classes migrated to Indiana . William Henry Harrison , longtime Indiana Territory governor and future United States President , was from the long established aristocracy class of the lowland and coastal South . His class supported slavery . From the non @-@ slaveholding class of the Upland South were migrants such as Abraham Lincoln , whose family is representative of the migration to Indiana from Kentucky and Tennessee . Some of his social class , while not owning slaves , typically condoned the institution . Lincoln 's father worked as a slave catcher and the family of Lincoln 's wife , Mary Todd , owned slaves . But others immigrated to Indiana such as Levi Coffin , a North Carolina Quaker who was an outspoken abolitionist . 
 = = Treatment of slaves = = 
 The first recorded slaves in Indiana were owned by the French traders who entered the region and introduced the practice to the native tribes . Jesuit priests encouraged the tribes they lived among to adopt slavery as an alternative to executing their prisoners in war . According to some classical historians , the decline of cannibalism among the tribes was a direct result of the rise of slavery . Early slaves were often Native Americans who were sold to pay debts . The early slaves typically performed manual labor , helping the traders transport their goods and to build forts and trading posts . While part of new France , laws were enacted to give slaves some protection from their masters . Torture and mutilation of slaves was forbidden , and families were prevented from being forcibly broken up . Other laws allowed slaves to be seized by creditors as payment . Other laws required that if a master had children by a slave , the slave and her children were then to be freed . Their status under the French laws was similar to that of minors . 
 As the territory developed , their tasks changed ; slaves also served as household servants and farm workers , as in the case of William Henry Harrison 's slaves . George Rogers Clark 's two slaves assisted him in running a gristmill in Clarksville . While the pro @-@ slavery faction was in power , laws were passed permitting anyone to seize and return slaves who were more than ten miles from their home , and a one hundred dollar fine was placed on anyone who helped a slave escape . Some slaves , like " Aunt Fannie " , who belonged to Dennis Pennington , refused to be set free . Pennington had freed all his slaves when he left Virginia , but Fannie did not want to be left behind and continued on as a free household servant for the rest of her life . She was buried in the Pennington family cemetery in Corydon , Indiana . Others were not so fortunate as in the case of another black woman who also lived in Corydon . When she tried to escape from her masters she was run down in the street , beaten , and carried back home . The men threatened death to anyone in the town , which was strongly anti @-@ slavery , who interfered . 
 The slaves did not have a large impact on Indiana 's economy as they never became a large percentage of the population and large scale plantation style farms , that were common in the southern states , never developed in Indiana . In 1820 , the year all the state 's slaves were freed , the census only counted 192 out of a population over 65 @,@ 000 . Many slaves had already been freed by that time and there over 1200 free blacks in the state during the same census . 
 = = Indiana Territory = = 
 Slavery in the Indiana Territory was supported by Governors William Henry Harrison and his successor Thomas Posey , who both sought to legalize it in the territory . Both men were appointed by the President of the United States while the office was held by southern slaveholders . Although slavery was not legal under Article 6 of the Northwest Ordinance , Harrison recognized the existing customs of slavery and indenture in the territory , Both men 's slavery positions were resisted by the territory 's population . In a gesture to the residents who lived in the territory before the Northwest Ordinance , Harrison organized a public meeting in 1802 which called for a 10 @-@ year moratorium on the slavery ban . Harrison and Posey were strongly opposed by Jonathan Jennings , Dennis Pennington , and other prominent men who would eventually take over the territorial legislature . 
 Indiana courts never ruled on the Ordinance / slavery issue during the territorial period . When the issue of slavery was in the courts , it “ was always treated as an existing institution and its legality went unchallenged . ” Early Hoosiers , including William Henry Harrison , wanted to have slavery legalized in the new territory . Harrison may have been motivated by the need to appease existing slaveowners , the need for labor in a developing territory , or the desire to attract immigrants from southern colonies . They sought passage of a new law to override the Northwest Ordinance 's ban on slavery . Harrison succeeded in getting permission from Congress for the territory to decide for itself whether slavery should be legalized . Harrison and his party sought to gradually legalize slavery three times ( 1803 , 1807 , and 1809 ) but all three efforts ultimately failed . Harrison succeeded , however , in passing laws that established forms of indentured servitude . 
 Harrison was particularly interested in having slavery legalized . He maintained a plantation style home in Vincennes called Grouseland . Harrison was also in the process of constructing another plantation style farm called Harrison Valley near Corydon in 1807 , the same year he was pushing for slavery to be legalized . 
 In 1803 Harrison asked Congress to suspend the anti @-@ slavery clause of the Northwest Ordinance for ten years . Harrison claimed it was necessary to increase the territory 's population more quickly and attract new settlers . Congress wanted the territory to become economically viable so that the federal government would not longer have to financially support it . In 1803 the entire territory 's population numbered less than 5 @,@ 000 . That year the legislature — which was appointed by Harrison — passed legislation reintroducing indentured servitude . 
 In 1805 the Territory was granted representation in Congress . Pro @-@ slavery Benjamin Parke was elected and supported Harrison 's request to have Congress suspend the ban on slavery in the territory . Parke submitted legislation to outright legalize slavery , but no action was taken on it . The same year , Congress suspended Article Six of the Northwest Ordinance for ten years , and granted the territories covered by it the right to choose for themselves to legalize slavery . By the same act , Congress removed the legislative power from the General Court of the territory and created a Legislative Council that would was to be popularly elected . When the election was complete Davis Floyd was the only anti @-@ slavery member elected ; slavery had not yet become a major issue in the state . That year Harrison persuaded the legislature to begin the debate to legalize slavery . The bill was narrowly defeated because many of the slaveholders in the council wanted a concession from Harrison , namely to recommend creating the Illinois Territory , a concession which he refused to make . 
 = = = Fight to end slavery = = = 
 Harrison 's move to legalize slavery was not taken lightly by President Thomas Jefferson . Although Jefferson was himself a slaveholder , he was opposed to the spread of slavery . Jefferson had been working with James Lemen since at least 1784 and used him as an agent in the Northwest to organize an anti @-@ slavery movement . Lemen succeeded in helping to establish an anti @-@ slavery Baptist church that drew many members . Jefferson sent Lemen to the Indiana territory again in 1807 with the mission to seek out and organize the anti @-@ slavery men of the state and encourage them to take action . Several prominent men had already been stirred by Harrison 's moves to legalize slavery . Dennis Pennington , a former slave holder who had freed his slaves when he moved to Indiana , was chief among the anti @-@ slavery men . Jonathan Jennings , who also attended the meeting , would quickly grow into the party 's leader . Other prominent anti @-@ slavery men included Richard Rue , John Paul , and General William Johnson , all veterans of the Revolution . 
 Later in 1807 , at Lemen 's urging , a mass meeting was held in Springville attended by many of the anti @-@ slavery men within the state . The meeting was held largely in response to Harrison 's attempt to legalize slavery and the fact that he almost succeeded , and likely would soon unless a large anti @-@ slavery faction came to power . The meeting was chaired by John Beggs , with Davis Floyd acting as secretary . Dennis Pennington and others put forth speeches , and resolved to stop the attempt to legalize slavery . They declared their intentions to end the " despised institution " . Their resolution stated : 
 ... a great number of citizens , in various parts of the United States , are preparing , and many have actually emigrated to this Territory , to get free from a Government which does tolerate slavery ... And although it is contended by some , that , at this day , there is a great majority in favor of slavery , whilst the opposite opinion is held by others , the fact is certainly doubtful . But when we take into consideration the vast emigration into this Territory , and of citizens , too , decidedly opposed to the measure , we feel satisfied that , at all events , Congress will suspend any legislative act on this subject until we shall , by the constitution , be admitted into the Union , and have a right to adopt such a constitution , in this respect , as may comport with the wishes of a majority of the citizens .... The toleration of slavery is either right or wrong ; and if Congress should think , with us , that it is wrong , that it is inconsistent with the principles upon which our future constitution is to be formed , your <unk> will rest satisfied that , at least , this subject will not be by them taken up until the constitutional number of the citizens of this Territory shall assume that right . 
 When the petition was signed and circulated , it gained six hundred more signatures than the petition circulated to request the legalization of slavery . The same year , the abolitionists won their first victory over the Harrison faction . In the election for territorial delegate , Jesse B. Thomas , the anti @-@ slavery factions candidate , defeated Harrison 's candidate . 
 By 1809 the territory 's population had climbed to over 20 @,@ 000 . Congress passed legislation that allowed the Indiana Territory to elect a bicameral legislature and made the Legislative Council the upper house It also ordered Harrison to dissolve the existing one and created the Illinois Territory . The effect of these actions , was to cut the pro @-@ slavery faction remaining in the Indiana Territory in half . The election resulted in a sweeping victory for the anti @-@ slavery party . The new assembly quickly passed legislation revoking the indentured servitude laws of 1803 , and introduced legislation to prevent its reintroduction . They also passed laws aimed at preventing slave hunters from removing escaped slaves from the state . 
 The repeal of the laws was met with resentment and violence in Vincennes . An effigy of Jesse Bright was burnt in the street , and Rice Jones , a popular abolitionist , was murdered . 
 = = = Abolitionist victory = = = 
 In 1809 , Dennis Pennington , one of the most outspoken anti @-@ slavery men and a friend of Henry Clay , was elected to the legislature as the representative from Harrison County , and became speaker of the assembly . His prominence allowed him to dominate the legislature . Before the constitutional convention in 1816 , Pennington was quoted as saying " Let us be on our guard when our convention men are chosen that they be men opposed to slavery . " At the constitutional convention , the anti @-@ slavery party was able to take control , electing Jennings as the president of the convention . It was by their actions that slavery was banned by the first constitution . 
 When Indiana sought statehood in 1816 , there was talk of its entering as a slave state among the dwindling group of slavery supporters as illustrated in the March 2 , 1816 edition of the ( Vincennes ) Western Sun , where a " citizen of Gibson " stated , " the best interests of humanity required the admission of slavery into the state . " The eastern half of the state saw much debate over the slavery issue . While the state constitution did outlaw slavery and indentures , much of the population that had immigrated from the South were commoners and not landed slaveholders . Of the 43 men who wrote the constitution , 34 were either born or had once lived in the South , and the constitution was a near copy of the Kentucky constitution , save for the anti @-@ slavery clause . 
 During the first gubernatorial election , Jonathan Jennings 's campaign motto was " No Slavery in Indiana " . He easily defeated pro @-@ slavery candidate Thomas Posey , and upon his victory he declared that Indiana was a " Free State " . He also asked the legislature to pass laws that would stop the " unlawful attempts to seize and carry into bondage persons of color legally entitled to their freedom : and at the same time , as far as practical , to prevent those who rightfully owe service to the citizen of any other State of Territory , from seeking , within the limits of this State ( Indiana ) , a refuge from the possession of their lawful masters . " He stated that such laws would help secure the freedom of many . This request resulted in the creation of a Man Stealing Act aimed to prevent slave hunters from operating in the state . 
 In 1818 Dennis Pennington , then a state senator , had three Kentuckians indicted for violating the Man Stealing Act when they forcibly took a black woman from a home in Harrison County and removed her to Kentucky . Governor Jennings requested the Kentucky Governor send the men to Indiana for trials ; after several years of correspondence the Kentucky governor refused on constitutional grounds . These events led Jennings to eventually have to reverse his position and request that the legislature pass laws to discourage runaway slaves from seeking refuge in Indiana . Jennings said it was needed to " maintain harmony between the states " . 
 From 1810 to 1820 , the number of free blacks in Indiana increased from 400 to 1200 . In 1820 the State Supreme Court case of Polly v. Lasselle ordered all slaves , except those held before the 1787 Northwest Territory Ordinance , to be freed . The new ruling led to a sharp decline in the state 's slave population . In 1820 the census recorded 190 slaves ; by the 1830 census there were only three . 
 In 1823 , when Ohio passed resolutions asking the Federal government for a national ban on slavery , at the urging of Governor William Hendricks , the Indiana General Assembly issued a resolution which was forwarded the Federal government stating : 
 " Resolved That it is expedient that such a system should be predicated upon the principle that the evil of slavery is a national one and that the people and the States of this Union ought mutually to participate in the duties and burdens of removing it Therefore , " Resolved By the General Assembly of the State of Indiana that we do approve of and cordially concur in the aforesaid resolutions of the State of Ohio and that His Excellency the Governor be requested to communicate the same to the Executives of each of the several States in the Union and each of our Senators and Representatives in Congress requesting their cooperation in all national measures to effect the grand object therein embraced . " 
 = = Indiana state = = 
 = = = Remnants of slavery = = = 
