 Even with statehood , there was still slavery in Indiana . Despite slavery and indentures becoming illegal in 1816 due to the state constitution , the 1820 federal census listed 190 slaves in Indiana . Many Hoosier slaveholders felt that the 1816 constitution did not cover preexisting slavery ; others just did not care if it was illegal . In eastern Indiana nearly all slaveholders immediately freed their slaves . But the majority of slaveholders in western counties , especially in Knox , decided to keep their slaves . The Vincennes newspaper Western Sun had numerous times advertised " indentured Negroes and other slaves " , a sign of the approval of slavery in the area . " In Knox County , virtually all of the ( slave ) suits were denied by the County Court in 1817 and 1818 . " A black woman known as Polly was held slave by French trader Hyacinthe Lasselle of Vincennes . Polly sued in 1820 for her freedom , but was denied in the Knox County Court . She appealed to the Indiana Supreme Court , who ruled in her favor that she should be free . But even after this decision , there was slavery in Indiana . The federal census of 1830 still showed three slaves in Indiana : one each in Orange County , Decatur County , and Warrick County . A separate local census in Knox County in 1830 showed the presence of 32 slaves . Even in 1840 there were three slaves listed in the federal census as being in Indiana : a girl in Putnam County and a man and girl in Rush County . 
 = = = Views upon slavery = = = 
 A traveler from New York , Dr. Samuel Bernard Judah , described Vincennes in 1829 as having many blacks , making the observation of them being “ generally poorly clad … poor miserable race ” . Indiana Governor Noah Noble spoke with pride in December 1837 on how Indiana helped slaveholders recapture their escaped slaves . When Kentucky expressed displeasure at how some Hoosiers helped runaways , the Indiana legislature passed a resolution that stated acts by Northerners to interfere with the capture of runaways was “ unpatriotic and injurious to the stability of the Union . ” 
 In 1851 Indiana adopted a new constitution , and among its new clauses was one that prohibited blacks from immigrating to Indiana . The prohibition was intended to be a punishment to the slavery states . Like several other northern states , Indiana lawmakers believed the majority of free blacks were uneducated and ill equipped to care for themselves . They believed since the South put them in that condition , they should be responsible for the " burden " of caring for them . This view , that the South should clean up its own mess , remained dominant even after the Civil War , and the clause in Indiana 's constitution was not repealed until the 20th century . 
 = = = Abraham Lincoln = = = 
 Abraham Lincoln lived in Indiana from 1816 until 1830 , age 7 to 21 . It was during these years that Lincoln first encountered slavery and began to form his opinions . Growing up in a climate where the state politics were run by men like Jennings and Pennington would have much influence on the development of Lincoln 's views . 
 In 1860 when the American Civil War broke out , Indiana would remain part of the Union and contribute over 200 @,@ 000 men to suppress the rebellion . By that act Hoosiers helped to outlaw slavery in the United States forever . 
 = = = Underground Railroad = = = 
 Many Indiana residents participated in the underground railroad . Two major arteries in the underground railroad traveled through Indiana . Tell City , Evansville , and Jeffersonville were two gateways to the underground railroad . An important stopover was Westfield , where food and hiding places were provided to slaves trying to reach Canada . Other safe houses dotted Indiana , including one in Town Clock Church ( pictured ) . Escaping slaves who entered Indiana would be ferried from safe house to safe house northward , usually into Michigan , where they could cross safely to Windsor , in Ontario , Canada . 
 In one of the more famous events of the underground railroad , Eliza Harris , a slave from Kentucky , crossed the Ohio River one winter 's night when it froze over . She was aided in her escape by Levi Coffin of Fountain City , and eventually escaped to Ontario after being guided by Hoosiers from safe house to safe house through Indiana . Her story was the inspiration for the book Uncle Tom 's Cabin . Coffin and his wife would help as many as two thousand slaves escape the South . 
 = Aymer de Valence , 2nd Earl of Pembroke = 
 Aymer de Valence , 2nd Earl of Pembroke ( c . 1275 – 23 June 1324 ) was a Franco @-@ English nobleman . Though primarily active in England , he also had strong connections with the French royal house . One of the wealthiest and most powerful men of his age , he was a central player in the conflicts between Edward II of England and his nobility , particularly Thomas , 2nd Earl of Lancaster . Pembroke was one of the Lords Ordainers appointed to restrict the power of Edward II and his favourite Piers Gaveston . His position changed with the great insult he suffered when Gaveston , as a prisoner in his custody whom he had sworn to protect , was removed and beheaded on the instigation of Lancaster . This led Pembroke into close and lifelong cooperation with the King . Later in life , however , political circumstances combined with financial difficulties would cause him problems , driving him away from the centre of power . 
 Though earlier historians saw Pembroke as the head of a ' middle party ' , between the extremes of Lancaster and the king , the modern consensus is that he remained essentially loyal to Edward throughout most of his career . Pembroke was married twice , and left no legitimate issue , though he did have a bastard son . He is today remembered primarily through his wife 's , Marie de St Pol , foundation of Pembroke College , Cambridge , and for his splendid tomb that can still be seen in Westminster Abbey . He was also an important figure in the wars against Robert the Bruce . 
 = = Family and early years = = 
 Aymer was the son of William de Valence , son of Hugh X , Count of La Marche and Isabella of Angoulême . William was Henry III 's half @-@ brother through his mother ’ s prior marriage to King John , and as such gained a central position in the Kingdom of England . He had come to the earldom of Pembroke through his marriage to Joan de <unk> , granddaughter of William Marshal . Aymer was the third son of his family , so little is known of his birth and early years . He is believed to have been born some time between 1270 and 1275 . As his father was on crusade with Lord Edward until January 1273 , a date towards the end of this period is more likely . With the death in battle in Wales of his remaining brother William in 1282 ( John , the elder brother , was dead in 1277 ) , Aymer found himself heir to the Earldom of Pembroke . William de Valence died in 1296 , and Aymer inherited his father 's French lands , but had to wait until his mother died in 1307 to succeed to the Earldom . Through inheritance and marriages his lands consisted of – apart from the county palatine in Pembrokeshire – property spread out across England primarily in a strip from Gloucestershire to East Anglia , in south @-@ east Ireland ( Wexford ) , and French lands in the <unk> and Calais areas . 
 In 1297 he accompanied Edward I on a campaign to Flanders , and seems to have been knighted by this time . With his French connections he was in the following years a valuable diplomat in France for the English King . He also served as military commander in Scotland . He won an important victory over Robert the Bruce in 1306 at the Battle of Methven , only to be defeated by Bruce at Loudoun Hill the next year . 
 = = The Ordinances and Piers Gaveston = = 
 Edward I died in 1307 and was succeeded by his son Edward II . The new King at first enjoyed the good will of his nobility , Valence among them . Conflict soon ensued , however , connected especially with the enormous unpopularity of Edward 's favourite Piers Gaveston . Gaveston 's arrogance towards the peers , and his control over Edward , united the Baronage in opposition to the King . In 1311 the initiative known as the Ordinances was introduced , severely limiting Royal powers in financial matters and in the appointment of officers . Equally important , Gaveston was expelled from the realm - as Edward I had already done once before . Pembroke , who was not among the most radical of the Ordainers , and had earlier been sympathetic with the King , had now realised the necessity of exiling Gaveston . 
 When Gaveston without permission returned from exile later the same year , a Baronial council entrusted Pembroke and The Earl of Surrey , with the task of taking him into custody . This they did on 19 May 1312 , but not long after Thomas of Lancaster , acting with the Earls of Warwick , Hereford and Arundel , seized Gaveston and executed him on 19 June . This criminal act had the effect of garnering support for the King , and marginalising the rebellious earls . As far as Pembroke is concerned , the seizing and execution of a prisoner in his custody was a breach of the most fundamental chivalric codes , and a serious affront to his honour . The event must therefore be seen as pivotal in turning his sympathies away from the rebels and towards the King . 
 = = Later years = = 
 In the following years Pembroke worked closely with the King . He was appointed the King ’ s lieutenant in Scotland in 1314 , and was present at the disastrous English defeat at the Battle of Bannockburn , where he helped lead Edward away from the field of battle . In 1317 , however , while returning from a papal embassy to Avignon , he was captured by a Jean de <unk> , and held for ransom in Germany . The ransom of £ 10 @,@ 400 was to cause Pembroke significant financial difficulties for the remainder of his life . 
 Although ostracised because of the murder of Gaveston , Thomas of Lancaster had regained virtual control of royal government in the period after Bannockburn . Proving himself as incapable to rule as Edward , however , he soon grew unpopular . Pembroke was one of the magnates who in the years 1316 @-@ 18 tried to prevent civil war from breaking out between the supporters of Edward and those of Lancaster , and he helped negotiate the Treaty of Leake in 1318 , restoring Edward to power . Peace did not last long , however , as the King by now had taken on Hugh Despenser the younger as another favourite , in much the same position as Gaveston . Pembroke 's attempts at reconciliation eventually failed , and civil war broke out in 1321 . In 1322 Lancaster was defeated at the Battle of Boroughbridge , and executed . Pembroke was among the Earls behind the conviction . Also in 1322 , Pembroke founded a leper hospital in Gravesend . 
 After Boroughbridge Pembroke found himself in a difficult situation . The opponents of Hugh Despenser and his father had lost all faith in him , but at the same time he found himself marginalised at court where the Despensers ' power grew more and more complete . On top of this came his financial problems . On 24 June 1324 , while on an embassy to France , he suddenly collapsed and died while lodging somewhere in Picardy . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 T.F. Tout , in 1914 one of the first historians to make a thorough academic study of the period , considered Pembroke the one favourable exception in an age of small @-@ minded and incompetent leaders . Tout wrote of a ' middle party ' , led by Pembroke , representing a moderate position between the extremes of Edward and Lancaster . This ' middle party ' supposedly took control of royal government through the Treaty of Leake in 1318 . In his authoritative study of 1972 , <unk> Phillips rejects this view . In spite of misgivings with the King ’ s favourites , Pembroke was consistently loyal to Edward . What was accomplished in 1318 was not the takeover by a ' middle party ' , but simply a restoration of royal power . 
 Aymer and his sister Agnes rented the one of the old manor houses of Dagenham in Essex , which has been called Valence House ever since . 
 Aymer married twice ; his first marriage , before 1295 , was to Beatrice , daughter of Raoul de Clermont , Lord of Nesle in Picardy and Constable of France . Beatrice died in 1320 , and in 1321 he married Marie de St Pol , daughter of Gui de Châtillon , Count of St Pol and Butler of France . He never had any legitimate children , but he had an illegitimate son , Henry de Valence , whose mother is unknown . Pembroke 's most lasting legacy is probably through his second wife , who in 1347 founded Pembroke College , Cambridge . The family arms are still represented on the dexter side of the college arms . Aymer de Valence was buried in Westminster Abbey , where his tomb can still be seen as a splendid example of late gothic architecture , elaborating on the design of the nearby tomb of Edmund Crouchback . 
 = Paparazzi ( Lady Gaga song ) = 
 " Paparazzi " is a song by American singer @-@ songwriter Lady Gaga from her debut studio album , The Fame ( 2008 ) . It was released as the fifth and final single by Interscope Records . Gaga wrote and produced the song with Rob Fusari . The song portrays Gaga 's struggles in her quest for fame , as well as balancing success and love . Musically , it is an up @-@ tempo dance @-@ pop song whose lyrics describe a stalker following somebody to grab attention and fame . 
 Although released on July 6 , 2009 , in the United Kingdom and four days later in Australia , " LoveGame " initially had been planned as the third single release in the former but deeming its lyrics and music video potentially controversial , it was decided that " Paparazzi " would be released instead . " Paparazzi " was critically acclaimed for its " fun @-@ filled " and club @-@ friendly nature . It was also commercially successful , reaching top @-@ ten positions in the music charts of Australia , Canada , Ireland , the United Kingdom , and the United States and topping the charts in the Czech Republic and Germany . 
 The accompanying music video portrays Gaga as a doomed starlet , hounded by photographers , who is almost killed by her boyfriend . It shows her survival , comeback , revenge on her boyfriend , and experiences on the way to fame . The video won two MTV Video Music Awards in 2009 for Best Art Direction and Best Special Effects . Gaga also performed the song at the 2009 MTV Video Music Awards in a performance art piece symbolizing the negative effect of fame leading to death . Additional live performances of the song include on The Fame Ball Tour , where it was the opening song , on an October 2009 episode of Saturday Night Live and on The Monster Ball Tour . On the first leg of the tour , she appeared as a Rapunzel @-@ like character ; from the second leg onward , she performed the song alongside a giant anglerfish ( " The Fame Monster " ) who , attempting to devour her , was killed after her leotard shot sparks into the creature . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 Before she rose to fame , Lady Gaga met music producer Rob Fusari in March 2006 and began dating him in May . Gaga traveled daily to New Jersey to work on songs she had written and compose new material with Fusari . While working together , he compared some of her vocal harmonies to those of Freddie Mercury , lead singer of Queen . He also created the " Lady Gaga " moniker after the Queen song " Radio Ga Ga " . Although the musical relationship between Fusari and Gaga was unsuccessful at first , the pair soon started writing more songs for Gaga . Towards the end of 2007 , Gaga 's management company introduced her to songwriter and producer RedOne , whom they also managed . 
 By 2008 , Gaga relocated to Los Angeles in order to work extensively with her record label to complete her debut album , The Fame , and set up her own creative team called the Haus of Gaga . " Paparazzi " was one of the songs written by Gaga and Fusari who also produced the track . In a 2009 interview with Rolling Stone , Gaga recalled her relationship with a heavy metal drummer called Luke , who became an inspiration for most of the songs on The Fame , including " Paparazzi " . The song became a symbol for Gaga to escape her own narcissism and desire for fame . She was infatuated with Luke , calling him " the love of her life " , and ready to be his fan , to turn the camera around and photograph him . 
 To the Australian Daily Telegraph , Gaga explained that " Paparazzi " was about struggling to balance success and love . Further explanations said that the song was about trying to win the paparazzi and the media in one 's favor . " It 's a love song for the cameras , but it 's also a love song about fame or love – can you have both , or can you only have one " , she concluded . " Paparazzi " was the album 's third single in Ireland , Italy and the United Kingdom , the fourth in Canada and the United States and the fifth in Australia , France and New Zealand . Although released on July 6 , 2009 , in the United Kingdom and four days later in Australia , " LoveGame " initially had been planned as the third single release in the former but deeming its lyrics and music video potentially controversial , it was decided that " Paparazzi " would be released instead . 
 = = Recording and composition = = 
 " Paparazzi " was recorded at 150 Studios in Parsippany @-@ Troy Hills , New Jersey . Along with the production and songwriting of the track , Gaga also did the background vocals and played piano and synthesizer . Calvin " Sci @-@ Fidelty " Gaines did the programming and Fusari did the audio engineering and recording . Other personnel involved in creating the final version of the song included Robert Orton who did the audio mixing , and Gene Grimaldi who mastered the song at Oasis Mastering Studios , Burbank , California . 
 " Paparazzi " has a similar up @-@ tempo composition to the previous singles " Just Dance " and " Poker Face " and carries a sultry beat , while its composition is of the dance @-@ pop genre . According to the sheet music published by Sony / ATV Music Publishing , the song has a moderate electro @-@ synth groove . It is composed in the key of C minor with a tempo of 115 beats per minute . It is set in common time , and Gaga 's vocal range spans from a low @-@ note of G3 to the high @-@ note of E ♭ 5 . The verses follow in the chord progression of Cm – A ♭ – Cm and the chorus uses an A ♭ – E ♭ – Fm – D ♭ progression . The lyrics of " Paparazzi " deal with stalking and the trappings of fame . Gaga sings about her desire to get attention from the cameras : " I 'm your biggest fan / I 'll follow you until you love me / Papa , paparazzi . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The song received positive reviews from music critics . In 2011 , Rolling Stone called it the second greatest Gaga song of all time , praising the song 's theme and beat . Jill Menze of Billboard , while reviewing The Fame Ball Tour , complimented Gaga 's vocals on the song by saying , " The fame @-@ obsessed ballad ' Paparazzi ' showed how adept she can be with her range . " Alexis Petridis of The Guardian said that , " You may quickly tire of hearing the album 's theme constantly reiterated , but the tune of ' Paparazzi ' takes up residence in your brain and refuses to budge . " Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic called the song clever and said that it " functions simultaneously as glorious pop trash and a wicked parody of it . " 
 Priya Elan of The Times thought that " even the trio of songs that provides the core of the album 's celebrity theme ( ' Paparazzi ' , ' Beautiful Dirty Rich ' , and the title track ) don 't ruminate on the addictive inanity of fame , choosing instead to observe passively . " David Balls from Digital Spy praised Gaga 's decision of releasing a mid @-@ tempo track after two <unk> ( " Just Dance " and " Poker Face " ) saying that " thanks to a typically catchy chorus and some smart , celebrity @-@ themed lyrics , very nearly as thrilling in the finish . Backed with a hilariously self @-@ indulgent video , it seems GaGa still has us firmly in her clutch and , ahem , squealing for more . " 
 Evan Sawdey of PopMatters said that both " Paparazzi " and the earlier single " Poker Face " are comparable with the musical styles of first single " Just Dance " but added that " never once does it feel like Gaga is deliberately repeating herself ; instead , her faults only come from covering territory that she 's obviously not prepared for . " Freedom du Lac of The Washington Post said that even though Gaga turns somewhat serious while disapprovingly singing " Paparazzi " , the song comes across as flat and faceless as well as vapid . Erika Howard of the New Times Broward @-@ Palm Beach called it the most telling track from the album . 
 Jon Caramanica of The New York Times said that " ' Paparazzi ' is a love letter from camera to subject but stops short of admitting that the affection runs both ways . Any notion that Lady Gaga is sketching an elaborate stunt is stopped cold at the lyric sheet , a perverse flaunting of simplicity that betrays no cynicism whatsoever . " Pitchfork Media ranked " Paparazzi " number 83 on their list of 2009 's 100 best tracks . NME ranked it at number 9 in their list of the best songs of 2009 . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the United States , the song debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 at number 74 on the issue dated September 12 , 2009 , and reached a peak of number six , becoming her fourth consecutive top @-@ ten song on the chart . With the song , Gaga joined Christina Aguilera , Beyoncé , and Fergie as the only women this decade to collect four Hot 100 top @-@ tens from a debut album . It also reached the top of Billboard 's Pop Songs chart , thus making Gaga the first artist in the seventeen @-@ year history of Pop Songs chart to have her first four singles from a debut album reach the top of the chart . The song also topped the Hot Dance Club Songs chart . It has sold 3 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 paid digital downloads in the United States as of April 2015 , according to Nielsen Soundscan . It became Gaga 's fourth song to top the three @-@ million mark , and was certified three @-@ times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . " Paparazzi " debuted on the Canadian Hot 100 at number 92 and moved up to number 57 the following week becoming the week 's greatest digital gainer . The song ultimately peaked at number three on the chart , in its 13th week . 
 " Paparazzi " debuted on the official Australian Singles Chart at number seventy @-@ three on the issue dated June 1 , 2009 and leaped to twenty @-@ seven the next week . The song ultimately peaked at number two , giving Gaga her fourth top five single in Australia . The song was certified two @-@ times platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for shipment of 140 @,@ 000 copies . In New Zealand , " Paparazzi " debuted at number twenty @-@ three on the week ending June 22 , 2009 and reached a peak of number five . The song was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) after fourteen weeks on the chart , for shipping over 7 @,@ 500 copies . 
 In the UK , " Paparazzi " debuted on the UK Singles Chart at number ninety @-@ nine in February 2009 due to digital downloads after the release of The Fame . It reached number thirteen for the issue dated June 21 , 2009 , after jumping from forty @-@ three to this position from the last week . The next week the song further climbed to number eight and ultimately peaked at number four . It was certified Platinum by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) and sold a total of 585 @,@ 000 copies according to the Official Charts Company . " Paparazzi " debuted at number thirty @-@ eight on the Irish Singles Chart and peaked at number four . " Paparazzi " reached number one in Germany , making it her second chart @-@ topper there . The song also debuted on the Dutch Top 40 at number twenty @-@ seven on the issue dated July 18 , 2009 . It peaked at number four on its sixth week on the chart . In Italy , the song debuted at number nineteen and then climbed to number three , becoming Gaga 's second top three there . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The music video was directed by Swedish director , Jonas Åkerlund , who has previously directed music videos for artists like The Smashing Pumpkins , Madonna , Moby , Rammstein , and U2 . His wife Bea Åkerlund was hired as Gaga 's stylist for the video . It was filmed at Villa de Leon in Malibu , California and at Chateau d 'Or in Bel Air , Los Angeles . Gaga told MTV News that she was satisfied with the finished version of the " Paparazzi " video , likening it to a short film . In an interview with The Canadian Press on May 26 , 2009 , Gaga cited her video as " the most amazing creative work that [ she 's ] put together so far . " She went on to describe the message of the video : 
 " It has a real , genuine , powerful message about fame @-@ whoring and death and the demise of the celebrity , and what that does to young people . The video explores ideas about sort of hyperbolic situations that people will go to in order to be famous . Most specifically , pornography and murder . These are some of the major themes in the video . 
 Later , in her V magazine cover story , Gaga believed that Princess Diana was referenced in the video , claiming she died because of being a martyr symbolic of fame . The video was supposed to premiere on June 4 , 2009 , in the United Kingdom and Ireland , on Channel 4 . However , while touring in Australia , Gaga posted a message on her Twitter account on May 29 , 2009 saying " Stop leaking my motherfucking videos " , which referred to the video being released without the singer 's consent . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The music video is eight minutes long . Swedish actor Alexander Skarsgård plays Gaga 's boyfriend . The video features a murderous plot line involving a doomed starlet who is constantly followed by photographers . The video opens with a shot of a seaside mansion , where Gaga and her boyfriend are shown lying on a bed talking in Swedish . They move to the balcony and start making out ; however , when hidden photographers start taking pictures of them , Gaga realizes that her boyfriend has set the paparazzi to photograph her and tries to stop him . Her struggles nevertheless remain futile even when she punches him , and in a final frantic attempt at defense , she smashes a nearby bottle of liquor into his face . The enraged boyfriend throws her over the balcony . Gaga lies on the ground in her own blood as the photographers continue take pictures of her bloody body and tabloid headlines proclaim that her career is over . According to Rolling Stone this scene pays homage to Alfred Hitchcock 's film Vertigo . 
 Gaga is shown getting out of a limousine , being carried by male dancers to a wheelchair . It is during this scene , that the song starts . As the dancers gyrate around her , she starts walking down the carpet with the help of a pair of crutches while wearing a metallic bustier and a matching helmet . The metallic outfit is a reference to the film Metropolis . These scenes are interspersed with scenes of dead models lying around the mansion . Next Gaga is shown on a golden couch where she makes out with a trio of hair metal rockers during the line " Loving you is cherry pie " . The trio , which consist of the triplets Calle " <unk> " Landeberg , Nisse " Izzy " Landeberg , and Pelle " Rock " Landeberg are known as Snake of Eden and they are from the reality television dating program Daisy of Love . According to MTV this scene is a reference to the song " Cherry Pie " by American glam band Warrant . The video continues through the intermediate bridge with Gaga wearing a dress made up of film strips and a towering feathered Mohawk headdress . 
 In the next scene , Gaga and her eye @-@ patch wearing boyfriend are reading magazines on a sofa in a tea room . Gaga wears a yellow jumpsuit with circular glasses and shoulder pads . The Guardian compared this look with that of Minnie Mouse . She finally takes her revenge on her boyfriend by discreetly poisoning his drink with white powder concealed in her ring . As he falls dead , Gaga calls 9 @-@ 1 @-@ 1 and declares that she just killed her boyfriend . The police arrive at the mansion and arrest Gaga who , wearing a tall ice cream cone corkscrew wig , walks to the police car as the paparazzi surround her once again . Images flash by , with newspapers proclaiming her innocence and that Gaga is back in the spotlight and has regained her fame . The video ends with Gaga posing for mug shots like a fashion model while wearing a tulip shaped metallic dress similar to the single cover . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Rolling Stone writer Daniel Kreps compared the video with the music video of " November Rain . " The scenes of the dead models were described as stomach turning while he complimented the video for " brimming with cinematic style [ so ] that it ’ s hard to take your eyes off it , though it will likely be labeled as a little self @-@ indulgent . " He also commented on the leaking of the video saying that it " warranted more than just a simple leak ; it deserved a red carpet . " Anna Pickard from The Guardian complimented the video saying that " quite a lot of work has gone into it " . However , she opined that the video was too long . Entertainment Weekly gave a positive review of the video , saying it " gives us even more of the next @-@ level cuckoo we 've come to expect from the girl born Stefani Joanne Angelina Germanotta . " The paparazzi theme of the video was compared to Britney Spears 's 2004 music video , " Everytime " . MTV News called the video a " 1940s romantic @-@ epic @-@ style video " that " proves once and for all that Gaga is a true original with a unique vision . " The video was nominated for five VMAs at the 2009 awards in the categories of Best Direction , Best Editing , Best Special Effects , Best Cinematography and Best Art Direction . Along with four other nominations for " Poker Face " , she and Beyoncé were tied for most nominations that year . The video won the award for Best Art Direction and Best Special Effects . The music video for Gaga 's single " Telephone " is a continuation of the " Paparazzi " music video , and is a short film as well . The video picks up right where " Paparazzi " left off ; starting with Gaga in prison . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Gaga performed " Paparazzi " live on the UK program , The Album Chart Show on February 14 , 2009 as promotion for The Fame . The song was performed at Capital Radio 95 @.@ 8 FM in an acoustic piano version on May 1 , 2009 . On June 26 , 2009 , Gaga performed the song at the Glastonbury Festival emerging from a silver case on stage . The song was a major part of Gaga 's performance in her first headlining Fame Ball tour as the opening number of the setlist . The show started with a video intro called " The Heart " where Gaga played an alternate persona called Candy Warhol . She wore a silver and black short skirt like a tutu and shaped like peplum on both sides . She was surrounded by her dancers holding plates which were encrusted with crystals and completely hid them . The stage was surrounded by mechanical fog and heavy lighting was being emitted from the background . 
 It was also performed at the 2009 MTV Video Music Awards . The performance began with Gaga lying on the floor , on a set that was described as an ornate mansion . Gaga staggered across the stage and pirouetted behind a dancer in a lily @-@ white wheelchair . She made her way to a white grand piano which she played by placing one foot up on the keyboard . Once again , she staggered across the stage , with theatrical blood dripping from her ribcage . She collapsed on the stage wailing in agony as one of the dancers gently lifted her . Gaga then hung <unk> with one hand rising above her dancers and blood smeared on her face with a golden halo being projected on the screen behind her . The ending climax of the performance pays homage to a similar sounding ending climax in " A Day In The Life " by The Beatles . She later commented that the performance was for her fans : " I wanted to say something honest and real and not just give a performance where I was jacking off on stage the whole time about my record , " [ ... ] It was really for my fans , who I knew would be at home cheering and swooning . " In a poll conducted by Billboard , the performance was ranked as the fourth best in the history of MTV Video Music Awards . 
 The song was performed by Gaga in a similar choreography at the thirty @-@ fifth season of NBC 's late night comedy show Saturday Night Live . It was also present on the set list of Gaga 's The Monster Ball Tour . She wore multiple donned braided extensions and was perched atop a railing . From each of her braids , a dancer was attached on the stage . A backdrop of stars were shown during the performance . During the revised shows of The Monster Ball , Gaga changed the concept and the performance of the song . She wore an emerald green dress by Thierry Mugler , and was attacked by a giant , mechanical Angler fish . Gaga then removed the dress to reveal a leotard of the same color and during the bridge she is lowered beneath the stage to acquire her pyro @-@ <unk> bra . In the final chorus of the song Gaga returns and kills the monster with the sparks from the bra . 
 The song was performed on the Born This Way Ball and ArtRave : The Artpop Ball tours ; in the latter she dressed up in a polka @-@ dotted rubber outfit with tentacles growing out around her waist and her head . Rob Sheffield from Rolling Stone described her look as " she had an inflatable rubber order of fried calamari growing out of her spine " , while Adam Carlson from Billboard called the performance as reminiscing a " dancing Ursula from The Little Mermaid " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Lady Gaga – vocals , songwriting , co @-@ production , piano , synthesizer 
 Rob Fusari – songwriting , production 
 Calvin " Sci @-@ Fidelty " Gaines – programming 
 Robert Orton – audio mixing 
 Gene Grimaldi – audio mastering at Oasis Mastering , Burbank , California 
 Recorded at 150 Studios , Parsippany @-@ Troy Hills , New Jersey 
 Credits adapted from The Fame album liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Rogers Locomotive and Machine Works = 
 Rogers Locomotive and Machine Works was a 19th @-@ century manufacturer of railroad steam locomotives based in Paterson , in Passaic County , New Jersey , in the United States . It built more than six thousand steam locomotives for railroads around the world . Most railroads in 19th @-@ century United States rostered at least one Rogers @-@ built locomotive . The company 's most famous product was a locomotive named The General , built in December 1855 , which was one of the principals of the Great Locomotive Chase of the American Civil War . 
 The company was founded by Thomas Rogers in an 1832 partnership with Morris Ketchum and Jasper Grosvenor as Rogers , Ketchum and Grosvenor . Rogers remained president until his death in 1856 when his son , Jacob S. Rogers , took the position and reorganized the company as Rogers Locomotive and Machine Works . The younger Rogers led the company until he retired in 1893 . Robert S. Hughes then became president and reorganized the company as Rogers Locomotive Company , which he led until his death in 1900 . 
 Rogers avoided the American Locomotive Company ( ALCO ) merger in 1901 through closing and reopening as Rogers Locomotive Works . The company remained independent until 1905 , when ALCO purchased it ; ALCO continued building new steam locomotives at the Rogers plant until 1913 . ALCO used the Rogers facilities through the 1920s as a parts storage facility and warehouse , but eventually sold the property to private investors . Today , several Rogers @-@ built locomotives exist in railroad museums around the world , and the plant 's erecting shop is preserved as the Thomas Rogers Building ; it is the current location of the Paterson Museum , whose mission is to preserve and display Paterson 's industrial history . 
 = = 1831 to 1856 : Thomas Rogers era = = 
 The firm that was to become Rogers Locomotive Works began in 1831 . Thomas Rogers had been designing and building machinery for textile manufacturing for nearly 20 years when he sold his interest in Godwin , Rogers & Company ( of which he was the Rogers part of the name ) in June of that year . Rogers set out on his own with a new company called Jefferson Works in Paterson , New Jersey . The Jefferson Works built textile and agricultural machinery for a year before Rogers met the two men who would help transform the company into a major locomotive manufacturer . 
 In 1832 , Rogers partnered with two investors from New York City , Morris Ketchum and Jasper Grosvenor . Jefferson Works was renamed Rogers , Ketchum & Grosvenor , and the company began to diversify into the railroad industry . The company soon manufactured springs , axles and other small parts for railroad use . 
 The first locomotive that Rogers ' company assembled was actually built by Robert Stephenson and Company of England in 1835 . This locomotive was the McNeil for the Paterson and Hudson River Railroad . It took another two years before Rogers received its first order for a complete locomotive . In 1837 , the Mad River and Lake Erie Railroad ordered two locomotives from Rogers to form the beginning of the railroad 's roster . The first of these two locomotives was the Sandusky , which became the first locomotive to cross the Allegheny Mountains ( albeit by canal boat and not by rail ) , and the first locomotive to operate in Ohio . 
 Sandusky included features designed by Thomas Rogers that had not been seen in locomotive construction to date . It was also the first locomotive to use cast iron driving wheels , and the wheels included built @-@ in counterweights to reduce the amount of wear on the track caused by the weight of the driving rod and wheel all coming down at once during the wheels ' rotations . Before Sandusky 's construction , driving wheels were typically built with wooden spokes , much like wagon wheels . Some accounts also state that Sandusky was the first locomotive to feature a whistle , but this has since been proven false . 
 Rogers was not working completely alone in American locomotive manufacturing . In 1837 , in addition to building the company 's first locomotive , Rogers also filled orders from fellow locomotive builders Matthias W. Baldwin ( founder of Baldwin Locomotive Works ) and William Norris ( founder of Norris Locomotive Works ) for locomotive tires of various sizes . Once Rogers started working on his own locomotives , however , no further orders from either Baldwin or Norris were forthcoming . 
 Within Rogers ' own shop , William Swinburne worked as the shop foreman until he moved on to form his own locomotive manufacturing company , Swinburne , Smith and Company in 1845 . After Swinburne left Rogers , John Cooke also worked at the Rogers plant . Like Swinburne , Cooke later went on to form his own locomotive manufacturing firm , Danforth , Cooke & Company . Another engineer who worked at Rogers was <unk> Colburn , the well known locomotive engineer and , later editor and publisher . Colburn was , around 1854 , " superintendent and / or consultant " at the works where he introduced a number of improvements in locomotive design . His assistant was William S. Hudson who succeeded Rogers after he died in 1856 , and was responsible for further engineering enhancement . 
 Rogers locomotives were , from very early in the company 's history , seen as powerful , capable engines on American railroads . The Uncle Sam , serial number 11 , a 4 @-@ 2 @-@ 0 ( a locomotive with two unpowered axles in front , followed by one powered axle ) built in 1839 for the New Jersey Railroad and Transportation Company , was noted by American Railroad Journal for hauling a 24 @-@ car train up a grade of 26 feet per mile ( 4 @.@ 9 m / km ) or 0 @.@ 49 % at 24 @.@ 5 mph ( 39 @.@ 4 km / h ) . In 1846 , Rogers built what is referred to as the largest 6 @-@ wheel truck engine ( 4 @-@ 2 @-@ 0 ) in the United States ; the Licking , serial number 92 , built for the Mansfield and Sandusky Railroad , generated 110 psi ( 760 kPa ) of steam pressure and could pull a 380 @-@ short @-@ ton ( 345 t ; 339 @-@ long @-@ ton ) train up a grade of 16 feet per mile ( 3 m / km ) or 0 @.@ 3 % . 
 Arguably , the most famous locomotive to come out of the Rogers shops was built in 1855 . Rogers built a 4 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 , serial number 631 , in December of that year for the Western and Atlantic Railroad . The railroad named the locomotive The General . This locomotive , best known for being at the heart of an American Civil War incident , is now on display at the Southern Museum of Civil War and Locomotive History ( the Big Shanty Museum ) in Kennesaw , Georgia . 
 Not only were Rogers locomotives known in the industry for their power , but they were also known for their endurance . It is estimated that one locomotive , Illinois Central Railroad 4 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 number 23 , serial number 449 , built in December 1853 , operated over one million miles ( 1 @.@ 6 × 106 km ) in its thirty @-@ year career on the Illinois Central . 
 = = 1856 to 1905 : Reorganization and decline = = 
 When Thomas Rogers died in 1856 , his son Jacob S. Rogers reorganized RK & G , with Ketchum and Grosvenor remaining as investors , as the Rogers Locomotive & Machine Works . Rogers built their first 2 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 , which is sometimes referred to as the first 2 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 built in the United States , in 1863 for the New Jersey Railroad and Transportation Company . The company continued manufacturing both locomotives and textile machinery for nearly another 20 years . 
 In November 1868 Rogers delivered five identical coal @-@ burning 4 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 steam locomotives ( assigned Nos. 116 – 120 ) to the Union Pacific Railroad , which were subsequently placed into freight service in western Wyoming and Utah . Union Pacific No. 119 would gain fame on May 10 , 1869 , when it took part in the " Golden Spike " ceremony at Promontory , Utah , to celebrate the completion of the First Transcontinental Railroad . The unit was rebuilt in the early 1880s , and redesignated as road No. 343 in 1885 . No. 119 was retired and sent to the scrapyard after nearly 35 years of service in April 1903 . A full @-@ scale , operating replica was completed in 1979 , and now is part of an operational display at the Golden Spike National Historic Site . 
 In the mid @-@ 1870s , Rogers ended production of textile machinery and began concentrating solely on locomotive manufacturing . Rogers customers of the mid @-@ 19th century continued purchasing their locomotives . The Louisville and Nashville Railroad ( L & N ) purchased so many locomotives from Rogers that Rogers gave the L & N a free locomotive as a thank @-@ you bonus in 1879 . 
 Reuben Wells was appointed as shop superintendent in 1887 . Jacob Rogers , now in his late 70s , gradually passed more and more responsibility to Wells until Rogers resigned the presidency in 1893 . After just over 60 years , the Rogers company would no longer be run by a member of the Rogers family . The company reorganized under its former treasurer and new president , Robert S. Hughes , as the Rogers Locomotive Company ; Jacob Rogers remained the company 's principal investor . Hughes led the company until his own death in 1900 . A year later , Jacob Rogers closed the Rogers Locomotive Company plant . 
 In 1901 , the year that Jacob Rogers died and the same year that the American Locomotive Company ( ALCO ) was formed through the merger of eight other locomotive manufacturers , the company reopened as the Rogers Locomotive Works . Reuben Wells was again the shop superintendent . But Rogers was at a competitive disadvantage . Not enough capital investment was made to purchase new equipment or in research and development . ALCO and Baldwin , the two companies that were at the time the largest locomotive manufacturers in North America , held too much of a lead in manufacturing and selling their own locomotives for Rogers to keep up . Compounding Rogers ' troubles was the greater city of Paterson that had grown up around the shop . There was not any room for Rogers to expand . 
 = = 1905 to present : absorbed into ALCO = = 
 Faced with stiff competition and an inability to increase its own capacity , Rogers Locomotive Works was purchased by ALCO in 1905 . Rogers ' last independently built locomotive was serial number <unk> , a 0 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 tank locomotive built for W. R. Grace & Company in February 1905 . ALCO continued building locomotives at the Rogers plant until 1913 when manufacturing at the plant ceased permanently . Locomotives built at the Rogers plant under ALCO are generally referred to as locomotives built by ALCO @-@ Rogers . ALCO used the Rogers plant buildings as warehouses well into the 1920s , but eventually sold off all of the property . The original Rogers erecting shop was converted into office space and was still in use in that manner as late as 1992 . 
 The erecting shop building has since been renamed the " Thomas Rogers Building " and is now the home of the Paterson Museum . The museum preserves and displays artifacts of Paterson 's industrial history . A 2 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 locomotive that was used in the construction of the Panama Canal is on display outside the museum , but it is one that was built by ALCO @-@ Cooke ( the former Cooke Locomotive and Machine Works plant , also located in Paterson ) and not by Rogers . 
 = = Preserved Rogers locomotives = = 
 The following locomotives ( in serial number order ) built by Rogers , before ALCO 's acquisition of the company , have been preserved . Where multiple railroads and road numbers are listed , they are given in chronological order for the locomotives ; all locations are in the United States unless noted . 
 = Pal ( dog ) = 
 Pal ( June 4 , 1940 – June 1958 ) was a Rough Collie performer and the first in a line of such dogs to portray the fictional female collie Lassie in film and television . Pal was born in California in 1940 and eventually brought to the notice of Rudd Weatherwax , a Hollywood animal trainer . In 1943 , the dog was chosen to play Lassie in MGM 's feature film , Lassie Come Home . Following his film debut , Pal starred in six more MGM Lassie films from the mid @-@ 1940s to early 1950s , then appeared briefly in shows , fairs , and rodeos around the United States before starring in the two pilots filmed in 1954 for the television series , Lassie . Pal retired after filming the television pilots , and died in June 1958 . He sired a line of descendants who continued to play the fictional character he originated . The Saturday Evening Post said Pal had " the most spectacular canine career in film history " . 
 = = Birth and early years = = 
 Pal was born at Cherry Osborne 's Glamis Kennels in North Hollywood on June 4 , 1940 . The son of Red Brucie of Glamis and Bright Bauble of Glamis , Pal 's ancestry is traced to the nineteenth century and England 's first great collie , " Old <unk> " . Because of his large eyes and the white blaze on his forehead , Pal was judged not of the highest standards and sold as a pet @-@ quality dog . 
 Howard Peck , an animal trainer , brought the eight @-@ month @-@ old collie to Hollywood animal trainer Rudd Weatherwax in order to break the animal of uncontrolled barking and a habit of chasing motorcycles . After working with the dog , Weatherwax gained control of the barking but was unable to break Pal of his motorcycle @-@ chasing habit . Peck was disappointed with the results and gave the dog to Weatherwax in exchange for the money Peck owed him . Weatherwax , in turn , gave the dog to a friend , but when he learned that Eric Knight 's 1940 novel , Lassie Come @-@ Home , was being considered as a feature film by MGM , Weatherwax sensed Pal was the dog to fill the role , and bought Pal back from his friend for $ 10 @.@ 00 USD . Peck later tried to reclaim him after he became famous as Lassie , but Weatherwax 's legal ownership was upheld . Rudd 's brother Frank Weatherwax , who trained dogs for such films as The 5 @,@ 000 Fingers of Dr. T and The Wizard of Oz , assisted Rudd in training Pal . 
 = = MGM films = = 
 The first MGM " Lassie " film was planned as a low budget , black and white children 's film . Pal was among 1 @,@ 500 dogs who auditioned for the title role , but was rejected because he was male , his eyes were too big , his head too flat , and a white blaze ran down his forehead . A female prize @-@ winning show collie was hired to play the title character . Weatherwax was hired to train the star , and Pal was hired as a stunt dog . 
 During the course of filming , a decision was made to take advantage of a massive flooding of the San Joaquin River in central California in order to obtain some spectacular footage for the film . The female collie was still in training and refused to enter the raging waters created by the flood . Weatherwax was on the site with Pal and offered to have his dog perform in a five @-@ stage shot in which Pal would swim the river , haul himself out , lie down without shaking the water off his coat , attempt to crawl while lying on his side and finally lie motionless , completely exhausted . Pal performed exceptionally well and the scene was completed in one take . Weatherwax said director Fred M. Wilcox was so impressed with Pal during the sequence that he had " tears in his eyes . " In response , producers released the female collie and hired Pal in her stead , reshooting the first six weeks of the filming with Pal now portraying Lassie . Other sources say that the female collie was replaced because she began to shed excessively during shooting of the film in the summer , resulting in Weatherwax substituting the male collie , Pal , in the role of " Lassie " . In any case , MGM executives were so impressed , they upgraded the production to an A film with full advertising support , top publicity and filming in Technicolor . Pal went through his paces with enthusiasm , rarely required multiple retakes , and did his own stunt work . 
 Pal 's success in Lassie Come Home in 1943 led to six more MGM films : Son of Lassie ( a sequel to Lassie Come Home ) , Courage of Lassie , Hills of Home , The Sun Comes Up , Challenge to Lassie , and The Painted Hills . In his earlier years with MGM , Rudd Weatherwax was assisted by Frank Inn , who , for fourteen years , trained <unk> and later supplied animals for the 1954 Lassie television series . 
 Following The Painted Hills in 1951 , MGM executives felt Lassie had run her course and planned no future films featuring the character . MGM executives then sought a way to break Weatherwax 's contract . Weatherwax was concerned about protecting Pal and the Lassie image he had created from future diminishment at the hands of others . In lieu of US $ 40 @,@ 000 in back pay owed him by the studio , Weatherwax bargained for and received the Lassie name and trademark . 
 = = Television series = = 
 Following their departure from MGM , Pal and Weatherwax went on the road performing an 18 @-@ minute program at dog shows and department stores . Television producer Robert Maxwell convinced Weatherwax that Pal 's future lay in television . Together , the men created a boy @-@ and @-@ his @-@ dog scenario about a struggling family on a weatherbeaten farm in Middle America . 
 The field for the role of the boy in Lassie was narrowed to three young actors , but the final decision was left to Pal . After spending a week with the boys at Weatherwax 's North Hollywood home , Pal seemed to like eleven @-@ year @-@ old Tommy Rettig more than the other two . Rettig won the role based on Pal 's response , and filming for the two pilots began in the summer of 1954 , with Pal portraying Lassie in both . 
 After viewing the pilots , CBS executives immediately signed the 30 @-@ minute show to its fall 1954 schedule . Pal retired after filming the two pilots , and his son , Lassie Junior ( who was three years old and had been in training for a couple of years ) , stepped into the television role . Pal would come to the show 's studio home at Stage One of KTTV in Los Angeles every day with his son during filming . He had a bed behind the set , and was respectfully termed The Old Man . Series star Tommy Rettig later recalled , " When Rudd would ask Lassie , Jr. to do something , if you were behind the set , you could see The Old Man get up from his bed and go through the routine back there . " 
 = = Death = = 
 By 1957 , Pal was growing blind , deaf , and stiff , and rarely visited the Lassie set . The star of the show Jon Provost later recalled , " As young as I was , I recognized how much that dog meant to Rudd . Rudd loved that old dog as much as anyone could love an animal or person . " 
 Pal died in natural causes in June 1958 at age 18 ( about 126 in " dog years " ) ; and for months Weatherwax slipped in and out of deep depression . Robert Weatherwax , Rudd 's son , later recalled , " It hit him very hard when Pal died . He buried him in a special place on the ranch and would often visit the grave . Dad would never again watch an MGM Lassie movie . He just couldn 't bear to see Pal . He didn 't want to have to be reminded of just how much he loved that dog . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In 1950 , Rudd Weatherwax and co @-@ author John H. Rothwell co @-@ wrote a book about Pal 's life called The Story of Lassie : His Discovery and Training from <unk> to Stardom . 
 Several descendants of Pal played the fictional Lassie character following their progenitor 's death . On the original television series ( 1954 – 73 ) , Pal 's son , Lassie Junior , and his grandsons , Spook and Baby , worked the first several seasons . Mire appeared in a few of the Ranger seasons , and Hey Hey worked the final two syndicated seasons . 
 The casting of non @-@ Pal bloodline collies in the role of Lassie has met with protest . In 1997 , a Lassie television series debuted on the Animal Planet network but without a Weatherwax @-@ trained dog as Lassie . A protest campaign was waged , and producers brought a ninth generation Weatherwax dog to the show . The 2005 – 2006 remake of the original Lassie movie provoked comment when a non @-@ Pal bloodline collie was cast in the title role . Robert Weatherwax has disputed the casting of non @-@ Pal bloodline dogs in the role of Lassie . 
 In 2000 the Lassie trademark was sold by the eight remaining members of the Weatherwax family to Classic Media . In 2004 Robert Weatherwax 's personal contract to supply a dog to play the role of Lassie ended and neither side pursued a renewal . After several years of stand @-@ in collies that were not related to the line , Classic Media contracted with Carol Riggins , who had been co @-@ trainer with Robert Weatherwax , and her 9th generation dog <unk> , who had played the role of Lassie during the last 13 episodes of the Canada Lassie series under the Weatherwax Trained Dogs banner . Carol Riggins continues today as the official owner and trainer of Lassie with another " Pal " , a 10th generation direct descendant of the original Pal . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = Television work = = 
 = Space Invaders = 
 Space Invaders ( Japanese : <unk> , Hepburn : <unk> <unk> ) is an arcade video game created by Tomohiro Nishikado and released in 1978 . It was originally manufactured and sold by Taito in Japan , and was later licensed for production in the United States by the Midway division of Bally . Space Invaders is one of the earliest shooting games and the aim is to defeat waves of aliens with a laser cannon to earn as many points as possible . In designing the game , Nishikado drew inspiration from popular media : Breakout , The War of the Worlds , and Star Wars . To complete it , he had to design custom hardware and development tools . 
 It was one of the forerunners of modern video gaming and helped expand the video game industry from a novelty to a global industry ( see golden age of video arcade games ) . When first released , Space Invaders was very successful . 
 The game has been the inspiration for other video games , re @-@ released on numerous platforms , and led to several sequels . The 1980 Atari 2600 version quadrupled the system 's sales and became the first " killer app " for video game consoles . Space Invaders has been referenced and parodied in multiple television shows , and been a part of several video game and cultural exhibitions . The pixelated enemy alien has become a pop culture icon , often used as a synecdoche representing video games as a whole . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Space Invaders is a two @-@ dimensional fixed shooter game in which the player controls a laser cannon by moving it horizontally across the bottom of the screen and firing at descending aliens . The aim is to defeat five rows of eleven aliens — some versions feature different numbers — that move horizontally back and forth across the screen as they advance towards the bottom of the screen . The player defeats an alien , and earns points , by shooting it with the laser cannon . As more aliens are defeated , the aliens ' movement and the game 's music both speed up . Defeating the aliens brings another wave that is more difficult , a loop which can continue without end . 
 The aliens attempt to destroy the cannon by firing at it while they approach the bottom of the screen . If they reach the bottom , the alien invasion is successful and the game ends . A special " mystery ship " will occasionally move across the top of the screen and award bonus points if destroyed . The laser cannon is partially protected by several stationary defense bunkers — the number varies by version — that are gradually destroyed by a numerous amount of blasts from the aliens or player . 
 = = = Scoring = = = 
 Alien invaders : 10 ( bottom two rows ) , 20 ( middle and second from top rows ) , or 30 points ( top row ) . 
 Mystery ship : 50 , 100 , 150 , or 300 points . 
 Points earned for shooting mystery ship varies . 
 Players earn an extra life at either 1 @,@ 000 or 1 @,@ 500 points , and none thereafter . 
 = = Development = = 
 Space Invaders was created by Tomohiro Nishikado , who spent a year designing the game and developing the necessary hardware to produce it . The game 's inspiration is reported to have come from varying sources , including an adaptation of the mechanical game Space Monsters released by Taito in 1972 , and a dream about Japanese school children who are waiting for Santa Claus and are attacked by invading aliens . However , Nishikado has cited Atari 's arcade game Breakout as his inspiration . He aimed to create a shooting game that featured the same sense of achievement from completing stages and destroying targets , but with more complex graphics . Nishikado used a similar layout to that of Breakout , but altered the game mechanics . Rather than bounce a ball to attack static objects , players are given the ability to fire projectiles at their own discretion to attack moving enemies . 
 Early enemy designs included tanks , combat planes , and battleships . Nishikado , however , was not satisfied with the enemy movements ; technical limitations made it difficult to simulate flying . Humans would have been easier to simulate , but Nishikado considered shooting them immoral . After seeing a magazine feature about Star Wars , he thought of using a space theme . Nishikado drew inspiration for the aliens from H. G. Wells ' The War of the Worlds — he had watched the 1953 film adaptation as a child — and created initial bitmap images after the octopus @-@ like aliens . Other alien designs were modeled after squids and crabs . The game was originally titled Space Monsters , inspired by a popular song in Japan at the time ( " Monster " ) , but was changed to Space Invaders by Nishikado 's superiors . 
 = = = Hardware = = = 
 Because microcomputers in Japan were not powerful enough at the time to perform the complex tasks involved in designing and programming Space Invaders , Nishikado had to design his own custom hardware and development tools for the game . He created the arcade board using new microprocessors from the United States . The game uses an Intel 8080 central processing unit , and features raster graphics on a CRT monitor and monaural sound hosted by a combination of analogue circuitry and a Texas Instruments <unk> sound chip . Despite the specially developed hardware , Nishikado was unable to program the game as he wanted — the Control Program board was not powerful enough to display the graphics in color or move the enemies faster — and he considered the development of the hardware the most difficult part of the whole process . While programming the game , Nishikado discovered that the processor was able to render the alien graphics faster the fewer were on screen . Rather than design the game to compensate for the speed increase , he decided to keep it as a challenging gameplay mechanism . 
 Space Invaders was first released in a cocktail @-@ table format with black and white graphics , while the Western release by Midway was in an upright cabinet format . The upright cabinet uses strips of orange and green cellophane over the screen to simulate color graphics . The graphics are reflected onto a painted backdrop of a moon against a starry background . Later Japanese releases used rainbow @-@ colored cellophane , such as T.T. Space Invaders in 1978 , followed by a version with a full color display . The cabinet artwork features large , humanoid monsters not present in the game . Nishikado attributes this to the artist basing the designs on the original title , Space Monsters , rather than referring to the in @-@ game graphics . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Despite its simplicity , the music to Space Invaders was revolutionary in the gaming industry . Videogame scholar Andrew Schartmann identifies three aspects of the music that would have a significant impact on the development of game music : 
 Whereas videogame music prior to Space Invaders was restricted to the extremities ( i.e. , a short introductory theme with game @-@ over counterpart ) , the alien @-@ inspired hit featured continuous music — the well @-@ known four @-@ note loop — throughout , uninterrupted by sound effects . " It was thus the first time that sound effects and music were superimposed to form a rich sonic landscape . Not only do players receive feedback related directly to their actions through sound effects ; they also receive stimulus in a more subtle , non @-@ interactive fashion through music . " 
 The music interacts with on @-@ screen animation to influence the emotions of the player . " That seemingly pedestrian four @-@ note loop might stir us in the most primitive of ways , but that it stirs us at all is worthy of note . By demonstrating that game sound could be more than a simple tune to fill the silence , Space Invaders moved videogame music closer to the realm of art . " 
 The music popularized the notion of variability — the idea that music can change in accordance with the ongoing narrative . The variable in Space Invaders ( tempo ) is admittedly simple , but its implications are not to be underestimated . " Over the years , analogous strategies of variation would be applied to pitch , rhythm , dynamics , form , and a host of other parameters , all with the goal of accommodating the nonlinear aspect of videogames . " 
 At the deepest of conceptual levels , one would be hard @-@ pressed to find an arcade game as influential to the early history of videogame music as Space Invaders . Its role as a harbinger of the fundamental techniques that would come to shape the industry remains more or less unchallenged . And its blockbuster success ensured the adoption of those innovations by the industry at large . 
 = = Impact and legacy = = 
 After the first few months following its release in Japan , the game became very popular . Specialty arcades opened with nothing but Space Invaders cabinets , and by the end of 1978 , Taito had installed over 100 @,@ 000 machines and grossed over $ 600 million in Japan alone . Within two years by 1980 , Taito had sold over 300 @,@ 000 Space Invaders arcade machines in Japan , in addition to 60 @,@ 000 machines in the United States , where prices ranged from $ 2000 to $ 3000 for each machine , within one year . The arcade cabinets have since become collector 's items with the cocktail and cabaret versions being the rarest . By mid @-@ 1981 , more than four billion quarters , or $ 1 billion , had been grossed from Space Invaders machines , and it would continue to gross an average of $ 600 million a year through to 1982 , by which time it had grossed $ 2 billion in quarters ( equivalent to $ 7 @.@ 26 billion in 2016 ) , with a net profit of $ 450 million ( equivalent to $ 1 @.@ 63 billion in 2016 ) . This made it the best @-@ selling video game and highest @-@ grossing entertainment product of its time , with comparisons made to the then highest @-@ grossing film Star Wars , which had grossed $ 486 million in movie tickets ( costing $ 2 @.@ 25 each on average ) with a net profit of $ 175 million . Space Invaders had earned Taito profits of over $ 500 million . The 1980 Atari 2600 version was the first official licensing of an arcade game and became the first " killer app " for video game consoles by quadrupling the system 's sales . It sold over two million units in its first year on sale as a home console game , making it the first title to sell a million cartridges . Other official ports of the game were made for the Atari 8 @-@ bit computer line and Atari 5200 console . Taito released it for the NES in 1985 ( Japan only ) . Numerous unofficial clones were made as well , such as the popular computer games Super Invader ( 1979 ) and TI Invaders ( 1981 ) , which was the top @-@ selling computer game for the TI @-@ 99 / 4A through at least 1982 . 
 An oft @-@ quoted urban legend states that there was a shortage of 100 @-@ yen coins — and subsequent production increase — in Japan attributed to the game , although in actuality , 100 @-@ yen coin production was lower in 1978 and 1979 than in previous or subsequent years . The claim also doesn 't hold up to logical scrutiny ; arcade operators would have emptied out their machines and taken the money to the bank , thus keeping the coins in circulation . Reports from those living in Japan at the time indicate " nothing out of the ordinary ... during the height of the Space Invaders invasion . " 
 Game designer Shigeru Miyamoto considers Space Invaders to be the game that revolutionized the video game industry ; he was never interested in video games before seeing it . Hideo Kojima also described it as the first video game that impressed him and got him interested in video games . Several publications ascribed the expansion of the video game industry from a novelty into a global industry to the success of the game . Edge magazine attributed the shift of video games from bars and arcades to more mainstream locations like restaurants and department stores to Space Invaders . Its popularity was such that it was the first game where an arcade machine 's owner could make up for the cost of the machine in under one month , or in some places within one week . 
 Technology journalist Jason Whittaker credited the game 's success to ending the video game crash of 1977 , which had earlier been caused by Pong clones flooding the market , and beginning the golden age of video arcade games . According to The Observer , the home console versions were popular and encouraged users to learn programming ; many who later became industry leaders . 1UP.com stated that Space Invaders showed that video games could compete against the major entertainment media at the time : movies , music , and television . IGN attributed the launch of the arcade phenomenon in North America in part to Space Invaders . Electronic Games credited the game 's success as the impetus behind video gaming becoming a rapidly growing hobby and as " the single most popular coin @-@ operated attraction of all time . " Game Informer considered it , along with Pac @-@ Man , one of the most popular arcade games that tapped into popular culture and generated excitement during the golden age of arcades . IGN listed it as one of the " Top 10 Most Influential Games " in 2007 , citing the source of inspiration to video game designers and the impact it had on the shooting genre . The Times ranked it No. 1 in its list of " The ten most influential video games ever " in 2007 . 1UP ranked it at No. 3 in its list of " The 60 Most Influential Games of All Time , " stating that , in contrast to earlier arcade games which " were attempts to simulate already @-@ existing things , " Space Invaders was " the first video game as a video game , instead of merely a playable electronic representation of something else . " In 2008 , Guinness World Records listed it as the top @-@ rated arcade game in technical , creative , and cultural impact . Entertainment Weekly named Space Invaders one of the top ten games for the Atari 2600 in 2013 . In 2015 , the World Video Game Hall of Fame selected Space Invaders as one of the finalists for its 2015 induction class . 
 As one of the earliest shooting games , it set precedents and helped pave the way for future titles and for the shooting genre . Space Invaders popularized a more interactive style of gameplay with the enemies responding to the player controlled cannon 's movement , and was the first video game to popularize the concept of achieving a high score , being the first to save the player 's score . While earlier shooting games allowed the player to shoot at targets , Space Invaders was the first in which targets could fire back at the player . It was also the first game where players were given multiple lives , had to repel hordes of enemies , could take cover from enemy fire , and use destructible barriers , in addition to being the first game to use a continuous background soundtrack , with four simple diatonic descending bass notes repeating in a loop , which was dynamic and changed pace during stages , like a heartbeat sound that increases pace as enemies approached . 
 It also moved the gaming industry away from Pong @-@ inspired sports games grounded in real @-@ world situations towards action games involving fantastical situations . Whittaker commented that Space Invaders helped action games become the most dominant genre on both arcades and consoles , through to contemporary times . Guinness World Records considered Space Invaders one of the most successful arcade shooting games by 2008 . In describing it as a " seminal arcade classic " , IGN listed it as the number eight " classic shoot ' em up " . Space Invaders set the template for the shoot ' em up genre . Its worldwide success created a demand for a wide variety of science fiction games , inspiring the development of arcade games , such as Atari 's Asteroids , Williams Electronics ' Defender , and Namco 's Galaxian and Galaga , which were modeled after Space Invaders 's gameplay and design . This influence extends to most shooting games released to the present day , including first @-@ person shooters such as Wolfenstein , Doom , Halo and Call of Duty . Space Invaders also had an influence on early computer dungeon crawl games such as Dungeons of <unk> , which used similar heartbeat sounds to indicate player health . 
 = = = Remakes and sequels = = = 
 Space Invaders has been remade on numerous platforms and spawned many sequels . Re @-@ releases include ported and updated versions of the original arcade game . Ported versions generally feature different graphics and additional gameplay options — for example , moving defense bunkers , zigzag shots , invisible aliens , and two @-@ player cooperative gameplay . Ports on earlier systems like the Atari home consoles featured simplified graphics , while later systems such as the Super Nintendo Entertainment System and PlayStation featured updated graphics . Later titles include several modes of gameplay and integrate new elements into the original design . For example , Space Invaders Extreme , released on the Nintendo DS and PlayStation Portable , integrated musical elements into the standard gameplay . A spin @-@ off for WiiWare , Space Invaders Get Even , allows players to control the aliens instead of the laser cannon . 
 In 1980 , Bally Midway released a pinball version of the game . However , few elements from the original game are included , and the aliens instead resemble the <unk> from the film Alien ; Bally Midway was later sued over the game 's resemblance to designs by H. R. Giger . Different ports have been met with mixed receptions ; the Atari 2600 version was very successful while the Nintendo Entertainment System version was poorly received . 
 Taito has released several arcade sequels that built upon the basic design of the original . The first was Space Invaders Part II in 1979 ; it featured color graphics , an attract mode , and new gameplay elements , and added an intermission between gameplay . According to the Killer List of Video Games , this was the first video game to include an intermission . The game also allowed the player with the top score to sign their name on the high score table . This version was released in the United States as Deluxe Space Invaders ( also known as Space Invaders Deluxe ) , but featured a different graphical color scheme and a lunar @-@ city background . Another arcade sequel , titled Space Invaders II , was released exclusively in the United States . It was in a cocktail @-@ table format with very fast alien firing and a competitive two @-@ player mode . During the summer of 1985 , Return of the Invaders was released with updated color graphics , and more complex movements and attack patterns for the aliens . Subsequent arcade sequels included Super Space Invaders ' 91 , Space Invaders DX , and Space Invaders ' 95 . Each game introduced minor gameplay additions to the original design . Like the original game , several of the arcade sequels have become collector 's items , though some are considered rarer . In 2002 , Taito released Space Raiders , a third @-@ person shooter reminiscent of Space Invaders . 
 The game and its related games have been included in video game compilation titles . Space Invaders Anniversary was released in 2003 for the PlayStation 2 and included nine Space Invader variants . A similar title for the PlayStation Portable , Space Invaders Pocket , was released in 2005 . Space Invaders , Space Invaders Part II and Return of the Invaders are included in Taito Legends , a compilation of Taito 's classic arcade games released in 2005 on the PlayStation 2 , Xbox , and PC . Super Space Invaders ' 91 , Space Invaders DX and Space Invaders ' 95 were included in Taito Legends 2 , a sequel compilation released in 2006 . 
 = = = In popular culture = = = 
 Many publications and websites use the pixelated alien graphic as an icon for video games in general , including video game magazine Electronic Gaming Monthly , technology website Ars Technica , and concert event Video Games Live . There have also been Space Invaders themed merchandising , including necklaces and puzzles . The trend continues to this day , with handmade sites like <unk> and Pinterest showcasing thousands of handmade items featuring Space Invaders characters . 
 The game — and references to it — has appeared in numerous facets of popular culture . Soon after the game 's release , hundreds of favourable articles and stories about the emerging video game medium popularized by Space Invaders aired on television and were printed in newspapers and magazines . The Space Invaders Tournament , held by Atari in 1980 and won by Bill Heineman , was the first electronic sports event and attracted more than 10 @,@ 000 participants , establishing video gaming as a mainstream hobby . The Arcade Awards ceremony was created that same year to honour the best video games , with Space Invaders winning the first Game of the Year award . The impact of Space Invaders on the video game industry has been compared to that of The Beatles in the pop music industry . Considered " the first blockbuster video game , " Space Invaders became synonymous with video games worldwide for some time . 
 Within a year of the game 's release , the Japanese PTA unsuccessfully attempted to ban the game for allegedly inspiring truancy . In North America , doctors identified a condition called the " Space Invaders elbow " as a complaint , while a physician in The New England Journal of Medicine named a similar ailment the " Space Invaders Wrist " . Space Invaders was also the first game to attract political controversy , when a 1981 Private Member 's Bill called the " Control of Space Invaders ( and other Electronic Games ) Bill " drafted by British Labour MP George Foulkes attempted to allow local councils to restrict the game , and those like it , by licensing for its " addictive properties " and for causing " deviancy " . Conservative MP Michael Brown defended the game as " innocent and harmless pleasure " which he himself had enjoyed that day , and criticized the bill as an example of " Socialist beliefs in restriction and control " . A motion to bring the bill before Parliament was defeated by 114 votes to 94 votes ; the bill itself was never considered by Parliament . 
 = = = = Music = = = = 
 Musicians drew inspiration for their music from Space Invaders . Video Games Live performed audio from the game as part of a special retro " Classic Arcade Medley " . 
 The pioneering Japanese synthpop group Yellow Magic Orchestra reproduced Space Invaders sounds in its 1978 self @-@ titled album and its hit single " Computer Game " , the latter selling over 400 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . 
 Other pop songs based on Space Invaders soon followed , including disco records such as " Disco Space Invaders " ( 1979 ) by Funny Stuff , and the hit songs " Space Invader " ( 1980 ) by The Pretenders , " Space Invaders " ( 1980 ) by Uncle Vic and the Australian hit " Space Invaders " ( 1979 ) by Player One ( known in the US as Playback ) , which in turn provided the bassline for Jesse Saunders ' " On and On " ( 1984 ) , the first Chicago house music track . 
 Space Invaders is referenced in the lyrics to Rush 's 1981 hit song " Tom Sawyer , " and the game is singled out for special thanks in the liner notes to the band 's Permanent Waves album . 
 The game was also sampled in I @-@ F 's " Space Invaders Are Smoking Grass " ( 1997 ) , the first electroclash record . 
 In honor of the game 's 30th anniversary , Taito produced an album titled Space Invaders 2008 . The album is published by Avex Trax and features music inspired by the game . Taito 's store Taito Station also unveiled a Space Invaders themed music video . 
 = = = = Television and film = = = = 
 Multiple television series have aired episodes that either reference or parody the game and its elements ; for example , Danger Mouse , That ' 70s Show , Scrubs , Chuck , Robot <unk> and The Amazing World of Gumball . 
 Elements are prominently featured in the " Raiders of the Lost Arcade " segment of " Anthology of Interest II " , an episode of Futurama . 
 Space Invaders appears in the film Pixels , and a film version of the game is in the works by Warner Bros with Akiva Goldsman produced . On February 13 , 2015 , Daniel <unk> was set to write the script for the film . 
 Episode 111 of the second series of Lupin the Third features Lupin playing an ' invaders ' game . 
 = = = = Books = = = = 
 Various books have been published about Space Invaders , including Space Invaders : An addict ’ s guide to battle tactics , big scores and the best machines ( 1982 ) by Martin Amis ; Tomb Raiders and Space Invaders : Videogame forms and Contexts , by Geof King and Tanya Krzywinska ( 2006 ) , and Space Invaders ( 1980 ) by Mark Roeder and Julian <unk> 
 = = = = Other = = = = 
 In 2006 , the game was one of several video game related media selected to represent Japan as part of a project compiled by Japan 's Agency for Cultural Affairs . 
 In the same year , Space Invaders was included in the London Science Museum 's Game On exhibition meant to showcase the various aspects of video game history , development , and culture . 
 The game is also a part of the Barbican Centre 's traveling Game On exhibition . 
 At the <unk> <unk> International 2006 festival in Fribourg , Switzerland , Guillaume Reymond created a three @-@ minute video recreation of a game of Space Invaders as part of the " <unk> " project using humans as pixels . 
 The GH ART exhibit at the 2008 Games Convention in Leipzig , Germany , included an art game , Invaders ! , based on Space Invaders 's gameplay . The creator later asked for the game to be removed from the exhibit following criticism of elements based on the September 11 attacks in the United States . 
 There is a bridge in Cáceres , Spain , projected by engineers Pedro Plasencia and <unk> Arias whose pavement design is based on this game . The laser cannon , some shoots and several figures can be seen on the deck . 
 A French street artist , Invader , made a name for himself by creating mosaic artwork of Space Invader aliens around the world . 
 = Delaware State Route System = 
 The Delaware State Route System consists of roads in the U.S. state of Delaware that are maintained by the Delaware Department of Transportation ( DelDOT ) . The system includes the portions of the Interstate Highway System and United States Numbered Highways system located in the state along with state routes and other roads maintained by DelDOT . All roads maintained by the state are assigned a maintenance road number ( reference number ) that is only marked on little white markers at intersections and on auxiliary plates below warning signs approaching intersections . These numbers are only unique in a specific county , some roads can be designated with multiple road numbers , and numbers do not necessarily correspond to the signed Interstate , U.S. , or state route numbers . DelDOT maintains a total of 5 @,@ 386 @.@ 14 miles ( 8 @,@ 668 @.@ 15 km ) of roads , comprising 89 percent of the roads within the state . Some large bridges in the state are maintained by other agencies including the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the Delaware River and Bay Authority . Roads in the system include multilane freeways , multilane surface divided highways , and two @-@ lane undivided roads serving urban , suburban , and rural areas . Some of the roads maintained by DelDOT are toll roads , in which motorists must pay to use . 
 The first roads in Delaware were Native American trails and unpaved roads laid out by colonial Swedish and English settlers . From this time , counties were responsible for roads . In the 19th century , private companies operated several turnpikes radiating from Wilmington . Thomas Coleman DuPont proposed a modern road in 1908 to run the north @-@ south length of the state ; this road evolved into the DuPont Highway , which was completed by the state in 1923 . The Delaware State Highway Department was formed on April 2 , 1917 to construct a state highway system in Delaware . Numbered routes came with the creation of the U.S. Highway System in 1926 ; state route numbers appeared 10 years later . In 1935 , the state took over the remaining county roads . In the middle part of the 20th century , several major roads were widened into divided highways . The creation of the Interstate Highway System in 1956 led to the construction of 40 miles ( 64 km ) of freeway in northern New Castle County , including the tolled Delaware Turnpike . The Delaware Route 1 ( DE 1 ) limited @-@ access toll road between Dover and Wilmington was fully completed in 2003 , and was the largest public works project in state history . 
 = = Numbering = = 
 = = = Interstate and U.S. Routes = = = 
 The Interstate Highways and U.S. Routes in Delaware are numbered according to a national numbering pattern . Interstate Highways that run north – south have odd numbers , increasing from west to east , while those that run east – west have even numbers , increasing from south to north . Major north – south Interstates have numbers ending in 5 while major east – west Interstates have numbers ending in 0 . Three @-@ digit Interstates begin with odd numbers if they are a spur and an even number if they are a bypass or beltway and repeat numbers in different states . As such , the major north – south Interstate along the East Coast , Interstate 95 ( I @-@ 95 ) , passes through northern New Castle County . I @-@ 495 bypasses the section of I @-@ 95 that runs through the city of Wilmington . 
 U.S. Routes that run north – south have odd numbers , increasing from east to west , while those that run east – west have even numbers , increasing from north to south . Major north – south U.S. Routes have numbers ending in 1 while major east – west U.S. Routes have numbers ending in 0 . Three @-@ digit U.S. Routes serve as branches of their parent route . As such , U.S. Route 13 ( US 13 ) runs north – south through the entire length of Delaware while US 40 , a major U.S. Route running from Utah to New Jersey , passes east – west through northern New Castle County . US 113 serves as a branch of US 13 in the southern part of the state . US 9 is an exception to the numbering pattern as it runs east – west across Sussex County , though the route runs north – south in New Jersey and New York . 
 = = = State routes = = = 
 State routes in Delaware are signed with the MUTCD default circular route marker , which consists of black numbers in a white circle on a rectangular black background . These routes are largely assigned in a pattern similar to the Interstate and U.S. routes . Odd @-@ numbered routes generally run north @-@ south and even @-@ numbered routes generally run east @-@ west . A grid pattern exists for several low @-@ numbered east @-@ west state routes that increases from north to south , starting with DE 2 in northern Delaware and continuing south to DE 30 in the southern part of the state . There is also a pattern for some low @-@ numbered north @-@ south routes beginning with DE 1 in the east and continuing to DE 11 in the west . Several routes in Delaware are numbered as continuations of Maryland and Pennsylvania state routes , without regard to the even / odd pattern . Examples include DE 52 , which is a southern continuation of PA 52 , and DE 273 , which is an eastern continuation of MD 273 . DE 48 was once connected to Route 48 in New Jersey by a ferry across the Delaware River . Most of the 3 @-@ digit state routes are or were continuations of routes from Maryland and Pennsylvania , with the exception of DE 141 and DE 202 . The lowest numbered state route is DE 1 , while the highest numbered route is DE 896 . 
 Unlike some other states , Delaware does not prohibit duplication between route numbers of different systems . There are two examples of duplication between U.S. and state routes within Delaware . US 9 exists in Sussex County while DE 9 is located in Kent and New Castle counties . US 202 passes through the Wilmington area in northern New Castle County , with DE 202 heading south from an interchange with I @-@ 95 and US 202 along Concord Avenue into the city of Wilmington . DE 202 is signed along a former alignment of US 202 . 
 = = = Maintenance road numbers = = = 
 Every road that is maintained by DelDOT , including Interstate , U.S. , and state routes , is assigned a maintenance road number ( also known as a reference number ) . The maintenance road numbers are only unique in a specific county and some roads can be designated with multiple road numbers . For example , <unk> Corner Road in Kent County is designated as Road 205 , Road 103 , and Road 219 . Suffixed maintenance road numbers exist near their parent roads , often for a short alignment . For example , Woodland Ferry Road in Sussex County is designated Road 78 , while Old Sailor Road , a short road branching off from it near Laurel , is designated as Road 78A . The maintenance road numbers are signed with little white markers at intersections showing the two roads that intersect each other and on auxiliary plates below warning signs approaching intersections . 
 Interstate , U.S. , and state routes have maintenance road numbers that often do not match their signed route numbers . For instance , DE 261 in New Castle County is designated as Road 203 . In Sussex County , several state routes largely have matching maintenance road numbers ; for example , the entire length of DE 24 is designated Road 24 . Some routes in Sussex County have maintenance road numbers that reflect former route designations ; an example is the section of US 9 between Laurel and Georgetown which is designated Road 28 , reflecting the former DE 28 designation along this stretch of road . 
 = = Highway systems = = 
 The Delaware State Route System includes Delaware 's portion of the Interstate Highway System and U.S. Highway System along with state routes . The system also includes special routes of the U.S. and state routes , such as alternate , business , and truck routes . These routes consist of a banner denoting the type of special route above the route marker . Alternate routes provide a second alignment of a route between two points . DE 10 Alternate provides an alternate routing to DE 10 between Willow Grove and Rising Sun by passing through Woodside while DE 10 passes through Camden . Business routes pass through the business area of a city while the main route bypasses it . DE 1 Business passes through the central portion of Milford while DE 1 bypasses the city to the east . Truck routes provide an alternate route for trucks around a certain portion of a route . DE 14 Truck provides a route for truck traffic that bypasses the section of DE 14 that passes through Harrington . Suffixed routes also exist for short alignments that branch off their parent routes , in which a letter suffix is added after the route number . DE 1 has three suffixed routes in the Rehoboth Beach area while DE 9A provides access to the Port of Wilmington from DE 9 . In addition to these systems are other state roads designated with a maintenance road number . 
 DelDOT maintains a total of 5 @,@ 386 @.@ 14 miles ( 8 @,@ 668 @.@ 15 km ) of state roads within Delaware , which comprises 89 percent of all roadway mileage in the state . Some exceptions to DelDOT maintenance include the bridges over the Chesapeake and Delaware Canal , which are maintained by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers , and the Delaware Memorial Bridge , which is maintained by the Delaware River and Bay Authority ( DRBA ) . A total of 338 @.@ 19 miles ( 544 @.@ 26 km ) of Delaware 's roadways are part of the National Highway System , a system of highways important to the United States 's economy , defense , and mobility . This system includes all the Interstate Highways in Delaware , other principal arterials which connect to intermodal transportation facilities , and the Strategic Highway Network which provides connections to major military facilities in the United States . The longest route overall in Delaware is US 13 at 103 @.@ 33 miles ( 166 @.@ 29 km ) , with DE 1 being the longest state route at 103 @.@ 02 miles ( 165 @.@ 79 km ) . At a length of 23 @.@ 43 miles ( 37 @.@ 71 km ) , I @-@ 95 is the longest of Delaware 's three Interstate Highways . The shortest route is DE 491 at 0 @.@ 36 miles ( 0 @.@ 58 km ) . 
 The roads maintained by DelDOT include Interstate Highways , other freeways , arterial roads , collector roads , and local roads serving both urban and rural areas . Delaware has a total of 40 @.@ 61 miles ( 65 @.@ 36 km ) of freeway considered part of the Interstate Highway System . Non @-@ Interstate freeways in the state include the portion of DE 1 between Dover Air Force Base and Christiana , the section of DE 141 between south of Newport and Prices Corner , and the Puncheon Run Connector that links US 13 and DE 1 in Dover . Two toll roads exist in the state . A mainline toll plaza is located along the Delaware Turnpike portion of I @-@ 95 near the Maryland border in Newark . Tolls are also collected along the DE 1 freeway , with mainline toll plazas at Dover and Biddles Corner and ramp tolls at North Dover , South Smyrna , and Boyds Corner . Tolls along I @-@ 95 and DE 1 may be paid with cash or an electronic toll collection system known as E @-@ ZPass . The DRBA also collects tolls for the Delaware Memorial Bridge for motorists entering Delaware from New Jersey using cash or E @-@ ZPass . Highways and other transportation projects in Delaware are funded through both the Transportation Trust Fund and the Federal Highway Trust Fund . The Transportation Trust Fund receives revenue from tolls along I @-@ 95 and DE 1 , motor fuel taxes of 23 cents per gallon on gasoline and 22 cents per gallon on special fuels , motor vehicle document and registration fees , and DMV fees . In 2013 , revenues from the Transportation Trust Fund were $ 445 @.@ 4 million while revenue from the Federal Highway Trust Fund totaled $ 214 @.@ 5 million . 
 The Delaware Byways system designates state roads that have scenic , historic , natural , cultural , recreational , or archaeological qualities . The system was created in 2000 and was originally known as the Delaware Scenic and Historic Highways Program . Six byways make up the system , including one National Scenic Byway . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early roads = = = 
 The Native Americans who originally inhabited Delaware used waterways to travel , with land trails connecting different bodies of water . Between the arrival of the Swedish colonists to Delaware and the 20th century , roads in Delaware were maintained by individual counties . The early roads that existed following Swedish settlement were short and discontinuous and followed Native American trails and animal paths . During colonial times , most roads in the state remained unimproved . With the arrival of English settlers to Delaware , the King of England called for the construction of " King 's Highways " to provide for right @-@ of @-@ way and communication between people in the colony . These roads were simply a narrow clearing through brushes that was not paved . Several roads bearing the King 's Highway name connected Philadelphia to Dover and points south . Most of the colonial roads im Delaware ran east @-@ west , connecting coastal ports to inland areas . In the 18th century , the King 's Highway ran between Lewes and Wilmington via Dover . By the later part of that century , a post road ran from Horn Town , Virginia north across the Delmarva Peninsula towards Philadelphia . In Delaware , this road passed through Selbyville , Georgetown , Milford , Dover , and Wilmington . During the course of the 18th century , the road network in Delaware became more developed and provided links to waterways , which were still the primary mode of transportation at the time . 
 In the 19th century , private turnpike companies constructed and improved a few of the more important roadways in the state . Turnpikes were chartered by the state and privately financed , with tolls collected at toll houses every few miles along the road . The first turnpike in Delaware was the Newport Gap Pike , which was built in 1808 and completed to Wilmington in 1811 . Many other turnpikes were constructed in northern New Castle County radiating from Wilmington and connected the industrial city to agricultural areas . The turnpikes were built as straight roads in order to reduce costs . Many of these roads were constructed with a macadam surface . During the course of the 19th century , new methods of transportation such as canals and railroads came about and there was less investment on roads . The revenues of the turnpike companies fell and roads became more of a local concern . 
 = = = Development of state highways = = = 
 At the turn of the 20th century , the automobile was introduced and a push came for better roads to be constructed . In 1903 , the state attempted to create a state highway system by passing a state aid law where both the state and county would finance improvements to roads . However , this law was repealed in 1905 due to public outcry . In 1908 , Thomas Coleman DuPont proposed a modern road that was to run the length of the state from Selbyville north to Wilmington as part of a philanthropic measure . This roadway was planned to improve travel and bring economic development to Kent and Sussex counties . The DuPont Highway was to be modeled after the great boulevards of Europe and was to have a 200 @-@ foot ( 61 m ) wide right @-@ of @-@ way consisting of a 40 @-@ foot ( 12 m ) wide roadway for automobiles flanked by dual trolley lines , 30 @-@ foot ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) wide roadways for heavy vehicles , 15 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) wide unpaved roadways for horses , and sidewalks . Utilities were to be buried underground below the horse roadways . The highway was also to include agricultural experimental stations and monuments for future surveying . Trolley revenues would help pay for the construction of the roadway . After portions of the DuPont Highway were built , these portions were planned to be turned over to the state at no charge . The Coleman DuPont Road , Inc. was established in 1911 and construction of the DuPont Highway began . The DuPont Highway would end up being built as a two @-@ lane concrete road on a 60 @-@ foot ( 18 m ) alignment with a 32 @-@ foot ( 9 @.@ 8 m ) wide roadway . 
 The Delaware State Highway Department ( DSHD ) was created on April 2 , 1917 to construct and maintain a system of state highways across Delaware . As a result , the state took over construction of the DuPont Highway . The DuPont Highway was completed in 1923 when the final section near Odessa was finished . The DuPont Highway was a boon to southern Delaware , which had formerly been economically isolated from the large cities of the northeast . In conjunction with the rise of the automobile , the highway spurred the growth of the Delaware beaches by greatly improving access to the coast for tourists from northern Delaware and adjacent portions of the Northeast megalopolis . Southern Delaware also developed into a major truck farming region due to having much greater access to urban markets . No longer fully reliant on the railroads to transport their goods , farmers in Sussex and Kent counties could market their fruits , vegetables , and broiler chickens directly to consumers in the north . Also during this time , the State Aid Road Law ushered in a period of highway improvement in which the county would offer road bonds and the state would match . The DSHD would then improve the highway . Most of the highways improved by the DSHD were built as concrete roads , with sharp curves eliminated . The state also took over the last of the private turnpikes and converted them to free roads . In 1926 , the state began eliminating several railroad grade crossings and in 1927 the first all @-@ weather secondary roads were constructed , consisting of one concrete lane and one dirt lane in an effort to reduce costs . 
 The first numbered routes in Delaware were announced in 1925 with the creation of the U.S. Highway System , in which US 13 , US 40 , and US 113 were planned to run through the state . These three U.S. Highways , along with US 122 , were designated through Delaware on November 11 , 1926 . In 1930 and again in 1932 , the DSHD recommended giving numbers to state roads to supplement the existing U.S. Highway System . By 1936 , Delaware began assigning numbers to state routes . The original state route marker was a square with " DEL " on top and the route number on bottom in a block font . By 1955 , the shield was modified to a square with " <unk> " on top and the route number on bottom in FHWA Series font . In 1964 , the route marker became a cutout circle with " DEL " on top and the route number on bottom . The current route marker was introduced in 1971 . 
 In 1934 , the entire length of US 13 between Dover and Wilmington was widened into a divided highway , which at the time was the best superhighway and the longest stretch of divided highway in the world . During the course of the 1930s , several other state roads were constructed while others were widened into divided highways . In 1935 , the DSHD took over maintenance of all remaining county roads , tripling the mileage of the state highway system , and took over several city streets in Wilmington in 1936 . Progress on improving the state highway system slowed during World War II ; the only major project completed during that time was the construction of the high @-@ level St. Georges Bridge to replace a lift bridge destroyed by a ship in 1939 . Following the war , several highway improvement projects took place including widening more roads to divided highways . On August 16 , 1951 , the Delaware Memorial Bridge and its approach road opened to traffic , providing a fixed road link for US 40 across the Delaware River to New Jersey and replacing ferry service that previously existed . Following the completion of the bridge , traffic along US 13 and US 40 increased , with plans made for a new freeway to handle the increased traffic . In 1957 , US 13 was widened into a divided highway between Greenwood and Harrington , providing a divided highway running the north @-@ south length of the state . 
 = = = Freeways = = = 
 In 1956 , the Interstate Highway System was created , with under 40 miles ( 64 km ) of Interstate Highway planned in New Castle County . The first Interstate came in 1959 when the Delaware Memorial Bridge approach was upgraded to Interstate Highway standards and became part of I @-@ 295 . The portion of I @-@ 95 between the Maryland border near Newark and Newport and I @-@ 295 between Newport and the approach to the Delaware Memorial Bridge in Farnhurst was to be built as a free Interstate Highway using federal funds , but was built as the tolled Delaware Turnpike instead in order to speed up construction . On November 15 , 1963 , the turnpike opened to traffic . The Delaware Turnpike allowed motorists to travel from Washington , D.C. to Boston without having to stop at a traffic light . In 1968 , I @-@ 95 was completed between the Delaware Turnpike and the Pennsylvania border . The I @-@ 495 bypass to the east of Wilmington fully opened in 1977 . 
 In the 1980s , plans were made for a limited @-@ access Relief Route of US 13 between Dover and the Wilmington area that would alleviate it of traffic heading to the Delaware Beaches in the summer . This Relief Route would become designated as part of DE 1 , a route that ran along the Atlantic Ocean in Sussex County and north to Milford . The DE 1 toll road between Dover Air Force Base and Christiana opened in stages between 1991 and 2003 . The total cost to build the DE 1 toll road was $ 900 million and it was the largest public works project in Delaware history . 
 Since the 1950s , a freeway has been planned along the US 301 corridor between I @-@ 95 and the Maryland border southwest of Middletown in order to provide a connection from the Delaware Memorial Bridge towards the Chesapeake Bay Bridge and the Washington , D.C. area . The current proposal calls for US 301 to be built as a limited @-@ access toll road from the Maryland border southwest of Middletown northeast to DE 1 in St. Georges . Construction began in 2016 with completion of the highway planned for 2018 . 
 = = = 21st century = = = 
 DelDOT began a program to pave the last of the state @-@ maintained dirt roads within Delaware in the mid 1990s , which at the time totaled 100 miles ( 160 km ) . The last dirt road in the state to be paved was Spicer Road ( Road 240 ) near Ellendale in Sussex County in 2002 . Since 2000 , DelDOT has eliminated several concurrencies in the state in order to reduce motorist confusion . Among the changes made included truncating US 113 from Dover to Milford to eliminate an overlap with DE 1 , removing DE 20 from heading into Fenwick Island along DE 54 , and shortening the length of DE 2 through Newark to avoid several concurrencies . 
 = = Work cited = = 
 = Mayfly = 
 Mayflies also known as <unk> or <unk> in Canada , are aquatic insects belonging to the order Ephemeroptera . This order is part of an ancient group of insects termed the <unk> , which also contains dragonflies and damselflies . Over 3 @,@ 000 species of mayfly are known worldwide , grouped into over 400 genera in 42 families . 
 Mayflies are relatively primitive insects and exhibit a number of ancestral traits that were probably present in the first flying insects , such as long tails and wings that do not fold flat over the abdomen . They are aquatic insects whose immature stages ( called " naiads " or " nymphs " ) live in fresh water , where their presence indicates a clean , unpolluted environment . They are unique among insect orders in having a fully winged terrestrial adult stage , the subimago , which moults into a sexually mature adult , the imago . 
 Mayflies " hatch " ( emerge as adults ) from spring to autumn , not necessarily in May , in enormous numbers . Some hatches attract tourists . Fly fishermen make use of mayfly hatches by choosing artificial fishing flies that resemble the species in question . One of the most famous English mayflies is <unk> germanica , the fisherman 's " March brown mayfly " . 
 The brief lives of mayfly adults have been noted by naturalists and encyclopaedists since Aristotle and Pliny the Elder in classical times . The German engraver Albrecht Dürer included a mayfly in his 1495 engraving The Holy Family with the Mayfly to suggest a link between heaven and earth . The English poet George Crabbe compared the brief life of a newspaper with that of a mayfly , both being called " Ephemera " , in 1785 . 
 = = Description = = 
 = = = Nymph = = = 
 Immature mayflies are aquatic , and are known as nymphs or naiads . They have an elongated , cylindrical or somewhat flattened body that passes through a number of instars ( stages ) , moulting and increasing in size each time . When ready to emerge from the water , nymphs vary in length , depending on species , from 3 to 30 mm ( 0 @.@ 12 to 1 @.@ 18 in ) . The head has a tough outer covering of <unk> , often with various hard ridges and projections ; it points either forwards or downwards , with the mouth at the front . There are two large compound eyes , three ocelli ( simple eyes ) and a pair of antennae of variable lengths , set between or in front of the eyes . The mouthparts are designed for chewing and consist of a flap @-@ like labrum , a pair of strong mandibles , a pair of maxillae , a membranous hypopharynx and a labium . 
 The thorax consists of three segments , the hindmost two , the mesothorax and metathorax being fused . Each segment bears a pair of legs which usually terminate in a single claw . The legs are robust and often clad in bristles , hairs or spines . Wing pads develop on the mesothorax , and in some species , hind wing pads develop on the metathorax . 
 The abdomen consists of ten segments , some of which may be obscured by a large pair of operculate gills , a thoracic shield ( expanded part of the prothorax ) or the developing <unk> . In most taxa up to seven pairs of gills arise from the top or sides of the abdomen , but in some species they are under the abdomen , and in a very few species the gills are instead located on the coxae of the legs , or the bases of the maxillae . The abdomen terminates in a pair of , or three , slender thread @-@ like projections . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The final moult of the nymph is not to the full adult form , but to a winged stage called a subimago that physically resembles the adult , but which is usually sexually immature and duller in colour . The subimago often has partially cloudy wings fringed with minute hairs ; its eyes , legs and genitalia are not fully developed . <unk> are generally poor fliers , and typically lack the colour patterns used to attract mates . After a period , usually lasting one or two days but in some species only a few minutes , the subimago moults to the full adult form , making mayflies the only insects where a winged form undergoes a further moult . 
 = = = Imago = = = 
 Adult mayflies , or <unk> , are relatively primitive in structure , exhibiting traits that were probably present in the first flying insects . These include long tails and wings that do not fold flat over the abdomen . Mayflies are delicate @-@ looking insects with one or two pairs of membranous , triangular wings , which are extensively covered with veins . At rest , the wings are held upright , like those of a butterfly . The hindwings are much smaller than the forewings , and may be vestigial or absent . The second segment of the thorax , which bears the forewings , is enlarged to hold the main flight muscles . Adults have short , flexible antennae , large compound eyes , three ocelli and non @-@ functional mouthparts . In most species , the males ' eyes are large and the front legs unusually long , for use in locating and grasping females during the mid @-@ air mating . In the males of some families there are two large cylindrical " turban " eyes that face upwards in addition to the lateral eyes . They are capable of detecting ultraviolet light and are thought to be used during courtship to detect females flying above them . In some species , all the legs are functionless , apart from the front pair in males . The abdomen is long and roughly cylindrical , with ten segments and two or three long cerci ( tail @-@ like appendages ) at the tip . Uniquely among insects , mayflies possess paired genitalia , with the male having two <unk> ( penis @-@ like organs ) and the female two gonopores ( sexual openings ) . 
 = = Biology = = 
 = = = Reproduction and life cycle = = = 
 Mayflies are hemimetabolous ( they have " incomplete metamorphosis " ) . They are unique among insects in that they moult one more time after acquiring functional wings ; this last @-@ but @-@ one winged ( alate ) instar usually lives a very short time and is known as an imago , or to fly fishermen as a spinner . Mayflies at the imago stage are a favourite food of many fish , and many fishing flies are modelled to resemble them . The imago stage does not survive for long , rarely for more than 24 hours . In some species , it may last for just a few minutes , while the mayflies in the family <unk> have sexually mature subimagos and no true adult form at all . 
 Often , all the mayflies in a population mature at once ( a hatch ) , and for a day or two in the spring or autumn , mayflies are everywhere , dancing around each other in large groups , or resting on every available surface . In many species the emergence is synchronised with dawn or dusk , and light intensity seems to be an important cue for emergence , but other factors may also be involved . <unk> <unk> , for example , usually emerges just after sunset in July and August , but in one year , a large hatch was observed at midday in June . The soft @-@ bodied subimagos are very attractive to predators . Synchronous emergence is probably an adaptive strategy that reduces the individual 's risk of being eaten . The lifespan of an adult mayfly is very short , varying with the species . The primary function of the adult is reproduction ; adults do not feed , and have only vestigial ( unusable ) mouthparts , while their digestive systems are filled with air . <unk> americana has the shortest lifespan of any mayfly : the adult females of the species live for less than five minutes . 
 Male adults may patrol individually , but most congregate in swarms a few metres above water with clear open sky above it , and perform a nuptial ( courtship ) dance . Each insect has a characteristic up @-@ and @-@ down pattern of movement ; strong wingbeats propel it upwards and forwards with the tail sloping down ; when it stops moving its wings , it falls passively with the abdomen tilted upwards . Females fly into these swarms , and mating takes place in the air . A rising male clasps the thorax of a female from below using his front legs bent upwards , and inseminates her . Copulation may last just a few seconds , but occasionally a pair remains in tandem and flutters to the ground . Males may spend the night in vegetation and return to the nuptial dance the following day . Although they do not feed , some briefly touch the surface to drink a little water before flying off . 
 Females typically lay between four hundred and three thousand eggs . The eggs are often dropped onto the surface of the water ; sometimes the female deposits them by dipping the tip of her abdomen into the water during flight , releasing a small batch of eggs each time , or deposits them in bulk while standing next to the water . In a few species , the female submerges and places the eggs among plants or in crevices underwater , but in general , they sink to the bottom . The incubation time is variable , depending at least in part on temperature , and may be anything from a few days to nearly a year . Eggs can go into a quiet dormant phase or diapause . The larval growth rate is also temperature @-@ dependent , as is the number of moults . At anywhere between ten and fifty , these post @-@ embryonic moults are more numerous in mayflies than in most other insect orders . The nymphal stage of mayflies may last from several months to several years , depending on species and environmental conditions . 
 Many species breed in moving water , where there is a tendency for the eggs and nymphs to get washed downstream . To counteract this , females may fly upriver before depositing their eggs . For example , the female Tisza mayfly , the largest European species with a length of 10 cm ( 4 in ) , flies up to 3 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) upstream before depositing eggs on the water surface . These sink to the bottom and hatch after 45 days , the nymphs burrowing their way into the sediment where they spend two or three years before hatching into subimagos . 
 When ready to emerge , several different strategies are used . In some species , the transformation of the nymph occurs underwater and the subimago swims to the surface and launches itself into the air . In other species , the nymph rises to the surface , bursts out of its skin , remains quiescent for a minute or two resting on the exuviae ( cast skin ) and then flies upwards , and in some , the nymph climbs out of the water before transforming . 
 = = = Ecology = = = 
 Nymphs live primarily in streams under rocks , in decaying vegetation , or in sediments . Few species live in lakes , but they are among the most prolific . For example , the emergence of one species of <unk> was recorded on Doppler weather radar by the shoreline of Lake Erie in 2003 . In the nymphs of most mayfly species , the paddle @-@ like gills do not function as respiratory surfaces because sufficient oxygen is absorbed through the integument , instead serving to create a respiratory current . However , in low @-@ oxygen environments such as the mud at the bottom of ponds in which Ephemera <unk> burrows , the filamentous gills act as true accessory respiratory organs and are used in gaseous exchange . 
 In most species , the nymphs are herbivores or detritivores , feeding on algae , diatoms or detritus , but in a few species , they are predators of <unk> and other small insect larvae and nymphs . Nymphs of <unk> burrow into submerged wood and can be problem for boat owners in Asia . Some are able to shift from one feeding group to another as they grow , thus enabling them to utilise a variety of food resources . They process a great quantity of organic matter as nymphs and transfer a lot of phosphates and nitrates to terrestrial environments when they emerge from the water , thus helping to remove pollutants from aqueous systems . Along with caddisfly larvae and gastropod molluscs , the grazing of mayfly nymphs has a significant impact on the primary producers , the plants and algae , on the bed of streams and rivers . 
 The nymphs are eaten by a wide range of predators and form an important part of the aquatic food chain . Fish are among the main predators , picking nymphs off the bottom or ingesting them in the water column , and feeding on emerging nymphs and adults on the water surface . Carnivorous stonefly , caddisfly , <unk> and dragonfly larvae feed on bottom @-@ dwelling mayfly nymphs , as do aquatic beetles , leeches , crayfish and amphibians . Besides the direct mortality caused by these predators , the behaviour of their potential prey is also affected , with the nymphs ' growth rate being slowed by the need to hide rather than feed . The nymphs are highly susceptible to pollution and can be useful in the <unk> of water bodies . Once they have emerged , large numbers are preyed on by birds , bats and by other insects . 
 Mayfly nymphs may serve as hosts for parasites such as nematodes and trematodes . Some of these affect the nymphs ' behaviour in such a way that they become more likely to be predated . Other nematodes turn adult male mayflies into quasi @-@ females which haunt the edges of streams , enabling the parasites to break their way out into the aqueous environment they need to complete their life cycles . The nymphs can also serve as intermediate hosts for the horsehair worm Paragordius varius , which causes its definitive host , a grasshopper , to jump into water and drown . 
 = = = = Effects on ecosystem functioning = = = = 
 Mayflies are involved in both primary production and bioturbation . A study in laboratory simulated streams revealed that the <unk> genus of the mayfly increased the export of periphyton , thus indirectly affecting primary production positively , which is essential process for ecosystems . The mayfly can also reallocate and alter the nutrient availability in aquatic habitats through the process of bioturbation . By burrowing in the bottom of lakes and redistributing nutrients , mayflies indirectly regulate phytoplankton and epibenthic primary production . Once burrowing to the bottom of the lake , mayfly nymphs begin to billow their respiratory gills . This motion creates current that carries food particles through the burrow and allows the nymph to filter feed . Other mayfly nymphs possess elaborate filter feeding mechanisms like that of the genus <unk> . The nymph have forelegs that contain long bristle @-@ like structures that have two rows of hairs . Interlocking hairs form the filter by which the insect traps food particles . The action of filter feeding has a small impact on water purification but an even larger impact on the convergence of small particulate matter into matter of a more complex form that goes on to benefit consumers later in the food chain . 
 = = = Distribution = = = 
 Mayflies are distributed all over the world in clean freshwater habitats , though absent from Antarctica . They tend to be absent from oceanic islands or represented by one or two species that have dispersed from nearby mainland . Female mayflies may be dispersed by wind , and eggs may be transferred by adhesion to the legs of waterbirds . The greatest generic diversity is found in the Neotropic ecozone , while the Holarctic has a smaller number of genera but a high degree of speciation . Some thirteen families are restricted to a single bioregion . The main families have some general habitat preferences : the <unk> favour warm water ; the <unk> live under stones and prefer fast @-@ flowing water ; and the relatively large <unk> make burrows in sandy lake or river beds . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 The nymph is the dominant life history stage of the mayfly . Different insect species vary in their tolerance to water pollution , but in general , the larval stages of mayflies , stoneflies ( Plecoptera ) and caddis flies ( Trichoptera ) are susceptible to a number of pollutants including sewage , pesticides and industrial effluent . In general , mayflies are particularly sensitive to acidification , but tolerances vary , and certain species are exceptionally tolerant to heavy metal contamination and to low pH levels . <unk> are among the most tolerant groups and <unk> and <unk> the least . The adverse effects on the insects of pollution may be either lethal or sub @-@ lethal , in the latter case resulting in altered enzyme function , poor growth , changed behaviour or lack of reproductive success . As important parts of the food chain , pollution can cause knock @-@ on effects to other organisms ; a dearth of herbivorous nymphs can cause overgrowth of algae , and a scarcity of predacious nymphs can result in an over @-@ abundance of their prey species . Fish that feed on mayfly nymphs that have bioaccumulated heavy metals are themselves at risk . Adult female mayflies find water by detecting the polarization of reflected light . They are easily fooled by other polished surfaces which can act as traps for swarming mayflies . 
 The status of many species of mayflies is unknown because they are known from only the original collection data . Four North American species are believed to be extinct . Among these , <unk> robusta was originally collected from the Ohio River near Cincinnati , but this species has not been seen since its original collection in the 1800s . Ephemera compar is known from a single specimen , collected from the " foothills of Colorado " in 1873 , but despite intensive surveys of the Colorado mayflies reported in 1984 , it has not been rediscovered . 
 The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) red list of threatened species includes one mayfly : <unk> <unk> , the large blue lake mayfly , which is a native of Australia and is listed as endangered because its alpine habitat is vulnerable to climate change . 
 = = Taxonomy and phylogeny = = 
 Over 3 @,@ 000 species of mayfly in 42 families and over 400 genera are known worldwide , including about 630 species in North America . Mayflies are an ancient group of winged ( <unk> ) insects . Putative fossil stem group representatives ( e.g. <unk> like <unk> <unk> ) are already known from the late Carboniferous . The largest mayfly of all times may have been <unk> <unk> from the Upper Carboniferous of Moravia with a wing span of 45 cm ( 18 in ) . The name Ephemeroptera is from the Greek <unk> , <unk> 
 = " short @-@ lived " ( literally " lasting a day " , cf . English " ephemeral " ) , and πτερόν , pteron = 
 " wing " , referring to the brief lifespan of adults . The English common name is for the insect 's emergence in or around the month of May in the UK . The name <unk> is from the Atlantic fish the shad , which runs up American East Coast rivers at the same time as many mayflies emerge . 
 From the Permian , numerous stem group representatives of mayflies are known , which are often lumped into a separate taxon Permoplectoptera ( e.g. including <unk> <unk> in the <unk> , and <unk> ) . The larvae of Permoplectoptera still had 9 pairs of abdominal gills , and the adults still had long hind wings . Maybe the fossil family <unk> from the Lower Cretaceous Crato Formation of Brazil also belongs as the last offshoot to Permoplectoptera . The Crato outcrops otherwise yielded fossil specimens of modern mayfly families or the extinct ( but modern ) family <unk> . However , from the same locality the strange larvae and adults of the extinct family <unk> ( order Coxoplectoptera ) have been described , which represents the fossil sister group of modern mayflies , even though they had very peculiar adaptations such as raptorial forelegs . 
 The oldest mayfly inclusion in amber is <unk> <unk> ( <unk> ) from the Lower Cretaceous of Siberia . In the much younger Baltic amber numerous inclusions of several modern families of mayflies have been found ( <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> ) . The modern genus <unk> is represented in the fossil record by the Ypresian species N. antiqua from Washington State . 
 Grimaldi and Engel , reviewing the phylogeny in 2005 , commented that many cladistic studies had been made with no stability in Ephemeroptera suborders and infraorders ; the traditional division into <unk> and <unk> was wrong because <unk> is derived from the <unk> . The phylogeny of the Ephemeroptera was first studied using molecular analysis by Ogden and Whiting in 2005 . They recovered the <unk> as sister to the other clades . Mayfly phylogeny was further studied using morphological and molecular analyses by Ogden and others in 2009 . They found that the Asian genus <unk> was sister to all other mayflies . Some existing lineages such as <unk> , and families such as <unk> , were found not to be monophyletic , through convergence among nymphal features . 
 The following traditional classification is based on Peters and Campbell ( 1991 ) , in Insects of Australia . 
 = = In human culture = = 
 = = = In art and literature = = = 
 The Ancient Greek naturalist and philosopher Aristotle wrote in his History of Animals that 
 Bloodless and many footed animals , whether furnished with wings or feet , move with more than four points of motion ; as , for instance , the <unk> ( <unk> ) moves with four feet and four wings : and , I may observe in passing , this creature is exceptional not only in regard to the duration of its existence , whence it receives its name , but also because though a quadruped it has wings also . 
 The Ancient Roman encyclopaedist Pliny the Elder described the mayfly as the " <unk> " in his Natural History : 
 The River Bug on the Black Sea at midsummer brings down some thin membranes that look like berries out of which burst a four @-@ legged caterpillar in the manner of the creature mentioned above , but it does not live beyond one day , owing to which it is called the <unk> . 
 The Dutch Golden Age author <unk> <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) illustrated some mayflies in his 1634 De <unk> ( " On the Mayfly " ) , the earliest book written on the group . <unk> de Vos similarly illustrated a mayfly in his 1587 depiction of the fifth day of creation , amongst an assortment of fish and water birds . 
 In 1495 Albrecht Dürer included a mayfly in his engraving The Holy Family with the Mayfly . The critics Larry Silver and Pamela H. Smith argue that the image provides " an explicit link between heaven and earth .. to suggest a cosmic resonance between sacred and profane , celestial and terrestrial , macrocosm and microcosm . " 
 In his 1789 book The Natural History and Antiquities of Selborne , Gilbert White described in the entry for " June 10th , 1771 " how 
 <unk> of May @-@ flies appear for the first time on the Alresford stream . The air was crowded with them , and the surface of the water covered . Large <unk> sucked them in as they lay struggling on the surface of the stream , unable to rise till their wings were dried ... Their motions are very peculiar , up and down for so many yards almost in a perpendicular line . 
 The mayfly has come to symbolise the transitoriness and brevity of life . The English poet George Crabbe , known to have been interested in insects , compared the brief life of a newspaper with that of mayflies , both being known as " Ephemera " , things that live for a day : 
 The theme of brief life is echoed in the artist Douglas Florian 's 1998 poem , " The Mayfly " . The American Poet Laureate Richard Wilbur 's 2005 poem " Mayflies " includes the lines " I saw from unseen pools a mist of flies , In their <unk> rise , And animate a ragged patch of glow , With sudden glittering " . 
 Another literary reference to mayflies is seen in The Epic of Gilgamesh , one of the earliest surviving great works of literature . The briefness of Gilgamesh 's life is compared to that of the adult mayfly . 
 In Szeged , Hungary , mayflies are celebrated in two monuments , one by Pal Farkas , and another on the <unk> bridge , symbolizing freedom . 
 = = = In fly fishing = = = 
 Mayflies are the primary source of models for artificial flies , hooks tied with coloured materials such as threads and feathers , used in fly fishing . These are based on different life @-@ cycle stages of mayflies . For example , the flies known as " <unk> " in North America are designed by fly fishermen to resemble subimago mayflies , and are intended to lure freshwater trout . In 1983 , Patrick McCafferty recorded that artificial flies had been based on 36 genera of North American mayfly , from a total of 63 western species and 103 eastern / central species . A large number of these species have common names among fly fishermen , who need to develop a substantial knowledge of mayfly " habitat , distribution , seasonality , morphology and behavior " in order to match precisely the look and movements of the insects that the local trout are expecting . 
 Izaak Walton describes the use of mayflies for catching trout in his 1653 book The Compleat Angler ; for example , he names the " Green @-@ drake " for use as a natural fly , and " duns " ( mayfly subimagos ) as artificial flies . These include for example the " Great Dun " and the " Great Blue Dun " in February ; the " Whitish Dun " in March ; the " Whirling Dun " and the " Yellow Dun " in April ; the " Green @-@ drake " , the " Little Yellow May @-@ Fly " and the " Grey @-@ Drake " in May ; and the " Black @-@ Blue Dun " in July . Nymph or " wet fly " fishing was restored to popularity on the chalk streams of England by G.E.M. <unk> with his 1910 book Minor Tactics of the Chalk Stream . In the book , <unk> discusses the use of duns to catch trout . The March brown is " probably the most famous of all British mayflies " , having been copied by anglers to catch trout for over 500 years . 
 Some English public houses beside trout streams such as the River Test in Hampshire are named " The Mayfly " . 
 = = = As a spectacle = = = 
 The hatch of the giant mayfly <unk> longicauda on the Tisza and Mureș Rivers in Hungary and Serbia , known as " Tisza blooming " , is a tourist attraction . The 2014 hatch of the large black @-@ brown mayfly <unk> <unk> on the Mississippi River in the US was imaged on weather radar ; the swarm flew up to 760 m ( 2500 feet ) above the ground near La Crosse , Wisconsin , creating a radar signature that resembled a " significant rain storm " , and the mass of dead insects covering roads , cars and buildings caused a " slimy mess " . 
 = = = As food = = = 
 Mayflies are consumed in several cultures and are estimated to contain the most raw protein content of any edible insect by dry weight . In Malawi , <unk> , a paste of mayflies ( <unk> <unk> ) and mosquito is made into a cake for eating . Adult mayflies are collected and eaten in many parts of China and Japan . Near Lake Victoria , <unk> mayflies are collected , dried and preserved for use in food preparations . 
 = = = As a name for ships and aircraft = = = 
 " Mayfly " was the crew 's nickname for His Majesty 's Airship No. 1 , an aerial scout airship built by Vickers but wrecked by strong winds in 1911 before her trial flights . 
 Two vessels of the Royal Navy were named HMS Mayfly : a torpedo boat launched in January 1907 , and a Fly @-@ class river gunboat constructed in sections at Yarrow in 1915 . 
 The Seddon Mayfly , which was constructed in 1908 , was an aircraft that was unsuccessful in early flight . The first aircraft designed by a woman , Lillian Bland , was titled the Bland Mayfly . 
 = = = Other human uses = = = 
 In pre @-@ 1950 France , " chute de <unk> " was obtained by pressing mayflies into cakes and using them as bird food and <unk> . From an economic standpoint , mayflies also provide fisheries with an excellent diet for fish . Mayflies could find uses in the biomedical , pharmaceutical , and cosmetic industries . Their exoskeleton contains chitin , which has applications in these industries . 
 Mayfly larvae do not survive in polluted aquatic habitats and , thus , have been chosen as bioindicators , markers of water quality in ecological assessments . 
 In marketing , Nike produced a line of running shoes in 2003 titled " Mayfly " . The shoes were designed with a wing venation pattern like the mayfly and were also said to have a finite lifetime . The telecommunication company Vodafone featured mayflies in a 2006 branding campaign , telling consumers to " make the most of now " . 
 = Integer sorting = 
 In computer science , integer sorting is the algorithmic problem of sorting a collection of data values by numeric keys , each of which is an integer . Algorithms designed for integer sorting may also often be applied to sorting problems in which the keys are floating point numbers or text strings . The ability to perform integer arithmetic on the keys allows integer sorting algorithms to be faster than comparison sorting algorithms in many cases , depending on the details of which operations are allowed in the model of computing and how large the integers to be sorted are . 
 Integer sorting algorithms including pigeonhole sort , counting sort , and radix sort are widely used and practical . Other integer sorting algorithms with smaller worst @-@ case time bounds are not believed to be practical for computer architectures with 64 or fewer bits per word . Many such algorithms are known , with performance depending on a combination of the number of items to be sorted , number of bits per key , and number of bits per word of the computer performing the sorting algorithm . 
 = = General considerations = = 
 = = = Models of computation = = = 
 Time bounds for integer sorting algorithms typically depend on three parameters : the number n of data values to be sorted , the magnitude K of the largest possible key to be sorted , and the number w of bits that can be represented in a single machine word of the computer on which the algorithm is to be performed . Typically , it is assumed that w ≥ log2 ( max ( n , K ) ) ; that is , that machine words are large enough to represent an index into the sequence of input data , and also large enough to represent a single key . 
 Integer sorting algorithms are usually designed to work in either the pointer machine or random access machine models of computing . The main difference between these two models is in how memory may be addressed . The random access machine allows any value that is stored in a register to be used as the address of memory read and write operations , with unit cost per operation . This ability allows certain complex operations on data to be implemented quickly using table lookups . In contrast , in the pointer machine model , read and write operations use addresses stored in pointers , and it is not allowed to perform arithmetic operations on these pointers . In both models , data values may be added , and bitwise Boolean operations and binary shift operations may typically also be performed on them , in unit time per operation . Different integer sorting algorithms make different assumptions , however , about whether integer multiplication is also allowed as a unit @-@ time operation . Other more specialized models of computation such as the parallel random access machine have also been considered . 
 Andersson , <unk> & Thorup ( 1999 ) showed that in some cases the multiplications or table lookups required by some integer sorting algorithms could be replaced by customized operations that would be more easily implemented in hardware but that are not typically available on general @-@ purpose computers . Thorup ( 2003 ) improved on this by showing how to replace these special operations by the bit field manipulation instructions already available on Pentium processors . 
 = = = Sorting versus integer priority queues = = = 
 A priority queue is a data structure for maintaining a collection of items with numerical priorities , having operations for finding and removing the item with the minimum priority value . Comparison @-@ based priority queues such as the binary heap take logarithmic time per update , but other structures such as the van Emde Boas tree or bucket queue may be faster for inputs whose priorities are small integers . These data structures can be used in the selection sort algorithm , which sorts a collection of elements by repeatedly finding and removing the smallest element from the collection , and returning the elements in the order they were found . A priority queue can be used to maintain the collection of elements in this algorithm , and the time for this algorithm on a collection of n elements can be bounded by the time to initialize the priority queue and then to perform n find and remove operations . For instance , using a binary heap as a priority queue in selection sort leads to the heap sort algorithm , a comparison sorting algorithm that takes O ( n log n ) time . Instead , using selection sort with a bucket queue gives a form of pigeonhole sort , and using van Emde Boas trees or other integer priority queues leads to other fast integer sorting algorithms . 
 Instead of using an integer priority queue in a sorting algorithm , it is possible to go the other direction , and use integer sorting algorithms as subroutines within an integer priority queue data structure . Thorup ( 2007 ) used this idea to show that , if it is possible to perform integer sorting in time T ( n ) per key , then the same time bound applies to the time per insertion or deletion operation in a priority queue data structure . Thorup 's reduction is complicated and assumes the availability of either fast multiplication operations or table lookups , but he also provides an alternative priority queue using only addition and Boolean operations with time T ( n ) + T ( log n ) + T ( log log n ) + ... per operation , at most multiplying the time by an iterated logarithm . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The classical integer sorting algorithms of pigeonhole sort , counting sort , and radix sort are widely used and practical . Much of the subsequent research on integer sorting algorithms has focused less on practicality and more on theoretical improvements in their worst case analysis , and the algorithms that come from this line of research are not believed to be practical for current 64 @-@ bit computer architectures , although experiments have shown that some of these methods may be an improvement on radix sorting for data with 128 or more bits per key . Additionally , for large data sets , the near @-@ random memory access patterns of many integer sorting algorithms can handicap them compared to comparison sorting algorithms that have been designed with the memory hierarchy in mind . 
 Integer sorting provides one of the six benchmarks in the DARPA High Productivity Computing Systems Discrete Mathematics benchmark suite , and one of eleven benchmarks in the NAS Parallel Benchmarks suite . 
 = = Practical algorithms = = 
 <unk> sort or counting sort can both sort n data items having keys in the range from 0 to K − 1 in time O ( n + K ) . In pigeonhole sort ( often called bucket sort ) , pointers to the data items are distributed to a table of buckets , represented as collection data types such as linked lists , using the keys as indices into the table . Then , all of the buckets are concatenated together to form the output list . Counting sort uses a table of counters in place of a table of buckets , to determine the number of items with each key . Then , a prefix sum computation is used to determine the range of positions in the sorted output at which the values with each key should be placed . Finally , in a second pass over the input , each item is moved to its key 's position in the output array . Both algorithms involve only simple loops over the input data ( taking time O ( n ) ) and over the set of possible keys ( taking time O ( K ) ) , giving their O ( n + K ) overall time bound . 
 <unk> sort is a sorting algorithm that works for larger keys than pigeonhole sort or counting sort by performing multiple passes over the data . Each pass sorts the input using only part of the keys , by using a different sorting algorithm ( such as pigeonhole sort or counting sort ) that is suited only for small keys . To break the keys into parts , the radix sort algorithm computes the positional notation for each key , according to some chosen radix ; then , the part of the key used for the ith pass of the algorithm is the ith digit in the positional notation for the full key , starting from the least significant digit and progressing to the most significant . For this algorithm to work correctly , the sorting algorithm used in each pass over the data must be stable : items with equal digits should not change positions with each other . For greatest efficiency , the radix should be chosen to be near the number of data items , n . Additionally , using a power of two near n as the radix allows the keys for each pass to be computed quickly using only fast binary shift and mask operations . With these choices , and with pigeonhole sort or counting sort as the base algorithm , the radix sorting algorithm can sort n data items having keys in the range from 0 to K − 1 in time O ( n <unk> K ) . 
 = = Theoretical algorithms = = 
 Many integer sorting algorithms have been developed whose theoretical analysis shows them to behave better than comparison sorting , pigeonhole sorting , or radix sorting for large enough combinations of the parameters defining the number of items to be sorted , range of keys , and machine word size . Which algorithm has the best performance depends on the values of these parameters . However , despite their theoretical advantages , these algorithms are not an improvement for the typical ranges of these parameters that arise in practical sorting problems . 
 = = = Algorithms for small keys = = = 
 A Van Emde Boas tree may be used as a priority queue to sort a set of n keys , each in the range from 0 to K − 1 , in time O ( n log log K ) . This is a theoretical improvement over radix sorting when K is sufficiently large . However , in order to use a Van Emde Boas tree , one either needs a directly @-@ addressable memory of K words , or one needs to simulate it using a hash table , reducing the space to linear but making the algorithm be randomized . Another priority queue with similar performance ( including the need for randomization in the form of hash tables ) is the Y @-@ fast trie of Willard ( 1983 ) . 
 A more sophisticated technique with a similar flavor and with better theoretical performance was developed by Kirkpatrick & Reisch ( 1984 ) . They observed that each pass of radix sort can be interpreted as a range reduction technique that , in linear time , reduces the maximum key size by a factor of n ; instead , their technique reduces the key size to the square root of its previous value ( halving the number of bits needed to represent a key ) , again in linear time . As in radix sort , they interpret the keys as two @-@ digit base @-@ b numbers for a base b that is approximately √ K. They then group the items to be sorted into buckets according to their high digits , in linear time , using either a large but uninitialized direct addressed memory or a hash table . Each bucket has a representative , the item in the bucket with the largest key ; they then sort the list of items using as keys the high digits for the representatives and the low digits for the non @-@ representatives . By grouping the items from this list into buckets again , each bucket may be placed into sorted order , and by extracting the representatives from the sorted list the buckets may be concatenated together into sorted order . Thus , in linear time , the sorting problem is reduced to another recursive sorting problem in which the keys are much smaller , the square root of their previous magnitude . Repeating this range reduction until the keys are small enough to bucket sort leads to an algorithm with running time O ( n log <unk> K ) . 
 A complicated randomized algorithm of Han & Thorup ( 2002 ) allows these time bounds to be reduced even farther , to O ( n √ log log K ) . 
 = = = Algorithms for large words = = = 
 An integer sorting algorithm is said to be non @-@ conservative if it requires a word size w that is significantly larger than log max ( n , K ) . As an extreme instance , if w ≥ K , and all keys are distinct , then the set of keys may be sorted in linear time by representing it as a <unk> , with a 1 bit in position i when i is one of the input keys , and then repeatedly removing the least significant bit . 
 The non @-@ conservative packed sorting algorithm of Albers & Hagerup ( 1997 ) uses a subroutine , based on Ken <unk> 's <unk> sorting network , for merging two sorted sequences of keys that are each short enough to be packed into a single machine word . The input to the packed sorting algorithm , a sequence of items stored one per word , is transformed into a packed form , a sequence of words each holding multiple items in sorted order , by using this subroutine repeatedly to double the number of items packed into each word . Once the sequence is in packed form , Albers and Hagerup use a form of merge sort to sort it ; when two sequences are being merged to form a single longer sequence , the same <unk> sorting subroutine can be used to repeatedly extract packed words consisting of the smallest remaining elements of the two sequences . This algorithm gains enough of a speedup from its packed representation to sort its input in linear time whenever it is possible for a single word to contain Ω ( log n log log n ) keys ; that is , when log K log n log log n ≤ <unk> for some constant c > 0 . 
 = = = Algorithms for few items = = = 
 <unk> sort , counting sort , radix sort , and Van Emde Boas tree sorting all work best when the key size is small ; for large enough keys , they become slower than comparison sorting algorithms . However , when the key size or the word size is very large relative to the number of items ( or equivalently when the number of items is small ) , it may again become possible to sort quickly , using different algorithms that take advantage of the parallelism inherent in the ability to perform arithmetic operations on large words . 
 An early result in this direction was provided by <unk> , Fredman & <unk> ( 1984 ) using the cell probe model of computation ( an artificial model in which the complexity of an algorithm is measured only by the number of memory accesses it performs ) . Building on their work , Fredman & Willard ( 1994 ) described two data structures , the Q @-@ heap and the atomic heap , that are <unk> on a random access machine . The Q @-@ heap is a bit @-@ parallel version of a binary trie , and allows both priority queue operations and successor and predecessor queries to be performed in constant time for sets of O ( ( log N ) 1 / 4 ) items , where N ≤ <unk> is the size of the <unk> tables needed to implement the data structure . The atomic heap is a B @-@ tree in which each tree node is represented as a Q @-@ heap ; it allows constant time priority queue operations ( and therefore sorting ) for sets of ( log N ) O ( 1 ) items . 
 Andersson et al . ( 1998 ) provide a randomized algorithm called signature sort that allows for linear time sorting of sets of up to 2O ( ( log w ) 1 / 2 − ε ) items at a time , for any constant ε > 0 . As in the algorithm of Kirkpatrick and Reisch , they perform range reduction using a representation of the keys as numbers in base b for a careful choice of b . Their range reduction algorithm replaces each digit by a signature , which is a hashed value with O ( log n ) bits such that different digit values have different signatures . If n is sufficiently small , the numbers formed by this replacement process will be significantly smaller than the original keys , allowing the non @-@ conservative packed sorting algorithm of Albers & Hagerup ( 1997 ) to sort the replaced numbers in linear time . From the sorted list of replaced numbers , it is possible to form a compressed trie of the keys in linear time , and the children of each node in the trie may be sorted recursively using only keys of size b , after which a tree traversal produces the sorted order of the items . 
 = = = Trans @-@ dichotomous algorithms = = = 
 Fredman & Willard ( 1993 ) introduced the <unk> model of analysis for integer sorting algorithms , in which nothing is assumed about the range of the integer keys and one must bound the algorithm 's performance by a function of the number of data values alone . Alternatively , in this model , the running time for an algorithm on a set of n items is assumed to be the worst case running time for any possible combination of values of K and w . The first algorithm of this type was Fredman and Willard 's fusion tree sorting algorithm , which runs in time O ( n log n / log log n ) ; this is an improvement over comparison sorting for any choice of K and w . An alternative version of their algorithm that includes the use of random numbers and integer division operations improves this to O ( n √ log n ) . 
 Since their work , even better algorithms have been developed . For instance , by repeatedly applying the Kirkpatrick – Reisch range reduction technique until the keys are small enough to apply the Albers – Hagerup packed sorting algorithm , it is possible to sort in time O ( n log log n ) ; however , the range reduction part of this algorithm requires either a large memory ( proportional to √ K ) or randomization in the form of hash tables . 
 Han & Thorup ( 2002 ) showed how to sort in randomized time O ( n √ log log n ) . Their technique involves using ideas related to signature sorting to partition the data into many small <unk> , of a size small enough that signature sorting can sort each of them efficiently . It is also possible to use similar ideas to sort integers deterministically in time O ( n log log n ) and linear space . Using only simple arithmetic operations ( no multiplications or table lookups ) it is possible to sort in randomized expected time O ( n log log n ) or deterministically in time O ( n ( log log n ) 1 + ε ) for any constant ε > 0 . 
 = Maryland Route 331 = 
 Maryland Route 331 ( MD 331 ) is a 28 @.@ 74 @-@ mile ( 46 @.@ 25 km ) state highway on the Eastern Shore of Maryland in the United States . The route runs from Vienna in Dorchester County northwest to Easton in Talbot County , intersecting U.S. Route 50 ( US 50 ) at both ends . MD 331 is a two @-@ lane undivided road most of its length that passes mostly through agricultural areas . The road also passes through the communities of Hurlock and Preston along the way . It encounters several routes during its journey , including MD 14 near Rhodesdale and MD 16 in the Preston area , both of which the route forms concurrencies with . In addition , the route also intersects with MD 392 and MD 307 in Hurlock and with MD 318 near Preston . 
 Most of present @-@ day MD 331 was designated as part of US 213 in 1926 when the U.S. Highway System was established . By 1940 , US 213 was moved to a new alignment that crossed the Choptank River at Cambridge on a bridge built in 1935 and MD 331 was designated to run from Vienna to Easton . Both ends of MD 331 have been shortened since , with the southernmost portion of MD 331 curtailed following the completion of the US 50 bypass of Vienna by the 1990s and the northern terminus of the route cut back to US 50 in 2004 when the state @-@ maintained portion of Dover Road to Dover Street in Easton was turned over to the city . 
 = = Route description = = 
 MD 331 is a part of the National Highway System as a principal arterial within the town of Easton . 
 = = = Dorchester County = = = 
 MD 331 begins at an interchange with US 50 in Vienna , Dorchester County , a short distance west of the Nanticoke River . From this interchange , the route heads north on Rhodesdale Vienna Road , a two @-@ lane undivided road . It passes through wooded areas , with a set of power lines and an abandoned railroad line located along the east side of the road . MD 331 continues into farmland , with some rural residences alongside the road , before it approaches Reids Grove , where MD 819 ( Reids Grove Road ) loops to the west of MD 331 . Past Reids Grove , the route continues through a mix of woodland and farmland , still paralleling the power lines and the abandoned railroad . 
 MD 331 reaches Rhodesdale , where it intersects MD 14 ( Rhodesdale Eldorado Road ) . At this intersection , the route makes a left turn to run concurrent with MD 14 along East New Market Rhodesdale Road , heading west through Rhodesdale . The road leaves Rhodesdale and heads into farmland . MD 331 splits from MD 14 by turning north on Shiloh Church Hurlock Road at an intersection . Along Shiloh Church Hurlock Road , MD 331 passes a few residences before heading through more farm fields . 
 MD 331 enters Hurlock and heads into residential areas , with the name changing to Main Street at the Jackson Street intersection . It passes more residences before intersecting MD 392 ( Delaware Avenue ) . Past MD 392 , the road passes more homes before it heads into the downtown area of Hurlock , where it crosses the Maryland and Delaware Railroad 's Seaford Line and MD 307 ( Broad Street ) . Past this intersection , MD 331 heads northwest on Academy Street past numerous homes before the road leaves Hurlock . Upon leaving Hurlock , the road becomes Waddells Corner Road and it heads into farmland . The road turns to the west and continues through agricultural areas with intermittent residences . It comes to an intersection with MD 16 ( East New Market Ellwood Road ) , where MD 331 makes a right turn to head north along with MD 16 . MD 16 and MD 331 head north through a mix of woods and farms with some residences . The road continues through rural areas with an increasing number of residences as it approaches the Preston area . The road intersects the western terminus of MD 318 ( Preston Road ) near a car dealership . Past this intersection , MD 16 and MD 331 continue northwest on Preston Road . 
 = = = Caroline and Talbot counties = = = 
 The road crosses the Hunting Creek into Caroline County . Before entering Preston , MD 817 loops off to the west of MD 16 and MD 331 on Linchester Road . Past MD 817 , the road enters Preston , where it becomes Main Street , passing by residences and some businesses . The route intersects MD 324 ( Maple Avenue ) before reaching the center of town , where MD 16 splits from MD 331 by heading northeast on Harmony Road . Past this intersection , the route passes more residences before leaving Preston , where it becomes Dover Bridge Road . It heads north into rural areas of woods and farms with some residences along the road . The road turns to the northwest and intersects Tanyard Road . MD 331 turns west and continues to the residential community of Bethlehem , where it intersects MD 578 ( Bethlehem Road ) . Past Bethlehem , the road continues past many rural residences . 
 MD 331 enters wetlands as it approaches the Choptank River , which it crosses into Talbot County on the Dover Bridge , a swing bridge . Upon entering Talbot County , the route becomes Dover Road and continues to the northwest through a mix of woodland and farmland . It turns to the west with the number of residences increasing as it approaches Easton . Upon reaching Easton , MD 331 heads into commercial and industrial areas . The route ends at the intersection with US 50 ( Ocean Gateway ) , where Dover Road continues west as a local road toward downtown Easton . 
 = = History = = 
 MD 331 from Rhodesdale to Easton was one of the original state roads marked for improvement in 1909 . In 1910 , the only paved sections of the highway were the approaches to Dover Bridge in both Talbot County and Caroline County . The state road was paved from Hurlock to Shiloh Church in 1912 , from Easton to Waddell 's Corner in 1913 and 1914 , from Waddell 's Corner to Hurlock in 1915 , and within Hurlock in 1916 . When the U.S. Highway System was organized in 1926 , the state road became part of US 213 . 
 The first section of the Vienna – Rhodesdale highway was 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) of pavement south from Rhodesdale that was completed by 1923 . The remainder of the highway was under construction by 1924 , with another 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) section of the road completed north from Vienna by 1927 . The gap between Vienna and Rhodesdale was filled in 1928 . When the Nanticoke River Bridge at Vienna was completed in 1931 , US 213 was rerouted between Mardela Springs and Rhodesdale to pass through Vienna . A new Dover Bridge , replacing a bridge built in the 19th century , was completed in 1932 . In 1939 , the original MD 331 and US 213 swapped routes ; US 213 also assumed MD 344 between Vienna and MD 16 at Mount Holly . 
 MD 331 has seen little change since 1939 . MD 331 and MD 16 were realigned around Ellwood and Linchester around 1960 . MD 331 's southern terminus was truncated at its newly constructed interchange with US 50 in Vienna in 1991 shortly after US 50 bypassed Vienna . MD 331 's northern terminus has been rolled back twice in Easton . The state highway was rolled back from Washington Street to Park Street in 1983 . MD 331 was truncated at US 50 in 2004 . 
 = = Junction list = = 
 = = Auxiliary routes = = 
 MD <unk> is the designation for the 0 @.@ 08 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 13 km ) section of Linchester Road from MD 331 to MD <unk> near Preston in Caroline County . 
 MD <unk> is the designation for the 0 @.@ 06 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 097 km ) section of Seaman Road from MD 331 near its intersection with MD 318 in Dorchester County to Langrell Road ( MD <unk> ) on the Dorchester / Caroline County line near Preston . 
 MD <unk> is the designation for the 0 @.@ 21 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 34 km ) section of Payne Road from MD 331 to the terminus of County Route 201 southeast of Preston . 
 = Aloe vera = 
 Aloe vera ( / <unk> / or / <unk> / ) is a succulent plant species of the genus Aloe . It grows wild in tropical climates around the world and is cultivated for agricultural and medicinal uses . Aloe also is used for decorative purposes and grows successfully indoors as a potted plant . 
 It is found in many consumer products . There is little scientific evidence of the effectiveness or safety of Aloe vera extracts for either cosmetic or medicinal purposes . Studies finding positive evidence are frequently contradicted by other studies . 
 = = Description = = 
 Aloe vera is a stemless or very short @-@ stemmed succulent plant growing to 60 – 100 cm ( 24 – 39 in ) tall , spreading by offsets . The leaves are thick and fleshy , green to grey @-@ green , with some varieties showing white flecks on their upper and lower stem surfaces . The margin of the leaf is serrated and has small white teeth . The flowers are produced in summer on a spike up to 90 cm ( 35 in ) tall , each flower being pendulous , with a yellow tubular corolla 2 – 3 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 – 1 @.@ 2 in ) long . Like other Aloe species , Aloe vera forms arbuscular mycorrhiza , a symbiosis that allows the plant better access to mineral nutrients in soil . 
 Aloe vera leaves contain phytochemicals under study for possible bioactivity , such as acetylated <unk> , <unk> , anthraquinone C @-@ glycosides , <unk> , other <unk> , such as <unk> , and various lectins . 
 = = Taxonomy and etymology = = 
 The species has a number of synonyms : A. <unk> Mill . , Aloe indica Royle , Aloe perfoliata L. var. vera and A. vulgaris Lam . Common names include Chinese Aloe , Indian Aloe , True Aloe , Barbados Aloe , Burn Aloe , First Aid Plant . The species epithet vera means " true " or " genuine " . Some literature identifies the white @-@ spotted form of Aloe vera as Aloe vera var. chinensis ; however , the species varies widely with regard to leaf spots and it has been suggested that the spotted form of Aloe vera may be conspecific with A. <unk> . The species was first described by Carl Linnaeus in 1753 as Aloe perfoliata var. vera , and was described again in 1768 by Nicolaas Laurens Burman as Aloe vera in Flora Indica on 6 April and by Philip Miller as Aloe <unk> some ten days after Burman in the Gardener 's Dictionary . 
 Techniques based on DNA comparison suggest Aloe vera is relatively closely related to Aloe perryi , a species endemic to Yemen . Similar techniques , using chloroplast DNA sequence comparison and <unk> profiling have also suggested it is closely related to Aloe <unk> , Aloe inermis , Aloe <unk> , Aloe <unk> , and Aloe striata . With the exception of the South African species A. striata , these Aloe species are native to Socotra ( Yemen ) , Somalia , and Sudan . The lack of obvious natural populations of the species has led some authors to suggest Aloe vera may be of hybrid origin . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 The natural range of A. vera is unclear , as the species has been widely cultivated throughout the world . Naturalised stands of the species occur in the southern half of the Arabian Peninsula , through North Africa ( Morocco , Mauritania , Egypt ) , as well as Sudan and neighbouring countries , along with the Canary , Cape Verde , and Madeira Islands . This distribution is somewhat similar to the one of Euphorbia <unk> , <unk> atlantica , and a few others , suggesting that a dry sclerophyll forest once covered large areas , but has been dramatically reduced due to desertification in the Sahara , leaving these few patches isolated . Several closely related ( or sometimes identical ) species can be found on the two extreme sides of the Sahara : dragon trees ( Dracaena ) and <unk> being two of the most representative examples . 
 The species was introduced to China and various parts of southern Europe in the 17th century . The species is widely naturalised elsewhere , occurring in temperate and tropical regions of Australia , Barbados , Belize , Curaçao , Nigeria , Paraguay , Mexico and the US states of Florida , Arizona and Texas . The actual species ' distribution has been suggested to be the result of human cultivation ( anthropogenic ) . 
 = = Cultivation = = 
 Aloe vera has been widely grown as an ornamental plant . The species is popular with modern gardeners as a putatively medicinal plant and for its interesting flowers , form , and succulence . This succulence enables the species to survive in areas of low natural rainfall , making it ideal for rockeries and other low water @-@ use gardens . The species is hardy in zones 8 – 11 , although it is intolerant of very heavy frost or snow . The species is relatively resistant to most insect pests , though spider mites , mealy bugs , scale insects , and aphid species may cause a decline in plant health . This plant has gained the Royal Horticultural Society 's Award of Garden Merit . 
 In pots , the species requires well @-@ drained , sandy potting soil and bright , sunny conditions ; however , Aloe plants can burn under too much sun or shrivel when the pot does not drain water . The use of a good @-@ quality commercial propagation mix or packaged " cacti and succulent mix " is recommended , as they allow good drainage . Terra cotta pots are preferable as they are porous . <unk> plants should be allowed to completely dry prior to <unk> . When potted , aloes become crowded with " pups " growing from the sides of the " mother plant " , they should be divided and <unk> to allow room for further growth and help prevent pest infestations . During winter , Aloe vera may become dormant , during which little moisture is required . In areas that receive frost or snow , the species is best kept indoors or in heated glasshouses . 
 There is large @-@ scale agricultural production of Aloe vera in Australia , Bangladesh , Cuba , the Dominican Republic , China , Mexico , India , Jamaica , Kenya , Tanzania and South Africa , along with the USA to supply the cosmetics industry . 
 = = Uses = = 
 = = = Research = = = 
 There is little scientific evidence of the effectiveness or safety of Aloe vera extracts for either cosmetic or medicinal purposes . A research study finding positive evidence is frequently contradicted by other studies . 
 Despite this , the cosmetic and alternative medicine industries regularly make claims regarding the soothing , moisturizing , and healing properties of aloe vera . 
 Two 2009 reviews of clinical studies determined that all were too small and faulty to allow strong conclusions to be drawn , but concluded : " there is some preliminary evidence to suggest that oral administration of aloe vera might be effective in reducing blood glucose in diabetic patients and in lowering blood lipid levels in <unk> . The topical application of aloe vera does not seem to prevent radiation @-@ induced skin damage . The evidence regarding wound healing is contradictory . More and better trial data are needed to define the clinical effectiveness of this popular herbal remedy more precisely . " One of the reviews found that Aloe has not been proven to offer protection for humans from sunburn . 
 A 2007 review of aloe vera use in burns concluded , " cumulative evidence tends to support that aloe vera might be an effective intervention used in burn wound healing for <unk> to second @-@ degree burns . Further , well @-@ designed trials with sufficient details of the contents of aloe vera products should be carried out to determine the effectiveness of aloe vera . " Topical application of aloe vera may also be effective for genital herpes and psoriasis . A 2014 Cochrane review found no strong evidence for the value of topical application of aloe vera to treat or prevent phlebitis caused by intravenous infusion . 
 Aloe vera gel is used commercially as an ingredient in yogurts , beverages , and some desserts , although at certain doses , its toxic properties could be severe whether ingested or topically applied . The same is true for aloe latex , which was taken orally for conditions ranging from glaucoma to multiple sclerosis until the FDA required manufacturers to discontinue its use . 
 = = = Dietary supplement = = = 
 <unk> , a compound found in the exudate of some Aloe species , was the common ingredient in over @-@ the @-@ counter ( OTC ) laxative products in the United States until 2002 when the Food and Drug Administration banned it because the companies manufacturing it failed to provide the necessary safety data . Aloe vera has potential toxicity , with side effects occurring at some dose levels both when ingested or applied topically . Although toxicity may be less when <unk> is removed by processing , Aloe vera that contains <unk> in excess amounts may induce side effects . 
 Aloe vera juice is marketed to support the health of the digestive system , but there is neither scientific evidence nor regulatory approval to support this claim . The extracts and quantities typically used for such purposes appear to be dose @-@ dependent for toxic effects . 
 = = = Traditional medicine = = = 
 Aloe vera is used in traditional medicine as a multipurpose skin treatment . In Ayurvedic medicine it is called <unk> , as are extracts from agave . Early records of Aloe vera use appear in the Ebers Papyrus from the 16th century BC , and in Dioscorides ' De Materia Medica and Pliny the Elder 's Natural History – both written in the mid @-@ first century AD . It is also written of in the Juliana Anicia Codex of 512 AD . The plant is used widely in the traditional herbal medicine of many countries . 
 = = = Commodities = = = 
 Aloe vera is used on facial tissues where it is promoted as a <unk> and anti @-@ irritant to reduce chafing of the nose . Cosmetic companies commonly add sap or other derivatives from Aloe vera to products such as makeup , tissues , moisturizers , soaps , sunscreens , incense , shaving cream , or shampoos . A review of academic literature notes that its inclusion in many hygiene products is due to its " moisturizing emollient effect " . 
 Other potential uses for extracts of Aloe vera include the dilution of semen for the artificial fertilization of sheep , as a fresh food preservative , or for water conservation in small farms . It has also been suggested that biofuels could be obtained from Aloe vera seeds . 
 = = Toxicity = = 
 Under the guidelines of California Proposition 65 , orally ingested non @-@ <unk> aloe vera leaf extract has been listed by the <unk> , along with <unk> , among " chemicals known to the state to cause cancer or reproductive toxicity " . 
 Use of topical aloe vera is not associated with significant side effects . Oral ingestion of aloe vera , however , may cause abdominal cramps and diarrhea which in turn can decrease the absorption of drugs . IARC studies have found ingested non @-@ <unk> liquid aloe vera to be carcinogenic in animals , and state that it is a possible carcinogen in humans as well . 
 = Henry Alexander Stuart @-@ Menteth = 
 Commander Henry Alexander Stuart @-@ Menteth DSC , usually shortened to Alex Stuart @-@ Menteth ( 26 August 1912 – 14 May 2000 ) was a British naval officer famous for his service in the Royal Navy , particularly during World War II where he assisted in the sinking of two U @-@ boats ; and helped capture Enigma code fragments which enabled Bletchley Park to decipher the code . He commanded six ships during his career . He married in 1952 , having two sons and a daughter , and seven grandchildren in turn . 
 Stuart @-@ Menteth was born as one of four . He joined a navy cadet force in Devon , serving on several ships . After his promotion course , he served both abroad and in the United Kingdom . He joined HMS Hunter shortly before World War II , before in April 1940 his ship was torpedoed after a raid on a German held port . He was kept in a hospital by the Germans , and was listed at home as killed in action . When the British liberated the area , he was freed . On his next ship , HMS Somali , he helped capture Enigma code fragments which enabled Bletchley Park to decipher the code , again capturing code in 1941 , and in the same year was given his first command , HMS Berkeley . He was mentioned in despatches in 1942 , whilst working on HMS Aldenham after the ship sunk a U @-@ boat , and a Distinguished Service Cross for sinking another U @-@ boat . Stuart @-@ Menteth was entrusted to the Royal Australian Navy in 1949 , where he commanded two destroyers . He ran the Scottish Corps of Commissionaires for 20 years after his 1958 retirement . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Henry Alexander Stuart @-@ Menteth , often abbreviated to Alex Stuart @-@ Menteth , was born on 26 August 1912 in <unk> , Surrey . He was the son of Walter Stuart @-@ Menteth and Violet Stuart @-@ Menteth ( née Lafone ) , one of four : Walter Granville Stuart @-@ Menteth ( 1906 – 1970 ) , Frances <unk> Stuart @-@ Menteth ( 1907 – 1957 ) , and Lucy Violet Stuart @-@ Menteth ( 1911 – ) . In 1926 , he became a cadet in Dartmouth , Devon . With the cadets , he served on the ships HMS Renown in the Atlantic , HMS Dragon in the West Indies and America , and on the shore establishment HMS President on his promotion course . 
 = = Naval career = = 
 Alex Stuart @-@ Menteth served on the destroyers HMS Whitehall in the Mediterranean in 1934 and 1935 , HMS Windsor in the home fleet in 1935 and 1936 , the minesweeper HMS Elgin in the reserve fleet in 1935 , and HMS Defender in 1935 serving in China . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 On 28 August 1939 , shortly before the outbreak of World War II , Stuart @-@ Menteth joined the destroyer HMS Hunter . Hunter was in Captain Warburton @-@ Lee 's 2nd Flotilla , along with four other destroyers . On 10 April 1940 , in a snowstorm , the Flotilla attacked the port of Narvik , held by the Germans . Four German destroyers were sunk and seven damaged , notably sinking SS <unk> , an 8 @,@ 500 @-@ ton ship transporting ammunition . Hunter was set alight and torpedoed , leading to her sinking . As she sank , Stuart @-@ Menteth was trapped by a malfunctioning davit with a leg wound on the upper deck . A rating saved Stuart @-@ Menteth , and they were both picked up by German sailors . 
 Stuart @-@ Menteth was taken to Narvik , at a civilian hospital . He remained in the town until its eventual liberation by the Allies . However , whilst he was in hospital , Stuart @-@ Menteth was listed as killed in action , and had an obituary in The Times as such , which he later read . After further hospitalisation in Britain from April to December 1940 , on 3 December Stuart @-@ Menteth became the first lieutenant of the Tribal @-@ class destroyer HMS Somali . She partook in Operation Claymore , an operation to disrupt supplies , to ferry <unk> to shore , and to capture German code . Somalia brought to a stop Krebs , a German trawler , by firing at her , forcing her to stop . A boarding party found cryptographic keys and rotor machines . This assisted Bletchley Park to decipher several Enigma codes . 
 In May 1941 , Stuart @-@ Menteth again assisted the capture of Enigma material from the German ship München , enabling Bletchley Park to begin to decipher German Enigma codes . Several months later , he was given command of his first ship , HMS Berkeley , a Hunt @-@ class destroyer . Stuart @-@ Menteth joined HMS Aldenham in March 1942 , and helped sink the German submarine U @-@ 58 . He was mentioned in despatches on 2 June 1943 as " Lieutenant @-@ Commander Henry Alexander Stuart @-@ Menteth , Royal Navy " ; after commanding Aldenham in a disastrous mission in the Aegean Sea . In late 1943 , Stuart @-@ Menteth took command of HMS Dinosaur , and partook in training officers of landing craft . His last command in the war was HMS Havelock , with which he assisted in the sinking of U @-@ 242 , for which he was awarded a Distinguished Service Cross . 
 = = = After war = = = 
 After World War II on 13 February 1946 Stuart @-@ Menteth became first lieutenant on HMS Birmingham , followed by HMS Superb on 4 September 1946 , before being entrusted to the Royal Australian Navy in 1949 . There he commanded his last two ships , the destroyers HMS St. James and HMS Obdurate . He went on to work with Lord Mountbatten in Malta , and in 1958 he retired , moving to Scotland . He did , however , operate the Scottish Corps of Commissionaires for close to 20 years , and was chairman of the Edinburgh World Wildlife Fund for 10 years . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Stuart @-@ Menteth met Penelope Giles in 1952 in Australia , the couple married , having a daughter and two sons : Andrew Alexander ( 1954 ) , Walter Henry ( 1957 ) , and Harriet Lucy ( 1959 ) ; and seven grandchildren . He died on 14 May 2000 in Edinburgh , Lothian . 
 = NextWorth = 
 NextWorth is an electronics trade @-@ in and recycling service . Users of the service exchange used electronics for cash or discounts on newer models . NextWorth was founded by business students at Babson College in 2005 . It started as a commission @-@ based service to help businesses setup online auctions for their used items , then changed its business model to focus on electronics trade @-@ ins in 2006 . As of late 2012 , NextWorth was one of the best @-@ known and largest electronics trade @-@ in and recycling services in the United States , although it handles only a small percentage of total trade @-@ in traffic . 
 = = History = = 
 NextWorth was founded by David Chen , Andrew Walsh and Scott Richardson while they were students at Babson College . The company was selected for Babson College 's 2005 Business <unk> program , which provides free resources to student @-@ led startups . NextWorth Inc. began operations the following year . It was originally a service that helped businesses and non @-@ profits prepare luxury items for online auctions in exchange for a 20 @-@ 33 percent commission . In the spring of 2006 , NextWorth changed its business model and services to focus on electronics trade @-@ ins . In January 2007 , NextWorth raised $ 1 @.@ 5 million in its first round of funding . 
 = = Services = = 
 NextWorth purchases used electronics and <unk> about 80 @-@ 85 percent of them , while the remainder are sent to a network of partners for recycling . Many used iPhones are resold in countries where new ones are more expensive . Sellers can fill out an online form to describe the used products they want to sell , then get a quote through the website . After receiving the quote , sellers have thirty days to ship the product using a pre @-@ paid shipping label provided by NextWorth . The company wipes the device 's memory and inspects the item before sending the seller reimbursement in 3 @-@ 15 days depending on the payment method . If NextWorth <unk> a product at a lower condition than the seller expected , they can get an explanation from NextWorth , challenge the quote , or reject it and get the product back . 
 Sellers can also do trade @-@ ins in @-@ person and get reimbursed immediately at partnered retailers like Target . The Target trade @-@ in program began as a pilot project in 2009 , and expanded to 190 locations by 2010 and almost 1 @,@ 500 stores by 2011 . A similar partnership was in place with Circuit City before it went out of business in 2009 . A company spokesperson stated in 2009 that the company was also partnered with 15 smaller retailers for in @-@ person trade @-@ ins . 
 = = Pricing = = 
 NextWorth sets its prices through an algorithm developed by MBA students and a professor at Babson College . Sellers can obtain better prices by reselling their electronics directly through services like eBay or Craigslist , but services like NextWorth are more convenient and have predictable pricing . A CNET editor found most of the trade @-@ in prices at NextWorth to be " pretty fair " , though he was expecting higher prices for some items . Variations in price between trade @-@ in services and products depend on timing ( release of new models and market fluctuations ) , the model being sold , and the product 's condition . 
 According to About.com , how fair the seller is in describing the condition of the product " will determine whether your experience with NextWorth is satisfying or not . " Some sellers get higher or lower prices than they were originally quoted , depending on how NextWorth 's assessment of the product 's condition compares to the seller 's description . 
 NextWorth has experienced spikes in trade @-@ in activity from sellers when newer models are announced , such as when the iPad 2 was announced in March 2011 , and when the iPhone 5 was announced in September 2012 These announcements also caused the trade @-@ in price of older models to decrease , due to over @-@ <unk> as well as after the holiday season . 
 = Silky shark = 
 The silky shark ( Carcharhinus falciformis ) , also known by numerous names such as blackspot shark , grey whaler shark , olive shark , <unk> shark , sickle shark , sickle @-@ shaped shark , and sickle silk shark , is a species of requiem shark , in the family Carcharhinidae , named for the smooth texture of its skin . It is one of the most abundant sharks in the pelagic zone , and can be found around the world in tropical waters . Highly mobile and migratory , this shark is most often found over the edge of the continental shelf down to 50 m ( 164 ft ) . The silky shark has a slender , streamlined body and typically grows to a length of 2 @.@ 5 m ( 8 ft 2 in ) . It can be distinguished from other large requiem sharks by its relatively small first dorsal fin with a curving rear margin , its tiny second dorsal fin with a long free rear tip , and its long , sickle @-@ shaped pectoral fins . It is a deep , metallic bronze @-@ gray above and white below . 
 With prey often scarce in its oceanic environment , the silky shark is a swift , inquisitive , and persistent hunter . It feeds mainly on bony fishes and cephalopods , and has been known to drive them into compacted schools before launching open @-@ mouthed , slashing attacks . This species often trails schools of tuna , a favored prey . Its sense of hearing is extremely acute , allowing it to localize the low @-@ frequency noises generated by other feeding animals , and , by extension , sources of food . The silky shark is viviparous , meaning that the developing embryos are sustained by a placental connection to their mother . Significant geographical variation is seen in its life history details . Reproduction occurs year @-@ round except in the Gulf of Mexico , where it follows a seasonal cycle . Females give birth to litters of up to 16 pups annually or biennially . The newborn sharks spend their first months in relatively sheltered reef nurseries on the outer continental shelf , growing substantially before moving into the open ocean . 
 The large size and cutting teeth of the silky shark make it potentially dangerous , and it has behaved aggressively towards divers . However , attacks are rare , as few humans enter its oceanic habitat . Silky sharks are valued for their fins , and to a lesser extent their meat , hide , liver oil , and jaws . Because of their abundance , they form a major component of commercial and artisanal shark fisheries in many countries . Furthermore , their association with tuna results in many sharks being taken as bycatch in tuna fisheries . Although slow @-@ reproducing like most other sharks , the wide distribution and large population size of the silky shark was once thought to buffer the species against these fishing pressures . However , data now suggest that silky shark numbers are declining around the world , which prompted the IUCN to reassess its conservation status from Least Concern to Near Threatened in 2007 . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 A scientific description of the silky shark was first published by the German biologists Johannes Müller and Jakob Henle under the name Carcharias ( Prionodon ) falciformis , in their 1839 Systematische Beschreibung der Plagiostomen . Subsequent authors have assigned this species to the genus Carcharhinus . Because Müller and Henle 's type specimen was a 53 @-@ cm @-@ long female fetus from Cuba , adult silky sharks were historically not recognized as C. falciformis and were described as a separate species , Carcharhinus floridanus , by Henry Bigelow , William Schroeder , and Stewart Springer in 1943 . Jack Garrick , Richard Backus , and Robert Gibbs , Jr. synonymized C. floridanus with C. falciformis in 1964 . 
 The specific epithet falciformis is Latin for " sickle @-@ shaped " , which refers to the outline of the dorsal and pectoral fins . The silky shark 's common name comes from the fine texture of its skin compared to other sharks , a product of its tiny , densely packed dermal denticles . It may also be referred to as blackspot shark ( usually used for C. sealei ) , grey reef shark ( usually used for C. amblyrhynchos ) , grey whaler shark , olive shark , reef shark , <unk> shark , sickle shark , sickle silk shark , sickle @-@ shaped shark , silk shark , and silky whaler . 
 = = Phylogeny and evolution = = 
 Fossilized teeth belonging to the silky shark have been found in North Carolina : from the vicinity of two baleen whales , one in mud dating to the Pleistocene @-@ Holocene ( circa 12 @,@ 000 years ago ) and the other in Goose Creek Limestone dating to the Late Pliocene ( circa 3 @.@ 5 million years ago – Mya ) , as well as from the Pungo River , dating to the Miocene ( 23 – 5 @.@ 3 Mya ) . Fossil teeth have also been found in Pliocene strata at the Cava <unk> quarry in Tuscany , Italy . Carcharhinus elongatus , an earlier representative of its lineage with smooth @-@ edged teeth , is known from Oligocene ( 34 – 23 Mya ) deposits in the Old Church formation of Virginia , and the Ashley formation of South Carolina . A set of poorly described , Eocene ( 56 – 34 Mya ) teeth resembling those of this species are known from Egypt . 
 Initial efforts to resolve the evolutionary relationships of the silky shark were inconclusive ; based on morphology , Jack Garrick in 1982 suggested the blackspot shark ( C. sealei ) as its closest relative . In 1988 , Leonard Compagno assigned it <unk> to an informal " transitional group " also containing the blacknose shark ( C. acronotus ) , the blacktip reef shark ( C. melanopterus ) , the nervous shark ( C. cautus ) , the copper shark ( C. brachyurus ) , and the night shark ( C. signatus ) . 
 More recently , Gavin Naylor 's 1992 phylogenetic analysis , based on allozyme sequence data , found that the silky shark is part of a group containing large sharks with a ridge between the dorsal fins . One branch within this group contains the sandbar shark ( C. plumbeus ) and the bignose shark ( C. altimus ) , while the silky shark is the basal member of the other branch and the sister taxon to a clade containing the Caribbean reef shark ( C. perezi ) , Galapagos shark ( C. galapagensis ) , oceanic whitetip shark ( C. longimanus ) , dusky shark ( C. obscurus ) , and blue shark ( Prionace glauca ) . Mine Dosay @-@ <unk> 's 2008 ribosomal DNA analysis , which included the silky , blue , and bignose sharks , confirmed the closeness of those three species . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The silky shark has a cosmopolitan distribution in marine waters warmer than 23 ° C ( 73 ° F ) . In the Atlantic Ocean , it is found from the U.S. state of Massachusetts to Spain in the north , and from southern Brazil to northern Angola in the south , including the Mediterranean Sea , Gulf of Mexico , and Caribbean Sea . It occurs throughout the Indian Ocean , as far south as Mozambique in the west and Western Australia in the east , including the Red Sea and the Persian Gulf . In the Pacific Ocean , the northern extent of its range runs from southern China and Japan to southern Baja California and the Gulf of California , while the southern extent runs from Sydney , Australia , to northern New Zealand to northern Chile . Based on life history differences , four distinct populations of silky sharks have been identified in ocean basins worldwide : in the northwestern Atlantic , in the western and central Pacific , in the eastern Pacific , and in the Indian Ocean . 
 Primarily an inhabitant of the open ocean , the silky shark is most common from the surface to a depth of 200 m ( 660 ft ) , but may dive to 500 m ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) or more . Tracking studies in the tropical eastern Pacific and northern Gulf of Mexico have found that cruising silky sharks spend 99 % of their time within 50 m ( 160 ft ) of the surface , and 80 – 85 % of their time in water with a temperature of 26 – 30 ° C ( 79 – 86 ° F ) ; the pattern was constant regardless of day or night . This species favors the edges of continental and insular shelves , often over deepwater reefs and around islands . Its range extends farther north and south along continental margins than in oceanic waters . On occasion , it may venture into coastal waters as shallow as 18 m ( 59 ft ) . Silky sharks are highly mobile and migratory , though the details of their movements are little @-@ known . Tagging data have recorded individual sharks moving up to 60 km ( 37 mi ) per day , and covering distances up to 1 @,@ 339 km ( 832 mi ) . Larger sharks generally move longer distances than smaller ones . In the Pacific Ocean and possibly elsewhere , it spends the summer at slightly higher latitudes , particularly during warmer El Niño years . In the northern Atlantic , most sharks follow the Gulf Stream northward along the U.S. East Coast . In the Gulf of Aden , it is most common in late spring and summer . 
 = = Description = = 
 Slim and streamlined , the silky shark has a fairly long , rounded snout with barely developed flaps of skin in front of the nostrils . The circular , medium @-@ sized eyes are equipped with nictitating membranes ( protective third eyelids ) . Short , shallow furrows are present at the corners of the mouth . Fourteen to 16 and 13 – 17 tooth rows are found on either side of the upper and lower jaws , respectively ( typically 15 for both ) . The upper teeth are triangular and strongly serrated , with a notch in the posterior edge ; they are erect at the center and become more oblique towards the sides . The lower teeth are narrow , erect , and smooth @-@ edged . The five pairs of gill slits are moderate in length . 
 The dorsal and pectoral fins are distinctive and help to distinguish the silky shark from similar species . The first dorsal fin is relatively small , measuring less than a tenth as high as the shark is long , and originates behind the free rear tips of the pectoral fins . It has a rounded apex , an " S " -shaped rear margin , and a free rear tip about half as long as the fin is tall . The second dorsal fin is tiny , smaller than the anal fin , with a drawn @-@ out free rear tip up to three times as long as the fin is tall . A narrow dorsal ridge runs between the dorsal fins . The pectoral fins are narrow and sickle @-@ shaped , and particularly long in adults . The anal fin originates slightly ahead of the second dorsal fin and has a deep notch in the posterior margin . The caudal fin is fairly high with a well @-@ developed lower lobe . 
 The skin is densely covered by minute , overlapping dermal denticles . Each dermal denticle is diamond @-@ shaped and bears horizontal ridges leading to posterior marginal teeth , which increase in number as the shark grows . The back is metallic golden @-@ brown to dark gray and the belly is snowy white , which extends onto the flank as a faint lighter stripe . The fins ( except for the first dorsal ) darken at the tips ; this is more obvious in young sharks . The coloration quickly fades to a dull gray after death . One of the larger members of its genus , the silky shark commonly reaches a length of 2 @.@ 5 m ( 8 @.@ 2 ft ) , with a maximum recorded length and weight of 3 @.@ 5 m ( 11 ft ) and 346 kg ( 763 lb ) , respectively . Females grow larger than males . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 The silky shark is one of the three most common pelagic sharks along with the blue and oceanic whitetip sharks , and counts among the most numerous large oceanic animals in the world with a population of at least tens of millions . Compared to the other two species , it is less strictly pelagic with the greatest numbers found in offshore waters associated with land , where food is more readily obtained than farther out in the truly open ocean . The silky shark is an active , inquisitive , and aggressive predator , though it will defer to the slower but more powerful oceanic whitetip shark in competitive situations . When approaching something of interest , it may seem inattentive , sedately circling and sometimes swinging its head from side to side . However , it can respond with startling swiftness to any shift in its immediate surroundings . This shark is often found around floating objects such as logs or tethered naval buoys . 
 Younger silky sharks are known to form large , loosely organized aggregations , possibly for mutual defense . During migrations , over a thousand individuals may gather . These groups are generally segregated by size , and in the Pacific perhaps also by sex . Silky sharks within a group have been observed to " tilt " , presenting their full lateral profile towards each other , as well as gape their jaws or puff out their gills . On occasion , sharks have also been seen suddenly charging straight up , veering away just before reaching the surface and gliding back down to deeper water . The significance of these behaviors is unknown . When confronted , the silky shark may perform a threat display , in which it arches its back , drops its tail and pectoral fins , and elevates its head . The shark then proceeds to swim in tight loops with a stiff , jerky motion , often turning broadside towards the perceived threat . 
 Potential predators of the silky shark include larger sharks and killer whales ( Orcinus orca ) . Known parasites of this shark include the isopod Gnathia trimaculata , the copepod <unk> <unk> , and the tapeworms Dasyrhynchus <unk> and Phyllobothrium sp . Silky sharks frequently intermingle with schools of scalloped hammerheads ( Sphyrna lewini ) , and have been known to follow marine mammals . One account from the Red Sea describes 25 silky sharks following a large pod of bottlenose dolphins ( Tursiops sp . ) , along with 25 grey reef sharks ( C. amblyrhynchos ) and a lone silvertip shark ( C. albimarginatus ) . Silky sharks are themselves accompanied by juvenile pilot fish ( Naucrates ductor ) , which " ride " the pressure wave ahead of the shark , as well as by jacks , which snatch scraps of food and rub against the shark 's skin to scrape off parasites . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 The silky shark is an opportunistic predator , feeding mainly on bony fishes from all levels of the water column , including tuna , mackerel , sardines , mullets , groupers , snappers , mackerel scads , sea chubs , sea catfish , eels , lanternfishes , <unk> , triggerfishes , and <unk> . It may also take squid , paper nautilus , and swimming crabs , and fossil evidence indicates it scavenged on whale carcasses . Good feeding opportunities can draw silky sharks in large numbers ; one such feeding aggregation in the Pacific has been documented " herding " a school of small fishes into a compact mass ( a bait ball ) and trapping it against the surface , whereupon the sharks consumed the entire school . When attacking tightly packed fish , silky sharks charge through the ball and slash open @-@ mouthed , catching the prey fish at the corners of their jaws . Although multiple individuals may feed at once , each launches its attack independently . 
 Studies conducted off the Florida coast and the Bahamas have shown that silky sharks are highly sensitive to sound , in particular low @-@ frequency ( 10 – 20 Hz ) , irregular pulses . Experiments in which these sounds were played underwater attracted sharks from hundreds of meters away . Silky sharks likely orient to these sounds because they are similar to the noise generated by feeding animals such as birds or dolphins , thus indicating promising sources of food . These studies have also demonstrated that a silky shark attracted by one sound will quickly withdraw if that sound abruptly changes in amplitude or character ; this change need not be a sound produced by a predator to evoke the reaction . Over repeated exposures , silky sharks habituate to the sound change and stop withdrawing , though it takes them much longer to do so compared to the bolder oceanic whitetip shark . 
 The bite force of a 2 @-@ m @-@ long silky shark has been measured at 890 newtons ( 200 lbf ) . A well @-@ established association exists between this species and tuna : off Ghana , almost every tuna school has silky sharks trailing behind , and in the eastern Pacific , these sharks inflict such damage to tuna fishing gear and catches that fishery workers have given them the moniker " net @-@ eating sharks " . Silky sharks and bottlenose dolphins compete when both species target the same school of fish ; the amount eaten by the dolphins decreases relative to the number of sharks present . If a large number of sharks is present , they tend to remain inside the prey school , while the dolphins consign themselves to the periphery , possibly to avoid incidental injury from the sharks ' slashing attacks . Conversely , if a large enough group of dolphins gathers , they become able to chase the sharks away from the prey school . Regardless of which one dominates , the two predators do not engage in any overtly aggressive behavior against each other . 
 = = = Life history = = = 
 Like other members of its family , the silky shark is viviparous : once the developing embryo exhausts its supply of yolk , the depleted yolk sac is converted into a placental connection through which the mother delivers nourishment . Relative to other viviparous sharks , the placenta of the silky shark is less similar to the analogous mammalian structure in that no <unk> exists between the tissues of the fetus and mother . Furthermore , the fetal red blood cells are much smaller than maternal blood cells , which is opposite the pattern seen in mammals . Adult females have a single functional ovary ( on the right side ) and two functional uteri , which are divided lengthwise into separate compartments for each embryo . 
 Silky sharks in most parts of the world are thought to reproduce year @-@ round , whereas mating and birthing in the Gulf of Mexico take place in late spring or early summer ( May to August ) . However , in some cases , the presence of reproductive seasonality may have been obscured by biases in data collection . Females give birth after a gestation period of 12 months , either every year or every other year . The litter size ranges from one to 16 and increases with female size , with six to 12 being typical . The pups are born in reef nursery areas on the outer continental shelf , where ample food supplies and protection from large pelagic sharks occur . The risk of predation has selected for fast growth in young sharks , which add 25 – 30 cm ( 9 @.@ 8 – 11 @.@ 8 in ) to their length within their first year of life . After a few months ( or by the first winter in the Gulf of Mexico ) , the now @-@ subadult sharks migrate out from the nursery into the open ocean . 
 The life history characteristics of the silky shark differ across its range ( see table ) . Northwestern Atlantic sharks tend to be larger than those in the western @-@ central Pacific at all ages , while eastern Pacific sharks tend to be smaller than sharks in other regions . Eastern Atlantic and Indian Ocean sharks seem to match or exceed the size of northwestern Atlantic sharks , but the figures are based on relatively few individuals and more data are needed . 
 The overall growth rate of the silky shark is moderate compared to other shark species and similar for both sexes , though it varies significantly between individuals . One central Pacific study has found females growing much slower than males , but the results may have been skewed by missing data from large females . The highest reported growth rates are from sharks in the northern Gulf of Mexico , and the lowest from sharks off northeastern Taiwan . Males and females reach sexual maturity at ages of 6 – 10 years and 7 – 12 + years , respectively . Sharks from more temperate waters may grow slower and mature later than those in warmer regions . The maximum lifespan is at least 22 years . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 Given its formidable size and dentition , the silky shark is regarded as potentially dangerous to humans . However , it only rarely comes into contact with people due to its oceanic habits . Its natural curiosity and boldness may lead it to repeatedly and closely approach divers , and it can become dangerously excited in the presence of food . The silky shark tends to be more aggressive if encountered on a reef than in open water . Cases of individual sharks persistently harassing divers and even forcing them out of the water have been reported . As of May 2009 , the International Shark Attack File lists six attacks attributable to the silky shark , three of them unprovoked and none fatal . 
 Large numbers of silky sharks are caught by commercial and artisanal <unk> shark fisheries operating off Mexico , Guatemala , El Salvador , Costa Rica , the United States , Ecuador , Spain , Portugal , Sri Lanka , the Maldives , Yemen , and Côte d 'Ivoire . Even greater numbers are caught incidentally by tuna longline and purse seine fisheries throughout its range , particularly those using fish aggregating devices . It is the most common shark caught as bycatch in the eastern Pacific and Gulf of Mexico tuna fisheries , and the second @-@ most common shark caught as bycatch ( next to the blue shark ) overall . The fins are valued as an ingredient in shark fin soup , with captured sharks often finned at sea and the rest of the body discarded . Fins from an estimated one @-@ half to one and a half million silky sharks are traded globally per year ; it is the second- or third @-@ most common species auctioned on the Hong Kong fin market , which represents over half the global trade . The meat ( sold fresh or dried and salted ) , skin , and liver oil may also be used , as well as the jaws : this species is the predominant source of dried shark jaw curios sold to tourists in the tropics . Some sport fishers catch silky sharks . 
 = = = Conservation = = = 
 As one of the most abundant and widely distributed sharks on Earth , the silky shark was once thought to be mostly immune to depletion despite heavy fishing mortality . In 1989 alone , some 900 @,@ 000 individuals were taken as bycatch in the southern and central Pacific tuna longline fishery , seemingly without effect on the total population . Fishery data on this shark are often confounded by under @-@ reporting , lack of species @-@ level separation , and problematic identification . Nevertheless , mounting evidence indicates the silky shark has , in fact , declined substantially worldwide , a consequence of its modest reproductive rate which is unable to sustain such high levels of exploitation . The total annual catch reported to the Food and Agricultural Organization fell steadily from 11 @,@ 680 tons in 2000 to 4 @,@ 358 tons in 2004 . Regional assessments have found similar trends , estimating declines of some 90 % in the central Pacific from the 1950s to the 1990s , 60 % off Costa Rica from 1991 to 2000 , 91 % in the Gulf of Mexico from the 1950s to the 1990s , and 85 % ( for all large requiem sharks ) in the northwestern Atlantic from 1986 to 2005 . The silky shark fishery off Sri Lanka reported a drop from a peak catch of 25 @,@ 400 tons in 1994 to only 1 @,@ 960 tons in 2006 , indicative of a local stock collapse . However , Japanese fisheries in the Pacific and Indian Oceans have recorded no change in catch rate between the 1970s and the 1990s , and the validity of the methodologies used to assess declines in the Gulf of Mexico and the northwestern Atlantic have come under much debate . 
 In light of recent findings , in 2007 , the IUCN reassessed the silky shark from Least Concern to Near Threatened worldwide . Regionally , it is listed as Near Threatened in the southwestern Atlantic , Indian Ocean , and western central Pacific , and as Vulnerable in the eastern central and southeastern Pacific and the northwestern and western central Atlantic . The silky shark is listed on Annex I , Highly Migratory Species , of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea , though this has yet to result in any management schemes . The species should benefit from bans on shark finning , which are being increasingly implemented by nations and supranational entities , including the United States , Australia , and the European Union . Organizations such as the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas and the Inter @-@ American Tropical Tuna Commission have also taken steps to improve fishery monitoring , with the ultimate goal of reducing shark bycatch . However , given the highly migratory nature of the silky shark and its association with tuna , no simple way is known to reduce bycatch without also affecting the economics of the fishery . 
 = Edward Scissorhands = 
 Edward Scissorhands is a 1990 American romantic dark fantasy film directed by Tim Burton , produced by Denise Di Novi and Tim Burton , and written by Caroline Thompson from a story by Tim Burton and Caroline Thompson , starring Johnny Depp as an artificial man named Edward , an unfinished creation who has scissors for hands , who is taken in by a suburban family and falls in love with their teenage daughter Kim ; additional roles were portrayed by Winona Ryder , Dianne Wiest , Anthony Michael Hall , Kathy Baker , Vincent Price and Alan Arkin . 
 Burton conceived Edward Scissorhands from his childhood upbringing in suburban Burbank , California . During pre @-@ production of Beetlejuice , Caroline Thompson was hired to adapt Burton 's story into a screenplay , and the film began development at 20th Century Fox , after Warner Bros. denied . Edward Scissorhands was then fast tracked after Burton 's critical and financial success with Batman . The majority of filming took place in Lakeland , Florida between March 10 and June 10 , 1990 . The film also marks the fourth collaboration between Burton and film score composer Danny Elfman . 
 The leading role of Edward had been connected to several actors prior to Depp 's casting : a meeting between Burton and the preferred choice of the studio , Tom Cruise , was not fruitful , and Gary Oldman and Tom Hanks turned down the part . The character of The Inventor was devised specifically for Vincent Price , and would be his last major role . Edward 's scissor hands were created and designed by Stan Winston . 
 Edward Scissorhands was released to positive feedback from critics , and was a financial success . The film received numerous nominations at the Academy Awards , British Academy Film Awards , Saturn Awards , as well as winning the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation . Both Burton and Elfman consider Edward Scissorhands their most personal and favorite work . 
 = = Plot = = 
 An elderly woman tells her granddaughter a bedtime story of where snow comes from , by telling her the story of a young man named Edward who has scissors for hands . As the creation of an old Inventor , Edward was a human @-@ like boy who was in the penultimate stage of work . The Inventor homeschooled Edward , but suffered a fatal heart attack and died just as he was about to fasten hands on Edward . 
 Local Avon saleswoman Peg Boggs visits the decrepit Gothic mansion on the hill where Edward lives . She finds Edward alone – at first startled , but , upon realizing he means well and is virtually harmless , takes him to her home . Edward becomes friends with Peg 's young son Kevin and her husband Bill . He later falls in love with the Boggs ' beautiful teenage daughter Kim , despite her initial fear of him . 
 Peg 's neighbors are impressed by Edward 's adept hedge @-@ trimming and hair @-@ cutting skills , though an eccentric religious fanatic named Esmeralda and Kim 's overbearing boyfriend Jim are fearful and contemptuous of him . Joyce , an ageing , unfaithful housewife in the Boggs ' neighborhood , has become fascinated with Edward and suggests that Edward open a hair @-@ cutting salon with her . While examining a proposed site , she attempts to seduce him in the back room , causing Edward to leave in a panic , and Joyce <unk> of him trying to rape her . 
 Wanting money for a van , Jim takes advantage of Edward 's ability to pick locks to break into his parents ' house to steal from his wealthy but bullying father . The burglar alarm sounds and everyone except Edward flees after he is trapped by the automatic locks triggered by the alarm , despite Kim 's insistence that they return for him , as the police have him arrested . He is released when a psychological examination reveals that his isolation allowed him to live without a sense of reality and common sense . Upon questioning by Peg , Edward takes full blame for the robbery , and is scrutinized for his behavior , believed to have committed the robbery as earlier he was denied a bank loan for his hair salon . During Christmas , Edward is cast out by almost everyone except the Boggs family . When Edward returns home , he reveals that he knew it was Jim 's house and that he did it because she asked him to , much to Kim 's shock , which causes her to break up with Jim . 
 While the family is setting up Christmas decorations , Edward creates a large angel ice sculpture ( modelled on Kim ) . The shavings create an effect of falling snow , which Kim dances under . Jim arrives and calls out to Edward , startling him , resulting in Edward accidentally cutting Kim 's hand . Jim accuses Edward of intentionally harming her and attacks him . Edward runs away , wandering the neighborhood in a rage , ruining one of his earlier hedge works , pokes a hole in the tire on someone 's car , and trims a bush in Esmeralda 's front yard into the shape of the devil . However , when a shaggy puppy comes near , Edward calms down , smiles at the dog and give it a trim . While Peg and Bill search for Edward , he returns and finds Kim alone in the Boggs ' house . She asks Edward to hold her , but he is afraid that he will hurt her again – she pulls his arms around her and they embrace . Jim returns to the Boggs ' house in a drunken rage to confront Kim , forcing his friend to drive his van while inebriated . Kevin is almost run over , but Edward pushes him out of the way , cutting Kevin 's arms and face , causing witnesses to think he is attacking him . Jim then attacks him furiously and Edward cuts Jim 's right arm . When the police arrive , Edward flees to the mansion as the neighbors pursue . 
 Kim runs to the mansion , reuniting with Edward . Jim follows her and attacks them with a handgun , beating Edward severely , who refuses to fight until Jim strikes Kim across the face when she intervenes . Edward stabs Jim in the stomach , causing him to fall out of a window to his death . Kim confesses her love for Edward and they share a kiss before saying goodbye . Kim tells the townspeople that Edward and Jim fought each other to death and tells them that the roof caved in on Edward , showing them a discarded scissor @-@ hand from the Inventor 's lab . The neighbors return home with Joyce feeling guilty for framing Edward and causing the neighbors to hate him . 
 The elderly woman finishes telling her granddaughter the story , revealing that she is Kim and saying that she never saw Edward again . She chose not to visit him because decades have passed and she wanted him to remember her the way she was in her youth . She believes that Edward is still alive , immortal because he is artificial , and because of the winter " snow " that Edward creates by carving ice sculptures that scatter shavings over the neighborhood , and remind her of dancing in the snow long ago . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Johnny Depp – Edward Scissorhands 
 Winona Ryder – Kim Boggs 
 Dianne Wiest – Peg Boggs 
 Anthony Michael Hall – Jim 
 Kathy Baker – Joyce 
 Robert Oliveri – Kevin Boggs 
 <unk> Ferrell – Helen 
 Caroline Aaron – Marge 
 Dick Anthony Williams – Officer Allen 
 O @-@ Lan Jones – Esmeralda 
 Vincent Price – The Inventor 
 Alan Arkin – Bill Boggs 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The genesis of Edward Scissorhands came from a drawing by then @-@ teenaged director Tim Burton , which reflected his feelings of isolation and being unable to communicate to people around him in suburban Burbank . Burton stated that he was often alone and had trouble retaining friendships . " I get the feeling people just got this urge to want to leave me alone for some reason , I don 't know exactly why . " During pre @-@ production of Beetlejuice , Burton hired Caroline Thompson , then a young novelist , to write the Edward Scissorhands screenplay as a spec script . Burton was impressed with her short novel , First Born , which was " about an abortion that came back to life " . Burton felt First Born had the same psychological elements he wanted to showcase in Edward Scissorhands . " Every detail was so important to Tim because it was so personal " , Thompson remarked . She wrote Scissorhands as a " love poem " to Burton , calling him " the most articulate person I know , but couldn 't put a single sentence together " . 
 Shortly after Thompson 's hiring , Burton began to develop Edward Scissorhands at Warner Bros. , with whom he worked on Pee @-@ wee 's Big Adventure and Beetlejuice . However , within a couple of months , Warner sold the film rights to 20th Century Fox . Fox agreed to finance Thompson 's screenplay while giving Burton complete creative control . At the time , the budget was projected to be around $ 8 – 9 million . When writing the storyline , Burton and Thompson were influenced by Universal Horror films , such as The Hunchback of Notre Dame ( 1923 ) , The Phantom of the Opera ( 1925 ) , Frankenstein ( 1931 ) , and Creature from the Black Lagoon ( 1954 ) , as well as King Kong ( 1933 ) and various fairy tales . Burton originally wanted to make Scissorhands as a musical , feeling " it seemed big and operatic to me " , but later dropped the idea . Following the enormous success of Batman , Burton arrived to the status of being an A @-@ list director . He had the opportunity to do any film he wanted , but rather than fast track Warner Bros. ' choices for Batman Returns or Beetlejuice Goes Hawaiian , Burton opted to make Edward Scissorhands for Fox . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Although Winona Ryder was the first cast member attached to the script , Dianne Wiest was the first to sign on . " Dianne , in particular , was wonderful " , Burton said . " She was the first actress to read the script , supported it completely and , because she is so respected , once she had given it her stamp of approval , others soon got interested " . When it came to casting the lead role of Edward , several actors were considered ; Fox was insistent on having Burton meet with Tom Cruise . " He certainly wasn 't my ideal , but I talked to him " , Burton remembered . " He was interesting , but I think it worked out for the best . A lot of questions came up " . Cruise asked for a " happier " ending . Gary Oldman and Tom Hanks turned down the part , the latter in favor of critical and commercial flop The Bonfire of the Vanities . Oldman found the story absurd , and declined without meeting with Burton . He said of the finished film , however : " Literally two minutes in , I went , ' Yeah , I get it ' . I just got it too late . " Jim Carrey was also considered for the role , while Thompson favored John Cusack . Elsewhere , William Hurt , Robert Downey Jr. and musician Michael Jackson expressed interest , although Burton neglected to converse with Jackson . 
 Though Burton was unfamiliar with Johnny Depp 's then @-@ popular performance in 21 Jump Street , he had always been Burton 's first choice . At the time of his casting , Depp was wanting to break out of the teen idol status which his performance in 21 Jump Street had afforded him . When he was sent the script , Depp " wept like a newborn " and immediately found personal and emotional connections with the story . In preparation for the role , Depp watched many Charlie Chaplin films to study the idea of creating sympathy without dialogue . Fox studio executives were so worried about Edward 's image , that they tried to keep pictures of Depp in full costume under wraps until release of the film . Burton approached Ryder for the role of Kim Boggs based on their positive working experience in Beetlejuice . Drew Barrymore previously auditioned for the role . Crispin Glover auditioned for the role of Jim before Anthony Michael Hall was cast . 
 Kathy Baker saw her part of Joyce , the neighbor who tries to seduce Edward , as a perfect chance to break into comedy . Alan Arkin says when he first read the script , he was " a bit baffled . Nothing really made sense to me until I saw the sets . Burton 's visual imagination is extraordinary " . The role of The Inventor was written specifically for Vincent Price , and would ultimately be his final feature film role . Burton commonly watched Price 's films as a child , and , after completing Vincent , the two became good friends . Robert Oliveri was cast as Kevin , Kim 's younger brother . Nick Carter from The Backstreet Boys was an uncredited casting as the blond boy playing on the Slip ' n Slide when Edward was riding in Peg 's car through suburbia . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Burbank , California was considered as a possible location for the suburban neighborhoods , but Burton believed the city had become too altered since his childhood so the Tampa Bay Area of Florida , including the town of Lutz and the Southgate Shopping Center of Lakeland was chosen for a three @-@ month shooting schedule . The production crew found , in the words of the production designer Bo Welch , " a kind of generic , plain @-@ wrap suburb , which we made even more characterless by painting all the houses in faded pastels , and reducing the window sizes to make it look a little more paranoid . " The key element to unify the look of the neighborhood was Welch 's decision to repaint each of the houses in one of four colors , which he described as " sea @-@ foam green , dirty flesh , butter , and dirty blue " . The facade of the Gothic mansion was built just outside Dade City . Filming Edward Scissorhands created hundreds of ( temporary ) jobs and injected over $ 4 million into the Tampa Bay economy . Production then moved to a Fox Studios sound stage in Century City , California , where interiors of the mansion were filmed . 
 To create Edward 's scissor hands , Burton employed Stan Winston , who would later design the Penguin 's prosthetic makeup in Batman Returns . Depp 's wardrobe and prosthetic makeup took one hour and 45 minutes to apply . The giant hedge sculptures that Edward creates in the film were made by wrapping metal skeletons in chicken wire , then weaving in thousands of small plastic plant sprigs . Rick Heinrichs worked as one of the art directors . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Edward Scissorhands is the fourth feature film collaboration between director Tim Burton and composer Danny Elfman . The orchestra consisted of 79 musicians . Elfman cites Scissorhands as epitomizing his most personal and favorite work . In addition to Elfman 's music , three Tom Jones songs also appear : " It 's Not Unusual " , " Delilah " and " With These Hands " . " It 's Not Unusual " would later be used in Mars Attacks ! ( 1996 ) , another film of Burton 's with music composed by Elfman . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Burton acknowledged that the main themes of Edward Scissorhands deal with self @-@ discovery and isolation . Edward is found living alone in the attic of a Gothic castle , a setting that is also used for main characters in Burton 's Batman and The Nightmare Before Christmas . Edward Scissorhands climaxes much like James Whale 's Frankenstein and Burton 's own Frankenweenie . A mob confronts the " evil creature " , in this case , Edward , at his castle . With Edward unable to consummate his love for Kim because of his appearance , the film can also be seen as being influenced by Beauty and the Beast . Edward Scissorhands is a fairy tale book @-@ ended by a prologue and an epilogue featuring Kim Boggs as an old woman telling her granddaughter the story , augmenting the German Expressionism and Gothic fiction archetypes . 
 Burton explained that his depiction of suburbia is " not a bad place . It 's a weird place . I tried to walk the fine line of making it funny and strange without it being judgmental . It 's a place where there 's a lot of integrity . " Kim leaves her jock boyfriend ( Jim ) to be with Edward , an event that many have postulated as Burton 's revenge against jocks he encountered as a teenager in suburban Burbank , CA . Jim is subsequently killed , a scene that shocked a number of observers who felt the whole tone of the film had been radically altered . Burton referred to this scene as a " high school fantasy " . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Test screenings for the film were encouraging for 20th Century Fox . Joe Roth , then president of the company , considered marketing Edward Scissorhands on the scale of " an <unk> blockbuster , " but Roth decided not to aggressively promote the film in that direction . " We have to let it find its place . We want to be careful not to hype the movie out of the universe , " he reasoned . Edward Scissorhands had its limited release in the United States on December 7 , 1990 . The wide release came on December 14 , and the film earned $ 6 @,@ 325 @,@ 249 in its opening weekend in 1 @,@ 372 theaters . Edward Scissorhands eventually grossed $ 56 @,@ 362 @,@ 352 in North America , and a further $ 29 @,@ 661 @,@ 653 outside North America , coming to a worldwide total of $ 86 @.@ 02 million . With a budget of $ 20 million , the film was declared to be a box office success . The New York Times wrote " the chemistry between Johnny Depp and Winona Ryder , who were both together in real life at the time ( 1989 – 1993 ) , gave the film teen idol potential , drawing younger audiences . " 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Edward Scissorhands received acclaim from critics and audiences . Review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reports that the film holds an 89 % approval rating , based on 56 reviews , with an average score of 7 @.@ 7 / 10 . The site 's consensus reads : " The first collaboration between Johnny Depp and Tim Burton , Edward Scissorhands is a magical modern fairy tale with gothic overtones and a sweet center . " Metacritic , another review aggregator , assigned the film a weighted average score of 77 ( out of 100 ) based on 19 reviews from mainstream critics , considered to be " generally favorable " . CinemaScore reported that audiences gave the film a " A- " grade . 
 Peter Travers of Rolling Stone praised the piece by stating , " Burton 's richly entertaining update of the Frankenstein story is the year 's most comic , romantic and haunting film fantasy . " He continued by praising Depp 's performance stating , " Depp artfully expresses the fierce longing in gentle Edward ; it 's a terrific performance " and the " engulfing score " from Danny Elfman . Staff of Variety spoke highly of the film , " Director [ Burton ] takes a character as wildly unlikely as a boy whose arms end in pruning shears , and makes him the center of a delightful and delicate comic fable . " 
 Marc Lee of The Daily Telegraph scored the film five out of five stars , writing , " Burton 's modern fairytale has an almost palpably personal feel : it is told gently , subtly and with infinite sympathy for an outsider who charms the locals but then inadvertently arouses their baser instincts . " whilst additionally adding praise to Depp 's performance , " [ Depp ] is sensational in the lead role , summoning anxiety , melancholy and innocence with heartbreaking conviction . And it 's all in the eyes : his dialogue is cut @-@ to @-@ the @-@ bone minimal . " 
 Desson Thomson of The Washington Post wrote , " Depp is perfectly cast , Burton builds a <unk> funny cul @-@ de @-@ sac world , and there are some very funny performances from grownups Dianne Wiest , Kathy Baker and Alan Arkin . " Rita Kempley of The Washington Post granted the film praise , " Enchantment on the cutting edge , a dark yet heartfelt portrait of the artist as a young mannequin . " She too praised Depp 's performance in stating , " ... nicely cast , brings the eloquence of the silent era to this part of few words , saying it all through bright black eyes and the tremulous care with which he holds his horror @-@ movie hands . 
 Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly gave the film an " A- " rating and praised it in " The romanticism has a personal dimension – for Edward is , of course , Burton 's surreal portrait of himself as an artist : a wounded child converting his private darkness into outlandish pop visions . Like Edward , he finds the light . " He also commented very positively on character of Edward , " ... who is Burton 's purest achievement as a director so far . " Of Depp he wrote , " Depp may not be doing that much acting beneath his neo @-@ Kabuki makeup , but what he does is tremulous and affecting . " As well as <unk> 's score of the piece by saying it to be , " [ A ] lovely , storybook score highlights the pop romanticism of Burton 's conception . The romanticism has a personal dimension . " 
 Janet Maslin of The New York Times wrote , " Mr. Burton invests awe @-@ inspiring ingenuity into the process of reinventing something very small . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Stan Winston and Ve Neill were nominated the Academy Award for Best Makeup , but lost to John Caglione , Jr. and Doug Drexler for his work on Dick Tracy . Production designer Bo Welch won the BAFTA Award for Best Production Design , while costume designer Colleen Atwood , and Winston and Neil also received nominations at the British Academy Film Awards . In addition , Winston was nominated for his visual effects work . Depp was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor in a Musical or Comedy , but lost to Gérard Depardieu of Green Card . Edward Scissorhands was able to win the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation and the Saturn Award for Best Fantasy Film . Danny Elfman , Ryder , Dianne Wiest , Alan Arkin , and Atwood received individual nominations . Elfman was also given a Grammy Award nomination . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Burton cites Edward Scissorhands as epitomizing his most personal work . The film is also Burton 's first collaboration with actor Johnny Depp and cinematographer Stefan Czapsky . In October 2008 , the Hallmark Channel purchased the television rights . Metal band Motionless in White have a song entitled " Scissorhands ( The Last Snow ) " , with its lyrics written about the film in homage to its legacy and impact on the gothic subculture . Scottish indie rock band The Twilight Sad named a mini @-@ album Here , It Never Snowed . Afterwards It Did after a line spoken in the final scene of the film . 
 An extinct lobster @-@ like sea creature called <unk> <unk> is named after Depp because of its scissor @-@ like claws . 
 = = Stage adaptations = = 
 A theatrical ballet adaptation by the British choreographer Matthew Bourne premiered at Sadler 's Wells Theatre in London in November 2005 . After an 11 @-@ week season , the production toured the UK , Asia and the United States . 
 The British director Richard Crawford directed a stage adaptation of the Tim Burton film , which had its world premiere on June 25 , 2010 , at The Brooklyn Studio Lab and ended July 3 . 
 = Time Capsule ( Parks and Recreation ) = 
 " Time Capsule " is the third episode of the third season of the American comedy television series Parks and Recreation , and the 33rd overall episode of the series . It originally aired on NBC in the United States on February 3 , 2011 . In the episode , Leslie tries to encourage civic pride through a time capsule , but it descends into chaos as Pawnee citizens argue over what to include . Meanwhile , Chris tries to help Andy win back April . 
 Written and directed by series co @-@ creator and executive producer Michael Schur , " Time Capsule " was one of six episodes filmed early after second season to accommodate Amy Poehler 's pregnancy . Although always meant as the third episode of the season , it was the last of the six filmed because it had the highest amount of props that could conceal Poehler 's belly . Saturday Night Live star Will Forte guest starred as Kelly Larson , a Pawnee citizen who passionately argues for including the Twilight books in the time capsule . 
 " Time Capsule " also included appearances by recurring guest stars Jama Williamson , Alison Becker , Darlene Hunt and Natalie Morales , who made her last in a string of performances as Tom 's girlfriend Lucy . According to Nielsen Media Research , the episode was seen by 4 @.@ 95 million household viewers , a 17 percent decline from the previous episode , " Flu Season " . It received generally positive reviews . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Leslie ( Amy Poehler ) is organizing the making of a time capsule , meant to be opened 50 years in the future and filled with items that encapsulate the spirit of Pawnee . A citizen named Kelly Larson ( Will Forte ) comes to Leslie 's office and makes a passionate plea for the Twilight books to be included . When Leslie refuses because the books have no connection to Pawnee , Kelly handcuffs himself to a pipe in her office until she reconsiders . He is able to stay several days because he brought food , water and a pillow . During his stay , Kelly notices Tom ( Aziz Ansari ) appears sad , and correctly deduces Tom is having romantic issues ; Tom 's girlfriend Lucy ( Natalie Morales ) has dumped him because Tom cannot get over the fact that his ex @-@ wife , Wendy ( Jama Williamson ) , is dating Ron ( Nick Offerman ) . Kelly encourages Tom to read Twilight , to which he initially scoffs , but after reading them finds he loves the books . Lucy later visits Tom and tells him she still likes him , and if he ever gets past his Ron & Wendy @-@ jealousy problems he should call her . 
 After Leslie notices the name " Liz Waverly " in one of Kelly 's Twilight books , Kelly admits she is his 12 @-@ year @-@ old daughter . He is divorced from her mother , and wants to put Twilight into the time capsule to impress her . Leslie now wants to include it , but Ben ( Adam Scott ) says if she makes one exception , everyone will want their own item in the capsule . Leslie decides to hold a public meeting so all citizens can make suggestions for capsule items . The meeting descends into chaos when the participants argue over what to include and make absurd suggestions , like human ashes and dead cats . Conservative activist Marcia Langman ( Darlene Hunt ) argues Twilight should not be included because it is too anti @-@ Christian , while a civil liberties organization member says that the book isn 't suitable because it is pro @-@ Christian . Leslie tries to compromise by making multiple time capsules , but she ultimately decides to stick to one capsule and include nothing except a video recording of the meeting , which she said represents Pawnee because it shows " a lot of people with a lot of opinions arguing passionately for what they believed in " . Ben , a visiting state auditor , says he thinks the residents of Pawnee are strange , but he is impressed by their passion . 
 In the B story , Andy ( Chris Pratt ) still pines for April ( Aubrey Plaza ) , who remains angry at Andy and is now dating the handsome Eduardo ( Carlo Mendez ) . Chris ( Rob Lowe ) suggests Andy tap into the aspects of his personality April was attracted to in the first place . However , the only things he can think of are that he is nice and he is in a band . Andy decides to be nice to Eduardo , and the two realize they have similar musical tastes ( they both like the Dave Matthews Band ) and end up bonding over a guitar session . April becomes frustrated because she only dated Eduardo to make Andy jealous . She dumps Eduardo , which Chris interprets as a sign that his efforts are succeeding . Ann ( Rashida Jones ) , who was nervous about Andy and Chris spending time together , is relieved when Chris tells her that Andy had nothing but positive things to say about her . The episode ends with the Pawnee residents — including Kelly and his daughter — watching an outdoor screening of the Twilight film . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Time Capsule " was written and directed by Parks and Recreation co @-@ creator and executive producer Michael Schur . Like all six of the first third season episodes , it was written and filmed almost immediately after the second season ended as part of an early shooting schedule due to Amy Poehler 's pregnancy . However , although finished early in anticipation of a September 2010 release date , Parks was ultimately placed on hiatus until early 2011 , many months after production on " Time Capsule " was completed . " Time Capsule " was the last of these six episodes to be filmed , but as planned was shown third in the season . It was filmed last because the story presented the highest amount of props to place Poehler in front of objects that strategically concealed her pregnancy , most notably the time capsule itself . 
 The episode featured comedian Will Forte in a guest appearance as Kelly Larson , a Pawnee citizen obsessed with Twilight . Forte was a cast member of NBC 's sketch comedy show Saturday Night Live , where he previously worked with performer Poehler and writer Schur . " Time Capsule " featured the last in a string of guest performances by Natalie Morales as Lucy , a romantic interest for the Tom Haverford character . Darlene Hunt made a guest appearance as Marcia Langman , a member of the conservative group , the Society for Family Stability Foundation . Hunt previously portrayed Langman in the second season premiere , " Pawnee Zoo " , where she tried to have Leslie fired for holding a same @-@ sex wedding for two male penguins . The episode also featured appearances by Jama Williamson and Alison Becker in their recurring roles as Tom 's ex @-@ wife Wendy and reporter Shauna Malwae @-@ Tweep , respectively . 
 " Time Capsule " continued what Michael Schur described as one of the primary story arcs of the third season : Ben Wyatt gradually falling in love not only with Leslie Knope , but with the town of Pawnee itself . This is particularly illustrated by how impressed Ben is with the Pawnee citizens who make impassioned cases for what they want inside the Pawnee time capsule : although he still considers them weirdos , he respectfully calls them " weirdos who care " . During the cold open , while discussing the time capsule , Leslie describes several former Pawnee town slogans . After each slogan , the camera switches to a different cut of Leslie reading another . This method of comedic narrative is frequently used in Parks and Recreation , in which Poehler and the other actors improvise several different jokes and the editors slice them all together into one scene . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 A great deal of the plot in " Time Capsule " revolves around the Twilight series of novels and films . The popular book series was written by Stephenie Meyer . At one point , while trying to persuade Leslie to include Twilight in the capsule , Kelly Larson begins telling the entire story of the Twilight series , including Meyer 's birth and life story and shot @-@ for @-@ shot descriptions of the film adaptations . The stories are told from the perspective of high school student and outsider Bella Swan , who is pursued romantically by a vampire named Edward Cullen and a werewolf named Jacob Black . Elements of the story are raised in various scenes of " Time Capsule " , including when Tom tries to ask Lucy why she broke up with him : " Is it because I 'm not cool enough , like the normal kids compared to the vampires ? Is it an Edward @-@ Bella @-@ Jacob type situation , where you like me but there 's someone else you like more ? " Leslie claims to favor Harry Potter , the popular fantasy series by author J.K. Rowling , over Twilight . Parks department employee Donna professes an unhealthy infatuation with Robert Pattinson , the actor who played Edward Cullen in the Twilight films . 
 Among the town slogans Leslie described was " Pawnee : The Birthplace of Julia Roberts " , a reference to the Academy Award @-@ winning actress . Leslie subsequently explains Roberts is not from Pawnee and that she sued over the slogan , leading to a new slogan : " Pawnee : Home of the World Famous Julia Roberts Lawsuit " . During the public meeting , one resident proposes putting Crazy from the Heat , the autobiography of Van Halen lead vocalist David Lee Roth , into the time capsule . When Andy and Eduardo bond , they find they are both fans of Dave Matthews Band , an American jam band . After Lucy breaks up with Tom , he <unk> claims she is crazy , which he claims is what the characters on the HBO comedy @-@ drama series Entourage always say whenever they break up with a woman . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Time Capsule " was seen by an estimated 4 @.@ 95 million household viewers , according to Nielsen Media Research , with an overall 2 @.@ 9 rating / 4 share , and 2 @.@ 4 rating / 6 share among viewers between ages 18 and 49 . It marked a more than 17 percent decline compared to the previous episode , " Flu Season " , and an even further drop compared to the season premiere " Go Big or Go Home " , which was seen by 6 @.@ 19 million households . The night " Time Capsule " was broadcast , almost all of the comedy shows in NBC 's Thursday lineup lost viewership compared to the prior week : while 30 Rock remained flat , Perfect Couples was down 18 percent , Community dropped 9 percent , The Office was down 7 percent and Outsourced dropped 5 percent . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Time Capsule " received generally positive reviews . Alex Strachan of the Montreal Gazette called it a " near @-@ perfect episode " featuring brisk timing , laugh @-@ out @-@ loud jokes and heartwarming moments of civic unity . Strachan praised Michael Schur 's script for being " funny without being hurtful or vicious , heartwarming without being mawkish or sentimental " . New York magazine writer Steve Kandell said the fact that Will Forte 's character segued believably from a loon to a believable and sympathetic father was a sign of the script 's strength . Kandell said , " Could the character have been more over @-@ the @-@ top ? Sure . But in the long run , it ’ s not just funnier , but more dramatic , that he ’ s not . " Hillary Busis of Entertainment Weekly praised " Time Capsule " , which she said highlighted how the quirky setting of Pawnee itself contributed a major part to the show 's success . Busis said the town 's eccentricities were on great display during the public scenes , but did not feel forced or over @-@ the @-@ top . Barry Hertz of the National Post praised both the episode and Forte , whose eccentric performance he said fit in well with the rest of the show . Hertz said , " Every single element on this show is on fire right now , from Andy ’ s naive stupidity and infatuation with April to Ben ’ s continued surprise at what Pawnee has to offer . " 
 Matt Fowler of IGN said this episode highlighted how the show <unk> as portraying small town life in a comedic way without ridiculing small towns . Fowler said the Twilight jokes felt a bit stale , but he praised Aziz Ansari 's performances and moments highlighting the supporting characters , like jokes at the expense of character Jerry Gergich and Ben 's developing respect for Pawnee . Zap2it writer Rick Porter said the series , and " Time Capsule " in particular , accurately captures the details and flavors of the local governments and the public in small towns , even if they exaggerate them . Porter praised the pairing of Chris and Andy and said the two conflicting character personalities worked well together . HitFix writer Alan Sepinwall said he did not feel Will Forte 's character was well integrated with the rest of the cast and that he dragged down the first episode of the series . However , Sepinwall said once Forte removed himself from Leslie 's office , the episode had a " terrific second half " , and that the public hearing in particular displayed the strengths of the show . Joel Keller of TV Squad had the opposite view of Alan Sepinwall and felt Forte 's character was the most interesting part of the episode , whereas the second half felt " dragged down " and less funny . Keller wrote , " It just lasted a scene too long ; we get it , the people in Pawnee are loopy . " Eric Sundermann of Hollywood.com said Parks and Recreation is " at its best when its illustrating small @-@ town life in America " and that the public hearing meetings did so brilliantly . Sundermann praised Rob Lowe 's performance and said the new additions of the Chris and Ben characters was " exactly what the show needed to push itself to another level of silliness " . 
 The Atlantic writer Scott Meslow said Will Forte 's obsession with Twilight led to funny scenes , particularly an impromptu book club meeting with Tom and Donna , but said the character 's efforts to impress his daughter didn 't make much sense : " Is there a preteen on the planet who would be anything but mortified to find her middle school buzzing with gossip about her father 's Twilight @-@ based sit @-@ in ? " Steve <unk> of The A.V. Club said the episode demonstrated how far the show has come because " it was only mid @-@ season two when Parks & Rec started producing episodes where Pawnee residents showed up two , three , or more at a time — and contributed to the larger town mythology . " Heisler also praised how the show could pair two seemingly random characters like Andy and Chris and make them so funny . Time magazine writer James Poniewozik called " Time Capsule " the weakest of the first seven third season episodes , but he said " that speaks more to the high quality of the rest " . Poniewozik said the episode demonstrated that , despite how bizarre the complaints of Pawnee residents are , " those concerns and arguments are what makes Pawnee Pawnee " . Some reviews were more negative . Matt Richenthal called " Time Capsule " mediocre at best , especially compared to the previous episode , " Flu Season " . He said the episode was too centered on the " one @-@ note joke " of Will Forte 's character , and that the jokes about Twilight felt dated . Richenthal wrote , " Parks and Recreation features too many hilarious characters to include such a gimmick . " 
 = Van Morrison = 
 Sir George Ivan " Van " Morrison , OBE ( born 31 August 1945 ) is a Northern Irish singer , songwriter and musician . He has received six Grammy Awards , the 1994 Brit Award for Outstanding Contribution to Music , and has been inducted into both the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and the Songwriters Hall of Fame . In 2016 he was knighted for his musical achievements and his services to tourism and charitable causes in Northern Ireland . 
 Known as " Van the Man " to his fans , Morrison started his professional career when , as a teenager in the late 1950s , he played a variety of instruments including guitar , harmonica , keyboards and saxophone for various Irish showbands covering the popular hits of the day . He rose to prominence in the mid @-@ 1960s as the lead singer of the Northern Irish R & B band Them , with whom he recorded the garage band classic " Gloria " . His solo career began under the pop @-@ hit oriented guidance of Bert Berns with the release of the hit single " Brown Eyed Girl " in 1967 . After Berns ' death , Warner Bros. Records bought out his contract and allowed him three sessions to record Astral Weeks ( 1968 ) . 
 Even though this album would gradually garner high praise , it was initially a poor seller ; Moondance ( 1970 ) , however , established Morrison as a major artist , and he built on his reputation throughout the 1970s with a series of acclaimed albums and live performances . Morrison continues to record and tour , producing albums and live performances that sell well and are generally warmly received , sometimes collaborating with other artists , such as Georgie Fame and the Chieftains . In 2008 he performed Astral Weeks live for the first time since 1968 . 
 Much of Morrison 's music is structured around the conventions of soul music and R & B , such as the popular singles " Brown Eyed Girl " , " Jackie Wilson Said ( I 'm in Heaven When You Smile ) " , " Domino " and " Wild Night " . An equal part of his catalogue consists of lengthy , loosely connected , spiritually @-@ inspired musical journeys that show the influence of Celtic tradition , jazz and stream @-@ of @-@ consciousness narrative , such as the album Astral Weeks and lesser @-@ known ones such as Veedon Fleece and Common One . The two strains together are sometimes referred to as " Celtic soul " . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = Early life and musical roots : 1945 – 64 = = = 
 George Ivan " Van " Morrison was born on 31 August 1945 , at 125 Hyndford Street , Bloomfield , Belfast , Northern Ireland , as the only child of George Morrison , a shipyard electrician , and Violet Stitt Morrison , who had been a singer and tap dancer in her youth . Morrison 's family roots descend from the Ulster Scots population that settled in Belfast . From 1950 to 1956 , Morrison , who began to be known as " Van " during this time , attended Elmgrove Primary School . His father had what was at the time one of the largest record collections in Ulster ( acquired during his time in Detroit , Michigan , in the early 1950s ) and the young Morrison grew up listening to artists such as Jelly Roll Morton , Ray Charles , Lead Belly , Sonny Terry and Brownie McGhee , and Solomon Burke ; of whom he later said , " If it weren 't for guys like Ray and Solomon , I wouldn 't be where I am today . Those guys were the inspiration that got me going . If it wasn 't for that kind of music , I couldn 't do what I 'm doing now . " 
 His father 's record collection exposed him to various musical genres , such as the blues of Muddy Waters ; the gospel of Mahalia Jackson ; the jazz of Charlie Parker ; the folk music of Woody Guthrie ; and country music from Hank Williams and Jimmie Rodgers , while the first record he ever bought was by blues musician Sonny Terry . When Lonnie Donegan had a hit with " Rock Island Line " , written by Huddie Ledbetter ( Lead Belly ) , Morrison felt he was familiar with and able to connect with skiffle music as he had been hearing Lead Belly before that . 
 Morrison 's father bought him his first acoustic guitar when he was eleven , and he learned to play rudimentary chords from the song book The Carter Family Style , edited by Alan Lomax . A year later , when he was twelve years old , Morrison formed his first band , a skiffle group , " The <unk> " , named after the recently launched Soviet satellite , Sputnik 1 . In 1958 , the band played at some of the local cinemas , and Morrison took the lead , contributing most of the singing and arranging . Other short @-@ lived groups followed – at fourteen , he formed Midnight Special , another modified skiffle band and played at a school concert . Then , when he heard Jimmy Giuffre playing saxophone on " The Train and The River " , he talked his father into buying him a saxophone , and took lessons in tenor sax and music reading . Now playing the saxophone , Morrison joined with various local bands , including one called Deanie Sands and the Javelins , with whom he played guitar and shared singing . The line @-@ up of the band was lead vocalist Deanie Sands , guitarist George Jones and drummer , vocalist Roy Kane . Later the four main musicians of the Javelins , with the addition of Wesley Black as pianist , became known as the Monarchs . 
 Morrison attended Orangefield Boys Secondary School , leaving in July 1960 with no qualifications . As a member of a working @-@ class community , it was expected that he would get a regular full @-@ time job , so after several short apprenticeship positions , he settled into a job as a window cleaner — later alluded to in his songs " Cleaning Windows " and " Saint Dominic 's Preview " . However , he had been developing his musical interests from an early age and continued playing with the Monarchs part @-@ time . Young Morrison also played with the Harry Mack Showband , the Great Eight , with his older workplace friend , Geordie ( G. D. ) Sproule , whom he later named as one of his biggest influences . 
 At age 17 , Morrison toured Europe for the first time with the Monarchs , now calling themselves the International Monarchs . This Irish showband , with Morrison playing saxophone , guitar and harp , in addition to back @-@ up duty on bass and drums , toured steamy clubs and US Army bases in Scotland , England and Germany , often playing five sets a night . While in Germany , the band recorded a single , " <unk> Hully Gully " / " <unk> Baby " , under the name Georgie and the Monarchs . This was Morrison 's first recording , taking place in November 1963 at Ariola Studios in Cologne with Morrison on saxophone ; it made the lower reaches of the German charts . 
 Upon returning to Belfast in November 1963 , the group disbanded , so Morrison connected with Geordie Sproule again and played with him in the Manhattan Showband along with guitarist Herbie Armstrong . When Armstrong auditioned to play with Brian Rossi and the Golden Eagles , later known as the Wheels , Morrison went along and was hired as a blues singer . 
 = = = Them : 1964 – 66 = = = 
 The roots of Them , the band that first broke Morrison on the international scene , came in April 1964 when he responded to an advert for musicians to play at a new R & B club at the Maritime Hotel – an old dance hall frequented by sailors . The new R & B club needed a band for its opening night ; however , Morrison had left the Golden Eagles ( the group with which he had been performing at the time ) , so he created a new band out of the Gamblers , an East Belfast group formed by Ronnie <unk> , Billy Harrison , and Alan Henderson in 1962 . Eric Wrixon , still a schoolboy , was the piano player and keyboardist . Morrison played saxophone and harmonica and shared vocals with Billy Harrison . They followed Eric Wrixon 's suggestion for a new name , and the Gamblers morphed into Them , their name taken from the Fifties horror movie Them ! 
 The band 's strong R & B performances at the Maritime attracted attention . Them performed without a routine and Morrison ad libbed , creating his songs live as he performed . While the band did covers , they also played some of Morrison 's early songs , such as " Could You Would You " , which he had written in Camden Town while touring with the Manhattan Showband . The debut of Morrison 's " Gloria " took place on stage here . Sometimes , depending on his mood , the song could last up to twenty minutes . Morrison has stated that " Them lived and died on the stage at the Maritime Hotel , " believing that the band did not manage to capture the spontaneity and energy of their live performances on their records . The statement also reflected the instability of the Them line @-@ up , with numerous members passing through the ranks after the definitive Maritime period . Morrison and Henderson would remain the only constants , and a less successful version of Them even soldiered on after Morrison 's departure . 
 Dick Rowe of Decca Records became aware of the band 's performances , and signed Them to a standard two @-@ year contract . In that period , they released two albums and ten singles , with two more singles released after Morrison departed the band . They had three chart hits , " Baby , Please Don 't Go " ( 1964 ) , " Here Comes the Night " ( 1965 ) , and " Mystic Eyes " ( 1965 ) , but it was the B @-@ side of " Baby , Please Don 't Go " , the garage band classic " Gloria " , that went on to become a rock standard covered by Patti Smith , the Doors , the Shadows of Knight , Jimi Hendrix and many others . 
 Building on the success of their singles in the United States , and riding on the back of the British Invasion , Them undertook a two @-@ month tour of America in May and June 1966 that included a residency from 30 May to 18 June at the Whisky a Go Go in Los Angeles . The Doors were the supporting act on the last week , and Morrison 's influence on the Doors singer , Jim Morrison , was noted by John Densmore in his book Riders On The Storm . Brian Hinton relates how " Jim Morrison learned quickly from his near namesake 's stagecraft , his apparent recklessness , his air of subdued menace , the way he would improvise poetry to a rock beat , even his habit of crouching down by the bass drum during instrumental breaks . " On the final night , the two Morrisons and the two bands jammed together on " Gloria " . 
 Toward the end of the tour the band members became involved in a dispute with their manager , Decca Records ' Phil Solomon , over the revenues paid to them ; that , coupled with the expiry of their work visas , meant the band returned from America dejected . After two more concerts in Ireland , Them split up . Morrison concentrated on writing some of the songs that would appear on Astral Weeks , while the remnants of the band reformed in 1967 and relocated in America . 
 = = = Start of solo career with Bang Records and " Brown Eyed Girl " : 1967 = = = 
 Bert Berns , Them ’ s producer and composer of their 1965 hit , " Here Comes the Night " , persuaded Morrison to return to New York to record solo for his new label , Bang Records . Morrison flew over and signed a contract he had not fully studied . Then , during a two @-@ day recording session at A & R Studios starting 28 March 1967 , eight songs were recorded , originally intended to be used as four singles . Instead , these songs were released as the album Blowin ' Your Mind ! without Morrison being consulted . He said he only became aware of the album 's release when a friend mentioned on a phone call that he had just bought a copy of it . He later commented to Donal Corvin in a 1973 interview : " I wasn 't really happy with it . He picked the bands and tunes . I had a different concept of it . " 
 However , from these early sessions emerged " Brown Eyed Girl " . Captured on the 22nd take on the first day , this song was released as a single in mid @-@ June 1967 , reaching number ten in the US charts in 1967 . " Brown Eyed Girl " became Morrison 's most played song and over the years it has remained a classic ; forty years later in 2007 , it was the fourth most requested song of DJs in the US . 
 Following the death of Berns in 1967 , Morrison became involved in a contract dispute with Berns ' widow , Ilene Berns , that prevented him from performing on stage or recording in the New York area . The song " Big Time Operators " , released in 1993 , is thought to allude to his dealings with the New York music business during this time period . He then moved to Boston , Massachusetts , and was soon confronted with personal and financial problems ; he had " slipped into a malaise " and had trouble finding concert bookings . However , through the few gigs he could find , he regained his professional footing and started recording with Warner Bros. Records . The record company managed to buy out his contract with Bang Records . Morrison fulfilled a clause that bound him to submit thirty @-@ six original songs within a year to Web IV Music , Berns ' music publishing company , by recording thirty @-@ one songs in one session ; however , Ilene Berns thought the songs " nonsense music … about <unk> " and did not use them . The throwaway compositions would come to be known as the " revenge " songs . 
 = = = Astral Weeks : 1968 = = = 
 His first album for Warner Bros Records was Astral Weeks ( which he had already performed in several clubs around Boston ) , a mystical song cycle , often considered to be his best work and one of the best albums of all time . Morrison has said , " When Astral Weeks came out , I was starving , literally . " Released in 1968 , the album eventually achieved critical acclaim , but it originally received an indifferent response from the public . It was described by AllMusic 's William Ruhlmann as hypnotic , meditative , and as possessing a unique musical power . It has been compared to French Impressionism and mystical Celtic poetry . 
 A 2004 Rolling Stone magazine review begins with the words : " This is music of such enigmatic beauty that thirty @-@ five years after its release , Astral Weeks still defies easy , admiring description . " Alan Light would later describe Astral Weeks as " like nothing he had done previously — and really , nothing anyone had done previously . Morrison sings of lost love , death , and nostalgia for childhood in the Celtic soul that would become his signature . " It has been placed on many lists of best albums of all time . In the 1995 Mojo list of 100 Best Albums , it was listed as number two and was number nineteen on the Rolling Stone magazine 's The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time in 2003 . In December 2009 , it was voted the top Irish album of all time by a poll of leading Irish musicians conducted by Hot Press magazine . 
 = = = From Moondance to Into the Music : 1970 – 79 = = = 
 Morrison 's third solo album , Moondance , which was released in 1970 , became his first million selling album and reached number twenty @-@ nine on the Billboard charts . The style of Moondance stood in contrast to that of Astral Weeks . Whereas Astral Weeks had a sorrowful and vulnerable tone , Moondance restored a more optimistic and cheerful message to his music , which abandoned the previous record 's abstract folk compositions in favor of more formally composed songs and a lively rhythm and blues style he would expand on throughout his career . 
 The title track , although not released in the US as a single until 1977 , received heavy play in FM radio formats . " Into the Mystic " has also gained a wide following over the years . " Come Running " , which reached the American Top 40 , rescued Morrison from what seemed then as Hot 100 obscurity . Moondance was both well received and favourably reviewed . Lester Bangs and Greil Marcus had a combined full page review in Rolling Stone , stating that Morrison now had " the striking imagination of a consciousness that is visionary in the strongest sense of the word . " " That was the type of band I dig , " Morrison said of the Moondance sessions . " Two horns and a rhythm section – they 're the type of bands that I like best . " He produced the album himself as he felt like nobody else knew what he wanted . Moondance was listed at number sixty @-@ five on the Rolling Stone magazine 's The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time . In March 2007 , Moondance was listed as number seventy @-@ two on the NARM Rock and Roll Hall of Fame list of the " Definitive 200 " . 
 Over the next few years , he released a succession of albums , starting with a second one in 1970 . His Band and the Street Choir had a freer , more relaxed sound than Moondance , but not the perfection , in the opinion of critic Jon Landau , who felt like " a few more numbers with a gravity of ' Street Choir ' would have made this album as perfect as anyone could have stood . " It contained the hit single " Domino " , which charted at number nine in the Billboard Hot 100 . 
 In 1971 , he released another well @-@ received album , Tupelo Honey . This album produced the hit single " Wild Night " that was later covered by John Mellencamp . The title song has a notably country @-@ soul feel about it and the album ended with another country tune , " Moonshine Whiskey " . Morrison said he originally intended to make an all country album . The recordings were as live as possible – after rehearsing the songs the musicians would go into the studio and play a whole set in one take . His co @-@ producer , Ted Templeman , described this recording process as the " scariest thing I 've ever seen . When he 's got something together , he wants to put it down right away with no overdubbing . " 
 Released in 1972 , Saint Dominic 's Preview revealed Morrison 's break from the more accessible style of his previous three albums and moving back towards the more daring , adventurous , and meditative aspects of Astral Weeks . The combination of two styles of music demonstrated a versatility not previously found in his earlier albums . Two songs , " Jackie Wilson Said ( I 'm in Heaven When You Smile ) " and " Redwood Tree " , reached the Hot 100 singles chart . The songs " Listen to the Lion " and " Almost Independence Day " are each over ten minutes long and employ the type of poetic imagery not heard since Astral Weeks . It was his highest charting album in the US until his Top Ten debut on Billboard 200 in 2008 . 
 He released his next album Hard Nose the Highway in 1973 receiving mixed , but mostly negative , reviews . The album contained the popular song " Warm Love " but otherwise has been largely dismissed critically . In a 1973 Rolling Stone review , it was described as : " psychologically complex , musically somewhat uneven and lyrically excellent . " 
 During a three @-@ week vacation visit to Ireland in October 1973 , Morrison wrote seven of the songs that would make up his next album , Veedon Fleece . Though it attracted scant initial attention , its critical stature grew markedly over the years — with Veedon Fleece now often considered to be one of Morrison 's most impressive and poetic works . In a 2008 Rolling Stone review , Andy Greene writes that when released in late 1974 : " it was greeted by a collective shrug by the rock critical establishment " and concludes : " He 's released many wonderful albums since , but he 's never again hit the majestic heights of this one . " " You Don 't Pull No Punches , but You Don 't Push the River " , one of the album 's side closers , exemplifies the long , hypnotic , cryptic Morrison with its references to visionary poet William Blake and to the seemingly Grail @-@ like Veedon Fleece object . 
 Morrison would not release a follow @-@ up album for another three years . After a decade without taking time off , he said in an interview , he needed to get away from music completely and ceased listening to it for several months . Also suffering from writer 's block , he seriously considered leaving the music business for good . Speculation that an extended jam session would be released either under the title Mechanical Bliss , or Naked in the Jungle , or Stiff Upper Lip , came to nothing , and Morrison 's next album was A Period of Transition in 1977 , a collaboration with Dr. John , who had appeared at The Last Waltz concert with Morrison in 1976 . The album received a mild critical reception and marked the beginning of a very prolific period of song making . 
 Into the Music : " The album 's last four songs , " Angelou " , " And the Healing Has Begun " , and " It 's All in the Game / You Know What They 're Writing About " are a veritable tour @-@ de @-@ force with Morrison summoning every vocal trick at his disposal from " Angelou 's climactic shouts to the sexually @-@ charged , half @-@ mumbled monologue in " And the Healing Has Begun " to the barely audible whisper that is the album 's final sound . " ( Scott Thomas Review ' ) 
 The following year , Morrison released Wavelength ; it became at that time the fastest @-@ selling album of his career and soon went gold . The title track became a modest hit , peaking at number forty @-@ two . Making use of 1970s synthesisers , it mimics the sounds of the shortwave radio stations that he listened to in his youth . The opening track , " Kingdom Hall " – the name given by Jehovah 's Witnesses to their places of worship – evoked Morrison 's childhood experiences of religion with his mother , and foretold the religious themes that would be more evident on his next album , Into the Music . 
 Considered by AllMusic as " the definitive post @-@ classic @-@ era Morrison " , Into the Music , was released in the last year of the 1970s . Songs on this album for the first time alluded to the healing power of music , which would become an abiding interest of Morrison 's . " Bright Side of the Road " was a joyful , uplifting song that would appear on the soundtrack of the movie , Michael . 
 = = = Common One to Avalon Sunset : 1980 – 89 = = = 
 With his next album , the new decade found Morrison following his muse into uncharted territory and sometimes merciless reviews . In February 1980 , Morrison and a group of musicians travelled to Super Bear , a studio in the French Alps , to record ( on the site of a former abbey ) what is considered to be the most controversial album in his discography ; later " Morrison admitted that his original concept was even more esoteric than the final product . " The album , Common One , consisted of six songs ; the longest , " Summertime in England " , lasted fifteen and one @-@ half minutes and ended with the words , " Can you feel the silence ? " . NME magazine 's Paul Du Noyer called the album " colossally smug and cosmically dull ; an interminable , vacuous and drearily egotistical stab at spirituality : Into the muzak . " Greil Marcus , whose previous writings had been favourably inclined towards Morrison , critically remarked : " It 's Van acting the part of the ' mystic poet ' he thinks he 's supposed to be . " Morrison insisted that the album was never " meant to be a commercial album . " Biographer Clinton Heylin concludes : " He would not attempt anything so ambitious again . Henceforth every radical idea would be tempered by some notion of <unk> . " Later the critics would reassess the album more favourably with the success of " Summertime in England " . Lester Bangs wrote in 1982 , " Van was making holy music even though he thought he was , and us rock critics had made our usual mistake of paying too much attention to the lyrics . " 
 Morrison 's next album , Beautiful Vision , released in 1982 , had him returning once again to the music of his Northern Irish roots . Well received by the critics and public , it produced a minor UK hit single , " Cleaning Windows " , that referenced one of Morrison 's first jobs after leaving school . Several other songs on the album , " <unk> Stairway " , " She Gives Me Religion " , and the instrumental , " Scandinavia " show the presence of a new personal muse in his life : a Danish public relations agent , who would share Morrison 's spiritual interests and serve as a steadying influence on him throughout most of the 1980s . " Scandinavia " , with Morrison on piano , was nominated in the Best Rock Instrumental Performance category for the 25th Annual Grammy Awards . 
 Much of the music Morrison released throughout the 1980s continued to focus on the themes of spirituality and faith . His 1983 album , Inarticulate Speech of the Heart was " a move towards creating music for meditation " with synthesisers , uilleann pipes and flute sounds and four of the tracks were instrumentals . The titling of the album and the presence of the instrumentals were noted to be indicative of Morrison 's long @-@ held belief that " it 's not the words one uses but the force of conviction behind those words that matters . " During this period of time , Morrison had studied Scientology and gave " Special Thanks " to L. Ron Hubbard on the album 's credits . 
 A Sense of Wonder , Morrison 's 1985 album , pulled together the spiritual themes contained in his last four albums , which were defined in a Rolling Stone review as : " rebirth ( Into the Music ) , deep contemplation and meditation ( Common One ) ; ecstasy and humility ( Beautiful Vision ) ; and blissful , mantra like languor ( Inarticulate Speech of the Heart ) . " The single , " Tore Down a la Rimbaud " was a reference to Rimbaud and an earlier bout of writer 's block that Morrison had encountered in 1974 . In 1985 , Morrison also wrote the musical score for the movie , Lamb starring Liam Neeson . 
 Morrison 's 1986 release , No Guru , No Method , No Teacher , was said to contain a " genuine holiness ... and musical freshness that needs to be set in context to understand . " Critical response was favourable with a Sounds reviewer calling the album " his most intriguingly involved since Astral Weeks " and " Morrison at his most mystical , magical best . " It contains the song , " In the Garden " that , according to Morrison , had a " definite meditation process which is a ' form ' of transcendental meditation as its basis . It 's not TM " . He entitled the album as a rebuttal to media attempts to place him in various creeds . In an interview in the Observer he told Anthony Denselow : 
 There have been many lies put out about me and this finally states my position . I have never joined any organisation , nor plan to . I am not affiliated to any guru , don 't subscribe to any method and for those people who don 't know what a guru is , I don 't have a teacher either . 
 After releasing the " No Guru " album , Morrison 's music appeared less gritty and more adult contemporary with the well @-@ received 1987 album , Poetic Champions <unk> , considered to be one of his recording highlights of the 1980s . The romantic ballad from this album , " Someone Like You " , has been featured subsequently in the soundtracks of several movies , including 1995 's French Kiss , and in 2001 , both Someone Like You and Bridget Jones 's Diary . 
 In 1988 , he released Irish Heartbeat , a collection of traditional Irish folk songs recorded with the Irish group the Chieftains , which reached number 18 in the UK album charts . The title song , " Irish Heartbeat " , was originally recorded on his 1983 album Inarticulate Speech of the Heart . 
 The 1989 album , Avalon Sunset , which featured the hit duet with Cliff Richard " Whenever God Shines His Light " and the ballad " Have I Told You Lately " ( on which " earthly love transmutes into that for God " ( Hinton ) ) , reached 13 on the UK album chart . Although considered to be a deeply spiritual album , it also contained " Daring Night " , which " deals with full , blazing sex , whatever its churchy organ and gentle lilt suggest " ( Hinton ) . Morrison 's familiar themes of " God , woman , his childhood in Belfast and those enchanted moments when time stands still " were prominent in the songs . He can be heard calling out the change of tempo at the end of this song , repeating the numbers " 1 – 4 " to cue the chord changes ( the first and fourth chord in the key of the music ) . He often completed albums in two days , frequently releasing first takes . 
 = = = The Best of Van Morrison to Back on Top : 1990 – 99 = = = 
 The early to middle 1990s were commercially successful for Morrison with three albums reaching the top five of the UK charts , sold @-@ out concerts , and a more visible public profile ; but this period also marked a decline in the critical reception to his work . The decade began with the release of The Best of Van Morrison ; compiled by Morrison himself , the album was focused on his hit singles , and became a multi @-@ platinum success remaining a year and a half on the UK charts . AllMusic determined it to be " far and away the best selling album of his career . " After Enlightenment which included the hit singles " Real Real Gone " and the title cut in 1990 , an ambitious double album " Hymns to the Silence " was released the following year , his only double studio album . Another compilation album , The Best of Van Morrison Volume Two was released in January 1993 , followed by Too Long in Exile in June , another top five chart success . The 1994 live double album A Night in San Francisco received favourable reviews as well as commercial success by reaching number eight on the UK charts . 1995 's Days Like This also had large sales – though the critical reviews were not always favourable . This period also saw a number of side projects , including the live jazz performances of 1996 's How Long Has This Been Going On , from the same year Tell Me Something : The Songs of Mose Allison , and 2000 's The Skiffle Sessions – Live in Belfast 1998 , all of which found Morrison paying tribute to his early musical influences . 
 In 1997 , Morrison released The Healing Game . The album received mixed reviews , with the lyrics being described as " tired " and " dull " , though critic Greil Marcus praised the musical complexity of the album by saying : " It carries the listener into a musical home so perfect and complete he or she might have forgotten that music could call up such a place , and then populate it with people , acts , wishes , fears . " The following year , Morrison finally released some of his previously unissued studio recordings in a two @-@ disc set , The Philosopher 's Stone . His next release , 1999 's Back on Top , achieved a modest success , being his highest charting album in the US since 1978 's Wavelength . 
 = = = Recent years : 2000 – present = = = 
 Van Morrison continued to record and tour in the 2000s , often performing two or three times a week . He formed his own independent label , Exile Productions Ltd , which enables him to maintain full production control of each album he records , which he then delivers as a finished product to the recording label that he chooses , for marketing and distribution . 
 The album , Down the Road released in May 2002 , received a good critical reception and proved to be his highest charting album in the US since 1972 's Saint Dominic 's Preview . It had a nostalgic tone , with its fifteen tracks representing the various musical genres that Morrison had previously covered — including R & B , blues , country and folk ; one of the tracks was written as a tribute to his late father George , who had played a pivotal role in nurturing his early musical tastes . 
 Morrison 's 2005 album , Magic Time , debuted at number twenty @-@ five on the US Billboard 200 charts upon its May release , some forty years after Morrison first entered the public 's eye as the frontman of Them . Rolling Stone listed it as number seventeen on The Top 50 Records of 2005 . Also in July 2005 , Morrison was named by Amazon as one of their top twenty @-@ five all @-@ time best @-@ selling artists and inducted into the Amazon.com Hall of Fame . Later in the year , Morrison also donated a previously unreleased studio track to a charity album , Hurricane Relief : Come Together Now , which raised money for relief efforts intended for Gulf Coast victims devastated by hurricanes , Katrina and Rita . Morrison composed the song , " Blue and Green " , featuring Foggy Lyttle on guitar . This song was released in 2007 on the album , The Best of Van Morrison Volume 3 and also as a single in the UK . Van Morrison was a headline act at the international Celtic music festival , The Hebridean Celtic Festival in Stornoway Outer Hebrides in the summer of 2005 . 
 He released an album with a country music theme , entitled Pay the Devil , on 7 March 2006 and appeared at the Ryman Auditorium where the tickets sold out immediately after they went on sale . Pay the Devil debuted at number twenty @-@ six on the Billboard 200 and peaked at number seven on Top Country Albums . Amazon Best of 2006 Editor 's Picks in Country listed the country album at number ten in December 2006 . Still promoting the country album , Morrison 's performance as the headline act on the first night of the Austin City Limits Music Festival on 15 September 2006 was reviewed by Rolling Stone magazine as one of the top ten shows of the 2006 festival . In November 2006 , a limited edition album , Live at Austin City Limits Festival was issued by Exile Productions , Ltd . A later deluxe CD / DVD release of Pay the Devil , in the summer of 2006 contained tracks from the Ryman performance . In October 2006 , Morrison had released his first commercial DVD , Live at Montreux 1980 / 1974 with concerts taken from two separate appearances at the Montreux Jazz Festival . 
 A new double CD compilation album The Best of Van Morrison Volume 3 was released in June 2007 containing thirty @-@ one tracks , some of which were previously unreleased . Morrison selected the tracks , which ranged from the 1993 album Too Long in Exile to the song " Stranded " from the 2005 album Magic Time . On 3 September 2007 , Morrison 's complete catalogue of albums from 1971 through 2002 were made available exclusively at the iTunes Store in Europe and Australia and during the first week of October 2007 , the albums became available at the US iTunes Store . 
 Still on Top – The Greatest Hits , a thirty @-@ seven track double CD compilation album was released on 22 October 2007 in the UK on the Polydor label . On 29 October 2007 , the album charted at number two on the Official UK Top 75 Albums — his highest UK charting . The November release in the US and Canada contains twenty @-@ one selected tracks . The hits that were released on albums with the copyrights owned by Morrison as Exile Productions Ltd . — 1971 and later — had been remastered in 2007 . 
 Keep It Simple , Morrison 's 33rd studio album of completely new material was released by Exile / Polydor Records on 17 March 2008 in the UK and released by Exile / Lost Highway Records in the US and Canada on 1 April 2008 . It comprised eleven self @-@ penned tracks . Morrison promoted the album with a short US tour including an appearance at the SXSW music conference , and a UK concert broadcast on BBC Radio 2 . In the first week of release Keep It Simple debuted on the Billboard 200 chart at number ten , Morrison 's first Top Ten charting in the US . 
 Morrison released his 34th studio album , Born to Sing : No Plan B on 2 October 2012 on Blue Note Records . The album was recorded in Belfast , Morrison 's birthplace and hometown . The first single from this album , " Open the Door ( To Your Heart ) " , was released on 24 August 2012 . 
 A selection of Morrison 's lyrics , Lit Up Inside , was published by City Lights Books in the US and Faber & Faber in the UK the book was released on 2 October 2014 and an evening of words and music commenced at the Lyric Theatre , London on 17 November 2014 to mark its launch . Morrison himself selected his best and most iconic lyrics from a catalog of 50 years of writing 
 Morrison 's 35th studio album , Duets : Re @-@ working the Catalogue was released on 24 March 2015 on the RCA record label . 
 Morrison 's 70th birthday in 2015 was marked by celebrations in his hometown of Belfast , commencing with BBC Radio Ulster presenting programs including " Top 70 Van Tracks " between 26 and 28 August . As the headline act ending the Eastside Arts Festival , Morrison performed two 70th @-@ birthday concerts on Cyprus Avenue on his birthday 31 August . The first of the concerts was broadcast live on BBC Radio Ulster and a 60 @-@ minute BBC film of highlights from the concerts , entitled Up On Cyprus Avenue , was first shown on 4 September . 
 Morrison will release Keep Me Singing , his 36th studio album on 30 September 2016 . " Too Late " , the first single , will also be released on that date . The songs are twelve originals and one cover song . The album will be his first release of originals since Born to Sing : No Plan B in 2012 . A short tour of the U.S. will follow with six dates in October 2016 . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 By 1972 , after being a performer for nearly ten years , Morrison began experiencing stage fright when performing for audiences of thousands , as opposed to the hundreds as he had experienced in his early career . He became anxious on stage and would have difficulty establishing eye contact with the audience . He once said in an interview about performing on stage , " I dig singing the songs but there are times when it 's pretty agonising for me to be out there . " After a brief break from music , he started appearing in clubs , regaining his ability to perform live , albeit with smaller audiences . 
 The 1974 live double album , It 's Too Late to Stop Now has been noted to be one of the greatest recordings of a live concert and has appeared on lists of greatest live albums of all time . Biographer Johnny Rogan states that " Morrison was in the midst of what was arguably his greatest phase as a performer . " Performances on the album were from tapes made during a three @-@ month tour of the US and Europe in 1973 with the backing group the Caledonia Soul Orchestra . Soon after recording the album , Morrison restructured the Caledonia Soul Orchestra into a smaller unit , the Caledonia Soul Express . 
 On Thanksgiving Day 1976 , Morrison performed at the farewell concert for the Band . It was his first live performance in several years , and he considered skipping his appearance until the last minute , even refusing to go on stage when they announced his name . His manager , Harvey Goldsmith , said he " literally kicked him out there . " Morrison was on good terms with the members of the Band as near @-@ neighbours in Woodstock , and they had the shared experience of stage fright . At the concert , he performed two songs . His first was a rendition of the classic Irish song " Too Ra Loo Ra Loo Ral " . His second song was " Caravan " , from his 1970 album Moondance . Greil Marcus , in attendance at the concert , wrote : " Van Morrison turned the show around ... singing to the rafters and ... burning holes in the floor . It was a triumph , and as the song ended Van began to kick his leg into the air out of sheer exuberance and he kicked his way right offstage like a <unk> . The crowd had given him a fine welcome and they cheered wildly when he left . " The filmed concert served as the basis for Martin Scorsese 's 1978 film , The Last Waltz . 
 During his association with the Band , Morrison acquired the nicknames " Belfast Cowboy " and " Van the Man " . On the Band 's album Cahoots , as part of the duet " 4 % Pantomime " that Morrison sings with Richard Manuel ( and that he co @-@ wrote with Robbie Robertson ) , Manuel addresses him , " Oh , Belfast Cowboy " . When he leaves the stage after performing " Caravan " on The Last Waltz , Robertson calls out " Van the Man ! " 
 On 21 July 1990 , Morrison joined many other guests for Roger Waters ' massive performance of The Wall – Live in Berlin with an estimated crowd of between three hundred thousand and half a million people and broadcast live on television . He sang " Comfortably Numb " with Roger Waters , and several members from The Band : Levon Helm , Garth Hudson and Rick Danko . At concert 's end , he and the other performers sang " The Tide Is Turning " . 
 Morrison performed before an estimated audience of sixty to eighty thousand people when US President Bill Clinton visited Belfast , Northern Ireland on 30 November 1995 . His song " Days Like This " had become the official anthem for the Northern Irish peace movement . 
 Van Morrison continued performing concerts in the 2000s throughout the year rather than touring . Playing few of his best @-@ known songs in concert , he has firmly resisted relegation to a nostalgia act . During a 2006 interview , he told Paul Sexton : 
 I don 't really tour . This is another misconception . I stopped touring in the true sense of the word in the late 1970s , early 1980s , possibly . I just do gigs now . I average two gigs a week . Only in America do I do more , because you can 't really do a couple of gigs there , so I do more , 10 gigs or something there . 
 On 7 and 8 November 2008 , at the Hollywood Bowl in Los Angeles , California , Morrison performed the entire Astral Weeks album live for the first time . The Astral Weeks band featured guitarist Jay Berliner , who had played on the album that was released forty years previously in November 1968 . Also featured on piano was Roger Kellaway . A live album entitled Astral Weeks Live at the Hollywood Bowl resulted from these two performances . The new live album on CD was released on 24 February 2009 , followed by a DVD from the performances . The DVD , Astral Weeks Live at the Hollywood Bowl : The Concert Film was released via Amazon Exclusive on 19 May 2009 . In February and March 2009 , Morrison returned to the US for Astral Weeks Live concerts , interviews and TV appearances with concerts at Madison Square Garden and at the Beacon Theatre in New York City . He was interviewed by Don Imus on his Imus in the Morning radio show and put in guest appearances on Late Night with Jimmy Fallon and Live with Regis and Kelly . Morrison continued with the Astral Weeks performances with two concerts at the Royal Albert Hall in London in April and then returned to California in May 2009 performing the Astral Weeks songs at the Hearst Greek Theatre in Berkeley , the Orpheum Theatre in Los Angeles , California and appeared on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno . Morrison filmed the concerts at the Orpheum Theatre so that they could be viewed by Farrah Fawcett , confined to bed with cancer and thus unable to attend the concerts . 
 In addition to It 's Too Late to Stop Now and Astral Weeks Live at the Hollywood Bowl , Morrison has released three other live albums : Live at the Grand Opera House Belfast in 1984 ; A Night in San Francisco in 1994 that Rolling Stone magazine felt stood out as : " the culmination of a career 's worth of soul searching that finds Morrison 's eyes turned toward heaven and his feet planted firmly on the ground " ; and The Skiffle Sessions – Live in Belfast 1998 recorded with Lonnie Donegan and Chris Barber and released in 2000 . 
 Morrison was scheduled to perform at the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame 's 25th anniversary concert on 30 October 2009 , but cancelled . In an interview on 26 October , Morrison told his host Don Imus that he had planned to play " a couple of songs " with Eric Clapton ( who had cancelled on 22 October due to gallstone surgery ) , but that they would do something else together at " some other stage of the game " . 
 Morrison performed for the Edmonton Folk Music Festival in Edmonton , Alberta , Canada on 4 August 2010 as the headline act for the fundraiser and scheduled as second day headliner at the Feis 2011 Festival in London 's Finsbury Park on 19 June 2011 . 
 Morrison appeared in concert at Odyssey Arena in Belfast on 3 February and at the O2 in Dublin on 4 February 2012 . He appeared at the 46th Montreux Jazz Festival as a headliner on 7 July 2012 . 
 In 2014 Morrison 's former high school Orangefield High School , formerly known as Orangefield Boys ' Secondary School closed its doors permanently . To mark the school 's closure Morrison performed in the school assembly hall for three nights of concerts from 22 – 24 August . The performance on the 22 August was exclusively for former teachers and pupils and the two remaining concerts were for members of the public 
 The first night of the Nocturne Live concerts at Blenheim Palace , Oxfordshire , UK on 25 June 2015 , featured Morrison and Grammy Award @-@ winning American Jazz vocalist and songwriter Gregory Porter . 
 = = Collaborations = = 
 During the 1990s , Morrison developed a close association with two vocal talents at opposite ends of their careers : Georgie Fame ( with whom Morrison had already worked occasionally ) lent his voice and Hammond organ skills to Morrison 's band ; and Brian Kennedy 's vocals complemented the grizzled voice of Morrison , both in studio and live performances . 
 The 1990s also saw an upsurge in collaborations by Morrison with other artists , a trend continuing into the new millennium . He recorded with Irish folk band the Chieftains on their 1995 album , The Long Black Veil . Morrison 's song , " Have I Told You Lately " would win a Grammy Award for Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals in 1996 . 
 He also produced and was featured on several tracks with blues legend John Lee Hooker on Hooker 's 1997 album , Don 't Look Back . This album would win a Grammy Award for Best Traditional Blues Album in 1998 and the title track " Don 't Look Back " , a duet featuring Morrison and Hooker , would also win a Grammy Award for " Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals " in 1998 . The project capped a series of Morrison and Hooker collaborations that began in 1971 when they performed a duet on the title track of Hooker 's 1972 album Never Get Out of These Blues Alive . On this album , Hooker also recorded a cover of Morrison 's " T.B. Sheets " . 
 Morrison additionally collaborated with Tom Jones on his 1999 album Reload , performing a duet on " Sometimes We Cry " , and he also sang vocals on a track entitled " The Last Laugh " on Mark Knopfler 's 2000 album , Sailing to Philadelphia . In 2004 , Morrison was one of the guests on Ray Charles ' album , Genius Loves Company , featuring the two artists performing Morrison 's " Crazy Love " . 
 In 2000 , Morrison recorded a classic country music duet album You Win Again with Linda Gail Lewis . The album received a three star review from AllMusic who called it " a roots effort that never sounds studied " . 
 = = Music = = 
 = = = Vocals = = = 
 Featuring his characteristic growl — a mix of folk , blues , soul , jazz , gospel , and Ulster Scots Celtic influences — Morrison is widely considered by many rock historians to be one of the most unusual and influential vocalists in the history of rock and roll . Critic Greil Marcus has gone so far as to say that " no white man sings like Van Morrison . " In his 2010 book , Marcus wrote , " As a physical fact , Morrison may have the richest and most expressive voice pop music has produced since Elvis Presley , and with a sense of himself as an artist that Elvis was always denied . " 
 As Morrison began live performances of the 40 @-@ year @-@ old album Astral Weeks in 2008 , there were comparisons to his youthful voice of 1968 . His early voice was described as " flinty and tender , beseeching and plaintive " . Forty years later , the difference in his vocal range and power were noticeable but reviewers and critic 's comments were favourable : " Morrison 's voice has expanded to fill his frame ; a deeper , louder roar than the blue @-@ eyed soul voice of his youth – softer on the diction – but none the less impressively powerful . " Morrison also commented on the changes in his approach to singing : " The approach now is to sing from lower down [ the diaphragm ] so I do not ruin my voice . Before , I sang in the upper area of my throat , which tends to wreck the vocal cords over time . Singing from lower in the belly allows my resonance to carry far . I can stand four feet from a mic and be heard quite resonantly . " 
 = = = Songwriting and lyrics = = = 
 Morrison has written hundreds of songs during his career with a recurring theme reflecting a nostalgic yearning for the carefree days of his childhood in Belfast . Some of his song titles derive from familiar locations in his childhood , such as " Cyprus Avenue " ( a nearby street ) , " Orangefield " ( the boys school he attended ) , and " On Hyndford Street " ( where he was born ) . Also frequently present in Morrison 's best love songs is a blending of the sacred @-@ profane as evidenced in " Into the Mystic " and " So Quiet in Here " . 
 Beginning with his 1979 album , Into the Music and the song " And the Healing Has Begun " , a frequent theme of his music and lyrics has been based on his belief in the healing power of music combined with a form of mystic Christianity . This theme has become one of the predominant qualities of his work . 
 His lyrics show an influence of the visionary poets William Blake and W. B. Yeats and others such as Samuel Taylor Coleridge and William Wordsworth . Biographer Brian Hinton believes " like any great poet from Blake to Seamus Heaney he takes words back to their origins in magic ... Indeed , Morrison is returning poetry to its earliest roots – as in Homer or Old English epics like Beowulf or the Psalms or folk song – in all of which words and music combine to form a new reality . " Another biographer John Collis believes that Morrison 's style of jazz singing and repeating phrases preclude his lyrics from being regarded as poetry or as Collis asserts : " he is more likely to repeat a phrase like a mantra , or burst into scat singing . The words may often be prosaic , and so can hardly be poetry . " 
 Morrison has described his songwriting method by remarking that : " I write from a different place . I do not even know what it is called or if it has a name . It just comes and I sculpt it , but it is also a lot of hard work doing the sculpting . " 
 = = = Performance style = = = 
 Critic Greil Marcus argues that given the truly distinctive breadth and complexity of Morrison 's work , it is almost impossible to cast his work among that of others : " Morrison remains a singer who can be compared to no other in the history of rock & roll , a singer who cannot be pinned down , dismissed , or fitted into anyone 's expectations . " Or in the words of Jay Cocks : " He extends himself only to express himself . Alone among rock 's great figures — and even in that company he is one of the greatest — Morrison is adamantly inward . And unique . Although he freely crosses musical boundaries — R & B , Celtic melodies , jazz , rave @-@ up rock , hymns , down @-@ and @-@ dirty blues — he can unfailingly be found in the same strange place : on his own wavelength . " 
 His transcendental signature style first came into full expression with his 1968 classic , Astral Weeks and he was noted to have remained a " master of his transcendental craft " in 2009 while performing the Astral Weeks songs live . This musical art form was based on stream of consciousness songwriting and emotional vocalising of lyrics that have no basis in normal structure or symmetry . His live performances are dependent on building dynamics with spontaneity between himself and his band , whom he controls with hand gestures throughout , sometimes signalling impromptu solos from a selected band member . The music and vocals build towards a hypnotic and trance @-@ like state that depends on in @-@ the @-@ moment creativity . Scott Foundas with LA Weekly wrote " he seeks to transcend the apparent boundaries of any given song ; to achieve a total freedom of form ; to take himself , his band and the audience on a journey whose destination is anything but known . " Greil Marcus wrote an entire book devoted to examining the moments in Morrison 's music where he reaches this state of transcendence and explains : " But in his music the same sense of escape from ordinary limits – a reach for , or the achievement of , a kind of violent transcendence – can come from hesitations , repetitions of words or phrases , pauses , the way a musical change by another musician is turned by Morrison as a bandleader or seized on by him as a singer and changed into a sound that becomes an event in and of itself . In these moments , the self is left behind , and the sound , that " <unk> , " becomes the active agent : a musical person , with its own mind , its own body . " A book reviewer further described it as " This transcendent moment of music when the song and the singer are one thing not two , neither dependent on the other or separate from the other but melded to the other like one , like breath and life ... " 
 Morrison has said he believes in the jazz improvisational technique of never performing a song the same way twice and except for the unique rendition of the Astral Weeks songs live , doesn 't perform a concert from a preconceived set list . Morrison has said he prefers to perform at smaller venues or symphony halls noted for their good acoustics . His ban against alcoholic beverages , which made entertainment news during 2008 , was an attempt to prevent the disruptive and distracting movement of audience members leaving their seats during the performances . In a 2009 interview , Morrison stated : " I do not consciously aim to take the listener anywhere . If anything , I aim to take myself there in my music . If the listener catches the wavelength of what I am saying or singing , or gets whatever point whatever line means to them , then I guess as a writer I may have done a day 's work . " 
 = = = Genre = = = 
 The music of Van Morrison has encompassed many genres since his early days as a blues and R & B singer in Belfast . Over the years he has recorded songs from a varying list of genres drawn from many influences and interests . As well as blues and R & B , his compositions and covers have moved between pop music , jazz , rock , folk , country , gospel , Irish folk and traditional , big band , skiffle , rock and roll , new age , classical and sometimes spoken word ( " Coney Island " ) and instrumentals . Morrison defines himself as a soul singer . 
 Morrison 's music has been described by music journalist Alan Light as " Celtic soul " , or what biographer Brian Hinton referred to as a new alchemy called " Caledonian soul . " Another biographer , Ritchie Yorke quoted Morrison as believing that he has " the spirit of Caledonia in his soul and his music reflects it . " According to Yorke , Morrison claimed to have discovered " a certain quality of soul " when he first visited Scotland ( his Belfast ancestors were of Ulster Scots descent ) and Morrison has said he believes there is some connection between soul music and Caledonia . Yorke relates that Morrison " discovered several years after he first began composing music that some of his songs lent themselves to a unique major modal scale ( without sevenths ) which of course is the same scale as that used by bagpipe players and old Irish and Scottish folk music . " 
 = = Caledonia = = 
 The name " Caledonia " has played a prominent role in Morrison 's life and career . Biographer Ritchie Yorke had pointed out already by 1975 that Morrison has referred to Caledonia so many times in his career that he " seems to be obsessed with the word " . In his 2009 biography , Erik Hage found that " Morrison seemed deeply interested in his paternal Scottish roots during his early career , and later in the ancient countryside of England , hence his repeated use of the term Caledonia ( an ancient Roman name for Scotland / northern Britain ) " . As well as being his daughter Shana 's middle name , it is the name of his first production company , his studio , his publishing company , two of his backing groups , his parents ' record store in Fairfax , California in the 1970s , and he also recorded a cover of the song " <unk> " ( with the name spelled " Caledonia " ) in 1974 . Morrison used " Caledonia " in what has been called a quintessential Van Morrison moment in the song , " Listen to the Lion " with the lyrics , " And we sail , and we sail , way up to Caledonia " . As late as 2008 , Morrison used " Caledonia " as a mantra in the live performance of the song , " Astral Weeks " recorded at the two Hollywood Bowl concerts . 
 = = Influence = = 
 Morrison 's influence can readily be heard in the music of a diverse array of major artists and according to The Rolling Stone 's Encyclopedia of Rock and Roll ( Simon & Schuster , 2001 ) , " his influence among rock singers / song writers is unrivaled by any living artist outside of that other prickly legend , Bob Dylan . Echoes of Morrison 's rugged <unk> and his gruff , feverish emotive vocals can be heard in latter day icons ranging from Bruce Springsteen to Elvis Costello " . His influence includes U2 ( Bono was quoted saying " I am in awe of a musician like Van Morrison . I had to stop listening to Van Morrison records about six months before we made The Unforgettable Fire because I didn 't want his very original soul voice to overpower my own . " ) ; John Mellencamp ( " Wild Night " ) ; Jim Morrison ; Joan Armatrading ( the only musical influence she will acknowledge ) ; Nick Cave ; Rod Stewart ; Tom Petty ; Rickie Lee Jones ( recognises both Laura Nyro and Van Morrison as the main influences on her career ) ; Elton John ; Graham Parker ; Sinéad O 'Connor ; Phil Lynott of Thin Lizzy ; Bob Seger ( " I know Bruce Springsteen was very much affected by Van Morrison , and so was I. " from Creem interview ) ( " I 've Been Working " ) ; Kevin Rowland of Dexys Midnight Runners ( " Jackie Wilson Said " ) ; Jimi Hendrix ( " Gloria " ) ; Jeff Buckley ( " The Way Young Lovers Do " , " Sweet Thing " ) ; Nick Drake ; and numerous others , including the Counting Crows ( their " sha @-@ la @-@ la " sequence in Mr Jones , is a tribute to Morrison ) . Morrison 's influence reaches into the country music genre , with Hal Ketchum acknowledging , " He ( Van Morrison ) was a major influence in my life . " 
 Morrison 's influence on the younger generation of singer @-@ songwriters is pervasive : including Irish singer Damien Rice , who has been described as on his way to becoming the " natural heir to Van Morrison " ; Ray <unk> ; James Morrison ; Paolo Nutini ; Eric Lindell David Gray and Ed Sheeran are also several of the younger artists influenced by Morrison . Glen Hansard of the Irish rock band the Frames ( who lists Van Morrison as being part of his holy trinity with Bob Dylan and Leonard Cohen ) commonly covers his songs in concert . American rock band the Wallflowers have covered " Into the Mystic " . Canadian blues @-@ rock singer Colin James also covers the song frequently at his concerts . Actor and musician Robert Pattinson has said that Van Morrison was his " influence for doing music in the first place " . Morrison has shared the stage with Northern Irish singer @-@ songwriter Duke Special , who admits Morrison has been a big influence . 
 Overall , Morrison has typically been supportive of other artists , often willingly sharing the stage with them during his concerts . On the live album , A Night in San Francisco , he had as his special guests , among others , his childhood idols : Jimmy Witherspoon , John Lee Hooker and Junior Wells . Although he often expresses his displeasure ( in interviews and songs ) with the music industry and the media in general , he has been instrumental in promoting the careers of many other musicians and singers , such as James Hunter , and fellow Belfast @-@ born brothers , Brian and <unk> Kennedy . 
 Morrison has also influenced the other arts : the German painter Johannes <unk> created a series of lithographs illustrating the book In the Garden – for Van Morrison , published by <unk> Galerie <unk> , Germany , in 1997 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Morrison lived in Belfast from birth until 1967 , when he moved to New York after signing with Bang Records . Facing deportation due to visa problems , he managed to stay in the US when his American girlfriend Janet ( Planet ) Rigsbee agreed to marry him . Once married , Morrison and his wife moved to Cambridge , Massachusetts , where he found work performing in local clubs . The couple had one daughter in 1970 , Shana Morrison , who has become a singer @-@ songwriter . Morrison and his family moved around America , living in Boston ; Woodstock , New York ; and a hilltop home in Fairfax , California . His wife appeared on the cover of the album Tupelo Honey . They divorced in 1973 . 
 Morrison moved back to Europe in the late 1970s , first settling in London 's Notting Hill Gate area . Later , he moved to Bath , where he purchased the Wool Hall studio in January 1994 . He also has a home in the Irish seaside village of Dalkey near Dublin , where legal actions against two different neighbours concerning safety and privacy issues have been taken to court in 2001 and in 2010 . In the former case , Morrison pursued his action all the way to the Irish Supreme Court . 
 In 2001 , nine months into a tour with Linda Gail Lewis promoting their collaboration You Win Again , Lewis left , later filing claims against Morrison for unfair dismissal and sexual discrimination . Both claims were later withdrawn , and Morrison 's solicitor was quoted that " ( Mr. Morrison 's ) pleased that these claims have finally been withdrawn . He accepted a full apology and comprehensive retraction which represents a complete vindication of his stance from the outset . Miss Lewis has given a full and categorical apology and retraction to Mr. Morrison . " Lewis ' legal representative Christine Thompson said both parties had agreed to the terms of the settlement . 
 Morrison met Irish socialite Michelle Rocca in the summer of 1992 , and they often featured in the Dublin gossip columns , an unusual event for the reclusive Morrison . Rocca also appeared on one of his album covers , Days Like This . The couple married and have two children ; a daughter was born in February 2006 and a son in August 2007 . 
