 In December 2009 , Texas native and Morrison employee Gigi Lee gave birth to a son who she asserted was Morrison 's and whom she named after him . Lee announced the birth of the child on Morrison 's official website although Morrison has subsequently denied paternity . It was revealed in December 2011 that both had died : Lee from throat cancer in October 2011 and her son in January 2011 from complications of diabetes . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = Recognition and legacy = = 
 Morrison has received several major music awards in his career , including six Grammy Awards ( 1996 – 2007 ) ; inductions into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame ( January 1993 ) , the Songwriters Hall of Fame ( June 2003 ) , and the Irish Music Hall of Fame ( September 1999 ) ; and a Brit Award ( February 1994 ) . In addition he has received civil awards : an OBE ( June 1996 ) and an Officier de l ’ Ordre des Arts et des Lettres ( 1996 ) . He has honorary doctorates from the University of Ulster ( 1992 ) and from Queen 's University Belfast ( July 2001 ) . 
 The Hall of Fame inductions began in 1993 with the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame ; Morrison becoming notable as the first living inductee not to attend his own ceremony , – Robbie Robertson from the Band accepted the award on his behalf . When Morrison became the initial musician inducted into the Irish Music Hall of Fame , Bob Geldof presented Morrison with the award . Morrison 's third induction was into the Songwriters Hall of Fame for " recognition of his unique position as one of the most important songwriters of the past century " . Ray Charles presented the award , following a performance during which the pair performed Morrison 's " Crazy Love " from the album , Moondance . Morrison 's BRIT Award was for his Outstanding Contribution to British Music . Former Beirut hostage , John McCarthy presented the award ; while testifying to the importance of Morrison 's song " Wonderful Remark " McCarthy called it " a song … which was very important to us . " 
 Morrison received two civil awards in 1996 , firstly the Order of the British Empire for his service to music , secondly an award from the French government which made him an Officier de l ’ Ordre des Arts et des Lettres . Along with these state awards he has two honorary degrees in music ; an honorary doctorate in literature from the University of Ulster , and an honorary doctorate in music from Queen 's University in his hometown of Belfast . 
 Other awards include an Ivor Novello Award for Lifetime Achievement in 1995 , the BMI ICON award in October 2004 for Morrison 's " enduring influence on generations of music makers " , and an Oscar Wilde : Honouring Irish Writing in Film award in 2007 for his contribution to over fifty films , presented by Al Pacino , who compared Morrison to Oscar Wilde – both " visionaries who push boundaries " . He was voted the Best International Male Singer of 2007 at the inaugural International Awards in Ronnie Scott 's Jazz Club , London . 
 Morrison has also appeared in a number of " Greatest " lists , including the TIME magazine list of The All @-@ Time 100 Albums , which contained Astral Weeks and Moondance , and he appeared at number thirteen on the list of <unk> 's 885 All Time Greatest Artists . In 2000 , Morrison ranked twenty @-@ fifth on American cable music channel VH1 's list of its " 100 Greatest Artists of Rock and Roll " . In 2004 , Rolling Stone magazine ranked Van Morrison forty @-@ second on their list of " Greatest Artists of All Time " . Paste ranked him twentieth in their list of " 100 Greatest Living Songwriters " in 2006 . Q ranked him twenty @-@ second on their list of " 100 Greatest Singers " in April 2007 and he was voted twenty @-@ fourth on the November 2008 list of Rolling Stone magazine 's 100 Greatest Singers of All Time . 
 Three of Morrison 's songs appear in The Rock and Roll Hall of Fame 's 500 Songs that Shaped Rock and Roll : " Brown Eyed Girl " , " Madame George " and " Moondance " . 
 Morrison has been announced as of the 2010 honorees listed in the Hollywood Walk of Fame . 
 In August 2013 , it was announced that Morrison would receive the Freedom of Belfast , the highest honour the city can bestow . On 15 November 2013 , Morrison became the 79th recipient of the award , presented at the Waterfront Hall for his career achievements . After receiving the award , he performed a free concert for residents who won tickets from a lottery system . 
 In August 2014 , a " Van Morrison Trail " was established in East Belfast by Morrison in partnership with the <unk> Community Greenway . It is a self @-@ guided trail , which over the course of 3 @.@ 5 kilometers leads to eight places that were important to Morrison and inspirational to his music . 
 On 2 September 2014 , Morrison was presented with the Legend award at the GQ Men of the Year ceremony at Royal Opera House in London . 
 On 13 October 2014 , Morrison received his fifth BMI Million @-@ Air Award for 11 million radio plays of the song Brown Eyed Girl making it one of the Top 10 Songs of all time on US radio and television . Morrison has also received Million @-@ Air awards for Have I Told You Lately 
 The Songwriter 's Hall of Fame announced on 8 April 2015 that Morrison would be the 2015 recipient of the Johnny Mercer Award on 18 June 2015 at their 46th Annual Induction and Awards Dinner in New York City . 
 On 4 February 2016 he was knighted , by Prince Charles , for his musical achievements and his services to tourism and charitable causes in Northern Ireland . 
 = The Convict = 
 " The Convict " is the ninth episode of the third season of the American comedy television series The Office , and the show 's 37th overall . It first aired on November 30 , 2006 in the United States on NBC . The episode was the series ' only original script written by Ricky Gervais and Stephen Merchant , who are the creators of the original British comedy series of the same name . It was directed by Jeffrey Blitz , his first such credit of the series . 
 The series depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton and Stamford branches of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . In this episode , Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) discovers that an employee named Martin Nash ( Wayne Wilderson ) , who came with the branches ' recent merger , was previously in prison . Michael becomes frustrated when Martin 's stories of prison sound better than working in the office . Meanwhile , Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) plays a prank on Pam Beesly ( Jenna Fischer ) by giving incorrect information to Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) on how to impress her . 
 According to Nielsen Media Research , an estimated 9 @.@ 07 million viewers watched " The Convict " on its first broadcast , making it up to that point the largest audience of the season . Among adults aged 18 to 49 , it earned a 4 @.@ 4 / 11 ratings share , finishing in eighteenth place for the week among all the major networks . Television critics were largely positive towards the episode , particularly Carell 's " Prison Mike " sequence as well as Helms ' performance as Andy Bernard . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) learns that black employee Martin Nash ( Wayne Wilderson ) is a former criminal , and tells the entire office . During this time , in a misguided effort to avoid issues of stereotyping and racism Michael asks the employees to name a white person that they trust and he will name a black person he trusts even more . The name Jesus pops up and Michael replies with Apollo Creed . Meanwhile , Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) encourages Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) to pursue Pam Beesly ( Jenna Fischer ) , and intentionally gives him information about her strong dislikes . Later , Andy strums " The Rainbow Connection " on his banjo while singing falsetto . Pam smiles politely and silently shares the joke with Jim . 
 Martin tells the others he was incarcerated for insider trading , and that he enjoyed certain perks of prison , including outside time and art classes . Pam comments that prison sounds better than their current work situation . Attempting to convince his employees that the office is better than prison , Michael sends everyone to " outside time " in the bitter cold . He then calls a meeting in which he adopts the persona of " Prison Mike . " Martin comments that Michael 's performance did not remind him of his time in prison . This further infuriates Michael , who then locks all of the staff inside the conference room . In order to have his co @-@ workers released , Toby Flenderson ( Paul Lieberstein ) tells Michael the staff is simply teasing him . After letting the workers go , a relieved Michael relents , but Martin chooses to quit . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Convict " was written by Ricky Gervais and Stephen Merchant , the co @-@ creators of the British comedy series of the same name . It was their first original script for the American series , after years of creator and executive producer Greg Daniels imploring them to participate . Gervais and Merchant had refused previously because they believed that the American show should be written by Americans , and only changed their minds after watching the second season . 
 Gervais first worried that he was too unfamiliar with office protocol in the United States , noting that he " knew everything about this place ( in England ) , the pitfalls , the dos and don 'ts . Whereas in America , I don 't know if I 'm getting it right or not . " Despite this , his script writing went " remarkably fast . I suppose that 's because we 'd been away from those characters for two or three years . It 's one of our favorite shows , the American Office . " Gervais and Merchant spent several days debating phrasing and language , leading them to a point where they felt they had " translated it pretty well " for American viewers . 
 " The Convict " was the first Office episode to be directed by Jeffrey Blitz , who later won an Emmy Award for the fifth season episode " Stress Relief " . In a departure from series routine , Gervais and Merchant were not present on set for much of filming , though episode writers had typically been available in the past . Actress Kate Flannery found the episode " a lot of fun to shoot , " and observed that on the occasions Gervais was present , " it seems to me like he is looking at all of us with a sense of , ' I can 't believe that this exists because of me . ' That is just my interpretation , but he seems so humble , and kind of reverent . " One scene was meant to take place outdoors under cold temperatures , so the parking lot set was laden with fake snow and slush . Also present on set were two sets of twin babies , as the character of Hannah <unk> @-@ Barr brings her son to the office . 
 The third season DVD contains several scenes that were deleted from the final cut of the episode . These include Dwight and Andy verbally sparring in the kitchen , Dwight informing Michael that he believes Martin has murdered Meredith , Michael explaining that he created " Prison Mike " in an improvisation class , and Pam giving Andy wildly incorrect tips for hanging out with Jim . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " The Convict " was first broadcast on NBC in the United States on November 30 , 2006 , near the end of the fall sweeps period . According to Nielsen Media Research , it was watched by an estimated 9 @.@ 07 million viewers , the highest number of the series ' season up to that point . The episode earned a 4 @.@ 4 / 11 ratings share among adults aged 18 to 49 , meaning that it was seen by 4 @.@ 4 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 11 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of broadcast . Among that demographic , The Office finished in eighteenth place for the week among all of the major networks . 
 Eric Goldman of IGN rated " The Convict " 9 out of 10 , an indication of an " amazing " episode . He wrote that " while this wouldn 't qualify as one of the very best episodes of the series , the great news is , Gervais and Merchant did an excellent job , working very well within the same @-@ but @-@ different world the US version of the show has created , and delivering some of the biggest and best laughs of the season . " Mark A. Perigard of the Boston Herald however was more critical of the episode , explaining that " Carell is a fearless actor , but he can 't stop a train wreck . The B @-@ story is better , as Jim decides to prank Pam by coaching Andy on just the wrong way to woo the receptionist . The Office has been erratic all season , but even at its worst , it 's still the best comedy on television . " 
 Writing for AOL TV , Michael Sciannamea thought " The Convict " seemed different from previous episodes , citing as evidence the scene of Michael and Martin discussing trustworthy black men ; Sciannamea attributed this to its guest writers : " I don 't think Gervais and Merchant went over the top ... it just seemed a little different than the others . " Also in his review , Sciannamea expressed his gradual enjoyment of Andy , " When I first saw him up in Stamford , I thought he was just the Connecticut version of Dwight . But now I think he adds greatly to the mix and is definitely one who is going to stir things up in Scranton . " Give Me My Remote 's Kath Skerry believed " the uncomfortable , unbearably awkward moments that the UK version perfected are definitely present throughout the episode . " She also praised Helms for " prov [ ing ] once again how perfectly he fits in on this show as he is absolutely hysterical . " 
 Entertainment Weekly columnist Abby West was pleased with the Jim @-@ Karen storyline and called it " a nice , normal progression for two single people who are into each other . " She also praised Jim 's prank on Pam , especially viewing Helms ' performance " amazingly funny as this oblivious blowhard . " Referring to " Michael 's earnest determination not to assume that Martin was the ex @-@ con whom the Stamford office had hired , " West found the episode to be a satire of " white liberal guilt " . Reviewers were also positive towards the " Prison Mike " sequence , with West calling it " a dead @-@ on impersonation of a badass convict . " Television Without Pity gave the episode an " A- " . 
 = Deinocheirus = 
 Deinocheirus ( / <unk> / DY @-@ no @-@ KY @-@ <unk> ) is a genus of large ornithomimosaur that lived during the Late Cretaceous around 70 million years ago . In 1965 , a pair of large arms , shoulder girdles , and a few other bones of a new dinosaur were first discovered in the Nemegt Formation of Mongolia . In 1970 , this specimen became the holotype of the only species within the genus , Deinocheirus mirificus ; the genus name is Greek for " horrible hand " . No further remains were discovered for almost fifty years , and its nature remained a mystery . Two more complete specimens were described in 2014 , which shed light on many aspects of the animal . Parts of these new specimens had been looted from Mongolia some years before , but were repatriated in 2014 . 
 Deinocheirus was an unusual ornithomimosaur , the largest of the clade at 11 m ( 36 ft ) long , and weighing 6 @.@ 36 t ( 14 @,@ 000 lb ) . Though it was a bulky animal , it had many hollow bones which saved weight . The arms were among the largest of any bipedal dinosaur at 2 @.@ 4 m ( 7 @.@ 9 ft ) long , with large , blunt claws on its three @-@ fingered hands . The legs were relatively short , and bore blunt claws . Its vertebrae had tall neural spines that formed a " sail " along its back . The tail ended in pygostyle @-@ like vertebrae , which indicate the presence of a fan of feathers . The skull was 1 @.@ 024 m ( 3 @.@ 36 ft ) long , with a wide bill and a deep lower jaw , similar to those of hadrosaurs . 
 The classification of Deinocheirus was long uncertain , and it was initially placed in the theropod group <unk> , but similarities with ornithomimosaurians were soon noted . After more complete remains were found , Deinocheirus was shown to be a primitive ornithomimosaurian , most closely related to the smaller genera <unk> and <unk> , together forming the family Deinocheiridae . Members of this group were not adapted for speed , unlike other ornithomimosaurs . Deinocheirus is thought to have been omnivorous ; its skull shape indicates a diet of plants , fish scales were found in association with one specimen and gastroliths were also present in the stomach region of the specimen . The large claws may have been used for digging and gathering plants . Bite marks on Deinocheirus bones have been attributed to the tyrannosaurid Tarbosaurus . 
 = = Description = = 
 Deinocheirus is the largest ornithomimosaurian ( ostrich dinosaur ) discovered ; the largest known specimen measured up to 11 m ( 36 ft ) long , with an estimated weight of 6 @.@ 36 t ( 14 @,@ 000 lb ) . The two other known specimens are smaller , the holotype being 94 % as big while the smallest , a subadult , only 74 % as big . When only the incomplete holotype arms were known , various sizes were extrapolated from them by different methods . A 2010 study estimated the hip height of Deinocheirus to be 3 @.@ 3 – 3 @.@ 6 m ( 11 – 12 ft ) . The weight had previously been estimated between 2 tonnes ( 4 @,@ 400 lb ) to 12 tonnes ( 26 @,@ 000 lb ) . Enormous sizes were also suggested by comparing the arms with those of tyrannosaurs , even though members of that group have very small arms in proportion to their body size . 
 Deinocheirus and Therizinosaurus possessed the longest forelimbs known for any bipedal dinosaurs . The holotype forelimbs measure 2 @.@ 4 m ( 7 @.@ 9 ft ) long — the humerus ( upper arm bone ) is 93 @.@ 8 cm ( 36 @.@ 9 in ) , the ulna 68 @.@ 8 cm ( 27 @.@ 1 in ) , and the hand is 77 cm ( 30 in ) — including the 19 @.@ 6 cm ( 7 @.@ 7 in ) long recurved claws . Each <unk> of the shoulder girdle has a length of 1 @.@ 53 m ( 5 @.@ 0 ft ) . Each half of the paired <unk> measure 42 cm ( 17 in ) . The shoulder @-@ blade was long and narrow , and the <unk> crest was pronounced and triangular . The upper arm ( humerus ) was relatively slender , and only slightly longer than the hand . The ulna and radius ( lower arm bones ) were elongate and not firmly connected to each other in a <unk> . The metacarpus was long compared to the fingers . The three fingers were about equal in length , the first being the stoutest and the second the longest . Various rough areas and impressions on the forelimbs indicate the presence of powerful muscles . Most articular surfaces of the arm bones were deeply furrowed , indicating that the animal had thick pads of cartilage between the joints . Though the arms of Deinocheirus were large , the ratio between them and the shoulder girdle was less than that of the smaller ornithomimosaur Ornithomimus . The arm bones of Deinocheirus were similar in proportions to those of the small theropod Compsognathus . The wishbone ( furcula ) , an element not known from any other ornithomimosaurs , was U @-@ shaped . The hindlimbs were relatively short , and the thigh bone ( femur ) was longer than the shin bone ( tibia ) , as is common for large animals . The metatarsus was short and not <unk> , as in most other theropods . The claw bones of the feet were blunt and broad @-@ tipped instead of tapered , unlike other theropods , but resembled the unguals of large ornithischian dinosaurs . The proportions of the toe bones resembled those of tyrannosaurs , due to the large weight they had to bear . 
 Though Deinocheirus was a bulky animal , its dorsal ribs were tall and relatively straight , indicating that the body was narrow . The ten neck vertebrae were low and long , and progressively shorter backwards from the skull . This resulted in a more S @-@ curved neck than seen in other ornithomimosaurs , due to the larger skull . The neural spines of the twelve back vertebrae became increasingly longer from front to back , the last one being 8 @.@ 5 times the height of the centrum part . This is almost the same as the highest ratio in the neural spines of the theropod Spinosaurus . The neural spines had a system of interconnecting ligaments , which stiffened the vertebral column allowing it to support the abdomen while transmitting the stress to the hips and hindlimbs . Together , the neural spines formed a tall " sail " along the lower back , hips , and base of the tail , somewhat similar to that of Spinosaurus . 
 All the vertebrae were highly pneumatised by invading air sacs , except for the atlas bone and the hindmost tail vertebrae , and were thereby connected to the respiratory system . The back vertebrae were as pneumatised as those of sauropod dinosaurs , and had an extensive system of depressions . These adaptations may be correlated with gigantism , as they reduce weight . The six vertebrae of the sacrum were also tall and pneumatised , and all but the first one were fused together at the top , their neural spines forming a neural plate . The ilium , the top hip bone , was also partially pneumatised close to the sacral vertebrae . Part of the pelvis was hypertrophied ( enlarged ) compared to other ornithomimosaurs , to support the weight of the animal with strong muscle attachments . The front hip bones tilted upwards in life . The tail of Deinocheirus ended in at least two fused vertebrae , which were described as similar to the pygostyle of oviraptorosaurian and <unk> theropods . <unk> are known to have had pennaceous feathers , so this feature suggests that they might have had a fan of feathers at the tail end . 
 The only known skull , belonging to the largest specimen , measures 1 @.@ 024 m ( 3 @.@ 36 ft ) from the premaxilla at the front to the back of the occipital condyle . The widest part of the skull behind the eyes is only 23 cm ( 9 @.@ 1 in ) wide in comparison . The skull was similar to those of other ornithomimosaurs in being low and narrow , but differed in that the snout was more elongated . The skull bone walls were rather thin , about 6 mm ( 0 @.@ 24 in ) . It had a rounded , flattened beak , which would have been covered by keratin in life . The nostrils were turned upwards , and the nasal bone was a narrow strap that extended up above the eye sockets . The outer diameter of the sclerotic rings in the eyes was small , 8 @.@ 4 cm ( 3 @.@ 3 in ) , compared to the size of the skull . The lower temporal fenestrae , openings behind the eyes , were partially closed off by the jugal bones , similar to Gallimimus . The jaws were toothless and down @-@ turned , and the lower jaw was very massive and deep compared to the slender and low upper jaw . The relative size of the lower jaw was closer to that of tyrannosaurids than to other ornithomimosaurs . The snout was spatulate ( flared outwards to the sides ) and 25 cm ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) wide , which is wider than the skull roof . This shape is similar to the snout of duck @-@ billed hadrosaurids . 
 = = History of discovery = = 
 The first known fossil remains of Deinocheirus were discovered by Polish palaeontologist Zofia Kielan @-@ Jaworowska on July 9 , 1965 , at the Altan Ula III site ( coordinates : 43 ° 33 @.@ 987 ′ N 100 ° 28 @.@ 959 ′ E ) in the Nemegt Basin of the Gobi Desert . She was part of a Polish group accompanied by Mongolian palaeontologist Rinchen Barsbold during the 1963 – 1965 Polish @-@ Mongolian palaeontological expeditions , which were organised by the Polish Academy of Sciences and the Mongolian Academy of Sciences . The crew spent July 9 – 11 excavating the specimen and loading it onto a vehicle . A 1968 report by Kielan @-@ Jaworowska and <unk> <unk> , which summarised the accomplishments of the expeditions , announced that the remains represented a new family of theropod dinosaur . The specimen was discovered on a small hill in sandstone , and consists of a partial , disarticulated skeleton , most parts of which had probably eroded away at the time of discovery . The specimen consisted of both forelimbs , excluding the claws of the right hand , the complete shoulder girdle , centra of three dorsal vertebrae , five ribs , gastralia ( belly ribs ) , and two <unk> . The specimen was made the holotype of Deinocheirus mirificus , named by Halszka Osmólska and Ewa Roniewicz in 1970 . The generic name is derived from Greek deinos ( δεινός ) , meaning " horrible " , and <unk> ( <unk> ) , meaning " hand " , due to the size and strong claws of the forelimbs . The specific name comes from Latin and means " unusual " or " peculiar " , chosen for the unusual structure of the forelimbs . The Polish @-@ Mongolian expeditions were notable for being led by women , among the first to name new dinosaurs . The original specimen number of the holotype was <unk> MgD @-@ I / 6 , but it has since been re @-@ catalogued as MPC @-@ D 100 / 18 . 
 The paucity of known Deinocheirus remains inhibited a thorough understanding of the animal for almost half a century onwards , and the scientific literature often described it as among the most " enigmatic " , " mysterious " , and " bizarre " of dinosaurs . The holotype arms went on to become part of a traveling exhibit of Mongolian dinosaur fossils , touring various countries . In 2012 , Phil R. Bell , Philip J. Currie , and <unk> @-@ Nam Lee announced the discovery of additional elements of the holotype specimen , including fragments of gastralia , found by a Korean @-@ Mongolian team which re @-@ located the original quarry in 2008 . Bite marks on two gastralia were identified as belonging to Tarbosaurus , and it was proposed that this accounted for the scattered , disassociated state of the holotype specimen . 
 In 2013 , the discovery of two new Deinocheirus specimens was announced before the annual Society of Vertebrate Paleontology ( SVP ) conference by Lee , Barsbold , Currie , and colleagues . Housed at the Mongolian Academy of Sciences , these two headless individuals were given the specimen numbers MPC @-@ D 100 / 127 and MPC @-@ D 100 / 128 . MPC @-@ D 100 / 128 , a subadult specimen , was found by scientists in the Altan Ula IV locality ( coordinates : 43 ° 36 @.@ 091 ′ N 100 ° 27 @.@ 066 ′ E ) of the Nemegt Formation during the Korea @-@ Mongolia International Dinosaur Expedition in 2006 , but had already been damaged by fossil poachers . The second specimen , MPC @-@ D 100 / 127 , was found by scientists in the Bugiin Tsav locality ( coordinates : 43 ° 54 @.@ 025 ′ N 99 ° 58 @.@ 359 ′ E ) in 2009 . It is slightly larger than the holotype , and it could be clearly identified as Deinocheirus by its left forelimb , and therefore helped identify the earlier collected specimen as Deinocheirus . The specimen had also been excavated by poachers , who had removed the skull , hands and feet , but left behind a single toe bone . It had probably been looted after 2002 , based on money left in the quarry . Currie stated in an interview that it was a policy of their team to investigate quarries after they had been looted and recover anything of significance , and that finding any new Deinocheirus fossils was cause for celebration , even without the poached parts . A virtual model of Deinocheirus revealed at the SVP presentation brought applause from the crowd of attending palaeontologists , and Scottish palaeontologist Stephen L. Brusatte stated he had never been as surprised by a SVP talk , though new fossils are routinely presented at the conference . 
 After the new specimens were announced , it was rumoured that a looted skull had found its way to a European museum through the black market . The poached elements were spotted in a private European collection by the French fossil trader François <unk> , who notified Belgian palaeontologist Pascal Godefroit about them in 2011 . They suspected the remains belonged to Deinocheirus , and contacted the Korean @-@ Mongolian team . <unk> subsequently acquired the fossils and donated them to the Royal Belgian Institute of Natural Sciences . The recovered material consisted of a skull , a left hand , and feet , which had been collected in Mongolia , sold to a Japanese buyer , and resold to a German party . The team concluded that these elements belonged to specimen MPC @-@ D 100 / 127 , as the single leftover toe bone fit perfectly into the unprepared matrix of a poached foot , the bone and matrix matched in colour , and because the elements belonged to an individual of the same size , with no overlap in skeletal elements . On May 1 , 2014 , the fossils were repatriated to Mongolia by a delegation from the Belgian Museum , during a ceremony held at the Mongolian Academy of Sciences . The reunited skeleton was deposited at the Central Museum of Mongolian Dinosaurs in Ulaanbaatar , along with a Tarbosaurus skeleton which had also been brought back after being stolen . American palaeontologist Thomas R. Holtz stated in an interview that the new Deinocheirus remains looked like the " product of a secret love affair between a hadrosaur and Gallimimus " . 
 Combined with the poached elements , both new specimens represent almost the entire skeleton of Deinocheirus , as MPC @-@ D 100 / 127 includes all material apart from the middle dorsal vertebrae , most caudal vertebrae , and the right forelimb ; MPC @-@ D 100 / 128 fills in most gaps of the other skeleton , with nearly all dorsal and caudal vertebrae , the ilium , a partial ischium , and most of the left hindlimb . In 2014 , the specimens were described in the Nature journal by Lee , Barsbold , Currie , Yoshitsugu Kobayashi , Hang @-@ Jae Lee Lee , Godefroit , <unk> , and <unk> <unk> . A similar series of events was reported earlier in 2014 with Spinosaurus , another sail @-@ backed theropod which had only been known from few remains since 1912 . Poached remains were reunited with specimens obtained by scientists , and Spinosaurus was shown to have been quite different from other spinosaurids . The two cases showed that the lifestyle and appearance of incompletely known extinct animals cannot always be safely inferred from close relatives . 
 = = Classification = = 
 When Deinocheirus was only known from the original forelimbs , its taxonomic relationship was difficult to determine , and several hypotheses were proposed . Osmólska and Roniewicz initially concluded that Deinocheirus did not belong in any already named theropod family , so they created a new , monotypic family Deinocheiridae , placed in the infraorder Carnosauria . This was due to the large size and thick @-@ walled limb bones , but they also found some similarities with Ornithomimus , and , to a lesser extent , Allosaurus . In 1971 , John Ostrom first proposed that Deinocheirus belonged with the <unk> , while noting that it contained both ornithomimosaurian and non @-@ ornithomimosaurian characters . In 1976 , <unk> Barsbold named the order <unk> , which was to include the supposedly related genera Deinocheirus and Therizinosaurus . A relationship between Deinocheirus and the long @-@ armed therizinosaurs was supported by some later writers , but they are not considered to be closely related today . 
 In 2004 , Peter Makovicky , Kobayashi and Currie pointed out that Deinocheirus was likely a primitive ornithomimosaurian , since it lacked some of the features typical of the <unk> family . Primitive traits include its recurved claws , the low humerus @-@ to @-@ scapula ratio , and the lack of a <unk> . A 2006 study by Kobayashi and Barsbold found Deinocheirus to be possibly the most primitive ornithomimosaur , but was unable to further resolve its affinities , due to the lack of skull and hindlimb elements . A cladistic analysis accompanying the 2014 description of the two much more complete specimens found that Deinocheirus formed a clade with <unk> and <unk> , which were therefore included in the Deinocheiridae . The resulting cladogram follows below : 
 The 2014 study defined Deinocheiridae as a clade including all taxa with a more recent common ancestor with Deinocheirus mirificus than with Ornithomimus velox . The three members share various anatomical features in the limbs . The 2014 cladogram suggested that ornithomimosaurians diverged into two major lineages in the Early Cretaceous ; Deinocheiridae and <unk> . Unlike other ornithomimosaurians , <unk> were not built for running . The anatomical peculiarities of Deinocheirus when compared to other , much smaller ornithomimosaurs , can largely be explained by its much larger size and weight . <unk> and the smaller ornithomimids did not have teeth , unlike more primitive ornithomimosaurs . 
 = = Paleobiology = = 
 The blunt and short claws of Deinocheirus are similar to those of the <unk> <unk> , which indicates the long arms and claws were used for digging and gathering plants . The blunt claws of the feet could have helped the animal from sinking into substrate when wading . The robust hind limbs and hip region indicates the animal moved slowly . The large size of the animal may have helped it against predators such as Tarbosaurus , but in turn it lost the running ability of other ornithomimosaurs . The long neural spines and possible tail fan may have been used for display behaviour . Deinocheirus was likely diurnal ( active during the day ) , since the sclerotic rings of the eyes were relatively small in comparison with its skull length . The hand had good mobility relative to the lower arm , but was capable of only a limited flexing motion , unable to close in grasping . 
 The brain of Deinocheirus was reconstructed through CT scans and presented at the 2014 Society of Vertebrate Palaeontology conference . The brain was globular and similar in shape to that of birds and troodontid theropods , the cerebrum was expanded in a way similar to most theropods , and the olfactory tracts were relatively large . The brain was proportionally small and compact , and its Reptile <unk> Quotient ( brain @-@ body ratio ) was estimated at 0 @.@ 69 , which is low for theropods , and similar to sauropods . Other ornithomimosaurs have proportionally large brains , and the small brain of Deinocheirus may reflect its social behaviour or diet . Its coordination and balance would not have been as important as for carnivorous theropods . A bone microstructure study presented at the 13th Annual Meeting of the European Association of Vertebrate Palaeontologists in 2015 showed that Deinocheirus probably had a high metabolic rate , and grew rapidly before reaching sexual maturity . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 The distinct shape of the skull shows that Deinocheirus had a more specialised diet than other ornithomimosaurs . The beak was similar to that of ducks , which indicates it may have likewise foraged in water , or browsed near the ground like some sauropods and hadrosaurs . The attachment sites for the muscles that open and close the jaws were very small in comparison to the size of the skull , which indicates Deinocheirus had a weak bite force . The skull was likely adapted for cropping soft understorey or water vegetation . The depth of the lower jaw indicates the presence of a large tongue , which could have assisted the animal in sucking in food material obtained with the broad beak when foraging on the bottom of freshwater bodies . 
 More than 1 @,@ 400 gastroliths ( stomach stones , 8 to <unk> in size ) were found among the ribs and gastralia of specimen MPC @-@ <unk> / 127 . The ratio of gastrolith mass to total weight , 0 @.@ 0022 , supports the theory that these gastroliths helped the toothless animals in grinding their food . Features such as the presence of a beak and a U @-@ shaped , downturned jaw , are indicators of facultative ( optional ) herbivory among coelurosaurian theropods . In spite of these features , fish vertebrae and scales were also found among the gastroliths , which suggests that it was an omnivore . <unk> in general are thought to have fed on both plants and small animals . 
 Various feeding behaviours were proposed before more complete remains of Deinocheirus were known , and it was early on envisioned as a predatory , allosaur @-@ like animal with giant arms . In their original description , Osmólska and Roniewicz found that the hands of Deinocheirus were unsuited for grasping , but could instead have been used to tear prey apart . In 1970 , the Russian paleontologist Anatoly Konstantinovich Rozhdestvensky compared the forelimbs of Deinocheirus to sloths , leading him to hypothesise that Deinocheirus was a specialised climbing dinosaur , that fed on plants and animals found in trees . In 1988 , Gregory S. Paul instead suggested that the claws were too blunt for predatory purposes , but would have been good defensive weapons . While attempting to determine the ecological niches for Deinocheirus and Therizinosaurus in 2010 , Phil Senter and James H. Robins suggested that Deinocheirus had the largest vertical feeding range due to its hip height , and specialised in eating high foliage . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Osmólska and Roniewicz reported that the holotype specimen has abnormal pits , grooves and tubercles on the first and second phalanx of the left second finger that may be the result of injuries to the joint between the two bones . The damage may have caused changes to the arrangement of ligaments of muscles . The two coracoids are also differently developed . A rib of specimen MPC @-@ D 100 / 127 shows a healed trauma which has remodelled the bone . In 2012 , bite marks on two gastralia of the holotype specimen were reported . The size and shape of the bite marks match the teeth of Tarbosaurus , the largest known predator from the Nemegt Formation . Various types of feeding traces were identified ; punctures , gouges , striae , fragmentary teeth , and combinations of the above marks . The bite marks probably represent feeding behaviour instead of aggression between the species , and the fact that bite marks were not found elsewhere on the body indicates the predator focused on internal organs . Tarbosaurus bite marks have also been identified on hadrosaur and sauropod fossils , but theropod bite marks on bones of other theropods are very rare in the fossil record . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 The three known Deinocheirus specimens were recovered from the Nemegt Formation in the Gobi Desert of southern Mongolia . This geologic formation has never been dated radiometrically , but the fauna present in the fossil record indicate it was probably deposited during the early Maastrichtian stage , at the end of the Late Cretaceous about 70 million years ago . The rock facies of the Nemegt Formation suggest the presence of stream and river channels , mudflats , and shallow lakes . Such large river channels and soil deposits are evidence of a far more humid climate than those found in the older Barun Goyot and Djadochta formations . However , caliche deposits indicate at least periodic droughts occurred . Sediment was deposited in the channels and floodplains of large rivers . 
 Deinocheirus is thought to have been widely distributed within the Nemegt Formation , as the only three specimens found have been 50 km ( 31 mi ) apart . The river systems of the Nemegt Formation provided a suitable niche for Deinocheirus with its omnivorous habits . The environment was similar to the Okavango Delta of present @-@ day Botswana . Within this ecosystem , Deinocheirus would have eaten plants and small animals , including fish . It may have competed for trees with other large herbivorous dinosaurs such as the long @-@ necked theropod Therizinosaurus , various titanosaurian sauropods , and the smaller hadrosaurid Saurolophus . Deinocheirus may have competed with those herbivores for higher foliage such as trees , but was also able to feed on material that they could not . Along with Deinocheirus , the discoveries of Therizinosaurus and <unk> show that three groups of herbivorous theropods ( ornithomimosaurs , therizinosaurs and oviraptorosaurs ) , independently reached their maximum sizes in the late Cretaceous of Asia . 
 The habitats in and around the Nemegt rivers where Deinocheirus lived provided a home for a wide array of organisms . Occasional mollusc fossils are found , as well as a variety of other aquatic animals like fish and turtles . Nemegt crocodylomorphs included several species of <unk> . Mammal fossils are rare in the Nemegt Formation , but many birds have been found , including the enantiornithine <unk> , the <unk> <unk> , as well as <unk> , a possible <unk> . <unk> dinosaurs of the Nemegt Formation include ankylosaurids such as Tarchia , the pachycephalosaurian Prenocephale , large hadrosaurids such as Saurolophus and Barsboldia , and sauropods such as Nemegtosaurus , and Opisthocoelicaudia . Predatory theropods that may have lived alongside Deinocheirus include tyrannosauroids such as Tarbosaurus , Alioramus , and Bagaraatan , and troodontids such as Borogovia , <unk> , and <unk> . Theropod groups with both omnivorous and herbivorous members include therizinosaurs , such as Therizinosaurus , oviraptorosaurians , such as <unk> , <unk> , and Rinchenia , and other ornithomimosaurians , such as <unk> and Gallimimus . 
 = Cow Clicker = 
 Cow Clicker is an incremental social network game on Facebook developed by video game researcher Ian Bogost . The game serves as a deconstructive satire of social games . The goal of the game is to earn " clicks " by clicking on a sprite of a cow every six hours . The addition of friends ' cows to the player 's pasture allows the user to also receive " clicks " whenever the player 's cow is clicked . A premium currency known as " Mooney " allows the user to purchase different cow designs and skip the six @-@ hour interval between clicks . 
 In the wake of a controversial speech by Zynga 's president at the Game Developers Choice Awards in 2010 , Bogost developed Cow Clicker for a presentation at a New York University seminar on social gaming in July 2010 . The game was created to demonstrate what Bogost felt were the most commonly abused mechanics of social games , such as the promotion of social interaction and monetization rather than the artistic aspects of the medium . As the game unexpectedly began to grow in popularity , Bogost also used Cow Clicker to parody other recent gaming trends , such as gamification , educational apps , and alternate reality games . 
 Some critics praised Cow Clicker for its dissection of the common mechanics of social network games and viewed it as a commentary on how social games affect people . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The player is initially given a pasture with nine slots and a single plain cow , which the player may click once every six hours . Each time the cow is clicked , a point also known as a " click " is awarded ; if the player adds friends ' cows to their pasture , they also receive clicks added to their scores when the player clicks their own cow . As in other Facebook games , players are encouraged to post announcements to their news feed whenever they click their cow . A virtual currency known as " Mooney " can be bought with Facebook Credits ; it can be used to purchase special " premium " cow designs , and the ability to skip the six @-@ hour time limit that must be waited before the cow can be clicked again . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Creation and development = = = 
 At the 2010 Game Developers Conference , Zynga 's game FarmVille was awarded the " Best New Social / Online Game " at its Game Developers Choice Awards . Ian Bogost ( who was also in attendance ) was critical of Zynga 's success , as he felt that its business model was focused on convincing users to pay money to progress further in their " freemium " games rather than treating gaming as an artistic experience . He also believed Zynga 's vice president Bill Mooney was trying to attack " artistic " gaming during his acceptance speech for the award when he personally invited independent game developers to join his company . After the conference , Bogost coined the term " cow <unk> " to describe games such as FarmVille which only involve performing tasks at certain intervals , since in these games , " you click on a cow , and that ’ s all you do . " Bogost compared the players of Zynga 's games to the rats in B. F. Skinner 's operant conditioning experiment , often receiving variable reinforcement rather than regular rewards . As one of the most vocal critics of Zynga 's practices and business model , Bogost made further appearances at various events and panels to discuss his views on social gaming . 
 In July 2010 , Bogost was scheduled to make an appearance at a New York University seminar , " Social Games On Trial " , to discuss the controversial aspects of social network gaming . To clearly demonstrate what he felt were the most commonly abused mechanics of these games , Bogost quickly developed a Facebook game entitled Cow Clicker . The game was designed to be a satire of what Bogost personally believed were the only points of FarmVille : to encourage users to continue playing by inviting other users into the game , and to provide incentives for those who purchase virtual goods . 
 = = = Updates = = = 
 Unexpectedly to Bogost , Cow Clicker became a viral phenomenon , amassing over 50 @,@ 000 players by September 2010 . In response to its sudden popularity , he committed to improving the game with new features . Updates to the game added awards for reaching certain milestones ( such as the Golden Cowbell for 100 @,@ 000 clicks ) , the ability to earn Mooney by clicking on other users ' Cow Clicker news feed posts , and the chance to randomly gain or lose Mooney on every click . New cow designs were also introduced , such as an oil @-@ coated cow to commemorate the BP oil spill , and the " <unk> Cow " , which was only a mirror image of the original cow that cost around $ 20 's worth of Mooney . 
 Although continually disturbed by its popularity , Bogost also used Cow Clicker to parody other recent gaming and social networking trends ; such as the addition of an API to allow websites to have their own clickable cows ( in a process he dubbed " <unk> " ) , the spin @-@ off game Cow Clicker Blitz ( co @-@ developed with PopCap Games co @-@ founder Jason Kapalka ) , " My First Cow Clicker " for iOS ( a parody of simplistic education apps ; designed to " train " children on cow clicking and add the resulting clicks to their parent 's total ) , and a " Cow <unk> " campaign where users could click on an emaciated cow to donate to Oxfam America — with a goal of donating an actual cow to a third world country . The cow , known as the " <unk> Cow " , could also be unlocked for the player 's pasture with a $ 110 donation . 
 = = = " Cowpocalypse " event and conclusion = = = 
 In 2011 , an alternate reality game known as the " Cow <unk> " was held , where a series of clues from the " bovine gods " eventually revealed that a " Cowpocalypse " would occur on July 21 , 2011 ( exactly one year since the original release of the game ) . From then on , every click made by players would deduct thirty seconds from a countdown clock leading to the Cowpocalypse . However , players could extend the countdown clock by paying to supplicate with Facebook Credits : paying 10 credits would extend the countdown by a single hour , while 4 @,@ 000 would extend the countdown by an entire month . After $ 700 worth of extensions , the countdown clock expired on the evening of September 7 , 2011 . At this point , the game remained playable , but all the cows were replaced by blank spaces and said to have been <unk> . Bogost intended the Cowpocalypse event to signal the " end " of the game to players ; when addressing a complaint by a fan who felt the game was no longer fun after the cow rapture , Bogost responded that " it wasn 't very fun before . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Cow Clicker received critical attention soon after its release . One early commentator was Alexia <unk> of TechCrunch , who acknowledged the game 's intent as a commentary on the impact of social network games . In an interview , Bogost foresaw the transformation of the internet into a " compulsive virtual dystopia " through Zynga 's use of social gaming . 
 Nick Yee of the Palo Alto Research Center compared the players of games which do not provide " meaningful opportunities for achievement , social interaction , and challenge " to rats in a Skinner box . Accordingly , he compared Cow Clicker to being inside an " incredibly clear Skinner box " — acknowledging how little effort the game took in order to keep users playing the game . Jason Tanz of Wired considered Cow Clicker as an example of the growth in the trend of gamification — where developers introduce elements influenced by games into their services without providing the normal " experience " a game traditionally incorporates . 
 PopCap Games co @-@ founder Jason Kapalka praised Cow Clicker for being the type of " ironic , satirical , self @-@ referential " game that Facebook 's game ecosystem was lacking , as he felt there were too many commercially driven games on the social network . <unk> 's Scott Jon Siegel criticized the game for not going far enough in its satire , and putting too many highlights on the " absurd <unk> practices and meaningless clicking which social games are all too well known for . " 
 = Four Seasons Mall = 
 Four Seasons Mall was an enclosed shopping mall in Plymouth , Minnesota , a suburb of the Twin Cities . Four Seasons Mall once comprised 117 @,@ 000 square feet ( 11 @,@ 000 m2 ) of retail space with approximately 26 storefronts . The mall opened in 1978 and the last tenant closed in the center on February 29 , 2012 . The site currently sits completely vacant and is considered a dead mall . 
 Over the years , Four Seasons Mall was home to several regional chains , including various restaurants and small businesses . Although the mall currently still stands vacant in Plymouth , several redevelopment and demolition plans exist for the mall . Despite its closure , several events periodically take place at the mall , such as arts and crafts shows . 
 = = History = = 
 Opening in 1978 , Four Seasons Mall became a popular attraction for the residents of Plymouth , Minnesota . The mall was built atop 22 acres of land ; however , the land was surrounded by wetland and not zoned for a large scale shopping center . The shopping center was developed by the <unk> Group , who had helped construct other shopping centers , like nearby Brookdale Center . Following the mall 's decline , Walmart expressed interest in the site for the construction of a new store . Contractors for Walmart studied the mall 's site and created " a variety of plans and guidelines for the site " . Surveyors found the land suitable for a 240 @,@ 000 square feet ( 22 @,@ 000 m2 ) Walmart Supercenter , but Plymouth city officials were displeased with the idea of a big @-@ box retailer opening in their community . Walmart later agreed on constructing a significantly smaller 87 @,@ 000 square feet ( 8 @,@ 100 m2 ) location , which was still rejected by the city . 
 Throughout the 2000s and 2010s , several projects went underway to improve the city water available to the tenants of Four Seasons Mall . Nearby Northwood Lake was included in the projects ; as several channels between the lake and the mall had eroded . The channels affected in the projects provided water to nearly 285 acres of land in Plymouth . Several initiatives such as ponding , stream restoration , and flow restriction were considered to improve the quality of the water . In mid 2015 , all of the improvement projects were finalized following two years of channel work . 
 = = Closure = = 
 Despite regularly hosting several arts and crafts shows throughout the years , the mall 's vacancy rates steadily increased annually , which prompted the mall 's independent owners to place the facilities up for sale . On November 30 , 2010 , Walmart purchased the entire mall for $ 10 @.@ 6 million . Two years after Walmart 's purchase of the land , the mall 's final tenant , Marcello 's Pizza , was forced to close up their 28 year @-@ old location . Lisa Pieper , one of the owners of Marcello 's , stated that they " had no choice but to close " after Walmart refused to renew their tenant 's lease . Among the mall 's final tenants included Marcello 's , Curves International , and a family @-@ owned Asian restaurant . 
 In January 2015 , the plans for construction of a Walmart Supercenter fell through when Walmart announced the shopping center 's resale . Plymouth city council member Ginny Black called Walmart 's decision " disappoint [ ing ] " and " overwhelming " . When the mall 's resale occurred in 2015 , the entire site was purchased by <unk> Properties . Various concepts and plans for the site 's redevelopment have been created by the City of Plymouth ; most of the plans created were inspired by lifestyle centers , with retail and residential space . However , residents of Plymouth are still " overwhelmingly opposed " to the deconstruction of Four Seasons Mall . 
 = Pseudoryzomys = 
 Pseudoryzomys simplex , also known as the Brazilian false rice rat or false oryzomys , is a species of rodent in the family Cricetidae from south @-@ central South America . It is found in lowland palm savanna and thorn scrub habitats . It is a medium @-@ sized species , weighing about 50 grams ( 1 @.@ 8 oz ) , with gray – brown fur , long and narrow hindfeet , and a tail that is about as long as the head and body . The IUCN has assessed its conservation status as being of least concern , although almost nothing is known of its diet or reproduction . 
 The only species in the genus Pseudoryzomys , its closest living relatives are the large rats Holochilus and Lundomys , which are semiaquatic , spending much of their time in the water . The three genera share several characters , including specializations towards a semiaquatic lifestyle , such as the presence of membranes between the digits ( interdigital webbing ) , and a reduction in the complexity of the molar crowns , both of which are at incipient stages in Pseudoryzomys . Together , they form a unique assemblage within the oryzomyine tribe , a very diverse group including over one hundred species , mainly in South America . This tribe is part of the subfamily Sigmodontinae and family Cricetidae , which include many more species , mainly from Eurasia and the Americas . Pseudoryzomys simplex was independently described in 1887 on the basis of subfossil cave specimens from Brazil ( as Hesperomys simplex ) ; and in 1921 on the basis of a live specimen from Paraguay ( as Oryzomys wavrini ) . This was confirmed in 1991 that both names pertained to the same species . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 = = = Discovery and recognition = = = 
 Pseudoryzomys simplex has had a complex taxonomic history . It was first described in 1887 by Danish zoologist Herluf Winge , who reviewed the materials Peter Wilhem Lund had collected in the caves of Lagoa Santa , Minas Gerais , Brazil . Winge described the species as Hesperomys simplex , and placed it in the same genus ( Hesperomys ) as the species now called Lundomys molitor and two species now placed in Calomys . Like most other species Winge proposed , H. simplex was mostly ignored in the systematic literature , but from 1952 it was used briefly , in the combination " Oecomys simplex " , for an Oecomys species from central Brazil . In his 1960 review of Oecomys , Field Museum mammalogist Philip Hershkovitz denied any affinities between simplex and Oecomys , noting that various features of the H. simplex skull illustrated by Winge instead suggested affinities to the <unk> or <unk> groups . 
 In 1921 , renowned British mammalogist Oldfield Thomas described Oryzomys wavrini as a new species of Oryzomys from Paraguay . In the next decades , it was viewed as an aberrant species of Oryzomys ( then used in a much broader sense than now ) , but it was moved to a separate genus , named Pseudoryzomys , by Hershkovitz in 1959 , who noted that although it is similar to Oryzomys palustris in appearance , other features suggest it is more closely related to Phyllotis . Thus , he viewed the animal as a member of the <unk> group of rodents , which includes Calomys and Phyllotis , not of the oryzomyine group , which includes Oryzomys , and his opinion was mostly accepted in the next few decades . Scientific knowledge of the rare Pseudoryzomys wavrini — only three specimens were known when Hershkovitz described the genus Pseudoryzomys in 1959 — increased in the following years , and in 1975 the Bolivian population was named as a separate subspecies , Pseudoryzomys wavrini <unk> , because Bolivian animals are slightly larger and darker than those from Paraguay . 
 In 1980 , Argentinean zoologist Elio <unk> suggested that Winge 's Hesperomys simplex and the living Pseudoryzomys wavrini are in fact the same species . In a 1991 study , American zoologists Voss and Myers confirmed this suggestion after re @-@ examining Winge 's material , finding no appreciable differences among specimens of H. simplex and P. wavrini . Since then , the species has been known as Pseudoryzomys simplex ( Winge , 1887 ) , because simplex is the oldest specific name for the animal ; Oryzomys wavrini Thomas , 1921 , and Pseudoryzomys wavrini <unk> Pine and Wetzel , 1975 , are junior synonyms . Voss and Myers also re @-@ evaluated the relationships of Pseudoryzomys ; they considered it closer to oryzomyines than to <unk> , but declined to formally place it in Oryzomyini in the absence of explicit phylogenetic justification for such a placement . 
 = = = <unk> relationships = = = 
 When Voss and Carleton formally characterized Oryzomyini two years later , they did place Pseudoryzomys in the group , even though it lacks complete mesoloph ( id ) s . The mesoloph is an accessory crest on the upper molars and the mesolophid is the corresponding structure on the lower molars . Only a few other animals now considered oryzomyines lack complete mesoloph ( id ) s , but they are absent in various non @-@ oryzomyines , some of which had previously been regarded as close relatives of the oryzomyines that lack them . Oryzomyines with and without complete mesoloph ( id ) s share various other characters , however , including presence of mammae on the chest , absence of a gall bladder , and some characters of the skull , suggesting that they form one natural , monophyletic group . Oryzomyini is now one of several tribes recognized within the subfamily Sigmodontinae , which encompasses hundreds of species found across South America and into southern North America . Sigmodontinae itself is the largest subfamily of the family Cricetidae , other members of which include voles , lemmings , hamsters , and deermice , all mainly from Eurasia and North America . 
 Several phylogenetic studies published during the 1990s and 2000s supported a close relationship between Pseudoryzomys and two other oryzomyines with reduced or absent mesoloph ( id ) s , Lundomys and Holochilus . The extinct genera Noronhomys and Carletonomys , described in 1999 and 2008 respectively , were also recognized as members of the group . In 2006 , a broad morphological and molecular phylogenetic study of Oryzomyini provided further support for the relationship between Holochilus , Lundomys , and Pseudoryzomys . Within this group , morphological data supported a closer relationship between Holochilus and Lundomys to the exclusion of Pseudoryzomys , but DNA sequence data favored a clustering between Holochilus and Pseudoryzomys to the exclusion of Lundomys ; among all oryzomyines , this was the only case where relationships which received strong support from morphological and DNA sequence data conflicted . Together , the three genera form part of a large group of oryzomyines ( " clade D " ) , which contains tens of other species . Several of those display some adaptations to life in the water , being partially aquatic , as do Pseudoryzomys and its relatives . Morphological data indicate that the genus Oryzomys is the closest relative of the group that includes Pseudoryzomys , but DNA sequence data from the nuclear IRBP gene did not support this relationship ; convergent adaptations towards a semiaquatic lifestyle may explain the morphological support for a relation between Oryzomys and the other three genera . 
 = = Description = = 
 Pseudoryzomys simplex is a nondescript , medium @-@ sized rat with long , soft fur . The upperparts are gray – brown and the underparts are buff ; the color changes gradually over the body . The small ears are covered with short hairs . The tail is as long as or slightly longer than the head and body and is dark above and light below . Despite the presence of short hairs , the scales on the tail are clearly visible . The hairs on the feet are pale . The hindfeet are long and narrow and have five toes , the first and fifth of which are short . <unk> is present between the second , third , and fourth toes , but the membranes are not as large as in Lundomys or Holochilus . The tufts of hair on the toes and several of the pads are reduced , other common characteristics of semiaquatic oryzomyines . The head @-@ body length is 94 to 140 millimeters ( 3 @.@ 7 to 5 @.@ 5 in ) , tail length 102 to 140 mm ( 4 @.@ 0 to 5 @.@ 5 in ) , hindfeet length 27 to 33 mm ( 1 @.@ 1 to 1 @.@ 3 in ) , ear length 13 to 19 mm ( 0 @.@ 5 to 0 @.@ 7 in ) and body mass 45 to 55 g ( 1 @.@ 6 to 1 @.@ 9 oz ) . 
 The female has four pairs of teats , including one on the chest and three on the belly , and the gall bladder is absent , both important characters of Oryzomyini . As is characteristic of Sigmodontinae , Pseudoryzomys has a complex penis , with the baculum ( penis bone ) displaying large protuberances at the sides . In the cartilaginous part of the baculum , the central digit is smaller than those at the sides . 
 = = = Skull = = = 
 The skull , which is short at the front , shows some typical oryzomyine characters . The palate is long , extending past the molars and the maxillary bones . The alisphenoid strut , which in some sigmodontines separates two foramina ( openings ) in the skull , is absent . The squamosal bone lacks a suspensory process contacting the tegmen tympani , the roof the tympanic cavity . The front part is short . 
 The nasal bones end bluntly close to the hindmost extent of the premaxillary bones . The narrow interorbital region , located between the eyes , converges towards the front and is flanked by low beads . The interparietal bone , located in the roof of the skull on the braincase , is nearly as wide as the frontals , but does not reach the squamosals . 
 The incisive foramina , which perforate the palate between the incisors and the molars , are long and narrow , extending between the first molars . The back margins of the zygomatic plates , the flattened front portions of the zygomatic arches ( cheekbones ) , are located before the first molars . Like its close relatives Lundomys and Holochilus , Pseudoryzomys has spinous processes on its zygomatic plates . These genera also share relatively simple posterolateral palatal pits , perforations of the palate near the third molar . Unlike Holochilus and Lundomys , however , Pseudoryzomys has a flat palate , lacking a ridge on the middle that extends along the length of the palate . The <unk> fossae , which are located behind the third molars , are excavated beyond the level of the palate , but not as deeply as in Holochilus and Lundomys . The mastoid skull bone contains a conspicuous opening , as in most oryzomyines . 
 The mandible ( lower jaw ) is short and deep . The mental foramen , an opening at the front of the mandible , just before the first molar , opens to the side . The capsular process of the lower incisor , a raising of the mandibular bone at the back end of the incisor , is well developed . The two masseteric ridges , to which some of the chewing muscles are attached , are entirely separate , joining only at their front edges , which are located below the first molar . 
 = = = Molars = = = 
 As in all oryzomyines except Holochilus and its close relatives , the molars are brachyodont , low @-@ crowned , and bunodont , with the cusps extending higher than the central parts of the molars . They are characterized by strong cusps and absence or reduction of accessory crests . The cusps of the upper molars are opposite , but in the lower molars the labial ( outer ) cusps are slightly further to the front than the lingual ( inner ) ones . On the upper first molar , one accessory ridge , the anteroloph , is lacking , but another , the mesoloph , is present . Unlike in most other oryzomyines , however , which have mesolophs reaching the labial margin of the molar , the mesolophs of Pseudoryzomys are short and protrude only slightly from the middle of the molar . The corresponding structure in the lower molars , the mesolophid , is completely absent . The hindmost valley between cusps on the lower first molar , the <unk> , is severely reduced , foreshadowing its loss in Lundomys and Holochilus . A number of molar traits support Pseudoryzomys 's relationship with Holochilus and Lundomys , forming steps in the transition from the complex , low @-@ crowned generalized oryzomyine molar pattern to the simpler , high @-@ crowned pattern of Holochilus . 
 As in all oryzomyines , the upper molars all have one root on the inner ( lingual ) side and two on the outer ( labial ) side ; in addition , the first upper molar in Pseudoryzomys and some other species has another labial root . The first lower molar has large roots at the front and back of the tooth and two smaller ones in between , at the labial and lingual side . The second and third lowers molars have two roots at the front , one labial and one lingual , and another at the back . 
 = = = Postcranial skeleton = = = 
 Pseudoryzomys has 19 or 20 thoracic ( chest ) and lumbar vertebrae , 13 of which bear ribs , as is characteristic of oryzomyines . The first ribs contact both the seventh cervical ( neck ) vertebra and the first thoracic vertebra , an important character of the Sigmodontinae . Unlike in most sigmodontines , including Holochilus and Lundomys , the fourth lumbar vertebra lacks the processes known as <unk> . There are three or four sacral and about 29 caudal ( tail ) vertebrae . Between the second and third caudal vertebrae , separate bones called hemal arches are present . These display a spinous process at the back , as in both Holochilus and Lundomys . On the humerus , the upper arm bone , the entepicondylar foramen is absent , as in all members of the Sigmodontinae ; in some other <unk> , it perforates the far ( distal ) end of the humerus . 
 = = = Karyotype = = = 
 The karyotype generally includes 56 chromosomes with a total of 54 major arms ( 2n 
 = 56 , FN = 
 54 ) in specimens from both Bolivia and Brazil ; a poorly prepared Paraguayan specimen seems to have a similar karyotype . In this karyotype , all autosomes ( non @-@ sex chromosomes ) are acrocentric ( with one arm so short as to be almost invisible ) . However , in two specimens from the Brazilian states of Tocantins and São Paulo , one pair of autosomes contains both an acrocentric and a metacentric chromosome ( with two equally long arms ) , yielding an FN of 55 . One arm of the metacentric chromosome consists entirely of heterochromatin . Apparently , a whole heterochromatic arm was added to this chromosome ; cases of similar variation are known from the rodents Peromyscus , <unk> , and <unk> . Both sex chromosomes are acrocentric , and X is larger than Y. In addition to heterochromatin near the centromere , the Y chromosome contains two large blocks of heterochromatin on its long arm . The karyotype is closely similar to that of Holochilus brasiliensis . 
 = = Distribution , ecology , and variation = = 
 Pseudoryzomys simplex is known from northeastern Argentina , probably south to about 30 ° S , northward through western Paraguay to eastern Bolivia and from there eastward through Brazil in the states of Mato Grosso , Goiás , Tocantins , Minas Gerais , São Paulo , Bahia , and far in the northeast , Alagoas and Pernambuco . Paraguayan animals are somewhat smaller than those from Bolivia and Brazil and those from Bolivia have darker fur than Paraguayan specimens , but these differences are not considered significant enough to recognize subspecies . Certain bats show a similar pattern of variation : they are smaller and paler in the Chaco region , which includes much of Paraguay . Two specimens from Paraguay , collected 600 kilometres ( 400 mi ) apart , differed by 1 @.@ 4 % in the sequence of the cytochrome b gene , but nothing is known about genetic variation in other parts of the range . The species has long been rare in collections ; in 1991 , Voss and Myers could use less than 50 specimens for their study of the species , including Lund 's fragmentary material from Lagoa Santa . 
 A fragmentary lower jaw of " Pseudoryzomys aff . P. simplex " ( i.e. , an unnamed species close to Pseudoryzomys simplex ) is known from a cave deposit in Cueva <unk> , Buenos Aires Province , Argentina , outside the current distribution of the species . It is dated from the first millennium CE . The jaw 's morphology agrees with that of P. simplex , but the toothrow is relatively long ( 5 @.@ 78 mm ; 4 @.@ 61 to 5 @.@ 60 mm in three specimens of P. simplex ) and the first molar is relatively narrow ( 1 @.@ 28 mm ; 1 @.@ 30 to 1 @.@ 40 mm in five P. simplex ) . 
 P. simplex inhabits open , usually humid tropical and subtropical lowlands . In Argentina , it is mainly a species of the eastern Chaco and in Brazil it is found in the Cerrado and Caatinga . Most specimens for which habitat data are known were caught on the ground in humid grassland , some in seasonally flooded areas ; an Argentinean specimen was captured in dense swamp vegetation . It is terrestrial and semiaquatic , living on the ground but also spending time in the water . 
 Nothing is known about behavior or diet . P. simplex has frequently been found in pellets of the barn owl ( Tyto alba ) and also in those of the great horned owl ( Bubo virginianus ) . It is a preferred prey of the maned wolf ( Chrysocyon brachyurus ) . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 The species is not known to be threatened and its conservation status is classified as least concern by the IUCN . It is a widely distributed species without substantial threats to its continued existence , but degradation of its habitat may endanger some populations . It was assessed as " potentially vulnerable " in Argentina . 
 = 56 ; FN = 
 54 @-@ 55 ( Rodentia , Sigmodontinae ) ( subscription required ) . Genetics and Molecular Biology 36 ( 2 ) : 201 – 206 . 
 Musser , G.G. and Carleton , M.D. 2005 . Superfamily Muroidea . <unk> . 894 – 1531 in Wilson , D.E. and Reeder , D.M. ( eds . ) . Mammal Species of the World : a taxonomic and geographic reference . 3rd ed . Baltimore : The Johns Hopkins University Press , 2 vols . , 2142 pp . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 8018 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 
 Pardiñas , U.F.J. 1995 . <unk> <unk> ( Mammalia , Rodentia ) en el <unk> de la Región <unk> , Argentina . <unk> 32 ( 2 ) : 197 – 203 ( in Spanish ) . 
 Pardiñas , U.F.J. 2008 . A new genus of oryzomyine rodent ( Cricetidae : Sigmodontinae ) from the Pleistocene of Argentina ( subscription required ) . Journal of Mammalogy 89 ( 5 ) : 1270 – 1278 . 
 Pardiñas , U.F.J. , <unk> , S. and Galliari , C.A. 2004 . Distribution of Pseudoryzomys simplex ( Rodentia : Cricetidae ) in Argentina . <unk> Neotropical 11 ( 1 ) : 105 – 108 . 
 Percequillo , A. , Weksler , M. , Pardiñas , U. and D <unk> , G. 2008 . Pseudoryzomys simplex . In IUCN . IUCN Red List of Threatened Species . Version 2009 @.@ 2 . < <unk> > . Downloaded on November 9 , 2009 . 
 Voss , R.S. and Carleton , M.D. 1993 . A new genus for Hesperomys molitor Winge and Holochilus magnus Hershkovitz ( Mammalia , Muridae ) with an analysis of its phylogenetic relationships . American Museum Novitates <unk> : 1 – 39 . 
 Voss , R.S. and Myers , P. 1991 . Pseudoryzomys simplex ( Rodentia : Muridae ) and the significance of Lund 's collections from the caves of Lagoa Santa , Brazil . Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History 206 : 414 – 432 . 
 Weksler , M. 2006 . Phylogenetic relationships of oryzomyine rodents ( Muroidea : Sigmodontinae ) : separate and combined analyses of morphological and molecular data . Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History 296 : 1 – 149 . 
 Wetzel , R.M. and Lovett , J.W. 1974 . A collection of animals from the Chaco of Paraguay . University of Connecticut Occasional Papers 2 ( 13 ) : 203 – 216 . 
 Winge , H. 1887 . <unk> og <unk> <unk> ( Rodentia ) fra Lagoa Santa , Minas Geraes , <unk> . E Museo <unk> 1 ( 3 ) : 1 – 200 . 
 = Kõpu Lighthouse = 
 Kõpu Lighthouse ( Estonian : Kõpu <unk> ) is one of the best known symbols and tourist sights on the Estonian island of Hiiumaa . It is one of the oldest lighthouses in the world , having been in continuous use since its completion in 1531 . 
 The lighthouse marks the Hiiu sandbank ( Estonian : Hiiu <unk> , Swedish : <unk> ) and warns ships away from the shoreline . Light from Kõpu Lighthouse can be used for navigation as far as 26 nautical miles ( 48 km ; 30 mi ) away , although in 1997 a radar lighthouse largely took over its role as navigation aid . 
 Kõpu Lighthouse was previously known under its Swedish name , Upper Dagerort lighthouse . 
 = = Design and location = = 
 The lighthouse is built at the top of the highest hillock of Hiiumaa island , <unk> ( English : Tower Hill , 68 metres ( 223 ft ) ) . The height of the building itself is 36 metres ( 118 ft ) , and the light is 102 @.@ 6 metres ( 337 ft ) above sea level , making it the highest coastal light on the Baltic Sea . 
 Kõpu Lighthouse has the shape of a square prism , with massive <unk> in the directions of principal divisions of the compass . The tower is laid solely of stone up to the height of 24 metres ( 79 ft ) . The outside layer of the walls is supported by lime mortar , with the body itself built without mortar . 
 The body of the tower contains roughly 5 @,@ 000 cubic metres ( 6 @,@ 500 cu yd ) of stone , with its total weight reaching 12 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 26 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 lb ) . Local limestone and glacial erratic stones were used as building material . 
 Originally , the base of the tower was solid stone without any rooms ; the top of the lighthouse was reached using external wooden stairs , which were later replaced with iron ones . During reconstruction in the 1800s , a stairway was cut into the tower and has remained in use since . 
 = = Construction and history = = 
 = = = Construction of the original tower = = = 
 The most important East – West shipping lane in the Baltic Sea passed the Hiiu sandbank . Already before the year 1490 the Hanseatic merchants were seeking permission to mark this peninsula with an outstanding landmark . Around 1490 they asked the bishop of Bishopric of Ösel @-@ Wiek to let them build a landmark on the Kõpu peninsula which was under the bishop ’ s control . This action had no real results . 
 At a meeting of the Hanseatic League in Lübeck in 1499 , they applied once more to the bishop for permission to build a beacon . On 20 April 1500 Bishop Johannes III <unk> ( John Orgies ) agreed to allow a massive stone pillar without any openings . To cover the building costs , Tallinn city council had to establish a special lighthouse tax until the sum was complete . 
 Building of the beacon was supposed to start in the summer of 1500 , but the building was stopped when Wolter von Plettenberg , master of the Livonian Order , started a war which lasted until 1503 . In the spring of 1504 , purchase and delivery of the building materials began , but in the autumn of the same year the plague broke out , stopping the work once more . Building work was discontinued and alderman Lambert <unk> , the magistrate in charge of the building , died in Tallinn on 28 December 1505 . 
 The account ledgers of Tallinn city council contain entries about the Kõpu lighthouse from 1507 to 1533 , showing money was spent on the beacon of Hiiumaa from 13 May 1514 until 12 October 1532 . The amounts show the majority of the work took place from 1514 to 1519 ; later there are only a couple of bigger expenditures on the beacon . A fire was first lit in the autumn of 1531 ; it was simply a bonfire on top of the tower . 
 The 20 @-@ metre @-@ high ( 66 ft ) and 8 @-@ metre @-@ wide ( 26 ft ) tower was visible on a clear day up to 20 kilometres ( 12 mi ) offshore . 
 = = = Reconstruction and rebuilding = = = 
 In August 1649 a wooden staircase was built to the outside wall of the tower and an open iron fire grate affixed to the top . Originally it was planned to burn coal in the lighthouse , but due to high transport costs of coal , wood was used instead . 
 The fire consumed up to 1000 cords of firewood every year during the 180 @-@ day navigation period , a quantity so great that it led to deforestation of most of the Kõpu peninsula . A team of six was on guard every night , but storms extinguished the fire often . A rule passed in 1652 decreed that the fire must be strong and a fathom ( ~ 2 yards ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) ) high . 
 Count Axel Julius De la Gardie bought the island of Hiiumaa from the King of Sweden for 38 @,@ 000 thalers and took over management of the Kõpu lighthouse in 1659 . He had its height extended to 35 @.@ 6 m ( 117 ft ) and the wooden stairs replaced with an iron staircase . The light , now visible from as far as 24 kilometres ( 15 mi ) away , was lit one hour after the sun set and extinguished one hour before sunrise . 
 The Russian Empire took over the administration of the lighthouse in 1805 . Major reconstruction of the tower began in 1810 . A stone staircase was cut to the southern <unk> plus a room large enough for a team of six men . Into the upper part they made two subsidiary rooms , one on top of the other , and another , the topmost room , 35 metres ( 115 ft ) from the ground , was for the lanterns . The lantern room housed twenty three oil lamps , using silver @-@ plated brass reflectors . The lamps burned hemp oil , requiring 3 @.@ 28 tonnes ( 7 @,@ 200 lb ) yearly . 
 In 1845 , a crack in the upper part of the lighthouse called for extensive reconstruction , which saw part of the tower pulled down and rebuilt . The tower now gained its final height : 36 metres ( 118 ft ) . A wooden structure with lamp @-@ chimneys was built for the lantern and its optical devices . 
 The lighthouse came under navy control , and the first maintenance rules were laid down . The fire was to be lit and extinguished in strict accordance to sunrise and sunset . In cloudy weather lighthouse keepers were to consult a calendar for the necessary data . At that time , the fire was kept burning nightly from 1 July to 1 May – 10 months of the year . 
 As part of his naval reforms , Grand Duke Constantine Nikolaevich of Russia demanded modernization of the Kõpu lighthouse , in 1859 . In May 1860 , a novel gyratory device ( manufactured by Le <unk> in Paris ) was installed . It rotated at a speed of one revolution per four minutes , using a clockwork pulley @-@ weight system . The device had one <unk> lamp with four concentric light sources and a Fresnel lens . The lamp consumed 0 @.@ 5 kilograms ( 1 @.@ 1 lb ) of rapeseed oil hourly , and the fuel pump was powered by the same clockwork mechanism . It was said to be visible up to 27 nautical miles ( 50 km ; 31 mi ) away . A team of seven serviced the lighthouse , with one required to be near the light at all times . 
 The <unk> with the staircase was roofed with wooden boards and tin sheets in 1869 . A telegraph installation and rescue stations were established near the lighthouse in the same year ; the first @-@ established worked until 1898 when it was replaced by a telephone . 
 = = = Twentieth century = = = 
 A new light system was bought at the 1900 Paris World Fair , for three million gold rubles . The new apparatus ( including the light chamber ) was made by Sautter , <unk> & Co . It used a kerosene lamp with a gas mantle . A heavy cast iron system floated and rotated in a bath of mercury , which acted as a bearing . The bath contained roughly 500 kilograms ( 1 @,@ 100 lb ) of mercury . The poisonous mercury from the lighthouse was used for decades by children in the surrounding villages for playing . 
 The light system was set in rotation by a suspended 400 kilograms ( 880 lb ) load ; it needed to be rewound every two hours . It was installed during repairs of 1901 . 
 In 1939 , the lighthouse underwent major repairs for its anniversary . As part of those renovations , the tower was painted with high quality oil paint , which became the main contributor to the deterioration of the tower in subsequent decades – thick waterproof layers of paint did not allow the limestone to dry . The mortar began to deteriorate rapidly . 
 The lighthouse was connected to the electricity grid in 1940 . German bombers targeted the lighthouse in August 1941 , though only the lantern structure and optical system were destroyed . 
 After World War II , various optical systems were tested . Kohler generators were installed in 1949 along with the stationary electric light system . A new rotating light system ( <unk> @-@ 3 ) was installed in 1963 , making the lighthouse fully automated . It was in use until 1982 , when an experimental <unk> @-@ 930M system ( made in Ukraine ) was installed . The rotation mechanism of the optical system is a novel solution – there are no electric motors ; it uses a revolving magnetic field instead . The optics brought a six to eight hundredfold increase to the efficiency of the light radiated by a 1 kW quartz lamp . The same light system is still in use . 
 Due to the progressing deterioration , the lighthouse underwent frequent repairs . Major repairs were in 1957 , 1970 , 1979 – 1981 and a major overhaul in 1982 . The walls crumbled partially during the 1980s . To stop the deterioration , a 15 centimetres ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) thick reinforced concrete dress was built to support the foundation and walls ( 1989 – 1990 ) . Small air channels were left in the concrete . The top of the lighthouse was renovated in 2001 . 
 = = Current status = = 
 Kõpu Lighthouse only lost its important role as a primary navigation aid in 1997 , when a radar lighthouse took over its duties . Recreational craft and small fishing vessels continue to rely on Kõpu for navigating , as a backup to electronic navigation systems . The Estonian Maritime Administration still classifies it as an active aid to navigation . Its future is ensured by its status as a protected cultural memorial . 
 Due to its enduring popularity and memorable shape , it is often used as a symbol of Hiiumaa . A major tourist attraction , the tower has been open for tourists since 1999 . Together with the nearby Ristna lighthouse , the Kõpu lighthouse was commemorated on a postage stamp in 2000 . 
 = Mario Power Tennis = 
 Mario Power Tennis , known in Japan as Mario Tennis GC ( <unk> , Mario <unk> Jī Shī ) , is a sports game developed by Camelot Software Planning and published by Nintendo for the GameCube in 2004 . The game is the sequel to the Nintendo 64 title Mario Tennis , and is the fourth game in the Mario Tennis series . Power Tennis was released in Japan on October 28 , 2004 , in North America on November 8 , 2004 , and in Australia on February 25 , 2005 . The game was re @-@ released for the Wii in 2009 as part of the New Play Control ! collection of titles , featuring GameCube games with added Wii controls . As of 2012 , the title is available as part of the Nintendo Selects collection . 
 Power Tennis incorporates multiple characters , themes , and locations from the Mario series . The game includes standard tennis matches , but contains variants that feature different scoring formats and objectives . Other variants include " Gimmick " courts , thematic areas with components and properties that directly affect gameplay . The game has 18 playable characters , each categorised by their style of play and each with a pair of unique moves known as " Power Shots " . Power Tennis was developed simultaneously with Mario Golf : Toadstool Tour , and the pair shared similar technology and concepts with each other during production . Such similarities include an emphasis on the Mario theme in characters and settings as well as alternative game modes such as " Ring Shot " . 
 The GameCube version was positively received in general , attaining an aggregate score of 81 percent from GameRankings and 80 out of 100 from Metacritic . Critics praised the game 's depth and variety , but criticised the Power Shot animations , which could not be skipped . In 2010 , the game was included as one of the titles in the book 1001 Video Games You Must Play Before You Die . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Mario Power Tennis includes variations of tennis matches consisting of characters , courts , and scenarios based on the Mario series . The range of courts includes the standard three types of tennis court , but consists predominantly of those themed upon games in the Mario series , known as " Gimmick " courts . As well as adopting the style aesthetically , these feature thematic elements that influence how the match will be played on that surface , such as the ghosts in the Luigi 's Mansion court , which hinder movement when the character comes into physical contact with them . Although standard tennis is available , variants of the sport can be played which adopt different rules and methods of victory . " Ring Shot " involves the player earning points by hitting the ball through rings of varying sizes , with the number of points dependent on the difficulty of the shot . The player acquires the points whenever a winning shot is made adhering to standard rules ; the match is won once the predetermined number of points is equaled or surpassed . A similar mode , " Item Battle " , involves the characters using items based on the Mario universe to interfere with each other 's game and gain an advantage . The central mode of the game is " Tournament Mode " , which comprises a set of events with accumulating difficulty . These set of events must be finished successfully to unlock playable characters . This mode can be completed either in " doubles " or " singles " , and is divided into Gimmick courts and standard courts . An alternative to these are " Special Games " , which involve the player trying to meet a tennis @-@ related objective on a Gimmick court . These Special Games come in multiple forms , incorporating themes from past Nintendo games , such as " Tic @-@ Tac @-@ Glow " , which requires the player to hit balls of water to liberate Shine Sprites trapped in dirt , a reference to Super Mario Sunshine . Power Tennis supports the option for four @-@ player multiplayer , which can be accessed during " Exhibition Mode " , the standard mode of play where the player can choose his or her opponents and the conditions of the match . Such options include the difficulty of the opponent , the court used , and the number of games and sets required to win the match . 
 Power Tennis features 18 playable characters , all of whom derive from the Mario franchise . Many characters , such as Wario , had already appeared in the game 's predecessor and several other Mario spin @-@ offs , while this was the first appearance for <unk> as a playable character . All of the characters are categorised into six groups that reflect their playing style : all @-@ around , technical , power , speed , defensive , and tricky . Inherent in each character is a set of two unique moves known as " Power Shots " . These powerful moves , which are accompanied with an animation each time they are triggered , incorporate the character 's specific qualities . They can only be triggered occasionally in the match , but will usually result in defending or scoring a point , depending on the type of shot chosen . Generic tennis moves , such as slices , <unk> , and <unk> , can be applied at any time in the match . 
 = = Development = = 
 Power Tennis was developed by Camelot Software Planning , with a team of approximately 30 people , headed by brothers Hiroyuki and Shugo Takahashi . The game was first unveiled in a 2002 issue of the Japanese magazine Famitsu , and was later presented at the E3 conference of 2004 . Before release , the brothers discussed multiple developmental processes in an interview with Famitsu . Camelot had been working on a previous GameCube version of Mario Tennis , but discontinued the project and began again using ideas and technology from Mario Golf : Toadstool Tour , which was being developed simultaneously with the game . Shugo noted that the original would have been more serious and contained deeper gameplay , but with fewer " Mario @-@ esque " gimmicks . There was also a willingness not to update the graphics only without exploring advancements to concepts and gameplay , which Hiroyuki stated would be " unacceptable for a Mario game " . Due to the success of its predecessor , the brothers felt pressure to make a game that was original and would not appear too similar to its predecessor on first sight . 
 Following release , IGN interviewed Hiroyuki regarding the development of the game . He revealed that Camelot had received co @-@ operation from Nintendo in relation to voice acting and animation , which Takahashi stated as " contributing quite a bit to the improvement of the game 's graphics " . Takahashi proceeded to explain why the role @-@ playing game elements that were present in Mario Tennis were excluded from Power Tennis , stating that he felt they were more suitable for the " deep single @-@ player experience " present in portable consoles . Regarding the themed courts in the game , he explained that the concepts were conceived during long brainstorming sessions , with courts selected that would both remind gamers of older Mario games and introduce new gamers to Mario games they may not have played . When questioned regarding difficulties in developing the game , Takahashi noted the effort used in making the opening sequences , developing the Special Games , and animations , which caused problems with meeting the schedule . Although there was speculation about online capabilities before release , Takahashi refrained from making the game online @-@ compatible due to fear of lagging problems , stating " I don 't think you can play a tennis game online under the current Internet environment and feel satisfied " . 
 Nintendo collaborated with the Lawn Tennis Association in 2005 to promote Power Tennis in the United Kingdom . The promotion featured on @-@ site sampling and official Nintendo branding at various tennis events such as Wimbledon . The LTA 's ACE Magazine advertised Power Tennis and featured competitions offering the game as a prize . Nintendo also released an online questionnaire regarding players ' habits and preferences in relation to tennis as a part of their Who Are You ? campaign . Nintendo announced in 2008 that they would be re @-@ releasing the title as part of their New Play Control ! selection , which feature added Wii controls . The game can be controlled using the Wii Remote and optional Nunchuk attachment , allowing the player to trigger actions such as <unk> and backhands by swinging the Remote like a tennis racket . It was released on January 15 , 2009 in Japan and on March 2009 in other countries . It was later re @-@ released in North America on June 10 , 2012 along with Pikmin 2 as Nintendo Selects titles . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The GameCube version of Mario Power Tennis enjoyed a generally positive reception , with reviewers complimenting the variety of play and multiple minigames available . GameSpy 's Raymond Padilla lauded the game 's use of characters and the player categories , stating " When you put it all together , you have a broad cast of characters , each of whom offers a different feel . " Despite this , the Gimmick courts were labeled by Matt Casamassina as a " distraction " and " annoyance " , although he acknowledged that some courts were better than others . Additionally , Nintendo World Report 's Michael Cole thought that most players would revert to standard courts " after being ' unfairly defeated ' by ghosts , paint , or some other trap . " Eurogamer 's Tom Bramwell welcomed Power Tennis 's style , which he said emphasised gameplay over simulation and realism . When comparing the game to its predecessor , reviewers praised Power Tennis for its incorporation of the Mario franchise in the different scenarios and courts . 
 The gameplay features introduced to the game received a mixed response . IGN noted that the Special Games varied in quality between different games , with Casamassina commenting that " they certainly don 't make or break the experience . " The game 's " Power Shots " was also met with an ambivalent reaction — the shot themselves were praised for adding strategy and character , although GameSpot 's Ryan Davis commented that " it would have been nice if you could just skip past the animations and keep the wild moves . " In general , the game 's multiplayer modes were more popular than single @-@ player , with the " predictable and basic " artificial intelligence contributing to a low difficulty level at times . GameSpy noted how the number of options and variables enhanced the multiplayer experience , and commented that " The game is very good on its own , but it excels when you bring friends into the mix . " The mechanics of the tennis gameplay were also popular , with reviewers lauding the game 's accessibility as well as its depth relating to the variety of shots available and how the position of the character affects the contact with the ball . 
 Most critics praised Power Tennis 's presentation , with reviewers noting the game 's opening sequence especially . Nintendo World Report complimented the level of detail given to the themed locations and character animations , stating that it " [ puts ] even the Mario Kart series to shame . " IGN generally shared this view , although they criticised the background animations , commenting that " The crowds in particular are a repeating blob of the same sprites over and over " . On the other hand , the audio received a mediocre response , despite the comical voice acting . Power Tennis sold 139 @,@ 000 copies during its first week of release in Japan , and sold 377 @,@ 000 copies altogether in the country from release to December 31 , 2006 . Power Tennis had sold 296 @,@ 893 units in North America by January 31 , 2005 . The game was at fifth position in the Australian GameCube sales charts from October 16 to October 29 , 2005 . 
 In spite of the mostly positive reception the GameCube version held , the reception for the Wii remake was mixed . It holds an average score of 65 / 100 and 68 @.@ 19 % at Metacritic and GameRankings respectively . While it has been praised for the original game 's graphics holding up to current Wii games , many editors have found fault in the controls . IGN editor Mark Bozon criticized its motion controls , describing them as imprecise , for ruining a " great game " . X @-@ Play editor Dana Vinson similarly disliked the controls , also describing the act of releasing GameCube titles for the Wii with motion controls as being lazy . GamePro editor Dave <unk> criticized the game for adding multiple moves into Wii Remote motions , commenting that it would have to be " twice as responsive " for it to work . Eurogamer editor Oli Welsh criticized both the inaccurate controls and limited improvements , stating that Wii Sports is a superior alternative . While GameDaily editor Robert Workman criticized the motion controls , he stated that everything else works . He also describes it as being mildly enjoyable with three other friends . 
 In spite of the negative reception , the Wii version has had some positive reception . While Official Nintendo Magazine UK editor Tom East similarly bemoaned the motion controls , he felt that the multiplayer still held up , as it becomes balanced since the other players would have the same problems with the controls . 1UP.com editor Justin Haywald agreed , stating that while it made single player modes difficult , the game was meant to be played with friends . Game Informer editor Matt Helgeson , however , found the motion controls to be good , commenting that other developers should learn from Nintendo . In spite of this , fellow Game Informer editor Matthew Kato described the controls as being only so @-@ so . GameShark editor Danielle Riendeau , however , described the controls as excellent , though adding that it occasionally misreads her shots . In the first four days of the Wii version 's release in Japan , Mario Power Tennis sold 56 @,@ 000 copies . By January 3 , 2010 , it had sold 205 @,@ 070 copies in Japan . 
 = Mycena haematopus = 
 Mycena haematopus , commonly known as the bleeding fairy helmet , the <unk> bonnet , or the bleeding Mycena , is a species of fungus in the Mycenaceae family , of the order Agaricales . It is widespread and common in Europe and North America , and has also been collected in Japan and Venezuela . It is saprotrophic — meaning that it obtains nutrients by consuming decomposing organic matter — and the fruit bodies appear in small groups or clusters on the decaying logs , trunks , and stumps of deciduous trees , particularly beech . The fungus , first described scientifically in 1799 , is classified in the section Lactipedes of the genus Mycena , along with other species that produce a milky or colored latex . 
 The fruit bodies of M. haematopus have caps that are up to 4 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) wide , whitish gills , and a thin , fragile reddish @-@ brown stem with thick coarse hairs at the base . They are characterized by their reddish color , the scalloped cap edges , and the dark red latex they " bleed " when cut or broken . Both the fruit bodies and the mycelia are weakly bioluminescent . M. haematopus produces various alkaloid pigments unique to this species . The edibility of the fruit bodies is not known definitively . 
 = = Taxonomy and naming = = 
 The species was initially named Agaricus haematopus by Christian Hendrik Persoon in 1799 , and later sanctioned under this name by Elias Magnus Fries in his 1821 Systema Mycologicum . In the classification of Fries , only a few genera were named , and most agaric mushrooms were grouped in Agaricus , which was organized into a large number of tribes . Mycena haematopus gained its current name in 1871 when the German fungal taxonomist Paul Kummer raised many of Fries ' Agaricus tribes to the level of genus , including Mycena . In 1909 Franklin Sumner Earle placed the species in <unk> , a genus that is no longer considered separate from Mycena . Mycena haematopus is placed in the section Lactipedes , a grouping of Mycenas characterized by the presence of a milky or colored latex in the stem and flesh of the cap . The specific epithet is derived from Ancient Greek roots meaning " blood " ( <unk> , <unk> ) and " foot " ( πους , pous ) . It is commonly known as the blood @-@ foot mushroom , the bleeding fairy helmet , the <unk> bonnet , or the bleeding Mycena . 
 In 1914 , Jakob Emanuel Lange described the variety M. haematopus var. marginata , characterized by the reddish color on the edge of the gills ; Mycena specialist Rudolph Arnold Maas Geesteranus considered the coloration of the gill edge too variable to have taxonomical significance . Mycena haematopus var. <unk> was initially found in Colorado in 1976 , and described as a new variety by American mycologists Duane Mitchel and Alexander H. Smith two years later . The fruit bodies are characterized by a " beak " on the cap that often splits or collapses as the cap matures . It was treated as Mycena sanguinolenta var. <unk> by Maas Geesteranus in 1988 . 
 = = Description = = 
 The fruit bodies of Mycena haematopus are the reproductive structures produced by cellular threads or hyphae which grow in rotting wood . The shape of the cap of the fruit body will vary depending on its maturity . Young caps , or " buttons " , are ovoid ( egg @-@ shaped ) to conical ; later they are <unk> ( bell @-@ shaped ) , and as the fruit body matures , the margins ( cap edge ) lift upward so that the cap becomes somewhat flat with an umbo ( a central nipple @-@ shaped bump ) . The fully grown cap can reach up to 4 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) in diameter . The surface of the cap initially appears dry and covered with what appears to be a very fine whitish powder , but it soon becomes polished and moist . Mature caps appear somewhat translucent , and develop radial grooves mirroring the position of the gills underneath . The color of the cap is reddish- or pinkish @-@ brown , often tinged with violet , and paler towards the edge . The margin is wavy like the edge of a scallop , and may appear ragged because of lingering remnants of the partial veil . 
 The mushroom flesh can range from pale to the color of red wine ( vinaceous ) , and has no distinctive odor . It oozes a red latex when cut . The gills have an adnate attachment to the stem , meaning they are more or less directly attached to it . They are initially whitish or " grayish vinaceous " in color , and can develop reddish @-@ brown stains . Between 20 and 30 gills reach from the cap edge to the stem , resulting in a gill spacing that is described as " close to subdistant " — gaps are visible between adjacent gills . There are additional gills , called lamellulae , that do not extend directly from the margin to the stem ; these are arranged in two or three series ( tiers ) of equal length . The stem is up to 9 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) tall and 0 @.@ 1 to 0 @.@ 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 04 to 0 @.@ 08 in ) thick , hollow and brittle , and a dark reddish @-@ brown color . In young fruit bodies , the upper part of the stem is densely covered with a pale cinnamon @-@ colored powder which wears off with age . The stem has a mass of coarse hairs at the base . Like the cap , the stem also bleeds a red latex when it is cut or broken . 
 Mycena haematopus can be parasitized by Spinellus fusiger , another fungal species which gives the mushroom a strikingly hairy appearance . 
 = = = Microscopic characteristics = = = 
 The spore print is white . The spores are elliptical , smooth , with dimensions of 8 – 11 by 5 – 7 µm . They are amyloid , meaning they will absorb iodine when stained with Melzer 's reagent . The spore @-@ bearing cells ( basidia ) are 4 @-@ spored . Sterile cells called cystidia are numerous on the edges on the gills ; they measure 33 – 60 µm ( sometimes up to 80 ) by 9 – 12 µm . Cystidia that are present on the stipe ( caulocystidia ) appear in clusters , and <unk> to irregular in shape , measuring 20 – 55 by 3 @.@ 5 – 12 @.@ 5 µm . The gill tissue contains numerous lactifers , cells that produce the latex that is secreted when it is cut . 
 The surface mycelium of M. haematopus is whitish and fluffy . Swelling at the terminal tips of hyphae ( diameter up to 12 µm ) is present , but not very abundant , and moniliform hyphae are very rare . Bioluminescence is present , but weak . Extracellular oxidase enzymes are present , consistent with its ecological role as a saprobe . 
 = = = Edibility = = = 
 Although some sources claim that M. haematopus is edible , it is " hardly worth collecting because of its small size . " Other sources consider the species inedible , or recommend avoiding consumption , " since most of them have not yet been tested for toxins . " The taste of the mushroom is mild to slightly bitter . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Another Mycena that produces a reddish latex is Mycena sanguinolenta , the " terrestrial bleeding Mycena " . It may be distinguished from M. haematopus in several ways : it is smaller , with cap diameters between 0 @.@ 3 to 1 cm ( 0 @.@ 1 to 0 @.@ 4 in ) wide ; grows in groups rather than clusters ; is found on leaves , dead branches , moss beds and pine needle beds rather than decaying wood ; and the edges of its gills are consistently dark brownish @-@ red . Furthermore , range of cap color in M. sanguinolenta is different than in M. haematopus , varying from reddish @-@ to orange @-@ brown , and it lacks a band of partial veil remnants hanging from the margin . 
 = = Ecology , distribution and habitat = = 
 Mycena haematopus obtains nutrients from decomposing organic matter ( saprobic ) and the fruit bodies can typically be found growing on stumps and well @-@ decayed logs , usually in groups that are joined together by a common base . The decomposition of woody debris on the forest floor is the result of the combined activity of a community of fungal species . In the sequential succession of mushrooms species , M. haematopus is a " late colonizer " fungus : its fruit bodies appear after the wood has first been decayed by white rot species . The initial stage of wood decay by white rot fungi involves the breakdown of " acid @-@ <unk> residue " and <unk> ( a mixture of cellulose and hemicellulose ) . 
 In North America , Mycena haematopus is known to be distributed from Alaska southward . According to Mycena specialist Alexander H. Smith , it is " the commonest and the most easily recognized one in the genus . " The species is common in Europe , and it has also been collected from Japan , and Mérida , Venezuela , as the variety M. haematopus var. marginata . In the Netherlands , M. haematopus is one of many mushrooms that can regularly be found fruiting on ancient timber wharves . The fruit bodies can be found year @-@ round in mild weather . 
 = = Bioluminescence = = 
 Both the mycelia and the fruit bodies of M. haematopus ( both young and mature specimens ) are reported to be bioluminescent . However , the luminescence is quite weak , and not visible to the dark @-@ adapted eye ; in one study , light emission was detectable only after 20 hours of exposure to X @-@ ray film . Although the biochemical basis of bioluminescence in M. haematopus has not been scientifically investigated , in general , bioluminescence is caused by the action of luciferases , enzymes that produce light by the oxidation of a luciferin ( a pigment ) . The biological purpose of bioluminescence in fungi is not definitively known , although several hypotheses have been suggested : it may help attract insects to help with spore dispersal , it may be a by @-@ product of other biochemical functions , or it may help deter heterotrophs that might consume the fungus . 
 = = Natural products = = 
 Several unique chemicals are produced by Mycena haematopus . The primary pigment is haematopodin B , which is so chemically sensitive ( breaking down upon exposure to air and light ) that its more stable breakdown product , haematopodin , was known before its eventual discovery and characterization in 2008 . A chemical synthesis for haematopodin was reported in 1996 . <unk> are the first <unk> alkaloids discovered in fungi ; <unk> combine the structures of <unk> and quinoline , both heterocyclic aromatic organic compounds . Compounds of this type also occur in marine sponges and are attracting research interest due to various biological properties , such as cytotoxicity against tumor cell lines , and both antifungal and antimicrobial activities . Additional alkaloid compounds in M. haematopus include the red pigments <unk> D , E and F. Prior to the discovery of these compounds , <unk> alkaloids were considered to be rare in terrestrial sources . 
 = = = Books cited = = = 
 Smith AH . ( 1947 ) . North American species of Mycena . Ann Arbor : University of Michigan Press . 
 = Appeal to Reason = 
 Appeal to Reason is the fifth studio album by American punk rock band Rise Against . After touring in support of their previous album , The Sufferer & the Witness , Rise Against began recording Appeal to Reason in January 2008 at the Blasting Room in Fort Collins , Colorado . Recording and production were finished in June , and the album was released in North America on October 7 , 2008 . The album is the band 's first release with guitarist Zach Blair . The album has been certified Gold by the RIAA and platinum by the CRIA . 
 Appeal to Reason was Rise Against 's highest charting album until the release of Endgame , debuting at number three on the Billboard 200 chart and selling 64 @,@ 700 copies in its first week of release . It received generally favorable reviews from critics . The album produced three singles : " Re @-@ Education ( Through Labor ) " , " Audience of One " , and " Savior " . 
 Although commercially successful , Rise Against was greatly criticized by many long @-@ term fans for producing an album that is a dramatic departure compared to Rise Against 's previous fast @-@ paced works . Despite this , the album has sold over 600 @,@ 000 copies in the USA , with one of the songs going Platinum , and another going Gold ; it is their most successful album to date . 
 = = Writing and recording = = 
 In May 2007 , it was reported that Rise Against was planning to return to the studio after touring in support of their previous album , The Sufferer & the Witness , to begin work on their next album . The band headlined a North American tour supporting The Sufferer & the Witness throughout July and August 2007 , instead of attending that year 's Warped Tour . When asked in July about the band 's plans for a new album , guitarist Zach Blair told <unk> that Rise Against would " start writing and recording the record " after touring and would be " writing for a few months " before returning to the studio . He also predicted a summer 2008 release date for the album . In an interview with bassist Joe Principe in August 2007 , he stated recording would likely begin around early 2008 , although he said " everything could change " , but that was " the plan right now " . The band continued to tour throughout the rest of 2007 , playing several shows in the Taste of Chaos tour and supporting its headliner , The Used . 
 On January 7 , 2008 , Rise Against announced on their website that they had begun writing and demoing for their next album . When asked in May what the status of the album was , frontman Tim McIlrath told the Los Angeles modern rock radio station , KROQ , that the band was in the middle of the recording process . He also stated that the album would be recorded at the Blasting Room in Fort Collins , Colorado and produced by Bill Stevenson and Jason Livermore , who had produced The Sufferer & the Witness . Also in May 2008 , Rise Against posted a blog on their website , stating that they were back in the studio working on the album . It explained that they had " spent many weeks in Chicago throughout the end of winter writing new songs " in their " rehearsal space " . Asked later about the writing and recording process , McIlrath said , " We kind of blocked a month off over the winter and said , ' Let 's all get together , get the rehearsal space , and start putting some ideas together , ' which is what we did . And then , we also blocked off a week or two at the Blasting Room after we arrived in Fort Collins to just kind of jam stuff out , get some new ideas going . " 
 In a June 2008 interview , Luisa Mateus of Gigwise.com asked McIlrath about the new album . He stated that it was " mostly finished " but that a name and release date were still undetermined . The only hint given on the musical style of the album was Mateus ' statement that the band said that they were " happy keeping their sound organic " . On July 14 , 2008 , it was reported on Punknews.org that the album would be titled Appeal to Reason . The name is taken from a leftist newspaper from 1897 . 
 = = Musical style and themes = = 
 Appeal to Reason is considered by critics to be one of Rise Against 's most accessible and melodic albums , both musically and lyrically . Jon Pareles of The New York Times felt that the band 's " righteousness grows more tuneful with every album " . John Hanson of Sputnikmusic said that the album is " ‘ appealing ’ to a larger audience than old fans will be comfortable with " . In an October 2008 interview with Tony Pascarella of AbsolutePunk.net , bassist Joe Principe said , " Appeal to Reason sounds like a Rise Against album but there 's still something new that we 're offering . I think we 've grown as songwriters and as a band , and it shows on the record . " According to Bill Stewart of PopMatters , " Appeal to Reason is a Rise Against album . If you possess more than a passing familiarity with the band , I wouldn ’ t even bother scrolling through the rest of this review , and I ’ d certainly avoid checking out the rating at the end of it — because that first sentence , for better or worse , says everything that needs to be said about this album . " 
 The album includes one acoustic song , " Hero of War " , which is about an Iraq War Veteran looking back on his war experiences . It is described by Rolling Stone as an " ambivalent aggro @-@ folk track " . McIlrath said of the song , " I wanted to take the perspective of ' What is the war going to be looked back on as ? ' " In another interview McIlrath stated , " It was a way to document what 's going on , like other artists documented for their generation and for generations to come . " He went on to say , " There are not many songs ... talking about what 's going on during eight years of occupation in Iraq . That , combined with meeting active soldiers and retired soldiers at our shows and hearing those stories about what is going on on the ground amid all the bullshit , showed me the differences from what is really happening to what is happening in the news media . I just thought that this needed to go into a song . " 
 Much of the rest of the album deals with political issues in the United States as well . Jeff Miers of The Buffalo News calls the album " a response to the oppressive vacuousness of the Bush years " . Dealing with specific tracks on the album , AllMusic states that Rise Against " rages against the moral decay rotting the core of the U.S. on the opening ' Collapse ( Post @-@ Amerika ) , ' just as they strike out against the slow dumbing down of America on ' Re @-@ Education ( Through Labor ) ' " . McIlrath said in an interview with The Red Alert , " All of our songs are ' that ' song that we won 't dilute . They always have been . I 've never written a song , until " Hero of War , " with a specific goal in mind . " When asked about how Appeal to Reason continues Rise Against 's tradition of making politically charged music , he said : " The reason I started this band , and the reason I still do it , is that I still open a paper and say , " Holy Shit ! Are you kidding me ? Is this really happening ? Are people voting for things like Proposition 8 ? Is this America ? Are we still in Iraq and in a place that people think a white versus a black president is a big deal ? " There is so much to address through music . There is plenty we need to learn from . " Nevertheless , the band has stated that their songs don 't only focus on politics . In one interview , Principe said , " The political side of this band is just that -- it 's a side . There are political lyrics . There are social awareness and there are lyrics about the environment . I think if people take the time to read the lyrics , they 'll know we 're not strictly force feeding you our politics . " 
 In the liner notes of the album , it recommends the reading of A People 's History of the United States by Howard Zinn . It also recommends the documentaries Wal @-@ Mart : The High Cost of Low Price , The Ground Truth , The Future of Food , An Inconvenient Truth by Al Gore , and Sicko by Michael Moore . 
 = = Promotion and release = = 
 Rise Against filmed the music video for Appeal to Reason 's first single , " Re @-@ Education ( Through Labor ) " with director Kevin Kerslake . The single and its music video were released digitally on August 25 . In December 2008 , it was reported that Rise Against would be shooting a music video for their second single , " Audience of One " , with director Brett Simon . The music video for " Audience of One " premiered on MySpace Music on January 15 , 2009 . The music video was filmed in Los Angeles in December and features the band performing in a miniature world on the White House lawn . The video for the song " Hero of War " was released on May 20 , 2009 , although the song itself was never released as an official single . Radio stations were sent copies of the album 's third single , " Savior " , on June 3 . 
 Rise Against began a U.S. tour with Thrice , Alkaline Trio , and The Gaslight Anthem to promote the album on October 2 , 2008 , in Cleveland , Ohio . The band co @-@ headlined a 2009 tour with Rancid throughout the summer months . That was followed by a short tour of the UK in November , which was supported by the bands Thursday and Poison the Well . 
 = = Reception and sales = = 
 Appeal to Reason received generally favorable reviews from music critics . It attained a score of 65 out of 100 on Metacritic 's average of ten professional reviews . In his review giving the album an 82 % rating , Chris Fallon of AbsolutePunk.net said , " Appeal to Reason is essentially focused on one big thing : intelligence . There is no fluff here -- the band has put together a fast , smart and generally focused piece of work here . Rolling Stone magazine tells of the band 's further emergence into the mainstream with Appeal to Reason , " Rise Against may be nervous about leaving the underground behind , but with sharp songs like these , they 're ready for the rest of the world . " IGN gave the album an 8 @.@ 2 out of 10 and said , " Rise Against has taken all of its protest attitude and all of its social leanings and has given America another truly great album . Appeal To Reason is both a wake @-@ up call for the country and a song of hope for those who can see a clear path on the horizon . While the songs may not be as driven and hard as on albums past , they lack nothing in definition and power of the word . And when it comes down to it , Rise Against want you to know that there is power in the meaning . " In his Consumer Guide , however , Robert Christgau gave the album a " dud " rating ( ) , calling it " a bad record whose details rarely merit further thought . " 
 Appeal to Reason is Rise Against 's second highest charting album to date . It peaked at number three on the U.S. Billboard 200 , selling 64 @,@ 700 copies in its first week of release . The singles released from Appeal to Reason also charted higher on the U.S. music charts than any of the band 's previous releases . " Re @-@ Education ( Through Labor ) " reached number 22 on Billboard 's Hot Mainstream Rock Tracks chart and number three on the Hot Modern Rock Tracks ( now Alternative Songs ) chart , making it Rise Against 's highest charting single on a U.S. rock chart , until it was surpassed by " Savior " . " Audience of One " reached number four on the Hot Modern Rock Tracks chart . " Savior " peaked at number 3 on Billboard 's Rock Songs chart and at number 3 on the Alternative Songs ( formerly Hot Modern Rock Tracks ) chart , making it the highest @-@ charting single to date . " Savior " has also spent the longest of any Rise Against song on the U.S. Rock Charts , with over a year on both the Rock Songs and Alternative Songs charts . All three appeared on the Canadian Hot 100 chart . In December 2010 , the album had sold 482 @,@ 000 copies . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All lyrics written by Tim McIlrath , all music composed by Tim McIlrath , Joe Principe , Brandon Barnes and Zach Blair . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Adventure Time ( season 5 ) = 
 The fifth season of American animated television series Adventure Time , created by Pendleton Ward , originally aired on Cartoon Network in the United States . The series is based on a short produced for Frederator 's Nicktoons Network animation incubator series Random ! Cartoons . The season debuted on November 12 , 2012 and finished on March 17 , 2014 . The season follows the adventures of Finn , a human boy , and his best friend and adoptive brother Jake , a dog with magical powers to change shape and grow and shrink at will . Finn and Jake live in the post @-@ apocalyptic Land of Ooo . Along the way , they interact with the other main characters of the show : Princess Bubblegum , The Ice King , and Marceline the Vampire Queen . 
 The first episode of the fifth season was the two @-@ parter episode " Finn the Human " and " Jake the Dog " , both of which aired on November 12 , 2012 . The episode was viewed by 3 @.@ 435 million viewers ; this marked a dramatic increase from the previous season 's premiere and finale . The season ended with the " Billy 's Bucket List " , which was viewed by 2 @.@ 335 million viewers . The season has been met with largely positive critical reception . In June 2013 , the series was nominated for " Best Animated Series " at the 2013 Critics ' Choice Television Awards , although it did not win . Both " Simon & Marcy " and " Be More " were nominated for Primetime Emmy Awards for Short @-@ Format Animation at the 65th and 66th Primetime Emmy Awards respectively . Former character designer Andy Ristaino and series ' art director Nick Jennings both won Emmys for " Outstanding Individual Achievement In Animation " in 2013 and 2014 , respectively . 
 This season comprised 52 episodes , making it twice the length of any of the show 's previous seasons . The episodes were storyboarded and written by Tom Herpich , Jesse Moynihan , Cole Sanchez , Rebecca Sugar , Steve Wolfhard , Skyler Page , Somvilay Xayaphone , Ako Castuera , Michael DeForge , Kent Osborne , David OReilly , Ward , Graham Falk , Thomas Wellmann , Luke Pearson , Seo Kim , and Ristaino . The season also featured OReilly and James Baxter as guest animators in the episodes " A Glitch is a Glitch " and " James Baxter the Horse " , respectively . Furthermore , this was the last year of Adventure Time to feature Sugar and Page ; they all left to create their own shows . It was also the final season to feature Ward as the showrunner . It was produced by Cartoon Network Studios and Frederator Studios . In addition , several compilation DVDs that contained episodes from the season have been released . The full season set was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray on July 14 , 2015 . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Concept = = = 
 The season follows the adventures of Finn the Human , a human boy , and his best friend Jake , a dog with magical powers to change shape and grow and shrink at will . Finn and Jake live in the post @-@ apocalyptic Land of Ooo . Along the way , they interact with the other main characters of the show : Princess Bubblegum , The Ice King , and Marceline the Vampire Queen . Common storylines revolve around Finn and Jake discovering strange creatures , dealing with the antagonistic but misunderstood Ice King , and battling monsters in order to help others . Various other episodes deal with Finn and his romantic relationship with Flame Princess . 
 = = = Production = = = 
 On October 12 , 2012 , it was announced that Cartoon Network had officially renewed Adventure Time for a fifth season . The episode titles were released on November 2 , 2012 by Frederator Studios , while the show had just reached the end of its fourth season . Based on production numbers , " Finn the Human " was the first episode that underwent production , and it was also the first episode aired . The season contains 52 episodes , twice the normal number of episodes per season . Both Frederator and storyboard artist Jesse Moynihan explained that originally , a four @-@ part special was supposed to divide the season in half , but that the special was pushed off , and later cancelled . In production , the first half of the season was referred to as season 5 @.@ 1 , and the second half was referred to as 5 @.@ 2 . 
 This season 's episodes were produced in a process similar to previous seasons ' episodes . First , all of the episodes began as simple two @-@ to @-@ three @-@ page outline that contained the necessary plot information . These outlines were then handed off to storyboard artists , who would then expand the rough outline into a full storyboard . The episodes ' design and coloring were done in Burbank , California . Animation was handled overseas in South Korea , either by Rough Draft Korea or by Saerom Animation . Although almost all of the episodes are hand @-@ animated , the fifteenth episode , " A Glitch Is a Glitch " , was created by guest animator David OReilly in his signature 3 @-@ D animation . According to Adam Muto , OReilly was brought on board after Ward expressed an interest in letting him helm an episode . Initially , the producers had wanted OReilly to appear in earlier seasons , but the network was hesitant to bring in guest directors . Eventually , the network relented , and he was finally approved to appear in the fifth season . British animator James Baxter guest animated the horse featured in the episode " James Baxter the Horse " . For the first half of the season , the writers room was largely composed of Ward , Kent Osborne , and Pat McHale . McHale eventually left the series to create Over the Garden Wall , and the newly promoted Muto and Jack Pendarvis were brought on board to pen story outlines . 
 The season was storyboarded and written by Tom Herpich , Moynihan , Cole Sanchez , Sugar , Steve Wolfhard , Skyler Page , Somvilay Xayaphone , Castuera , Michael DeForge , Osborne , OReilly , Ward , Graham Falk , Thomas Wellmann , Luke Pearson , Seo Kim , and Ristaino . " Little Dude " was the first entry in the series to have been storyboarded by prop and character designer DeForge . He wrote on his official Tumblr that , " Cole and Adam Muto basically held my hand through the whole process , and were both incredibly patient with me . " Starting with " Love Games " , Ristaino was promoted from lead character designer to storyboard artist . Guest artist Falk , creator of the animated series <unk> Bunny , storyboarded the episodes " Shh ! " and " Root Beer Guy " . The former was dedicated to Armen Mirzaian who was a storyboard artist for earlier episodes in the series . Mirzaian died in a car accident on February 21 , 2013 at the age of 35 . Regular <unk> Castuera had to take off two storyboard rotations due to an art show , and so her partner , Moynihan , worked with German cartoonist Wellmann on " The Suitor " and " Wizards Only , Fools " ; the two worked on their storyboards via Skype and Google + Hangout . Pearson was paired with Xayaphone for both the episodes " Candy Streets " and " Frost & Fire " ; however , this pairing was only temporary , and Xayaphone boarded the rest of the season with Kim . This season was the last to feature Page and Sugar . Page left after completing " Davey " to create his own series Clarence . Sugar left the series after storyboarding the episode " Simon & Marcy " to focus her attention on her own Cartoon Network series , Steven Universe . 
 The episode " All Your Fault " was the last regular episode of the season to feature a " directed by " credit . The subsequent episode , " Little Dude " , only credited Muto as " supervising director " and Nick Jennings as " art director " . Muto later explained that , " No one currently gets the ' directed by ' credit . " Both Muto and Nate Cash had , in previous episodes , been credited as creative directors , but according to Muto , the series decided to phase the title out in favor of " supervising director " . For the first half of the season , both Muto and Cash took turns holding the supervising director credit on different episodes . Starting with " Shh ! " , however , Elizabeth Ito , a former storyboard artist for the show in season one , returned to the series and was also credited as supervising director in place of Muto . " Bad Little Boy " , the season 's eleventh episode , however , still had a " directed by " credit . This is due to the fact that the episode was produced before " Little Dude " , but aired out of order . " A Glitch Is a Glitch " also featured a " directed by " credit , but this is due to the fact that the episode 's director , OReilly , was a guest animator and director for the series . 
 In an interview with Rolling Stone , Ward revealed that he stepped down as series showrunner sometime during this season in favor of Muto . He explained that , as a naturally introverted person , he found it extremely exhausting having to deal with people every day . With that being said , Ward remained working on the series as a storyboard artist and storyline writer , and every single fifth season episode ( with the exception of " A Glitch is a Glitch " ) featured story input by Ward . 
 = = Cast = = 
 The voice actors include voice acting veterans John DiMaggio ( who portrays Jake the Dog ) , Tom Kenny ( who plays The Ice King ) , and Hynden Walch ( who voices Princess Bubblegum ) . In addition , Jeremy Shada portrays the voice of Finn the Human , and Olivia Olson portrays Marceline the Vampire Queen . Ward himself provides the voice for several minor characters , including Lumpy Space Princess . Former storyboard artist Niki Yang voices the sentient video game console BMO in English , as well as Jake 's girlfriend Lady Rainicorn in Korean . Polly Lou Livingston , a friend of Pendleton Ward 's mother , Bettie Ward , plays the voice of the small elephant Tree Trunks . Jessica DiCicco voices Flame Princess , Finn 's former romantic interest . The season 's first few episodes also feature The Lich , the series principal antagonist . The Lich is portrayed by Ron Perlman . The Adventure Time cast records their lines together in group recordings as opposed to different recording sessions with each voice actor . This is to record more natural sounding dialogue among the characters . Hynden Walch has described these group recordings as akin to " doing a play reading — a really , really out there play . " 
 Several voices actors and actresses reprise their characters in this season . Emo Philips reprises his fourth season character Cuber in both " Five More Short Graybles " and " Another Five Short Graybles " . Both Justin Roiland and Andy Milonakis reprise their roles as the Earl of Lemongrab and N.E.P.T.R. , respectively in " Mystery Dungeon " . Roiland would voice both Earls of Lemongrab in the following episodes , " All Your Fault " , " Another Five More Short Graybles " , " Too Old " , and " Lemonhope " ; he would also voice the character Lemonhope in " Too Old " and the eponymous episode . " Bad Little Boy " featured Neil Patrick Harris returning as Prince Gumball , Madeleine Martin reprising the role of Fionna , and Roz Ryan reappearing as Cake . Keith David once again voices the Flame King in " Vault of Bones " , " Earth & Water " , and " The Red Throne " . Davey Johnson reappears as the goblin king <unk> in " The Great Bird Man " ; he also voices the titular character in the episode " Davey " . " Davey " also features Randy Liedtke as a candy person named Randy . Steve Little , who plays the recurring role as Peppermint Butler , also reprises his role as Abracadaniel in " Wizards Only , Fools " and " Play Date " . Maurice LaMarche reprises his role as Grand Master Wizard in both " Wizards Only , Fools " and " Betty " . Musical parody artist " Weird Al " Yankovic reprises his role as Banana Man in " We Fixed a Truck " . Noah Nelson reprises his role as Kee @-@ <unk> the demon in the two @-@ parter " Play Date " and " The Pit " , having first appeared in the third season episode " Dad 's Dungeon " . Osborne reprises his recurring role as Finn and Jake 's dad , Joshua , in the episode " The Pit " . Ron Lynch returns to the series in " Apple Wedding " , voicing Mr. Pig . Jeff Bennett reprises his role as Choose Goose in the episode " Blade of Grass " , and also voices an alternate @-@ universe version of the character named Choose Bruce in the episode " Finn the Human . " Miguel Ferrer reprises his role as Death , and Steve Agee returns as Ash in " Betty " . Both Lou Ferrigno , Andy Samberg , and Mark Hamill return in " Billy 's Bucket List " as Billy , Party Pat , and the Fear Feaster , respectively . 
 The series also regularly employs guest voices for new characters . For instance , in the two @-@ parter " Finn the Human " and " Jake the Dog " , Ming @-@ Na Wen voiced Farmworld Finn 's mother ( as she did in the season four cliffhanger " The Lich " ) , Kumail Nanjiani appeared as Prismo , and Cloris Leachman plays the role of Farmworld Marceline . Additionally , in " Jake the Dog " and " Frost & Fire " , M. Emmet Walsh voices the Cosmic Owl . In " Up a Tree " , Jim Cummings voices the Porcupine , Lenny the Beaver , and the Owl ; and Marc Maron appears as the squirrel . Cummings would later reappear in the latter season episode " Candy Streets " playing a different character . In " Jake the Dad " , Kristen Schaal lends her voice to Jake Jr . ( she would reprise the role in the later episodes " One Last Job " and " Another Five Short Graybles " ) ; Choe Dong @-@ Hyun appears as T.V. and Kim Kil Whan ; and Sunny Sandler voices both Charlie and Viola . In " Little Dude " , Dana Snyder appears as the Ancient Sleeping Magi of Life Giving . With " Bad Little Boy " , Donald Glover debuted as Marshall Lee , Marceline 's male counterpart . In the episode " Puhoy " , Jonathan Frakes voices a grown @-@ up version of Finn , Mandy <unk> voices Roselinen , and Wallace Shawn voices an oracle . Levar Burton voices an anthropomorphic bubble in " BMO Lost " . Baxter plays the eponymous character in the " James Baxter the Horse " . Both Johnny Pemberton and James <unk> appear in the episode " The Suitor " , voicing Braco and the demon @-@ possessed Cinnamon Bun , respectively . Series storyboard artist Cole Sanchez voiced the Party God in " Shh ! " and " Party 's Over , Isla de Señorita " ; Riki Lindhome portrayed the female island in the latter episode . The character Tiffany , who had first appeared in a minor role in the first season episode " My Two Favorite People " , reappears in " One Last Job " . In the first season , he was voiced by Vincenzo <unk> . However , in " One Last Job " , he was voiced by Collin Dean . Comedian Melissa Villasenor appears as Ann the pharmacist in " Candy Streets " . Duncan Trussell appears as Ron James in " Wizards Only , Fools " and " Betty " . 
 Dan Mintz appears as T.V. in " Jake Suit " . Aziz Ansari , Paul F. Tompkins , and Chuck McCann appear in " Be More " , as DMO , one of the SMOs , and Moe Giovanni , respectively . " Sky Witch " features Jill Talley , the wife of Kenny , voicing the eponymous sky witch , Maja . In " The Vault " , Isabelle <unk> voices Shoko and Paul Scheer voices the Bath Boy Gang Boss . In " Love Games " , Katie Crown voices Slime Princess 's sister <unk> , and John Hodgman appears as Elder <unk> . Marina Sirtis voices the character Samantha in the episode " The Pit " . In " James " , Andy Merrill appears as the titular character . In the episode " Root Beer Guy " , series ' outline writer Jack Pendarvis lends his voice to the character of the same name , and Anne Heche voices the character 's wife , Cherry Cream Soda . In addition , Make a Wish Foundation arranged for a 14 @-@ year @-@ old named Christopher to be the voice of a background character in " Root Beer Guy " . Andy Daly voices the King of Ooo in " Apple Wedding " . Rainn Wilson voices the titular character in " <unk> " . Roddy Piper plays the part of Don John in " The Red Throne " . Lena Dunham appears as Betty in the episode of the same name . Actor and musician Creed Bratton voices the character <unk> <unk> in " Lemonhope " . Series storyboard artist Ako Castuera voices Canyon in " Billy 's Bucket List " . 
 Various other characters are voiced by Tom Kenny , Dee Bradley Baker , Maria Bamford , Little , and Kent Osborne . 
 = = Reception and release = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 The season debuted on November 12 , 2012 , with the two @-@ part episode " Finn the Human " / " Jake the Dog " . Together , both episodes were watched by 3 @.@ 435 million viewers . This marked a drastic increase of almost one million viewers when compared to the previous season premiere , as well as the previous season finale . The season opener was also the most @-@ watched episode of the season . Aside from the season opener , " Jake the Dad " , " Bad Little Boy " , and " Frost & Fire " were the only other episodes of the season to garner over 3 million viewers , and they were watched by 3 @.@ 19 , 3 @.@ 077 , and 3 @.@ 009 million viewers , respectively . On March 29 , 2013 , it was reported that the show averaged roughly 2 to 3 million viewers per episode . The season <unk> with " Billy 's Bucket List " on March 17 , 2014 . The episode was viewed by 2 @.@ 335 million viewers , marking a slight decrease in viewers when compared to the season four finale " The Lich " which was viewed by 2 @.@ 589 million viewers . 
 = = = Reviews and accolades = = = 
 Eric Kohn of IndieWire praised the beginning of the season for being " irreverent and narratively engaging " . He called it " the ideal testament to animation 's glorious pliability in an commercial arena otherwise defined by restrictions . " Kohn felt that the show 's exploration of " sad subtext " — such as the series ' mysterious Mushroom War and the relationship between Marceline and the Ice King — and the characters ' abilities to " deny the bad vibes their surrounding world invites " via " cheery songs and vibrant artwork " were some of the series strongest points . He was particularly pleased with the season opener , calling it an " interesting creative challenge " . Kohn later published an article explaining why " ' Adventure Time ' is the best Sci @-@ Fi show on TV right now " . He singled out " Simon & Marcy " , praising the way in which the episode " deepen [ ed ] the world [ of Ooo ] in all kinds of morbidly fascinating ways . " Furthermore , he compared the entry to Cormac McCarthy 's book The Road , specifically citing the similarities between the mutant creatures in the episode and the " demented people " in the latter . Kohn ultimately concluded that the series ' " willingness to contemplate [ the themes of the episode ] while sticking to its unique combination of silliness and haunting beauty routinely transforms the show into a wondrous genre experiment . " 
 Oliver Sava of The A.V. Club wrote that the season was " experimental " in that the series ' writers and storyboard artists " continue to experiment with what they can do in 10 minutes " . He specifically cited the plots from the season openers , " All the Little People " , and " Shh ! " as examples , and applauded the fact that the series was willing to explore different styles of animation , such as in the installment " A Glitch is a Glitch " . Rich Goldstein of The Daily Beast argued that the emotional depth of the series increased during this season , highlighting " Simon & Marcy " as an example . Emily <unk> of The A.V. Club later awarded the entire season an " A " , noting that " Adventure Time has somehow managed to stay on fire for its fifth season 's double @-@ wide 52 @-@ episode run . " <unk> praised the show 's aforementioned creativity and experimentation , and also wrote that " the writing staff has also taken the less @-@ obvious X @-@ Files approach : expanding the length of the stories they 're able to tell by linking monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ week episodes into longer arcs . " The A.V. Club later named the series the 27th best television series of 2014 , noting that , " The end of the super @-@ sized season five saw a string of conceptually ambitious episodes that blew the world of Ooo wide open , deepening the stories of Lemongrab , Lumpy Space Princess ' doomed romance , and Ice King 's past as Simon Petrikov . " The site selected " Lemonhope " as the stand @-@ out from the season 's end . All in all , each episode was also graded by The A.V. Club with a different letter grade ; the season received four " C " grade entries , twenty " B " grade installments , and twenty @-@ six " A " grade episodes . 
 In June 2013 , the series was nominated for " Best Animated Series " at the 2013 Critics ' Choice Television Awards , although it lost to the FX series Archer . At the 65th Primetime Emmy Awards , " Simon & Marcy " , was later nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award for Short @-@ format Animation , and former character designer Andy Ristaino won an Emmy for " Outstanding Individual Achievement In Animation " for his character designs in the episode " Puhoy " , making it the series ' first Emmy win . The episode " Be More " was later nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award for Short @-@ format Animation at the 66th Primetime Emmy Awards in 2014 . On July 31 , 2014 , it was announced that series art director , Nick Jennings , had won an Emmy for " Outstanding Individual Achievement In Animation " for his work on the episode " Wizards Only , Fools " . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Warner Home Video released multiple DVD volumes , such as Jake the Dad , The Suitor , Princess Day , Finn the Human , Frost & Fire , and The Enchiridion which contain episodes from the fifth season . The complete season set was released on July 14 , 2015 . All DVD releases can be purchased on the Cartoon Network Shop , and the individual episodes can be downloaded from both the iTunes Store and Amazon.com. 
 = = Episodes = = 
 ^ † 
 = Director 
 ^ ‡ = 
 Supervising director 
 = = DVD release = = 
 = INS Shakti ( A57 ) = 
 INS Shakti ( A57 ) is a Deepak @-@ class fleet tanker in service with the Indian Navy . She was built by Fincantieri , an Italian shipbuilding company based in Trieste . She is the second and final ship of her class . Shakti , along with her predecessor Deepak , is one of the largest ships of the Indian Navy . 
 Construction of the vessel began in November 2009 and it was launched in October 2010 . She was handed over to India by September 2011 and was commissioned on 1 October 2011 . The construction of the vessel was completed in a record time of 27 months , after the contract worth € 159 @.@ 32 million was signed in April 2008 . 
 INS Shakti can refuel four ships at a time , with a fuelling speed of 1 @,@ 500 tonnes per hour while her predecessors had a speed of 300 per hour . She is also equipped with state @-@ of @-@ the art electronics , medical facilities and storage spaces . According to Admiral Nirmal Verma , Shakti would significantly add to the Indian Navy 's ability to conduct and sustain operations distant from the coast . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 = = = General characteristics and propulsion = = = 
 INS Shakti has a length of 175 m ( 574 ft ) overall , a beam of 25 m ( 82 ft ) and a draught of 9 @.@ 1 m ( 30 ft ) . The ships displaces about 27 @,@ 550 tonnes ( 27 @,@ 110 long tons ; 30 @,@ 370 short tons ) at full load . The complement is about 200 , including 20 officers . 
 The ship is powered by two MAN diesel engines providing a total power of 19 @.@ 2 MW ( 25 @,@ 700 hp ) . This allows the ship to reach a maximum speed of 20 knots ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) and an endurance of 10 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 19 @,@ 000 km ; 12 @,@ 000 mi ) at 16 knots ( 30 km / h ; 18 mph ) . 
 To help prevent accidental oil spills the ship features a double hull configuration , in compliance with MARPOL 73 / 78 . 
 = = = Capacity = = = 
 The Deepak @-@ class tanker can carry 17 @,@ 900 tonnes of cargo , including 15 @,@ 500 tonnes of liquid cargo ( water , ship and aircraft fuel ) and 500 tonnes of solid cargo ( victuals and ammunition ) . The modern cargo handling facility on board the ship enables transfer of heavy solid cargo via a 30 tonne capacity deck crane , and simultaneous fuelling of multiple ships at sea , and can refuel at the rate of 1 @,@ 500 tonnes per hour . Workshop facilities on the ship can support other ships of the fleet and it is capable of supporting heavy helicopters . 
 = = = Self @-@ defence systems = = = 
 The ship has self @-@ defence capability and is equipped with an indigenous anti @-@ missile defence chaff system . On @-@ board systems include fully automatic engine controls , power management and battle damage control systems . According to the navy , the ship was designed to operate as a command platform . The ship is fitted with four AK @-@ 630 Close @-@ in weapon systems , which can fire at a rate of 4 @,@ 000 to 10 @,@ 000 rounds a minute . 
 = = Construction and service = = 
 Fincantieri was awarded the contract to construct Shakti in April 2008 , at a cost of US $ 300 million . The Deepak @-@ class tankers were the first warships constructed for India by Fincantieri . The construction of the ship began in November 2009 at Fincantieri 's Sestri Ponente shipyard in Italy . The sea trials started in December 2010 . The ship was formally handed over to the Indian Navy on 23 September 2011 , in under two years . Admiral Nirmal Verma , the chief of the Naval Staff , commissioned the tanker at Visakhapatnam , the home of the Eastern Naval Command , saying that the ship enhanced the reach of the navy well beyond the limits of the Indian Ocean . 
 INS Shakti is the third tanker of the same name of the navy . The first Shakti had a displacement of 3 @,@ 000 tonnes and was commissioned during World War II . She was in service with the Indian Navy from 29 January 1954 and decommissioned on 31 December 1967 ; whilst the second Shakti , a large ship built by a German yard , was commissioned on 21 February 1976 and decommissioned on 21 July 2007 , after more than 31 years of naval service . 
 = = = 2012 = = = 
 Malabar 2012 In April 2012 , Shakti took part in the Indian navy 's annual maritime exercise with the US Navy , Malabar 2012 , in the Bay of Bengal . During these exercises , the ship replenished USS Carl Vinson , flagship of the US Navy 's Carrier Strike Group 1 . 
 South China Sea and the North @-@ West Pacific In May 2012 , Shakti , as part of a battle group of four ships , began a sustained operational deployment to the South China Sea and the North West Pacific Ocean . The other three ships were INS Rana , a Rajput @-@ class guided missile destroyer , INS Shivalik , a stealth frigate , and INS Karmuk , a Kora @-@ class corvette . This battle group was under the command of Rear Admiral P Ajit Kumar , Flag Officer Commanding , Eastern Naval Command . According to the Ministry of Defence , the two @-@ month deployment , far from India 's usual area of operations , along with naval exercises with a number of countries , aimed to demonstrate the Indian navy 's operational reach . 
 During the deployment , the battle group participated in passage exercises with the navies of the countries visited . The ' Passage Exercises ' focussed on maritime security cooperation , which included humanitarian aid and disaster relief ( HADR ) operations and ' Visit , Board , Search and Seizure ' ( <unk> ) drills for anti @-@ piracy operations . These exercises aimed to increase naval inter @-@ operability , enabling the two navies to function with enhanced coordination during possible HADR operations . In addition , during the port visits , the Fleet Commander along with the Commanding Officers of the ships met high @-@ ranking officials of the navy , state administration , port management , coastal security organisation , police , and other stakeholders of maritime security in the countries visited , to share professional experiences and exchange best practices in areas of mutual interest . 
 JIMEX 2012 The ship was deployed in the North West Pacific for JIMEX 2012 ( Japan @-@ India Maritime Exercise ) with the four ship group , and took part in India 's first bi @-@ lateral maritime exercise with Japan . The Japanese Maritime Self @-@ Defence Force ( JMSDF ) was represented by two destroyers , one maritime patrol aircraft and a helicopter . 
 The four ships entered Tokyo on 5 June 2012 after visiting Singapore , Vietnam , Philippines and Republic of Korea . They stayed in Tokyo for three days . This visit coincided with the commemoration of 60 years of diplomatic relations between India and Japan . Vice Admiral Anil Chopra , Flag Officer Commanding @-@ in @-@ Chief Eastern Naval Command also visited Tokyo to witness the first JIMEX . 
 South @-@ east Asia After the deployment in the North pacific , the battle group was deployed in the South China Sea . As part of India 's Look East policy , the ships visited the Shanghai port on 13 June 2012 , for a five @-@ day goodwill tour . INS Shakti served as the fuel and logistics tanker to the three destroyers . The ships left the port on 17 June 2012 . Before leaving the port , the ships conducted routine passage exercise with the People 's Liberation Army Navy . 
 After the visits to Singapore , Vietnam , Philippines , Japan , South Korea and China , the ships visited Port Klang , Malaysia . This was the last port call of the battle group , after which it returned to the Eastern fleet of the Indian Navy , after being on a two @-@ month @-@ long deployment which started in May 2012 . 
 = = = 2013 = = = 
 TROPEX 2013 Shakti was part of a seven @-@ ship fleet which represented the Eastern Naval Command at Indian Navy 's annual TROPEX exercise , which concluded on 1 March 2013 . TROPEX 2013 was a month @-@ long theatre level exercise which was conducted off India 's west coast . The navy conducted manoeuvres , weapon firings and tactical evaluation . 
 The other ships in the flotilla were the destroyer Rana , amphibious dock INS <unk> , corvettes INS <unk> , Karmuk and INS Sukanya , and it was led by INS Ranvijay under the command of Admiral Ajith Kumar P , Flag Officer Commanding Eastern Fleet . This flotilla made a port call at Kochi on 4 March 2013 , on route to its forward deployment . 
 South China Sea and Western Pacific The ship was part of a four @-@ vessel fleet on a regular operational deployment to the South China Sea and the Western Pacific during May – June 2013 , which departed from India on 20 May 2013 . The fleet led by Rear Admiral Ajit Kumar consisted of stealth frigate INS Satpura , Rajput @-@ class destroyer INS Ranvijay , corvette INS <unk> and Shakti , and carried more than 800 crew members . Shakti , along with Ranvijay sailed from Port Blair , Andaman and Nicobar on 21 May and were joined by Satpura and <unk> , which arrived from Singapore after participating in a maritime exhibition and a bilateral naval exercise . The ships made a five @-@ day port call at Malaysia 's Port Klang on 25 May 2013 . 
 The ships will conduct passage exercises and practice both conventional wartime drills and cooperative military action against unconventional sea threats with the Malaysian Navy . They will make further port calls at Da Nang in Vietnam and Manila in the Philippines . They are expected to return to India by June 2013 . The fleet would be deployed in the South China Sea and the Western Pacific from mid @-@ May to end June to reinforce military ties with ASEAN , in addition to showcasing India 's naval capabilities . 
 = = = 2014 = = = 
 Western Pacific : In July 2014 , an Indian Navy task force comprising INS Ranvijay , INS Shivalik , and Shakti visited the Russian Pacific Fleet at Vladivostok for Indra @-@ 2014 exercises . The Russian fleet consisted of guided @-@ missile cruiser Varyag , the flagship of the Pacific Fleet ; the destroyer Admiral Vinogradov , the Peresvet and several auxiliary ships , naval aircraft and helicopters . The exercise took place from 17 to 19 July in the Peter the Great Gulf in the Sea of Japan . The ships conducted tactical maneuvering drills , artillery and missile firing drills , as well as helicopter deck @-@ landing drills . After exercising with the Russian Navy , the task force moved to the Pacific Ocean to exercise with the Japanese and the US Navy during Malabar 2014 . Aircraft carrier USS George Washington and a nuclear submarine represented the US Navy , and the Japanese Maritime Self @-@ Defence Force was represented by two destroyers , Kurama and Ashigara , and US @-@ 2 amphibious warfare aircraft . The harbour phase of the drills was conducted in Sasebo , Japan . 
 Bay of Bengal : Naval ships Ranjit , Shivalik , Shakti and INS <unk> were readied by the Eastern Command to transport personnel and relief material as part of the rescue and relief mission during Cyclone Hudhud . 
 = = = 2015 = = = 
 Shakti deployed with other ships of the Eastern fleet to the Andaman & Nicobar Command , to exercise in the Andaman Sea and then deployed overseas to exercise with other navies of the region from Indonesia , Malaysia , Singapore , Cambodia , Thailand and Australia , as part of India 's Act East policy . This task force sailed under the command of Flag Officer Eastern Fleet Rear Admiral <unk> Bahadur Singh , VSM , who commanded from INS Satpura . The other ships in the task force were INS Sahyadri , the then @-@ newly commissioned anti @-@ submarine warfare INS <unk> , destroyers INS Ranvir and INS Ranvijay and missile corvette INS Khukri . The ships make port calls at Jakarta ( Indonesia ) , Freemantle ( Australia ) , Kuantan ( Malaysia ) , <unk> ( Thailand ) and Sihanoukville ( Cambodia ) . They exercised for four days with RSS Supreme and submarine RSS Archer along with fighters , patrol aircraft and helicopters of the Singaporean Navy from 24 @-@ 27 May in <unk> 2015 . 
 = Andrea Doria @-@ class battleship = 
 The Andrea Doria class ( usually called Caio Duilio class in Italian sources ) was a pair of dreadnought battleships built for the Royal Italian Navy ( Regia Marina ) during the early 1910s . The two ships — Andrea Doria and Caio Duilio — were completed during World War I. The class was an incremental improvement over the preceding Conte di Cavour class . Like the earlier ships , Andrea Doria and Caio Duilio were armed with a main battery of thirteen 305 @-@ millimeter ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) guns . 
 The two ships spent World War I based in southern Italy to keep the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy bottled up in the Adriatic , but neither vessel saw any combat . After the war , they cruised the Mediterranean and were involved in several international incidents , including the Corfu Incident in 1923 . Both ships were placed in reserve a decade later and began a lengthy reconstruction in 1937 . The modifications included removing their center main battery turret and boring out the rest of the guns to 320 mm ( 12 @.@ 6 in ) , strengthening their armor protection , installing new boilers and steam turbines , and lengthening their hulls . The reconstruction work lasted until 1940 , by which time Italy was already engaged in World War II . 
 The two ships were moored in Taranto on the night of 11 / 12 November 1940 when the British launched a carrier strike on the Italian fleet . In the resulting Battle of Taranto , Caio Duilio was hit by a torpedo and forced to beach to avoid sinking . Andrea Doria was undamaged in the raid ; repairs for Caio Duilio lasted until May 1941 . Both ships escorted convoys to North Africa in late 1941 , including Operation M42 , where Andrea Doria saw action at the inconclusive First Battle of Sirte on 17 December . Fuel shortages curtailed further activity in 1942 and 1943 , and both ships were interned at Malta following Italy 's surrender in September 1943 . Italy was permitted to retain both battleships after the war , and they alternated as fleet flagship until the early 1950s , when they were removed from active service . Both ships were scrapped after 1956 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The Andrea Doria @-@ class ships were designed by naval architect Vice Admiral ( Generale del Genio navale ) Giuseppe <unk> and were ordered in response to French plans to build the Bretagne @-@ class battleships . The design of the preceding Conte di Cavour @-@ class battleships was generally satisfactory and was adopted with some minor changes . These mostly concerned the reduction of the superstructure by shortening the forecastle deck , the consequent lowering of the amidships gun turret and the upgrading of the secondary armament to sixteen 152 @-@ millimeter ( 6 in ) guns in lieu of the eighteen 120 @-@ millimeter ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) guns of the older ships . 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 The ships of the Andrea Doria class were 168 @.@ 9 meters ( 554 ft 2 in ) long at the waterline , and 176 meters ( 577 ft 5 in ) overall . They had a beam of 28 meters ( 91 ft 10 in ) , and a draft of 9 @.@ 4 meters ( 30 ft 10 in ) . They displaced 22 @,@ 956 long tons ( 23 @,@ 324 t ) at normal load , and 24 @,@ 729 long tons ( 25 @,@ 126 t ) at deep load . They were provided with a complete double bottom and their hulls were subdivided by 23 longitudinal and transverse bulkheads . The ships had two rudders , both on the centerline . They had a crew of 31 officers and 969 enlisted men . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 The ships were fitted with three Parsons steam turbine sets , arranged in three engine rooms . The center engine room housed one set of turbines that drove the two inner propeller shafts . It was flanked by compartments on either side , each housing one turbine set powering the outer shafts . Steam for the turbines was provided by 20 Yarrow boilers , 8 of which burned oil and 12 of which burned coal sprayed with oil . Designed to reach a maximum speed of 22 knots ( 41 km / h ; 25 mph ) from 32 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 24 @,@ 000 kW ) , neither of the ships reached this goal on their sea trials , only achieving speeds of 21 to 21 @.@ 3 knots ( 38 @.@ 9 to 39 @.@ 4 km / h ; 24 @.@ 2 to 24 @.@ 5 mph ) . The ships could store a maximum of 1 @,@ 488 long tons ( 1 @,@ 512 t ) of coal and 886 long tons ( 900 t ) of fuel oil that gave them a range of 4 @,@ 800 nautical miles ( 8 @,@ 900 km ; 5 @,@ 500 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 As built , the ships ' main armament comprised thirteen 46 @-@ caliber 305 @-@ millimeter guns , designed by Armstrong Whitworth and Vickers , in five gun turrets . The turrets were all on the centerline , with a twin @-@ gun turret superfiring over a triple @-@ gun turret in fore and aft pairs , and a third triple turret amidships , designated ' A ' , ' B ' , ' Q ' , ' X ' , and ' Y ' from front to rear . The turrets had an elevation capability of − 5 to + 20 degrees and the ships could carry 88 rounds for each gun . Sources disagree regarding these guns ' performance , but naval historian Giorgio Giorgerini says that they fired 452 @-@ kilogram ( 996 lb ) armor @-@ piercing ( AP ) projectiles at the rate of one round per minute and that they had a muzzle velocity of 840 m / s ( 2 @,@ 800 ft / s ) , which gave a maximum range of 24 @,@ 000 meters ( 26 @,@ 000 yd ) . 
 The secondary armament on the two ships consisted of sixteen 45 @-@ caliber 152 @-@ millimeter ( 6 in ) guns , also designed by Armstrong Whitworth , mounted in casemates on the sides of the hull underneath the main guns . Their positions tended to be wet in heavy seas , especially the rear guns . These guns could depress to − 5 degrees and had a maximum elevation of + 20 degrees ; they had a rate of fire of six shots per minute . They could fire a 22 @.@ 1 @-@ kilogram ( 49 lb ) high @-@ explosive projectile with a muzzle velocity of 830 meters per second ( 2 @,@ 700 ft / s ) to a maximum distance of 16 @,@ 000 meters ( 17 @,@ 000 yd ) . The ships carried 3 @,@ 440 rounds for them . For defense against torpedo boats , the ships carried nineteen 50 @-@ caliber 76 mm ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) guns ; they could be mounted in 39 different positions , including on the turret roofs and upper decks . These guns had the same range of elevation as the secondary guns , and their rate of fire was higher at 10 rounds per minute . They fired a 6 @-@ kilogram ( 13 lb ) AP projectile with a muzzle velocity of 815 meters per second ( 2 @,@ 670 ft / s ) to a maximum distance of 9 @,@ 100 meters ( 10 @,@ 000 yd ) . The ships were also fitted with three submerged 45 @-@ centimeter ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes , one on each broadside and the third in the stern . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 The Andrea Doria @-@ class ships had a complete waterline armor belt with a maximum thickness of 250 millimeters ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) that reduced to 130 millimeters ( 5 @.@ 1 in ) towards the stern and 80 millimeters ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) towards the bow . Above the main belt was a strake of armor 220 millimeters ( 8 @.@ 7 in ) thick that extended up to the lower edge of the main deck . Above this strake was a thinner one , 130 millimeters thick , that protected the casemates . The ships had two armored decks : the main deck was 24 mm ( 0 @.@ 94 in ) thick in two layers on the flat that increased to 40 millimeters ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) on the slopes that connected it to the main belt . The second deck was 29 millimeters ( 1 @.@ 1 in ) thick , also in two layers . Fore and aft transverse bulkheads connected the belt to the decks . 
 The frontal protection of the gun turrets was 280 millimeters ( 11 @.@ 0 in ) in thickness with 240 @-@ millimeter ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) thick sides , and an 85 @-@ millimeter ( 3 @.@ 3 in ) roof and rear . Their barbettes had 230 @-@ millimeter ( 9 @.@ 1 in ) armor above the deck that reduced to 180 millimeters ( 7 @.@ 1 in ) between the forecastle and upper decks and 130 millimeters below the upper deck . The forward conning tower had walls 320 millimeters ( 12 @.@ 6 in ) thick ; those of the aft conning tower were 160 millimeters ( 6 @.@ 3 in ) thick . 
 = = Modifications and reconstruction = = 
 During World War I , a pair of 50 @-@ caliber 76 @-@ millimeter guns on high @-@ angle mounts were fitted as anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) guns , one gun at the bow and the other on top of ' X ' turret . In 1925 the number of 50 @-@ caliber 76 @-@ millimeter guns was reduced to 13 , all mounted on the turret tops , and six new 40 @-@ caliber 76 @-@ millimeter guns were installed abreast the aft funnel . Two license @-@ built 2 @-@ pounder AA guns were also fitted . In 1926 the rangefinders were upgraded and a fixed aircraft catapult was mounted on the port side of the forecastle for a Macchi M.18 seaplane . 
 By the early 1930s , the Regia Marina had begun design work on the new Littorio @-@ class battleships , but it recognized that they would not be complete for some time . As a stop @-@ gap measure in response to the new French Dunkerque @-@ class battleships , the navy decided to modernize its old battleships ; work on the two surviving Conte di <unk> began in 1933 and the two Andrea <unk> followed in 1937 . The work lasted until July 1940 for Duilio and October 1940 for Andrea Doria . The existing bow was dismantled and a new , longer , bow section was built , which increased their overall length by 10 @.@ 91 meters ( 35 ft 10 in ) to 186 @.@ 9 meters ( 613 ft 2 in ) ( on the Cavour @-@ class the new bow had been grafted over the existing one , instead ) . Their beam increased to 28 @.@ 03 meters ( 92 ft 0 in ) and their draft at deep load increased to 10 @.@ 3 meters ( 33 ft 10 in ) . The changes made during their reconstruction increased their displacement to 28 @,@ 882 long tons ( 29 @,@ 345 t ) for Andrea Doria and 29 @,@ 391 long tons ( 29 @,@ 863 t ) for Duilio at deep load . The ships ' crews increased to 70 officers and 1 @,@ 450 enlisted men . 
 Two of the propeller shafts were removed and the existing turbines were replaced by two sets of Belluzzo geared steam turbines rated at 75 @,@ 000 shp ( 56 @,@ 000 kW ) . The boilers were replaced by eight superheated Yarrow boilers . On their sea trials the ships reached a speed of 26 @.@ 9 – 27 knots ( 49 @.@ 8 – 50 @.@ 0 km / h ; 31 @.@ 0 – 31 @.@ 1 mph ) , although their maximum speed was about 26 knots ( 48 km / h ; 30 mph ) in service . The ships now carried 2 @,@ 530 long tons ( 2 @,@ 570 t ) of fuel oil , which provided them with a range of 4 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 7 @,@ 400 km ; 4 @,@ 600 mi ) at a speed of 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . 
 The center turret and the torpedo tubes were removed and all of the existing secondary armament and AA guns were replaced by a dozen 135 @-@ millimeter ( 5 @.@ 3 in ) guns in four triple @-@ gun turrets and ten 90 @-@ millimeter ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) AA guns in single turrets . In addition the ships were fitted with fifteen 54 @-@ caliber Breda 37 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) light AA guns in six twin @-@ gun and three single mounts and sixteen 20 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 8 in ) Breda Model 35 AA guns , also in twin mounts . The 305 @-@ millimeter guns were bored out to 320 millimeters ( 13 in ) and their turrets were modified to use electric power . They had a fixed loading angle of + 12 degrees , but there is uncertainty on their new maximum elevation , with some sources citing a maximum value of + 27 degrees , while others claim one of + 30 degrees . The 320 @-@ millimeter AP shells weighed 525 kilograms ( 1 @,@ 157 lb ) and had a maximum range of 28 @,@ 600 meters ( 31 @,@ 300 yd ) with a muzzle velocity of 830 m / s ( 2 @,@ 700 ft / s ) . In early 1942 the rearmost 20 @-@ millimeter mounts were replaced by twin 37 @-@ millimeter gun mounts and the 20 @-@ millimeter guns were moved to the roof of Turret ' B ' , while the RPC motors from the stabilized mounts of the 90 mm guns were removed The forward superstructure was rebuilt with a new forward conning tower , protected with 260 @-@ millimeter ( 10 @.@ 2 in ) thick armor . Atop the conning tower there was a fire @-@ control director fitted with three large rangefinders . 
 The deck armor was increased during reconstruction to a total of 135 millimeters ( 5 @.@ 3 in ) . The armor protecting the secondary turrets was 120 millimeters ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) thick . The existing underwater protection was replaced by the Pugliese system that consisted of a large cylinder surrounded by fuel oil or water that was intended to absorb the blast of a torpedo warhead . 
 These modernizations have been criticized by some naval historians , given that not only these ships would eventually prove to be inferior to the British battleships they were meant to face ( namely the Queen Elizabeth @-@ class ) , since by the time the decision to proceed was taken a war between Italy and the United Kingdom seemed more likely , but also because the cost of the reconstruction would be not much less than the cost of building a brand new Littorio @-@ class battleship ; moreover , the reconstruction work caused bottlenecks in the providing of steel plates , that caused substantial delays in the construction of the modern battleships , which otherwise might have been completed at an earlier date . 
 = = Ships = = 
 = = Service history = = 
 Both battleships were completed after Italy entered World War I on the side of the Triple Entente , though neither saw action , since Italy 's principal naval opponent , the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy , largely remained in port for the duration of the war . Admiral Paolo Thaon di Revel , the Italian naval chief of staff , believed that Austro @-@ Hungarian submarines and minelayers could operate effectively in the narrow waters of the Adriatic . The threat from these underwater weapons to his capital ships was too serious for him to use the fleet in an active way . Instead , Revel decided to implement a blockade at the relatively safer southern end of the Adriatic with the battle fleet , while smaller vessels , such as the MAS torpedo boats , conducted raids on Austro @-@ Hungarian ships and installations . Meanwhile , Revel 's battleships would be preserved to confront the Austro @-@ Hungarian battle fleet in the event that it sought a decisive engagement . 
 Andrea Doria and Caio Duilio both cruised in the eastern Mediterranean after the war , and both were involved in postwar disputes over control of various cities . Caio Duilio was sent to provide a show of force during a dispute over control of İzmir in April 1919 and Andrea Doria assisted in the suppression of Gabriele D 'Annunzio 's seizure of Fiume in November 1920 . Caio Duilio cruised the Black Sea after the İzmir affair until she was replaced in 1920 by the battleship Giulio Cesare . Andrea Doria and Caio Duilio were present during the Corfu incident in 1923 as part of the naval demonstration protesting the murder of General Enrico Tellini and four other Italians . In January 1925 , Andrea Doria visited Lisbon , Portugal , to represent Italy during the celebration marking the 400th anniversary of the death of explorer Vasco da Gama . The two ships performed the normal routine of peacetime cruises and goodwill visits throughout the 1920s and early 1930s ; both were placed in reserve in 1933 . 
 Both Andrea Doria and Caio Duilio went into drydock in the late 1930s for extensive modernizations ; this work lasted until October and April 1940 , respectively . By that time , Italy had entered World War II on the side of the Axis powers . The two ships joined the 5th Division based at Taranto . Caio Duilio participated in a patrol intended to catch the British battleship HMS Valiant and a convoy bound for Malta , but neither target was found . She and Andrea Doria were present during the British attack on Taranto on the night of 11 / 12 November 1940 . A force of twenty @-@ one Fairey Swordfish torpedo @-@ bombers , launched from HMS Illustrious , attacked the ships moored in the harbor . Andrea Doria was undamaged in the raid , but Caio Duilio was hit by a torpedo on her starboard side . She was grounded to prevent her from sinking in the harbor and temporary repairs were effected to allow her to travel to Genoa for permanent repairs , which began in January 1941 . In February , she was attacked by the British Force H ; several warships attempted to shell Caio Duilio while she was in dock , but they scored no hits . Repair work lasted until May 1941 , when she rejoined the fleet at Taranto . 
 In the meantime , Andrea Doria participated in several operations intended to catch British convoys in the Mediterranean , including the Operation Excess convoys in January 1941 . By the end of the year , both battleships were tasked with escorting convoys from Italy to North Africa to support the Italian and German forces fighting there . These convoys included Operation M41 on 13 December and Operation M42 on 17 – 19 December . During the latter , Andrea Doria and Giulio Cesare engaged British cruisers and destroyers in the First Battle of Sirte on the first day of the operation . Neither the Italians nor the British pressed their attacks and the battle ended inconclusively . Caio Duilio was assigned to distant support for the operation , and was too far away to actively participate in the battle . Convoy escort work continued into early 1942 , but thereafter the fleet began to suffer from a severe shortage of fuel , which kept the ships in port for the next two years . Caio Duilio sailed away from Taranto on 14 February with a pair of light cruisers and seven destroyers in order to intercept the British convoy MW 9 , bounded from Alexandria to Malta , but the force could not locate the British ships , and so returned to port . After learning of Caio Duilio departure , however , British escorts scuttled the transport Rowallan Castle , previously disabled by German aircraft . 
 Both ships were interned at Malta following Italy 's surrender on 3 September 1943 . They remained there until 1944 , when the Allies allowed them to return to Italian ports ; Andrea Doria went to Syracuse , Sicily , and Caio Duilio returned to Taranto before joining her sister at Syracuse . Italy was allowed to retain the two ships after the end of the war , and they alternated in the role of fleet flagship until 1953 , when they were both removed from service . Andrea Doria carried on as a gunnery training ship , but Caio Duilio was simply placed in reserve . Both battleships were stricken from the naval register in September 1956 and were subsequently broken up for scrap . 
 = = See Also = = 
 List of ships of the Second World War 
 List of ship classes of the Second World War 
 = GDRT = 
 GDRT ( also GDR , vocalized by historians as <unk> ) was a King of the Kingdom of Aksum ( c . 200 ) , known for being the first king to involve Axum in the affairs of what is now Yemen . He is known primarily from inscriptions in South Arabia that mention him and his son <unk> ( also vocalized as " <unk> " or " <unk> " ) . GDRT is thought to be the same person as GDR , the name inscribed on a bronze wand or sceptre that was found in an area near <unk> and Dar 'a / Addi @-@ Galamo in northern Ethiopia . 
 GDRT has been equated with the anonymous king of the Monumentum <unk> , which would date his reign c . 200 – c . 230 . However , the two rulers are usually thought to be distinct . However the French scholar Christian Robin , studying the inscriptions at al @-@ <unk> in Yemen , has shown that GDRT , and his successor <unk> , lived in the earlier half of the 3rd century . 
 = = Aksumite inscription = = 
 The inscriptions of GDR represent the oldest surviving royal inscriptions in the Ge 'ez alphabet . The oldest of these was found at Addi @-@ Galamo in the regions of <unk> and Dar 'a in eastern Tigray Region in northern Ethiopia . The area is rich in pre @-@ Aksumite artifacts , and inscriptions of a pre @-@ Aksumite kingdom called <unk> have been found in the region . The inscription mentioning GDR is the only evidence of his existence from the western side of the Red Sea : 
 <unk> / <unk> / <unk> / <unk> / mzlt / <unk> / <unk> 
 The Addi Galamo inscription was written on a sceptre or " boomerang @-@ like object " ; the linguist A.J. <unk> therefore interprets mzlt as meaning a sceptre or royal emblem . The inscription 's meaning is uncertain , but if mzlt is taken to mean a sceptre , and <unk> and <unk> are taken to be place names ( or sanctuaries ) , then , according to Alexander Sima , the text could mean " GDR , king of Aksum gave ( this ) sceptre into the possession of ( the sanctuaries ) <unk> and <unk> . " The South Arabian expert W.F. Albert <unk> , however , translates the inscription as " GDR king of Aksum occupied the passages of <unk> and <unk> " , or " <unk> , King of Axum is humbled before the [ gods ] Arg and <unk> , " ( i.e. <unk> or Ilmuqah ) , assuming that the <unk> in Ilmuqah was assimilated . 
 = = South Arabian involvement = = 
 GDRT is first mentioned in South Arabian inscriptions as an ally of `Alhan <unk> , king of Saba , in an inscription at <unk> <unk> , at Ma 'rib in Yemen , the temple of the moon god <unk> / Ilmuqah . According to Stuart Munro @-@ Hay , the inscription reads 
 they agreed together that their war and their peace should be in unison , against anyone that might rise up against them , and that in safety and in security there should be allied together <unk> and <unk> and `Alhan and <unk> . 
 Alexander Sima translates the text slightly differently , specifying that it was GDRT who " sent a diplomatic mission to [ <unk> ] in order to form an alliance . " Both interpret " <unk> " or " <unk> " as the name of the palace in Aksum at the time , parallel to " Sahlen , " the palace of Saba in Marib . This Sahlen @-@ Saba parallel , along with the Dhu @-@ <unk> @-@ Ḥimyar parallel , was often used by Aksumite kings in their inscriptions enumerating the territories under their control . A Ḥimyarite inscription confirms the Sabaean text , mentioning that Aksum , Saba ' , Ḥaḑramawt , and <unk> were all allied against Ḥimyar . `Alhan <unk> 's son Sha`ir Awtar or <unk> Awtar later abandoned the alliance with GDRT after he became king of Saba ' . However , during the first part of Sha`ir Awtar 's reign , the two powers seem to have joined in an alliance once again , this time against Ḥaḑramawt . Saba 's invasion of Ḥaḑramawt with Aksumite help culminated in the latter 's defeat and the occupation of its capital , Shabwah , in 225 . Sha`ir Awtar 's attack represented a major shift in policy as , before the attack , the king of Ḥaḑramawt , <unk> <unk> , was married to his sister ; he had even helped suppress a revolt against <unk> <unk> . 
 Although Saba ' was previously allied with Aksum against Ḥimyar , both Ḥimyarite and Sabaean troops were used in the attack against Ḥaḑramawt . Immediately following the conquest of Hadramaut , Sha`ir Awtar allied with Ḥimyar against his former ally GDRT . A second Sabaean inscription from the sanctuary ' Awam in Marib during the reign of Sha`ir Awtar 's successor , <unk> <unk> , describes events in the latter part of his predecessor 's reign . The inscription tells of a diplomatic mission sent by Sha`ir Awtar to GDRT , the results of which are unknown ; however , the text later goes on to describe a war between Saba ' and Aksum in the southern highlands of Yemen , implying that the negotiations were futile . Aksum lost a battle as a result of the Saba ' <unk> alliance , allowing the South Arabian forces to expel GDRT 's son <unk> and his forces from the Ḥimyarite capital Zafar , which had previously been held by Aksum after the Aksum @-@ Ḥaḑramawt @-@ <unk> @-@ Saba ' alliance . Despite this loss , Aksum still held territory in South Arabia , as evidenced by inscriptions of <unk> <unk> ( r. c . 230 ) , which detail at least one known clash with <unk> troops in Yemen after GDRT 's reign . Peace may have been established after GDRT 's death , but war and Aksumite involvement was renewed under his successors such as <unk> and <unk> , and the whole 3rd century was to be dominated by Ethio @-@ Yemeni conflicts . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 GDRT was most likely the first Aksumite king to be involved in South Arabian affairs , as well as the first known king to be mentioned in South Arabian inscriptions . His reign resulted in the control of much of western Yemen , such as the <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> ( until c . 230 ) , and parts of <unk> territory around <unk> in the northern highlands . Furthermore , GDRT 's military alliances and his conquests in Yemen and Saudi Arabia , the required formidable fleet for such feats , and the extension of Aksumite influence throughout Yemen and southern Saudi Arabia all reflect a new zenith in Aksumite power . His involvement would mark the beginning of centuries of Aksumite involvement in South Arabia , culminating with the full @-@ scale invasion of Yemen by King Kaleb in 520 ( or 525 ) , resulting in the establishment of an Aksumite province covering all of South Arabia . 
 GDRT 's name may be preserved in Ethiopian tradition through the traditional king lists , as what seem to be variants of his name crop up in three of them . <unk> is listed as the third king in list C , <unk> ( ze meaning ' of ' in Ge 'ez ) appears as the sixth in list E , and <unk> appears as the third in list B , after the legendary <unk> I. <unk> also is mentioned in at least one hagiography and short chronicle . The king lists were composed centuries after the fall of the Aksumite kingdom , however , and generally do not agree with archaeological records except when concerning famous kings . 
 = Por Debajo de la Mesa = 
 " Por Debajo de la Mesa " ( " Underneath the Table " ) is a song written by Armando Manzanero and performed by Mexican recording artist Luis Miguel . Arranged by Bebu Silvetti , it was one of the two original compositions written for Miguel 's fifteenth studio album Romances . It was released as the lead single from the album on 15 July 1997 and it became his thirteenth number @-@ one single on the Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart in the United States . The music video features Miguel performing at a fine @-@ dining restaurant in New York City . 
 The track received a negative reaction from Achy Obejas of the Chicago Tribune who called it " lame " . It was nominated Pop Song of the Year at the 10th Annual Lo Nuestro Awards and Manzanero was awarded a Broadcast Music , Inc . ( BMI ) Latin Award for writing the song . Manzanero performed the record as a duet with several artists such as Tania Libertad and Susana Zabaleta . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1991 Miguel released Romance , a collection of classic Latin ballads , the oldest of which dates back to the 1940s . The album was produced by Armando Manzanero and arranged by Bebu Silvetti , and was credited for revitalizing the bolero genre . It also made history as the first Spanish @-@ language album to be certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) in the United States . A follow @-@ up to Romance was released in 1994 under the title Segundo Romance ( Second Romance ) , which was produced by Miguel , Juan Carlos Calderón and Kiko Cibrian . Both albums received a platinum certification by the RIAA in the United States and also became successful in countries outside of Latin America and the United States , such as Finland and Saudi Arabia , selling over twelve million copies combined . 
 In December 1996 Miguel held a press conference in Buenos Aires , Argentina , where he announced his desire to record a third Romance album and mentioned the possibility of working with Manzanero and Juan Gabriel . He also expressed an interest in singing in Italian and Portuguese , although the album 's songs are originally all in Spanish . Two months later Manzanero confirmed that he was working with Miguel on another bolero @-@ inspired ballads album , under the tentative title Tercer Romance ( " Third Romance " ) . Miguel 's record label confirmed that fourteen tracks would be included on the album under the title Romances . " Por Debajo de la Mesa " was written by Manzanero as one of the two original compositions for the album along with " Contigo ( Estar Contigo ) " . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 A music video for " Por Debajo de la Mesa " was filmed in New York City which features Miguel performing at the Rainbow Room with the video being shot in black @-@ and @-@ white . The song was included on his greatest hits album Mis <unk> <unk> ( 2002 ) and Grandes Éxitos ( 2005 ) . A live version of the song was included on his album Vivo ( 2000 ) as part of the " Romances Medley " . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 " Por Debajo de la Mesa " serviced to radio stations across Latin America on 5 July <unk> . In the United States , the song debuted at number two on the Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart on the week of 2 August 1997 . Six weeks later , it peaked at number one on the chart where and remained on the position for four weeks . " Por Debajo de la Mesa " ended 1997 as the eighth best @-@ performing Latin single of the year in the United States . The track also peaked at number one on the Billboard Latin Pop Songs chart where it spent five weeks on top of the chart and was the best @-@ performing Latin pop song of the year in the country . 
 Despite giving Romances a positive review , Chicago Tribune editor Achy Obejas called " Por Debajo de la Mesa " a " lame " song and cited it as one of the songs where Miguel beginning is " to slip " on his ballad recordings . It received a nomination for Pop Song of the Year at the Lo Nuestro Awards of 1998 , losing to " Si Tu Supieras " by Alejandro Fernández . Manzanero was given a BMI Latin Award for composition of the song due to it being one of the best @-@ performing Latin songs of the year . At the inaugural Juventud Awards in 2004 , " Por Debajo de la Mesa " was nominated in the category for " La Más Pegajosa " ( " Catchiest Tune " ) , but lost to " El Za Za Za " by Liberación . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Other recordings = = 
 Manzanero has sung " Por Debajo de la Mesa " as a duet Peruvian musician Tania Libertad on the duo 's studio album Manzanero y la Libertad ( 1998 ) and with Chano Domínguez and Carmen Paris on <unk> 's album Duetos 2 ( 2002 ) . He also performed the song in a concert with Argentine pianist Raúl di Blasio in 1999 which was included on the latter 's live album Bohemia , Vol.2 ( 2000 ) and also performed the song live with fellow Mexican singer Susana Zabaleta on their album De la A a la Z ( 2006 ) . 
 = Brendan Morrison = 
 Brendan Morrison ( born August 15 , 1975 ) is a Canadian former professional ice hockey centre . He has previously played in the National Hockey League ( NHL ) for the New Jersey Devils , Vancouver Canucks , Anaheim Ducks , Dallas Stars , Washington Capitals , Calgary Flames and Chicago Blackhawks . 
 Morrison was selected 39th overall in the 1993 NHL Entry Draft by the Devils after a season in the British Columbia Junior Hockey League ( BCJHL ) ; he had won rookie of the year honours for the Interior Conference as a member of the Penticton Panthers . Following his draft , he joined the college ice hockey ranks with the Michigan Wolverines of the Central Collegiate Hockey Association ( CCHA ) . During his four @-@ year collegiate career , he was named the NCAA Tournament MVP while leading the Wolverines to a national championship in 1996 and won the Hobey Baker Award as the NCAA 's player of the year in 1997 . 
 Turning professional in 1997 – 98 , Morrison was named to the American Hockey League ( AHL ) All @-@ Rookie Team as a member of the Albany River Rats . He played his rookie season in the NHL the following season with the New Jersey Devils before being traded to the Vancouver Canucks in March 2000 . He played seven full seasons with the Canucks , which included a club @-@ record 534 consecutive regular season games played . As a member of the team 's " West Coast Express " line ( alongside Markus Näslund and Todd Bertuzzi ) , Morrison enjoyed the most successful years of his career , posting three consecutive 60 @-@ point seasons . During the 2004 – 05 NHL lockout , he played one season with Linköpings HC of the Swedish Elite League . Beginning in 2008 , he played stints with the Anaheim Ducks , Dallas Stars and Washington Capitals before joining the Calgary Flames in 2010 . 
 Internationally , Morrison has competed for Canada in three World Championships , winning gold in 2004 and silver in 2005 . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Amateur career ( 1992 – 97 ) = = = 
 Morrison played one season with the Penticton Panthers of the British Columbia Junior Hockey League ( BCJHL ) in 1992 – 93 , recording 94 points ( 35 goals and 59 assists ) over 56 games . He ranked second in team scoring , behind Marcel <unk> , and was awarded the Bruce Allison Memorial Trophy as the Interior Conference 's rookie of the year . In the off @-@ season , Morrison was selected by the New Jersey Devils 39th overall in the second round of the 1993 NHL Entry Draft . 
 Upon being drafted , he joined the Michigan Wolverines of the Central Collegiate Hockey Association ( CCHA ) . He had also been approached by the Denver Pioneers and the Maine Black Bears to join their school teams , but ultimately chose Michigan . Registering 48 points ( 20 goals and 28 assists ) over 38 games as a freshman , Morrison was named the CCHA Rookie of the Year for the 1993 – 94 season . He played on a line with fellow freshman Jason <unk> ; the two played together throughout their college career . In the 1994 playoffs , he helped the Wolverines to a CCHA championship . Playing in his sophomore year ( 1994 – 95 ) , Morrison improved to 76 points ( 23 goals and 43 assists ) over 39 games and received his first of three consecutive CCHA First Team All @-@ Star selections . 
 With 72 points over 45 games in 1995 – 96 , Morrison received his first of back @-@ to @-@ back CCHA Player of the Year awards . He added 15 points in 7 post @-@ season games to capture his second CCHA championship with the Wolverines . Advancing to the 1996 NCAA Tournament , Michigan advanced to the final against the Colorado College Tigers . Morrison scored the championship @-@ winning goal 3 : 35 into overtime to win the game 3 – 2 . It was the Wolverines ' first national title in 32 years . Michigan 's championship @-@ winning team that year included five future NHL players — Morrison , <unk> , Blake Sloan , John Madden , Marty Turco and Bill Muckalt . In addition to receiving NCAA Tournament MVP honours , Morrison was named to the NCAA West Regional and NCAA All @-@ Tournament Teams . 
 Morrison was named team captain in his senior year . He totalled college personal bests that season of 31 goals , 57 assists and 88 points over 43 games , culminating in a Hobey Baker Award as the NCAA 's most outstanding player ; Morrison had been a finalist for the award the previous two years . The Wolverines repeated as CCHA champions , but lost to the Boston University Terriers in the NCAA semifinal . Morrison completed his four @-@ year college career as the Wolverines ' all @-@ time points leader with 284 , surpassing Denny <unk> . His points total also ranked seventh all @-@ time among NCAA players . 
 = = = New Jersey Devils ( 1997 – 2000 ) = = = 
 Prior to the Devils ' training camp , Morrison was signed by the team to a multi @-@ year contract on September 9 , 1997 . He was seen as an unlikely candidate to secure a roster spot with the Devils ; ahead of Morrison on the depth chart were numerous centres , including Doug Gilmour , Bobby <unk> and Petr Sýkora . As such , he played the majority of the 1997 – 98 season in the American Hockey League ( AHL ) with the Devils ' minor league affiliate , the Albany River Rats . He scored 35 goals and 84 points over 72 games in the AHL , ranking first in team scoring and eighth in the League overall . He finished second among League rookies in scoring , eight points behind Daniel Brière of the Springfield Falcons , and was named to the AHL All @-@ Rookie Team . His AHL season included a five @-@ goal game against the Hartford Wolfpack on April 1 , 1998 ; two of his goals came short handed into an empty net , as part of a 5 – 2 Albany win . The feat was one goal shy of the AHL 's single @-@ game record . 
 Morrison also made his NHL debut during the 1997 – 98 season . He was called up to the Devils in December 1997 as a replacement for winger John MacLean , who had been informally suspended by General Manager Lou Lamoriello after requesting to be traded . Playing in his first NHL game on December 4 , 1997 , Morrison scored against goaltender Tom <unk> in a 4 – 0 win against the Pittsburgh Penguins . He received a second call @-@ up in April 1998 . Competing in 11 NHL games , he finished the season with five goals and four assists . 
 The following season , he secured a full @-@ time roster spot with the Devils . With Doug Gilmour having left the team as a free agent in the 1998 off @-@ season , Morrison was expected to help fill the void at centre . His 46 points ( 13 goals and 33 assists ) over 76 games finished second among NHL rookies behind Milan Hejduk of the Colorado Avalanche . He ranked fifth in Calder Memorial Trophy voting as the League 's rookie of the year with one first @-@ place ballot ( the award was given to the Avalanche 's Chris Drury ) . 
 Becoming a restricted free agent in the off @-@ season , Morrison was given a one @-@ year qualifying offer with a reported value of approximately US $ 500 @,@ 000 . With the Devils unwilling to increase their offer , he left in September 1999 for Třebíč , Czech Republic , where fellow Devils restricted free agent Patrik Eliáš was also holding out . While overseas , Morrison and Eliáš played for Czech teams SK <unk> Slavia Třebíč and HC Pardubice as they waited for contract negotiations to resume . Morrison was pointless in two games with Třebíč and recorded seven points in five games with Pardubice . On October 24 , 1999 , Morrison and Eliáš agreed to new contracts with the Devils . After recording 26 points over 44 games with the Devils , Morrison was traded to the Vancouver Canucks on March 14 , 2000 , alongside centre Denis Pederson , in exchange for winger Alexander Mogilny . Both Morrison and Pederson were struggling offensively and were unhappy with their roles on the team . 
 = = = Vancouver Canucks ( 2000 – 08 ) = = = 
 Morrison finished the 1999 – 2000 season with nine points in 12 games with the Canucks for a combined total of 35 points in 56 games . In the off @-@ season , he re @-@ signed with the Canucks . Playing in his first full season with the Canucks in 2000 – 01 , Morrison improved to 54 points ( 16 goals and 38 assists ) over 82 games . He helped the team reach the post @-@ season for the first time since 1996 , as Vancouver secured the eighth and final seed in the Western Conference . Facing the Colorado Avalanche in the first round , the Canucks were swept in four games . Morrison scored his first NHL playoff goal during the series and finished with three points in four games . 
 The 2001 – 02 campaign marked the beginning of what was widely considered to be the most effective line combination in the NHL for several years . During a game on January 9 , 2002 , Morrison replaced Andrew Cassels as the centreman on the team 's first line with wingers Markus Näslund and Todd Bertuzzi . He went on to record his three best statistical seasons in the NHL while playing with the two wingers . The latter two finished second and third in NHL scoring in 2001 – 02 , while Morrison tallied 23 goals and 67 points over 82 games . Morrison 's playmaking ability complemented his wingers ' goal @-@ scoring prowess . Together , they were known for playing a fast and entertaining style ; as a result , Head Coach Marc Crawford implemented a highly @-@ offensive coaching strategy . The trio were dubbed the " West Coast Express , " named after Vancouver 's commuter rail service of the same name . 
 Despite finishing as the NHL 's top @-@ scoring team , the Canucks entering the 2002 playoffs as the eighth seed in the West for the second consecutive season . Facing the Detroit Red Wings in the opening round , they were eliminated in six games . Morrison notched two assists during the series . After initially failing to come to terms on a new contract with the Canucks in the off @-@ season , Morrison filed for arbitration . He won his hearing and was awarded a two @-@ year , US $ 4 @.@ 6 million contract on August 3 , 2002 , more than doubling his previous year 's salary of US $ 775 @,@ 000 . 
 The following season , Morrison recorded career @-@ highs with 25 goals 46 assists and 71 points in 82 games . He ranked 26th in NHL point @-@ scoring , while Näslund and Bertuzzi finished second and fifth , respectively . He helped the Canucks come within a point of the Northwest Division title , entering the 2003 playoffs as the fourth seed in the West . After eliminating the St. Louis Blues in the opening round , they were defeated by the Minnesota Wild in a seven @-@ game second round series . Morrison had a career @-@ high four goals , seven assists and 11 points over 14 post @-@ season games . 
 In 2003 – 04 , Morrison registered 22 goals and 60 points over 82 games as all members of the Canucks ' top line experienced declines in offensive production . Bertuzzi was replaced on Morrison 's wing after he was suspended indefinitely by the NHL for sucker punching Steve Moore in a game against Colorado in March 2004 ; he was replaced on the Canucks ' top line by Matt Cooke . Nonetheless , the Canucks won their first @-@ ever Northwest Division title and went into the 2004 playoffs as the West 's third seed . Facing elimination in game six of the opening round against the Calgary Flames , Morrison scored there minutes into the contest 's third overtime session to force a seventh game . Having skated from the corner boards with the puck , Morrison <unk> across the net and scored past Calgary goaltender Miikka Kiprusoff . The Canucks were then eliminated in Game 7 ; Morrison finished the playoff season with five points . Becoming a restricted free agent in the off @-@ season , he filed for salary arbitration against the Canucks for the second time in two years . Both sides managed to avoid their hearing by agreeing to a one @-@ year deal on July 27 , 2004 . 
 In lieu of the 2004 – 05 NHL lockout , Morrison went overseas to play in the Swedish Elite League , signing with Linköpings HC on September 15 , 2004 . With 44 points ( 16 goals and 29 assists ) over 45 games , he ranked second in team scoring ( behind Kristian <unk> ) and sixth in League scoring . After finishing with the second @-@ best regular season in the <unk> , Linköping was eliminated in the first round by Södertälje SK . 
 With NHL play set to resume the next season , Morrison re @-@ signed with the Canucks at US $ 9 @.@ 6 million over three years . He suffered a torn labrum in his hip in December 2005 , but chose to play through the injury . He finished the season with 19 goals and 56 points over 82 games in 2005 – 06 , as the Canucks failed to qualify for the playoffs . Head Coach Marc Crawford recalled that by the end of the season , the line of Morrison , Bertuzzi and Näslund had been surpassed as the top unit by Daniel and Henrik Sedin . In the off @-@ season , Morrison underwent surgery for his hip injury and missed two months of workout and conditioning while recovering . Also in the summer , Bertuzzi was traded to the Florida Panthers , marking the end of the West Coast Express line . 
 Morrison 's hip continued to hinder his play in 2006 – 07 , contributing to a slow start early in the season . Later in the campaign , he set a Canucks record for consecutive regular season games played ( colloquially known as an " ironman streak " ) ; he had not missed a contest since arriving to the team from New Jersey . Playing against the Los Angeles Kings on February 22 , 2007 , he surpassed Trevor Linden 's old club record of 482 consecutive games played ( his overall streak was at 491 games , including eight contests played with the Devils prior to his trade ) . Three days later , he became the League 's active ironman when Avalanche defenceman Kārlis Skrastiņš was forced to miss a game with a knee injury . Skrastiņš had played in 495 consecutive games , while Morrison had 492 at the time . Offensively , Morrison finished the year with his sixth consecutive 50 @-@ point season in the NHL with 20 goals and 31 assists over 82 games . The Canucks returned to the post @-@ season and advanced to the second round , where they were eliminated by the Anaheim Ducks . Morrison recorded 4 points in 12 playoff games . 
 Morrison began the 2007 – 08 season with a minor wrist injury suffered during a game during the pre @-@ season ; he chose to play through the injury for months . He extended his ironman streak to 542 games before opting for wrist surgery on December 12 , 2007 . The streak , which had begun on February 27 , 2000 with the Devils , was the 11th longest in NHL history , 404 games short of Doug Jarvis ' NHL record . Morrison was succeeded as the league 's active ironman by Flames defenceman Cory Sarich , who had played in 419 consecutive games at the time of Morrison 's injury . Morrison 's Canucks record of 534 consecutive games played was later surpassed by Henrik Sedin on December 26 , 2011 ( the game in which Sedin tied the record was played between the Canucks and Morrison 's Calgary Flames ) . After undergoing wrist surgery in December 2007 , Morrison returned to the Canucks lineup in February 2008 , having missed 38 games . The following month , Morrison tore the ACL in his right knee during a game on March 28 , forcing him to miss the remaining four contests of the regular season . He underwent knee surgery 10 days later . Limited to 39 games due to his injuries , Morrison recorded nine goals and 25 points in 2007 – 08 . The Canucks finished out of the playoffs for the second time in three seasons . 
 Becoming an unrestricted free agent in the off @-@ season , Morrison ended his career with the Canucks ninth overall on the team 's all @-@ time scoring list with 393 points in 543 games . 
 = = = Post @-@ Vancouver ( 2008 – 2012 ) = = = 
 Morrison signed with the Anaheim Ducks to a one @-@ year , US $ 2 @.@ 75 million contract on July 7 , 2008 . He had received interest from as many as nine NHL teams , including the Canucks , who offered a one @-@ year , US $ 1 @.@ 9 million deal prior to Morrison 's free agency . Morrison scored his first goal as a Duck on November 7 in a 5 – 2 loss to the Dallas Stars . While it was hoped he could be a replacement for Andy McDonald as the team 's second @-@ line centre , Morrison struggled in his short tenure with the Ducks . He was relegated to the fourth line and made a healthy scratch at various points in the season . It was proposed by the media that he was not yet playing at full capacity on account of his off @-@ season knee surgery . With 22 points in 62 games , he was waived by the Ducks leading up to the NHL trade deadline on March 3 , 2009 . He was claimed the following day by the Dallas Stars . He scored his first goal with the Stars on March 12 , the game @-@ winner in a 3 – 2 contest against the Carolina Hurricanes . Morrison 's 2008 – 09 total of 31 points between the Ducks and Stars was the lowest output of his career ( not including the previous season 's injury @-@ shortened campaign and his 11 @-@ game 1997 – 98 season ) . 
 In the off @-@ season , he was signed as an unrestricted free agent by the Washington Capitals to a one @-@ year , US $ 1 @.@ 5 million contract on July 10 , 2009 . He registered his first goal as a Capital in the team 's home opener , a 6 – 4 victory over the Toronto Maple Leafs , on October 3 , 2009 . In the final two months of the season , Morrison missed six games due to a leg injury . He finished the campaign with 42 points in 74 games with the Capitals , his highest total in three years . Returning in time for the 2010 playoffs , he registered one assists in five games as the top @-@ seeded Capitals were eliminated by the Montreal Canadiens in the first round . 
 Becoming an unrestricted free agent for the third consecutive year in July 2010 , Morrison did not initially receive any offers . As a result , he accepted a tryout with the Vancouver Canucks and attended the team 's training camp in Penticton , British Columbia . At the conclusion of the pre @-@ season , the Canucks offered Morrison a two @-@ way contract , which he turned down . The following day , on October 4 , 2010 , Morrison was signed by the Calgary Flames to a one @-@ year , one @-@ way contract worth US $ 725 @,@ 000 . The Flames had signed Morrison in lieu of numerous injuries at the centre position on their roster . He scored his first goal as a Flame on October 16 in a 5 – 3 win against the Edmonton Oilers . After recording 43 points in 66 games , Morrison suffered a season @-@ ending injury in March 2011 . He hurt his left knee in a game against the Chicago Blackhawks when opposing defenceman Niklas <unk> pinned him against the end @-@ boards . At the time of the injury , Morrison was leading the Flames with a plus @-@ minus rating of + 13 while centring the team 's top line with Jarome Iginla and Alex Tanguay . On July 15 , 2011 , Morrison came to terms with the Flames on a one @-@ year deal worth US $ 1 @.@ 25 million . 
 On January 27 , 2012 , Morrison was traded to the Chicago Blackhawks in exchange for defenceman Brian Connelly . At season 's end , he has not played an NHL game since . 
 = = International play = = 
 Morrison debuted with the Canadian national team at the 2000 IIHF World Championship in Saint Petersburg . He was joined on the team by four other Canucks — Todd Bertuzzi , Adrian Aucoin , Ed Jovanovski and Peter Schaefer . Scoring a goal and three assists over seven games , he helped Canada reach the bronze medal game , where they were defeated 2 – 1 by Finland . Morrison ranked sixth in team point @-@ scoring and tied for first with Aucoin with a plus @-@ minus rating of + 7 . 
 Four years later , Morrison was selected again to the Canadian team for the 2004 IIHF World Championship in Prague and Ostrava , Czech Republic . He was one of two Canucks players on the roster , alongside Matt Cooke . In the gold medal game , Morrison registered an assist , helping Canada to a 5 – 3 win over Sweden . With seven points in nine games , Morrison ranked third in team scoring , behind Dany Heatley and Daniel Brière . 
 Morrison made his second consecutive tournament appearance at the 2005 IIHF World Championship in Vienna and Innsbruck , Austria . He was named to the team alongside Canucks teammate Ed Jovanovski . Due to the 2004 – 05 NHL lockout , all NHL players were available to participate as there was no timing conflict with the Stanley Cup playoffs . Reaching the gold medal game for the second consecutive year , Canada was shut @-@ out by the Czech Republic , 3 – 0 . Morrison ranked third on the team in goal @-@ scoring with four ; he had no assists . 
 Several months later , Morrison was invited to Canada 's Olympic Orientation Camp in August 2005 — a part of the selection process for the 2006 Winter Olympics in Turin . He was a late addition , replacing Mario Lemieux , who chose not to attend due to commitments with his club team , the Pittsburgh Penguins . Morrison was not chosen to the final roster . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Morrison was born in Pitt Meadows , British Columbia , to Ron and Deborah Morrison . He has a sister named Jennifer . His parents had moved to Pitt Meadows from Windsor , Ontario , in the 1970s . Ron coached his son on minor hockey teams , before Morrison moved away from home at age 17 to play junior hockey in Penticton . 
 Morrison and his wife Erin have one son , Brayden , and three daughters , <unk> , <unk> and Taylor . During his career with the Vancouver Canucks , Morrison resided year @-@ round with his family in Coquitlam , British Columbia . He spent a year living with his family in Newport Beach , California , during his stint with the Anaheim Ducks . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = Awards = = 
 = = = Junior = = = 
 = = = College = = = 
 = = = Professional = = = 
 = = Records = = 
 Michigan Wolverines ' all @-@ time points leader – 284 ( surpassed Denny <unk> ) 
 = = Transactions = = 
 June 26 , 1993 – Selected in the second round , 39th overall , of the 1993 NHL Entry Draft by the New Jersey Devils ; 
 September 9 , 1997 – Signed a multi @-@ year contract with the New Jersey Devils ; 
 October 24 , 1999 – Re @-@ signed by the New Jersey Devils to a one @-@ year contract ; 
 March 14 , 2000 – Traded to the Vancouver Canucks with Denis Pederson in exchange for Alexander Mogilny ; 
 September 2000 – Re @-@ signed by the Vancouver Canucks to a two @-@ year , US $ 4 @.@ 6 million contract ; 
 August 3 , 2002 – Won arbitration case ; re @-@ signed by the Vancouver Canucks to a two @-@ year , $ 4 @.@ 6 million contract ; 
 July 27 , 2004 – Re @-@ signed by the Vancouver Canucks to a one @-@ year contract ; 
 August 5 , 2005 – Re @-@ signed by the Vancouver Canucks to a three @-@ year , $ 9 @.@ 6 million contract ; 
 July 7 , 2008 – Signed a one @-@ year , $ 2 @.@ 75 million contract as an unrestricted free agent with the Anaheim Ducks ; 
 March 4 , 2009 – Placed on waivers by the Anaheim Ducks ; claimed by the Dallas Stars ; 
 July 10 , 2009 – Signed a one @-@ year , $ 1 @.@ 5 million contract as an unrestricted free agent with the Washington Capitals ; 
 October 4 , 2010 – Signed a one @-@ year , $ 725 @,@ 000 contract as an unrestricted free agent with the Calgary Flames ; 
 July 15 , 2011 – Re @-@ signed by the Calgary Flames to a one @-@ year contract , worth $ 1 @.@ 25 million ; 
 January 27 , 2012 – Traded to the Chicago Blackhawks in exchange for Brian Connelly . 
 = Sand whiting = 
 The sand whiting , Sillago ciliata , ( also known as the summer whiting , yellowfin whiting or blue @-@ nose whiting ) is a common species of coastal marine fish of the family Sillaginidae , the smelt @-@ whitings . It is a slender , slightly compressed fish that is very similar to other species of Sillago , with detailed spine , ray and lateral line scale counts needed to distinguish the species between its nearest relative Sillago analis . The sand whiting is distributed along the east coast of Australia from Cape York south to Tasmania , as well as Lord Howe Island and New Caledonia in the Pacific Ocean . 
 The sand whiting commonly inhabits shallow sandy substrates in bays , estuaries and surf zones where it preys on polychaete worms , small crustaceans and bivalve molluscs . Reproduction in the species is variable over its range , generally spawning twice between September and April . Young fish inhabit shallow sand flats , both along the coast and well into the upper reaches of estuaries . 
 First described in 1829 , the species has long been prized as a table fish and is commonly sought by both recreational and commercial fishermen in New South Wales and Queensland . The sand whiting fishery is most prolific in southern Queensland and northern New South Wales where the species is most abundant , often caught along other species of whiting in estuaries and from beaches . Due to its importance as a commercial fish , substantial research has been carried out on the species , especially feasibility studies involving the use of sand whiting in aquaculture . 
 = = Taxonomy and naming = = 
 The sand whiting belongs to the genus Sillago , a division of the smelt whiting family Sillaginidae containing 29 individual species . The Sillaginidae are in the suborder <unk> , a division of the Perciformes . 
 The species was first identified and named by the French naturalist Georges Cuvier in 1829 after receiving a specimen that was listed as having been collected in the " Southern seas " . This holotype specimen was apparently taken near the coastline of Tasmania , Australia . Four junior synonyms were subsequently placed on the species , with Castelnau applying both S. insularis and S. terra @-@ reginae , <unk> applying S. <unk> and Whitley S. ciliata <unk> to the species . All of these names are invalid under the ICZN nomenclature rules , which states that the first correct naming is the one to be used . Many of these synonyms were applied due to confusion over S. ciliata and the nearly identical , closely related species S. analis . The species was also misidentified as S. gracilis , a synonym of S. maculata , the trumpeter whiting ; and also S. <unk> , the southern school whiting . 
 S. ciliata is most commonly called the ' sand whiting ' in reference to its preference for sandy substrates compared to some members of the genus which prefer muddy , silty , or grassy substrates . Other common names include the ' blue @-@ nose whiting ' in reference to the colour of the nose in fish of larger sizes , and ' summer whiting ' , a name often applied to S. analis as well . This name is applied to these species as they move from deeper offshore waters into shallow beach and estuarine waters in summer , where they become a target for recreational fishers . 
 = = Description = = 
 The sand whiting has a very similar profile to other members of the genus Sillago , with a slightly compressed , elongate body tapering toward the terminal mouth . The dorsal fin is in two parts , the first made of feeble spines and the second of soft rays headed by a single feeble spine , while the ventral profile is straight . The species is known to grow to a maximum size of 51 cm and around 1 @.@ 25 kg weight . 
 The fin anatomy is highly useful for identification purposes , with the species having 11 spines in the first dorsal fin , with one spine and 16 or 18 soft rays on the second dorsal fin . The anal fin has two spines with 15 to 17 soft rays posterior to the spines . Lateral line scales and cheek scales are also distinctive , with sand whiting possessing 60 to 69 lateral line scales and cheek scales positioned in 3 @-@ 4 rows , all of which are ctenoid . The amount of vertebrae are also diagnostic , having 32 to 34 in total . The swim bladder has rudimentary tubules projecting anteriorly and a series laterally that diminish in size and become sawtooth @-@ like posteriorly . The posterior extension is a single , tapering projection that extends well into the caudal region . A duct like process extends from the ventral surface to the urogenital opening . Swim bladder morphology is useless when determining between S. ciliata and S. analis , as they are nearly identical . 
 The body is a pale brown or silvery brown colour , transitioning to white below , with green , mauve and rosy reflections when the fish is first removed from the water . An indistinct silver @-@ yellow mid @-@ lateral band extends across some specimens . The spinous dorsal fin is olive green with faint darker blotches , the second dorsal fin also a pale olive with rows of dark brown to blackish spots . The anal and ventral fins are pale yellow , the pectorals are pale yellow to pale brown with a well defined dark blue @-@ black blotch at the base . The caudal fin is yellow to olive in colour with darker margins . Juveniles less than 90 mm may have darker blotches along their sides and backs . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The sand whiting inhabits a range along the east coast of Australia from Cape York , Queensland , southward along the coast and the Great Barrier Reef to eastern Victoria and the east coast of Tasmania down to Southport . The species also inhabits a number of islands ; Lord Howe Island , New Caledonia , and Woodlark Island , Papua New Guinea . The species is most abundant in lower Queensland and New South Wales , where studies show it inhabits every estuary sampled throughout the course of a study , while in north Queensland , the species is very patchily distributed along the coast . 
 The sand whiting is an inshore species , inhabiting exposed coastal areas such as beaches , sandbars and surf zones as well as quieter bays , estuaries and coastal lakes . Sand whiting enter estuaries , including intermittently open ones , and penetrate far upstream to the tidal limits of rivers and creeks where juveniles and adolescent fish may be abundant . The adults congregate around the mouths of estuaries , bars , and spits , in depths down to 5 m where they may constitute a large percentage of the <unk> of such regions . As implied by their name , they are often found exclusively over sandy substrates , with occasional appearances in Zostera seagrass beds . Individuals are occasionally taken in offshore waters to 40 m during winter . 
 = = Biology = = 
 = = = Behaviour = = = 
 The sand whiting is a schooling species , whose movements are associated with a variety of factors including prey , lunar patterns and spawning movements ; although there appears to be little consistency in its movements in relation to these factors . Studies on the species over the period of a year have shown the species does not change its local distribution over the course of a day , generally being of the same abundance during both night and day . Seasonal abundance due to spawning is variable , with studies conducted in Moreton Bay , Queensland finding the species recruits heavily to shallow waters and increase numbers during winter months , while studies in the Noosa River estuary have shown no difference in numbers recruited over the course of a season . Like other sillaginids , they have the ability to ' burrow ' into the sand and remained hidden until a predator or seine net has passed by . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 The sand whiting 's distinctive body shape and mouth placement is an adaptation to bottom feeding , which is the predominant method of feeding for all whiting species . All larger whiting feed by using their <unk> jaws and tube @-@ like mouths to suck up various types of prey from in , on or above the ocean substrate , as well as using their nose as a ' plough ' to dig through the substrate . There is a large body of evidence that shows whiting do not rely on visual cues when feeding , instead using a system based on the vibrations emitted by their prey . 
 S. ciliata is a benthic carnivore that feeds predominantly on polychaetes and various crustaceans . Like other species of Sillago , the diet of the species is related to the size and age of the individual , with three distinct size classes identified in a study conducted in Botany Bay , NSW . The smallest fish of 0 – 10 mm take large amount of amphipods and few polychaetes , while fish between 11 and 20 cm consume mostly <unk> polychaetes and few amphipods . The largest fish over 21 cm take large amounts of bivalve molluscs and shrimps of the genus Callianassa . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 As with many species of fish , the timing of spawning varies over the range of the species , with gonad development indicating that spawning in the southern New South Wales region occurs from December to April , while spawning in southern Queensland occurs from September to February . Spawning takes place twice a year , evident by the two classes of egg size found in the ovaries and by the two recruitment pulses observed each year as young fish enter their juvenile habitats . The spawning takes place at the mouths of estuaries or in surf zones , with the larvae occurring in fully marine waters . Juveniles reach 16 @.@ 5 cm in length after their first year of life , 26 @.@ 7 cm after their second year and 30 @.@ 5 cm after their third year . After the beginning of the spawning season young whiting of 10 mm and over can be observed swimming actively in small droves of from 10 to 20 on the sand flats and beaches to which they are recruited , moving up and down with the tide , swimming in very shallow water to depths of 1 m . Unlike closely related sillaginids , the juveniles usually prefer unprotected sand substrates , while other species tend to use seagrass and mangroves as protection . As they grow older they keep further from the shore . 
 = = Relationship to humans = = 
 The sand whiting is a highly prized table fish often rated equal to the King George whiting , making it a common target for both commercial and recreational fisheries . The flesh is white , tender and has a moist , low oil content composition , making it easily digestible . Investigations into the aquaculture of the species began in the 1980s , and has led to the development of farmed sand whiting . 
 = = = Commercial fishery = = = 
 Although the sand whiting ranges down to Victoria and Tasmania , the species is not common enough to make up a significant part of their fisheries , with other sillaginids such as school whiting and stout whiting making up the bulk of the catch . In New South Wales and Queensland , however , it is one of the most common species taken , especially in lower Queensland . The species is often not differentiated from golden @-@ lined whiting or trumpeter whiting , meaning fisheries statistics do not reflect the total catch for the species . In 2000 , 238 tonnes of whiting were taken in Queensland , a decrease from the past 4 years . The species is primarily taken in estuaries in New South Wales , and is also included under the general heading of ' school whiting ' when taken from beaches . Research showed that the average commercial harvest from individual estuaries was around 1 @-@ 2 tonnes per year , with an increase in most rivers during the 1970s and 80 's . 
 The species is commonly taken by a number of fishing methods , with the most common being seine nets . Ring , fence , <unk> netting and beam trawling are also used occasionally , but more often associated with sampling the entire population for research purposes . Research has focused on the effectiveness of different mesh sizes used to net the species in order to prevent juvenile individuals dying after becoming enmeshed . Associated research has also shown that those whiting that survive and are discarded tend to have much lower survival rates due to scale loss , which is a major issue , as many young fish are regularly taken in such nets and released by the fisherman after sustaining scale loss . These studies have led to a number of proposals and subsequent changes to net regulations . 
 At market , sand whiting is medium priced fish , sold fresh or frozen ; whole and in fillet form . In abundance , sand whiting is moderately priced , with fillets being slightly more expensive . The recovery rate of fillets from whole fish is about 40 % . Sand whiting may be used as sashimi . 
 = = = Recreational fishery = = = 
 Sand whiting are commonly sought after by anglers due to their reputation as a food fish , and due to their relative accessibility , with large catches possible from many shore @-@ based locations . The catches of recreational fishermen may exceed the catches of professionals , with studies showing Queensland had over twice the amount of fish taken by anglers in 2000 . 
 The species is commonly caught throughout its habitat , with sand flats , tidal gutters in estuaries and surf beaches commonly having producing good catches . Excessively shallow water , especially in proximity to Zostera beds may produce numerous undersized fish , and may be avoided if the young fish are too prevalent . Due to their preferred habitat , light lines with minimal weight added are employed to avoid <unk> the fish , with a small running bean or ball sinker commonly rigged above a size 4 or 6 hook . Specialist whiting fishermen often use a red piece of tubing or beads to attract the whiting ; whether this works has yet to be proved , but anecdotal evidence shows the fishermen 's catches don 't suffer . Baits used resemble the species natural prey , with prawns , nippers , a variety of bivalves and beach worms most often used , with more successful catches obtained using live bait . 
 In New South Wales , sand whiting have a minimum legal length of 27 cm to be taken and a daily personal bag limit of 20 applies , while in Queensland there is a minimum size of 23 cm and a combined bag limit of 30 for all whiting species . 
 Sand whiting are used themselves as live bait for larger species such as <unk> , mangrove jack and large flathead , although anglers must still adhere to the minimum size limit . 
 = = = Aquaculture = = = 
 The aquaculture potential for sand whiting was first investigated in the late 1980s , with a number of reports detailing both successful trials and also a number of problems with such trials . A 1988 study showed that sand whiting were more likely to grow in captivity than other whiting species , but the mortality rate of over 50 % was unacceptable for use in an economic setting . A number of problems with diseases such as ulcerative dermatitis and the failure of the swim @-@ bladder to inflate properly were also documented , however many of these initial problems have been overcome , and some facilities are breeding around 2000 larvae with a 95 % survival rate . Some of these fingerlings are used to restock depleted estuaries , while others form the basis of commercial fish crops . 
 = Guitar Hero Mobile series = 
 Guitar Hero Mobile is a series of rhythm video games in the Guitar Hero series , adapting the normal console @-@ based gameplay which uses a guitar @-@ shaped controller to match notes of popular rock music songs to work with the face buttons on advanced mobile phones , including BlackBerry devices and those supporting the Windows Mobile platform . The first three games in the series — Guitar Hero III Mobile , Guitar Hero III Backstage Pass , and Guitar Hero World Tour Mobile — were developed by MachineWorks Northwest LLC and published by Hands @-@ On Mobile , while a mobile version of Guitar Hero 5 was developed by Glu Mobile . The series has proven to be popular ; the Guitar Hero III Mobile game has been downloaded more than 2 million times , and over 250 @,@ 000 songs are played each day across the series . 
 = = Development = = 
 Originally , the Guitar Hero Mobile series was published by Hands @-@ On Mobile and developed by MachineWorks Northwest LLC . For the first game , Guitar Hero III Mobile , Hands @-@ On Mobile received licensing from Activision to port 51 songs , two characters , three venues , and four guitars to the mobile version . The game was originally released on Verizon Wireless , but made available on other cellphone carriers in February 2008 . The game was programmed by Robinson Technologies ( shortened to <unk> ) in affiliation with MachineWorks Northwest LLC . The game graphics were developed in collaboration with <unk> and MachineWorks Northwest LLC by Anthem Game Group . The audio was taken from the original audio files used by Activision for Guitar Hero III : Legends of Rock . The audio files were reduced in file size , but remained multichannel ; for example , separate channels were used for the guitar track , background instruments and vocals , audience , etc . Each song was reduced in length to two minutes to maintain shorter , " bite @-@ sized " gameplay . To reduce the file size used by the phone , only two songs are stored at any time . Accessing other songs requires them to be downloaded via a cellphone network . A five button setup — like in console versions — was considered , but testing showed the game to be more entertaining with only three buttons . Rapid transitions and simultaneous button presses were included to add difficulty to the gameplay and compensate for the missing buttons . 
 In June 2009 , it was announced that Glu Mobile would be developing versions of several Activision titles , including Guitar Hero 5 , Modern Warfare 2 , and Tony Hawk : Ride for release in the last quarter of 2009 . The mobile version of Guitar Hero 5 was developed for Android , BlackBerry , BREW , Java ME and Windows Mobile platforms . In a change from previous games in the series , players are given the option to download MP3 versions of songs via Internet data services instead of using the MIDI versions that come with the game . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Gameplay in Guitar Hero Mobile games was similar to its console counterparts , except instead of 5 frets , 3 frets are used , corresponding to each column of numbered keys on a cellphone 's keypad . The numbered keys used are " 1 " , " 4 " , and " 7 " for green notes , " 2 " , " 5 " , and " 8 " for red notes , and " 3 " , " 6 " , and " 9 " for yellow notes . Once the note ( s ) reach the bottom , the player must play the note ( s ) by pressing or holding down the number key ( s ) in order to score points ( similar to using the controller on the console versions instead of a guitar ) . Star Power is activated using the " * " ( star ) button on the keypad or the " OK " button in the center of the directional pad . Other features include online leader boards , file saves , and accomplishments achieved by meeting certain in @-@ game criteria . The game features only single player Career mode , working through fifteen songs sorted into three tiers similar to other Guitar Hero games , and Quickplay mode , allowing the player to play any unlocked song at any time . There are no multiplayer modes in the game . 
 Guitar Hero III Backstage Pass adds in role @-@ playing video game elements to the core rhythm game ; players not only play gigs as with Guitar Hero III Mobile but also must manage their band from near @-@ poverty to stardom by creating marketing buzz about their band to virtual fans , manage their band , and plan out their performances at venues . Successfully completing these tasks helps the player to earn more money from their performances and to unlock new guitars and equipment that can be used by the band to further improve their performance . 
 In alignment with the expansion of the console series to include drums and vocal parts in Guitar Hero World Tour , Guitar Hero World Tour Mobile adds in the option to play the drum track for all of the included songs in addition to lead guitar . While drums are played similarly to guitar , the game also includes the bass drum kick , marked as a horizontal line across the on @-@ screen fretboard , requiring the player to hit a button on the phone 's keypad below the row they are using for normal drum hits . The game , when played on advanced phones that recognize simultaneous <unk> , support the playing of chords on guitar or simultaneous drum hits . Guitar Hero World Tour Mobile also supports a two @-@ player competitive mode in a manner similar to the " boss battles " introduced in Guitar Hero III : Legends of Rock ; a player may be able to collect power @-@ ups that can be triggered in the same manner as Star Power to affect their opponent 's ability to play for a brief period of time . No major gameplay additions were made for Guitar Hero 5 . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 = = = Guitar Hero III Mobile = = = 
 Guitar Hero III Mobile features 15 playable songs from Guitar Hero II and Guitar Hero III : Legends of Rock with additional expansion packs released every month . Song quality and format varies by phone type . However , only the first two minutes of each song are available to play . 
 = = = = Main setlist = = = = 
 As with Guitar Hero III for consoles , the mobile version presents songs separated into three tiers , each with four songs that must be completed before the fifth encore song can be performed . Successfully completing the encore allows the player to unlock the next tier of songs and play them in Quickplay mode . 
 = = = = Monthly download packs = = = = 
 Each month since January 2008 , a three @-@ song pack has been released as additional content for the game . Songs downloaded this way can be played in Career mode and / or Quickplay mode . 
 = = = Guitar Hero World Tour Mobile = = = 
 Guitar Hero World Tour Mobile includes 15 songs with the core game ; one or more new songs are released each month . 
 = = = = Main setlist = = = = 
 = = = = Monthly Download Packs = = = = 
 = = = Guitar Hero 5 Mobile = = = 
 Guitar Hero 5 Mobile includes 20 songs , stored as MIDI files in the game , though players can download MP3 @-@ quality versions via their mobile 's data network prior to playing . The songs are a subset of those from the Guitar Hero 5 setlist . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Guitar Hero III Mobile was well received upon its release . IGN considered it to be a " successful adaptation " of the Guitar Hero games to the cellphone keypad . They commented that while it may be tricky to download the songs for the game , requiring the user to be persistent during the download , the sound quality was excellent and the simplification down to three buttons from five makes the game " accessible to anybody with even a passing curiosity . " CNET praised the quality of the sound and animations , as well as the ease of play . Cell Play referred to the game as " the true mobile port of rock , " and praised the level of difficulty accomplished with the three button setup . They considered the shortened song length a negligible downside compared to the overall package . 1UP 's review criticized the compact layout that led to hand cramps , and that the limited space on the mobile version only allowed two songs to be stored at a time . 1UP also lamented the shorted versions of the songs given the outstanding audio quality achieved on the mobile platform ; their review summarized their experience as " As a literal interpretation of the Guitar Hero formula , there was apparently no room to alter the game to emphasize the strengths of the mobile platform . " Guitar Hero III Mobile won two awards at the Qualcomm 2008 BREW Developers Conference for " Best Game " and " People 's Choice Award " . The game has been downloaded by users 2 @.@ 5 million times , with both Verizon and Hands @-@ On Mobile claiming that over 250 @,@ 000 songs are played a day on the platform . 
 Guitar Hero III : Backstage Pass was also praised for the addition of role @-@ playing elements and smaller minigames to bring the series in line with other mobile phone games . The mini @-@ games were said to help build up the anticipation of the performance element of the game , making these feel as necessary elements of the player 's band 's career progression . The game won the 2009 Webby Award for Best Mobile Gaming application . 
 Guitar Hero World Tour Mobile has also received similar praise to its predecessors . Both CNet and IGN commented on the improvement in sound quality for both low- and high @-@ end phones , with songs being " instantly recognizable " on low @-@ phones , but noted that this quality came with the tradeoff of a larger memory footprint and slow downloads of songs through the cellular networks . However , Pocket Gamer UK noted that on the Java ME version , the songs are only slightly improved over that of a MIDI file . The addition of drums , which is said to effectively double amount of gameplay , and multiplayer to the mobile game was also well received . 
 Guitar Hero 5 was seen by Pocket Gamer UK to be yet another iteration of the series on mobile platforms , though the game still stands on its own given the numerous other music @-@ based games for mobile phones . They praised the ability to use higher @-@ quality versions of the songs though still allowing those with limited data plans to enjoy the game with the MIDI versions . 
 = Clark State Forest = 
 Clark State Forest , located just north of Henryville , Indiana in the United States , is Indiana 's oldest state forest , formed in 1903 as a forest research facility and a nursery and later expanded by the Works Progress Administration . Originally 2 @,@ 028 acres ( 8 km ² ) of total land area , it is now almost 24 @,@ 000 acres ( 100 km2 ) and is bisected by Interstate 65 . It features three trails used exclusively for hikers trails : two internal trails , and the 59 @-@ mile ( 95 km ) Knobstone Trail . There are nine horse trails , and five miles ( 8 km ) of mountain bike trails . Two nature preserves are also situated within the forest . The forest also contains a 100 @-@ yard ( 91 m ) outdoor gun range . 
 = = History = = 
 A concern around the turn of the 20th century was that many woodworking facilities in Indiana would be forced to close due to dwindling timber supplies . This wood was used by furniture makers and shipbuilders such as the Howard Shipyards . The timber industry was a major part of southern Indiana 's agricultural income , but thousands of acres had been deforested . In response to the problem , the state of Indiana decided to establish a series of state forests to ensure the continued existence of timber for woodworking facilities , and to allow Indiana to maintain its ability to export hardwood . The Indiana General Assembly in 1901 created the Indiana State Board of Forestry . 
 In May 1903 , the Indiana state government purchased 2 @,@ 028 acres ( 8 @.@ 21 km2 ) of forest in the north of Clark County , noted for its knob features ( isolated conical hills ) , for use as Indiana 's first state forest , at a cost of US $ 16 @,@ 000 . Seedlings were planted at Clark State Forest , many of which were to be later moved to other parts of the state . This practice allowed more productive use of the land within the forest , and facilitated the teaching of the art of forestry . Charles C. Deam , a botanist who in 1909 became Indiana 's state forester , was in charge of making the state forest an experimental laboratory for 20th @-@ century forest care . Between the opening of the forest , and 1935 , over 150 different tree types were tested , many of which survive yet . 
 During the Great Depression , the Works Progress Administration chose to make Clark State Forest a training center for the Civilian Conservation Corps , and also made it Indiana 's largest CCC cantonment in November 1933 . They created artificial lakes within Clark State Forest , and built many bridges , to aid in water conservation , provide beauty spots within the forest , and teach forestry skills to members of the Civilian Conservation Corps . The state forest 's proximity to the Jeffersonville Quartermaster Depot was key in the decision to focus so much attention on it . 
 = = Features = = 
 Having grown from its original 2 @,@ 028 acres ( 8 km2 ) , Clark State Forest now covers 24 @,@ 000 acres ( 97 km2 ) , with many roads and paths . The area also includes 100 miles ( 160 km ) miles of horse trails , ranging from " easy " ( for novice riders ) to " rugged " ( experienced riders only ) . The existence of these horse trails is one reason why nearby Charlestown State Park did not include them in its development plans . Hunting is allowed , except in those areas designated specifically for more popular recreational activities . Species of wildlife of interest to hunters include deer , foxes , ruffed grouse , squirrels , turkeys , raccoons and woodcocks . All the campsites are by design primitive , and the only other areas in the forest that are allowed for camping are 100 feet ( 30 m ) off the Knobstone Trail . Other recreational pursuits for visitors include hiking , biking , fishing and picnicking . All of these human activities are however of secondary importance to the primary function of the state forest , which is timber management . 
 Both native and non @-@ native tree saplings are grown within the forest . Trees officially allowed to be sold for lumber within the state forest are between 70 and 100 years old . Often , the chosen trees are felled to provide an area for native deer to live in the open , and to give smaller animals a brush area for their subsistence . Included in some protected areas are the White Oak ( 160 acres or 0 @.@ 6 km2 ) and the Chestnut Oak / Virginia Pine ( 20 acres ) Nature Preserves . Other species of tree include black oak , black walnut , pignut hickory , sugar maples , and tulip trees . North of the <unk> Lake is a fish hatchery . 
 The lakes of Clark State Forest include : 
 Bowen ( 7 acres or 2 @.@ 8 ha ) 
 Franke ( 13 acres or 5 @.@ 3 ha ) 
 Oak ( 2 @.@ 5 acres or 1 @.@ 0 ha ) 
 Pine ( 2 acres or 0 @.@ 81 ha ) 
 <unk> ( 18 acres or 7 @.@ 3 ha ) 
 Shaw ( 13 acres or 5 @.@ 3 ha ) 
 Wilcox ( 5 acres or 2 @.@ 0 ha ) 
 = Devil Pray = 
 " Devil Pray " is a song recorded by American singer and songwriter Madonna for her thirteenth studio album , Rebel Heart ( 2015 ) . It was written and produced by Madonna , Avicii , DJ Dahi , and Michael Diamonds , with additional writing by Arash Pournouri , Carl Falk , Rami Yacoub , and Savan Kotecha . During the early stages of the album , Madonna was encouraged by her manager to work with Avicii and his team of songwriters . Together , they worked on seven songs and " Devil Pray " was composed after Madonna desired to talk about her experiences with drugs and quest for spirituality . Lyrically , the song deals with themes of drug addiction , sin , temptation , and the desire for salvation and the allure , and destructiveness , of drug @-@ fueled revelry . 
 " Devil Pray " is a technopop song , which combines elements of country @-@ pop and folk , and has similarities with Madonna 's own single " Don 't Tell Me " , Avicii 's previous work and The Animals ' version of the traditional folk song " The House of the Rising Sun " . The song received high praise from critics for its musical elements , while also being highlighted for its self @-@ conscious lyrics . However , there were some criticism towards the list of drugs used in the chorus . Following its release as a pre @-@ ordered song from Rebel Heart , the song charted in many European territories , reaching the top @-@ 25 in Finland , Greece , Hungary and Lebanon . Madonna performed the song for the first time on the Italian TV show Che tempo che fa , wearing a black robe and various rosaries . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 Madonna and Avicii first met in 2012 when the singer appeared on the Ultra Music Festival to premiere a remix of her single " Girl Gone Wild " , produced by the DJ . Later , while developing her then upcoming album , Madonna 's manager Guy Oseary suggested the singer to work with Avicii 's songwriting team ; the singer accepted since she was a fan of Avicii 's work . On March 7 , 2014 , the singer posted a picture of herself on her Instagram account with the caption , " Doing some house work before heading to the studio with Avicii . " A week later , she posted photos with Avicii and his team of songwriters , claiming that they did " so many great songs " . In an interview with David Blaine for Interview , Madonna said of the song : 
 It 's about how people take drugs to connect to God or to a higher level of consciousness . I keep saying , ' <unk> into the matrix ' . If you get high , you can do that , which is why a lot of people drop acid or do drugs , because they want to get closer to God . But there 's going to be a short circuit , and that 's the illusion of drugs , because they give you the illusion of getting closer to God , but ultimately they kill you . They destroy you . I mean , I tried everything once , but as soon as I was high , I spent my time drinking tons of water to get it out of my system . As soon as I was high , I was obsessed with flushing it out of me . I was like , ' OK , I 'm done now ' . 
 In the same interview , she said the song was not written to anyone in particular and that she was merely sharing her experiences . Rolling Stone published an article in which Madonna advocated " intense personal exploration " over drug use . While being asked if " Devil Pray " could run the risk of being misunderstood as a song encouraging drugs , Madonna replied : " I 'm certainly not judging people who take drugs or saying ' don 't do drugs ' , however , I 'm saying you can do all of these things to connect to a higher level , but ultimately you 're going to be lost . People who are getting high are instinctively also trying to connect to a higher level of consciousness , but are doing it in a way that will not sustain them . " 
 The demo version of " Devil Pray " leaked onto the Internet in December 2014 , alongside 12 other demos from the upcoming album . Following this Madonna released the album , titled Rebel Heart , for pre @-@ order on December 20 , 2014 . When ordered , the first six tracks were automatically downloaded , including " Devil Pray " . Madonna stated that the songs were meant to be " an early Christmas gift " and added that she would prefer her fans hear the completed versions of some of the songs instead of the incomplete tracks that were circulating . 
 = = Recording and composition = = 
 " Devil Pray " was written and produced by Madonna , Avicii , DJ Dahi and Michael Diamonds , with additional writing done by Savan Kotecha , Carl Falk , Rami Yacoub and Arash Pournouri . Avicii and Falk were also responsible for providing keyboards and programming , with Falk also providing guitars . Additional recording and mixing was done by Angie Teo , while Demacio " Demo " Castellon was the song 's engineer and mixer . " Devil Pray " has been described as " moody mid @-@ tempo semi @-@ acoustic pop " and technopop song about overcoming addiction , with a more " country @-@ tinged " and " folksy " style in comparison to other tracks on the album . Critics found similarities between the song and Madonna 's own single " Don 't Tell Me " ( 2000 ) for its " country @-@ pop elements " and the traditional folk song " The House of the Rising Sun " , due to its " bluesy @-@ vibe " . 
 " Devil Pray " brings Madonna " as a devoted disciple , drawn to a darker kind of prayer " , as noted by The Quietus 's Amy Pettifer , and its story deals with sin , temptation and deliverance . The song starts with hand claps and guitar , " whose country edge is [ ... ] characteristic of Swedish producer Avicii 's own output " , claimed Pettifer . The chorus contains " an intoned , warning list of narcotic distractions " that " offer brief relief " , as she sings , " And we can do drugs , and we can smoke weed , and we can drink whiskey / Yeah , we can get high , and we can get stoned / And we can sniff glue , and we can do E , and we can drop acid . " 
 During the second verse , Madonna " seems to understand her own spiritual plight when she sings [ ... ] , ' Mother Mary , can 't you [ help ] me ? / ' Cause I 've gone astray / All the angels that were around me / Have all flown away ' , " before warning , " Lucifer is near " . Later , she advises that although providing brief relief , the use of those drugs will not provide any positive effect on the user , warning , " Yeah , we can run and we can hide / But we won 't find the answers " and invite them to " get help " for making the " devil pray " . Then , a " pitched down " voice joins in a " plea for [ her ] soul to be saved " . As she sings , " Ooh , save my soul , save my soul , save my / Devil 's here to fool ya " , a " bed of throaty , orgasmic samples rises in the mix , " and " a hundred tiny Madonna @-@ voices in coital abyss . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Devil Pray " received mostly positive response from music critics . While noting that the song " reaches back smartly , not only to the hoe @-@ down pop of [ her single ] ' Don 't Tell Me ' , but to the subject matter , and bluesy gait of ' The House of the Rising Sun ' , " Jim Farber of New York Daily News praised " [ t ] he addition of a pulsing house beat [ that ] gives it yet another lure . " Bernard Zuel of Sydney Morning Herald also found similarities in " Devil Pray " with both songs , defining it as an " acoustic guitar @-@ with @-@ electro @-@ cowboy " song , whose melody " doesn 't attempt to hide its familiarity with ' House of the Rising Sun ' . " The Huffington Post 's Matthew Jacobs pointed out that Madonna evoked " the more traditional dance palate for which she is known . " Jamieson Cox of Time enthusiastically wrote that the song " could fit in neatly on the radio beside this year 's British house @-@ pop crossovers and Avicii 's own ' Hey Brother ' . " Kathy Iandoli of Idolator praised Avicii and Blood Diamonds for " <unk> [ ing ] a divine pair for [ ' Devil Pray ' ] where you can hear both of their styles woven into the beat . " Andy Gill of The Independent found that " Devil Pray " recalled " the career @-@ apex achievements of ' Like a Prayer ' , while Gavin Haynes of NME opined that the song is " reminiscent of Lady Gaga 's crazed 2013 dance tune ' Aura ' . " 
 Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic picked it as one of Rebel Heart 's best songs , calling it " an expert evocation of her folktronica Y2K . " Caryn Ganz of Rolling Stone agreed , noting that " Avicii helps Madonna revive the strums @-@ and @-@ beats vibe of 2000 's Music . " Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine went further , calling it " her best song in 15 years " . He continued praising " Devil Pray " for " <unk> [ ing ] The Animals as a folktronica band with witch @-@ house tendencies ... Her ruminations on salvation and the existential pitfalls of sniffing glue [ that ] rid [ es ] an unexpected low @-@ end groove . " Annie Zaleski of The A.V. Club also saw the song as a highlight , describing it as a " gospel @-@ tinged , acoustic @-@ guitar irresistible plea for salvation and divine guidance in the face of temptations such as drugs . " Sasha Geffen of Consequence of Sound considered " Devil Pray " as one of Madonna 's best release in years and its chorus as " one of her strongest in decades " . She praised " Madonna 's voice [ which ] is pitch @-@ shifted into a ghostly echo — and unlike those ' Bitch ' beats , the production slides in perfectly . It 's one hell of a song about getting fucked up on every molecule imaginable , but it 's also heavy with the longing for self @-@ purification and direction . " The New York Times also shared this view , noting that the song " showcase [ s ] some of Madonna 's best singing in years . " Saeed Saeed of The National felt that the song was similar to The Animals ' version of " The House of the Rising Sun " and praised it for being a better country @-@ dance song than Madonna 's cover of Don McLean 's " American Pie " . 
 However , there were some criticism directed at the list of drugs used in the chorus of " Devil Pray " . Chris Richards from The Washington Post criticized the fact that the " lyrics on Rebel Heart feel almost violently resistant to wisdom " , citing the menu of intoxicants used in the chorus and asking , " Which one will best help us forget that this is happening ? " Andrew Unterberger of Spin also wrote about the " laundry list of intoxicants " referenced in the song , noting that it " makes ' Devil Pray ' sound like a mid @-@ 80s PSA . " Jessica Hopper of Pitchfork Media went on to criticize the list for being " a strange , tender , comical thing , [ ... ] but ultimately , it 's a boring stadium @-@ throb lite @-@ EDM song about seeking sobriety and / or big @-@ G , God . It 's also a Madonna @-@ doing @-@ Madonna cliche [ sic ] , which is too often the downfall of Rebel Heart . " Alexis Petridis of The Guardian was negative about " Devil Pray " ' s production , claiming that " [ it 's ] a pretty transparent attempt by Avicii to come up with something along the lines of his hit ' Wake Me Up ' . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Devil Pray " charted in many European territories after its release along with the other album 's five tracks , on December 20 , 2014 . The song reached the top @-@ ten in Greece and Hungary , peaking at numbers 9 and 10 , respectively , while in Finland , Lebanon and Sweden , " Devil Pray " managed to reach the top @-@ twenty , reaching numbers 16 , 18 and 14 . In Spain , the song reached number 50 and was the album 's lowest charting song , while in France , " Devil Pray " was the third highest charting song , after " Living for Love " and " Ghosttown " , the album 's first and second single respectively , and peaked at number 62 . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 On March 1 , 2015 , Madonna performed the song for the first time on Italian TV show , Che tempo che fa , along with " Ghosttown " , the album 's second single . An episode featuring her appearance was aired on March 8 . For the performance of " Devil Pray " , Madonna wore " an extravagant black robe and various rosaries . " A writer for Yahoo ! noticed that both performances were warmly received by the audience , while Lionel Nicaise appreciated that Madonna put more emphasis on the melodies and her vocals during the performance , rather than costumes and stage props . Bianca Grace of Idolator noted that the performance " will have you repenting your weekend sins , as the singer emotionally sings the tune . " " Devil Pray " is currently being performed during Madonna 's 2015 – 16 Rebel Heart Tour . Following the Last Supper @-@ themed mashup performance of " Holy Water " and " Vogue " , Madonna climbed down to the center stage to perform " Devil Pray " ; during the performance she straddled one of her male dancers , who was dressed as a priest , and engaged in a dance @-@ off with other dancers . Jordan Zivitz from the Montreal Gazette said that she found the performance to be " challenging " . Previous to this the song was also used for promotional videos related to the tour 's rehearsals and dancer interviews . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Management 
 Webo Girl Publishing , Inc . ( ASCAP ) / EMI Blackwood Music Inc . ( BMI ) / EMI Music Publishing Scandinavia AB ( <unk> ) / Sony / ATV Songs LLC ( BMI ) 
 Sony / ATV Scandinavia AB ( <unk> ) / Team 2101 Songs ( ASCAP ) / Rami Productions AB ( ASCAP ) / Kobalt Songs Music Publishing 
 Sony / ATV Sonata and Dahi Productions ( SESAC ) / Michael Tucker Music ( ASCAP ) c / o Kobalt Songs Music Publishing / These Are Songs of Pulse ( ASCAP ) / OWSLA Trax ( ASCAP ) 
 Personnel 
 Personnel adapted from Madonna official website . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Piers Gaveston , 1st Earl of Cornwall = 
 Piers Gaveston , 1st Earl of Cornwall ( c . 1284 – 19 June 1312 ) was an English nobleman of Gascon origin , and the favourite of King Edward II of England . 
 At a young age he made a good impression on King Edward I " Longshanks " , and was assigned to the household of the King 's son , Edward of Caernarfon . The prince 's partiality for Gaveston was so extravagant that Edward I sent the favourite into exile , but he was recalled a few months later , after the King 's death led to the prince 's accession as Edward II . Edward bestowed the Earldom of Cornwall on Gaveston , and arranged for him to marry his niece Margaret de Clare , sister of the powerful Earl of Gloucester . 
 Gaveston 's exclusive access to the King provoked several members of the nobility , and in 1307 the King was again forced to send him into exile . During this absence he served as the King 's Lord Lieutenant of Ireland . Edward managed to negotiate a deal with the opposition , however , and Gaveston returned the next year . Upon his return his behaviour became even more offensive , and by the Ordinances of 1311 it was decided that Gaveston should be exiled for a third time , to suffer outlawry if he returned . When he did return in 1312 , he was hunted down and executed by a group of magnates led by Thomas of Lancaster and Guy de Beauchamp , Earl of Warwick . 
 It was alleged by medieval chroniclers that Edward II and Piers Gaveston were lovers , a rumour that was reinforced by later portrayals in fiction , such as Christopher Marlowe 's late 16th @-@ century play Edward II . This assertion has received the support of some modern historians , while others have questioned it . According to Pierre Chaplais , the relationship between the two was that of an adoptive brotherhood , and Gaveston served as an unofficial deputy for a reluctant king . Other historians , like J. S. Hamilton , have pointed out that concern over the two men 's sexuality was not at the core of the nobility 's grievances , which rather centred on Gaveston 's exclusive access to royal patronage . 
 = = Family background and early life = = 
 Piers Gaveston 's father was Arnaud de Gabaston , a Gascon knight in the service of Gaston VII of Béarn . Gabaston had come into a substantial amount of land in Gascony through his marriage to <unk> de Marsan , who was co @-@ heir with her brother of the great landowner Arnaud @-@ Guillaume de Marsan . Through the possessions of his wife , Gabaston also became a vassal of the King of England , in the King 's capacity of Duke of Aquitaine . His service to Edward I of England stretched over a long period of time , starting in the Welsh Wars of 1282 – 83 , in which he participated with a substantial contingent . Sometime before 4 February 1287 , <unk> died , and for the rest of his life Gabaston struggled to retain his wife 's inheritance from rival claims by relatives and neighbours . Because of this , he became financially dependent on the English king , and was continuously in his service . He was used as a hostage by Edward twice : first in 1288 to Aragon , secondly in 1294 to the French king , when he managed to escape and flee to England in 1297 . After returning home , he was back in England in 1300 , where he served with Edward I in the Scottish Wars . He died at some point before 18 May 1302 . 
 Little is known of Piers Gaveston 's early years ; even his year of birth is unknown . He and Prince Edward of Caernarfon ( born 25 April 1284 ) were said to be contemporaries ( <unk> ) , so it can be assumed that he was born in or around 1284 . Though one chronicle claims he accompanied his father to England in 1297 , the first reliable reference to him is from Gascony later that year , when he served in the company of Edward I. In 1300 he sailed to England with his father and his older brother , Arnaud @-@ Guillaume de Marsan . It was at this time that he became a member of the household of the young Prince Edward – the future Edward II . The King was apparently impressed by Gaveston 's conduct and martial skills , and wanted him to serve as a model for his son . In 1304 , the King awarded Gaveston the wardship of Roger Mortimer of Wigmore , after the death of Roger 's father , on the request of Edward , Prince of Wales . This put Gaveston in charge of Mortimer 's possessions during the latter 's minority , and served as proof of the King 's confidence in his son 's companion . 
 As part of the circle around the prince , however , Gaveston also became entangled in conflicts between the King and his son . These difficulties first materialised in a dispute between treasurer Walter Langton and Prince Edward . The case enraged King Edward to the point where he banned his son from court , and banished several men from the prince 's household . Though the two were reconciled at a later point , the King still prevented Gaveston from rejoining the prince . This matter was settled before 26 May 1306 , however , the date when Gaveston was knighted , four days after the prince . Later that year Gaveston was once more in trouble , when he and twenty @-@ one other knights deserted a Scottish campaign to attend a tournament . An arrest order was sent out for the deserters , but , at the insistence of Queen Margaret , they were all pardoned in January 1307 . 
 = = First exile and return = = 
 Gaveston 's return to grace was only temporary . On 26 February 1307 , Edward I announced that the prince 's favourite had to leave the realm shortly after 30 April that year . This time it seems the punishment was not intended for Gaveston , though , but for the Prince of Wales . According to Walter of Guisborough , the prince appeared before the King to request that his own county of Ponthieu be given to Gaveston . Edward I , enraged , tore out handfuls of his son 's hair and threw him out of the royal chambers . Though Guisborough cannot necessarily be trusted on the details of the events , the story reflects the general exasperation the King felt with the prince 's favouritism towards Gaveston , and the lavish gifts bestowed on the favourite . This extravagance was clearly seen on Gaveston 's departure , when Prince Edward equipped him with horses , luxurious clothes , and £ 260 of money . 
 Gaveston 's first exile was to be a short one . In early July 1307 , Edward I fell ill while once more campaigning in the north , and lay dying at Burgh by Sands near the Scottish border . According to one chronicle , he gathered some of his most trusted men around him , including Henry de Lacy , Earl of Lincoln ; Guy de Beauchamp , Earl of Warwick ; and Aymer de Valence , soon to be Earl of Pembroke . Edward entrusted the magnates with the care of his son , and instructed them particularly to prevent the return of Piers Gaveston from exile . Nevertheless , when the King died on 7 July , one of Edward II 's first acts as king was to recall his friend . Gaveston returned almost immediately , and the two were reunited by early August . 
 = = Earl of Cornwall = = 
 On 6 August 1307 , less than a month after succeeding , Edward II made Piers Gaveston Earl of Cornwall . According to contemporary narrative sources , this was a controversial decision . Gaveston came from relatively humble origins , and his rise to the highest level of the peerage was considered improper by the established nobility . Furthermore , the earldom of Cornwall had traditionally been reserved for members of the royal family , and Edward I had intended it for one of his two younger sons from his second marriage . The discontent reported by the chronicles may have been the result of hindsight , however ; there is no sign that the established nobility objected to the ennoblement of Gaveston at the time . The earldom gave Gaveston substantial landholdings over great parts of England , to the value of £ 4 @,@ 000 a year . These possessions consisted of most of Cornwall , as well as parts of Devonshire in the south @-@ west , land in Berkshire and Oxfordshire centred on the honour of Wallingford , most of the eastern part of Lincolnshire , and the honour of Knaresborough in Yorkshire , with the territories that belonged to it . In addition to this , Edward also secured a prestigious marriage between Gaveston and Margaret de Clare , sister of the powerful Earl of Gloucester . The possessions and family connection secured Gaveston a place among the highest levels of the English nobility . 
 Even though the new king was initially met with goodwill from his subjects , it was not long before certain members of the nobility became disaffected with Gaveston and the special relationship he enjoyed with Edward . On 2 December 1307 , exactly one month after Gaveston 's marriage , the King organised a tournament in Gaveston 's honour at Wallingford Castle . Here Gaveston and his companions in arms handed a humiliating defeat to the earls of Warenne , Hereford , and Arundel . Gaveston won , according to various accounts of the events , either by bringing too many knights to the field , or simply by having a better contingent . From this point on Warenne – and possibly also the other two earls – became hostile to Gaveston . 
 When Edward II left the country early in 1308 to marry the French king 's daughter Isabella , he appointed Gaveston regent in his place . This was a responsibility that would normally be given to a close family member of the reigning king . There is no sign that Gaveston exploited the regency for personal gains , but the other nobles were still offended by his arrogant behaviour . This behaviour continued at the coronation feast after the King 's return , during which the King largely ignored his new wife in favour of Gaveston . The collective grievances first found expression in the so @-@ called ' Boulogne agreement ' of January 1308 , in which the earls of Warenne , Hereford , Lincoln and Pembroke expressed concern about oppression of the people and attacks on the honour of the crown . Though not mentioned by name , Gaveston was the implied target of this document . Later that year , in the April parliament , the so @-@ called Declaration of 1308 demanded the renewed exile of Gaveston , again without explicitly mentioning the favourite by name . The King initially resisted , but had to give in to the demand once it became clear that the barons had the support of King Philip IV of France , who was offended by Edward 's treatment of his daughter . On 18 May , Edward consented to sending Gaveston into exile . 
 = = Ireland and return = = 
 Gaveston was not exiled immediately ; he did not have to leave the realm until 25 June , but faced excommunication by the Archbishop of Canterbury , Robert Winchelsey , should he return . Edward used the intervening period to provide for his favourite 's continued prosperity and political importance . As a compensation for the loss of the earldom of Cornwall , which was another condition of the exile , Gaveston was granted land worth 3 @,@ 000 marks annually in Gascony , and land amounting to the same value in England . Further to this , he was appointed the King 's Lieutenant of Ireland , so that a certain amount of honour could be maintained despite the humiliation of the exile . The appointment came the day after Richard de Burgh , Earl of Ulster , had been given the same position , indicating that it was an improvised measure . Gaveston 's appointment came with wider authority than Ulster 's , however , for he had full regal powers to appoint and dismiss any royal officers . 
 Gaveston 's lieutenancy was primarily of a military nature ; by the early 14th century , Ireland had become a rebellious and unruly dominion for the English crown . In this capacity Gaveston had considerable success , killing or defeating several major insurgents . He fortified the town of Newcastle <unk> and Castle Kevin , and rebuilt the road from Castle Kevin to Glendalough . This helped pacify the county at least as far as the Wicklow Mountains , west of Dublin . In the field of administration he made less of a mark . The most notable issue with which he was involved concerned a dispute over murage – a toll on the town walls – between the citizens of Dublin . As during the regency , though , there is no evidence that Gaveston exploited his position for his own advantage and he did nothing to alienate the local elite . 
 Edward II began working towards a recall before Gaveston had even left . Through distribution of patronage and concessions to political demands , he won over several of the earls who had previously been of a hostile disposition . Lincoln , who was the leader of the baronial opposition due to his age and great wealth , was reconciled with Edward by late summer 1308 . Even Warwick , who had been the most unyielding of the King 's enemies , was gradually mollified . Significantly , though , Thomas , Earl of Lancaster , who had not been involved in the campaign to exile Gaveston , seems to have become disaffected at this time . Nevertheless , by 25 April 1309 , Pope Clement V was satisfied that the difficulties between the King and his magnates had been settled , and agreed to lift the interdict against Gaveston . At the parliament that met at Stamford in July , Edward had to agree to a series of political concessions . The so @-@ called Statute of Stamford was based on a similar document Edward I had consented to in 1300 , called the <unk> super carta , which was in turn based on Magna Carta . Before the Stamford Parliament , however , on 27 June , Gaveston had returned to England . 
 = = Ordinances and final exile = = 
 On 5 August 1309 , Gaveston was reinstated with the earldom of Cornwall . It did not take long , however , for him to alienate the earls once more . The chronicles tell of how Gaveston gave mocking nicknames to other earls , calling Lincoln ' burst @-@ belly ' , Pembroke ' Joseph the Jew ' , Lancaster ' the fiddler ' and Warwick ' the black dog of Arden ' ( from the forest of Arden in Warwickshire ) . Gaveston also began to exploit his relationship with the King more ostentatiously , obtaining favours and appointments for his friends and servants . The political climate became so hateful that in February 1310 , a number of the earls refused to attend parliament as long as Gaveston was present . Gaveston was dismissed , and , when parliament convened , the disaffected barons presented a list of grievances they wanted addressed . On 16 March , the King was forced to appoint a group of men to ordain reforms of the royal household . This group of so @-@ called Lords Ordainers consisted of eight earls , seven bishops and six barons . Among the earls were supporters of the King , like Gloucester and John of Brittany , Earl of Richmond , as well as strong opponents , like Lancaster and Warwick . 
 While the Ordainers were at work drafting their reform document , Edward decided to address one of the main causes behind the discontent : the Scottish situation . Edward II had , almost immediately after his accession , abandoned the relentless Scottish campaigns of his father . As a result , Robert the Bruce had been able to regain the initiative in the war , reconquer lost territory , and stage destructive raids into the north of England . To aggravate matters , Edward had continued to raise extortionate taxes , ostensibly for the war in Scotland , but without showing any result . If the King could produce victory against the Scots , this would go a long way towards undermining the work of the Ordainers . In June , the King summoned the magnates for a military campaign , but most of the Ordainers refused on the basis of the work they were performing . When the King departed for Scotland in September , only Gloucester , Warenne and Gaveston among the earls accompanied him . The campaign proved frustrating for Edward , when Bruce refused to engage in open battle , or even get involved in negotiations . In February , Gaveston was sent with an army north from Roxburgh to Perth , but he failed to track down the Scottish army . 
 While the royal army was in the north , Edward received news from London that the Earl of Lincoln had died on 6 February 1311 . This meant that a moderating influence on the baronial party had been lost , at the same time as the antagonistic Earl of Lancaster – who was Lincoln 's son @-@ in @-@ law and heir – emerged as the leader of the Ordainers . With the Ordainers ready to present their programme of reform , Edward had to summon a parliament . In late July he appointed Gaveston Lieutenant of Scotland , and departed for London . Bruce still evaded the English successfully , in early August even staging a raid into northern England , and shortly after this Gaveston withdrew to Bamburgh Castle in Northumberland . When parliament met on 16 August , the King was presented with a set of proposed reforms of the royal household , as well as specific attacks on individuals , including a demand for the renewed exile of Piers Gaveston . Edward initially offered to agree to the reforms as long as Gaveston was allowed to stay , but the Ordainers refused . The King held out for as long as he could , but eventually had to agree to the Ordinances , which were published on 27 September . On 3 November , two days after the allotted deadline , Gaveston left England for the last time . 
 = = Return and death = = 
 It is not quite clear where Gaveston spent his time abroad ; the conditions of his exile banned him from staying in any of the lands of the English king . This precluded both Aquitaine and Ireland , where he had spent his previous exiles . There is some evidence that he might have gone to France initially , but considering the French king 's hostile attitude towards him , he is not likely to have stayed there long . Flanders is a much more likely candidate for Gaveston 's third and final exile . This time his absence was even shorter than the second time , lasting no more than two months . Returning around Christmas 1311 , he was reunited with the King early in 1312 , probably at Knaresborough on 13 January . The reason for his quick return might have been the birth of his child , a daughter named Joan , around this time . On 18 January , Edward declared the judgement against Gaveston unlawful , and restored all lands to him . 
 The royal and baronial parties now both began preparations for war . In March , Gaveston settled at Scarborough , and began to fortify the castle . Around the same time , he was pronounced excommunicate by Archbishop Winchelsey at St Paul 's . At the same meeting the barons – under the leadership of Lancaster – divided up the realm to oppose the King . Pembroke and Warenne were given the responsibility of capturing Gaveston . On 4 May , the King and Gaveston were at Newcastle , and barely escaped a force led by Lancaster , Henry Percy and Robert Clifford . Gaveston then returned to Scarborough , while the King left for York . Scarborough was soon besieged by Pembroke , Warenne , Percy and Clifford , and on 19 May Gaveston surrendered to the besiegers . The terms of the surrender were that Pembroke , Warenne and Percy would take Gaveston to York , where the barons would negotiate with the king . If an agreement could not be reached by 1 August , Gaveston would be allowed to return to Scarborough . The three swore an oath to guarantee his safety . After an initial meeting with the King in York , Gaveston was left in the custody of Pembroke , who escorted him south for safekeeping . 
 On 9 June , Pembroke left Gaveston at the rectory at Deddington in Oxfordshire , while he himself left to visit his wife . When Warwick found out about Gaveston 's whereabouts , he immediately rode out to capture him . The next morning he appeared at the rectory , where he took Gaveston captive and brought him back to his castle at Warwick . Pembroke , whose honour had been affronted , appealed for justice both to Gaveston 's brother @-@ in @-@ law Gloucester and to the University of Oxford , but to no avail . At Warwick , Gaveston was condemned to death for violating the terms of the Ordinances , before an assembly of barons , including Warwick , Lancaster , Hereford and Arundel . On 19 June , he was taken out on the road towards Kenilworth as far as Blacklow Hill , which was on the Earl of Lancaster 's land . Here , two Welshmen ran him through with a sword and beheaded him . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Gaveston 's body was simply left behind at the site of his execution . One chronicle tells of how four shoemakers brought it to Warwick , who refused to accept it , and ordered them to take it back outside his jurisdiction . Eventually , a group of Dominican friars brought it to Oxford . A proper burial could not be arranged while Gaveston was still excommunicate , and it was not until 2 January 1315 , after the King had secured a papal absolution for his favourite , that he could have his body buried in an elaborate ceremony at the Dominican foundation of King 's Langley Priory ; the tomb is now lost . In 1823 , a cross with inscription was erected at Blacklow Hill by local squire , Bertie Greathead , at the place believed to be the location of Gaveston 's execution . 
 Edward also provided a generous endowment for Gaveston 's widow Margaret , who in 1317 married Hugh de Audley , later Earl of Gloucester . The King tried to find a suitable marriage for Piers ' and Margaret 's daughter Joan , but these arrangements came to nothing when Joan died in 1325 , at the age of thirteen . There is also some evidence that Gaveston might have fathered another , extra @-@ marital daughter ; one contemporary document refers to an " Amie <unk> Petri de Gaveston " . This Amie was a chamberlain of Edward III 's wife , Queen Philippa , and later married John <unk> , a yeoman of the royal family . 
 Edward 's initial reaction to the news of Gaveston 's execution was rage ; according to the Vita Edwardi he swore to avenge the act . Circumstances , however , prevented him from taking immediate action against the executioners . During the previous raid on Newcastle , the King and Gaveston had to flee quickly , leaving behind horses and jewels worth a great amount of money . At the same time , the barons ' extralegal action had alienated many of their former associates ; the Earl of Pembroke in particular became strongly tied to the King 's cause after the affront to his honour . Through the arbitration of the Earl of Gloucester and others , a settlement was finally reached on 14 October 1313 , whereby the barons were given a pardon and the horses and jewels were returned to the King . The following years were marked by a constant power struggle between Edward and Lancaster , centred on the maintenance of the Ordinances . The matter was not finally settled until 1322 , when Lancaster was defeated at the Battle of Boroughbridge , and executed . 
 = = Question of homosexuality = = 
 It was hinted at by medieval chroniclers , and has been alleged by modern historians , that the relationship between Gaveston and Edward was homosexual . The Annales Paulini claims that Edward loved Gaveston " beyond measure " , while the Lanercost says the intimacy between them was " undue " . The Chronicle of <unk> states that Edward " particularly delighted in the vice of sodomy " , without making special reference to Gaveston . The portrayal of Gaveston as homosexual continued in fictional portrayals , such as Christopher Marlowe 's play Edward II from the early 1590s , and the 1924 adaptation of that work by Bertolt Brecht and Lion Feuchtwanger . 
 Modern historians have been divided on the issue . T. F. Tout , writing in 1914 , rejected the idea . J. S. Hamilton , who wrote a biography of Gaveston in 1988 , on the other hand says that " there is no question that the king and his favourite were lovers . " Pierre Chaplais , writing a few years later , had more reservations . Chaplais cites the fact that Edward had four children with his wife – and even an extra @-@ marital son – as well as the relative silence of contemporary commentators on the topic . He also finds it hard to believe that Philip IV of France would have allowed the English king to marry his daughter Isabella if Edward was known to be homosexual . Mark Ormrod has pointed out the inherent anachronism of speaking of homosexuality in a medieval context . Instead Ormrod suggests the focus should be on the motivation behind the use of sexuality in contemporary attacks on the King and Gaveston . 
 If the King and Gaveston were indeed lovers , the question remains of what effect this had on their respective careers and eventual downfalls . John Boswell , in his Christianity , Social Tolerance , and Homosexuality , calls Gaveston Edward 's lover , and writes that there is little doubt " that [ Edward 's ] wife and the barons of England were violently hostile to Edward 's sexual proclivities , although he more than fulfilled his royal duties by fathering four children with Isabella . " Boswell argues that Edward and Gaveston fell victim to a new @-@ found concern about sexual morals among the secular powers of Europe , manifested shortly before in the trial of the Knights Templar in 1307 . This interpretation is disputed by Hamilton . " The favourite was murdered because of his control of patronage , " writes Hamilton , " not because of his access to the king 's bedchamber " . This same view is also expressed by Roy Martin Haines , in his 2003 biography of the King . 
 = = Historical assessment = = 
 Contemporary and near @-@ contemporary chroniclers were generally negative in their attitudes towards Gaveston , blaming the royal favourite for many of the problems of the reign . Gaveston was accused of such various crimes as draining the treasury , orchestrating the arrest of treasurer Walter Langton , and filling the court with foreigners . According to the Lanercost Chronicle , " There was not anyone who had a good word to say about the king or Piers . " Nevertheless , the chroniclers did not deny that he had certain good qualities . Irish chroniclers were appreciative both of his military and his administrative skills during his period in Ireland . Likewise , Geoffrey the Baker called him " graceful and agile in body , sharp witted , refined in manner , [ and ] sufficiently well versed in military matters . " Marlowe , however , focused exclusively on the negative aspects of Gaveston 's biography , portraying him – according to Hamilton – as " a sycophantic homosexual with a marked tendency towards avarice , nepotism , and especially overweening pride . " This was the impression that lived on in the popular imagination . 
 The first modern historians to deal with the reign of Edward II – William Stubbs , Thomas Frederick Tout and James Conway Davies – added little to the understanding of Gaveston . While generally agreeing with the chronicles , they allotted him no importance within their own main field of interest , that of constitutional history . For later generations of historians , the focus shifted from constitutional to personal issues . From the 1970s onwards , the topic of study became the personal relations between magnates and the crown , and the distribution of patronage . It is to this school of thought that Hamilton 's biography belongs , in which he argues that it was Gaveston 's exclusive access to royal patronage that was the driving force behind the baronial animosity towards him . Chaplais , on the other hand , takes a different approach to the study of Gaveston and his place in the reign of Edward II . According to Chaplais , Edward was more or less indifferent to the practice of kingship , and essentially delegated the job to Gaveston . As an alternative to a homosexual relationship , Chaplais suggests that the bond that existed between the King and Gaveston was that of an adoptive brotherhood . This concept had a Biblical precedent in the traditionalist , platonic interpretation of the relationship between David and Jonathan , and also existed in the Middle Ages , as exemplified in The Song of Roland , the story of Roland and Olivier . 
 In modern popular culture , Gaveston has been portrayed in a variety of ways . In Derek Jarman 's 1991 film , based on Marlow 's play , Edward and Gaveston are presented as victims of homophobia and prejudice . In the 1995 movie Braveheart , on the other hand , Gaveston ( thinly disguised as the character ' Phillip ' ) is again caricatured as arrogant and effeminate . There is also an Oxford University dining and drinking club called the Piers Gaveston Society . 
 = Linfield F.C. = 
 Linfield Football Club is a semi @-@ professional football club based in Belfast , Northern Ireland . The club was founded in 1886 as Linfield Athletic Club , and in 1905 moved into the current home of Windsor Park , which is also the home of the Northern Ireland national team . The club plays in the NIFL Premiership – the highest level of the Northern Ireland Football League . Linfield 's main rival is Glentoran – the other half of Belfast 's Big Two . This rivalry traditionally includes a league derby played on Boxing Day each year , which usually attracts the largest league attendance of the season . Linfield 's average league attendance at home is approximately 2 @,@ 000 , the highest average in the division and roughly twice as large as the league 's overall average , which has remained relatively steady at 800 – 900 spectators per game since the current league format began in 2008 . The Blues are managed by former Northern Ireland international and record goalscorer David Healy , who was appointed in October 2015 to succeed Warren Feeney . Feeney resigned in order to become assistant manager ( and later the manager ) of Newport County . 
 Historically , as the most dominant club in Northern Irish football , Linfield holds several domestic records and even two world records . The club was one of the eight founding members of the Irish League in 1890 , as well as the inaugural winners and one of only three clubs to have competed in every top division season , having never suffered relegation . Linfield has won a record 51 league championships to date – more than twice as many titles as any other Northern Irish club and the second @-@ highest tally of national top @-@ flight titles won by any club worldwide – behind the world record of 54 Scottish league titles won by Rangers . Linfield holds the world record for the most trophies won in a single season . In the 1921 – 22 season , Linfield became the first , and to date only club in the world to achieve the feat of winning seven titles in one season , and in the 1961 – 62 season they emulated the feat with a second seven @-@ trophy haul – the only recorded instances in the world of this feat being accomplished . In 2006 , the club also won all four available domestic trophies to achieve a quadruple , and has also won three domestic trebles along with a world record 23 domestic doubles . The club has lifted the Irish Cup a record 42 times , the League Cup a record nine times , and has been all @-@ Ireland champion ( excluding the 12 all @-@ Ireland league titles won prior to the partition of Ireland in 1921 ) on four occasions – 1962 , 1971 , 1980 and 2005 . The club has never won a European trophy , but did reach the quarter @-@ finals of the 1966 – 67 European Cup . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation and early years ( 1886 – 1918 ) = = = 
 The club was founded in March 1886 in an area of south Belfast known as Sandy Row by workers at the Ulster Spinning Company 's Linfield Mill . Originally known as Linfield Athletic Club , the team played on ground at the back of the mill known as the Meadow . However , success on the field meant that the club had to accommodate bigger crowds , so this brought about a move to Ulsterville Avenue in 1889 . In 1890 , Bob Milne signed for the club from the Gordon Highlanders . The Scot would soon become a key member of the team , helping the Blues to lift the Irish Cup at the young age of 20 . The club stayed at Ulsterville for five years before housing development on the ground in 1894 meant that the club had to move on once again . Between 1894 and 1897 , Linfield played all of their home games at opponents ' grounds until the president of the club , Robert Gibson – who had donated the Gibson Cup trophy to the Irish League for the championship – along with other club members eventually secured a ground lease at <unk> in the Balmoral area of the city . 
 However , this was another temporary home . The club stayed here until 1905 , when they moved into Windsor Park . The club 's first silverware at Windsor arrived in the 1906 – 07 season , with the club lifting both the league title and the County Antrim Shield . This would be the first of a trio of league titles , with the 1907 – 08 and 1908 – 09 league titles to follow . 
 In 1910 , team captain Bob Milne left the club with a legacy as one of Linfield 's best ever players . He had amassed nine Irish Cups , eight league titles , and had earned 27 international caps for Ireland during his time at the club . Another Scot , Marshall McEwan , joined Linfield in 1911 at the age of 26 . He had previously played for Blackpool , Bolton Wanderers and Chelsea . McEwan is perhaps best remembered for his performance in the 1913 Irish Cup final , described by some fans as the best in years . McEwan retired in 1916 , but remained in Belfast and later opened several businesses . In 1915 , the Irish League was suspended as a result of World War I. In its place , a temporary unofficial league known as the Belfast & District League was set up and ran for four seasons until the return of the Irish League in 1919 . As this was an unofficial competition , any titles during this time are not counted as Irish League Championships . Linfield won this competition twice , in 1915 – 16 along with the Irish Cup , and in 1917 – 18 . 
 = = = Two seven @-@ trophy seasons ( 1921 – 22 & 1961 – 62 ) = = = 
 In the 1921 – 22 season , the club achieved a clean sweep of all the domestic competitions they entered – the Irish League , Irish Cup , County Antrim Shield , Alhambra Cup , Belfast Charity Cup , Gold Cup and the City Cup . The club followed this up the next season by winning a treble including the Irish League , Irish Cup and County Antrim Shield in 1922 – 23 . In 1927 , Joe Bambrick signed for the Blues , and would become one of the club 's all @-@ time top goal scorers . In the 1929 – 30 season , Bambrick scored a remarkable 94 goals – a record that surprisingly stood for only one season , until Glentoran 's Fred Roberts scored an incredible 96 goals during the following campaign to break Bambrick 's record . In 1930 , Bambrick scored six goals in one game for Ireland – a 7 – 0 win over Wales . The 1931 – 32 , 1933 – 34 and 1934 – 35 league titles followed for Linfield , before Bambrick left the club to join Chelsea in 1935 having scored 286 league goals in just 183 games for Linfield – a remarkable ratio of 1 @.@ 56 goals per game . The Irish League was once again suspended in 1940 as a result of the Second World War , with another temporary unofficial league set up which was called the Northern Regional League . Linfield won this league three times – in 1942 – 43 , 1944 – 45 and 1945 – 46 . This league ran for seven seasons until the return of the Irish League once again in 1947 . 
 In 1957 , Jackie Milburn famously signed for the Blues as player @-@ manager from Newcastle United , and won the Ulster Footballer of the Year award for his performances during his first season at the club . Milburn 's presence dramatically increased average crowds at matches , with the Belfast Telegraph calling it the " signing of the century " . Milburn is famous for scoring Linfield 's first ever goals in European competition . In September 1959 , he scored both goals against IFK Göteborg in a 2 – 1 Linfield win at Windsor Park in the first leg of the 1959 – 60 European Cup preliminary round tie – the club 's European debut . Milburn was also the Irish league 's top goal scorer on two occasions before leaving the club in 1960 to join <unk> . In 1962 , forty years after Linfield 's remarkable seven @-@ trophy season , the club repeated the feat in the 1961 – 62 season under manager Isaac McDowell . They won another seven @-@ trophy haul including the Irish League , Irish Cup , County Antrim Shield , Gold Cup , City Cup and the Ulster Cup . They also won the North @-@ South Cup final that season , but it was actually the conclusion of the 1960 – 61 competition . Fixture congestion had meant that the final could not be played before the end of the previous season , so it was rescheduled to take place during the 1961 – 62 season . A commemorative event was held in April 2012 , celebrating the 90th and 50th anniversaries of the 1921 – 22 and 1961 – 62 seven @-@ trophy @-@ winning teams . 
 = = = Roy Coyle 's 31 @-@ trophy haul ( 1975 – 1997 ) = = = 
 Following a spell in England playing for Sheffield Wednesday and Grimsby Town , Roy Coyle joined the club as player @-@ manager , taking over the reigns from outgoing manager Billy Campbell . After a tough start to his managerial career at the club , Coyle went on to become the most successful Linfield manager in history , winning numerous trophies during his time at Windsor Park . His first season in charge was without silverware . In fact , having been Irish Cup runners @-@ up the previous season when Coleraine defeated the Blues 1 – 0 after two replays , Linfield suffered one of the biggest upsets in Northern Irish football history when B Division club Carrick Rangers defeated the Blues 2 – 1 in the 1975 – 76 Irish Cup final on 10 April 1976 . This giant @-@ killing act in which a junior club defeated a senior club in the Irish Cup final had only happened twice before in the cup 's history , and not since 1955 – 21 years earlier . The club stuck by Coyle however , and it was not long before he brought silverware to the club . His first honour arrived in the 1976 – 77 season in the form of the County Antrim Shield . However , the Blues suffered defeat in the Irish Cup final for the third consecutive season when they once again lost out against Coleraine – losing 4 – 1 . The 1977 – 78 season saw the club win an Irish League , Irish Cup and Ulster Cup treble . Runners @-@ up in the last three Irish Cup finals , this time they were not to be denied . A 3 – 1 victory over Ballymena United secured the club 's third trophy of the season . 
 Coyle retired from playing duties in 1980 , but continued as manager . In 1982 , future manager David Jeffrey joined the club following a stint in the Manchester United youth team and played for Coyle under many of his trophy successes , captaining the side for much of that time . One of Coyle 's biggest achievements as manager was leading the club to six consecutive league titles between 1981 – 82 and 1986 – 87 , equalling the record for the most consecutive titles which was set by Belfast Celtic in 1947 – 48 . 1986 was the year that Noel Bailie began what would turn out to be a 25 @-@ year career at the club . Although a defender for most of that time , Bailie began as a left midfielder . 
 Coyle 's final trophy as Linfield manager was the Gold Cup in 1989 – 90 . During his 15 years at the club he had amassed 10 League titles , 3 Irish Cups , 7 Gold Cups , 4 Ulster Cups , 5 County Antrim Shields , the Irish League Cup , and the Tyler Cup – 31 major honours in total . Coyle left the club in April 1990 . Eric Bowyer was appointed as Coyle 's replacement , but it was a relatively unsuccessful reign that only lasted for two years until he was sacked in 1992 , with David Jeffrey also leaving the club that year to join Ards . Next into the managerial hot seat was Trevor Anderson , who brought more silverware to the club during his five years in charge between 1992 and 1997 , including 2 Irish League titles and 2 Irish Cups . After retiring as a player in 1996 following a one @-@ year spell at Larne , David Jeffrey returned to the club as Anderson 's assistant manager . This partnership lasted until Anderson resigned on the morning of 4 January 1997 . Anderson later became Director of Football at Newry Town . 
 = = = The David Jeffrey years ( 1997 – 2014 ) = = = 
 Jeffrey took charge of the team in a caretaker capacity for a league match against Portadown that afternoon , and remained as caretaker manager for the following match against Ballyclare Comrades in the Floodlit Cup on 7 January . He was officially appointed as manager on a permanent basis on 8 January 1997 . In his first full season in charge he led the club to three trophies – the League Cup , County Antrim Shield , and Floodlit Cup – and narrowly missed out on the league title to champions Cliftonville by four points . Jeffrey won his first league title as manager in the 1999 – 2000 season however , along with a third consecutive League Cup triumph . The Blues retained the league title the following season , and also won the Charity Shield and the County Antrim Shield . The 2001 – 02 season saw the club win a cup double , lifting both the Irish Cup and the League Cup . In 2005 , the inauguration of the Setanta Cup meant the return of an all @-@ Ireland cup competition for the first time since 1980 . The Blues qualified as league champions , but started the competition poorly – losing 2 – 1 away to Longford Town . However , they recovered to eventually reach the final against Shelbourne , and although the Blues were major underdogs going into the match against professional League of Ireland opposition , they overcame the odds to become inaugural winners of the competition by defeating Shelbourne 2 – 0 . Incidentally , Linfield were in fact the reigning all @-@ Ireland champions at the time , having won the final staging of the Tyler Cup in 1980 before the competition was discontinued . 
 The 2005 – 06 season was the most successful of Jeffrey 's tenure , with the Blues achieving a clean sweep of all four domestic competitions ; the Irish Premier League , Irish Cup , Irish League Cup , and County Antrim Shield . However , they did fail to retain the Setanta Cup as defending champions when they were narrowly beaten 1 – 0 at Windsor Park in the semi @-@ finals by eventual winners , Drogheda United . In April 2010 , former captain Noel Bailie made his 1,000th appearance for the club when he played in a 0 – 0 draw against Crusaders in the league . A few days later , Linfield won their 49th league title after a 1 – 0 home win against Cliftonville . The following year , a landmark 50th league title arrived during the club 's 125th anniversary year . Bailie retired from football in April 2011 at the age of 40 , after making 1 @,@ 013 appearances for the club in all competitions since making his debut against Ballymena United in March 1989 . Linfield subsequently retired the number 11 shirt in his honour . In the 2011 – 12 season , Linfield won a league and cup double for the third consecutive season and the sixth time in seven seasons – a record 51st league title , 42nd Irish Cup win , and 23rd double overall . 
 The 2012 – 13 season was undoubtedly a low ebb for the club under Jeffrey 's reign . The Blues were off the pace for most of the league campaign – their season encapsulated in a 3 – 1 home defeat by newly promoted <unk> United in October 2012 . Cliftonville were the eventual champions , securing their fourth league title after defeating Linfield 3 – 2 at Solitude on 13 April 2013 . Crusaders secured the runners @-@ up place , leaving the Blues in third place – a distant 29 points behind the champions . The club went out of the 2013 Setanta Sports Cup after a heavy aggregate defeat in the quarter @-@ finals , went out of the League Cup at the semi @-@ final stage , and exited the Irish Cup in the fifth round after a replay . The club 's first Irish Cup defeat in four years was also the first time in 16 years they had lost their opening tie of the competition . 
 When the 2014 Setanta Sports Cup was confirmed in December 2013 , the club opted not to enter the competition , citing inconvenient fixture scheduling , reduced prize money , and the difficulty faced by Linfield supporters attending away games as the reasons behind their withdrawal . However , the club did not rule out future participation . League champions Cliftonville also withdrew from the competition for similar reasons , with the next two highest placed sides from the previous season 's league table ( <unk> United and Coleraine ) being drafted in as replacements . In February 2014 , Jeffrey announced that he would be stepping down at the end of the 2013 – 14 season , bringing an end to his trophy @-@ laden reign after 17 years . In March 2014 , the Blues lifted the County Antrim Shield for a record 43rd time by defeating Crusaders 4 – 1 on penalties following a 0 – 0 draw after extra time in the final . This was a significant milestone for Jeffrey – his 31st and last trophy as Linfield manager , equalling Roy Coyle 's record . Jeffrey still had the opportunity to win a record @-@ breaking 32nd trophy as manager in the form of the 2013 – 14 league title . However , despite topping the league table for much of the season , the Blues had to settle for the runners @-@ up spot , six points behind champions Cliftonville . Jeffrey 's reign came to a winning end with a 5 – 2 victory over Glenavon on the final day of the 2013 – 14 league season . 
 = = = Feeney & Healy ( 2014 – present ) = = = 
 Former Northern Ireland international Warren Feeney succeeded Jeffrey as Linfield manager . Feeney had been player @-@ assistant manager at English Conference Premier side Salisbury City at the time of his appointment . His cousin , Lee Feeney , played for Linfield in two different spells between 1997 – 1999 and 2002 – 2003 . Former Blackburn Rovers player , Andy Todd , was appointed as Feeney 's assistant . Feeney 's only full season in charge of the club ended without silverware . The Blues challenged for the league title for most of the season , but ultimately had to settle for the runners @-@ up spot for the second successive season , behind champions Crusaders . One positive for the season was the team 's record in the four " Big Two " league derbies against Glentoran , of which the Blues won three and drew the other . The lowest point of the season for the team was undoubtedly a shock 1 – 0 loss against second @-@ tier side Ballyclare Comrades in the second round of the 2014 – 15 League Cup , while their 2014 – 15 Irish Cup campaign ended when they were eliminated in the quarter @-@ finals after losing 3 – 2 to eventual runners @-@ up Portadown . 
 In May 2015 , the Blues were invited to compete in the Setanta Sports Cup scheduled to take place in June 2015 . The club declined once again , with inconvenient fixture scheduling still remaining a concern . The competition was ultimately cancelled , when suitable fixture dates could not be agreed upon . With the Blues top of the table after 10 games of the 2015 – 16 NIFL Premiership season , Feeney 's reign came to an end in October 2015 , when he resigned to become assistant manager ( and subsequently the manager ) of English Football League Two side Newport County . 
 Former Northern Ireland striker and the country 's all @-@ time record international goalscorer David Healy was appointed as Feeney 's successor , with Andy Todd staying on as Healy 's assistant manager . However , in January 2016 Todd also departed the club to join Newport County and reunite with Warren Feeney , who had subsequently been promoted to County 's manager following the departure of John Sheridan . Todd once again became Feeney 's assistant manager . 
 = = Stadium = = 
 Since 1905 , Windsor Park in south Belfast has been Linfield 's home ground . In the initial years after the club was formed in 1886 , Linfield had to change grounds several times for various reasons such as housing development . The numerous ground changes and the club 's desire to have a permanent home with which to build an identity resulted in the purchase of a piece of land known as the ' bog meadows ' just off lower Windsor Avenue on 1 October 1904 . Later known as Windsor Park , this became the club 's permanent home as well as the venue for international matches . The first game at Windsor took place on 29 August 1905 , with Linfield playing out a 0 – 0 draw against Distillery in a friendly match arranged to officially commemorate the opening of the stadium . The first competitive game played at the stadium took place just a few days later on 2 September 1905 , and ended with a 1 – 0 win for Linfield over Glentoran – the other half of Belfast 's Big Two – though Belfast Celtic were Linfield 's main rivals at the time . 
 Windsor Park is the largest Association football stadium in Northern Ireland , with Glentoran 's ground , the Oval , being the next largest . The governing body of Northern Irish football , the Irish Football Association , leases the ground for use by the Northern Ireland national football team . The club currently receives 15 % of Northern Ireland international gate receipts as rent . This is controversial as rival Irish League clubs see this as giving Linfield an unfair advantage by allowing them to offer more attractive wages and have a larger squad than all of the other clubs . In 2010 , UEFA provided € 500 @,@ 000 towards substantial refurbishment of the stadium , to increase capacity and improve safety . 
 In 2011 , the Northern Ireland Executive allocated £ 138 million for a major programme of stadium redevelopment throughout Northern Ireland , with £ 28 million allocated to the redevelopment of Windsor Park . In June 2012 , further details of the stadium 's redevelopment were released . The plan was to redevelop Windsor Park into an 18 @,@ 000 all @-@ seater stadium with a series of phased works originally intended to begin in the middle of 2013 . The redevelopment would include the demolition of the existing East and South Stand structures , to be replaced by new purpose built stands that would partially enclose the stadium ; complete renovation of the existing North and West Stands ; and construction of both new conferencing facilities and a new headquarters facility for the IFA . 
 In February 2013 , planning permission for the redevelopment was granted . The cost of the project was estimated to be around £ 29 @.@ 2 million , of which £ 25 @.@ 2 million would come from government funding . It was initially planned for the work to begin in September 2013 . Two months later however , Crusaders began legal proceedings against the redevelopment . The club called for the process to be judicially reviewed , believing it to be against European Union competition laws and also a form of State aid towards Linfield . When Crusaders played Linfield at Windsor Park at the end of April , their club officials were allegedly informed that they would not be welcome in the directors box or the boardroom during the game – an apparent reaction to Crusaders ' legal challenge of the stadium redevelopment . In a hearing that took place on 22 May 2013 , Crusaders ' request was granted . It was ruled that it was a possibility for the redevelopment to be classed as state aid towards Linfield . The aspect of the challenge concerning competition law however , was dismissed . 
 In July 2013 , Crusaders agreed to a possible settlement brought forward by the judicial review . The details of the settlement were not made public , but Crusaders said that it had the " potential to benefit the entirety of the football family " . In September 2013 , sports minister <unk> Ní <unk> said that she was still committed to making sure the redevelopment went ahead as scheduled , after previously stating that she would not sign off on the funding until the IFA resolved " governance issues " surrounding David Martin 's return to the role of deputy president . 
 In December 2013 , three months after the work was originally scheduled to begin , the redevelopment was finally given the green light . The sports minister signed off on £ 31 million to complete the project . The redevelopment finally got under way on 6 May 2014 after the 2013 – 14 domestic season had finished , eight months later than originally planned . The work is due to be completed in 2015 . On 31 March 2015 , the West Stand of the stadium was sealed off after cracks in the structure were discovered . Construction work related to the stadium redevelopment had been ongoing behind the stand in the weeks prior to the damage , but it was not known if that was directly related . Originally planned for refurbishment as part of the redevelopment , it was later decided that the West Stand would be demolished and eventually replaced . 
 = = Supporters and rivalry = = 
 = = = Big Two rivalry = = = 
 Linfield 's main rivals are Glentoran from east Belfast – a rivalry which is commonly known as Belfast 's Big Two . However , this term did not always refer to Linfield and Glentoran . Up until 1949 , the Big Two consisted of Linfield and Belfast Celtic , as they had traditionally been the two most successful clubs in Northern Irish football to that point . However , after Belfast Celtic withdrew from the league in 1949 , Glentoran gradually established themselves as Linfield 's biggest rivals . The earliest recorded match between the two clubs was played on 1 October 1887 – just over a year after Linfield 's formation . A friendly match played at King 's Field , Westbourne in <unk> was won 3 – 1 by Linfield ( then known as Linfield Athletic ) . In 1890 , the two teams played each other competitively for the first time , during the inaugural Irish League season . Linfield won 7 – 0 at Musgrave Park on 18 October , and 6 – 0 at Ulsterville Avenue on 21 March 1891 . The first meeting at the Oval took place on 8 October 1892 , and the first meeting at Windsor Park took place 13 years later on 2 September 1905 . 
 At the height of the second World War in 1941 , the Oval – including terraces , offices , kits and club records – was destroyed in a bombing raid on the nearby Harland & Wolff Shipyard . Glentoran approached Distillery to play at Grosvenor Park , which they did until the Oval was rebuilt with help from other clubs , most notably Cliftonville . During this time , Glentoran considered resigning from senior football to become a junior club , but after borrowing kits from Distillery and Crusaders they continued to compete at Grosvenor until 1949 . Out of 14 league games at Grosvenor Park however , they were only victorious over Linfield on one occasion . 
