 Critical response to Off the Deep End was generally positive . Many critics praised not only Yankovic 's parodies , but also his originals . Barry Weber , of Allmusic , wrote , " In addition to re @-@ establishing his satirical craftsmanship , Deep End showcases some of Yankovic 's best originals ever ; " Trigger Happy , " " When I Was Your Age , " and " You Don 't Love Me Anymore " prove to be the album 's greatest songs . " Christopher Thelen , of the Daily Vault , wrote , " In fact , it 's strange to admit , but the originals on Off The Deep End actually are , at times , stronger than the parodies . " In The Rolling Stone Album Guide , Off the Deep End was awarded 3 @.@ 5 stars out of 5 , denoting that the album averaged between good and excellent . Not all reviews were so positive , however . Entertainment Weekly reviewer David Browne noted that the video for Off the Deep End ' lead single " Smells Like Nirvana " was " an old @-@ fashioned laugh riot " , but that half of Yankovic 's humor was merely visual , meaning that the songs without videos were not as funny . 
 The music video for " Smells Like Nirvana " achieved similar praise . Spy Magazine named it the " Video Of The Year " in 1993 , Rolling Stone ranked it as # 68 on their list of the Top 100 Videos of All Time , and it was nominated for the MTV Video Music Award for Best Male Performance in 1992 . At the 35th Grammy Awards 
 in 1993 , Off the Deep End was nominated for the Grammy Award for Best Comedy Album . However , the album lost to Peter Schickele 's Music for an Awful Lot of Winds and Percussion . In addition , Off the Deep End was also named the Best Selling Comedy Recording in 1992 by NARM . 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 Off the Deep End was released April 1992 , and up to that point , became Yankovic 's best selling album . On June 17 , 1992 , Off the Deep End was certified gold . On January 25 , 2006 , the album was certified platinum . The album 's lead @-@ off single , " Smells Like Nirvana " was a hit on the Billboard Hot 100 , charting at number 35 . It also charted on Hot 100 Singles Sales at number 12 and the U.S. Billboard Mainstream Rock Tracks chart at number 35 . Both the album and hit single helped propel Yankovic into the 1990s . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 The following is adapted from the album liner notes . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 = Post @-@ traumatic epilepsy = 
 Post @-@ traumatic epilepsy ( PTE ) is a form of epilepsy that results from brain damage caused by physical trauma to the brain ( traumatic brain injury , abbreviated TBI ) . A person with PTE suffers repeated post @-@ traumatic seizures ( PTS , seizures that result from TBI ) more than a week after the initial injury . PTE is estimated to constitute 5 % of all cases of epilepsy and over 20 % of cases of symptomatic epilepsy ( in which seizures are caused by an identifiable organic brain condition ) . 
 It is not known how to predict who will develop epilepsy after TBI and who will not . However , the likelihood that a person will develop PTE is influenced by the severity and type of injury ; for example penetrating injuries and those that involve bleeding within the brain confer a higher risk . The onset of PTE can occur within a short time of the physical trauma that causes it , or months or years after . People with head trauma may remain at a higher risk for seizures than the general population even decades after the injury . PTE may be caused by several biochemical processes that occur in the brain after trauma , including <unk> of brain cells and damage to brain tissues by free radicals . 
 Diagnostic measures include electroencephalography ( EEG ) and brain imaging techniques such as magnetic resonance imaging , but these are not totally reliable . Antiepileptic drugs do not prevent the development of PTE after head injury , but may be used to treat the condition if it does occur . When medication does not work to control the seizures , surgery may be needed . Modern surgical techniques for PTE have their roots in the 19th century , but trepanation ( cutting a hole in the skull ) may have been used for the condition in ancient cultures . 
 = = Classification = = 
 Seizures may occur after traumatic brain injury ; these are known as post @-@ traumatic seizures ( PTS ) . However , not everyone who has post @-@ traumatic seizures will continue to have post @-@ traumatic epilepsy , because the latter is a chronic condition . However , the terms PTS and PTE are used interchangeably in medical literature . Seizures due to post @-@ traumatic epilepsy are differentiated from non @-@ epileptic post @-@ traumatic seizures based on their cause and timing after the trauma . A person with PTE suffers late seizures , those occurring more than a week after the initial trauma . Late seizures are considered to be unprovoked , while early seizures ( those occurring within a week of trauma ) are thought to result from direct effects of the injury . A provoked seizure is one that results from an exceptional , <unk> cause such as the immediate effects of trauma rather than a defect in the brain ; it is not an indication of epilepsy . Thus for a diagnosis of PTE , seizures must be unprovoked . 
 Disagreement exists about whether to define PTE as the occurrence of one or more late , unprovoked seizures , or whether the condition should only be diagnosed in people with two or more . Medical sources usually consider PTE to be present if even one unprovoked seizure occurs , but more recently it has become accepted to restrict the definition of all types of epilepsy to include only conditions in which more than one occur . Requiring more than one seizure for a diagnosis of PTE is more in line with the modern definition of epilepsy , but it eliminates people for whom seizures are controlled by medication after the first seizure . 
 As with other forms of epilepsy , seizure types in PTE may be partial ( affecting only part of one hemisphere of the brain ) or generalized ( affecting both hemispheres and associated with loss of consciousness ) . In about a third of cases , people with PTE have partial seizures ; these may be simple or complex . In simple partial seizures , level of consciousness is not altered , while in complex partial seizures consciousness is impaired . When generalized seizures occur , they may start out as partial seizures and then spread to become generalized . 
 = = Causes = = 
 It is not clear why some patients get PTE while others with very similar injuries do not . However , possible risk factors have been identified , including severity and type of injury , presence of early seizures , and genetic factors . 
 = = = Genetics = = = 
 Genetics may play a role in the risk that a person will develop PTE ; people with the <unk> @-@ <unk> allele may be at higher risk for PTE . The haptoglobin <unk> @-@ 2 allele may be another genetic risk factor , possibly because it binds hemoglobin poorly and thus allows more iron to escape and damage tissues . However , most studies have found that having family members with epilepsy does not significantly increase the risk of PTS , suggesting that genetics are not a strong risk factor . 
 = = = Severity of trauma = = = 
 The more severe the brain trauma is , the more likely a person is to suffer late PTE . Evidence suggests that mild head injuries do not confer an increased risk of developing PTE , while more severe types do . In simple mild TBI , the risk for PTE is about 1 @.@ 5 times that of the uninjured population . By some estimates , as many as half of sufferers of severe brain trauma experience PTE ; other estimates place the risk at 5 % for all TBI patients and 15 – 20 % for severe TBI . One study found that the 30 @-@ year risk of developing PTE was 2 @.@ 1 % for mild TBI , 4 @.@ 2 % for moderate , and 16 @.@ 7 % for severe injuries , as shown in the chart at right . 
 = = = Nature of trauma = = = 
 The nature of the head trauma also influences the risk of PTE . People who suffer depressed skull fractures , penetrating head trauma , early PTS , and intracerebral and subdural haematomas due to the TBI are especially likely to suffer PTE , which occurs in more than 30 % of people with any one of these findings . About 50 % of patients with penetrating head trauma develop PTE , and missile injuries and loss of brain volume are associated with an especially high likelihood of developing the condition . Injuries that occur in military settings carry higher @-@ than @-@ usual risk for PTE , probably because they more commonly involve penetrating brain injury and brain damage over a more widespread area . Intracranial hematomas , in which blood accumulates inside the skull , are one of the most important risk factors for PTE . <unk> hematoma confers a higher risk of PTE than does epidural hematoma , possibly because it causes more damage to brain tissue . Repeated intracranial surgery confers a high risk for late PTE , possibly because people who need more surgery are more likely to have factors associated with worse brain trauma such as large hematomas or cerebral swelling . In addition , the chances of developing PTE differ by the location of the brain lesion : brain contusion that occurs on in one or the other of the frontal lobes has been found to carry a 20 % PTE risk , while a contusion in one of the parietal lobes carries a 19 % risk and one in a temporal lobe carries a 16 % chance . When contusions occur in both hemispheres , the risk is 26 % for the frontal lobes , 66 % for the parietal , and 31 % for the temporal . 
 = = = Post @-@ traumatic seizures = = = 
 The risk that a person will develop PTE is heightened but not 100 % if PTS occur . Because many of the risk factors for both PTE and early PTS are the same , it is unknown whether the occurrence of PTS is a risk factor in and of itself . However , even independent of other common risk factors , early PTS have been found to increase the risk of PTE to over 25 % in most studies . A person who has one late seizure is at even greater risk for having another than one who has early PTS ; epilepsy occurs in 80 % of people who have a late seizure . Status epilepticus , a continuous seizure or multiple seizures in rapid succession , is especially strongly correlated with the development of PTE ; status seizures occur in 6 % of all TBIs but are associated with PTE 42 % of the time , and quickly halting a status seizure reduces chances of PTE development . 
 = = Pathophysiology = = 
 For unknown reasons , trauma can cause changes in the brain that lead to epilepsy . There are a number of proposed mechanisms by which TBI causes PTE , more than one of which may be present in a given person . In the period between a brain injury and onset of epilepsy , brain cells may form new synapses and axons , undergo apoptosis or necrosis , and experience altered gene expression . In addition , damage to particularly vulnerable areas of the cortex such as the hippocampus may give rise to PTE . 
 Blood that gathers in the brain after an injury may damage brain tissue and thereby cause epilepsy . Products that result from the breakdown of hemoglobin from blood may be toxic to brain tissue . The " iron hypothesis " holds that PTE is due to damage by oxygen free radicals , the formation of which is catalyzed by iron from blood . Animal experiments using rats have shown that epileptic seizures can be produced by injecting iron into the brain . Iron catalyzes the formation of hydroxyl radicals by the Haber @-@ Weiss reaction ; such free radicals damage brain cells by <unk> lipids in their membranes . The iron from blood also reduces the activity of an enzyme called nitric oxide synthase , another factor thought to contribute to PTE . 
 After TBI , abnormalities exist in the release of neurotransmitters , chemicals used by brain cells to communicate with each other ; these abnormalities may play a role in the development of PTE . TBI may lead to the excessive release of glutamate and other excitatory neurotransmitters ( those that stimulate brain cells and increase the likelihood that they will fire ) . This excessive glutamate release can lead to excitotoxicity , damage to brain cells through overactivation of the biochemical receptors that bind and respond to excitatory neurotransmitters . <unk> of glutamate receptors damages neurons ; for example it leads to the formation of free radicals . <unk> is a possible factor in the development of PTE ; it may lead to the formation of a chronic <unk> focus . An epileptic focus is the part of the brain from which epileptic discharges originate . 
 In addition to chemical changes in cells , structural changes that lead to epilepsy may occur in the brain . Seizures that occur shortly after TBI can reorganize neural networks and cause seizures to occur repeatedly and spontaneously later on . The kindling hypothesis suggests that new neural connections are formed in the brain and cause an increase in excitability . The word kindling is a metaphor : the way the brain 's response to stimuli increases over repeated exposures is similar to the way small burning twigs can produce a large fire . This reorganization of neural networks may make them more excitable . Neurons that are in a <unk> state due to trauma may create an epileptic focus in the brain that leads to seizures . In addition , an increase in neurons ' excitability may accompany loss of inhibitory neurons that normally serve to reduce the likelihood that other neurons will fire ; these changes may also produce PTE . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 To be diagnosed with PTE , a person must have a history of head trauma and no history of seizures prior to the injury . Witnessing a seizure is the most effective way to diagnose PTE . Electroencephalography ( EEG ) is a tool used to diagnose a seizure disorder , but a large portion of people with PTE may not have the abnormal " epileptiform " EEG findings indicative of epilepsy . In one study , about a fifth of people who had normal EEGs three months after an injury later developed PTE . However , while EEG is not useful for predicting who will develop PTE , it can be useful to localize the epileptic focus , to determine severity , and to predict whether a person will suffer more seizures if they stop taking antiepileptic medications . 
 Magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) is performed in people with PTE , and CT scanning can be used to detect brain lesions if MRI is unavailable . However , it is frequently not possible to detect the epileptic focus using neuroimaging . 
 For a diagnosis of PTE , seizures must not be attributable to another obvious cause . Seizures that occur after head injury are not necessarily due to epilepsy or even to the head trauma . Like anyone else , TBI survivors may suffer seizures due to factors including imbalances of fluid or electrolytes , epilepsy from other causes , hypoxia ( insufficient oxygen ) , and ischemia ( insufficient blood flow to the brain ) . Withdrawal from alcohol is another potential cause of seizures . Thus these factors must be ruled out as causes of seizures in people with head injury before a diagnosis of PTE can be made . 
 = = Prevention = = 
 Prevention of PTE involves preventing brain trauma in general ; protective measures include bicycle helmets and child safety seats . No specific treatment exists to prevent the development of epilepsy after TBI occurs . In the past , antiepileptic drugs were used with the intent of preventing the development of PTE . However , while antiepileptic drugs can prevent early PTS , clinical studies have failed to show that prophylactic use of antiepileptic drugs prevents the development of PTE . Why antiepileptic drugs in clinical trials have failed to stop PTE from developing is not clear , but several explanations have been offered . The drugs may simply not be capable of preventing epilepsy , or the drug trials may have been set up in a way that did not allow a benefit of the drugs to be found ( e.g. drugs may have been given too late or in inadequate doses ) . Animal studies have similarly failed to show much protective effect of the most commonly used seizure medications in PTE trials , such as phenytoin and carbamazepine . Antiepileptic drugs are recommended to prevent late seizures only for people in whom PTE has already been diagnosed , not as a preventative measure . On the basis of the aforementioned studies , no treatment is widely accepted to prevent the development of epilepsy . However , it has been proposed that a narrow window of about one hour after TBI may exist during which administration of antiepileptics could prevent epileptogenesis ( the development of epilepsy ) . 
 Corticosteroids have also been investigated for the prevention of PTE , but clinical trials revealed that the drugs did not reduce late PTS and were actually linked to an increase in the number of early PTS . 
 = = Treatment = = 
 Antiepileptic drugs may be given to prevent further seizures ; these drugs completely eliminate seizures for about 35 % of people with PTE . However , antiepileptics only prevent seizures while they are being taken ; they do not reduce the occurrence once the patient stops taking the drugs . Medication may be stopped after seizures have been controlled for two years . PTE is commonly difficult to treat with drug therapy , and antiepileptic drugs may be associated with side effects . The antiepileptics carbamazepine and valproate are the most common drugs used to treat PTE ; phenytoin may also be used but may increase risk of cognitive side effects such as impaired thinking . Other drugs commonly used to treat PTE include clonazepam , <unk> , <unk> , gabapentin , and <unk> . Among antiepileptic drugs tested for seizure prevention after TBI ( phenytoin , sodium valproate , carbamazepine , phenobarbital ) , no evidence from randomized controlled trials has shown superiority of one over another . 
 People whose PTE does not respond to medication may undergo surgery to remove the <unk> focus , the part of the brain that is causing the seizures . However surgery for PTE may be more difficult than it is for epilepsy due to other causes , and is less likely to be helpful in PTE than in other forms of epilepsy . It can be particularly difficult in PTE to localize the epileptic focus , in part because TBI may affect diffuse areas of the brain . Difficulty locating the seizure focus is seen as a deterrent to surgery . However , for people with sclerosis in the mesial temporal lobe ( in the inner aspect of the temporal lobe ) , who comprise about one third of people with intractable PTE , surgery is likely to have good outcome . When there are multiple epileptic foci or the focus cannot be localized , and drug therapy is not effective , vagus nerve stimulation is another option for treating PTE . 
 People with PTE have follow @-@ up visits , in which health care providers monitor neurological and neuropsychological function and assess the efficacy and side effects of medications . As with sufferers of other types of epilepsy , PTE sufferers are advised to exercise caution when performing activities for which seizures could be particularly risky , such as rock climbing . 
 = = Prognosis = = 
 The prognosis for epilepsy due to trauma is worse than that for epilepsy of undetermined cause . People with PTE are thought to have shorter life expectancies than people with brain injury who do not suffer from seizures . Compared to people with similar structural brain injuries but without PTE , people with PTE take longer to recover from the injury , have more cognitive and motor problems , and perform worse at everyday tasks . This finding may suggest that PTE is an indicator of a more severe brain injury , rather than a complication that itself worsens outcome . PTE has also been found to be associated with worse social and functional outcomes but not to worsen patients ' rehabilitation or ability to return to work . However , people with PTE may have trouble finding employment if they admit to having seizures , especially if their work involves operating heavy machinery . 
 The period of time between an injury and development of epilepsy varies , and it is not uncommon for an injury to be followed by a latent period with no recurrent seizures . The longer a person goes without developing seizures , the lower the chances are that epilepsy will develop . At least 80 – 90 % of people with PTE have their first seizure within two years of the TBI . People with no seizures within three years of the injury have only a 5 % chance of developing epilepsy . However , one study found that head trauma survivors are at an increased risk for PTE as many as 10 years after moderate TBI and over 20 years after severe TBI . Since head trauma is fairly common and epilepsy can occur late after the injury , it can be difficult to determine whether a case of epilepsy resulted from head trauma in the past or whether the trauma was incidental . 
 The question of how long a person with PTE remains at higher risk for seizures than the general population is controversial . About half of PTE cases go into remission , but cases that occur later may have a smaller chance of doing so . 
 = = Epidemiology = = 
 Studies have found that the incidence of PTE ranges between 1 @.@ 9 and more than 30 % of TBI sufferers , varying by severity of injury and by the amount of time after TBI for which the studies followed subjects . 
 Brain trauma is one of the strongest predisposing factors for epilepsy development , and is an especially important factor in young adults . Young adults , who are at the highest risk for head injury , also have the highest rate of PTE , which is the largest cause of new @-@ onset epilepsy cases in young people . Children have a lower risk for developing epilepsy ; 10 % of children with severe TBI and 16 – 20 % of similarly injured adults develop PTE . Being older than 65 is also a predictive factor in the development of epilepsy after brain trauma . One study found PTE to be more common in male TBI survivors than in females . 
 = = History = = 
 Records of PTE exist from as early as 3000 BC . Trepanation , in which a hole is cut in the skull , may have been used to treat PTE in ancient cultures . In the early 19th century , the surgeons Baron Larrey and WC Wells each reported having performed the operation for PTE . The French @-@ educated American surgeon Benjamin Winslow Dudley ( 1785 – 1870 ) performed six trepanations for PTE between the years of 1819 and 1832 in Kentucky and had good results despite the unavailability of antisepsis . The surgery involved opening the skull at the site of injury , <unk> injured tissue , and sometimes draining blood or fluid from under the dura mater . Dudley 's work was the largest series of its kind that had been done up to that point , and it encouraged other surgeons to use trepanation for post @-@ traumatic seizures . His reports on the operations came before it was accepted that surgery to relieve excess pressure within the skull was effective in treating epilepsy , but it helped set the stage for trepanation for PTE to become common practice . The procedure became more accepted in the late 19th century once antisepsis was available and cerebral localization was a familiar concept . However , in 1890 , the prominent German physician Ernest von Bergmann criticized the procedure ; he questioned its efficacy ( except in particular circumstances ) and suggested that operations had been declared successful too soon after the procedures to know whether they would confer a long @-@ term benefit . The late 19th century saw the advent of intracranial surgery , operating on brain lesions believed to be causing seizures , a step beyond cranial surgery which involved just the skull and meninges . By 1893 , at least 42 intracranial operations had been performed for PTE in the US , with limited success . 
 Surgery was the standard treatment for PTE until the years following World War II , when the condition received more attention as soldiers who had survived head trauma developed it . The increased need for drugs to treat PTE led to trials with antiepileptics ; these early trials suggested that the drugs could prevent epileptogenesis ( the development of epilepsy ) . It was still thought that antiepileptic drugs could prevent <unk> in the 1970s ; in 1973 , 60 % of physicians surveyed used them to prevent PTE . However , the clinical trials which had supported a protective effect of antiepileptics were uncontrolled ; in later , controlled trials the drugs failed to demonstrate an antiepileptogenic effect . Studies did show that antiepileptics prevented seizures occurring within a week after injury , and in 1995 the task force of the Brain Trauma Foundation published a recommendation suggesting their use to protect against seizures early after trauma . However , recommendations were published against the prophylactic use of antiepileptic drugs more than a week after injury by the Brain Injury Special Interest group of the American Academy of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation in 1998 and by the American Association of Neurological Surgeons in 2000 . 
 = = Research = = 
 How epilepsy develops after an insult to the brain is not fully understood , and gaining such understanding may help researchers find ways to prevent it , or make it less severe or easier to treat . Researchers hope to identify biomarkers , biological indications that epileptogenesis is occurring , as a means to find drugs that can target pathways by which epilepsy develops . For example , drugs could be developed to interfere with secondary brain injury ( injury that does not occur at the moment of trauma but results from processes initiated by it ) , by blocking pathways such as free radical damage to brain tissue . An increase in understanding of age differences in epilepsy development after trauma may also help researchers find biomarkers of epileptogenesis . There is also interest in finding more antiepileptic drugs , with the potential to interfere with epileptogenesis . Some new antiepileptic drugs such as topiramate , gabapentin , and lamotrigine have already been developed and have shown promise in treatment of PTE . No animal model has all the characteristics of epileptogenesis in humans , so research efforts aim to identify one . Such a model may help researchers find new treatments and identify the processes involved in epileptogenesis . 
 = Palanga Amber Museum = 
 The Palanga Amber Museum ( Lithuanian : <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , near the Baltic Sea in Palanga , Lithuania , is a branch of the Lithuanian Art Museum . It is housed in the restored 19th @-@ century <unk> Palace and is surrounded by the Palanga Botanical Garden . The museum 's collection of amber comprises about 28 @,@ 000 pieces , of which about 15 @,@ 000 contain inclusions of insects , spiders , or plants . About 4 @,@ 500 pieces of amber are exhibited ; many of these are items of artwork and jewelry . 
 = = History and background = = 
 The Baltic Sea coast has been a source of Eurasian amber trade since prehistoric times ( see Amber Road ) . Neolithic artifacts made of amber were discovered in nearby <unk> in the 19th century - these artifacts unfortunately disappeared during the 20th century . Lithuanian mythology , folklore , and art have long associations with amber ; the legend of <unk> and <unk> imagines an undersea palace of amber under the Baltic , which was shattered by <unk> , the god of thunder . Its fragments were said to be the source of the amber that still washes up on the beaches nearby . 
 Amber workshops appeared in Palanga during the 17th century ; guilds devoted to the material functioned in <unk> , Lübeck , Danzig , and Königsberg . By the end of the 18th century Palanga was the center of the Russian Empire 's amber industry . In the years preceding World War I about 2 @,@ 000 kilograms of raw amber were processed in Palanga annually . 
 In 1897 Feliks <unk> , a member of an old Ruthenian / Lithuanian noble family that had long had a presence in Palanga , built the Neo @-@ Renaissance @-@ style palace that now houses the museum . Designed by the German architect Franz Heinrich <unk> , it fell into disrepair after the disruptions of World War I and World War II . The palace was restored in 1957 according to plans by the architect <unk> <unk> . It opened as an amber museum in 1963 as a branch of the Lithuanian Museum of Fine Arts , with a small collection of about 480 pieces ; it received its millionth visitor on August 13 , 1970 . The palace was incorporated into the Lithuanian Art Museum during the 1990s , and continues to expand . 
 = = Exhibits = = 
 The exhibition areas open to the public include 15 rooms covering about 750 square meters ; a chapel connected to the palace houses temporary exhibitions . The museum is thematically divided into the scientific and cultural / artistic aspects of amber . 
 The first floor is dedicated to displays that illustrate the formation and composition of amber . Amber in the area arose from deltaic deposits of rivers flowing from Fennoscandia in the Eocene Period , about 40 to 45 million years ago . The processes via which resin is changed into amber by microorganisms , oxidation , and polymerization are illustrated . Samples of <unk> and <unk> ( i.e. " amber within amber " ) are among the displayed items . The museum holds Europe 's third largest amber specimen , the " Sun Stone " , of size <unk> mm and weighing 3 @,@ 526 grams , which has been stolen twice . Amber from other areas of the world is also part of the collection . 
 The cultural and artistic exhibits include a 15th @-@ century ring , a 16th @-@ century cross , and amber jewelry from the past four centuries , as well as a number of rosaries , cigarette holders , and decorative boxes . The missing amber artifacts that were dated to the Neolithic era have been reconstructed by archeologists . Selections of modern amber work are part of the collection , including pieces by the Lithuanian artists <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> , Jonas <unk> , and others . 
 = = Botanical garden = = 
 The gardens surrounding the museum cover about 100 hectares . They were designed by the French landscape architect and botanist Édouard André ( 1840 – 1911 ) and his son Rene Eduard Andre , assisted by the Belgian gardener <unk> de Coulon . Local historians have estimated that they originally contained about 500 varieties of trees and shrubs , some brought from gardens in Berlin . About 250 imported and 370 native plant species are now represented at the park ; 24 of these are included in Lithuania 's 1992 list of endangered species . Pine and fir trees adapted to the sandy soil predominate . 
 The park features a rose garden , greenhouse , rotunda , a sculpture of <unk> , the Queen of Serpents , a Holocaust memorial , ponds , and gazebos ; during the summer it hosts concerts and festivals . It contains an ancient forested sand dune , known as Birutė 's Hill ( Lithuanian : <unk> <unk> ) , topped with a chapel dedicated to Saint George that was built in 1869 . According to legend , this dune is the place where Grand Duke of Lithuania Kęstutis met his wife Birutė , a pagan priestess , and where she is supposed to have been interred in 1382 ; it has been a pilgrimage site ever since . 
 = Operation Graffham = 
 Operation Graffham was a military deception employed by the Allies during the Second World War . It formed part of Operation Bodyguard , a broad strategic deception designed to disguise the imminent Allied invasion of Normandy . Graffham provided political support to the visual and wireless deception of Operation Fortitude North . These operations together created a fictional threat to Norway during the summer of 1944 . 
 Planning for the operation began in February 1944 . In contrast to the other aspects of Bodyguard , Graffham was planned and executed by the British , with no American involvement . Graffham 's aim was to convince German intelligence that the Allies were actively building political ties with Sweden , in preparation for an upcoming invasion of Norway . It involved meetings between several British and Swedish officials , as well as the purchase of Norwegian securities and the use of double agents to spread rumours . During the war , Sweden maintained a neutral stance and it was hoped that if the government were convinced of an imminent Allied invasion of Norway this would filter through to German intelligence . 
 The impact of Graffham was minimal . The Swedish government agreed to few of the concessions requested during the meetings , and few high @-@ level officials were convinced that the Allies would invade Norway . Overall , the influence of Graffham and Fortitude North on German strategy in Scandinavia is disputed . 
 = = Background = = 
 Operation Graffham formed part of Operation Bodyguard , a broad strategic military deception intended to confuse the Axis high command as to Allied intentions during the lead @-@ up to the Normandy landings . One of the key elements of Bodyguard was Operation Fortitude North , which promoted a fictional threat against Norway via wireless traffic and visual deception . Fortitude North played on German , and particularly Adolf Hitler 's , belief that Norway was a key objective for the Allies ( although they had earlier considered and rejected the option ) . 
 The Allies had previously employed several deceptions against the region ( for example Operation Hardboiled in 1942 and Operation Cockade in 1943 ) . As a result , John Bevan , head of the London Controlling Section ( LCS ) and charged with overall organisation of Bodyguard , was concerned that visual / wireless deception would not be enough to create a believable threat . 
 Bevan suggested a political deception with the aim of convincing the Swedish government that the Allies intended to invade Norway . During the war Sweden maintained a neutral position , and had relations with both Axis and the Allied nations . It was therefore assumed that if Sweden believed in an imminent threat to Norway this would be passed on to German intelligence . Graffham was envisioned as an extension of existing pressure the Allies were placing on Sweden to end their neutral stance , one example being the requests to end the export of ball bearings ( an important component in military hardware ) to Germany . By increasing this pressure with additional , false requests , Bevan hoped to further convince the Germans that Sweden was preparing to join the Allied nations . 
 = = Planning = = 
 On 3 February 1944 , the LCS proposed a plan " to induce the enemy to believe that we are enlisting the help of Sweden in connection with the British and Russian contemplated operations against northern Norway in the Spring of this year . " The department received approval to move forward with Graffham on 10 February 1944 . It would be an entirely British operation with no American involvement ( in contrast to the other Bodyguard components ) . Based on recommendations from the Chiefs of Staff , the LCS outlined seven requests to present to the Swedish government : 
 Access to Swedish airspace for the passage of Allied aircraft , including permission for emergency landings 
 Access to repair facilities at Swedish airfields for up to 48 hours 
 Permission for reconnaissance flights within Swedish airspace 
 Collaboration between British and Swedish transport experts to organise transport of equipment across Sweden following German withdrawal 
 Permission for Colonel H. V. Thornton ( the former military attaché to Sweden ) to meet Swedish officials 
 Agreement to the purchase of Norwegian securities by the British government 
 False wireless traffic between the two countries and the option for Norwegian exiles to move from Britain to Sweden 
 After some discussion , it was decided that requests to land at Swedish airfields and those related to Norwegian exiles would be dropped . The LCS devised a plan to present the requests in stages rather than all at once . Various envoys would build relations with the Swedish government and present the proposals over a period of time . 
 = = Operation = = 
 The first stage of Graffham began in March and April 1944 . Sir Victor Mallet , the British Minister to Sweden , was recalled to London for a briefing on the operation . On 25 March , Wulf Schmidt , a double agent with the code name Tate , transmitted a message to his handlers explaining that Mallet was in the country to receive instructions and would be returning to Sweden for " important negotiations " . 
 Mallet traveled to Stockholm on 4 April where he met with Erik Boheman , the Swedish State Secretary for Foreign Affairs . During the meeting he presented the proposals for British reconnaissance flights and for the transport collaboration . The Swedish government rejected the former but accepted the latter . However , privately Boheman indicated that Sweden 's air force would not pursue Allied planes in their airspace , and also that limitations of the transport collaboration meant it would have little benefit for the British . 
 This was not an encouraging start for the operation but despite this , the LCS decided to continue with the deception . Colonel Thornton 's trip was approved and he travelled to Stockholm toward the end of April . Thornton spent two weeks in Sweden , meeting with the head of the Royal Swedish Air Force , General Bengt Nordenskiöld . The conferences were treated with a high degree of secrecy in the hope this would emphasise their importance . It had the required effect ; Thornton 's conversations were recorded by a pro @-@ German chief of police and forwarded to Germany . Despite siding with the Allies , Nordenskiöld communicated very little sensitive information to Thornton . Nordenskiöld was convinced that the Allies intended to invade Norway , but he kept this conviction to himself , contrary to Allied hopes . Thornton returned to England on 30 April . 
 In tandem with these approaches , the British government began purchasing Norwegian securities . The operation was replaced by Operation Royal Flush in June 1944 , an expanded political deception also targeting Spain and Turkey . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Overall the operation appeared to meet few of its initial aims . The political approach did lead to an increased discussion amongst the lower levels of Swedish officialdom as to the possibility of an invasion in Norway . However , it failed to convince the higher levels of government ( with the exception of Nordenskiöld , who did not communicate his beliefs to anyone ) . Even the purchase of Norwegian securities went unnoticed . The overriding belief within the Swedish government was that any invasion of Norway would be diversionary , and that the European mainland would always be the main target of the Allies . 
 Graffham was envisioned as a way to bolster the aims of Fortitude North , and overall this aspect of the plan was successful . German documents , captured after the war , showed that , although they did not believe Norway to be the main invasion target , the Fortitude North units were considered capable of a diversionary attack . As a result of the deceptions , German forces in Scandinavia were put on higher alert and were not transferred south to reinforce France . 
 The extent to which both Graffham and Fortitude North influenced German strategy in Scandinavia is disputed , with some historians arguing that very little of either deception reached the enemy . While others argue that the existence of fictional units in Scotland helped confirm German fears of a diversionary attack in the region . 
 = Leslie Groves = 
 Lieutenant General Leslie Richard Groves Jr . ( 17 August 1896 – 13 July 1970 ) was a United States Army Corps of Engineers officer who oversaw the construction of the Pentagon and directed the Manhattan Project , a top secret research project that developed the atomic bomb during World War II . As the son of a United States Army chaplain , Groves lived at a number of Army posts during his childhood . He graduated fourth in his class at the United States Military Academy at West Point in 1918 and was commissioned into the US Army Corps of Engineers . In 1929 , he went to Nicaragua as part of an expedition whose purpose was to conduct a survey for the Inter @-@ Oceanic Nicaragua Canal . Following the 1931 Nicaragua earthquake , Groves took over responsibility for Managua 's water supply system , for which he was awarded the Nicaraguan Presidential Medal of Merit . He attended the Command and General Staff School at Fort Leavenworth , Kansas , in 1935 and 1936 , and the Army War College in 1938 and 1939 , after which he was posted to the War Department General Staff . 
 In 1940 Groves , who " had a reputation as a doer , a driver , and a stickler for duty " , became special assistant for construction to the Quartermaster General , tasked with inspecting construction sites and checking on their progress . In August 1941 , he was given responsibility for the gigantic office complex to house the War Department 's 40 @,@ 000 staff which would ultimately become the Pentagon . In September 1942 , Groves took charge of the Manhattan Project . He was involved in most aspects of the atomic bomb 's development . He participated in the selection of sites for research and production at Oak Ridge , Tennessee ; Los Alamos , New Mexico ; and Hanford , Washington . He directed the enormous construction effort , made critical decisions on the various methods of isotope separation , acquired raw materials , directed the collection of military intelligence on the German nuclear energy project and helped select the cities in Japan that were chosen as targets . Groves wrapped the Manhattan Project in security but failed to prevent the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics from conducting a successful espionage program that stole some of its most important secrets . 
 After the war , Groves remained in charge of the Manhattan Project until responsibility for nuclear weapons production was handed over to the United States Atomic Energy Commission in 1947 . He then headed the Armed Forces Special Weapons Project , which had been created to control the military aspects of nuclear weapons . Groves realized that in the rapidly shrinking postwar military he would not be given any assignment approaching in importance the one he had held in the Manhattan Project , and he decided to leave the Army in 1948 . He was promoted to lieutenant general just before his retirement on 29 February 1948 in recognition of his leadership of the bomb program . By a special Act of Congress , his date of rank was backdated to 16 July 1945 , the date of the Trinity nuclear test . Groves went on to become a vice @-@ president at Sperry Rand . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Leslie Richard Groves Jr. was born in Albany , New York , on 17 August 1896 , the third son of four children of a pastor , Leslie Richard Groves Sr. , and his wife Gwen née Griffith . A descendant of French Huguenots who came to America in the 17th century , Leslie Groves Sr. resigned as pastor of the Sixth Presbyterian church in Albany in December 1896 to become a United States Army chaplain . He was posted to the 14th Infantry at Vancouver Barracks in Washington in 1897 . Following the outbreak of the Spanish – American War in 1898 , Chaplain Groves was sent to Cuba with the 8th Infantry . On returning to Vancouver Barracks , he was ordered to rejoin the 14th Infantry in the Philippines ; service in the Philippine – American War and the Boxer Rebellion followed . The 14th Infantry returned to the United States in 1901 and moved to Fort Snelling , Minnesota . The family relocated to there from Vancouver , then moved to Fort Hancock , New Jersey , the next year , and returned to Vancouver in 1905 . Chaplain Groves was hospitalized with tuberculosis at Fort Bayard in 1905 . He decided to settle in southern California and bought a house in Altadena . His next posting was to Fort Apache , Arizona . The family spent their summers there and returned to Altadena where the children attended school . 
 In 1911 , Chaplain Groves was ordered to return to the 14th Infantry , which was now stationed at Fort William Henry Harrison , Montana . Here young Dick Groves met Grace ( Boo ) Wilson , the daughter of Colonel Richard Hulbert Wilson , a career Army officer who had served with Chaplain Groves with the 8th Infantry in Cuba . In 1913 , the 14th Infantry moved once more , this time to Fort Lawton , Washington . Dick Groves entered Queen Anne High School in nearby Seattle in 1913 . In September of that year , he commenced his final year of high school , and also enrolled at the University of Washington . He attempted to secure an appointment to the United States Military Academy at West Point in 1914 , earning a nomination from the president , which allowed him to compete for a vacancy , but did not score a sufficiently high enough mark on the examination . Charles W. Bell from California 's 9th congressional district accepted Groves as an alternate for one of his appointments , but the principal nominee accepted . Instead , Groves enrolled at Massachusetts Institute of Technology . In 1916 , Groves took the examinations for admission to West Point again and this time he was accepted . " Entering West Point fulfilled my greatest ambition . I had been brought up in the Army , and in the main had lived on Army posts all my life , " Groves said after the fact . 
 Groves ' class entered West Point on 15 June 1916 , but the United States declaration of war on Germany in April 1917 led to the course being shortened to what was known as the War Emergency Course ( WEC ) , which graduated early on 1 November 1918 . Groves came fourth in his class , and was commissioned as a second lieutenant into the United States Army Corps of Engineers . The Corps of Engineers was the usual appointment for the highest @-@ ranking cadets in a class . 
 = = Between the wars = = 
 After the traditional month 's leave following graduation from West Point , Groves reported to Camp A. A. Humphreys , Virginia , in December 1918 , where he was promoted to first lieutenant on 1 May 1919 . He was sent to France in June on an educational tour of the European battlefields of World War I. After returning from Europe , Groves became a student officer at the Engineer School at Camp Humphreys in September 1919 . On graduation he was posted to the 7th Engineers at Fort Benning , Georgia , as a company commander . He returned to Camp Humphreys in February 1921 for the Engineer Basic Officers ' Course . On graduation in August 1921 , he was posted to the 4th Engineers , stationed at Camp Lewis , Washington . He was then posted to Fort Worden in command of a survey detachment . This was close to Seattle , so he was able to pursue his courtship of Grace Wilson ( 1897 – 1986 ) , who had become a kindergarten teacher . They were married in St. Clement 's Episcopal Church in Seattle on 10 February 1922 . Their marriage produced two children : a son , Richard Hulbert , born in 1923 , and a daughter , Gwen , born in 1928 . 
 In November 1922 , Groves received his first overseas posting , as a company commander with the 3rd Engineers at the Schofield Barracks in Hawaii . He earned a commendation for his work there , constructing a trail from Kahuku to <unk> . In November 1925 he was posted to Galveston , Texas , as an assistant to the District Engineer , Major Julian Schley . Groves ' duties included opening the channel at Port Isabel and supervising dredging operations in Galveston Bay . In 1927 he became commander of Company D , 1st Engineers , at Fort DuPont , Delaware . During the New England Flood of November 1927 he was sent to Fort Ethan Allen , Vermont , to assist with a detachment of the 1st Engineers . After a pontoon bridge they constructed was swamped and swept away by the flood waters , Groves was accused of negligence . A month later Groves and several of his men were seriously injured , one fatally , when a block of TNT prematurely detonated . Groves ' superior wrote a critical report on him , but the Chief of Engineers , Major General Edgar Jadwin , interceded , attributing blame to Groves ' superiors instead . Groves was returned to Fort DuPont . 
 In 1929 , Groves departed for Nicaragua in charge of a company of the 1st Engineers as part of an expedition whose purpose was to conduct a survey for the Inter @-@ Oceanic Nicaragua Canal . Following the 1931 Nicaragua earthquake , Groves took over responsibility for Managua 's water supply system , for which he was awarded the Nicaraguan Presidential Medal of Merit . Groves was promoted to captain on 20 October 1934 . He attended the Command and General Staff School at Fort Leavenworth , Kansas , in 1935 and 1936 , after which he was posted to Kansas City , Missouri , as assistant to the commander of the Missouri River Division . In 1938 and 1939 he attended the Army War College . On 1 July 1939 , he was posted to the War Department General Staff in Washington , D.C. 
 = = World War II = = 
 = = = Construction Division = = = 
 Groves was promoted to major on 1 July 1940 . Three weeks later , he became special assistant for construction to the Quartermaster General , Major General Edmund B. Gregory . The two men had known each other a long time , as Groves ' father was a close friend of Gregory 's . At this point , the US Army was about to embark on a national mobilization , and it was the task of the Construction Division of the Quartermaster Corps to prepare the necessary accommodations and training facilities for the vast army that would be created . The enormous construction program had been dogged by bottlenecks , shortages , delays , spiralling costs , and poor living conditions at the construction sites . Newspapers began publishing accounts charging the Construction Division with incompetence , ineptitude , and inefficiency . Groves , who " had a reputation as a doer , a driver , and a stickler for duty " , was one of a number of engineer officers brought in to turn the project around . He was tasked with inspecting construction sites and checking on their progress . 
 On 12 November 1940 , Gregory asked Groves to take over command of the Fixed Fee Branch of the Construction Division as soon as his promotion to colonel came through . Groves assumed his new rank and duties on 14 November 1940 . Groves later recalled : 
 During the first week that I was on duty there , I could not walk out of my office down the corridor to Hartman 's office without being literally assailed by the officers or civilian engineers with liaison responsibility for various camps . It is no exaggeration to state that during this period decisions involving up to $ 5 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 [ $ 84 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 with inflation ] were made at the rate of about one every 100 feet of corridor walked . 
 Groves instituted a series of reforms . He installed phone lines for the Supervising Construction <unk> , demanded weekly reports on progress , ordered that reimbursement vouchers be processed within a week , and sent <unk> to sites reporting shortages . He ordered his contractors to hire whatever special equipment they needed and to pay premium prices if necessary to guarantee quick delivery . Instead of allowing construction of camps to proceed in whatever order the contractors saw fit , Groves laid down priorities for completion of camp facilities , so that the troops could begin moving in even while construction was still under way . By mid @-@ December , the worst of the crisis was over . Over half a million men had been mobilized and essential accommodations and facilities for two million men were 95 per cent complete . Between 1 July 1940 and 10 December 1941 , the Construction Division let contracts worth $ 1 @,@ 676 @,@ 293 @,@ 000 ( $ 26 @,@ 968 @,@ 600 @,@ 000 with inflation ) , of which $ 1 @,@ 347 @,@ 991 @,@ 000 ( $ 21 @,@ 686 @,@ 800 @,@ 000 with inflation ) , or about 80 per cent , were fixed @-@ fee contracts . 
 On 19 August 1941 , Groves was summoned to a meeting with the head of the Construction Division , Brigadier General Brehon B. Somervell . In attendance were Captain Clarence Renshaw , one of Groves ' assistants ; Major Hugh J. Casey , the chief of the Construction Division 's Design and Engineering Section ; and George Bergstrom , a former president of the American Institute of Architects . Casey and Bergstrom had designed an enormous office complex to house the War Department 's 40 @,@ 000 staff together in one building , a five @-@ story , five @-@ sided structure , which would ultimately become the Pentagon . The Pentagon had a total square footage of 5 @,@ 100 @,@ 000 square feet ( 470 @,@ 000 m2 ) — twice that of the Empire State Building — making it the largest office building in the world . The estimated cost was $ 35 million ( $ 563 @,@ 100 @,@ 000 with inflation ) , and Somervell wanted 500 @,@ 000 square feet ( 46 @,@ 000 m2 ) of floor space available by 1 March 1942 . Bergstrom became the architect @-@ engineer with Renshaw in charge of construction , reporting directly to Groves . At its peak the project employed 13 @,@ 000 persons . By the end of April , the first occupants were moving in and 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 square feet ( 93 @,@ 000 m2 ) of space was ready by the end of May . In the end , the project cost some $ 63 million ( $ 1 @,@ 013 @,@ 600 @,@ 000 with inflation ) . 
 Groves steadily overcame one crisis after another , dealing with strikes , shortages , competing priorities and engineers who were not up to their tasks . He worked six days a week in his office in Washington , D.C. During the week he would determine which project was in the greatest need of personal attention and pay it a visit on Sunday . Groves later recalled that he was " hoping to get to a war theater so I could find a little peace . " 
 = = = Manhattan Project = = = 
 The Manhattan Engineer District ( MED ) was formally established by the Chief of Engineers , Major General Eugene Reybold on 16 August 1942 . The name was chosen by Groves and MED 's district engineer , Colonel James C. Marshall . Like other engineer districts , it was named after the city where its headquarters was located , at 270 Broadway . Unlike the others , however , it had no geographic boundaries , only a mission : to develop an atomic bomb . Moreover , Marshall had the authority of a division engineer head and reported directly to Reybold . Although Reybold was satisfied with the progress being made , Dr. Vannevar Bush was less so . He felt that aggressive leadership was required , and suggested the appointment of a prestigious officer as overall project director . Somervell , now Chief of Army Service Forces , recommended Groves . Somervell met Groves outside the hearing room where Groves had been testifying before a United States Congress committee on military housing and informed him that " The Secretary of War has selected you for a very important assignment , and the President has approved the selection ... If you do the job right , it will win the war . " Groves could not hide his disappointment at not receiving a combat assignment : " Oh , that thing , " he replied . 
 Groves met with Major General Wilhelm D. Styer in his office at the Pentagon to discuss the details . They agreed that in order to avoid suspicion , Groves would continue to supervise the Pentagon project . He would be promoted to brigadier general , as it was felt that the title " general " would hold more sway with the academic scientists working on the Manhattan Project . Groves therefore waited until his promotion came through on 23 September 1942 before assuming his new command . His orders placed him directly under Somervell rather than Reybold , with Marshall now answerable to Groves . Groves was given authority to sign contracts for the project from September 1 , 1942 . Under Secretary of War Robert P. Patterson ( retrospectively ) delegated his authority from the President under the War Powers Act of 1941 in a memorandum to Groves dated April 17 , 1944 . Groves delegated the authority to Nichols , except that contracts of $ 5 million or more required his authority . The written authority was only given in 1944 when Nichols was about to sign a contract with Du Pont , and it was found that Nichols original authority to sign project contracts from Colonel Marshall was based on a verbal authority from Styer , and Nichols only had the low delegated authority of a divisional engineer . 
 Groves soon decided to establish his project headquarters on the fifth floor of the New War Department Building ( now known as the Harry S Truman Building ) in Washington , D.C. , where Marshall had maintained a liaison office . In August 1943 , the MED headquarters ( and Nichols , who was in charge of the production facilities at Hanford and Oak Ridge ) moved to Oak Ridge , Tennessee , but the name of the district did not change . 
 Construction accounted for roughly 90 percent of the Manhattan Project 's total cost . The day after Groves took over , he and Marshall took a train to Tennessee to inspect the site that Marshall had chosen for the proposed production plant at Oak Ridge . Groves was suitably impressed with the site , and steps were taken to condemn the land . Protests , legal appeals , and congressional inquiries were to no avail . By mid @-@ November US Marshals were tacking notices to vacate on farmhouse doors , and construction contractors were moving in . 
 Meanwhile , Groves had met with J. Robert Oppenheimer , the University of California , Berkeley physicist , and discussed the creation of a laboratory where the bomb could be designed and tested . Groves was impressed with the breadth of Oppenheimer 's knowledge . A long conversation on a train in October 1942 convinced Groves and his deputy Kenneth Nichols that Oppenheimer thoroughly understood the issues involved in setting up a laboratory in a remote area . These were features that Groves found lacking in other scientists , and he knew that broad knowledge would be vital in an interdisciplinary project that would involve not just physics , but chemistry , metallurgy , ordnance and engineering . 
 In October 1942 Groves and Oppenheimer inspected sites in New Mexico , where they selected a suitable location for the laboratory at Los Alamos , New Mexico . Unlike Oak Ridge , the ranch school at Los Alamos , along with 54 @,@ 000 acres ( 22 @,@ 000 ha ) of surrounding forest and grazing land , was soon acquired . Groves also detected in Oppenheimer something that many others did not , an " overweening ambition " which Groves reckoned would supply the drive necessary to push the project to a successful conclusion . Groves became convinced that Oppenheimer was the best and only man to run the laboratory . 
 Few agreed with him in 1942 . Oppenheimer had little administrative experience and , unlike other potential candidates , no Nobel Prize . There was also concern about whether Oppenheimer was a security risk , as many of his associates were communists , including his brother Frank Oppenheimer , his wife Kitty and his girlfriend Jean Tatlock . Oppenheimer 's Communist Party connections soon came to light , but Groves personally waived the security requirements and issued Oppenheimer a clearance on 20 July 1943 . Groves ' faith in Oppenheimer was ultimately justified . Oppenheimer 's inspirational leadership fostered practical approaches to designing and building bombs . Asked years later why Groves chose him , Oppenheimer replied that the general " had a fatal weakness for good men . " Isidor Rabi considered the appointment " a real stroke of genius on the part of General Groves , who was not generally considered to be a genius ... " 
 Groves made critical decisions on prioritizing the various methods of isotope separation and acquiring raw materials needed by the scientists and engineers . By the time he assumed command of the project , it was evident that the AA @-@ 3 priority rating that Marshall had obtained was insufficient . The top ratings were AA @-@ 1 through AA @-@ 4 in descending order , although there was also a special AAA rating reserved for emergencies . Ratings AA @-@ 1 and AA @-@ 2 were for essential weapons and equipment , so Colonel Lucius D. Clay , the deputy chief of staff at Services and Supply for requirements and resources , felt that the highest rating he could assign was AA @-@ 3 , although he was willing to provide an AAA rating on request for critical materials to remove bottlenecks . Groves went to Donald M. Nelson , the chairman of the War Production Board and , after threatening to take the matter to the President , obtained a AAA priority for the Manhattan project . It was agreed that the AA @-@ 3 priority would still be used where possible . 
 The Combined Development Trust was established by the governments of the United Kingdom , United States and Canada in June 1944 , with Groves as its chairman , to procure uranium and thorium ores on international markets . In 1944 , the trust purchased 3 @,@ 440 @,@ 000 pounds ( 1 @,@ 560 @,@ 000 kg ) of uranium oxide ore from companies operating mines in the Belgian Congo . In order to avoid briefing US Secretary of the Treasury Henry Morgenthau Jr. on the project , a special account not subject to the usual auditing and controls was used to hold Trust monies . Between 1944 and the time he resigned from the Trust in 1947 , Groves deposited a total of $ 37 @.@ 5 million into the Trust 's account . 
 In 1943 , the Manhattan District became responsible for collecting military intelligence on Axis atomic research . Groves created Operation Alsos , special intelligence teams that would follow in the wake of the advancing armies , rounding up enemy scientists and collecting what technical information and technology they could . Alsos teams ultimately operated in Italy , France and Germany . The security system resembled that of other engineer districts . The Manhattan District organized its own counterintelligence which gradually grew in size and scope , but strict security measures failed to prevent the Soviets from conducting a successful espionage program that stole some of its most important secrets . 
 Groves met with the Chief of United States Army Air Forces , General Henry H. Arnold , in March 1944 to discuss the delivery of the finished bombs to their targets . Groves was hoping that the Boeing B @-@ 29 Superfortress would be able to carry the finished bombs . The 509th Composite Group was duly activated on 17 December 1944 at Wendover Army Air Field , Utah , under the command of Colonel Paul W. Tibbets . A joint Manhattan District – USAAF targeting committee was established to determine which cities in Japan should be targets ; it recommended Kokura , Hiroshima , Niigata and Kyoto . At this point , Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson intervened , announcing that he would be making the targeting decision , and that he would not authorize the bombing of Kyoto . Groves attempted to get him to change his mind several times and Stimson refused every time . Kyoto had been the capital of Japan for centuries , and was of great cultural and religious significance . In the end , Groves asked Arnold to remove Kyoto not just from the list of nuclear targets , but from targets for conventional bombing as well . Nagasaki was substituted for Kyoto as a target . 
 Groves was promoted to temporary major general on 9 March 1944 . After the atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki became public knowledge , he was awarded the Distinguished Service Medal . His citation read : 
 Major General Leslie Richard Groves , as Commanding General , Manhattan Engineer District , Army Service Forces , from June 1942 to August 1945 coordinated , administered and controlled a project of unprecedented , world @-@ wide significance – the development of the Atomic Bomb . His was the responsibility for procuring materiel and personnel , marshalling the forces of government and industry , erecting huge plants , blending the scientific efforts of the United States and foreign countries , and maintaining completely secret the search for a key to release atomic energy . He accomplished his task with such outstanding success that in an amazingly short time the Manhattan Engineer District solved this problem of staggering complexity , defeating the Axis powers in the race to produce an instrument whose peacetime potentialities are no less marvellous than its wartime application is awesome . The achievement of General Groves is of unfathomable importance to the future of the nation and the world . 
 Groves had previously been nominated for the Distinguished Service Medal for his work on the Pentagon , but to avoid drawing attention to the Manhattan Project , it had not been awarded at the time . After the war , the Decorations Board decided to change it to a Legion of Merit . In recognition of his work on the project , the Belgian government made him a Commander of the Order of the Crown and the British government made him an honorary Companion of the Order of the Bath . 
 = = After the war = = 
 Responsibility for nuclear power and nuclear weapons was transferred from the Manhattan District to the United States Atomic Energy Commission on 1 January 1947 . On 29 January 1947 , Secretary of War Robert P. Patterson and Secretary of the Navy James V. Forrestal issued a joint directive creating the Armed Forces Special Weapons Project ( AFSWP ) to control the military aspects of nuclear weapons . Groves was appointed its chief on 28 February 1947 . In April , AFSWP moved from the New War Department Building to the fifth floor of the Pentagon . Groves had already made a start on the new mission by creating Sandia Base in 1946 . 
 The Chief of Staff of the United States Army , General of the Army Dwight D. Eisenhower , met with Groves on 30 January 1948 to evaluate his performance . Eisenhower recounted a long list of complaints about Groves pertaining to his rudeness , arrogance , insensitivity , contempt for the rules and maneuvering for promotion out of turn . Eisenhower made it clear that Groves would never become Chief of Engineers . Groves realized that in the rapidly shrinking postwar military he would not be given any assignment approaching in importance the one he had held in the Manhattan Project , as such posts would go to combat commanders returning from overseas , and he decided to leave the Army . He was promoted to lieutenant general on 24 January 1948 , just before his retirement on 29 February 1948 in recognition of his leadership of the Manhattan Project . By special Act of Congress his date of rank was backdated to 16 July 1945 , the date of the Trinity nuclear test . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Groves went on to become a vice president at Sperry Rand , an equipment and electronics firm , and moved to Darien , Connecticut , in 1948 . He retired from Sperry Rand in 1961 . He also served as president of the West Point alumni organization , the Association of Graduates . He presented General of the Army Douglas MacArthur the Sylvanus Thayer Award in 1962 , which was the occasion of MacArthur 's famous Duty , Honor , Country speech to the United States Military Academy Corps of Cadets . In retirement , Groves wrote an account of the Manhattan Project entitled Now It Can Be Told , originally published in 1962 . In 1964 , he moved back to Washington , D.C. 
 Groves suffered a heart attack caused by chronic calcification of the aortic valve on 13 July 1970 . He was rushed to Walter Reed Army Medical Center , where he died that night . A funeral service was held in the chapel at Fort Myer , Virginia , after which Groves was interred in Arlington National Cemetery next to his brother Allen , who had died of pneumonia in 1916 . Groves is memorialized as the namesake of Leslie Groves Park along the Columbia River , near the Hanford Site in Richland . 
 = Oregon Civic Justice Center = 
 The Oregon Civic Justice Center is a three @-@ story former library building on the campus of Willamette University in downtown Salem , Oregon , United States . Built in 1912 as a Carnegie library for the city of Salem , the building now houses several programs of Willamette University College of Law . Prior to the law school 's moving into the facility in 2008 , the building was used by the adjacent Young Women 's Christian Association ( YWCA ) from 1971 to 2006 . 
 Willamette purchased the old library in 2003 and later selected the College of Law as the program at the school to gain use of the building . The university began renovations in 2007 to restore part of the original layout and modernize the facility to accommodate the needs of modern education . After the brick @-@ faced , Beaux Arts style structure was remodeled , community oriented programs from the law school relocated to the renamed Oregon Civic Justice Center . This center houses programs such as a legal clinic and the school 's law review journal . 
 = = History = = 
 On October 12 , 1901 , the Salem Woman 's Club was organized with the wife of Oregon Governor Theodore Thurston Geer serving as president of the organization . Two years later the group started the Salem Public Library at Geer 's home , and then later located at <unk> and High streets in downtown Salem in the then city hall , with the library 's collection totaling 50 books at that time . The library group hired a librarian , Miss F. Phillips , for a salary of $ 20 per month to run the library . In 1907 , the group explored options to build a stand @-@ alone library building using funds provided by Andrew Carnegie , who was providing funds for building libraries around the world . 
 In May 1909 , the Woman ’ s Club purchased an option to buy the property on the southwest corner of Winter and State streets for $ 5500 , which was located across State from Willson Park ( a city park at that time ) . This group then raised the funds to purchase the land for $ 12 @,@ 000 , and Salem applied for a grant from the Carnegie foundation . The city was allotted $ 14 @,@ 000 by the foundation to build a library , but the Women ’ s Club which owned the existing library and land had not been involved in the process . The organization was able to get the money rescinded , and in November 1910 , worked with the city to increase their maintenance fund for the library . Carnegie then raised the grant to $ 27 @,@ 500 at the lobbying of Lulu Bush ( daughter @-@ in @-@ law to Asahel Bush ) and the Woman ’ s Club deeded the lot and the other library assets to the city of Salem . 
 On September 12 , 1912 , the new library opened on the property near Willamette University and the Oregon State Capitol , though construction on the structure was not completed , and much of the furniture had not been installed in the building . The completed structure included hardwood floors , crown molding , windows that were two @-@ stories tall , and a fireplace . The library cost $ 30 @,@ 000 to build , and within a year of operating had expanded to serve nearly 7 @,@ 700 patrons with a collection of nearly 10 @,@ 500 books . On January 4 , 1920 , a small fire damaged the furnace room and about 50 books at the library . 
 In 1914 , the YWCA of Salem was organized by the same Salem Women 's Club . Located in downtown on Cottage Street Northeast , the YWCA moved in 1954 to the lot adjoining the library . By the 1960s , the small library had a collection in excess of 100 @,@ 000 volumes , but needed a larger facility . A public campaign to build a new library began in 1968 , with the library to be part of a larger government center that included a city hall and fire station . In 1971 , the YWCA purchased the adjacent Carnegie library building for $ 150 @,@ 000 , and on July 6 , 1972 , the Salem Public Library vacated the Carnegie building and moved to Salem ’ s new Civic Center located west of the old library . Located next to the YWCA 's existing home , the old library was turned into the organization 's youth center . The building was remodeled from 1990 to 1991 . 
 = = = Legal center = = = 
 In 2003 , Willamette University purchased the old building from the YWCA . The $ 1 @.@ 35 million purchase included the main YWCA building adjacent to the former library for a total of 54 @,@ 000 square feet ( 5 @,@ 000 m2 ) , with the YWCA continuing their operations in the building for three years after the sale . After that group left the building in 2006 , Willamette spent $ 4 @.@ 6 million ( $ 2 million more than originally planned ) to remodel the old library building over a year 's time and convert it into the Oregon Civic Justice Center as part of the College of Law . The remodeling project began in the summer of 2007 and included removing a swimming pool structure that had been added to the south of the building , while also adding a new entrance to the former library on the same side as where the pool was located . Renovations also removed a mezzanine that the YWCA had added to the upper portion of the main floor . Other renovations included new heating , cooling , and ventilation systems , upgrades for technology , all while retaining the historical look and feel of the original 1912 building . 
 On September 12 , 2008 , the building was re @-@ dedicated exactly 96 years after the original dedication in a ceremony featuring sitting Associate Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court Ruth Bader Ginsburg . The ceremony was part of the College of Law 's 125th anniversary festivities and featured Oregon dignitaries such as Oregon Supreme Court Chief Justice and Willamette alum Paul De Muniz . Willamette President M. Lee Pelton , who also attended the ceremony , selected the law school as the new tenants after other departments and programs at the school submitted proposals for the use of the old library . 
 = = Amenities = = 
 The Beaux Arts style brick structure includes a portico on the State Street entrance on the north side . The façade includes an inscription , " PUBLIC LIBRARY " , in Roman type over the entryway , which is sheltered by a rigid metal awning on this north front . The roof of the square @-@ shaped structure is constructed of both metal and tile . Stone is used for architectural accents of lintels and cornices on the exterior . The building remains connected to the neighboring former offices of the YWCA , which is a Pietro Belluschi designed building also owned by Willamette University . 
 Inside , the main room is a conference room on the main floor that includes a large projection system that can be used for remote feeds , such as from the state capitol across the street . A painting by John <unk> is displayed over the fireplace , which the fireplace was part of the original structure in the conference room . The remainder of the interior of the building has a modern look with glass @-@ enclosed offices surrounding an open common area . Artwork owned by the university 's Hallie Ford Museum of Art is displayed in this area . The main floor of the three @-@ story building is the second floor , which rests atop the look @-@ out basement . A small meeting room is located above a small portion of the main floor . 
 = = Programs = = 
 The center is utilized to connect the College of Law and Willamette as a whole to the larger Salem community . In this capacity , the center houses several law school programs with community outreach aspects . These include the Oregon Law Commission , the Center for Democracy , the Center for Religion and Law , the Center for Dispute Resolution , Willamette 's Clinical Law Program , the Center for Law and Government , and the school 's law journal , the Willamette Law Review . Each of these programs were chosen to be housed in the center due to having community outreach programs , with the goal of the center being to create a community atmosphere between students , faculty , and the community at large . 
 = Oerip Soemohardjo = 
 Oerip Soemohardjo ( [ <unk> <unk> ] ; Perfected Spelling : Urip <unk> , 22 February 1893 – 17 November 1948 ) was an Indonesian general and the first chief of staff of the Indonesian National Armed Forces . He received several awards from the Indonesian government , including the title National Hero of Indonesia in 1964 . 
 Born in Purworejo , Dutch East Indies , Oerip exhibited leadership skills from an early age . As his parents wanted him to become a regent , after elementary school Oerip was sent to the School for Native Government Employees in Magelang . His mother died during his second year at the school , and Oerip left to undertake military training in Meester Cornelis , Batavia ( modern @-@ day Jatinegara , Jakarta ) . Upon graduating in 1914 , he became a lieutenant in the Royal Netherlands East Indies Army ; during almost 25 years of service he was stationed on three different islands and promoted several times , eventually becoming the highest @-@ ranking Native officer in the country . 
 Oerip resigned from his position in about 1938 after a disagreement with the regent of Purworejo , where he had been stationed . He and his wife Rohmah then moved to a village near Yogyakarta , where they established a large garden and villa . After Nazi Germany invaded the Netherlands in May 1940 Oerip was recalled to active duty . When the Empire of Japan occupied the Indies less than two years later , Oerip was arrested and detained in a prisoner @-@ of @-@ war camp for three and a half months . He spent the rest of the occupation at his villa . 
 On 14 October 1945 , several months after Indonesia proclaimed its independence , Oerip was declared the chief of staff and interim leader of the newly formed army . Working to build a united force from the fractured former military groups in the country , Oerip received little oversight owing to irregularities in the chain of command . On 12 November 1945 General Sudirman was selected as leader of the armed forces , while Oerip remained as chief of staff . The two oversaw almost three years of development during the Indonesian National Revolution , until Oerip resigned in early 1948 because of the political leadership 's lack of trust in the army . His health deteriorated ; he was already suffering from a weak heart , and he died of a heart attack a few months later . He was posthumously promoted to full general . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Oerip Soemohardjo was born <unk> Sidik ( " Little Muhammad " ) in his family 's home in <unk> , Purworejo , Dutch East Indies ( a colony of the Netherlands ) , on 22 February 1893 . He was the first son born to Soemohardjo , a headmaster and son of a local Muslim leader , and his wife , the daughter of Raden Tumenggung Widjojokoesoemo , the regent of Trenggalek ; the family later had two more sons , Iskandar and <unk> , as well as three daughters . The boys were raised partly by servants , and at a young age Sidik began showing leadership qualities , commanding groups of neighbourhood children in fishing and games of football . The brothers attended the school for Javanese headed by their father , and as a result received special treatment ; this led to them becoming complacent and frequently misbehaving . 
 In his second year of school , Sidik fell from a <unk> tree and lost consciousness . After he awoke , his mother sent a letter to Widjojokoesoemo , who decided that Sidik 's name was the cause of his misbehaviour . In reply , Widjojokoesoemo wrote that Sidik should be renamed Oerip , which means " alive " . When he recovered fully , his family decided that the newly renamed Oerip – who continued to misbehave – should study at the local Dutch School for Girls ( <unk> <unk> <unk> ) ; the schools for boys were full and they hoped that the girls ' school would improve Oerip 's skill in Dutch , the language of the regime , as well as his temperament . After a year in the girls ' school , in which Oerip became calmer , he was sent to a Dutch @-@ run school for boys . However , his academic results continued to be poor . Beginning in his final year of elementary school , he often visited his friend 's father , an ex @-@ soldier who had served in Aceh for twenty years , to listen to the old man 's stories , which inspired Oerip to join the Royal Netherlands East Indies Army ( Koninklijk Nederlands Indisch Leger , or KNIL ) . 
 After passing an exam for would @-@ be state employees and several months of preparations , Oerip moved to Magelang in 1908 to attend the School for Native Government Employees ( <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> , or OSVIA ) ; his parents intended for him to become a regent like his grandfather . The following year his brothers joined him . After his mother died in 1909 , Oerip sank into a months @-@ long bout of depression and became withdrawn . 
 After finishing the year at OSVIA , he decided to enrol at the military academy in Meester Cornelis , Batavia ( modern @-@ day Jatinegara , Jakarta ) . He went there directly from Magelang , and told his brothers to inform their father , who disapproved of his son 's choice . Soemohardjo initially attempted to bribe his son with 1 @,@ 000 gulden to return to OSVIA , but eventually agreed to pay for Oerip 's tuition . After his training , during which he found military life enjoyable , Oerip graduated from the academy in October 1914 and became a second lieutenant in the KNIL . 
 = = Royal Netherlands East Indies Army = = 
 After several days visiting his father in Purworejo , Oerip returned to Meester Cornelis where he took up a posting to Battalion XII . Even though he was the smallest man in the unit and the only native , he was placed in a position of leadership . A year and half later he was sent to Banjarmasin , Borneo . After a period patrolling the jungles outside <unk> <unk> and Muara <unk> , he was sent to Tanah <unk> , followed by Balikpapan . While stationed there Oerip was promoted to first lieutenant but faced discrimination as a native in the Dutch forces . In Banjarmasin he had convinced his commander to strike an ordinance forbidding non @-@ Dutch officers from joining the football team , and by 1917 Oerip had received equal legal status with Dutch officers . After Balikpapan Oerip was further sent to <unk> , Tarakan , and ultimately <unk> . 
 In <unk> , Oerip patrolled the border between the Dutch East Indies and the British @-@ controlled Kingdom of Sarawak ( part of modern @-@ day Malaysia ) ; he also worked to prevent conflicts and headhunting among Dayak tribes . One day , seven years after arriving in Borneo , Oerip returned from patrol to find his home had been burned down . Upon the recommendation of a passing doctor , Oerip went back to Java , via Tarakan and Surabaya , to Cimahi , where he spent several months in recovery from fatigue . 
 Fully recovered , in 1923 Oerip was stationed in his hometown , Purworejo . In September 1925 Oerip was transferred to Magelang to serve in the <unk> te <unk> ( Foot <unk> ) , a gendarmerie . Initially known to avoid women and under pressure to marry quickly , in Magelang Oerip became involved with Rohmah <unk> , the daughter of his former Javanese and Malay language teacher <unk> and a distant relative of female emancipation figure Kartini . The pair were engaged on 7 May 1926 and married on 30 June of the same year . Also in Magelang , Oerip took on his father 's name , which he used as a family name for dealing with the Dutch . Afterwards he began referring to himself by the full name of Oerip Soemohardjo , although others continued to call him Oerip . 
 The year after his marriage , Oerip and his wife were stationed in Ambarawa , where Oerip was tasked with rebuilding a previously disbanded unit . While training local recruits in place of the Dutch commander who had yet to arrive , Oerip was promoted to captain . After the Dutch commander arrived , in July 1928 Oerip was given a year 's leave , which he used to travel throughout Europe on a sightseeing trip with his wife . Upon his return to the Indies , he was stationed at Meester Cornelis . 
 In Meester Cornelis , Oerip began running training exercises ; while stationed in Batavia , his father died . In 1933 , he was sent to Padang Panjang in Sumatra to deal with unrest that had already killed several Dutch officers . His time in Padang Panjang passed uneventfully , and in July 1935 he was given leave to go to Europe again . He was also promoted to major at that time , which made him the highest @-@ ranking native officer in the KNIL . The following year , upon his return to the Indies , he was stationed in Purworejo . In mid @-@ 1938 , after a disagreement with the local regent , Oerip was told to transfer to Gombong ; he refused , then left the KNIL and moved to his parents @-@ in @-@ law 's home in Yogyakarta . 
 = = Civilian life and Japanese occupation = = 
 In Yogyakarta , the unemployed Oerip took up orchid gardening . Soon after arriving , he and his wife bought a villa in <unk> , north of the city . Although the villa was small , the couple used its 2 hectares ( 4 @.@ 9 acres ) of land to open a large flower garden , with their income subsidised by Oerip 's pension from the KNIL . At his villa , named KEM ( for <unk> en <unk> , or " Purity and Bravery " ) , Oerip often received guests , both military and civilian , from whom he received information about current events and to whom he gave advice regarding military matters and politics . In 1940 , the pair adopted a four @-@ year @-@ old Dutch girl named Abby from an orphanage in Semarang . 
 Shortly thereafter , on 10 May 1940 , when Nazi Germany invaded the Netherlands , Oerip was recalled to active service . Three days after reporting to Colonel Pik in Magelang , he went to the KNIL headquarters in Bandung , where he was the first retired officer to report . Afterwards , he and his family – who had joined him – were transferred to Cimahi , where Oerip was tasked with establishing a new battalion depot . Several native officers were stationed in northern parts of the Indies during 1941 in preparation for an expected attack by the Empire of Japan , although Oerip stayed in Cimahi . 
 After the Japanese occupied the Indies in early 1942 , Oerip was held in a mixed prisoner of war camp in Cimahi . Upon his release three and a half months later , Oerip refused an offer to form a new , Japanese @-@ backed police force and returned to KEM , where he and his wife rented paddy fields to grow rice while continuing to operate their flower garden . To protect their land , they surrounded their property and home with a high bamboo fence . Although no longer active in the military , Oerip occasionally received former KNIL members , including Abdul Haris Nasution and <unk> , who brought news of events outside the village . The couple continued their work , harassed and surveilled by the Japanese and pro @-@ Japanese Indonesians , until the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in early August 1945 signified that Japan would soon withdraw . It was during this period that Oerip began having heart problems . 
 = = Indonesian National Revolution and death = = 
 After the Proclamation of Indonesian Independence on 17 August 1945 , Oerip and his family left KEM for <unk> 's parents ' home in Yogyakarta . When the People 's Safety Body ( Badan Keamanan Rakjat , or BKR ) was formed on 23 August , Oerip led a group of military commanders who petitioned for it to be set up as a national military formation ; a separate group , led by politician Oto Iskandar di Nata , wanted the BKR to fulfil the functions of a police organisation . The political leadership , consisting of President Sukarno and Vice President Mohammad Hatta , agreed to a compromise : it became a police @-@ style organisation , but most of its members had served in the military , either with the Defenders of the Homeland ( Pembela Tanah Air , or PETA ) or the Heihō . 
 On 14 October 1945 – nine days after the Indonesian National Armed Forces was formally established – Oerip was declared its Chief of Staff and interim leader , and left immediately for Jakarta . In a cabinet meeting the following day , he was ordered to build a national army , headquartered in Yogyakarta , in preparation for an expected assault by Dutch troops coming to reclaim the Indies . He departed for Yogyakarta on 16 October , and arrived the following day . He first established the headquarters in a room at Hotel Merdeka , which he used until the Sultan of Yogyakarta Hamengkubuwono IX donated land and a building for the army to use . 
 With the BKR scattered under independent leadership throughout the country , the newly formed People 's Security Army ( Tentara <unk> Rakjat or TKR , now known as the Tentara Nasional Indonesia ) drew officers mainly from the native members of the former KNIL . However , these officers were poorly received by Indonesian nationalists , who viewed them as mercenaries for having served in the Dutch forces . Meanwhile , rank and file members of the TKR were drawn from numerous groups , including former PETA , current Pemuda ( young Indonesian revolutionaries ) , and the BKR . Although Oerip set out a command structure , in reality the army 's hierarchy was provisional and depended heavily on the strength of local units . 
 Following a government decree on 20 October Oerip became subordinate to both the acting Minister of Defence <unk> and Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces Soeprijadi . However , neither man showed up to assume his duties . Soeprijadi , a PETA soldier who had led an uprising against Japanese forces in Blitar in February 1945 , was thought dead . While <unk> 's position remained unfilled , the guerrilla leader <unk> declared himself Minister of Defence . As such , Oerip had little oversight and felt pressured to quickly establish a stable command structure . On 2 November , he appointed leaders for military operations in various parts of the country : Didi Kartasasmita for western Java , <unk> for central Java , Mohammad for eastern Java , and <unk> <unk> for Sumatra ; each of these sub @-@ commanders was given the rank of major general . Oerip also began appropriating weapons to different TKR commands . He took confiscated Japanese weapons from well @-@ equipped forces and distributed them as needed . However , the results were less successful than he had hoped . PETA had been organised locally during the Japanese occupation , and as such its members were unable to accept a centralised leadership . 
 On 12 November 1945 , at the first general meeting of army leadership , General Sudirman – the leader of the Fifth Division in Purwokerto , who had two years military experience and was 23 years younger than Oerip – was elected leader of the army following two deadlocked votes . In the third round , Oerip had 21 votes to Sudirman 's 22 . Divisional commanders from Sumatra , who had voted unanimously , swayed the vote in Sudirman 's favour ; Oerip had lost votes because some of the division leaders distrusted his history with the KNIL and the oath he had taken to the Dutch motherland upon graduation . Although Sudirman was surprised at his selection and offered to surrender the leadership position to Oerip , the meeting did not allow it ; Oerip himself was glad to no longer be in charge of the army . Sudirman kept Oerip , by then a lieutenant general , to serve as chief of staff under him . While Sudirman remained unconfirmed , Oerip remained de jure leader ; however , the Indonesian journalist Salim Said writes that Oerip 's orders were at times unintelligible owing to the leader 's poor command of Indonesian and often ignored unless approved by Sudirman . 
 When General Sudirman was approved on 18 December , he began working to consolidate and unite the army . Meanwhile , Oerip handled day @-@ to @-@ day organisational and technical issues . Many of the details , such as company uniforms , he left to regional commanders . However , to deal with more important issues , such as establishing a military police and preventing enemy paratroopers from landing , he passed edicts that applied nationally . 
 Together , Sudirman and Oerip were able to address many of the differences between former KNIL and PETA troops . The government also renamed the army twice in January 1946 , first to the People 's Security Army ( Tentara Keamanan Rakjat ) , then to the Army of the Republic of Indonesia ( Tentara <unk> Indonesia , or TRI ) . On 23 February 1946 , Oerip was appointed head of the 11 @-@ member Committee to <unk> the Army ( <unk> Besar <unk> Tentara ) , formed by presidential decree . After four months of discussion , on 17 May the committee gave its recommendations to Sukarno . Oerip was set to handle day @-@ to @-@ day operations of a downsized army , while the Ministry of Defence was given greater bureaucratic power . Sudirman was kept as leader of the army . 
 As Minister of Defence Amir Sjarifuddin began establishing pro @-@ leftist groups within the military , Oerip became distrustful of the political leadership and vehemently decried the government 's attempts to use soldiers ' political affiliations to control the military . Still , he and Sudirman continued to work to ensure that paramilitary troops ( laskar ) , which had arisen from the general populace , were included in the military . This was realised on 3 June 1947 , when the government declared the union of the laskar and TRI into a new military organisation , the Indonesian National Armed Forces ( Tentara Nasional Indonesia , or TNI ) . Meanwhile , Oerip established a military academy in Yogyakarta . 
 To meet the Dutch threat , Oerip intended to attack while the former colonists were still consolidating their forces , a plan that was quashed by the government 's attempts at diplomacy . He preferred guerrilla tactics to formal military conflicts , once telling a subordinate that the best attack would be one with a hundred snipers hidden behind enemy lines . Oerip was strongly against the Renville Agreement , an ultimately unsuccessful treaty that led to the withdrawal of 35 @,@ 000 troops from western Java and the formalisation of the Van Mook Line between Dutch and Indonesian forces . He saw the agreement , ratified on 17 January 1948 , as a stalling tactic , giving the Dutch the chance to strengthen their forces . Meanwhile , Amir Sjarifuddin – by then also serving as prime minister – began culling the army , predominantly keeping leftist @-@ leaning troops . Disgusted with what he perceived as the government 's lack of trust in the military , Oerip tendered his resignation , although he continued to serve as an advisor to the Minister of Defence , Vice President Hatta . 
 After several months of growing steadily weaker and undergoing treatment from Dr Sim Ki Ay , on the evening of 17 November 1948 Oerip collapsed and died from a heart attack in his room in Yogyakarta . After a night @-@ long viewing he was buried the next day in Semaki Heroes ' Cemetery and posthumously promoted to general . When Sudirman threatened to resign in 1949 , he blamed Oerip 's death – as well as his own tuberculosis – on the government 's inconsistency during the revolution . Oerip was survived by his wife and adopted daughter . Abby died of malaria in January 1951 , and Rohmah died on 29 October 1977 in Semarang ; she was buried in <unk> . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Oerip received numerous awards from the national government posthumously , including the Bintang Sakti ( 1959 ) , Bintang Mahaputera ( 1960 ) , Bintang Republik Indonesia Adipurna ( 1967 ) , and Bintang Kartika Eka <unk> Utama ( 1968 ) . On 10 December 1964 he was declared a National Hero of Indonesia through Presidential Decree 314 of 1964 . Sudirman was also declared a National Hero by the same decree . 
 On 22 February 1964 the Indonesian military academy in Magelang dedicated a memorial to him , which described the military leader as " a son of Indonesia who valued work over words , who prioritised his Duty over his wants . " The academy 's Catholic chapel also includes a dedication to him from 1965 , prompted by a discussion between Rohmah and a missionary friend of hers . Several streets are named after Oerip , including in his hometown of Purworejo , nearby Yogyakarta , and the capital at Jakarta . 
 = Hud ( 1963 film ) = 
 Hud is a 1963 Western film directed by Martin Ritt and starring Paul Newman , Melvyn Douglas and Patricia Neal . It was produced by Ritt and Newman 's recently founded company , Salem Productions , and was their first film for Paramount Pictures . Hud was filmed on location on the Texas Panhandle and in Claude , Texas . Its screenplay was by Irving Ravetch and Harriet Frank , Jr. and was based on Larry McMurtry 's 1961 novel , Horseman , Pass By . The film 's title character , Hud Bannon , was a minor character in the original screenplay but was reworked as the lead role . With its main character an antihero , Hud was later described as a revisionist Western . 
 The film centers on the ongoing conflict between principled patriarch Homer Bannon and his unscrupulous and arrogant son , Hud , during an outbreak of foot @-@ and @-@ mouth disease putting the family 's cattle ranch at risk . Lonnie , Homer 's grandson and Hud 's nephew , is caught in the conflict and forced to choose which character to follow . 
 Hud premiered at the Venice International Film Festival , and was a critical and commercial success at its general release . It was nominated for seven Academy Awards , winning three ; Patricia Neal won Best Actress , Melvyn Douglas won Best Supporting Actor and James Wong Howe the Academy Award for Best Black and White Cinematography . Howe 's use of contrast to create space and his selection of black @-@ and @-@ white was favored by critics . In later reviews , the film received additional praise . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Hud Bannon ( Paul Newman ) is ambitious and self @-@ centered , the opposite of his deeply principled rancher father Homer ( Melvyn Douglas ) . Also living on the Bannon ranch is Hud 's teenage nephew , Lonnie ( Brandon <unk> ) , who looks up to both men but is most impressed by Hud . Lonnie and Hud are attracted to the <unk> ' housekeeper , Alma ( Patricia Neal ) . Although she is attracted to Hud , Alma keeps her distance because she has been mistreated in the past by men like him . 
 After the sudden , inexplicable death of a cow on the ranch , Homer sends Lonnie to town to bring Hud to the ranch for his opinion . Hud is annoyed by his father 's decision to summon the state veterinarian , and suggests selling the animals to other ranchers before the news spreads ; otherwise , government agents will kill all the cattle and destroy everything they have worked for . He blames his father for not realizing that the cheap Mexican cattle were sick before he bought them . Adhering to his principles , Homer ignores Hud 's idea and waits for the veterinarian . Upon his arrival , the state veterinarian immediately issues a legally binding State Livestock Transfer Order directing the quarantine of the ranch for a possible foot @-@ and @-@ mouth disease outbreak . This freezes the movement of all livestock to or from the Bannon ranch , while they await the test results . Aware of the possibility of bankruptcy to the ranch , Homer nevertheless complies . 
 One night , Hud takes Lonnie out and they prevail in a drunken barroom brawl . Back at the ranch he reflects on the past ( when he and Lonnie 's father did the same thing ) , revealing his feelings about his brother Norman 's death and his father 's coldness to him . When they enter the house Homer confronts Hud , accusing his son of trying to corrupt Lonnie . They argue , with Hud accusing Homer of hypocrisy and resentment of him for Norman 's death . Homer replies that his disappointment in Hud began before the accident ; Hud cares about no one but himself , and is " not fit to live with " . Hurt and angry , Hud retorts " My mama loved me , but she died " as he walks away . When Lonnie tells Homer that he was too harsh and other people act like him , Homer replies that one day he will have to decide for himself what is right and wrong . 
 After learning from Lonnie that Hud is trying to seize the ranch , Homer confronts Hud . Infuriated by his eroded inheritance , Hud threatens to have Homer declared legally incompetent so he can take over the ranch . Homer tells his son he will lose . He admits that he made mistakes raising Hud , and was too hard on him . When Hud accuses him of having a " shape up or ship out " policy , Homer wonders aloud how a man like Hud can be his son and storms off to his room . Hud , drunk , goes outside and tries to rape Alma before Lonnie comes to her aid . 
 When the herd tests positive for foot @-@ and @-@ mouth disease , the veterinarian orders them to be killed and buried on the ranch under state supervision to keep the disease from spreading . Hud points out that they could sell some oil leases to keep the ranch profitable , but Homer refuses as he only has pride in cattle , despite his ruinous decision to purchase the Mexican cattle . 
 Alma decides to leave the ranch . After Lonnie drops her off at the bus station , Hud sees her as she is waiting . He apologizes for his drunken assault but not his attraction to her , and he would remember her as " the one who got away " . Driving back to the ranch , Lonnie sees his grandfather lying on the side of the road after a fall from his horse during a survey of the ranch . Hud pulls up behind Lonnie and , despite their efforts , he dies . 
 Lonnie is repelled by his uncle 's treatment of Homer and Alma and leaves the ranch after his grandfather 's funeral , uncertain if he will ever return . When he tells Hud to put his half of their inheritance in the bank , his uncle replies that Lonnie now sees him as Homer did . Hud goes back into the Bannon house alone ; as he closes the door , the final fade @-@ out is the window shade 's pull @-@ ring swaying . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Paul Newman as Hud Bannon , the arrogant , self @-@ centered son of rancher Homer Bannon . To prepare for the role Newman worked for ten days on a Texas ranch , sleeping in a bunkhouse . For his Texas accent he was coached by Bob Hinkle , who coached James Dean for his role as Jett Rink in Giant . 
 Melvyn Douglas as Homer Bannon : Hud 's father , Lonnie 's grandfather and owner of the Bannon ranch . Although Paramount was doubtful about casting him due to his heart condition , Martin Ritt insisted that he was the right actor for the role . 
 Brandon De Wilde as Lonnie Bannon , Hud 's teenage nephew who idolizes him . De Wilde , a former child actor , was best known at the time for his award @-@ winning role in Shane . 
 Patricia Neal as Alma Brown , the <unk> ' housekeeper . Ritt decided to cast Neal ( whom he had met at the Actors Studio ) when he was impressed by her performance in The Untouchables episode , " The Maggie Storm Story " . The actress signed for $ 30 @,@ 000 ; although she had third billing and 25 minutes of screen time , the film had a major impact on her career . 
 Whit Bissell as Mr. Burris 
 Crahan Denton as Jesse 
 John Ashley as <unk> 
 Val Avery as Jose 
 George Petrie as Joe Scanlon 
 Curt Conway as Truman Peters 
 Sheldon Allman as Mr. Thompson 
 Pitt Herbert as Mr. Larker 
 Carl Low as Mr. Kirby 
 Robert Hinkle as Radio Announcer Frank 
 Don Kennedy as Charlie Tucker 
 Sharyn Hillyer as Myra 
 Yvette Vickers as Lily Peters 
 = = Production = = 
 After working together on other projects , director Martin Ritt and Paul Newman co @-@ founded Salem Productions and the company made a three @-@ film deal with Paramount Studios . For its first film Salem hired husband @-@ and @-@ wife scriptwriters Irving Ravetch and Harriet Frank , Jr . , who worked with Ritt and Newman on The Long , Hot Summer . Ravetch found Larry McMurtry 's novel , Horseman , Pass By , in an airport shop during a Dallas stopover and presented the project to Ritt and Newman after reading a description of Hud Bannon . The partners met Ravetch and Frank at their home , approved the project and the writers adapted the script . 
 Although McMurtry 's novel focuses on Lonnie Bannon , Ravetch and Frank expanded Hud 's character to the lead role . Ritt wanted Hud to be an antihero who did not regret his actions at the end of the film . He was changed from Homer 's stepson to his son , and the character of Homer 's wife was eliminated . Newman and Ritt initially named the project Wild Desire , followed by The Winners , Hud Bannon Against the World , Hud Bannon and finally Hud . Ravetch and Frank accompanied Ritt and Newman through pre @-@ production , casting and publicity design . 
 Ritt asked that the housekeeper character ( originally <unk> , a black woman ) be renamed Alma and played by a white actress , because he thought a relationship between Hud and a black woman would not work . According to Ravetch and Frank , " Neither American film nor American society was quite ready for that back then " . Although <unk> is raped by Hud in the novel , Ravetch and Frank added Lonnie 's intervention to " highlight " his significance and keep Hud " human " and not " totally and simplistically evil " . To accentuate the scene 's violence , Hud 's roughness was complemented by the use of shadows , while a camera was attached on Newman 's back to create a " man 's view angle " while he chased Neal . Film critic Pauline Kael described Neal 's performance as " perhaps the first female equivalent of the white @-@ negro " . 
 Cinematographer James Wong Howe shot Hud in black @-@ and @-@ white to " elevate its dramatic propensities " . Filmed in Panavision , Howe used high contrast with unbalanced light and dark tones . He highlighted the white ground and clear skies , making the shadows black . Dark tones were " overpowered " by light ones , creating a sense of " infinite space " . For faces and structures , Howe used light reflected from the ground . The contrast between the environment and objects silhouetted against the background provides a sense of depth . Ritt 's biographer , Carlton Jackson , wrote that in Hud " the scenery becomes a part of the thematic development itself " . According to Texas Monthly , " Howe 's austere rendition of Texas landscapes [ ... ] remains one of the film 's most distinctive pleasures " . 
 Hud was shot over a four @-@ week period in and around the Texas Panhandle , using the town of Claude as a setting . Location filming began on May 21 , 1962 , and was finished by the second week of June . Outdoor scenes were filmed at the Goodnight Ranch , To avoid surpassing the shooting schedule due to weather conditions , the cast had to cancel two scenes originally planned for the location that featured people from Claude and Amarillo . The rest of the scenes were shot at the Paramount sound stages in Hollywood beginning in the first week of July . The film was completed on August 1 , 1962 . The pig @-@ scramble scene , written by dialect coach Bob Hinkle , replaced a softball game in Ravetch and Frank 's script ; Hinkle played the announcer in the scene . For the filming of the cattle @-@ slaughter scene , the Humane Society was present to monitor the animals ' treatment . The herd was sprayed with a substance to make it appear ill , and bungee cords were tied to the cows ' legs . Camera angles were arranged by Ritt and Howe to avoid showing the death of the cattle . When a man was shown shooting , the camera would switch to the cattle ; the crew shook the cords , creating an effect of the herd being shot . During location shooting , Newman and De Wilde often changed hotel rooms due to female fans following them . 
 Elmer Bernstein used sparse arrangements for Hud 's score ; in its theme , Bernstein " insinuated " natural sounds with " poignant strings on the guitar " . Variety called the theme " vital and noteworthy " , " sombre , plaintive and foreboding " . 
 Hud 's budget was $ 2 @.@ 35 million , and Paramount executives were unhappy with the film . They felt it was too dark and were displeased by the black @-@ and @-@ white cinematography and Hud 's lack of remorse and unchanged behavior . Although Martin <unk> asked Ritt to change the film 's ending , he and Newman decided to keep the original . After Hud was previewed , Paramount considered dropping the project , feeling that it was not " commercial enough " , but Ritt flew to New York and convinced the executives to release the film unmodified . Advertising posters , with Newman in blue jeans in a " suggestive , full @-@ length pose " , read : " Paul Newman is " Hud " ! ... the man with the barbed @-@ wire soul " . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Hud was acclaimed during its premiere at the 24th Venice International Film Festival . After its general release on May 29 , 1963 the film grossed $ 10 million at the domestic box office , earning $ 5 million in theatrical rentals . It was the 19th @-@ highest @-@ grossing film of the year . Life called Hud an " arresting — almost great — movie " , describing Paul Newman 's acting as " faultless " . An Outlook reviewer wrote that the four main cast members acted " splendidly " ; Newman " speaks at times with an unpleasant nasal twang , but is clearly suited to the part . " They described Melvyn Douglas ' performance as " impeccable " , Brandon de Wilde 's as " [ successful ] in looking earnest unsure of himself " and praised Patricia Neal 's expressiveness . Time called the performances " splendid " , and Howe 's photography " brings the Texas panhandle to dusty , sweaty life . " The New York Times , in a favorable review , said Ritt 's direction had " [ a ] powerfully realistic style " and called Ravetch and Frank 's work " [ an ] excellent screenplay . " The newspaper called Newman 's acting " tremendous " , Douglas ' " magnificent " , de Wilde 's " eloquent of clean , modern youth " and Patricia Neal 's " brilliant . " The review also praised James Wong Howe 's " excellent " camera work and Elmer Bernstein 's " poignant " score . Variety called Hud " a near miss " ; its screenplay fails to " filter its meaning and theme lucidly through its characters and story " , although it called the four leads ' performances " excellent . " 
 Through the character of Hud , Ritt and Newman had intended to show the corruption of modern capitalism and the pitfalls of admiring an individual blindly , without observing his character . Critics , however , did not universally echo this view . Life 's review described Hud as " likable , smart , and [ with ] the potential to measure up to his tough , honorable father " and Saturday Review called him a " charming , raffish monster " . According to Outlook , " Hud Bannon is a mean , unscrupulous man who never has even a momentary twinge of conscience or change of heart " ; in the end scene , Hud " [ p ] <unk> down the shade on the world of goodness and decency " . Pauline Kael initially described the film as an " anti @-@ Western " ; she called it an " Anti @-@ american film " , which was " so astutely made and yet such a mess that it ( was ) redeemed by its fundamental dishonesty . " 
 Although Hud was conceived as an outwardly charming but morally repugnant character , audiences , especially young people , found him likeable , even admirable . Paul Newman said , " We thought [ the ] last thing people would do was accept Hud as a heroic character ... His amorality just went over [ the audience 's ] head ; all they saw was this western , heroic individual " . Martin Ritt later attributed audience interpretation of the character to the counterculture of the 1960s which " changed the values " of the young audiences who saw Hud as a hero . 
 = = = Later evaluation in film guides = = = 
 Leonard Maltin 's Movie Guide gave Hud four stars out of four . Maltin called the story " excellent " and its performances " impeccable " . Steven H. Scheuer 's Movies on TV also gave the film four stars out of four ; Scheuer called it " a must for movie @-@ drama fans " , and said the cast was " superb " . In Film and Video Guide Leslie Halliwell gave Hud four stars out of four , calling it " unique " . Allmovie gave Hud five stars out of five , calling the film " a warning shot for the Sixties " and saying that its " generational conflict would prove prescient " . It praised Howe 's cinematography , which gave the film " an authentic Western feel " . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 Hud was nominated for seven Academy Awards at the 36th Annual Academy Awards in 1963 . It won three , including Best Actress ( Neal ) , Best Supporting Actor ( Douglas ) and Best Cinematography ( Wong ) . Neal also won the BAFTA Award for Best Foreign Actress . The film was nominated for five Golden Globe Awards , won four Laurel Awards ( Top Drama , Top Male Dramatic Performance , Top Female Dramatic Performance and Top Male Supporting Performance ) and received the Best Written American Drama Writers Guild of America Award . 
 = Battle of Bautzen ( 1945 ) = 
 The Battle of Bautzen ( or Battle of <unk> , April 1945 ) was one of the last battles of the Eastern Front during World War II . It was fought on the extreme southern flank of the Spremberg @-@ Torgau Offensive , seeing days of pitched street fighting between forces of the Polish Second Army and elements of the Soviet 52nd Army and 5th Guards Army on one side and elements of German Army Group Center in the form of the remnants of the 4th Panzer and 17th armies on the other . 
 The battle took place during Ivan Konev 's 1st Ukrainian Front 's push toward Berlin , which was part of the larger Soviet Berlin Offensive . The battle was fought in the town of Bautzen ( Polish : <unk> ) and the rural areas to the northeast situated primarily along the Bautzen – Niesky line . Major combat began on 21 April 1945 and continued until 26 April although isolated engagements continued to take place until 30 April . The Polish Second Army under Karol Świerczewski suffered heavy losses , but , with the aid of Soviet reinforcements , prevented the German forces from breaking through to their rear . According to one historian , the Battle of Bautzen was one of the Polish Army 's bloodiest battles . 
 After the battle both sides claimed victory and modern views as to who won the battle remain contradictory . Because the war was almost over and the battle had no strategic impact on the ongoing Battle of Berlin , German historiography has focused more on its tactical aspects . The German operation successfully recaptured Bautzen and its surroundings , which were held until the end of the war . Polish historiography during the People 's Republic of Poland portrayed the battle as difficult , but victorious . After the fall of communism , Polish historians became much more critical of Świerczewski 's command , blaming the near destruction of the Polish force on his incompetence and desire to capture Dresden . The battle 's outcome is now generally seen in Poland as a very costly victory for the Soviets and their Polish allies . 
 = = Background = = 
 In the last months of World War II , the Polish Second Army , under General Karol Świerczewski , took part in the Soviet drive on Berlin . Part of Marshal Ivan Konev 's 1st Ukrainian Front , the Poles operated in the centre of the front , flanked on the right by the 5th Guards Army and on the left by the 7th Mechanized Corps . Opposing these forces was the 4th Panzer Army under General Fritz @-@ Hubert <unk> , of Field Marshal Ferdinand Schörner 's Army Group Center . 
 On 17 April , the Polish Second Army breached German defenses on the rivers Weisser <unk> and Neisse . Their pursuit of retreating German forces toward Dresden threatened to cut off additional forces in the Muskauer Forst region . On 18 and 19 April elements of the Second Army ( the 8th Infantry Division and 1st Armored Corps ) engaged the Germans in the south and pushed them back while the remaining units ( 5th , 7th , 9th and 10th infantry divisions ) drove on to Dresden , gaining bridgeheads on the River Spree north of Bautzen and destroying German forces in the Muskauer Forst . The following day Soviet units of the 7th Mechanized Corps captured parts of Bautzen and secured the line south of Niesky , taking Weißenberg and trapping several German formations . 
 Świerczewski decided to prioritize the taking of Dresden over securing his southern flank , deviating from the plan he was given by Konev . Meanwhile , Schörner was concentrating his units ( the " Görlitz Group " ) in the Görlitz ( <unk> ) and Reichenbach region , and planned to launch a counteroffensive at the southern flank of the Polish Army . His aim was to stop the 1st Front 's advance and break through to Berlin to relieve the trapped 9th Army . The Germans were pinning their hopes on the idea that the Soviets might be fended off long enough for the city to be surrendered to the Western Allies . The concentration of Schörner 's units went unnoticed by Soviet and Polish reconnaissance . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 = = = Opposing forces = = = 
 German forces were composed of elements of the 4th Panzer Army and commanded by the headquarters for the Grossdeutschland and 57th Armored Corps . For the battle , the Germans had two armored divisions ( the 20th and Hermann Göring ) , two mechanized divisions ( the Brandenburg and Hermann Göring 2 ) , an infantry division ( the 17th ) as well as an infantry division battle group ( the remnants of the <unk> Volksgrenadier Division ) . This force counted some 50 @,@ 000 soldiers , 300 tanks , and 600 guns . The supply train of the 10th SS Panzer Division was also present near Bautzen . 
 The Polish Second Army consisted of five infantry divisions : ( 5th , 7th , 8th , 9th and 10th , the 1st Armored Corps , and smaller units ) , about 84 @,@ 000 – 90 @,@ 000 men , and 500 tanks . Many of them were new recruits inexperienced in combat , incorporated from the recently retaken Polish territories . The quality of the officer corps has also been questioned . One of the major problems facing the People 's Army was lack of a qualified cadre ; a 1944 estimate showed that the army had one officer for each 1 @,@ 200 soldiers . Many of the officers in the Polish Army were Soviet officers of Polish descent . 
 Overall , the German units were less numerous than the Polish forces , their equipment worn and supplies inferior . Polish sources describe the Germans as more experienced , however the German sources accentuate their mixed structure of experienced soldiers and inexperienced recruits of Hitlerjugend and Volkssturm units . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Drive on Dresden = = = 
 On 21 April , a gap had formed between the Polish infantry units ( 8th and 9th infantry divisions ) and the 1st Armored Corps pushing towards Dresden , and the Polish units which were securing the Muskauer Forst region . The 7th and 10th infantry divisions were engaged near Neisse and the 5th Infantry Division and the 16th Tank Brigade were in transit in between those two groups . The Polish units were stretched over a line of 50 kilometers ( 31 mi ) . The Germans took the opportunity presented to them and pushed into this gap . The events of 21 April marked the beginning of this battle . In the west , the 20th Panzer Division commenced its drive on Bautzen , while in the east the 17th Infantry Division advanced on Niesky and Weißenberg , freeing a number of trapped German troops on its way . The Germans drove in between the Polish Second Army and the Soviet 52nd Army around Bautzen , some 40 kilometers ( 25 mi ) north @-@ east of Dresden and 25 kilometers ( 16 mi ) west of Görlitz , sweeping the Soviet units of the 48th Rifle Corps , and driving towards Spremberg . Major General M. K. <unk> , commander of the 52nd Army 's 254 Rifle Division of the 73rd Rifle Corps was mortally wounded around Bautzen . At first , Polish general Świerczewski continued with his attempt to take Dresden , which contributed to the growing chaos in the Polish forces , as many communication lines were cut . 
 The Germans succeeded in linking up with the remnants of their forces in the Muskauer Forst , and throwing the local Polish and Soviet forces into chaos . The Polish Second Army lost cohesion and split into four groups . Several units of the Polish Second Army found themselves surrounded . In particular , the Polish 5th Infantry Division and 16th Tank Brigade were struck in the rear , suffering severe losses . The headquarters of the 5th Division , defended only by sapper and training battalions , came under attack . The command group managed to break through to the 16th Tank Brigade , but that unit itself was almost annihilated at <unk> ( <unk> ) , losing over 90 percent of its personnel ; out of 1 @,@ 300 soldiers , only about 100 survived . The commanding general of the Polish 5th Infantry Division , Aleksander <unk> , was killed . In the village of <unk> , today a part of Bautzen , between 196 and 300 captured German members of the Volkssturm were locked in a barn which was set on fire by retreating Polish or Soviet troops . 
 By 23 April the German breakthrough reached the Schwarzer <unk> River in the east , and <unk> , <unk> and <unk> in the west . The main body of the German force was located in the forested region around <unk> . The Germans continued their push toward Königswartha and Hoyerswerda . 
 = = = Polish retreat = = = 
 Eventually , Świerczewski halted his force 's advance on Dresden , and ordered it to pull back and secure the breach . On 22 April he ordered the 1st Armored Corps to change direction , retreat from Dresden and support the centre . The 8th Infantry Division was also recalled ; however , the 9th remained near Dresden . For a while Świerczewski was out of communication with his superiors , including Marshal Konev . Konev also sent his chief of staff , General Ivan <unk> Petrov , and his chief of operations , General Vladimir Ivanovich <unk> , to look at the situation . Petrov managed to re @-@ establish communications , and left <unk> in charge . Świerczewski was briefly relieved of his command for incompetence . To stabilize the situation , Konev ordered eight divisions from the Ukrainian Front to reinforce the Polish positions . Soviet 14th and Soviet 95th guards rifle divisions , as well as the Soviet 4th Guards Tank Corps , were ordered to attack toward Kamenz , Königswartha and <unk> to stop the Germans from advancing further north . The 2nd Air Army was also assigned to this theater . 
 Meanwhile , the German advance to the southeast of Bautzen was successful . The Soviet 294th Rifle Division was encircled at Weißenberg by the Brandenburg Division . In its subsequent breakout on 24 April , large parts of the 294th Division were destroyed . At the same time at Bautzen the 20th Panzer Division was able to make contact with the trapped units in the town from the south . <unk> then lost no time and immediately ordered an attack into Bautzen . Coordinating with the trapped troops , he was able to break into the town . A hastily assembled Polish counterattack was not successful and most of Bautzen was then recaptured after several days of bloody house @-@ to @-@ house combat . Several remaining pockets of resistance in the town were cleared during the next days . Outside the town the German advance stalled , as their troops were running low on fuel supplies . The recapture of Bautzen was one of the last successful German tactical victories on the Eastern Front . 
 By 25 April , Polish units were able to stabilize a defense on the line Kamenz – <unk> – north Bautzen – Spree – <unk> – <unk> . On that day , Hitler congratulated Schörner on his " victory " . The Polish 7th and 10th infantry divisions were ordered to advance toward <unk> @-@ <unk> . The 7th and 10th Polish infantry divisions slowly advanced , with the 10th reaching north of <unk> . With the Soviet units on their right flank they also secured a road to Königswartha . 
 The 9th Division found itself alone at the spearhead of the abandoned Polish push towards Dresden . It received orders to retreat on 26 April . Attempting to withdraw quickly and to form back with the main forces , it was intercepted by the Germans and sustained heavy losses . The units were moving with insufficient security , on the assumption that the line of retreat was safe ; at the same time the Germans captured Polish orders with details of their planned withdrawal routes . Coordination between the units was also lacking . 26th Infantry Regiment from the 9th Division took very heavy casualties ( 75 percent ) in the " valley of death " around <unk> @-@ <unk> and <unk> . A Polish military hospital convoy from the same division was ambushed near <unk> , with most of its personnel and wounded executed ( about 300 casualties ) . There was only one survivor , chaplain Jan <unk> . The division commander , Colonel Aleksander Łaski , was taken captive . As a result of these losses , the 9th Division ceased to be an effective force ; the remaining personnel were merged into the Soviet 19th Guards Rifle Division . 
 According to some sources , 26 April marks the end of this battle , although less severe and isolated clashes in that region continued until 30 April . Other sources note that heavy fighting still took place on 27 April , and that the German advance was only completely halted by 28 April . By the end of the month , the Polish Second Army and the Soviet forces had repelled the German attack , forming a line toward Kamenz – <unk> – <unk> , and was preparing to launch an offensive toward Prague . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Both sides suffered heavy casualties . The Polish casualties were particularly severe . In a relatively short time the Polish Second Army lost more than 22 percent of its personnel and 57 percent of its tanks and armored vehicles ( about 200 total ) . Official estimates claimed about 18 @,@ 000 casualties ( including almost 5 @,@ 000 dead ) . Some other estimates give the Polish casualties as up to 25 @,@ 000 . According to Polish historian Zbigniew Wawer , this was the most bloody battle that the Polish Army had been involved in since the battle of Bzura in 1939 . 
 German casualties were significant , but less than the Polish and Soviet ones ; contemporary Polish sources estimated German losses at 6 @,@ 500 personnel , which is now seen as an inflated estimate . The German forces failed in their objective of breaking through the 1st Ukrainian Front and coming to the aid of Berlin . They managed , however , to inflict very serious casualties on the local Polish and Soviet units and stopped the Polish drive on Dresden ( it was still in German hands at the time of the German capitulation on May 9 ) . The successful recapture of Bautzen , Weißenberg and surroundings is called one of the last successful German armored counterattacks of the war . Bautzen and surroundings stayed in German hands until Germany 's capitulation . Although the battle had no strategic impact on the battle raging in Berlin , it allowed most of the participating German units as well as numerous refugees from the east to escape to the west , surrendering to the Western Allies . 
 = = Historiography = = 
 Despite the heavy Polish casualties — or according to one historian , possibly because of them — the battle has been largely neglected in Polish historiography . During the period of the People 's Republic of Poland it was portrayed merely as a difficult but victorious battle . However , since the fall of communism modern Polish historians have been much more critical of Świerczewski 's command , blaming his drive on Dresden for the near destruction of the Polish force . Świerczewski 's lack of competence , according to some sources , included commanding the battle while drunk . He was briefly relieved of command by Marshal Konev , but due to the backing of the Soviet high command ( most likely the NKVD ) he not only retained his position but all controversies were hushed up , and after the war was hailed as a hero . The actions of other Polish officers have also been questioned , such as the 9th Infantry Division commander 's decision to advance without sufficient reconnaissance and escort . 
 In modern Polish historiography the battle 's outcome is seen as a victory , if a very costly one , for the Polish and Soviet troops . As noted by historians such as Wawer and Komorowski , despite the heavy casualties , the Polish – Soviet frontline was not seriously breached , and thus the German offensive was a failure . 
 = Bristol = 
 Bristol ( / <unk> / ) is a city , unitary authority area and county in South West England with an estimated population of 442 @,@ 500 in 2015 . It is England 's sixth and the United Kingdom 's eighth most populous city , and the most populous city in Southern England after London . People from Bristol are known as Bristolians . The city borders the Unitary Authority areas of North Somerset and South Gloucestershire , with the historic cities of Bath and Gloucester to the south @-@ east and north @-@ east , respectively . 
 Iron Age hill forts and Roman villas were built near the confluence of the rivers Frome and Avon , and around the beginning of the 11th century the settlement was known as Brycgstow ( Old English " the place at the bridge " ) . Bristol received a royal charter in 1155 and was in Gloucestershire until 1373 , when it became a county . From the 13th to the 18th century , Bristol was among the top three English cities after London ( with York and Norwich ) in tax receipts . Bristol was surpassed by the rapid rise of Manchester , Liverpool and Birmingham during the Industrial Revolution . 
 Bristol was a starting place for early voyages of exploration to the New World . On a ship out of Bristol in 1497 John Cabot , a Venetian , became the first European since the Vikings to land on mainland North America . In 1499 William Weston , a Bristol merchant , was the first Englishman to lead an exploration to North America . The Port of Bristol has since moved from Bristol Harbour in the city centre to the Severn Estuary at Avonmouth and Royal Portbury Dock . 
 Bristol 's modern economy is built on the creative media , electronics and aerospace industries , and the city @-@ centre docks have been redeveloped as centres of heritage and culture . The city has two universities , the University of the West of England and the University of Bristol and a variety of artistic and sporting organisations and venues including the Royal West of England Academy , the Arnolfini , Spike Island , Ashton Gate and the Memorial Stadium . It is connected to London and other major UK cities by road , rail , sea and air by the M5 and M4 ( which connects to the city centre by the M32 ) , Bristol Temple Meads and Bristol Parkway mainline rail stations , and Bristol Airport . One of the UK 's most popular tourist destinations , Bristol was selected in 2009 as one of the world 's top ten cities by international travel publishers Dorling Kindersley in their Eyewitness guides for young adults . In 2014 The Sunday Times named it as the best city in Britain in which to live , and Bristol also won the EU 's European Green Capital Award in 2015 . 
 = = History = = 
 Archaeological finds , including flint tools believed to be between 300 @,@ 000 and 126 @,@ 000 years old made with the Levallois technique , indicate the presence of Neanderthals in the Shirehampton and St Annes areas of Bristol during the Middle Palaeolithic . Iron Age hill forts near the city are at Leigh Woods and Clifton Down , on the side of the Avon Gorge , and on Kings Weston Hill near Henbury . A Roman settlement , Abona , existed at what is now Sea Mills ( connected to Bath by a Roman road ) ; another was at the present @-@ day Inns Court . Isolated Roman villas and small forts and settlements were also scattered throughout the area . 
 = = = Middle Ages = = = 
 Brycgstow ( Old English " the place at the bridge " ) was founded by 1000 ; by about 1020 , it was a trading centre with a mint producing silver pennies bearing its name . By 1067 Brycgstow was a well @-@ fortified burh , and that year the townsmen beat off a raiding party from Ireland led by three of Harold Godwinson 's sons . Under Norman rule , the town had one of the strongest castles in southern England . Bristol was the place of exile for Diarmait Mac Murchada , the Irish king of Leinster , after being overthrown . The Bristol merchants subsequently played a prominent role in funding Richard Strongbow de Clare and the Norman invasion of Ireland . 
 The port developed in the 11th century around the confluence of the Rivers Frome and Avon , adjacent to Bristol Bridge just outside the town walls . By the 12th century Bristol was an important port , handling much of England 's trade with Ireland , including slaves . The stone bridge built in 1247 was replaced by the current bridge during the 1760s . The town incorporated neighbouring suburbs and became a county in 1373 , the first town in England to be given this status . During this period , Bristol became a shipbuilding and manufacturing centre . By the 14th century Bristol , York and Norwich were England 's largest medieval towns after London . One @-@ third to one @-@ half the population died in the Black Death of 1348 – 49 , which checked population growth , and its population remained between 10 @,@ 000 and 12 @,@ 000 for most of the 15th and 16th centuries . 
 = = = 15th and 16th centuries = = = 
 During the 15th century Bristol was the second most important port in the country , trading with Ireland , Iceland and Gascony . It was the starting point for many voyages , including Robert <unk> 's ( 1457 – 58 ) unsuccessful attempt to break the Italian monopoly of Eastern Mediterranean trade . Bristol merchants then turned west , launching voyages of exploration in the Atlantic by 1480 in search of the phantom island of Hy @-@ Brazil . These Atlantic voyages , also aimed at China , culminated in Venetian John Cabot 's 1497 exploration of North America and subsequent expeditions to the New World , underwritten by Bristol merchants and King Henry VII until 1508 . A 1499 voyage , led by merchant William Weston of Bristol , was the first expedition commanded by an Englishman to North America . 
 During the 16th century , Bristol merchants concentrated on developing trade with Spain and its American colonies . This included the smuggling of prohibited goods , such as food and guns , to Iberia during the Anglo @-@ Spanish War ( 1585 – 1604 ) . Bristol 's illicit trade grew enormously after 1558 , becoming integral to its economy . 
 The original Diocese of Bristol was founded in 1542 , when the former Abbey of St. Augustine ( founded by Robert Fitzharding four hundred years earlier ) became Bristol Cathedral . Bristol also gained city status that year . During the English Civil War in the 1640s the city was occupied by Royalists , who built the Royal Fort House on the site of an earlier Parliamentarian stronghold . 
 = = = 17th and 18th centuries = = = 
 Growth of the city and trade came with the rise of England 's American colonies in the 17th century . Bristol 's location on the west side of Great Britain gave its ships an advantage in sailing to and from the New World , and the city 's merchants made the most of it . The 18th century saw an expansion of England 's role in the Atlantic trade in Africans taken for slavery to the Americas . Bristol and Liverpool became centres of the triangular trade . In the first side of the slavery triangle , manufactured goods were shipped to West Africa and exchanged for Africans ; the enslaved captives were transported across the Atlantic to the Americas in the Middle Passage under brutal conditions . In the third side of the triangle , plantation goods such as sugar , tobacco , rum , rice , cotton and a few slaves ( sold to the aristocracy as house servants ) returned across the Atlantic . Some household slaves were baptised in the hope this would mean their freedom in England . The Somersett Case of 1772 clarified that slavery was illegal in England . At the height of the Bristol slave trade from 1700 to 1807 , more than 2 @,@ 000 slave ships carried a conservatively estimated 500 @,@ 000 people from Africa to slavery in the Americas . The Seven Stars public house , where abolitionist Thomas Clarkson collected information on the slave trade , is still operating . 
 Fishermen from Bristol ( who had fished the Grand Banks of Newfoundland since the 15th century ) began settling Newfoundland permanently in larger numbers during the 17th century , establishing colonies at Bristol 's Hope and Cuper 's Cove . Because of Bristol 's nautical environment , maritime safety was an important issue in the city . During the 19th century , Samuel Plimsoll ( known as " the sailor 's friend " ) campaigned to make the seas safer ; shocked by overloaded vessels , he successfully fought for a compulsory load line on ships . 
 In 1739 John Wesley founded the first Methodist chapel , the New Room , in Bristol . Wesley , along with his brother Charles Wesley and George Whitefield , preached to large congregations in Bristol and the neighbouring village of Kingswood , often in the open air . 
 = = = 19th century = = = 
 The city was associated with Victorian engineer Isambard Kingdom Brunel , who designed the Great Western Railway between Bristol and London Paddington , two pioneering Bristol @-@ built oceangoing steamships ( SS Great Britain and SS Great Western ) , and the Clifton Suspension Bridge . The new railway replaced the Kennet and Avon Canal , which had fully opened in 1810 as the main route for the transport of goods between Bristol and London . Competition from Liverpool ( beginning around 1760 ) , disruptions of maritime commerce due to war with France ( 1793 ) and the abolition of the slave trade ( 1807 ) contributed to Bristol 's failure to keep pace with the newer manufacturing centres of Northern England and the West Midlands . The tidal Avon Gorge , which had secured the port during the Middle Ages , had become a liability . An 1804 – 09 plan to improve the city 's port with a floating harbour designed by William Jessop was a costly error , requiring high harbour fees . 
 By 1867 , ships were getting larger and the meanders in the river Avon prevented boats over 300 feet ( 90 m ) from reaching the harbour , resulting in falling trade . The port facilities were migrating downstream to Avonmouth and new industrial complexes were founded there . Some of the traditional industries including copper and brass manufacture went into decline , but the import and processing of tobacco flourished with the expansion of the W.D. & H.O. Wills business . 
 Supported by new industry and growing commerce , Bristol 's population ( 66 @,@ 000 in 1801 ) , quintupled during the 19th century , resulting in the creation of new suburbs such as Clifton and Cotham . These provide architectural examples from the Georgian to the Regency style , with many fine terraces and villas facing the road , and at right angles to it . In the early 19th century , the romantic medieval gothic style appeared , partially as a reaction against the symmetry of Palladianism , and can be seen in buildings such as the Bristol City Museum and Art Gallery , the Royal West of England Academy , and The Victoria Rooms . Riots broke out in 1793 and 1831 ; the first over the renewal of tolls on Bristol Bridge , and the second against the rejection of the second Reform Bill by the House of Lords . The Diocese of Bristol had undergone several boundary changes by 1897 when it was " reconstituted " into the configuration which has lasted into the 21st century . 
 = = = 20th century = = = 
 From a population of about 330 @,@ 000 in 1901 , Bristol grew steadily during the 20th century , peaking at 428 @,@ 089 in 1971 . Its docklands were enlarged during the early 1900s by the Royal Edward Dock . Another new dock , the Royal Portbury Dock , opened during the 1970s . As air travel grew in the first half of the century , aircraft manufacturers built factories . 
 Bristol was heavily damaged by Luftwaffe raids during World War II ; about 1 @,@ 300 people living or working in the city were killed and nearly 100 @,@ 000 buildings were damaged , at least 3 @,@ 000 beyond repair . The original central market area , near the bridge and castle , is now a park containing two bombed churches and fragments of the castle . A third bomb @-@ damaged church nearby , St Nicholas , has been restored and is a museum housing a 1756 William Hogarth triptych painted for the high altar of St Mary Redcliffe . The museum also has statues of King Edward I ( moved from Arno 's Court Triumphal Arch ) and King Edward III ( taken from <unk> ' Gate in the city walls when they were demolished about 1760 ) , and 13th @-@ century statues of Robert , 1st Earl of Gloucester ( builder of Bristol Castle ) and Geoffrey de Montbray ( who built the city 's walls ) from Bristol 's Newgate . 
 The rebuilding of Bristol city centre was characterised by 1960s and 1970s skyscrapers , mid @-@ century modern architecture and road improvements . Beginning in the 1980s some main roads were closed , the Georgian @-@ era Queen Square and Portland Square were restored , the Broadmead shopping area regenerated , and one of the city centre 's tallest mid @-@ century towers was demolished . Bristol 's road infrastructure changed dramatically during the 1960s and 1970s with the development of the M4 and M5 motorways , which meet at the Almondsbury Interchange just north of the city and link Bristol with London ( M4 eastbound ) , Swansea ( M4 westbound across the Severn Estuary ) , Exeter ( M5 southbound ) and Birmingham ( M5 northbound ) . 
 The 20th century relocation of the docks to Avonmouth Docks and Royal Portbury Dock , 7 miles ( 11 km ) downstream from the city centre , has allowed the redevelopment of the old dock area ( the Floating Harbour ) . Although the docks ' existence was once in jeopardy ( since the area was seen as a derelict industrial site ) , the inaugural 1996 International Festival of the Sea held in and around the docks affirmed the area as a leisure asset of the city . 
 = = Government = = 
 Bristol City council consists of 70 councillors representing 35 wards , with two per ward serving four @-@ year terms . Councillors are elected in thirds , with elections held in three years out of every four @-@ year period . Thus , since wards do not have both councillors up for election at the same time , two @-@ thirds of the wards participate in each election . Although the council was long dominated by the Labour Party , the Liberal Democrats have grown strong in the city and ( as the largest party ) took minority control of the council after the 2005 election . In 2007 , Labour and the Conservatives united to defeat the Liberal Democrat administration ; Labour ruled the council as a minority administration , with Helen Holland as council leader . 
 In February 2009 , the Labour group resigned and the Liberal Democrats took office with a minority administration . In the 4 June 2009 council elections the Liberal Democrats gained four seats and , for the first time , overall control of the city council . In 2010 they increased their representation to 38 seats , giving them a majority of 6 . In 2011 they lost their majority , leading to a hung council . In the 2013 local elections , in which a third of the city 's wards were up for election , Labour gained 7 seats and the Green party doubled their seats from 2 to 4 . The Liberal Democrats lost 10 seats . 
 These trends were continued into the next election in May 2014 , in which Labour gained three seats to take their total to 31 , the Green Party won two more seats , the Conservative party gained one seat , and UKIP won their first @-@ ever seat on the council . The Liberal Democrats lost a further seven seats . 
 On 3 May 2012 , Bristol held a referendum on the question of a directly elected mayor replacing one elected by the council . There were 41 @,@ 032 votes in favour of a directly elected mayor and 35 @,@ 880 votes against , with a 24 % turnout . An election for the new post was held on 15 November 2012 , and Independent candidate George Ferguson became Mayor of Bristol . 
 The Lord Mayor of Bristol , not to be confused with the Mayor of Bristol , is a figurehead elected each May by the city council . Councillor Faruk Choudhury was selected by his fellow councillors for the position in 2013 . At 38 , he was the youngest person to serve as Lord Mayor of Bristol and the first Muslim elected to the office . 
 Bristol constituencies in the House of Commons also included parts of other local authority areas until the 2010 general election , when their boundaries were aligned with the county boundary . The city is divided into Bristol West , East , South and North West . Since the 2015 election , the city has had three Labour members of parliament ( MPs ) and one Conservative . 
 The city has a tradition of political activism . Edmund Burke , MP for the Bristol constituency for six years beginning in 1774 , insisted that he was a member of parliament first and a representative of his constituents ' interests second . Women 's @-@ rights advocate Emmeline Pethick @-@ Lawrence ( 1867 – 1954 ) was born in Bristol , and left @-@ wing politician Tony Benn was MP for Bristol South East in 1950 – 1960 and 1963 – 83 . In 1963 the Bristol Bus Boycott , following the Bristol Omnibus Company 's refusal to hire black drivers and conductors , drove the passage of the UK 's 1965 Race Relations Act . The 1980 St. Pauls riot protested against racism and police harassment and showed mounting dissatisfaction with the social and economic circumstances of the city 's Afro @-@ Caribbean residents . Local support of fair trade was recognised in 2005 , when Bristol became a Fairtrade zone . 
 Bristol is both a city and a county , since Edward III granted it a county charter in 1373 . The county was expanded in 1835 to include suburbs such as Clifton , and it was named a county borough in 1889 when that designation was introduced . On 1 April 1974 , Bristol became a local government district of the county of Avon . The city regained its independence and county status on 1 April 1996 , when Avon was abolished and Bristol became a unitary authority . 
 = = Geography and environment = = 
 = = = Boundaries = = = 
 Bristol 's boundaries are defined in several ways , depending on whether they are those of the city , the developed area , or Greater Bristol . The narrowest definition of the city is the city council boundary , which includes a large section of the western Severn Estuary up to ( but not including ) the islands of Steep Holm and Flat Holm . 
 A slightly broader definition used by the Office for National Statistics ( ONS ) includes developed areas adjoining Bristol but outside the city @-@ council boundary , such as Whitchurch village , Filton , Patchway and Bradley Stoke , but excludes undeveloped areas within that boundary . The ONS has defined a Bristol Urban Area , which includes Kingswood , Mangotsfield , Stoke Gifford , Winterbourne , Frampton Cotterell , Almondsbury and Easton in Gordano . The North Fringe of Bristol , a developed area in South Gloucestershire between the Bristol city boundary and the M4 and M5 motorways , was so named as part of a 1987 plan prepared by the <unk> District Council . 
 = = = Greater Bristol = = = 
 The term Greater Bristol , used by the Government Office of the South West ( now abolished ) , the Office for National Statistics and others , refers to the city and portions of the three neighbouring local authorities ‍ — ‌ Bath and North East Somerset , North Somerset and South Gloucestershire ‍ — ‌ an area sometimes called the " former Avon area " or the West of England Partnership ( WEP ) area . Greater Bristol does not include Bath or Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare , which are included in the WEP area . The Friends of Suburban Bristol Railways ( FOSBR ) conflates the terms Greater Bristol and Suburban Bristol . 
 = = = Geography = = = 
 Bristol is part of a limestone area running from the Mendip Hills in the south to the Cotswolds in the northeast . The rivers Avon and Frome cut through the limestone to the underlying clay , creating Bristol 's characteristically hilly landscape . The Avon flows from Bath in the east , through flood plains and areas which were marshes before the city 's growth . To the west the Avon cuts through the limestone to form the Avon Gorge , aided by glacial meltwater after the last ice age . 
 The gorge , which helped protect Bristol Harbour , has been quarried for stone to build the city , and its surrounding land has been protected from development as The Downs and Leigh Woods . The Avon estuary and the gorge are the county boundary with North Somerset , and the river flows into the Severn Estuary at Avonmouth . Another gorge , cut by the Hazel Brook ( which flows into the River Trym ) , crosses the Blaise Castle estate in northern Bristol . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Located in southern England , Bristol is one of the warmest cities in the UK with a mean annual temperature of approximately 10 @.@ 5 ° C ( 50 @.@ 9 ° F ) . It is among the sunniest , with 1 @,@ 541 – 1 @,@ 885 hours of sunshine per year . Although the city is partially sheltered by the Mendip Hills , it is exposed to the Severn Estuary and the Bristol Channel . Annual rainfall increases from north to south , with totals north of the Avon in the 600 – 900 mm ( 24 – 35 in ) range and 900 – 1 @,@ 200 mm ( 35 – 47 in ) south of the river . Rain is fairly evenly distributed throughout the year , with autumn and winter the wetter seasons . The Atlantic Ocean influences Bristol 's weather , keeping its average temperature above freezing throughout the year , but winter frosts are frequent and snow occasionally falls from early November to late April . Summers are warm and drier , with variable sunshine , rain and clouds , and spring weather is unsettled . 
 The weather stations nearest Bristol for which long @-@ term climate data are available are Long Ashton ( about 5 miles ( 8 km ) south west of the city centre ) and Bristol Weather Station , in the city centre . Data collection at these locations ended in 2002 and 2001 , respectively , and Filton Airfield is currently the nearest weather station to the city . Temperatures at Long Ashton from 1959 to 2002 ranged from 33 @.@ 5 ° C ( 92 @.@ 3 ° F ) in July 1976 to − 14 @.@ 4 ° C ( 6 @.@ 1 ° F ) in January 1982 . Monthly high temperatures since 2002 at Filton exceeding those recorded at Long Ashton include 25 @.@ 7 ° C ( 78 @.@ 3 ° F ) in April 2003 , 34 @.@ 5 ° C ( 94 @.@ 1 ° F ) in July 2006 and 26 @.@ 8 ° C ( 80 @.@ 2 ° F ) in October 2011 . The lowest recent temperature at Filton was − 10 @.@ 1 ° C ( 13 @.@ 8 ° F ) in December 2010 . Although large cities in general experience an urban heat island effect , with warmer temperatures than their surrounding rural areas , this phenomenon is minimal in Bristol . 
 = = = Environment = = = 
 Bristol was ranked as Britain 's most @-@ sustainable city ( based on its environmental performance , quality of life , future @-@ proofing and approaches to climate change , recycling and biodiversity ) , topping environmental charity Forum for the Future 's 2008 Sustainable Cities Index . Local initiatives include Sustrans ( creators of the National Cycle Network , founded as <unk> in 1977 ) and <unk> , a non @-@ profit business established in 1988 by Avon Friends of the Earth . In 2014 The Sunday Times named it as the best city in Britain in which to live , The city received the 2015 European Green Capital Award , becoming the first UK city to receive this award . 
 = = Demography = = 
 In 2014 , the Office for National Statistics estimated the Bristol unitary authority 's population at 442 @,@ 474 , making it the 43rd @-@ largest ceremonial county in England . The ONS , using Census 2001 data , estimated the city 's population at 441 @,@ 556 and that of the contiguous urban area at 551 @,@ 066 . In 2006 the ONS estimated Bristol 's urban @-@ area population at 587 @,@ 400 , making it England 's sixth @-@ most @-@ populous city and ninth @-@ most @-@ populous urban area . At 3 @,@ 599 inhabitants per square kilometre ( 9 @,@ 321 / sq mi ) it has the seventh @-@ highest population density of any English district . 
 According to the 2011 census , 84 % of the population was White ( 77 @.@ 9 % White British , 0 @.@ 9 % White Irish , 0 @.@ 1 % Gypsy or Irish Travellers and 5 @.@ 1 % Other White ) ; 3 @.@ 6 % mixed @-@ race ( 1 @.@ 7 % white @-@ and @-@ black Caribbean , 0 @.@ 4 % white @-@ and @-@ black African , 0 @.@ 8 % white and Asian and 0 @.@ 7 % other mixed ) ; 5 @.@ 5 % Asian ( 1 @.@ 5 % Indian , 1 @.@ 6 % Pakistani , 0 @.@ 5 % Bangladeshi , 0 @.@ 9 % Chinese and one percent other Asian ) ; 6 % Black ( 2 @.@ 8 % African , 1 @.@ 6 % Caribbean , 1 @.@ 6 % Other Black ) , 0 @.@ 3 % Arab and 0 @.@ 6 % with other heritage . Bristol is unusual among major British towns and cities in its larger black than Asian population . These statistics apply to the Bristol Unitary Authority area , excluding areas of the urban area ( 2006 estimated population 587 @,@ 400 ) in South Gloucestershire , Bath and North East Somerset ( BANES ) and North Somerset — such as Kingswood , Mangotsfield , Filton and Warmley . 
 = = Economy and industry = = 
 Bristol has a long history of trade , originally exporting wool cloth and importing fish , wine , grain and dairy products ; later imports were tobacco , tropical fruits and plantation goods . Major imports are motor vehicles , grain , timber , produce and petroleum products . Since the 13th century , the rivers have been modified for docks ; during the 1240s , the Frome was diverted into a deep , man @-@ made channel ( known as Saint Augustine 's Reach ) which flowed into the River Avon . 
 Ships occasionally departed Bristol for Iceland as early as 1420 , and speculation exists that sailors from Bristol made landfall in the Americas before Christopher Columbus or John Cabot . Beginning in the early 1480s , the Bristol Society of Merchant Venturers sponsored exploration of the North Atlantic in search of trading opportunities . In 1552 , Edward VI granted a royal charter to the Merchant Venturers to manage the port . 
 By 1670 the city had 6 @,@ 000 tons of shipping ( of which half was imported tobacco ) , and by the late 17th and early 18th centuries shipping played a significant role in the slave trade . During the 18th century , Bristol was Britain 's second @-@ busiest port ; business was conducted in the trading area around The Exchange in Corn Street over bronze tables known as Nails . Although the Nails are cited as originating the phrase " cash on the nail " ( immediate payment ) , the phrase was probably in use before their installation . 
 The city 's economy also relies on the aerospace , defence , media , information technology , financial services and tourism industries . The Ministry of Defence ( MoD ) ' s Procurement Executive , later known as the Defence Procurement Agency and Defence Equipment and Support , moved to its headquarters at Abbey Wood , Filton , in 1995 . This organisation , with a staff of 7 @,@ 000 to 8 @,@ 000 , procures and supports MoD equipment . One of the UK 's most popular tourist destinations , Bristol was selected in 2009 as one of the world 's top @-@ ten cities by international travel publishers Dorling Kindersley in their Eyewitness guides for young adults . 
 Bristol is one of the eight largest regional English cities that make up the Core Cities Group , and is ranked as a gamma world city by the Globalization and World Cities Research Network , the fourth highest ranked English city . In 2014 Bristol 's gross domestic product was £ 30 @.@ 502 billion . Its per capita GDP was £ 46 @,@ 000 ( $ 65 @,@ 106 , € 57 @,@ 794 ) , which was some 65 % above the national average , the third highest of any English city ( after London and Nottingham ) and the sixth highest of any city in the United Kingdom ( behind London , Edinburgh , Glasgow , Belfast and Nottingham ) . Bristol 's March 2007 unemployment rate was 4 @.@ 8 % , compared with four percent for South West England and the national average of 5 @.@ 5 % . 
 Although Bristol 's economy no longer relies upon its port , which was moved to docks at Avonmouth during the 1870s and to the Royal Portbury Dock in 1977 as ship size increased , it is the largest importer of cars to the UK . Until 1991 , the port was publicly owned ; it is leased , with £ 330 million invested and its annual tonnage increasing from 3 @.@ 9 million long tons ( 4 million tonnes ) to 11 @.@ 8 million ( 12 million ) . Tobacco importing and cigarette manufacturing have ceased , but the importation of wine and spirits continues . 
 The financial services sector employs 59 @,@ 000 in the city , and 50 micro @-@ electronics and silicon design companies employ about 5 @,@ 000 . In 1983 Hewlett @-@ Packard opened its national research laboratory in Bristol . In 2014 the city was ranked seventh in the " top 10 UK destinations " by TripAdvisor . 
 During the 20th century , Bristol 's manufacturing activities expanded to include aircraft production at Filton by the Bristol Aeroplane Company and aircraft @-@ engine manufacturing by Bristol Aero Engines ( later Rolls @-@ Royce ) at Patchway . Bristol Aeroplane was known for their World War I Bristol Fighter and World War II Blenheim and Beaufighter planes . During the 1950s they were a major English manufacturer of civilian aircraft , known for the Freighter , Britannia and Brabazon . The company diversified into automobile manufacturing during the 1940s , producing hand @-@ built , luxury Bristol Cars at their factory in Filton , and the Bristol Cars company was spun off in 1960 . The city also gave its name to Bristol buses , which were manufactured in the city from 1908 to 1983 : by Bristol Tramways until 1955 , and from 1955 to 1983 by Bristol Commercial Vehicles . 
 Filton played a key role in the Anglo @-@ French Concorde supersonic airliner project during the 1960s . The British Concorde prototype made its maiden flight from Filton to RAF Fairford on 9 April 1969 , five weeks after the French test flight . In 2003 British Airways and Air France decided to discontinue Concorde flights , retiring the aircraft to locations ( primarily museums ) worldwide . On 26 November 2003 Concorde 216 made the final Concorde flight , returning to Bristol Filton Airport as the centrepiece of a proposed air museum which is planned to include the existing Bristol Aero collection ( including a Bristol Britannia ) . 
 The aerospace industry remains a major sector of the local economy . Major aerospace companies in Bristol include BAE Systems , a merger of Marconi Electronic Systems and BAe ( the latter a merger of BAC , Hawker Siddeley and Scottish Aviation ) . Airbus and Rolls @-@ Royce are also based at Filton , and aerospace engineering is an area of research at the University of the West of England . Another aviation company in the city is Cameron Balloons , who manufacture hot air balloons ; each August the city hosts the Bristol International Balloon Fiesta , one of Europe 's largest hot @-@ air balloon festivals . 
 In 2005 Bristol was named by the UK government one of England 's six science cities . A £ 500 million shopping centre , Cabot Circus , opened in 2008 amidst predictions by developers and politicians that the city would become one of England 's top ten retail destinations . The Bristol Temple Quarter Enterprise Zone , focused on creative , high @-@ tech and low @-@ carbon industries around Bristol Temple Meads railway station , was announced in 2011 and launched the following year . The 70 @-@ hectare ( 170 @-@ acre ) Urban Enterprise Zone has streamlined planning procedures and reduced business rates . Rates generated by the zone are channelled to five other designated enterprise areas in the region : Avonmouth , Bath , Bristol and Bath Science Park in Emersons Green , Filton , and Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare . Bristol is the only big city whose wealth per capita is higher than that of Britain as a whole . With a highly skilled workforce drawn from its universities , Bristol claims to have the largest cluster of computer chip designers and manufacturers outside Silicon Valley . The wider region has one of the biggest aerospace hubs in the UK , centred on Airbus , Rolls @-@ Royce and GKN at Filton airfield . 
 = = Culture = = 
 = = = Arts = = = 
 Bristol has a thriving current and historical arts scene . Some of the modern venues and modern digital production companies have merged with legacy production companies based in old buildings around the city . In 2008 the city was a finalist for the 2008 European Capital of Culture , although the title was awarded to Liverpool . 
 The Bristol Old Vic , founded in 1946 as an offshoot of The Old Vic in London , occupies the 1766 Theatre Royal ( 607 seats ) on King Street ; the 150 @-@ seat New Vic ( a studio @-@ type theatre ) , and a foyer and bar in the adjacent Coopers ' Hall ( built in 1743 ) . The Theatre Royal , a grade I listed building , is the oldest continuously operating theatre in England . The Bristol Old Vic Theatre School ( which originated in King Street ) is a separate company , and the Bristol Hippodrome is a 1 @,@ 951 @-@ seat theatre for national touring productions . Other smaller theatres include the Tobacco Factory , <unk> , the Redgrave Theatre at Clifton College and the Alma Tavern . Bristol 's theatre scene features several companies as well as the Old Vic , including Show of Strength , Shakespeare at the Tobacco Factory and Travelling Light . Theatre Bristol is a partnership between the city council , Arts Council England and local residents to develop the city 's theatre industry . Several organisations support Bristol theatre ; the Residence ( an artist @-@ led community ) provides office , social and rehearsal space for theatre and performance companies , and Equity has a branch in the city . 
 The city has many venues for live music , its largest the 2 @,@ 000 @-@ seat Colston Hall named after Edward Colston . Others include the Bristol Academy , The Fleece , The Croft , the Exchange , Fiddlers , the Victoria Rooms , Trinity Centre , St George 's Bristol and several pubs , from the jazz @-@ oriented The Old Duke to rock at the Fleece and Firkin and indie bands at the Louisiana . In 2010 PRS for Music called Bristol the UK 's most musical city , based on the number of its members born there relative to the city 's population . Since the late 1970s Bristol has been home to bands combining punk , funk , dub and political consciousness , and trip hop and Bristol Sound artists such as Tricky , Portishead and Massive Attack ; the list of bands from Bristol is extensive . The city is a stronghold of drum and bass , with artists such as Roni Size 's Mercury Prize @-@ winning <unk> , as DJ Krust and More Rockers . This music is part of the Bristol urban @-@ culture scene which received international media attention during the 1990s . 
 The Bristol City Museum and Art Gallery houses a collection encompassing natural history , archaeology , local glassware , Chinese ceramics and art . The M Shed museum opened in 2011 on the site of the former Bristol Industrial Museum . Both are operated by Bristol Museums , Galleries and Archives , which also runs three historic houses ‍ — ‌ the Tudor Red Lodge , the Georgian House and Blaise Castle House ‍ — ‌ and Bristol Record Office . The 18th- and 19th @-@ century portrait painter Thomas Lawrence , 19th @-@ century architect Francis Greenway ( designer of many of Sydney 's first buildings ) were born in the city . The graffiti artist Banksy is believed to be from Bristol , and many of his works are on display in the city . 
 The Watershed Media Centre and Arnolfini gallery ( both in dockside warehouses ) exhibit contemporary art , photography and cinema , and the city 's oldest gallery is at the Royal West of England Academy in Clifton . The nomadic Antlers Gallery opened in 2010 , moving into empty spaces on Park Street , on Whiteladies Road and in the Purifier House on Bristol 's Harbourside . Stop motion animation films and commercials ( produced by Aardman Animations ) are made in Bristol . Bristol is home to the regional headquarters of BBC West and the BBC Natural History Unit . Locations in and around Bristol have featured in the BBC 's natural @-@ history programmes , including Animal Magic ( filmed at Bristol Zoo ) . 
 Bristol is the birthplace of 18th @-@ century poets Robert Southey and Thomas Chatterton . Southey ( born on Wine Street in 1774 ) and his friend , Samuel Taylor Coleridge , married the Fricker sisters from the city . William Wordsworth spent time in Bristol , where Joseph Cottle published Lyrical Ballads in 1798 . Comedians from the city include Justin Lee Collins , Lee Evans Russell Howard and writer @-@ comedian Stephen Merchant . 
 = = = Architecture = = = 
 Bristol has 51 Grade I , 500 Grade II * and over 3 @,@ 800 Grade II listed buildings in a variety of architectural styles , from medieval to modern . During the mid @-@ 19th century Bristol Byzantine , a style unique to the city , was developed , and several examples have survived . Buildings from most architectural periods of the United Kingdom can be seen in the city . Surviving elements of the fortifications and castle date to the medieval period , and the Church of St James dates back to the 12th century . 
 The oldest Grade I listed buildings in Bristol are religious . St James ' Priory was founded in 1129 as a Benedictine priory by Earl Robert of Gloucester , the illegitimate son of Henry I. The second oldest is Bristol Cathedral and its associated Great Gatehouse . Founded in 1140 , the church became the seat of the bishop and cathedral of the new Diocese of Bristol in 1542 . Most of the medieval stonework , particularly the Elder Lady Chapel , is made from limestone taken from quarries around Dundry and Felton with Bath stone being used in other areas . Amongst the other churches included in the list is the 12th century St Mary Redcliffe which is the tallest building in Bristol . The church was described by Queen Elizabeth I as " the fairest , goodliest , and most famous parish church in England . " 
 Secular buildings include The Red Lodge , built in 1580 for John Yonge as a lodge for a larger house that once stood on the site of the present Colston Hall . It was subsequently added to in Georgian times and restored in the early 20th century . St Bartholomew 's Hospital is a 12th @-@ century town house which was incorporated into a monastery hospital founded in 1240 by Sir John la Warr , 2nd Baron De La Warr ( c . 1277 – 1347 ) , and became Bristol Grammar School from 1532 to 1767 , and then Queen Elizabeth 's Hospital 1767 – 1847 . The round piers predate the hospital , and may come from an aisled hall , the earliest remains of domestic architecture in the city , which was then adapted to form the hospital chapel . Three 17th @-@ century town houses which were attached to the hospital were incorporated into model workers ' flats in 1865 , and converted to offices in 1978 . St Nicholas 's Almshouses were built in 1652 to provide care for the poor . Several public houses were also built in this period , including the Llandoger Trow on King Street and the Hatchet Inn . 
 Manor houses include Goldney Hall , where the highly decorated Grotto dates from 1739 . Commercial buildings such as the Exchange and Old Post Office from the 1740s are also included in the list . Residential buildings include the Georgian Portland Square and the complex of small cottages around a green at Blaise Hamlet , which was built around 1811 for retired employees of Quaker banker and philanthropist John Scandrett Harford , who owned Blaise Castle House . The 18th @-@ century Kings Weston House , in northern Bristol , was designed by John Vanbrugh and is the only Vanbrugh building in any UK city outside London . Almshouses and pubs from the same period intermingle with modern development . Several Georgian squares were designed for the middle class as prosperity increased during the 18th century . During World War II , the city centre was heavily bombed during the Bristol Blitz . The central shopping area near Wine Street and Castle Street was particularly hard @-@ hit , and the Dutch House and St Peter 's Hospital were destroyed . Nevertheless , in 1961 John Betjeman called Bristol " the most beautiful , interesting and distinguished city in England " . 
 = = = Sport = = = 
 Bristol has teams representing all the major national sports . Bristol City and Bristol Rovers are the city 's main football clubs . Bristol Rugby ( Rugby Union ) and Gloucestershire County Cricket Club are also based in the city . 
 The two Football League clubs are Bristol City and Bristol Rovers ‍ — ‌ the former being the only club from the city to play in the precursor to the Premier League . Non @-@ league clubs include Mangotsfield United , Bristol Manor Farm and Brislington . Bristol City , formed in 1897 , were Division One runners @-@ up in 1907 and lost the FA Cup final in 1909 . In the First Division in 1976 , they then sank to the bottom professional tier before reforming after a 1982 bankruptcy . Bristol City were promoted to the second tier of English football in 2007 , losing to Hull City in the playoff for promotion to the Premier League that season . 
 Bristol Rovers , the oldest professional football team in the city , were formed in 1883 and promoted back into the football league in 2015 . They were third @-@ tier champions twice ( Division Three South in 1952 – 53 and Division Three in 1989 – 90 ) , Watney Cup Winners ( 1972 ) and runners @-@ up for the Johnstone 's Paint Trophy ( 2006 – 07 ) although have never played in England 's top Division . The club has planning permission for a new 21 @,@ 700 @-@ capacity all @-@ seater stadium at the University of the West of England 's Frenchay campus . Construction was due to begin in mid @-@ 2014 , but in March 2015 the sale of the Memorial Stadium site ( needed to finance the new stadium ) was in jeopardy . Bristol Academy Women 's Football Club is based at South Gloucestershire and Stroud College . 
 The city is also home to Bristol Rugby , formed in 1888 as Bristol Football Club by the merger of the Carlton club with rival Redland Park . Westbury Park declined the merger and folded , with many of its players joining Bristol . Bristol Rugby has often competed at the highest level of the sport since its formation in 1888 . The club played at the Memorial Ground , which it shared with Bristol Rovers from 1996 . Although Bristol Rugby owned the stadium when the football club arrived , a decline in the rugby club 's fortunes led to a transfer of ownership to Bristol Rovers . In 2014 Bristol Rugby moved to their new home , Ashton Gate Stadium ( home to Bristol Rovers ' rivals Bristol City ) , for the 2014 – 15 season . Dating from 1901 , the Bristol Combination and its 53 clubs promote rugby union in the city and help support Bristol Rugby . The most prominent of Bristol 's smaller rugby clubs include Clifton Rugby , <unk> Crusaders , and Cleve . Rugby league is represented in Bristol by the Bristol Sonics . 
 The first @-@ class cricket club Gloucestershire County Cricket Club has its headquarters and plays the majority of its home games at the Bristol County Ground , the only major international sports venue in the south west of England . It was formed by the family of W. G. Grace . The club is arguably Bristol 's most successful , achieving a period of success between 1999 and 2006 when it won nine trophies and became the most formidable one @-@ day outfit in England , including winning a " double double " in 1999 and 2000 ( both the Benson and Hedges Cup and the C & G Trophy ) , and the Sunday League in 2000 . Gloucestershire CCC also won the Royal London One @-@ Day Cup in 2015 . 
 The Bristol Flyers basketball team have competed in the British Basketball League , the UK 's premier professional basketball league , since 2014 . Bristol Aztecs play in Britain 's premier American football competition , the BAFA National Leagues . In 2009 ice hockey returned to Bristol after a 17 @-@ year absence , with the Bristol Pitbulls playing at Bristol Ice Rink ; after its closure , it shared a venue with Oxford City Stars . Bristol sponsors an annual half marathon and hosted the 2001 IAAF World Half Marathon Championships . Athletic clubs in Bristol include Bristol and West AC , Bitton Road Runners and Westbury Harriers . Bristol has staged finishes and starts of the Tour of Britain cycle race and facilities in the city were used as training camps for the 2012 London Olympics . The Bristol International Balloon Fiesta , a major UK hot @-@ air ballooning event , is held each summer at Ashton Court . 
 = = = Media = = = 
 Bristol is home to the regional headquarters of BBC West and the BBC Natural History Unit based at Broadcasting House , which produces television , radio and online content with a natural history or wildlife theme . These include nature documentaries , including The Blue Planet and Planet Earth . The city has a long association with David Attenborough 's authored documentaries , including Life on Earth . 
 Bristol has two daily newspapers , the Western Daily Press and the Bristol Post ; a weekly free newspaper , the Bristol Observer ; and a Bristol edition of the free Metro newspaper . All are owned by the Trinity Mirror Group . 
 The city has several radio stations , including BBC Radio Bristol . Bristol 's television productions include Points West for BBC West , Endemol productions such as Deal or No Deal , and ITV News West Country for ITV West & Wales ( formerly HTV West ) and ITV Westcountry . The hospital drama Casualty , formerly filmed in Bristol , moved to Cardiff in 2012 . Bristol has been a location for the Channel 4 comedy @-@ drama Teachers , the BBC drama Mistresses , the E4 teen drama Skins and the BBC3 comedy @-@ drama Being Human ; the latter moved to Barry after series two . 
 Publishers in the city have included 18th @-@ century Bristolian Joseph Cottle , who helped introduce Romanticism by publishing the works of William Wordsworth and Samuel Taylor Coleridge . During the 19th century , J.W. Arrowsmith published the Victorian comedies Three Men in a Boat ( by Jerome K. Jerome ) and The Diary of a Nobody by George and Weedon Grossmith . The contemporary Redcliffe Press has published over 200 books covering all aspects of the city . Bristol is home to YouTube video producers The Yogscast , with founders Simon Lane and Lewis Brindley moving their operations from Reading to Bristol in 2012 . 
 = = = Dialect = = = 
 A dialect of English , known as Bristolian , Bristolese , <unk> or Bristle ( after the publication of Derek Robson 's " Krek Waiters peak Bristle " ) is spoken by longtime residents , who are known as Bristolians . Bristol natives have a rhotic accent , in which the post @-@ vocalic r in " car " and " card " is pronounced ( unlike in Received Pronunciation ) . The unique feature of this accent is the " Bristol ( or terminal ) l " , in which l is appended to words ending in a or o . Whether this is a broad l or a w is a subject of debate , with " area " pronounced " areal " or " <unk> " . The ending of " Bristol " is another example of the Bristol l . Bristolians pronounce -a and -o at the end of a word as <unk> ( <unk> ) . To non @-@ natives , the pronunciation suggests an l after the vowel . 
 Until recently Bristolese was characterised by retention of the second @-@ person singular , as in the doggerel " Cassn 't see what bist looking at ? Cassn 't see as well as couldst , <unk> ? And if couldst , ' <unk> 't , ' <unk> ? " The West Saxon bist is used for the English " art " , and children were admonished with " Thee and thou , the Welshman 's cow " . In Bristolese , as in French and German , the second @-@ person singular was not used when speaking to a superior ( except by the egalitarian Quakers ) . The pronoun " thee " is also used in the subject position ( " What bist thee doing ? " ) , and " I " or " he " in the object position ( " Give he to I. " ) . Linguist Stanley Ellis , who found that many dialect words in the Filton area were linked to aerospace work , described Bristolese as " a cranky , crazy , crab @-@ apple tree of language and with the sharpest , juiciest flavour that I 've heard for a long time " . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 In the 2011 United Kingdom census , 46 @.@ 8 % of Bristol 's population identified as Christian and 37 @.@ 4 % said they were not religious ; the English averages were 59 @.@ 4 % and 24 @.@ 7 % , respectively . Islam is observed by 5 @.@ 1 % of the population , Buddhism by 0 @.@ 6 % , Hinduism by 0 @.@ 6 % , Sikhism by 0 @.@ 5 % , Judaism by 0 @.@ 2 % and other religions 0 @.@ 7 % ; 8 @.@ 1 % did not identify with a religion . 
 Bristol has several Christian churches ; the most notable are the Anglican Bristol Cathedral and St Mary Redcliffe and the Roman Catholic Clifton Cathedral . Nonconformist chapels include Buckingham Baptist Chapel and John Wesley 's New Room in Broadmead . After St James ' Presbyterian Church was bombed on 24 November 1940 , it was never again used as a church ; although its bell tower remains , its nave was converted into offices . The city has eleven mosques , several Buddhist meditation centres , a Hindu temple , Reform and Orthodox @-@ Jewish synagogues and four Sikh temples . 
 = = Education , science and technology = = 
 Bristol has two major institutions of higher education : the University of Bristol , a " redbrick " chartered in 1909 , and its main building opened in 1925 . A polytechnic university opened in 1969 , giving the city a second institute of higher education which became the University of the West of England in 1992 . The University of Law also has a campus in the city . Bristol has two further education institutions ( City of Bristol College and South Gloucestershire and Stroud College ) and three theological colleges : Trinity College , Wesley College and Bristol Baptist College . The city has 129 infant , junior and primary schools , 17 secondary schools , and three learning centres . After a section of north London , Bristol has England 's second @-@ highest number of independent @-@ school places . Independent schools in the city include Clifton College , Clifton High School , Badminton School , Bristol Grammar School , Redland High School , Queen Elizabeth 's Hospital ( the only all @-@ boys school ) and the Red Maids ' School ( founded in 1634 by John Whitson , which claims to be England 's oldest girls ' school ) . 
 In 2005 Chancellor of the Exchequer Gordon Brown named Bristol one of six English " science cities " , and a £ 300 million science park was planned at Emersons Green . Research is conducted at the two universities , the Bristol Royal Infirmary and Southmead Hospital , and science is demonstrated at At @-@ Bristol , the Bristol Zoo , the Bristol Festival of Nature and the Create Centre . 
 The city has produced a number of scientists , including 19th @-@ century chemist Humphry Davy ( who worked in Hotwells ) . Physicist Paul Dirac ( from Bishopston ) received the 1933 Nobel Prize for his contributions to quantum mechanics . Cecil Frank Powell was the Melvill Wills Professor of Physics at the University of Bristol when he received the 1950 Nobel Prize for , among other discoveries , his photographic method of studying nuclear processes . Colin <unk> was the planetary scientist behind the Beagle 2 project , and neuropsychologist Richard Gregory founded the Exploratory ( a hands @-@ on science centre which was the predecessor of At @-@ Bristol ) . 
 Initiatives such as the Flying Start Challenge encourage an interest in science and engineering in Bristol secondary @-@ school pupils ; links with aerospace companies impart technical information and advance student understanding of design . The Bloodhound SSC project to break the land speed record is based at the Bloodhound Technology Centre on the city 's harbourside . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Bristol has two principal railway stations . Bristol Temple Meads ( near the city centre ) has First Great Western service which includes high @-@ speed trains to London Paddington station and local , regional and CrossCountry trains . Bristol Parkway , north of the city centre , has high @-@ speed First Great Western service to Swansea , Cardiff Central and London Paddington and CrossCountry service to Birmingham and the North East . Limited service to London Waterloo via Clapham Junction from Bristol Temple Meads is operated by South West Trains , and there are scheduled coach links to most major UK cities . 
 The M4 motorway connects the city on an east @-@ west axis from London to West Wales , and the M5 is a north – south west axis from Birmingham to Exeter . The M49 motorway is a shortcut between the M5 in the south and the M4 Severn Crossing in the west , and the M32 is a spur from the M4 to the city centre . 
 The runway , terminal and other facilities at Bristol Airport ( <unk> ) , Lulsgate , have been upgraded since 2001 . Public transport in the city consists primarily of a FirstGroup ( formerly the Bristol Omnibus Company ) bus network . Other providers are Abus , Wessex and Wessex Star , operated by Wessex for the two universities . Bristol 's bus service has been criticised as unreliable and expensive , and in 2005 FirstGroup was fined for delays and safety violations . 
 Private car use is high in the city , leading to traffic congestion costing an estimated £ 350 million per year . Bristol allows motorcycles to use most of the city 's bus lanes and provides secure , free parking for them . Although the city council has included a light rail system in its local transport plan since 2000 , it has not yet funded the project ; Bristol was offered European Union funding for the system , but the Department for Transport did not provide the required additional funding . 
 A new bus rapid transit system ( BRT ) called MetroBus , is currently under construction across Bristol , as of 2015 , to provide a faster and reliable service than buses , improve transport infrastructure and reduce congestion . The MetroBus rapid transit scheme will run on both bus lanes and segregated guided busways on three routes ; Ashton Vale to Temple Meads ( <unk> ) , North Fringe to Hengrove and South Bristol Link ( <unk> ) . MetroBus services are expected to start in 2017 . 
 Several road @-@ construction plans , including re @-@ routing and improving the South Bristol Ring Road , are supported by the city council . Three park and ride sites serve Bristol . The city centre has water transport operated by Bristol Ferry Boats , Bristol Packet Boat Trips and Number Seven Boat Trips , providing leisure and commuter service in the harbour . 
 Bristol 's principal surviving suburban railway is the Severn Beach Line to Avonmouth and Severn Beach . Although Portishead Railway 's passenger service was a casualty of the Beeching cuts , freight service to the Royal Portbury Dock was restored from 2000 to 2002 with a Strategic Rail Authority rail @-@ freight grant . The MetroWest scheme , formerly known as The Greater Bristol Metro , proposes to increase the city 's rail capacity as well as the restoration of a further 3 miles ( 5 km ) of track to Portishead ( a dormitory town with one connecting road ) , despite concerns about insufficient funds to rebuild stations , is scheduled for completion by 2019 . 
 Bristol was designated as England 's first " cycling city " in 2008 and is home to Sustrans , the sustainable transport charity . The city has urban cycle routes and links with National Cycle Network routes to Bath , London , Gloucester , Wales and South West England . Cycling trips have increased by 21 % from 2001 to 2005 . 
 = = Twin cities = = 
 Bristol was among the first cities to adopt town twinning after World War II . Twin towns include : 
 Bordeaux , France ( since 1947 ) 
 Hanover , Germany ( since 1947 ; one of the first post @-@ war twinnings of British and German cities ) 
 Porto , Portugal ( since 1984 ) 
 Tbilisi , Georgia ( since 1988 ) 
 Puerto Morazán , Nicaragua ( since 1989 ) 
 Beira , Mozambique ( since 1990 ) 
 Guangzhou , China ( since 2001 ) 
 = Mansur al @-@ Atrash = 
 Mansur al @-@ Atrash ( Arabic : منصور <unk> ; 3 February 1925 – 14 November 2006 ) was a Syrian politician and journalist . Together with fellow university students , Atrash became a founding member of the Ba 'ath Party and its Syrian regional branch in 1947 . During the presidency of Adib Shishakli ( 1951 – 54 ) , he became an anti @-@ government activist and was imprisoned twice , only to be released in an unsuccessful attempt by Shishakli to gain the support of Atrash 's father , Sultan . In the year Shishakli was overthrown , Atrash was elected to parliament and turned down an offer to serve in Said al @-@ Ghazzi 's government . During the period of the United Arab Republic ( 1958 – 61 ) , Atrash became a strong supporter of Egyptian president and pan @-@ Arab leader Gamal Abdel Nasser . He opposed Syria 's secession from the UAR and turned down offers to serve in successive separatist governments in protest . 
 When the Ba 'ath Party gained power in the 1963 coup , Atrash became Minister of Social Affairs and in 1965 the head of the Revolutionary Command Council ( RCC ) . A second coup by left @-@ wing Ba 'athist officers resulted in a split within the party between the coup officers led by the Military Committee and the founders led by Michel Aflaq , with Atrash being an ardent supporter of the latter . He was subsequently imprisoned , but released in the aftermath of Syria 's defeat in the 1967 War with Israel . After two years of self @-@ imposed exile in Lebanon , he returned to Syria where he mostly abandoned political life . He died on 14 November 2006 and was buried near his hometown of al @-@ Qurayya . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Atrash was born 3 February 1925 in the Druze community of al @-@ Qurayya in Jabal al @-@ Druze ( Jabal al @-@ Arab ) , months before the Great Syrian Revolt , which was launched and led by his father Sultan al @-@ Atrash . At the time , the Jabal al @-@ Druze area constituted an autonomous zone ( existing between 1922 and 1936 ) within the French Mandate of Syria ( established in 1920 ) . Tensions between the Druze and the French authorities stemmed from a number of reasons , particularly what the local Druze leaders saw as French encroachment into their domestic affairs and self @-@ governance . The revolt began in the summer of 1925 and had soon spread throughout Syria , ending with the military defeat of Syrian rebels in 1927 and the self @-@ imposed exile of Sultan to Transjordan after the Mandatory authorities issued a warrant for his arrest . He returned in 1937 after being pardoned by the authorities . 
 It was in Transjordan , and later in Damascus and Beirut , that Mansur completed his primary and secondary education . In 1946 , Mansur went to study at the American University in Beirut ( AUB ) , and graduated in 1948 with a BA in political science . In 1951 , he attained a law degree from the Sorbonne University . He also served as a lecturer on Arabic literature in the University of Damascus . 
 = = Ba 'ath Party and conflict with <unk> = = 
 In 1947 Atrash , an ardent socialist and Arab nationalist ' in principle and practice , " according to historian Sami Moubayed , became a founding member of the Ba 'ath Party . He joined the organization during his time at the AUB and then left with his party colleagues Salah al @-@ Din al @-@ Bitar and Michel Aflaq for further studies in Paris . He became part of its Syrian regional branch , and actively participated in party strikes , marches and parades . Atrash wrote regularly for the party newspaper al @-@ Ba 'ath . He was the only prominent Druze member in the Ba 'ath Party who hailed from a major clan , the al @-@ Atrash . 
 General Adib Shishakli seized power in 1951 , establishing a military @-@ backed autocracy . Atrash participated in anti @-@ Shishakli activity , including throwing explosives at Shishakli 's residence in 1952 , an action which resulted in Atrash 's arrest . In 1953 Shishakli launched a crackdown on the Druze community , claiming they were being funded by Hashemite @-@ ruled Jordan and Iraq to establish a Hashemite government in Syria . Jabal al @-@ Druze was bombarded by government forces and Atrash 's father Sultan was put under house arrest for his vocal criticism of Shishakli . 
 After Shishakli came into conflict with the Ba 'athists that year as a result of the former 's authoritarian manner of governance , Atrash moved to Homs , a hotbed of opposition to Shishakli 's rule , where he helped coordinate the supply of arms to insurgents in Jabal al @-@ Druze . He was arrested by the authorities for a second time in May , during the peak of the unrest . He had been released both times because of his father 's popularity at the national level ; by releasing Atrash , Shishakli attempted to gain the appeasement of Sultan . In response to Atrash 's second release from prison , Sultan said " I didn 't ask Shishakli for the freedom of my son . I asked him for the freedom of my country . " 
 According to Moubayed , Atrash 's anti @-@ government activities significantly contributed to Shishakli 's resignation and departure from Syria in February 1954 amid the countrywide unrest . In the first post @-@ Shishakli democratic election later that year , Atrash was elected to parliament . Atrash was offered a cabinet position in Said al @-@ Ghazzi 's September 1955 government , but he rejected the offer because of the Ba 'ath Party 's opposition to the government 's makeup . 
 = = UAR period and Ba 'athist Syria = = 
 Atrash supported formation of the United Arab Republic ( UAR ) , a union between Syria and Egypt , in 1958 . During the UAR years , Atrash became a devoted Nasserite — a supporter of President Gamal Abdel Nasser 's policies — and wrote several articles in Nasserite daily newspaper Al <unk> ( " The People . " ) Atrash opposed the break @-@ up of the union after a secessionist coup in September 1961 , and opposed playing a political role in the anti @-@ unionist governments that succeeded the UAR ; Prime Minister Bashir al @-@ Azma ( term in 1962 ) offered him a cabinet post , but he turned down the offer , citing his ideological opposition to a secessionist government . Prime Minister Khalid al @-@ Azm ( term in 1962 – 63 ) appointed him minister of social affairs without asking him , but Atrash turned down that job as well . 
 His seclusion from Syrian politics ended after the Military Committee of the Ba 'ath Party took power in a coup d 'état on 8 March 1963 . The Military Committee 's stated goal was to reestablish a pan @-@ Arab state ; a goal Atrash shared . He was appointed Minister of Labor and Social Affairs in Salah al @-@ Din al @-@ Bitar 's first government , and became a member of the Presidential Council , an organ responsible for running day @-@ to @-@ day state affairs . In February 1964 Atrash was elected to the 12 @-@ member Ba 'ath Party National Command , which was nominally the highest policy @-@ making body of the party . 
 Differences between Bitar and the Regional Command had developed in 1964 , with the latter viewing Bitar 's cabinet as being right @-@ leaning and soft on " reactionary " elements within Syria in the aftermath of Hama uprising in April of that year by the Muslim Brotherhood . President Amin al @-@ Hafiz had been prime minister at the time of the unrest and stepped down in response to countrywide strikes and demonstrations in protest at the severity of the uprising 's suppression . Bitar replaced Hafiz to serve a second term as prime minister in May , publicly promising to protect civil liberties . Intra @-@ party tensions culminated with the Regional Command withdrawing its confidence from Bitar 's government on 25 September , and Bitar and Atrash ( an associate of Bitar ) subsequently resigning from the Presidential Council . Their positions were filled by Salah Jadid and Yusuf <unk> , respectively , and effectively brought the Presidential Council under the full control of the Military Committee and the Regional Command . Hafiz also replaced Bitar as premier in October , although Atrash remained in his ministerial post . 
 On 1 September 1965 Atrash was appointed Chairman of the Revolutionary Command Council ( RCC ) , but acquired little de facto power because of the Military Committee 's overarching control , with Atrash later remarking " the officers let us do the talking although , as we later discovered , they had agreed beforehand ... what the decisions would be . " The RCC played the role of parliament and Atrash was its speaker . In December tensions between the National Command ( loyal to Aflaq and Bitar ) and the Regional Command ( loyal to Jadid and backed by the military ) grew worse as elements of the former attempted to align with Military Committee member Muhammad Umran in an effort to split the military 's support ( and according to Syria expert <unk> Rabinovich , the Alawite officers ' solid backing ) of Jadid . However , Atrash , along with Munif al @-@ Razzaz of Jordan and <unk> al @-@ Majdalani and Ali al @-@ Khalil of Lebanon , was a part of the group in the National Command that opposed confrontation with the Regional Command , citing the National Command 's lack of military support and political power as well as the fundamental weakness of an alliance with Umran and Amin al @-@ Hafiz . The latter two had been engaged in an antagonistic rivalry over leadership of the Military Committee . 
 Atrash continued to hold the office of RCC , and was reelected as speaker on 15 February 1966 , shortly before the 1966 Syrian coup d 'état ( 21 – 23 February ) , which brought the left @-@ wing neo @-@ Ba 'athist government of Jadid to power and caused an internal party split . The Jadid government 's coming to power resulted in the self @-@ imposed exile of the leading Ba 'ath ideologue Michel Aflaq . Atrash , a partisan of Aflaq , was arrested and jailed in the Mezzeh Prison during the coup . The new defense minister and future president Hafez al @-@ Assad later paid him a visit to discuss Syria 's political situation and check on his health . 
 On 9 June 1967 , when the Israeli Army occupied the Golan Heights during the Six @-@ Day War , Atrash and other Aflaq loyalists were released from their detention . Atrash later remarked that " It was not agreeable to know that we owed our freedom to defeat . " In collaboration with dissenting Ba 'athist officer Salim Hatum , Atrash attempted to overthrow Jadid 's government in 1967 , but failed . Following this unsuccessful coup attempt , he moved into self @-@ imposed exile in Lebanon and lived there until the death of Abd al @-@ Karim al @-@ <unk> , the head of Syria 's secret intelligence service . He returned to Syria in 1969 and lived much of the remainder of his life in seclusion . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 In 1978 Atrash hosted a dinner aimed at healing the rift between the ruling Ba 'ath governments of Syria and neighboring Iraq . The dinner was attended by such notables as Iraqi foreign minister Tariq Aziz and Syrian defense minister Mustafa Tlass . Between 2000 and 2006 Atrash was a member of an organization in support of the Palestinian uprising against Israel . Between 2001 and 2006 he presided over the Syrian Arab Committee , which aimed to end the sanctions against Iraq and later support it after the 2003 invasion . 
 In August 1956 Atrash married teacher Hind al @-@ <unk> , an Christian and the daughter of Yusuf al @-@ <unk> , Sultan 's partner in the grain trade , who was based in al @-@ Midan and owned a house in al @-@ Qurayya . Atrash had a son named Tha 'er and a daughter named Rim . Because Atrash 's wife was not from the Druze community , the marriage caused a temporary schism between Atrash and his father . Eventually the two bridged their differences . Following Sultan 's death in 1982 , Mansur gained the latter 's role as the major spokesman for the al @-@ Atrash clan . 
 Atrash died at 6 : 30 am on 14 November 2006 , at the age of 80 . His funeral was held in the city of al @-@ Suwayda , and according to one of his relatives , Talal al @-@ Atrash , the ceremony was attended by " hundreds of thousands " of Druze from Syria , Lebanon and Jordan as well as some " prominent Arab personalities . " Atrash was buried in the woodland area of <unk> which he owned , near his native al @-@ Qurayya . 
 = Delaware Route 7 = 
 Delaware Route 7 ( DE 7 ) is a two- to four @-@ lane north – south highway in New Castle County , Delaware that connects U.S. Route 13 ( US 13 ) and DE 72 near Delaware City to the Pennsylvania border near Hockessin , where the road continues into Pennsylvania as State Route 3013 ( SR 3013 ) , intersecting Pennsylvania Route 41 ( PA 41 ) at an interchange . Between Delaware City and Christiana , DE 7 runs to the west of the DE 1 freeway through suburban areas , passing through Bear . By the Christiana Mall , DE 7 joins the DE 1 freeway and comes to an interchange with Interstate 95 ( I @-@ 95 ) before the DE 1 freeway ends at the DE 58 interchange . After the freeway segment , DE 7 continues north as a surface road concurrent with DE 4 through Stanton . From Stanton to the Pennsylvania border , DE 7 heads northwest through suburban areas , passing through Pike Creek . 
 What is now DE 7 was built as a state highway during the 1920s and 1930s . By 1936 , the route was designated to run along its present alignment between US 13 near Red Lion , Delaware and the Pennsylvania border . From the 1950s to the 1970s , DE 7 became a divided highway between Christiana and Milltown Road . With the construction of the DE 1 freeway in the 1990s , DE 7 was shifted to a portion of the freeway near the Christiana Mall . The route was also extended south to an intersection with US 13 and DE 72 as a result of the relocation of US 13 onto a portion of the freeway . The road also became a divided highway between Milltown Road and DE 72 in the 1990s . In 1999 , an interchange was built at DE 58 as a result of a northward extension of DE 1 along DE 7 . The interchange with I @-@ 95 was reconstructed to include flyover ramps in 2013 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 DE 7 begins at an intersection with US 13 and DE 72 in the community of Wrangle Hill to the west of Delaware City , where the road continues south as part of US 13 . From the southern terminus , the route heads north on four @-@ lane divided South Dupont Highway . The road runs through farmland and crosses Norfolk Southern 's Reybold Running Track railroad line before passing under the US 13 / DE 1 freeway . After this , DE 7 narrows into a two @-@ lane undivided road called Bear @-@ Corbitt Road , with the former alignment of Dupont Highway branching off to the northeast . The route continues north through woodland and homes , reaching an intersection with DE 71 in Red Lion . The road crosses Norfolk Southern 's New Castle Secondary railroad line and heads into Bear . Here , DE 7 widens into a four @-@ lane divided highway as it enters commercial areas and intersects US 40 . 
 After this intersection , the route becomes Bear @-@ Christiana Road and passes through suburban residential development with some farm fields . Farther north , DE 7 narrows into a two @-@ lane undivided road . The highway comes to an intersection with DE 273 , where it is briefly a four @-@ lane divided highway . Following this , DE 7 becomes East Main Street and narrows into a two @-@ lane undivided road , heading through woods and curving to the northwest as it crosses Christina River . The route enters Christiana and passes homes , intersecting Old Baltimore Pike . At this point , DE 7 turns north onto North Old Baltimore Pike , with the name changing to Stanton @-@ Christiana Road . The route turns east onto a four @-@ lane divided highway and comes to an interchange with the DE 1 freeway southwest of the Christiana Mall , a super @-@ regional shopping mall that is the largest in Delaware . 
 At this point , DE 7 heads north concurrent with DE 1 on a four @-@ lane freeway . The freeway comes to a southbound exit and northbound entrance that serves the Christiana Mall to the east . DE 1 / DE 7 continues to a modified cloverleaf interchange with I @-@ 95 ( Delaware Turnpike ) . The road continues through more commercial areas and interchanges with DE 58 , at which point the freeway segment and DE 1 ends . Past DE 58 , DE 7 continues north at @-@ grade as six @-@ lane divided Stanton @-@ Christiana Road , heading to the west of the Stanton Campus of Delaware Technical Community College before intersecting DE 4 . At this point DE 4 turns north for a concurrency with DE 7 , running through wooded areas with nearby development , including the Hale @-@ Byrnes House , and passing over Amtrak 's Northeast Corridor railroad line and White Clay Creek . The road heads to the east of Delaware Park Racetrack , a thoroughbred horse racetrack and casino , and curves northeast to enter Stanton . At this point the two routes continue into a commercial area and split into the one @-@ way pair of Mitch Road eastbound and Main Street westbound . 
 DE 7 splits from DE 4 by heading northwest on four @-@ lane divided Limestone Road . The road runs through suburban residential neighborhoods , coming to a bridge over CSX 's Philadelphia Subdivision railroad line . The route continues into business areas and comes to an intersection with DE 2 . Past this intersection , DE 7 heads into residential and commercial areas and becomes a four @-@ lane undivided road . The route becomes a divided highway again as it comes to the Milltown Road intersection and enters the Pike Creek area . The road curves west before turning northwest again and running to the southwest of <unk> @-@ Beacom College , a private non @-@ profit college . DE 7 turns to the north and comes to an intersection with the northern terminus of DE 72 . 
 Following this , the road continues through suburban development . At the intersection with Little Baltimore Road / Brackenville Road , the route curves to the northwest and narrows to a three @-@ lane undivided road with one northbound lane and two southbound lanes , heading into the Hockessin area . DE 7 becomes a two @-@ lane divided highway as it intersects Valley Road . Past this , the route becomes a two @-@ lane undivided road that runs through fields and residential areas . DE 7 reaches its northern terminus at the Pennsylvania border , where Limestone Road continues north into that state as SR 3013 , heading to an interchange with PA 41 . 
 DE 7 has an annual average daily traffic count ranging from a high of 65 @,@ 874 vehicles at the south end of the DE 4 concurrency to a low of 3 @,@ 777 vehicles at the Old Baltimore Pike intersection . The portion of DE 7 from the south end of the DE 1 concurrency to the Pennsylvania border is part of the National Highway System . 
 = = History = = 
 What would become DE 7 originally existed as a county road by 1920 . By 1924 , the road was paved between Christiana and Stanton and was upgraded to a state highway between Capitol Trail and New Linden Hill Road . A year later , the road was upgraded to a state highway between Bear and Christiana and between Paper Mill Road and Brackenville Road , with all the sections south of Bear , between New Linden Hill Road and Paper Mill Road and Brackenville Road and the Pennsylvania border proposed as a state highway . By 1931 , these sections of state highway had been completed . DE 7 was designated to run from US 13 south of Red Lion north to the Pennsylvania border by 1936 , following its present alignment . In 1937 , the narrow swing bridge over the Christina River in Christiana was replaced with a stone bridge . A concrete tied arch bridge was built over the White Clay Creek in Stanton in 1941 . By 1959 , DE 7 was widened into a divided highway between Stanton and DE 2 . The divided highway was extended north to Milltown Road by 1966 . By 1985 , DE 273 was realigned to bypass Christiana , removing it from a portion of DE 7 through the town . Also at this time , the route was widened into a divided highway from the Christiana Mall north to Stanton . The route was shifted west to a new alignment passing over the Amtrak tracks and the White Clay Creek . 
 In the 1980s , a freeway relief route for DE 7 was proposed to run between US 13 in Tybouts Corner and I @-@ 95 in Christiana in order to reduce congestion along DE 7 . In 1988 , this relief route would become part of DE 1 , a freeway connecting the Wilmington area to Dover . The first section of the DE 1 freeway opened in August 1991 between US 13 in Tybouts Corner and US 40 in Bear . Three months later , the freeway opened north to DE 273 in Christiana . The section of DE 1 between DE 273 and I @-@ 95 in Christiana opened in April 1993 . As a result , DE 7 was relocated onto the DE 1 freeway for a short distance near the Christiana Mall . The DE 1 freeway was extended from US 13 in Tybouts Corner to St. Georges in December 1995 , in which it incorporated a portion of the existing US 13 near Red Lion . US 13 was moved to the new freeway between DE 72 and Tybouts Corner , and DE 7 was extended south along the former alignment of US 13 to end at US 13 and DE 72 to the west of Delaware City . The divided highway portion of DE 7 was extended north from Milltown Road to DE 72 by 1999 . DE 7 from I @-@ 95 to north of DE 58 became an extension of the DE 1 freeway in 1999 with an interchange built at DE 58 . 
 The Delaware Department of Transportation ( DelDOT ) reconstructed the cloverleaf interchange at I @-@ 95 to include flyover ramps between southbound I @-@ 95 and southbound DE 1 / DE 7 and northbound DE 1 / DE 7 and northbound I @-@ 95 , aiming to reduce merging and congestion at the interchange . Construction began in 2011 with work to replace the bridge over DE 1 / DE 7 leading to the Christiana Mall in order to allow room for the flyover ramps ; this bridge was completed in March 2012 . The ramp from southbound I @-@ 95 to southbound DE 1 / DE 7 opened on August 27 , 2013 and the ramp from northbound DE 1 / DE 7 to northbound I @-@ 95 opened on October 17 , 2013 , with a ribbon cutting ceremony attended by Governor Jack Markell and DelDOT secretary Shailen Bhatt . A project widening DE 7 to four lanes between Newtown Drive and DE 273 in Bear was completed in early 2014 . 
 = = Future = = 
 DelDOT is planning to widen DE 1 and part of this involves reconstructing its interchange with DE 273 . One version of the plan involves moving DE 7 onto DE 1 from DE 273 northward and disconnecting East Main Street from the DE 273 interchange . New ramps would connect the southbound lanes of DE 1 directly to DE 7 where East Main Street once did , and the park and ride lot north of DE 273 would be removed . Local opposition to this project is strong as the nearby Christina River frequently floods and some local residents would not be able to evacuate . Also the Christiana Fire House is located in the center of Christiana and would not be able to continue directly onto DE 7 south , thus adding about 1 mile and sending trucks onto a frequently congested DE 273 east to reach DE 7 south . This was later revised to have the ramps to and from the southbound lanes of DE 1 merge with DE 7 using a roundabout located at the present entrance to the park and ride lot . This project has been placed on hold indefinitely by DelDOT due to budget shortfalls . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in New Castle County . 
 = Dunster Butter Cross = 
 The Butter Cross in Dunster within the English county of Somerset is a Grade II * listed building and ancient monument . The cross was originally erected in the late 14th or early 15th century in the main street and moved to its current site in the late 18th or early 19th century . Although the head of the cross is missing the shaft and socket stone are original . The cross is in the care of English Heritage for the state and managed by the National Trust . 
 = = History = = 
 The name <unk> originates from their location in market places , where people from neighbouring villages would gather around the market cross to buy locally produced products . The fresh produce was laid out and displayed on the stepped bases of the cross . The market in Dunster attracted people from surrounding villages and towns as far away as Taunton and Bodmin . The Dunster Butter Cross was erected in the late 14th or early 15th century and originally stood in the High Street , possibly at the southern end of the high street , near the Yarn Market . A cross , which was later known as the high cross , was recorded in 1461 ; by 1689 it was known as the Butter Cross . 
 It was moved to its current location on the edge of the village by Alcombe Road , although the date when this was done is unclear . The site where the cross now stands was leveled in 1776 by workman , paid by Henry Fownes Luttrell , and it may have been on this occasion that the cross was moved . An alternative local tradition is that it was moved in 1825 , although a drawing by J. M. W. Turner made in 1811 suggests it was in its present position by then . 
 The cross is in the care of English Heritage for the state and managed by the National Trust . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The cross comprises a shaft with a plinth and socket stone forming the base . The cross 's octagonal base and polygonal shaft have survived , however the head of the cross has been lost . It stands on a small area of raised ground on a plinth . The socket stone is 0 @.@ 85 metres ( 2 ft 9 in ) wide and 0 @.@ 5 metres ( 1 ft 8 in ) high . The surviving shaft is 1 @.@ 1 metres ( 3 ft 7 in ) high and changes from square to octagonal as it rises . There is an inscription on the northern face which says " WC , 1871 , WS " recording a restoration . 
 = Japanese battleship Settsu = 
 Settsu ( <unk> ) was the second and last of the Kawachi @-@ class dreadnought battleships built for the Imperial Japanese Navy ( IJN ) in the first decade of the 20th century . Following the Japanese ship @-@ naming conventions , Settsu was named after Settsu Province , now a part of Osaka prefecture . During World War I she bombarded German fortifications at Tsingtao during the Battle of Tsingtao in 1914 , but saw no other combat . She was placed in reserve in 1919 and was disarmed in 1922 in accordance with the terms of the Washington Naval Treaty . 
 Two years later , Settsu was converted into a target ship and she played a minor role at the beginning of the Second Sino @-@ Japanese War in 1937 . At the beginning of the Pacific War in 1941 , the ship was used in an attempt to deceive the Allies as to the locations and activities of the Japanese aircraft carriers . Settsu reverted to her normal role as a target ship for the rest of the war ; she was badly damaged when Allied aircraft carriers struck the naval base at Kure Naval District in July 1945 . The ship was refloated after the war and scrapped in 1946 – 47 . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Kawachi @-@ class was ordered on 22 June 1907 under the 1907 Warship Supplement Program after the Russo @-@ Japanese War as Japan 's first dreadnoughts , although their construction was delayed by a severe depression . Their design was based on the Aki with a uniform 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) main @-@ gun armament , although cost considerations prevented all the guns from having the same barrel length . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Unlike her sister ship , Kawachi , Settsu had a clipper bow that made her 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) longer than her sister . The ship had an overall length of 533 feet ( 162 @.@ 5 m ) , a beam of 84 feet 2 inches ( 25 @.@ 7 m ) , and a normal draft of 27 feet 10 inches ( 8 @.@ 5 m ) . She displaced 21 @,@ 443 long tons ( 21 @,@ 787 t ) at normal load . Her crew ranged from 999 to 1100 officers and enlisted men . Settsu was fitted with a pair of license @-@ built Curtis steam turbine sets , each set driving one propeller , using steam from 16 Miyabara water @-@ tube boilers . The turbines were rated at a total of 25 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 19 @,@ 000 kW ) for a design speed of 21 knots ( 39 km / h ; 24 mph ) . She carried enough coal and fuel oil to give her a range of 2 @,@ 700 nautical miles ( 5 @,@ 000 km ; 3 @,@ 100 mi ) at a speed of 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . 
 Settsu 's main armament consisted of four 50 @-@ caliber 12 @-@ inch 41st Year Type guns in two twin @-@ gun turrets , one each fore and aft of the superstructure , and eight 45 @-@ caliber 12 @-@ inch 41st Year Type guns mounted in four twin @-@ gun turrets , two on each side of the superstructure . Settsu 's secondary armament was ten 45 @-@ caliber 6 @-@ inch 41st Year Type guns , mounted in casemates in the sides of the hull , and eight 40 @-@ caliber quick @-@ firing ( QF ) 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch 41st Year Type guns . The ship was also equipped with a dozen 40 @-@ caliber 3 @-@ inch 4th Year Type guns and four others were used as saluting guns . In addition , the battleship was fitted with five submerged 18 @-@ inch ( 457 mm ) torpedo tubes , two on each broadside and one in the stern . 
 The waterline main belt of the ship had a maximum thickness of 12 inches amidships . It tapered to a thickness of 5 inches ( 127 mm ) at the ends of the ship . A 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) strake of armor protected the casemates . The barbettes for the main guns were 9 – 11 inches ( 229 – 279 mm ) thick . The armor of Settsu 's main gun turrets had a maximum thickness of 11 inches . The deck armor was 1 @.@ 1 inches ( 29 mm ) thick and the conning tower was protected by 6 to 10 inches of armor . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 Settsu was laid down at Kure Naval Arsenal on 18 January 1909 . She was launched on 30 March 1911 and completed on 1 July 1912 at a cost of ¥ 11 @,@ 010 @,@ 000 . Captain <unk> Tanaka assumed command on 1 December and the ship was assigned to the First Squadron . She spent most of the following year training and patrolling off the coast of China . When World War I began in August 1914 , Settsu was at Kure . Together with her sister Kawachi , she bombarded German fortifications in October – November 1914 during the final stage of the Battle of Tsingtao . Settsu was assigned to the First Squadron until 1 December 1916 when she was placed in reserve for a refit at Kure . Upon its completion on 1 December 1917 , the ship was assigned to the Second Squadron until 23 July 1918 when she rejoined the First Squadron . By this time , all 12 of the 3 @-@ inch 4th Year Type guns were removed and four 3 @-@ inch 4th Year Type anti @-@ aircraft guns were added . Two of the torpedo tubes were also removed . On 28 October 1918 , Settsu was the flagship for Emperor Taishō for the naval review held off Yokohama as well as the review held on 9 July 1919 . 
 Settsu was placed in reserve on 6 November 1919 and reboilered during an overhaul that lasted from 1 April 1920 to 21 August 1921 . While transporting Empress <unk> back to Tokyo after she toured several shrines where she prayed for the health of her husband , the ship was caught in a typhoon that forced her escorting destroyer , <unk> , ashore , but did not damage the battleship . She was disarmed in Kure in 1922 under the terms of the Washington Naval Treaty and stricken from the navy list on 1 October 1923 . The following year , she was converted into a target ship with the removal of one boiler room and her center funnel . Her armor was reinforced to be able to absorb hits from 203 @-@ millimeter ( 8 in ) shells and 30 @-@ kilogram ( 66 lb ) practice bombs . These changes reduced her maximum speed to 16 knots ( 30 km / h ; 18 mph ) and her displacement to 16 @,@ 130 long tons ( 16 @,@ 390 t ) In early February 1925 , Settsu towed the incomplete hulk of the battleship Tosa , which had been used for gunnery and torpedo damage experiments , from Kure to the Bungo Channel where it was scuttled on 8 February . 
 Between October 1935 and 1937 , Settsu was converted to radio @-@ control which allowed her to be maneuvered by operators aboard the destroyer Yakaze . Armor on the deck , funnels , and bridge was added to strengthen her ability to survive hits . In late August 1937 , Settsu , under the command of Captain Naomasa Sakonju , transported a battalion of the Sasebo 4th Special Naval Landing Force to the Shanghai area in the early stages of the Second Sino @-@ Japanese War . The troops were transferred offshore to the light cruiser Natori and the Yakaze for transportation up the Yangtze River . During 1940 , the ship was modified to make it suitable to train carrier pilots , and was used extensively by bomber pilots practicing for the attack on Pearl Harbor . She participated in the fleet review by Emperor Hirohito on 11 October 1940 in Tokyo Bay . 
 At the beginning of the Pacific War , Settsu , under the command of Captain Chiaki Matsuda sailed from Taiwan to the vicinity of the Philippines and simulated the radio traffic of all six aircraft carriers of the 1st Air Fleet as well as the light carriers Zuihō and Ryūjō in an effort to deceive Allied intelligence as to the locations and activities of the Japanese carriers . For most of the rest of the war , she was stationed in the Inland Sea and used for bomb and torpedo training . In March – June 1944 , she served as a target for the <unk> and 762nd Naval Air Groups . During this time , she was fitted with a number of license @-@ built Hotchkiss 25 mm Type 96 light AA guns , depth charges and a hydrophone . 
 During the U.S. Navy carrier air attack on Kure on 24 July 1945 , Settsu was attacked by 30 Grumman F6F Hellcat fighters near Etajima . She was struck by one bomb that killed two men and wounded another two ; five near misses started a serious leak in the starboard engine room . Captain <unk> Ofuji decided to run his ship aground on Etajima to prevent her from sinking . All of Settsu 's 25 mm guns were subsequently removed and the ship was used as a floating barracks . Four days later , the ship was again attacked by carrier aircraft that hit her twice more with bombs . She was abandoned the next day . Settsu was stricken from the navy list on 20 November and her hulk was raised in June 1946 and towed to Kure where scrapping was completed in August 1947 . 
 = Are You Lonesome Tonight ? ( song ) = 
 " Are You Lonesome Tonight ? " is a song which was written by Roy Turk and Lou <unk> in 1926 . It was recorded several times in 1927 — first by Charles Hart , with successful versions by Vaughn De Leath and the duet of Jerry Macy and John Ryan . In 1950 the Blue Barron Orchestra version reached the top twenty on the Billboard 's Pop Singles chart . 
 In April 1960 , after Elvis Presley 's two @-@ year service in the United States Army , he recorded the song at the suggestion of manager Colonel Tom Parker ; " Are You Lonesome Tonight ? " was Parker 's wife , Marie Mott 's , favorite song . Its release was delayed by RCA Records executives , who thought the song did not fit Presley 's new ( and publicized ) style . When " Are You Lonesome Tonight ? " was released in November 1960 it was an immediate success in the U.S. , topping Billboard 's Pop Singles chart and reaching number three on the R & B chart . A month after the song 's release , it topped the UK Singles Chart . Presley 's version was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America in 1961 and upgraded to double platinum in 1992 . 
 " Are You Lonesome Tonight ? " was later recorded by several other artists , with versions by Donny Osmond and Merle Haggard becoming top @-@ twenty hits on the pop and country charts respectively . Billboard ranked " Are You Lonesome Tonight ? " number 81 on its " Hot 100 All @-@ Time Top Songs " list in 2008 . 
 = = Composition and early versions = = 
 The song was written in 1926 by vaudevillians Lou <unk> and Roy Turk with three verses , followed by a spoken bridge . They based the bridge on a line in Ruggero Leoncavallo 's Pagliacci , and " You know someone said that the world 's a stage . And each must play a part " refers to " All the world 's a stage " from William Shakespeare 's As You Like It . This recitation is printed on the inside back cover of the original 1927 sheet music , and is sung on Stanley Kirbys recording in 1928 , Al Jolson 's recording in 1949 and Blue <unk> recording in 1950 ( US top 20 hit ) . Billboard reported in 1960 its discovery that it was written by songwriter and vaudeville pianist Dave Dreyer . 
 Several versions of " Are You Lonesome Tonight ? " were recorded in 1927 . The first , by Charles Hart , was recorded on May 9 and released on Harmony Records ( 431 @-@ H ) as the B @-@ side of " Sweet Marie " . On June 13 , Vaughn De Leath recorded the song as the B @-@ side of " It 's a Million to One You 're in Love " for Edison Records ( Ed @-@ <unk> ) . De Leath had the first hit version of the song , which peaked at number four in November . On July 10 , 1927 , the Newport Society Orchestra recorded the song with Irving Kaufman the vocalist ; it was released on Harmony Records ( 511 @-@ H ) with " I 'm Walkin ' On Air " . A version by the duet of Jerry Macy and John Ryan was released on Okeh Records ( Ok @-@ <unk> ) as the B @-@ side of " Carolina Mine " . Henry Burr 's version peaked at number ten , and Little Jack Little had a hit with the song for Columbia Records . The Carter Family recorded it in 1936 , changing several elements of the original version . Although Gene Austin included the song in his shows during the 1930s , he never recorded it . 
 In March 1950 , the Blue Barron Orchestra released " Are You Lonesome Tonight ? " with " Penny Wise and Love Foolish " on the B @-@ side , and it peaked at number nineteen on Billboard 's Top Pop Singles chart . In April Don Cornell released a version without the narrative bridge as the B @-@ side of his RCA Victor single , " Stay With the Happy People " . Billboard called it a : " dreamy waltz ... ( that ) gets effective treatment ( on the recording ) " . Based on votes sent to Billboard , the song received 78 points from disc jockeys , 78 from record dealers , 79 from jukebox operators and 78 points overall ; on the magazine 's 100 @-@ point scale , it was rated " Good " . Al Jolson recorded a version with the spoken bridge on April 28 , 1950 , in Los Angeles ; Gordon Jenkins conducted the orchestra . With " No Sad Songs For Me " on the B @-@ side , it was released by Decca Records in June . According to Billboard , although the version was " revived " by Jolson 's " schmaltz style " his recitation of the bridge was " <unk> " . Based on votes sent to the magazine , the song received 71 points from disc jockeys , 71 from record dealers and 71 from jukebox operators ; with an overall score of 71 , it was rated " Good " . In 1959 , Jaye P. Morgan released the song on MGM Records , with " Miss You " on the B @-@ side , and her version peaked at number 65 on Billboard 's Pop Singles chart . 
 = = Elvis Presley 's version = = 
 At the peak of his success in 1957 , Elvis Presley received his draft notice and was inducted into the Army on March 24 , 1958 . During the final months of his service , Presley began experimenting with new material in anticipation of his return to recording . Friend Charlie Hodge taught him to improve his breathing and expand his vocal range , and by the end of his deployment in Germany , Presley had added a full octave to his range . He returned to the United States on March 2 , 1960 , and was honorably discharged ( with the rank of sergeant ) on March 5 . 
 Presley 's first recording session after his return was scheduled for March 20 , and RCA 's Studio B had recently been equipped with a new three @-@ track recorder . To improve the recording of Presley 's voice , engineer Bill Porter had Telefunken U @-@ 47 microphones installed in the studio . A follow @-@ up session was scheduled for April , and the singer left for Miami to tape The Frank Sinatra Timex Show : Welcome Home Elvis . 
 During the selection of material for the sessions Presley 's manager , Colonel Tom Parker , suggested that he record " Are You Lonesome Tonight ? " . The favorite song of Parker 's wife , Marie Mott , the manager 's suggestion was the first and only time he intervened in his singer 's choice of repertoire . Mott knew the song from Gene Austin 's act , since he was managed at the time by her husband . Presley returned to the studio with his band , consisting of Scotty Moore , drummer D. J. Fontana , pianist Floyd Cramer , guitarist Hank Garland , bassist Bobby Moore , percussionist Buddy Harman and The Jordanaires , on April 3 . 
 After the eight songs Parker needed for Elvis Is Back ! were recorded , Presley moved on to his manager 's request . At 4 am on April 4 the singer began recording " Are You Lonesome Tonight ? " , accompanied by acoustic guitar , drums , bass and the backup group . He asked everyone else in the studio to leave the session , told Chet Atkins to turn the lights out and performed the song with the spoken bridge . After the second take Presley said to producer Steve Sholes , " Throw that tune out ; I can 't do it justice " . Sholes told engineer Bill Porter to ignore Presley 's order and asked the singer to do a new take , explaining that the Jordanaires had bumped into their microphone stand while recording in the dark . Presley performed the song once more , and that take became the master for the single . 
 = = = Release and reception = = = 
 " Are You Lonesome Tonight ? " was not released for several months while RCA executives decided if the ballad reflected Presley 's new style , but they and Parker ultimately decided to release the song . It was released as a single on November 1 , 1960 , with " I Gotta Know " on the B @-@ side , and pressing was assigned to plants in New Jersey , Indianapolis and Los Angeles . Copies ( with a sleeve featuring a smiling Presley in a chartreuse shirt against a blue background ) were sent to 5 @,@ 000 disc jockeys . Orders for the single began at 900 @,@ 000 copies the first week and climbed to 1 @,@ 200 @,@ 000 during the second . 
 The song debuted on Billboard 's Top 40 at number 35 on November 14 , moved a week later to number two and topped the chart by November 28 ( replacing Maurice Williams and the Zodiacs ' " Stay " ) . Presley 's 15th chart @-@ topping single , it held the top position until January 9 , 1961 . " Are You Lonesome Tonight ? " peaked at number three on the R & B chart , remaining on it for ten weeks . The song topped the Cash Box singles chart and reached number 45 on the Cash Box country singles chart . A month after its UK release it topped the UK Singles Chart . Three months after its release , the single had sales of two million copies worldwide ; that year , the Recording Industry Association of America certified it gold . 
 A November 7 , 1960 Billboard review called Presley 's rendition a " warm and touching performance " . In a later review , AllMusic praised Presley 's vocal range , calling " Are You Lonesome Tonight ? " a " tender ... sugary ballad ... full of soul and intense and intimate power " defining " one of Presley 's darkest moments " . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 The success of " Are You Lonesome Tonight ? " made the song one of Presley 's live staples . He performed it live for the first time on March 25 , 1961 , at a Bloch Arena benefit in Honolulu for the USS Arizona Memorial , Presley 's one of four live performances between his return from the Army and his shift in career focus to acting . 
 Returning to music in 1968 , Presley included the song on his playlist for the NBC special Elvis and performed it live the following year during his first Las Vegas engagement . A version of the song , recorded on August 26 and documenting Presley altering the words of the narration and laughing through the rest of the bridge , was released in 1980 as part of the Elvis Aaron Presley box set . In 1982 , " Are You Lonesome Tonight ? " was a radio hit in the United Kingdom and reached number 25 on the British Singles Chart . Presley included the song in his 1972 documentary , Elvis on Tour , and the 1977 CBS special Elvis in Concert . 
 On March 27 , 1992 , the RIAA certified " Are You Lonesome Tonight ? " double platinum . In 2008 ( the 50th anniversary of Billboard 's Hot 100 ) , the song was number 81 on the magazine 's " Hot 100 All @-@ Time Top Songs " list . 
 = = Later versions = = 
 Frank Sinatra recorded " Are You Lonesome Tonight ? " without the spoken bridge for his 1962 album , All Alone , and the Lettermen included the song on their 1964 album She Cried . Pat Boone recorded a version ( also without the spoken bridge ) in 1966 for his album , Memories . Doris Day recorded the song on June 6 , 1967 , for The Love Album . 
 Italian singer , Bobby Solo , recorded it both in English and Italian in the 1960s . " Ti <unk> sola stasera ? " can be viewed on <unk> 
 Donny Osmond 's 1973 version is a B @-@ side to When I Fall in <unk> and Merle Haggard 's cover on his 1977 album My Farewell to Elvis peaked at number 12 on Billboard 's Top Country Singles . A 1983 version by John Schneider peaked at number 53 on the Country Singles chart . In 1989 Sam Kinison performed a version of the song on The Tonight Show , substituting a bitter rant for the Shakespeare @-@ inspired bridge . Bryan Ferry 's version of " Are You Lonesome Tonight ? " was part of the soundtrack for 1992 's Honeymoon in Vegas . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = Tropical Storm Laura ( 2008 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Laura was a large but short @-@ lived tropical cyclone that developed over the north @-@ central Atlantic Ocean in late September during the 2008 Atlantic hurricane season . The 12th named storm of the season , Laura formed out of a large extratropical area of low pressure located about 1015 miles ( 1635 km ) west of the Azores on September 29 . Laura slowly developed tropical characteristics throughout the day as it moved over warmer waters . On the afternoon of September 30 , Laura had acquired enough tropical characteristics to be designated a Tropical Storm . Shortly after being declared tropical , Laura began to undergo an extratropical transition , which did not fully take place until the morning of October 1 . Laura degenerated into a post @-@ tropical cyclone later that morning , and the final advisory by the National Hurricane Center was issued . The remnants of Laura contributed to heavy rainfall and power outages in the British Isles , the Netherlands , and Norway on October 5 to 8 . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On September 26 , an extratropical area of low pressure developed along a quasi @-@ stationary frontal system a few hundred miles west of the Azores . The low intensified into the equivalent of a Category 1 hurricane with winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) at 12 : 00 UTC on September 27 . Over the following days , the low began to lose its frontal features and began to transition into a subtropical cyclone as it traveled in a general westward direction . By September 29 , the low had developed sufficient convection and was declared Subtropical Storm Laura . Upon being upgraded , cold cloud tops began to wrap around the center of Laura and consolidate near the center of circulation . The convection organized around the center quickly and a satellite pass over the storm revealed that it could be intensifying . A later satellite pass disregarded the possibility of intensification as the intensity was confirmed to be at 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) . The overall structure of Laura remained subtropical but there were indications that it was acquiring tropical characteristics . 
 During the afternoon , satellites revealed that Laura had developed a deep warm core , a characteristic of a tropical cyclone , but the wind field remained subtropical in nature . By the nighttime hours , the radius of the strongest winds contracted to 80 mi ( 130 km ) , much smaller than what is typical of a subtropical cyclone . However , Laura was still under the influence of an upper @-@ level low and cloud tops remained shallow . However , the cloud tops became colder overnight and Laura was on the verge of becoming a tropical cyclone by the morning of September 30 , but strong interaction with the upper @-@ level low meant it was still subtropical . Despite moving over colder waters , a water vapor satellite image determined that Laura had separated itself from the upper @-@ level low , signifying it had developed into a tropical cyclone . Laura was re @-@ classified as a tropical storm at a relatively high latitude , 40 @.@ 6 ° N. Not long after being declared tropical , early signs of an extratropical transition appeared . Cold air began to enter the storm on the west side and forecast models showed Laura becoming extratropical the next morning and non @-@ tropical later the next day . 
 Overnight , convection associated with Laura began to diminish and lose tropical characteristics , but still retained its status . Early on October 1 , the extratropical transition was fully apparent . Laura remained tropical but the cloud pattern was becoming frontal and there was little convection around the center of the system . With minimal shower and thunderstorm activity remaining around the center of Laura , the storm degenerated into a remnant @-@ low pressure area on October 1 while still producing tropical storm @-@ force winds . The next day , the remnant system transitioned into an extratropical cyclone and began to re @-@ intensify as it rapidly tracked towards the north . Early on October 3 , the system slowed down as it turned towards the east and strengthened into a hurricane @-@ force cyclone with winds of 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) . After accelerating towards the east , another large extratropical cyclone absorbed the remnants of Laura while located several hundred miles west of the British Isles on October 4 . 
 = = Impact = = 
 As a tropical cyclone , Laura never approached land , and no damages or fatalities occurred . Since the storm remained over open waters for most of its life , several ships and oil platforms recorded tropical storm @-@ force winds . The highest recorded winds were at an oil platform with the call sign <unk> at 03 : 00 UTC on October 1 . Winds were recorded up to 47 knots ( 54 mph ; 87 km / h ) . Despite the lack of impact , the storm 's remnants were caught in an upper @-@ level jet stream , and steered towards Europe . There , they contributed to heavy rainfall across portions of Britain on October 5 , causing localized accumulation of flood waters . As a result , Glebe Road near Windermere , England was closed in both directions , and along the <unk> road between Old Hutton and Kirkby Lonsdale , previously saturated soil , combined with overwhelmed storm drains resulted in localized flooding . Traffic on the M6 Motorway was slowed due to poor driving conditions . One person had to be rescued from her car after driving into a flooded street . The UK Environment Agency issued 76 flood watches and 21 severe flood warnings as a result of the rainfall . 
 On October 8 , the remnants of Laura reached the Netherlands . At the time , its rain bands began interacting with a cold front associated with a well @-@ developed low west of Norway , dropping up to 113 mm ( 4 @.@ 4 in ) of precipitation in the northwestern Netherlands . Consequently , streets and homes in the village of <unk> were reportedly inundated . The large amounts of precipitation broke the daily and monthly rainfall records for October , which were previously set in 2006 . Gradually passing through Norway , the remnants of the storm caused significant damage to electric utilities . As a result , more than 10 @,@ 000 people lost power in southern parts of the country . 
 = European Coal and Steel Community = 
 The European Coal and Steel Community ( ECSC ) was an international organisation serving to unify certain Continental European countries after World War II . It was formally established in 1951 by the Treaty of Paris , which was signed by Belgium , France , West Germany , Italy , the Netherlands and Luxembourg . The ECSC was the first international organisation to be based on the principles of supranationalism , and would ultimately lead the way to the founding of the European Union . 
 The ECSC was first proposed by French foreign minister Robert Schuman on 9 May 1950 as a way to prevent further war between France and Germany . He declared his aim was to " make war not only unthinkable but materially impossible " which was to be achieved by regional integration , of which the ECSC was the first step . The Treaty would create a common market for coal and steel among its member states which served to neutralise competition between European nations over natural resources , particularly in the Ruhr . 
 The ECSC was run by four institutions : a High Authority composed of independent appointees , a Common Assembly composed of national parliamentarians , a Special Council composed of nation ministers , and a Court of Justice . These would ultimately form the blueprint for today 's European Commission , European Parliament , the Council of the European Union and the European Court of Justice . 
 The ECSC was joined by two other similar communities in 1957 , the European Economic Community and European Atomic Energy Community , with whom it shared its membership and some institutions . In 1967 all its institutions were merged with that of the European Economic Community , but it retained its own independent legal personality . In 2002 the Treaty of Paris expired and all the ECSC activities and resources were absorbed by the European Community . 
 = = History = = 
 As Prime Minister and Foreign Minister , Schuman was instrumental in turning French policy away from the Gaullist policy of permanent occupation or control of parts of German territory such as the Ruhr or the Saar . Despite stiff ultra @-@ nationalist , Gaullist and communist opposition , the French Assembly voted a number of resolutions in favour of his new policy of integrating Germany into a community . The International Authority for the Ruhr changed in consequence . Schuman 's guiding principles were moral , based on the equality of states ( international democracy ) , not the power politics of domination . 
 = = = Schuman declaration = = = 
 The Schuman Declaration of 9 May 1950 ( later known as Europe Day ) occurred after two Cabinet meetings , when the proposal became French government policy . France was thus the first government to agree to surrender sovereignty in a supranational Community . That decision was based on a text , written and edited by Schuman 's friend and colleague , the Foreign Ministry lawyer , Paul Reuter with the assistance of Jean Monnet and Schuman 's Directeur de Cabinet , Bernard <unk> . It laid out a plan for a European Community to pool the coal and steel of its members in a common market . 
 Schuman proposed that " Franco @-@ German production of coal and steel as a whole be placed under a common High Authority , within the framework of an organisation open to the participation of the other countries of Europe . " Such an act was intended to help economic growth and cement peace between France and Germany , who were historic enemies . Coal and steel were vital resources needed for a country to wage war , so pooling those resources between two such enemies was seen as more than symbolic . Schuman saw the decision of the French government on his proposal as the first example of a democratic and supranational Community , a new development in world history . The plan was also seen by some , like Monnet , who crossed out Reuter 's mention of ' supranational ' in the draft and inserted ' federation ' , as a first step to a " European federation " . 
 The Schuman Declaration that created the ECSC had several distinct aims : 
 It would mark the birth of a united Europe . 
 It would make war between member states impossible . 
 It would encourage world peace . 
 It would transform Europe in a ' step by step ' process ( building through sectoral supranational communities ) leading to the unification of Europe democratically , unifying two political blocks separated by the Iron Curtain . 
 It would create the world 's first supranational institution . 
 It would create the world 's first international anti @-@ cartel agency . 
 It would create a common market across the Community . 
 It would , starting with the coal and steel sector , revitalise the whole European economy by similar community processes . 
 It would improve the world economy and the developing countries , such as those in Africa . 
 Firstly , it was intended to prevent further war between France and Germany and other states by tackling the root cause of war . The ECSC was primarily conceived with France and Germany in mind : " The coming together of the nations of Europe requires the elimination of the age @-@ old opposition of France and Germany . Any action taken must in the first place concern these two countries . " The coal and steel industries being essential for the production of munitions , Schuman believed that by uniting these two industries across France and Germany under an innovative supranational system that also included a European anti @-@ cartel agency , he could " make war not only unthinkable but materially impossible . " Schuman had another aim : " With increased resources Europe will be able to pursue the achievement of one of its essential tasks , namely , the development of the African continent . " Industrial cartels tended to impose " restrictive practices " on national markets , whereas the ECSC would ensure the increased production necessary for their ambitions in Africa . 
 = = = Political pressures = = = 
 In West Germany , Schuman kept the closest contacts with the new generation of democratic politicians . Karl Arnold , the Minister President of North Rhine @-@ Westphalia , the province that included the coal and steel producing Ruhr , was initially spokesman for German foreign affairs . He gave a number of speeches and broadcasts on a supranational coal and steel community at the same time as Robert Schuman began to propose this Community in 1948 and 1949 . The Social Democratic Party of Germany ( German : <unk> Partei Deutschlands , SPD ) , in spite of support from unions and other socialists in Europe , decided it would oppose the Schuman plan . Kurt Schumacher 's personal distrust of France , capitalism , and Konrad Adenauer aside , he claimed that a focus on integrating with a " Little Europe of the Six " would override the SPD 's prime objective of German reunification and thus empower ultra @-@ nationalist and Communist movements in democratic countries . He also thought the ECSC would end any hopes of nationalising the steel industry and lock in a Europe of " cartels , clerics and conservatives . " Younger members of the party like Carlo Schmid , were , however , in favor of the Community and pointed to the long socialist support for the supranational idea . 
 In France , Schuman had gained strong political and intellectual support from all sections of the nation and many non @-@ communist parties . Notable amongst these were ministerial colleague Andre Philip , president of the Foreign Relations Committee Edouard <unk> , and former prime minister , Paul Reynaud . Projects for a coal and steel authority and other supranational communities were formulated in specialist subcommittees of the Council of Europe in the period before it became French government policy . Charles de Gaulle , who was then out of power , had been an early supporter of " linkages " between economies , on French terms , and had spoken in 1945 of a " European confederation " that would exploit the resources of the Ruhr . However , he opposed the ECSC as a faux ( false ) pooling ( " le pool , ce faux <unk> " ) because he considered it an unsatisfactory " piecemeal approach " to European unity and because he considered the French government " too weak " to dominate the ECSC as he thought proper . De Gaulle also felt that the ECSC had insufficient supranational authority because the Assembly was not ratified by a European referendum and he did not accept Raymond Aron 's contention that the ECSC was intended as a movement away from United States domination . Consequently , de Gaulle and his followers in the RPF voted against ratification in the lower house of the French Parliament . 
 Despite these attacks and those from the extreme left , the ECSC found substantial public support , and so it was established . It gained strong majority votes in all eleven chambers of the parliaments of the Six , as well as approval among associations and European public opinion . In 1950 , many had thought another war was inevitable . The steel and coal interests , however , were quite vocal in their opposition . The Council of Europe , created by a proposal of Schuman 's first government in May 1948 , helped articulate European public opinion and gave the Community idea positive support . 
 = = = Treaties = = = 
 The 100 @-@ article Treaty of Paris , which established the ECSC , was signed on 18 April 1951 by " the inner six " : France , West Germany , Italy , Belgium , the Netherlands and Luxembourg ( Benelux ) . The ECSC was the first international organisation to be based on supranational principles and was , through the establishment of a common market for coal and steel , intended to expand the economies , increase employment , and raise the standard of living within the Community . The market was also intended to progressively rationalise the distribution of high level production whilst ensuring stability and employment . The common market for coal was opened on 10 February 1953 , and for steel on 1 May 1953 . Upon taking effect , the ECSC gradually replaced the International Authority for the Ruhr . 
 On 11 August 1952 , the United States was the first non @-@ ECSC member to recognise the Community and stated it would now deal with the ECSC on coal and steel matters , establishing its delegation in Brussels . Monnet responded by choosing Washington , D. C. as the site of the ECSC 's first external presence . The headline of the delegation 's first bulletin read " Towards a Federal Government of Europe " . 
 Six years after the Treaty of Paris , the Treaties of Rome were signed by the six ECSC members , creating the European Economic Community ( EEC ) and the European Atomic Energy Community ( EAEC or ' Euratom ' ) . These Communities were based , with some adjustments , on the ECSC . The Treaties of Rome were to be in force indefinitely , unlike the Treaty of Paris , which was to expire after fifty years . These two new Communities worked on the creation of a customs union and nuclear power community respectively . The Rome treaties were hurried through just before de Gaulle was given emergency powers and proclaimed the Fifth Republic . Despite his efforts to ' chloroform ' the Communities , their fields rapidly expanded and the EEC became the most important tool for political unification , overshadowing the ECSC . 
 = = = Merger and expiration = = = 
 Despite being separate legal entities , the ECSC , EEC and Euratom initially shared the Common Assembly and the European Court of Justice , although the Councils and the High Authority / Commissions remained separate . To avoid duplication , the Merger Treaty merged these separate bodies of the ECSC and Euratom with the EEC . The EEC later became one of the three pillars of the present day European Union . 
 The Treaty of Paris was frequently amended as the EC and EU evolved and expanded . With the treaty due to expire in 2002 , debate began at the beginning of the 1990s on what to do with it . It was eventually decided that it should be left to expire . The areas covered by the ECSC 's treaty were transferred to the Treaty of Rome and the financial loose ends and the ECSC research fund were dealt with via a protocol of the Treaty of Nice . The treaty finally expired on 23 July 2002 . That day , the ECSC flag was lowered for the final time outside the European Commission in Brussels and replaced with the EU flag . 
 = = = Timeline of treaties = = = 
 = = Institutions = = 
 The institutions of the ECSC were the High Authority , the Common Assembly , the Special Council of Ministers and the Court of Justice . A Consultative Committee was established alongside the High Authority , as a fifth institution representing civil society . This was the first international representation of consumers in history . These institutions were merged in 1967 with those of the European Community , which then governed the ECSC , except for the Committee , which continued to be independent until the expiration of the Treaty of Paris in 2002 . 
 The Treaty stated that the location of the institutions would be decided by common accord of the members , yet the issue was hotly contested . As a temporary compromise , the institutions were provisionally located in the City of Luxembourg , despite the Assembly being based in Strasbourg . 
 = = = High Authority = = = 
 The High Authority ( the predecessor to the European Commission ) was a nine @-@ member executive body which governed the Community . The Authority consisted of nine members in office for a term of six years . Eight of these members were appointed by the governments of the six signatories . These eight members then themselves appointed a ninth person to be President of the High Authority . 
 Despite being appointed by agreement of national governments acting together , the members were to pledge not to represent their national interest , but rather took an oath to defend the general interests of the Community as a whole . Their independence was aided by members being barred from having any occupation outside the Authority or having any business interests ( paid or unpaid ) during their tenure and for three years after they left office . To further ensure impartiality , one third of the membership was to be renewed every two years ( article 10 ) . 
 The Authority 's principal innovation was its supranational character . It had a broad area of competence to ensure the objectives of the treaty were met and that the common market functioned smoothly . The High Authority could issue three types of legal instruments : Decisions , which were entirely binding laws ; Recommendations , which had binding aims but the methods were left to member states ; and Opinions , which had no legal force . 
 Up to the merger in 1967 , the authority had five Presidents followed by an interim President serving for the final days . 
 = = = Other institutions = = = 
 The Common Assembly ( which later became the European Parliament ) was composed of 78 representatives and exercised supervisory powers over the executive High Authority . The Common Assembly representatives were to be national MPs delegated each year by their Parliaments to the Assembly or directly elected ' by universal suffrage ' ( article 21 ) , though in practice it was the former , as there was no requirement for elections until the Treaties of Rome and no actual election until 1979 , as Rome required agreement in the Council on the electoral system first . However , to emphasise that the chamber was not a traditional international organisation composed of representatives of national governments , the Treaty of Paris used the term " representatives of the peoples " . The Assembly was not originally specified in the Schuman Plan because it was hoped the Community would use the institutions ( Assembly , Court ) of the Council of Europe . When this became impossible because of British objections , separate institutions had to be created . The Assembly was intended as a democratic counter @-@ weight and check to the High Authority , to advise but also to have power to sack the Authority for incompetence , injustice , corruption or fraud . The first President ( akin to a Speaker ) was Paul @-@ Henri Spaak . 
 The Special Council of Ministers ( equivalent to the current Council of the European Union ) was composed of representatives of national governments . The Presidency was held by each state for a period of three months , rotating between them in alphabetical order . One of its key aspects was the harmonisation of the work of the High Authority and that of national governments , which were still responsible for the state 's general economic policies . The Council was also required to issue opinions on certain areas of work of the High Authority . Issues relating only to coal and steel were in the exclusive domain of the High Authority , and in these areas the Council ( unlike the modern Council ) could only act as a scrutiny on the Authority . However , areas outside coal and steel required the consent of the Council . 
 The Court of Justice was to ensure the observation of ECSC law along with the interpretation and application of the Treaty . The Court was composed of seven judges , appointed by common accord of the national governments for six years . There were no requirements that the judges had to be of a certain nationality , simply that they be qualified and that their independence be beyond doubt . The Court was assisted by two Advocates General . 
 The Consultative Committee ( similar to the Economic and Social Committee ) had between 30 and 50 members equally divided between producers , workers , consumers and dealers in the coal and steel sector . Again , there was no national quotas , and the treaty requires representatives of European associations to organise their own democratic procedures . They were to establish rules to make their membership fully ' representative ' for democratic organised civil society . Members were appointed for two years and were not bound by any mandate or instruction of the organisations which appointed them . The Committee had a plenary assembly , bureau and president . Again , the required democratic procedures were not introduced and nomination of these members remained in the hands of national ministers . The High Authority was obliged to consult the Committee in certain cases where it was appropriate and to keep it informed . The Consultative Committee remained separate ( despite the merger of the other institutions ) until 2002 , when the Treaty expired and its duties were taken over by the Economic and Social Committee ( ESC ) . Despite its independence , the Committee did cooperate with the ESC when they were consulted on the same issue . 
 = = Achievements and failures = = 
 Its mission ( article 2 ) was general : to ' contribute to the expansion of the economy , the development of employment and the improvement of the standard of living ' of its citizens . The Community had little effect on coal and steel production , which was influenced more by global trends . Trade between members did increase ( tenfold for steel ) which saved members ' money by not having to import resources from the United States . The High Authority also issued 280 modernization loans to the industry which helped the industry to improve output and reduce costs . Costs were further reduced by the abolition of tariffs at borders . 
 Among the ECSC 's greatest achievements are those on welfare issues . Some mines , for example were clearly unsustainable without government subsidies . Some miners had extremely poor housing . Over 15 years it financed 112 @,@ 500 flats for workers , paying US $ 1 @,@ 770 per flat , enabling workers to buy a home they could not have otherwise afforded . The ECSC also paid half the occupational redeployment costs of those workers who have lost their jobs as coal and steel facilities began to close down . Combined with regional redevelopment aid the ECSC spent $ 150 million creating 100 @,@ 000 jobs , a third of which were for unemployed coal and steel workers . The welfare guarantees invented by the ECSC were extended to workers outside the coal and steel sector by some of its members . 
 Far more important than creating Europe 's first social and regional policy , it is argued that the ECSC introduced European peace . It involved the continent 's first European tax . This was a flat tax , a levy on production with a maximum rate of one percent . Given that the European Community countries are now experiencing the longest period of peace in more than seventy years , this has been described as the cheapest tax for peace in history . Another world war , or ' world suicide ' as Schuman called this threat in 1949 , was avoided . In October 1953 Schuman said that the possibility of another European war had been eliminated . Reasoning had to prevail among member states . 
 However the ECSC failed to achieve several fundamental aims of the Treaty of Paris . It was hoped the ECSC would prevent a resurgence of large coal and steel groups such as the <unk> , which helped Adolf Hitler rise to power . In the Cold War trade @-@ offs , the cartels and major companies re @-@ emerged , leading to apparent price fixing ( another element that was meant to be tackled ) . With a democratic supervisory system the worst aspects of past abuse were avoided with the anti @-@ cartel powers of the Authority , the first international anti @-@ cartel agency in the world . Efficient firms were allowed to expand into a European market without undue domination . Oil , gas , electricity became natural competitors to coal and also broke cartel powers . Furthermore , with the move to oil , the Community failed to define a proper energy policy . The Euratom treaty was largely stifled by de Gaulle and the European governments refused the suggestion of an Energy Community involving electricity and other vectors that was suggested at Messina in 1955 . In a time of high inflation and monetary instability ECSC also fell short of ensuring an upward equalisation of pay of workers within the market . These failures could be put down to <unk> in a short period of time , or that the goals were merely political posturing to be ignored . It has been argued that the greatest achievements of the European Coal and Steel Community lie in its revolutionary democratic concepts of a supranational Community . 
 = Old Dan Tucker = 
 " Old Dan Tucker " , also known as " Ole Dan Tucker " , " Dan Tucker " , and other variants , is a popular American song . Its origins remain obscure ; the tune may have come from oral tradition , and the words may have been written by songwriter and performer Dan Emmett . The blackface troupe the Virginia Minstrels popularized " Old Dan Tucker " in 1843 , and it quickly became a minstrel hit , behind only " Miss Lucy Long " and " Mary Blane " in popularity during the antebellum period . " Old Dan Tucker " entered the folk vernacular around the same time . Today it is a bluegrass and country music standard . It is no . 390 in the Roud Folk Song Index . 
 The first sheet music edition of " Old Dan Tucker " , published in 1843 , is a song of boasts and nonsense in the vein of previous minstrel hits such as " Jump Jim Crow " and " Gumbo Chaff " . In exaggerated Black Vernacular English , the lyrics tell of Dan Tucker 's exploits in a strange town , where he fights , gets drunk , <unk> , and breaks other social taboos . Minstrel troupes freely added and removed verses , and folk singers have since added hundreds more . Parodies and political versions are also known . 
 The song falls into the idiom of previous minstrel music , relying on rhythm and text declamation as its primary motivation . Its melody is simple and the harmony little developed . Nevertheless , contemporary critics found the song more pleasant than previous minstrel fare . Musicologist Dale Cockrell argues that the song represents a transition between early minstrel music and the more European @-@ style songs of minstrelsy 's later years . 
 = = Lyrics = = 
 " Old Dan Tucker " as originally published exemplifies the masculine boasting songs that predominated in early minstrelsy . Modern analysts emphasize the song 's rawness , racism , and disdain for social taboos . In ersatz Black Vernacular English , the song uses short , active words such as runnin and <unk> , to portray Dan Tucker as a rough @-@ and @-@ ready black man in the mold of Jim Crow , Gumbo Chaff , and ultimately the tall tale frontiersman : 
 I come to town de udder night , 
 I hear de noise an saw de fight , 
 De watchman was a runnin <unk> , 
 Cryin Old Dan Tucker 's come to town . 
 Gran ' Chorus . 
 So get out de way ! Get out de way ! 
 Get out de way ! Old Dan Tucker . 
 You 're too late to come to supper . 
 Tucker is an animalistic character , driven by sex , violence , and strong drink . He is ugly , unrefined , and unintelligent , even <unk> . As a stranger in town , his devil @-@ may @-@ care actions show his problems with or ambivalence to adapting to local mores . More broadly , Tucker 's disdain for social norms allows the song to send up respectable middle class American society , as evidenced by the final verse : 
 Tucker was a hardened sinner , 
 He <unk> said his grace at dinner ; 
 De ole sow <unk> , de pigs did squall 
 He ' hole hog wid de tail and all . 
 Other verses are simply nonsense that do not go along with the main narrative . Their lines seem to serve no other purpose than to make a rhyme or extend the patter scheme . The third verse is one example : 
 Here 's my razor in good order 
 Magnum bonum — <unk> hab bought ' er ; 
 Sheep shell oats , Tucker shell de corn , 
 I 'll <unk> you soon as de water get warm . 
 Dan Tucker is both the teller and subject of the story . Verses 1 , 3 , and 5 of the 1843 edition are in the first person , whereas verses 2 , 4 , and 7 are in the third . This reflects the song 's intended performance by an entire minstrel troupe . The lead minstrel played Tucker and began the song , but backup singers took over at times to allow Tucker to act out the scenario , dance , and do another comedy bit . There was probably an element of competition to the various dance and music solos . The third @-@ person verses also allowed for commentary to suggest to the audience how they were to judge the character and his antics . 
 Individual companies probably selectively performed verses from the song or added new ones . For example , the Virginia Serenaders added verses about the Irish , Dutch , and French . At least four versions of the song were published with different lyrics during the 19th century . A parody called " <unk> de Track " appears in some playbills and songsters . 
 = = = Folk versions = = = 
 " Old Dan Tucker " entered American folklore soon after it was written . Its simple and malleable nature means that singers may begin or end it at any point or invent new verses on the spot . In fact , hundreds of folk verses have been recorded . This is a common folk variant : 
 Old Daniel Tucker wuz a mighty man , 
 He washed his face in a <unk> ' pan ; 
 <unk> his head wid a wagon wheel 
 And he died wid de <unk> in his heel . 
 A common chorus variant goes : 
 So , git <unk> de way for old Dan Tucker , 
 He 's come too late to git his supper . 
 Supper 's over and breakfast <unk> ' , 
 Old Dan Tucker standin ' lookin ' . 
 For decades " Old Dan Tucker " was used as part of a dancing game . The players formed a ring , and one man moved to the center . He selected women to swing around according to the lyrics : 
 Here 's old Dan , he comes to town ; 
 He swings the ladies round and round . 
 He swings one east , he swings one west , 
 He swings with the one he loves the best . 
 The third woman chosen then became his new partner , and her old partner now took the role of " Old Dan " . 
 These folk versions can be quite ribald . This one , recalled by a man from his boyhood in Benton County , Arkansas , in the 1910s , is one example : 
 Old Dan Tucker was a fine old soul , 
 Buckskin belly and a rubber ass @-@ hole , 
 Swallowed a barrel of cider down 
 And then he shit all over town . 
 Another version , sung by Charles Edward Carpenter — a Lawrenceburg , Tennessee business man and World War II Veteran ( born in <unk> , TN ) — to his children and grandchildren in Middle Tennessee during the mid- to late 1900s speaks of Old Dan Tucker 's love of a hard drink . The last line appears to have been sung in the first person ( " Oh my goodness , what 'll I do ? ) : 
 Old Dan Tucker , he got drunk , 
 He fell in the far ( fire ) and kicked up a chunk , 
 A red hot coal fell down his shoe , 
 Oh my goodness , what 'll I do ? 
 Go on home , ole Dan Tucker , 
 You 're too late to get your supper . 
 " Old Dan Tucker " entered the folklore of slaves as well . This version from Orange County , North Carolina , was recorded in the 1850s : 
 <unk> and Missus look ' might fine — 
 Gwine to take a journey , gwine <unk> dey gwine , 
 Crab grass a @-@ <unk> ' , red sun in de west , 
 Saturday 's comin ' , nigger gwine to rest . 
 = = = Political versions = = = 
 The original " Old Dan Tucker " and most folk variants are not political in nature . However , as early as 1844 , the Hutchinson Family Singers were performing " Get off the Track ! " to its tune , billed as " A song for emancipation " One verse and the chorus say : 
 Ho ! the car Emancipation 
 Rides majestic thro ' our nation , 
 Bearing on its train the story ; 
 Liberty ! a nation 's glory . 
 Get out the way ! Every station ! 
 Freedom 's car , Emancipation ! 
 That same year , supporters of Henry Clay at a Whig rally sang a version that makes references to Clay ( " Ole Kentucky " ) , Martin Van Buren , and James Buchanan : 
 The people 's <unk> <unk> , Henry Clay , is now the ' fashion ' of the day ; 
 And let the track be dry or mucky , we 'll stake our pile on Ole Kentucky . 
 Get out of the way , he 's swift and lucky ; clear the track for Ole Kentucky ! 
 In 1856 , supporters of John C. Frémont 's run for the Republican Party nomination adopted the tune as his campaign song with the changed refrain " Get out the way , old Buchanan " . William Jennings Bryan 's campaign song for the 1900 Democratic National Convention in Kansas City , Missouri , changed the lyrics to say : 
 Voters , come and hear my ditty , 
 What was done at Kansas City : 
 David Hill , the New York lion , 
 Nominated Billy Bryan . 
 Get out of the way , you Grand Old Party , 
 You 're so old , you 're getting warty . 
 A version popular during the American Civil War adds references to Abraham Lincoln : 
 Old Abe is coming down to fight , 
 And put the Democrats to flight ; 
 He 's coming with the wedge and maul 
 And he will split ' em one and all . 
 Get out the way , you little giant 
 You can 't come in , you 're too short and pliant . 
 = = Structure = = 
 " Old Dan Tucker " is a breakdown , a dance song wherein the rhythmic accent falls on the second and fourth beats rather than on the third . The song is largely Anglo @-@ American in nature , although it has black influences . Its repetitive melodic idiom matches that of earlier minstrel standards , such as " Jump Jim Crow " , " Coal Black Rose " , and " Old Zip Coon " . 
 The song consists of 28 bars . It begins with a boisterous eight @-@ bar introduction . Four bars follow to frame the coda . The remainder consists of sixteen bars with lyrics , half devoted to verse , and half to refrain . Each phrase gives way directly to the next with no rests between sections . 
 Rhythm is perhaps the most important component of " Old Dan Tucker " . It begins with a cadenced introduction and little melody . Even when the tune begins in earnest , it is flat and non @-@ harmonized and does little more than provide a beat on which words are uttered . The refrain is syncopated in a way that had only previously been used in the minstrel song " Old Zip Coon " . The intense rhythm on the line " Get out the way ! " generates a forward momentum and is answered by instruments in one example of the song 's black @-@ influenced call and response . 
 " Old Dan Tucker " was , of course , intended for stage performance . The verses are not only to be played but also acted out and danced to . Minstrels could begin leaping about at the introduction and coda , beginning the full music at the vocal section . Performers probably included instrumental versions of the chorus while they played , a rare practice in early minstrelsy . 
 Musicologist Dale Cockrell argues that " Old Dan Tucker " in fact represents a bridge between the percussive blackface songs of the 1830s and the more refined compositions of songwriters such as Stephen Foster . Cockrell says that , unlike previous minstrel songs , " Old Dan Tucker " is meant for more than just dancing ; its tune is developed enough to stand on its own . Contemporary critics certainly noticed the difference . Y. S. Nathanson called it " the best of what I have denominated the ancient negro ballads . The melody is far superior to anything that had preceded it . " Nathanson compared the song to works by Gaetano Donizetti and Daniel Auber . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The origin of the music of " Old Dan Tucker " has always been obscure , and no sheet music edition from 1843 , its year of its first publication , names a composer . The first performance of the tune ( but not lyrics ) may have happened as early as 1841 . The music may in fact be from the oral tradition or may have been a product of collaboration . 
 Nevertheless , " Old Dan Tucker " has been credited to at least three different songwriters : Dan Emmett , J. R. Jenkins , and Henry Russell . In his old age , Emmett related the traditional story to his biographer , H. Ogden Wintermute : " I composed Old Dan Tucker in 1830 or 1831 , when I was fifteen or sixteen years old . " The biography claims that Emmett first played the song in public at a performance by a group of traveling entertainers . They lacked a fiddle player , and the local innkeeper suggested young Emmett to fill in . Emmett played " Old Dan Tucker " to the troupe manager 's liking , and he debuted on the Mount Vernon , Ohio , village green in blackface to perform the song on the Fourth of July . Wintermute claims that the name Dan Tucker is a combination of Emmett 's own name and that of his dog . However , there is no evidence for any of this . Instead , Emmett may merely have written the words . Even these seem to partially derive from an earlier minstrel song called " Walk Along John " or " Oh , Come Along John " , first published in various songsters in the early 1840s . Some verses have clear echoes in versions of " Old Dan Tucker " : 
 Johnny law on de rail road track , 
 He tied de engine on his back ; 
 He pair 's his corn wid a rail road wheel , 
 It gib ' em de tooth ache in de heel . 
 The Charles Keith company published " Old Dan Tucker " in Boston , Massachusetts , in 1843 . The sheet music credits words to Dan Emmett but says that the song is from " Old Dan Emmit 's Original Banjo Melodies " . The lack of attribution of the melody may be another sign that Emmett did not write it . 
 = = = Possible slave origin = = = 
 A story dating to at least 1965 claims that " Old Dan Tucker " was written by slaves about a man named Daniel Tucker who lived in Elbert County , Georgia . Tucker was a farmer , ferryman , and minister who appears in records from the late 18th and early 19th centuries . The story , as related by Mrs. Guy Rucker , the great @-@ great @-@ granddaughter of one of Tucker 's neighbors , claims that Tucker became quite well liked by the slaves in his area through his ministry to them . 
 According to this interpretation , the lyrics address Tucker directly . The chorus , " You 're too late to get your supper " is a kindhearted taunt to a man who often arrived after dark , forcing his hosts to scrape up a meal for him . The song 's occasional lewdness is explained by the natural impromptu nature of its supposed origin . 
 " Old Dan Tucker " does show evidence of black influence . For example , bizarre imagery in folk versions of the song ( e.g. , " toothache in his heel " ) may be a sign of legitimate black input ( or of someone poking fun of slaves who had an incomplete knowledge of English ) . " Old Dan Tucker " most closely resembles African music in its call @-@ and @-@ response refrain . 
 Daniel Tucker was buried in Elbert County in 1818 . The Elbert County Chamber of Commerce today promotes his grave as a tourist attraction due to his possible connection with the character from the song . 
 = = Popularity = = 
 In December 1842 and January 1843 , Dan Emmett portrayed the character Old Dan Tucker in solo and duo performances ; the playbills do not indicate whether he included the song in his act . The Virginia Minstrels probably made " Old Dan Tucker " a regular part of their show beginning with their first performance at the Bowery Amphitheatre on February 6 , 1843 . Their minstrel show also included a comic scene loosely based on the song , " Dan Tucker on Horseback " , about a black riding master . The piece starred Richard Pelham in the title role and Frank Brower as a black clown . " Old Dan Tucker " did not appear on a Virginia Minstrels playbill until a March 7 and 8 performance at Boston 's Masonic Temple . There , the playbill described it as " OLD DAN <unk> , a Virginian Refrain , in which is described the ups and downs of Negro life . " As early as February 15 , Emmett billed himself as " Old Dan Emmett " . 
 By the end of March , " Old Dan Tucker " was a hit , and it quickly became the Virginia Minstrels ' most popular song . Robert Winans found the song on 49 % of the minstrel playbills he surveyed from the 1843 – 1847 period ( behind only " Miss Lucy Long " ) , and research by musicologist William J. Mahar suggests that it was behind only " Mary Blane " and " Lucy Long " in its frequency of publication in antebellum songsters . The next year , Dan Tucker returned in the popular " Ole Bull and Old Dan Tucker " , which pits him against Ole Bull in a contest of skill . Sequels such as " De New Ole Dan Tucker " and " Old Dan Tucker 's Wedding " followed . Other companies adopted Tucker for comedy sketches , such as burlesques of La sonnambula by Buckley 's Serenaders in 1850 and Sanford 's Opera Troupe in 1853 . 
 The song became so identified with Emmett and the Virginia Minstrels that it became part of their foundation myth . Billy Whitlock and George B. Wooldridge both claimed that the troupe members played " Old Dan Tucker " in their first impromptu performance together : 
 . . . as if by accident , each one picked up his tools and joined in a chorus of " Old Dan Tucker , " while Emmett was playing and singing . It went well , and they repeated it without saying a word . Each did his best , and such a rattling of the principal and original instruments in a minstrel band was never heard before . 
 Emmett repeated this story in the May 19 , 1877 , New York Clipper , although other details changed . The press began to refer to Emmett as " Ole Dan Tucker " , and Emmett eventually adopted the nickname . The Virginia Minstrels sometimes went by " Ole Dan Tucker and Co . " They were called " Old Dan Tucker & Co . , " either by themselves or by the press , as early as February 16 , 1843 . 
 The song 's disdain for the customs of the upper classes hit a chord with working class audiences . On January 28 , 1843 , The New York Sporting Whip reported that the song had been adopted by a Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , street gang called the Hallow Guards . As their leader , Stovepipe Bill , led them against a military raid , he sang the verses followed by the gang singing the chorus . Two years later , The Knickerbocker remarked , " At this present moment , a certain ubiquitous person seems to be in the way of the whole people of these United States simultaneously . " Nathanson claimed that " Old Dan Tucker " had " been sung , perhaps , oftener than any melody ever written . " 
 In 1871 , 28 years after its first published edition , Board and Trade listed editions of " Old Dan Tucker " in print from seven different publishers . The song had by default fallen into the public domain . In later decades , " Old Dan Tucker " became a standard of bluegrass and country music , with recordings by such artists as <unk> ' John Carson , Uncle Dave Macon , Pete Seeger , and <unk> Tanner and his Skillet Lickers . It is referred to in John Steinbeck 's novel The Grapes of Wrath . More recently , rock musician Bruce Springsteen made a recording . Children 's music collections frequently feature the song and it has been covered by children 's group The Wiggles with Australian country performer Troy Cassar @-@ Daley . In Joel Chandler Harris ' Uncle Remus , it appears in the context of powerless Crawfish trying to be heard in an assembly of animals , and Harris writes , " but dey might ez well er sung Ole Dan Tucker ter a <unk> . " In the 1935 novel Little House on the Prairie by Laura Ingalls Wilder , the character Mr. Edwards sings the song as his trademark ; accordingly , the Little House on the Prairie television series from the 1970s and 1980s uses the song as a leitmotif for the character . 
 = Dinosaur = 
 Dinosaurs are a diverse group of animals of the clade Dinosauria that first appeared during the Triassic period . Although the exact origin and timing of the evolution of dinosaurs is the subject of active research , the current scientific consensus places their origin between 231 and 243 million years ago . They became the dominant terrestrial vertebrates after the Triassic – Jurassic extinction event 201 million years ago . Their dominance continued through the Jurassic and Cretaceous periods and ended when the Cretaceous @-@ Paleogene extinction event led to the extinction of most dinosaur groups 66 million years ago . 
 Until the late 20th century , all groups of dinosaurs were believed to be extinct ; however , the fossil record indicates that birds are the modern descendants of feathered dinosaurs , having evolved from theropod ancestors during the Jurassic Period , and are now termed " avian dinosaurs " . As such , birds were the only dinosaur lineage to survive the mass extinction event . Throughout the remainder of this article , the term " dinosaur " is sometimes used generically to refer to both the avian and non @-@ avian dinosaurs combined , while at other times it is used to refer to the non @-@ avian dinosaurs specifically , and the avian dinosaurs are sometimes simply referred to as " birds " . This article deals primarily with non @-@ avian dinosaurs . 
 Dinosaurs are a varied group of animals from taxonomic , morphological and ecological standpoints . Birds , at over 10000 living species , are the most diverse group of vertebrates besides perciform fish . Using fossil evidence , paleontologists have identified over 500 distinct genera and more than 1000 different species of non @-@ avian dinosaurs . 
 Dinosaurs are represented on every continent by both extant species and fossil remains . Some are herbivorous , others carnivorous . While dinosaurs were ancestrally bipedal , many extinct groups included quadrupedal species , and some were able to shift between these stances . Elaborate display structures such as horns or crests are common to all dinosaur groups , and some extinct groups developed skeletal modifications such as bony armor and spines . Evidence suggests that egg laying and nest building are additional traits shared by all dinosaurs . 
 While the modern @-@ day surviving lineage of dinosaurs ( birds ) are generally small due to the constraints of flight , many prehistoric dinosaurs were large @-@ bodied — the largest sauropod dinosaurs are estimated to have reached lengths of 39 @.@ 7 meters ( 130 feet ) and heights of 18 meters ( 59 feet ) and were the largest land animals of all time . Still , the idea that non @-@ avian dinosaurs were uniformly gigantic is a misconception based in part on preservation bias , as large , sturdy bones are more likely to last until they are fossilized . Many dinosaurs were quite small : <unk> , for example , was only about 50 cm ( 20 in ) long . 
 Although the word dinosaur literally means " terrible lizard " , the name is something of an etymological misnomer ; even though dinosaurs are reptiles , they are not lizards , nor are they descended from them . Instead , dinosaurs , like many extinct forms of reptile sub @-@ groups , did not exhibit characteristics which were traditionally regarded as reptilian , such as a sprawling limb posture or ectothermy ( colloquially referred to as " cold @-@ bloodedness " ) . Additionally , many other prehistoric animals , including mosasaurs , ichthyosaurs , pterosaurs , plesiosaurs , and Dimetrodon , while often popularly conceived of as dinosaurs , are not taxonomically classified as dinosaurs . 
 Through the first half of the 20th century , before birds were recognized to be dinosaurs , most of the scientific community believed dinosaurs to have been sluggish and cold @-@ blooded . Most research conducted since the 1970s , however , has indicated that all dinosaurs were active animals with elevated metabolisms and numerous adaptations for social interaction . 
 Since the first dinosaur fossils were recognized in the early 19th century , mounted fossil dinosaur skeletons have been major attractions at museums around the world , and dinosaurs have become an enduring part of world culture . The large sizes of some dinosaur groups , as well as their seemingly monstrous and fantastic nature , have ensured dinosaurs ' regular appearance in best @-@ selling books and films , such as Jurassic Park . Persistent public enthusiasm for the animals has resulted in significant funding for dinosaur science , and new discoveries are regularly covered by the media . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The taxon Dinosauria was formally named in 1842 by paleontologist Sir Richard Owen , who used it to refer to the " distinct tribe or sub @-@ order of Saurian Reptiles " that were then being recognized in England and around the world . The term is derived from the Greek words δεινός ( deinos , meaning " terrible " , " potent " , or " fearfully great " ) and σαῦρος ( sauros , meaning " lizard " or " reptile " ) . Though the taxonomic name has often been interpreted as a reference to dinosaurs ' teeth , claws , and other fearsome characteristics , Owen intended it merely to evoke their size and majesty . 
 = = Definition = = 
 Under phylogenetic nomenclature , dinosaurs are usually defined as the group consisting of Triceratops , Neornithes [ modern birds ] , their most recent common ancestor ( MRCA ) , and all descendants . It has also been suggested that Dinosauria be defined with respect to the MRCA of Megalosaurus and Iguanodon , because these were two of the three genera cited by Richard Owen when he recognized the Dinosauria . Both definitions result in the same set of animals being defined as dinosaurs : " Dinosauria = Ornithischia + Saurischia " , encompassing theropods ( mostly bipedal carnivores and birds ) , ankylosaurians ( armored herbivorous quadrupeds ) , stegosaurians ( plated herbivorous quadrupeds ) , ceratopsians ( herbivorous quadrupeds with horns and frills ) , ornithopods ( bipedal or quadrupedal herbivores including " duck @-@ bills " ) , and sauropodomorphs ( mostly large herbivorous quadrupeds with long necks and tails ) . 
 Birds are now recognized as being the sole surviving lineage of theropod dinosaurs . In traditional taxonomy , birds were considered a separate class that had evolved from dinosaurs , a distinct superorder . However , a majority of contemporary paleontologists concerned with dinosaurs reject the traditional style of classification in favor of phylogenetic taxonomy ; this approach requires that , for a group to be natural , all descendants of members of the group must be included in the group as well . Birds are thus considered to be dinosaurs and dinosaurs are , therefore , not extinct . Birds are classified as belonging to the subgroup Maniraptora , which are coelurosaurs , which are theropods , which are saurischians , which are dinosaurs . 
 = = = General description = = = 
 Using one of the above definitions , dinosaurs can be generally described as archosaurs with hind limbs held erect beneath the body . Many prehistoric animal groups are popularly conceived of as dinosaurs , such as ichthyosaurs , mosasaurs , plesiosaurs , pterosaurs , and pelycosaurs ( especially Dimetrodon ) , but are not classified scientifically as dinosaurs , and none had the erect hind limb posture characteristic of true dinosaurs . Dinosaurs were the dominant terrestrial vertebrates of the Mesozoic , especially the Jurassic and Cretaceous periods . Other groups of animals were restricted in size and niches ; mammals , for example , rarely exceeded the size of a cat , and were generally rodent @-@ sized carnivores of small prey . 
 Dinosaurs have always been an extremely varied group of animals ; according to a 2006 study , over 500 non @-@ avian dinosaur genera have been identified with certainty so far , and the total number of genera preserved in the fossil record has been estimated at around 1850 , nearly 75 % of which remain to be discovered . An earlier study predicted that about 3400 dinosaur genera existed , including many that would not have been preserved in the fossil record . By September 17 , 2008 , 1047 different species of dinosaurs had been named . Some are herbivorous , others carnivorous , including seed @-@ eaters , fish @-@ eaters , insectivores , and omnivores . While dinosaurs were ancestrally bipedal ( as are all modern birds ) , some prehistoric species were quadrupeds , and others , such as <unk> and Iguanodon , could walk just as easily on two or four legs . Cranial modifications like horns and crests are common dinosaurian traits , and some extinct species had bony armor . Although known for large size , many Mesozoic dinosaurs were human @-@ sized or smaller , and modern birds are generally small in size . Dinosaurs today inhabit every continent , and fossils show that they had achieved global distribution by at least the early Jurassic period . Modern birds inhabit most available habitats , from terrestrial to marine , and there is evidence that some non @-@ avian dinosaurs ( such as Microraptor ) could fly or at least glide , and others , such as spinosaurids , had semi @-@ aquatic habits . 
 = = = Distinguishing anatomical features = = = 
 While recent discoveries have made it more difficult to present a universally agreed @-@ upon list of dinosaurs ' distinguishing features , nearly all dinosaurs discovered so far share certain modifications to the ancestral archosaurian skeleton , or are clear descendants of older dinosaurs showing these modifications . Although some later groups of dinosaurs featured further modified versions of these traits , they are considered typical for Dinosauria ; the earliest dinosaurs had them and passed them on to their descendants . Such modifications , originating in the last common ancestor of a certain taxonomic group , are called the synapomorphies of such a group . 
 A detailed assessment of archosaur interrelations by Sterling Nesbitt confirmed or found the following twelve unambiguous synapomorphies , some previously known : 
 in the skull , a supratemporal fossa ( excavation ) is present in front of the supratemporal fenestra , the main opening in the rear skull roof 
 epipophyses , obliquely backward pointing processes on the rear top corners , present in the anterior ( front ) neck vertebrae behind the atlas and axis , the first two neck vertebrae 
 apex of deltopectoral crest ( a projection on which the deltopectoral muscles attach ) located at or more than 30 % down the length of the humerus ( upper arm bone ) 
 radius , a lower arm bone , shorter than 80 % of humerus length 
 fourth trochanter ( projection where the caudofemoralis muscle attaches on the inner rear shaft ) on the femur ( thighbone ) is a sharp flange 
 fourth trochanter asymmetrical , with distal , lower , margin forming a steeper angle to the shaft 
 on the astragalus and calcaneum , upper ankle bones , the proximal articular facet , the top connecting surface , for the fibula occupies less than 30 % of the transverse width of the element 
 <unk> ( bones at the back of the skull ) do not meet along the midline on the floor of the endocranial cavity , the inner space of the braincase 
 in the pelvis , the proximal articular surfaces of the ischium with the ilium and the pubis are separated by a large concave surface ( on the upper side of the ischium a part of the open hip joint is located between the contacts with the pubic bone and the ilium ) 
 cnemial crest on the tibia ( protruding part of the top surface of the shinbone ) arcs <unk> ( curves to the front and the outer side ) 
 distinct <unk> oriented ( vertical ) ridge present on the posterior face of the distal end of the tibia ( the rear surface of the lower end of the shinbone ) 
 concave articular surface for the fibula of the calcaneum ( the top surface of the calcaneum , where it touches the fibula , has a hollow profile ) 
 Nesbitt found a number of further potential synapomorphies , and discounted a number of synapomorphies previously suggested . Some of these are also present in <unk> , which Nesbitt recovered as a sister group to Dinosauria , including a large anterior trochanter , metatarsals II and IV of subequal length , reduced contact between ischium and pubis , the presence of a cnemial crest on the tibia and of an ascending process on the astragalus , and many others . 
 A variety of other skeletal features are shared by dinosaurs . However , because they are either common to other groups of archosaurs or were not present in all early dinosaurs , these features are not considered to be synapomorphies . For example , as diapsids , dinosaurs ancestrally had two pairs of temporal fenestrae ( openings in the skull behind the eyes ) , and as members of the diapsid group Archosauria , had additional openings in the snout and lower jaw . Additionally , several characteristics once thought to be synapomorphies are now known to have appeared before dinosaurs , or were absent in the earliest dinosaurs and independently evolved by different dinosaur groups . These include an elongated scapula , or shoulder blade ; a sacrum composed of three or more fused vertebrae ( three are found in some other archosaurs , but only two are found in Herrerasaurus ) ; and a perforate acetabulum , or hip socket , with a hole at the center of its inside surface ( closed in Saturnalia , for example ) . Another difficulty of determining distinctly dinosaurian features is that early dinosaurs and other archosaurs from the late Triassic are often poorly known and were similar in many ways ; these animals have sometimes been misidentified in the literature . 
 Dinosaurs stand with their hind limbs erect in a manner similar to most modern mammals , but distinct from most other reptiles , whose limbs sprawl out to either side . This posture is due to the development of a laterally facing recess in the pelvis ( usually an open socket ) and a corresponding inwardly facing distinct head on the femur . Their erect posture enabled early dinosaurs to breathe easily while moving , which likely permitted stamina and activity levels that surpassed those of " sprawling " reptiles . Erect limbs probably also helped support the evolution of large size by reducing bending stresses on limbs . Some non @-@ dinosaurian archosaurs , including rauisuchians , also had erect limbs but achieved this by a " pillar erect " configuration of the hip joint , where instead of having a projection from the femur insert on a socket on the hip , the upper pelvic bone was rotated to form an overhanging shelf . 
 = = Evolutionary history = = 
 = = = Origins and early evolution = = = 
 Dinosaurs diverged from their archosaur ancestors during the middle to late Triassic period , roughly 20 million years after the Permian – Triassic extinction event wiped out an estimated 95 % of all life on Earth . Radiometric dating of the rock formation that contained fossils from the early dinosaur genus Eoraptor at 231 @.@ 4 million years old establishes its presence in the fossil record at this time . Paleontologists think that Eoraptor resembles the common ancestor of all dinosaurs ; if this is true , its traits suggest that the first dinosaurs were small , bipedal predators . The discovery of primitive , dinosaur @-@ like ornithodirans such as <unk> and <unk> in Argentinian Middle Triassic strata supports this view ; analysis of recovered fossils suggests that these animals were indeed small , bipedal predators . Dinosaurs may have appeared as early as 243 million years ago , as evidenced by remains of the genus <unk> from that period , though known fossils of these animals are too fragmentary to tell if they are dinosaurs or very close dinosaurian relatives . 
 When dinosaurs appeared , they were not the dominant terrestrial animals . The terrestrial habitats were occupied by various types of archosauromorphs and therapsids , like cynodonts and rhynchosaurs . Their main competitors were the <unk> , such as aetosaurs , <unk> and rauisuchians , which were more successful than the dinosaurs . Most of these other animals became extinct in the Triassic , in one of two events . First , at about 215 million years ago , a variety of basal archosauromorphs , including the protorosaurs , became extinct . This was followed by the Triassic – Jurassic extinction event ( about 200 million years ago ) , that saw the end of most of the other groups of early archosaurs , like aetosaurs , <unk> , phytosaurs , and rauisuchians . <unk> and dicynodonts survived ( at least in some areas ) at least as late as early @-@ mid Norian and early Rhaetian , respectively , and the exact date of their extinction is uncertain . These losses left behind a land fauna of crocodylomorphs , dinosaurs , mammals , <unk> , and turtles . The first few lines of early dinosaurs diversified through the Carnian and Norian stages of the Triassic , possibly by occupying the niches of the groups that became extinct . 
 = = = Evolution and <unk> = = = 
 Dinosaur evolution after the Triassic follows changes in vegetation and the location of continents . In the late Triassic and early Jurassic , the continents were connected as the single landmass Pangaea , and there was a worldwide dinosaur fauna mostly composed of <unk> carnivores and early sauropodomorph herbivores . Gymnosperm plants ( particularly conifers ) , a potential food source , radiated in the late Triassic . Early sauropodomorphs did not have sophisticated mechanisms for processing food in the mouth , and so must have employed other means of breaking down food farther along the digestive tract . The general homogeneity of dinosaurian faunas continued into the middle and late Jurassic , where most localities had predators consisting of <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> , and herbivores consisting of stegosaurian ornithischians and large sauropods . Examples of this include the Morrison Formation of North America and Tendaguru Beds of Tanzania . Dinosaurs in China show some differences , with specialized <unk> theropods and unusual , long @-@ necked sauropods like Mamenchisaurus . <unk> and ornithopods were also becoming more common , but prosauropods had become extinct . Conifers and <unk> were the most common plants . Sauropods , like the earlier prosauropods , were not oral processors , but ornithischians were evolving various means of dealing with food in the mouth , including potential cheek @-@ like organs to keep food in the mouth , and jaw motions to grind food . Another notable evolutionary event of the Jurassic was the appearance of true birds , descended from maniraptoran coelurosaurians . 
 By the early Cretaceous and the ongoing breakup of Pangaea , dinosaurs were becoming strongly differentiated by landmass . The earliest part of this time saw the spread of ankylosaurians , iguanodontians , and <unk> through Europe , North America , and northern Africa . These were later supplemented or replaced in Africa by large spinosaurid and carcharodontosaurid theropods , and rebbachisaurid and titanosaurian sauropods , also found in South America . In Asia , maniraptoran coelurosaurians like dromaeosaurids , troodontids , and oviraptorosaurians became the common theropods , and ankylosaurids and early ceratopsians like Psittacosaurus became important herbivores . Meanwhile , Australia was home to a fauna of basal ankylosaurians , hypsilophodonts , and iguanodontians . The stegosaurians appear to have gone extinct at some point in the late early Cretaceous or early late Cretaceous . A major change in the early Cretaceous , which would be amplified in the late Cretaceous , was the evolution of flowering plants . At the same time , several groups of dinosaurian herbivores evolved more sophisticated ways to orally process food . Ceratopsians developed a method of slicing with teeth stacked on each other in batteries , and iguanodontians refined a method of grinding with tooth batteries , taken to its extreme in hadrosaurids . Some sauropods also evolved tooth batteries , best exemplified by the rebbachisaurid Nigersaurus . 
 There were three general dinosaur faunas in the late Cretaceous . In the northern continents of North America and Asia , the major theropods were tyrannosaurids and various types of smaller maniraptoran theropods , with a predominantly ornithischian herbivore assemblage of hadrosaurids , ceratopsians , ankylosaurids , and pachycephalosaurians . In the southern continents that had made up the now @-@ splitting Gondwana , abelisaurids were the common theropods , and titanosaurian sauropods the common herbivores . Finally , in Europe , dromaeosaurids , <unk> iguanodontians , nodosaurid ankylosaurians , and titanosaurian sauropods were prevalent . Flowering plants were greatly radiating , with the first grasses appearing by the end of the Cretaceous . Grinding hadrosaurids and shearing ceratopsians became extremely diverse across North America and Asia . Theropods were also radiating as herbivores or omnivores , with <unk> and ornithomimosaurians becoming common . 
 The Cretaceous – Paleogene extinction event , which occurred approximately 66 million years ago at the end of the Cretaceous period , caused the extinction of all dinosaur groups except for the neornithine birds . Some other diapsid groups , such as crocodilians , <unk> , turtles , lizards , snakes , sphenodontians , and <unk> , also survived the event . 
 The surviving lineages of neornithine birds , including the ancestors of modern ratites , ducks and chickens , and a variety of waterbirds , diversified rapidly at the beginning of the Paleogene period , entering ecological niches left vacant by the extinction of Mesozoic dinosaur groups such as the arboreal enantiornithines , aquatic <unk> , and even the larger terrestrial theropods ( in the form of <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , ratites , <unk> , <unk> , and " terror birds " ) . It is often cited that mammals out @-@ competed the <unk> for dominance of most terrestrial niches but many of these groups co @-@ existed with rich mammalian faunas for most of the Cenozoic . Terror birds and <unk> occupied carnivorous guilds alongside predatory mammals , and ratites are still being fairly successful as mid @-@ sized herbivores ; <unk> similarly lasted from the Eocene to Pliocene , only becoming extinct very recently after over 20 million years of co @-@ existence with many mammal groups . 
 = = Classification = = 
 Dinosaurs are archosaurs , like modern crocodilians . Within the archosaur group , dinosaurs are differentiated most noticeably by their gait . Dinosaur legs extend directly beneath the body , whereas the legs of lizards and crocodilians sprawl out to either side . 
