 Collectively , dinosaurs as a clade are divided into two primary branches , Saurischia and Ornithischia . Saurischia includes those taxa sharing a more recent common ancestor with birds than with Ornithischia , while Ornithischia includes all taxa sharing a more recent common ancestor with Triceratops than with Saurischia . Anatomically , these two groups can be distinguished most noticeably by their pelvic structure . Early saurischians — " lizard @-@ hipped " , from the Greek sauros ( σαῦρος ) meaning " lizard " and <unk> ( <unk> ) meaning " hip joint " — retained the hip structure of their ancestors , with a pubis bone directed <unk> , or forward . This basic form was modified by rotating the pubis backward to varying degrees in several groups ( Herrerasaurus , <unk> , dromaeosaurids , and birds ) . Saurischia includes the theropods ( exclusively bipedal and with a wide variety of diets ) and sauropodomorphs ( long @-@ necked herbivores which include advanced , quadrupedal groups ) . 
 By contrast , ornithischians — " bird @-@ hipped " , from the Greek <unk> ( <unk> ) meaning " of a bird " and <unk> ( <unk> ) meaning " hip joint " — had a pelvis that superficially resembled a bird 's pelvis : the pubis bone was oriented <unk> ( rear @-@ pointing ) . Unlike birds , the ornithischian pubis also usually had an additional forward @-@ pointing process . Ornithischia includes a variety of species which were primarily herbivores . ( NB : the terms " lizard hip " and " bird hip " are <unk> – birds evolved from dinosaurs with " lizard hips " . ) 
 = = = Taxonomy = = = 
 The following is a simplified classification of dinosaur groups based on their evolutionary relationships , and organized based on the list of Mesozoic dinosaur species provided by Holtz ( 2007 ) . A more detailed version can be found at Dinosaur classification . The dagger ( † ) is used to signify groups with no living members . 
 Dinosauria 
 Saurischia ( " lizard @-@ hipped " ; includes Theropoda and Sauropodomorpha ) 
 Theropoda ( all bipedal ; most were carnivorous ) 
 † <unk> ( early bipedal carnivores ) 
 † Coelophysoidea ( small , early theropods ; includes Coelophysis and close relatives ) 
 † <unk> ( early crested and carnivorous theropods ) 
 † Ceratosauria ( generally elaborately horned , the dominant southern carnivores of the Cretaceous ) 
 Tetanurae ( " stiff tails " ; includes most theropods ) 
 † <unk> ( early group of large carnivores including the semi @-@ aquatic spinosaurids ) 
 † Carnosauria ( Allosaurus and close relatives , like Carcharodontosaurus ) 
 Coelurosauria ( feathered theropods , with a range of body sizes and niches ) 
 † Compsognathidae ( common early coelurosaurs with reduced forelimbs ) 
 † Tyrannosauridae ( Tyrannosaurus and close relatives ; had reduced forelimbs ) 
 † <unk> ( " ostrich @-@ mimics " ; mostly toothless ; carnivores to possible herbivores ) 
 † <unk> ( small insectivores with reduced forelimbs each bearing one enlarged claw ) 
 Maniraptora ( " hand snatchers " ; had long , slender arms and fingers ) 
 † <unk> ( bipedal herbivores with large hand claws and small heads ) 
 † <unk> ( mostly toothless ; their diet and lifestyle are uncertain ) 
 † <unk> ( small , winged theropods or primitive birds ) 
 † Deinonychosauria ( small- to medium @-@ sized ; bird @-@ like , with a distinctive toe claw ) 
 Avialae ( modern birds and extinct relatives ) 
 † <unk> ( small primitive avialans with long third fingers ) 
 † <unk> ( large , early short @-@ tailed avialans ) 
 † <unk> ( small toothless avialans ) 
 † Enantiornithes ( primitive tree @-@ dwelling , flying avialans ) 
 Euornithes ( advanced flying birds ) 
 † <unk> ( toothed Cretaceous Chinese birds ) 
 † <unk> ( specialized aquatic diving birds ) 
 Aves ( modern , beaked birds and their extinct relatives ) 
 † Sauropodomorpha ( herbivores with small heads , long necks , long tails ) 
 † <unk> ( small , primitive , omnivorous sauropodomorphs ) 
 † Plateosauridae ( primitive , strictly bipedal " prosauropods " ) 
 † <unk> ( small , primitive sauropodomorphs ) 
 † Massospondylidae ( small , primitive sauropodomorphs ) 
 † Sauropoda ( very large and heavy , usually over 15 m ( 49 ft ) long ; quadrupedal ) 
 † Vulcanodontidae ( primitive sauropods with pillar @-@ like limbs ) 
 † Eusauropoda ( " true sauropods " ) 
 † Cetiosauridae ( " whale reptiles " ) 
 † <unk> ( European group of Jurassic and Cretaceous sauropods ) 
 † <unk> ( " new sauropods " ) 
 † Diplodocoidea ( skulls and tails elongated ; teeth typically narrow and pencil @-@ like ) 
 † Macronaria ( boxy skulls ; spoon- or pencil @-@ shaped teeth ) 
 † <unk> ( long @-@ necked , long @-@ armed macronarians ) 
 † Titanosauria ( diverse ; stocky , with wide hips ; most common in the late Cretaceous of southern continents ) 
 † Ornithischia ( " bird @-@ hipped " ; diverse bipedal and quadrupedal herbivores ) 
 † Heterodontosauridae ( small basal ornithopod herbivores / omnivores with prominent canine @-@ like teeth ) 
 † Thyreophora ( armored dinosaurs ; mostly quadrupeds ) 
 † Ankylosauria ( scutes as primary armor ; some had club @-@ like tails ) 
 † Stegosauria ( spikes and plates as primary armor ) 
 † <unk> ( " new ornithischians " ) 
 † Ornithopoda ( various sizes ; bipeds and quadrupeds ; evolved a method of chewing using skull flexibility and numerous teeth ) 
 † Marginocephalia ( characterized by a cranial growth ) 
 † Pachycephalosauria ( bipeds with domed or knobby growth on skulls ) 
 † Ceratopsia ( quadrupeds with frills ; many also had horns ) 
 = = Biology = = 
 Knowledge about dinosaurs is derived from a variety of fossil and non @-@ fossil records , including fossilized bones , feces , trackways , gastroliths , feathers , impressions of skin , internal organs and soft tissues . Many fields of study contribute to our understanding of dinosaurs , including physics ( especially biomechanics ) , chemistry , biology , and the earth sciences ( of which paleontology is a sub @-@ discipline ) . Two topics of particular interest and study have been dinosaur size and behavior . 
 = = = Size = = = 
 Current evidence suggests that dinosaur average size varied through the Triassic , early Jurassic , late Jurassic and Cretaceous periods . Predatory theropod dinosaurs , which occupied most terrestrial carnivore niches during the Mesozoic , most often fall into the 100 to 1000 kg ( 220 to 2200 lb ) category when sorted by estimated weight into categories based on order of magnitude , whereas recent predatory carnivoran mammals peak in the 10 to 100 kg ( 22 to 220 lb ) category . The mode of Mesozoic dinosaur body masses is between one and ten metric tonnes . This contrasts sharply with the size of Cenozoic mammals , estimated by the National Museum of Natural History as about 2 to 5 kg ( 4 @.@ 4 to 11 @.@ 0 lb ) . 
 The sauropods were the largest and heaviest dinosaurs . For much of the dinosaur era , the smallest sauropods were larger than anything else in their habitat , and the largest were an order of magnitude more massive than anything else that has since walked the Earth . Giant prehistoric mammals such as Paraceratherium ( the largest land mammal ever ) were dwarfed by the giant sauropods , and only modern whales approach or surpass them in size . There are several proposed advantages for the large size of sauropods , including protection from predation , reduction of energy use , and longevity , but it may be that the most important advantage was dietary . Large animals are more efficient at digestion than small animals , because food spends more time in their digestive systems . This also permits them to subsist on food with lower nutritive value than smaller animals . Sauropod remains are mostly found in rock formations interpreted as dry or seasonally dry , and the ability to eat large quantities of low @-@ nutrient browse would have been advantageous in such environments . 
 = = = = Largest and smallest = = = = 
 Scientists will probably never be certain of the largest and smallest dinosaurs to have ever existed . This is because only a tiny percentage of animals ever fossilize , and most of these remain buried in the earth . Few of the specimens that are recovered are complete skeletons , and impressions of skin and other soft tissues are rare . Rebuilding a complete skeleton by comparing the size and morphology of bones to those of similar , better @-@ known species is an inexact art , and reconstructing the muscles and other organs of the living animal is , at best , a process of educated guesswork . 
 The tallest and heaviest dinosaur known from good skeletons is Giraffatitan <unk> ( previously classified as a species of Brachiosaurus ) . Its remains were discovered in Tanzania between 1907 and 1912 . Bones from several similar @-@ sized individuals were incorporated into the skeleton now mounted and on display at the Museum für Naturkunde Berlin ; this mount is 12 meters ( 39 ft ) tall and 21 @.@ 8 – 22 @.@ 5 meters ( 72 – 74 ft ) long , and would have belonged to an animal that weighed between 30000 and <unk> kilograms ( 70000 and <unk> lb ) . The longest complete dinosaur is the 27 meters ( 89 feet ) long Diplodocus , which was discovered in Wyoming in the United States and displayed in Pittsburgh 's Carnegie Natural History Museum in 1907 . 
 There were larger dinosaurs , but knowledge of them is based entirely on a small number of fragmentary fossils . Most of the largest herbivorous specimens on record were all discovered in the 1970s or later , and include the massive Argentinosaurus , which may have weighed 80000 to 100000 kilograms ( 90 to 110 short tons ) ; some of the longest were the 33 @.@ 5 meters ( 110 ft ) long Diplodocus hallorum ( formerly Seismosaurus ) and the 33 – 34 meters ( 108 – 112 ft ) long Supersaurus ; and the tallest , the 18 meters ( 59 ft ) tall Sauroposeidon , which could have reached a sixth @-@ floor window . The heaviest and longest dinosaur may have been Amphicoelias fragillimus , known only from a now lost partial vertebral neural arch described in 1878 . Extrapolating from the illustration of this bone , the animal may have been 58 meters ( 190 ft ) long and weighed <unk> kg ( <unk> lb ) . However , as no further evidence of sauropods of this size has been found , and the discoverer , Edward Cope , had made typographic errors before , it is likely to have been an extreme overestimation . The largest known carnivorous dinosaur was Spinosaurus , reaching a length of 12 @.@ 6 to 18 meters ( 41 to 59 ft ) , and weighing 7 – 20 @.@ 9 tonnes ( 7 @.@ 7 – 23 short tons ) . Other large carnivorous theropods included Giganotosaurus , Carcharodontosaurus and Tyrannosaurus . Therizinosaurus and Deinocheirus were among the tallest of the theropods . 
 The smallest dinosaur known is the bee hummingbird , with a length of only 5 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) and mass of around 1 @.@ 8 g ( 0 @.@ 063 oz ) . The smallest known non @-@ avialan dinosaurs were about the size of pigeons and were those theropods most closely related to birds . For example , Anchiornis <unk> is currently the smallest non @-@ avialan dinosaur described from an adult specimen , with an estimated weight of 110 grams and a total skeletal length of 34 cm ( 1 @.@ 12 ft ) . The smallest herbivorous non @-@ avialan dinosaurs included <unk> and <unk> , at about 60 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 ft ) long each . 
 = = = Behavior = = = 
 Many modern birds are highly social , often found living in flocks . There is general agreement that some behaviors that are common in birds , as well as in crocodiles ( birds ' closest living relatives ) , were also common among extinct dinosaur groups . Interpretations of behavior in fossil species are generally based on the pose of skeletons and their habitat , computer simulations of their biomechanics , and comparisons with modern animals in similar ecological niches . 
 The first potential evidence for herding or flocking as a widespread behavior common to many dinosaur groups in addition to birds was the 1878 discovery of 31 Iguanodon bernissartensis , ornithischians that were then thought to have perished together in Bernissart , Belgium , after they fell into a deep , flooded sinkhole and drowned . Other mass @-@ death sites have been discovered subsequently . Those , along with multiple trackways , suggest that gregarious behavior was common in many early dinosaur species . Trackways of hundreds or even thousands of herbivores indicate that duck @-@ bills ( hadrosaurids ) may have moved in great herds , like the American bison or the African springbok . Sauropod tracks document that these animals traveled in groups composed of several different species , at least in Oxfordshire , England , although there is no evidence for specific herd structures . <unk> into herds may have evolved for defense , for migratory purposes , or to provide protection for young . There is evidence that many types of slow @-@ growing dinosaurs , including various theropods , sauropods , ankylosaurians , ornithopods , and ceratopsians , formed aggregations of immature individuals . One example is a site in Inner Mongolia that has yielded the remains of over 20 <unk> , from one to seven years old . This assemblage is interpreted as a social group that was trapped in mud . The interpretation of dinosaurs as gregarious has also extended to depicting carnivorous theropods as pack hunters working together to bring down large prey . However , this lifestyle is uncommon among modern birds , crocodiles , and other reptiles , and the taphonomic evidence suggesting mammal @-@ like pack hunting in such theropods as Deinonychus and Allosaurus can also be interpreted as the results of fatal disputes between feeding animals , as is seen in many modern diapsid predators . 
 The crests and frills of some dinosaurs , like the marginocephalians , theropods and lambeosaurines , may have been too fragile to be used for active defense , and so they were likely used for sexual or aggressive displays , though little is known about dinosaur mating and <unk> . Head wounds from bites suggest that theropods , at least , engaged in active aggressive confrontations . 
 From a behavioral standpoint , one of the most valuable dinosaur fossils was discovered in the Gobi Desert in 1971 . It included a Velociraptor attacking a Protoceratops , providing evidence that dinosaurs did indeed attack each other . Additional evidence for attacking live prey is the partially healed tail of an Edmontosaurus , a hadrosaurid dinosaur ; the tail is damaged in such a way that shows the animal was bitten by a tyrannosaur but survived . Cannibalism amongst some species of dinosaurs was confirmed by tooth marks found in Madagascar in 2003 , involving the theropod Majungasaurus . 
 Comparisons between the scleral rings of dinosaurs and modern birds and reptiles have been used to infer daily activity patterns of dinosaurs . Although it has been suggested that most dinosaurs were active during the day , these comparisons have shown that small predatory dinosaurs such as dromaeosaurids , Juravenator , and Megapnosaurus were likely nocturnal . Large and medium @-@ sized herbivorous and omnivorous dinosaurs such as ceratopsians , sauropodomorphs , hadrosaurids , ornithomimosaurs may have been cathemeral , active during short intervals throughout the day , although the small ornithischian <unk> was inferred to be diurnal . 
 Based on current fossil evidence from dinosaurs such as <unk> , some ornithischian species seem to have led a partially fossorial ( burrowing ) lifestyle . Many modern birds are arboreal ( tree climbing ) , and this was also true of many Mesozoic birds , especially the enantiornithines . While some early bird @-@ like species may have already been arboreal as well ( including dromaeosaurids such as Microraptor ) most non @-@ avialan dinosaurs seem to have relied on land @-@ based locomotion . A good understanding of how dinosaurs moved on the ground is key to models of dinosaur behavior ; the science of biomechanics , pioneered by Robert McNeill Alexander , has provided significant insight in this area . For example , studies of the forces exerted by muscles and gravity on dinosaurs ' skeletal structure have investigated how fast dinosaurs could run , whether diplodocids could create sonic booms via whip @-@ like tail snapping , and whether sauropods could float . 
 = = = Communication = = = 
 Modern birds are known to communicate using visual and auditory signals , and the wide diversity of visual display structures among fossil dinosaur groups suggests that visual communication has always been important in dinosaur biology . However , the evolution of dinosaur vocalization is less certain . In 2008 , paleontologist Phil Senter examined the evidence for vocalization in Mesozoic animal life , including dinosaurs . Senter found that , contrary to popular depictions of roaring dinosaurs in motion pictures , it is likely that most Mesozoic dinosaurs were not capable of creating any vocalizations ( though the hollow crests of the lambeosaurines could have functioned as resonance chambers used for a wide range of vocalizations ) . To draw this conclusion , Senter studied the distribution of vocal organs in modern reptiles and birds . He found that vocal cords in the larynx probably evolved multiple times among reptiles , including crocodilians , which are able to produce guttural roars . Birds , on the other hand , lack a larynx . Instead , bird calls are produced by the syrinx , a vocal organ found only in birds , and which is not related to the larynx , meaning it evolved independently from the vocal organs in reptiles . The syrinx depends on the air sac system in birds to function ; specifically , it requires the presence of a clavicular air sac near the wishbone or collar bone . This air sac leaves distinctive marks or opening on the bones , including a distinct opening in the upper arm bone ( humerus ) . While extensive air sac systems are a unique characteristic of saurischian dinosaurs , the clavicular air sac necessary to vocalize does not appear in the fossil record until the enantiornithines ( one exception , Aerosteon , probably evolved its clavicular air sac independently of birds for reasons other than vocalization ) . 
 The most primitive dinosaurs with evidence of a vocalizing syrinx are the <unk> birds . Any bird @-@ line archosaurs more primitive than this probably did not make vocal calls . Rather , several lines of evidence suggest that early dinosaurs used primarily visual communication , in the form of distinctive @-@ looking ( and possibly brightly colored ) horns , frills , crests , sails and feathers . This is similar to some modern reptile groups such as lizards , in which many forms are largely silent ( though like dinosaurs they possess well @-@ developed senses of hearing ) but use complex coloration and display behaviors to communicate . 
 In addition , other , non @-@ vocal , methods of producing sound for communication include hissing , jaw grinding or clapping , use of environment ( such as splashing ) , and wing beating ( possible in winged maniraptoran dinosaurs ) . 
 = = = Reproductive biology = = = 
 All dinosaurs lay amniotic eggs with hard shells made mostly of calcium carbonate . Eggs are usually laid in a nest . Most species create somewhat elaborate nests , which can be cups , domes , plates , beds scrapes , mounds , or burrows . Some species of modern bird have no nests ; the cliff @-@ nesting common guillemot lays its eggs on bare rock , and male emperor penguins keep eggs between their body and feet . Primitive birds and many non @-@ avialan dinosaurs often lay eggs in communal nests , with males primarily incubating the eggs . While modern birds have only one functional oviduct and lay one egg at a time , more primitive birds and dinosaurs had two oviducts , like crocodiles . Some non @-@ avialan dinosaurs , such as Troodon , exhibited iterative laying , where the adult might lay a pair of eggs every one or two days , and then ensured simultaneous hatching by delaying brooding until all eggs were laid . 
 When laying eggs , females grow a special type of bone between the hard outer bone and the marrow of their limbs . This medullary bone , which is rich in calcium , is used to make eggshells . A discovery of features in a Tyrannosaurus rex skeleton provided evidence of medullary bone in extinct dinosaurs and , for the first time , allowed paleontologists to establish the sex of a fossil dinosaur specimen . Further research has found medullary bone in the carnosaur Allosaurus and the ornithopod Tenontosaurus . Because the line of dinosaurs that includes Allosaurus and Tyrannosaurus diverged from the line that led to Tenontosaurus very early in the evolution of dinosaurs , this suggests that the production of medullary tissue is a general characteristic of all dinosaurs . 
 Another widespread trait among modern birds is parental care for young after hatching . Jack Horner 's 1978 discovery of a Maiasaura ( " good mother lizard " ) nesting ground in Montana demonstrated that parental care continued long after birth among ornithopods , suggesting this behavior might also have been common to all dinosaurs . There is evidence that other non @-@ theropod dinosaurs , like Patagonian titanosaurian sauropods , also nested in large groups . A specimen of the Mongolian oviraptorid Citipati osmolskae was discovered in a chicken @-@ like brooding position in 1993 , which may indicate that they had begun using an insulating layer of feathers to keep the eggs warm . Parental care being a trait common to all dinosaurs is supported by other finds . For example , a dinosaur embryo ( pertaining to the prosauropod Massospondylus ) was found without teeth , indicating that some parental care was required to feed the young dinosaurs . Trackways have also confirmed parental behavior among ornithopods from the Isle of Skye in northwestern Scotland . Nests and eggs have been found for most major groups of dinosaurs , and it appears likely that all dinosaurs cared for their young to some extent either before or shortly after hatching . 
 = = = Physiology = = = 
 Because both modern crocodilians and birds have four @-@ chambered hearts ( albeit modified in crocodilians ) , it is likely that this is a trait shared by all archosaurs , including all dinosaurs . While all modern birds have high metabolisms and are " warm blooded " ( endothermic ) , a vigorous debate has been ongoing since the 1960s regarding how far back in the dinosaur lineage this trait extends . Scientists disagree as to whether non @-@ avian dinosaurs were endothermic , ectothermic , or some combination of both . 
 After non @-@ avian dinosaurs were discovered , paleontologists first posited that they were ectothermic . This supposed " cold @-@ bloodedness " was used to imply that the ancient dinosaurs were relatively slow , sluggish organisms , even though many modern reptiles are fast and light @-@ footed despite relying on external sources of heat to regulate their body temperature . The idea of dinosaurs as ectothermic and sluggish remained a prevalent view until Robert T. " Bob " Bakker , an early proponent of dinosaur endothermy , published an influential paper on the topic in 1968 . 
 Modern evidence indicates that even non @-@ avian dinosaurs and birds thrived in cooler temperate climates , and that at least some early species must have regulated their body temperature by internal biological means ( aided by the animals ' bulk in large species and feathers or other body coverings in smaller species ) . Evidence of endothermy in Mesozoic dinosaurs includes the discovery of polar dinosaurs in Australia and Antarctica as well as analysis of blood @-@ vessel structures within fossil bones that are typical of endotherms . Scientific debate continues regarding the specific ways in which dinosaur temperature regulation evolved . 
 In saurischian dinosaurs , higher metabolisms were supported by the evolution of the avian respiratory system , characterized by an extensive system of air sacs that extended the lungs and invaded many of the bones in the skeleton , making them hollow . Early avian @-@ style respiratory systems with air sacs may have been capable of sustaining higher activity levels than mammals of similar size and build could sustain . In addition to providing a very efficient supply of oxygen , the rapid airflow would have been an effective cooling mechanism , which is essential for animals that are active but too large to get rid of all the excess heat through their skin . 
 Like other reptiles , dinosaurs are primarily <unk> , that is , their kidneys extract nitrogenous wastes from their bloodstream and excrete it as uric acid instead of urea or ammonia via the ureters into the intestine . In most living species , uric acid is excreted along with feces as a <unk> waste . However , at least some modern birds ( such as hummingbirds ) can be facultatively <unk> , excreting most of the nitrogenous wastes as ammonia . They also excrete creatine , rather than creatinine like mammals . This material , as well as the output of the intestines , emerges from the cloaca . In addition , many species regurgitate pellets , and fossil pellets that may have come from dinosaurs are known from as long ago as the Cretaceous period . 
 = = = Number of Species = = = 
 As of March 2016 the estimated number of dinosaur species that existed in the Mesozoic era is 1 @,@ 543 – 2 @,@ 468 species . 
 = = Origin of birds = = 
 The possibility that dinosaurs were the ancestors of birds was first suggested in 1868 by Thomas Henry Huxley . After the work of Gerhard Heilmann in the early 20th century , the theory of birds as dinosaur descendants was abandoned in favor of the idea of their being descendants of generalized <unk> , with the key piece of evidence being the supposed lack of clavicles in dinosaurs . However , as later discoveries showed , clavicles ( or a single fused wishbone , which derived from separate clavicles ) were not actually absent ; they had been found as early as 1924 in Oviraptor , but misidentified as an <unk> . In the 1970s , John Ostrom revived the dinosaur – bird theory , which gained momentum in the coming decades with the advent of cladistic analysis , and a great increase in the discovery of small theropods and early birds . Of particular note have been the fossils of the Yixian Formation , where a variety of theropods and early birds have been found , often with feathers of some type . Birds share over a hundred distinct anatomical features with theropod dinosaurs , which are now generally accepted to have been their closest ancient relatives . They are most closely allied with maniraptoran coelurosaurs . A minority of scientists , most notably Alan Feduccia and Larry Martin , have proposed other evolutionary paths , including revised versions of Heilmann 's basal archosaur proposal , or that maniraptoran theropods are the ancestors of birds but themselves are not dinosaurs , only convergent with dinosaurs . 
 = = = Feathers = = = 
 Feathers are one of the most recognizable characteristics of modern birds , and a trait that was shared by all other dinosaur groups . Based on the current distribution of fossil evidence , it appears that feathers were an ancestral dinosaurian trait , though one that may have been selectively lost in some species . Direct fossil evidence of feathers or feather @-@ like structures has been discovered in a diverse array of species in many non @-@ avian dinosaur groups , both among saurischians and ornithischians . Simple , branched , feather @-@ like structures are known from heterodontosaurids , primitive <unk> and theropods , and primitive ceratopsians . Evidence for true , vaned feathers similar to the flight feathers of modern birds has been found only in the theropod subgroup Maniraptora , which includes oviraptorosaurs , troodontids , dromaeosaurids , and birds . Feather @-@ like structures known as <unk> have also been found in pterosaurs , suggesting the possibility that feather @-@ like filaments may have been common in the bird lineage and evolved before the appearance of dinosaurs themselves . Research into the genetics of American alligators has also revealed that crocodylian scutes do possess feather @-@ keratins during embryonic development , but these keratins are not expressed by the animals before hatching . 
 Archaeopteryx was the first fossil found that revealed a potential connection between dinosaurs and birds . It is considered a transitional fossil , in that it displays features of both groups . Brought to light just two years after Darwin 's seminal The Origin of Species , its discovery spurred the nascent debate between proponents of evolutionary biology and creationism . This early bird is so dinosaur @-@ like that , without a clear impression of feathers in the surrounding rock , at least one specimen was mistaken for Compsognathus . Since the 1990s , a number of additional feathered dinosaurs have been found , providing even stronger evidence of the close relationship between dinosaurs and modern birds . Most of these specimens were unearthed in the lagerstätte of the Yixian Formation , Liaoning , northeastern China , which was part of an island continent during the Cretaceous . Though feathers have been found in only a few locations , it is possible that non @-@ avian dinosaurs elsewhere in the world were also feathered . The lack of widespread fossil evidence for feathered non @-@ avian dinosaurs may be because delicate features like skin and feathers are not often preserved by fossilization and thus are absent from the fossil record . 
 The description of feathered dinosaurs has not been without controversy ; perhaps the most vocal critics have been Alan Feduccia and <unk> <unk> @-@ <unk> , who have proposed that some purported feather @-@ like fossils are the result of the decomposition of collagenous fiber that underlaid the dinosaurs ' skin , and that maniraptoran dinosaurs with vaned feathers were not actually dinosaurs , but convergent with dinosaurs . However , their views have for the most part not been accepted by other researchers , to the point that the scientific nature of Feduccia 's proposals has been questioned . 
 = = = Skeleton = = = 
 Because feathers are often associated with birds , feathered dinosaurs are often touted as the missing link between birds and dinosaurs . However , the multiple skeletal features also shared by the two groups represent another important line of evidence for paleontologists . Areas of the skeleton with important similarities include the neck , pubis , wrist ( semi @-@ lunate carpal ) , arm and pectoral girdle , furcula ( wishbone ) , and breast bone . Comparison of bird and dinosaur skeletons through cladistic analysis strengthens the case for the link . 
 = = = Soft anatomy = = = 
 Large meat @-@ eating dinosaurs had a complex system of air sacs similar to those found in modern birds , according to a 2005 investigation led by Patrick M. O 'Connor . The lungs of theropod dinosaurs ( carnivores that walked on two legs and had bird @-@ like feet ) likely pumped air into hollow sacs in their skeletons , as is the case in birds . " What was once formally considered unique to birds was present in some form in the ancestors of birds " , O 'Connor said . In 2008 , scientists described Aerosteon <unk> , the skeleton of which supplies the strongest evidence to date of a dinosaur with a bird @-@ like breathing system . CT @-@ scanning of Aerosteon 's fossil bones revealed evidence for the existence of air sacs within the animal 's body cavity . 
 = = = Behavioral evidence = = = 
 Fossils of the troodonts Mei and <unk> demonstrate that some dinosaurs slept with their heads tucked under their arms . This behavior , which may have helped to keep the head warm , is also characteristic of modern birds . Several <unk> and <unk> specimens have also been found preserved on top of their nests , likely brooding in a bird @-@ like manner . The ratio between egg volume and body mass of adults among these dinosaurs suggest that the eggs were primarily brooded by the male , and that the young were highly precocial , similar to many modern ground @-@ dwelling birds . 
 Some dinosaurs are known to have used gizzard stones like modern birds . These stones are swallowed by animals to aid digestion and break down food and hard fibers once they enter the stomach . When found in association with fossils , gizzard stones are called gastroliths . 
 = = Extinction of major groups = = 
 The discovery that birds are a type of dinosaur showed that dinosaurs in general are not , in fact , extinct as is commonly stated . However , all non @-@ avian dinosaurs as well as many groups of birds did suddenly become extinct approximately 66 million years ago . It has been suggested that because small mammals , squamata and birds occupied the ecological niches suited for small body size , non @-@ avian dinosaurs never evolved a diverse fauna of small @-@ bodied species , which led to their downfall when large @-@ bodied terrestrial tetrapods were hit by the mass extinction event . Many other groups of animals also became extinct at this time , including ammonites ( nautilus @-@ like mollusks ) , mosasaurs , plesiosaurs , pterosaurs , and many groups of mammals . Significantly , the insects suffered no discernible population loss , which left them available as food for other survivors . This mass extinction is known as the Cretaceous – Paleogene extinction event . The nature of the event that caused this mass extinction has been extensively studied since the 1970s ; at present , several related theories are supported by paleontologists . Though the consensus is that an impact event was the primary cause of dinosaur extinction , some scientists cite other possible causes , or support the idea that a confluence of several factors was responsible for the sudden disappearance of dinosaurs from the fossil record . 
 At the peak of the Mesozoic , there were no polar ice caps , and sea levels are estimated to have been from 100 to 250 meters ( 330 to 820 ft ) higher than they are today . The planet 's temperature was also much more uniform , with only 25 ° C ( 45 ° F ) separating average polar temperatures from those at the equator . On average , atmospheric temperatures were also much higher ; the poles , for example , were 50 ° C ( 90 ° F ) warmer than today . 
 The atmosphere 's composition during the Mesozoic is a matter for debate . While some academics argue that oxygen levels were much higher than today , others argue that biological adaptations seen in birds and dinosaurs indicate that respiratory systems evolved beyond what would be necessary if oxygen levels were high . By the late Cretaceous , the environment was changing dramatically . Volcanic activity was decreasing , which led to a cooling trend as levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide dropped . Oxygen levels in the atmosphere also started to fluctuate and would ultimately fall considerably . Some scientists hypothesize that climate change , combined with lower oxygen levels , might have led directly to the demise of many species . 
 = = = Impact event = = = 
 The asteroid collision theory , which was brought to wide attention in 1980 by Walter Alvarez and colleagues , links the extinction event at the end of the Cretaceous period to a bolide impact approximately 66 million years ago . Alvarez et al. proposed that a sudden increase in iridium levels , recorded around the world in the period 's rock stratum , was direct evidence of the impact . The bulk of the evidence now suggests that a bolide 5 to 15 kilometers ( 3 @.@ 1 to 9 @.@ 3 miles ) wide hit in the vicinity of the Yucatán Peninsula ( in southeastern Mexico ) , creating the approximately 180 km ( 110 mi ) Chicxulub Crater and triggering the mass extinction . Scientists are not certain whether dinosaurs were thriving or declining before the impact event . Some scientists propose that the meteorite caused a long and unnatural drop in Earth 's atmospheric temperature , while others claim that it would have instead created an unusual heat wave . The consensus among scientists who support this theory is that the impact caused extinctions both directly ( by heat from the meteorite impact ) and also indirectly ( via a worldwide cooling brought about when matter ejected from the impact crater reflected thermal radiation from the sun ) . Although the speed of extinction cannot be deduced from the fossil record alone , various models suggest that the extinction was extremely rapid , being down to hours rather than years . 
 = = = Deccan Traps = = = 
 Before 2000 , arguments that the Deccan Traps flood basalts caused the extinction were usually linked to the view that the extinction was gradual , as the flood basalt events were thought to have started around 68 million years ago and lasted for over 2 million years . However , there is evidence that two thirds of the Deccan Traps were created in only 1 million years about 66 million years ago , and so these eruptions would have caused a fairly rapid extinction , possibly over a period of thousands of years , but still longer than would be expected from a single impact event . 
 The Deccan Traps could have caused extinction through several mechanisms , including the release into the air of dust and sulfuric aerosols , which might have blocked sunlight and thereby reduced photosynthesis in plants . In addition , Deccan Trap volcanism might have resulted in carbon dioxide emissions , which would have increased the greenhouse effect when the dust and aerosols cleared from the atmosphere . Before the mass extinction of the dinosaurs , the release of volcanic gases during the formation of the Deccan Traps " contributed to an apparently massive global warming . Some data point to an average rise in temperature of 8 ° C ( 14 ° F ) in the last half million years before the impact [ at Chicxulub ] . " 
 In the years when the Deccan Traps theory was linked to a slower extinction , Luis Alvarez ( who died in 1988 ) replied that paleontologists were being misled by sparse data . While his assertion was not initially well @-@ received , later intensive field studies of fossil beds lent weight to his claim . Eventually , most paleontologists began to accept the idea that the mass extinctions at the end of the Cretaceous were largely or at least partly due to a massive Earth impact . However , even Walter Alvarez has acknowledged that there were other major changes on Earth even before the impact , such as a drop in sea level and massive volcanic eruptions that produced the Indian Deccan Traps , and these may have contributed to the extinctions . 
 = = = Possible Paleocene survivors = = = 
 Non @-@ avian dinosaur remains are occasionally found above the Cretaceous – Paleogene boundary . In 2001 , paleontologists Zielinski and <unk> reported the discovery of a single hadrosaur leg @-@ bone fossil in the San Juan Basin , New Mexico , and described it as evidence of Paleocene dinosaurs . The formation in which the bone was discovered has been dated to the early Paleocene epoch , approximately 64 @.@ 5 million years ago . If the bone was not re @-@ deposited into that stratum by weathering action , it would provide evidence that some dinosaur populations may have survived at least a half million years into the Cenozoic Era . Other evidence includes the finding of dinosaur remains in the Hell Creek Formation up to 1 @.@ 3 m ( 51 in ) above the Cretaceous – Paleogene boundary , representing <unk> years of elapsed time . Similar reports have come from other parts of the world , including China . Many scientists , however , dismissed the supposed Paleocene dinosaurs as re @-@ worked , that is , washed out of their original locations and then re @-@ buried in much later sediments . Direct dating of the bones themselves has supported the later date , with U – Pb dating methods resulting in a precise age of 64 @.@ 8 ± 0 @.@ 9 million years ago . If correct , the presence of a handful of dinosaurs in the early Paleocene would not change the underlying facts of the extinction . 
 = = History of study = = 
 Dinosaur fossils have been known for millennia , although their true nature was not recognized . The Chinese , whose modern word for dinosaur is <unk> ( <unk> , or " terrible dragon " ) , considered them to be dragon bones and documented them as such . For example , Hua Yang Guo Zhi , a book written by Chang Qu during the Western Jin Dynasty ( 265 – 316 ) , reported the discovery of dragon bones at <unk> in Sichuan Province . Villagers in central China have long unearthed fossilized " dragon bones " for use in traditional medicines , a practice that continues today . In Europe , dinosaur fossils were generally believed to be the remains of giants and other biblical creatures . 
 Scholarly descriptions of what would now be recognized as dinosaur bones first appeared in the late 17th century in England . Part of a bone , now known to have been the femur of a Megalosaurus , was recovered from a limestone quarry at Cornwell near Chipping Norton , Oxfordshire , in 1676 . The fragment was sent to Robert Plot , Professor of Chemistry at the University of Oxford and first curator of the Ashmolean Museum , who published a description in his Natural History of Oxfordshire in 1677 . He correctly identified the bone as the lower extremity of the femur of a large animal , and recognized that it was too large to belong to any known species . He therefore concluded it to be the thigh bone of a giant human similar to those mentioned in the Bible . In 1699 , Edward Lhuyd , a friend of Sir Isaac Newton , was responsible for the first published scientific treatment of what would now be recognized as a dinosaur when he described and named a sauropod tooth , " <unk> <unk> " , that had been found in Caswell , near Witney , Oxfordshire . 
 Between 1815 and 1824 , the Rev William Buckland , a professor of geology at Oxford , collected more fossilized bones of Megalosaurus and became the first person to describe a dinosaur in a scientific journal . The second dinosaur genus to be identified , Iguanodon , was discovered in 1822 by Mary Ann Mantell – the wife of English geologist Gideon Mantell . Gideon Mantell recognized similarities between his fossils and the bones of modern iguanas . He published his findings in 1825 . 
 The study of these " great fossil lizards " soon became of great interest to European and American scientists , and in 1842 the English paleontologist Richard Owen coined the term " dinosaur " . He recognized that the remains that had been found so far , Iguanodon , Megalosaurus and Hylaeosaurus , shared a number of distinctive features , and so decided to present them as a distinct taxonomic group . With the backing of Prince Albert , the husband of Queen Victoria , Owen established the Natural History Museum , London , to display the national collection of dinosaur fossils and other biological and geological exhibits . 
 In 1858 , William Parker Foulke discovered the first known American dinosaur , in marl pits in the small town of Haddonfield , New Jersey . ( Although fossils had been found before , their nature had not been correctly discerned . ) The creature was named Hadrosaurus <unk> . It was an extremely important find : Hadrosaurus was one of the first nearly complete dinosaur skeletons found ( the first was in 1834 , in Maidstone , England ) , and it was clearly a bipedal creature . This was a revolutionary discovery as , until that point , most scientists had believed dinosaurs walked on four feet , like other lizards . Foulke 's discoveries sparked a wave of dinosaur mania in the United States . 
 Dinosaur mania was exemplified by the fierce rivalry between Edward Drinker Cope and Othniel Charles Marsh , both of whom raced to be the first to find new dinosaurs in what came to be known as the Bone Wars . The feud probably originated when Marsh publicly pointed out that Cope 's reconstruction of an Elasmosaurus skeleton was flawed : Cope had inadvertently placed the plesiosaur 's head at what should have been the animal 's tail end . The fight between the two scientists lasted for over 30 years , ending in 1897 when Cope died after spending his entire fortune on the dinosaur hunt . Marsh ' won ' the contest primarily because he was better funded through a relationship with the US Geological Survey . Unfortunately , many valuable dinosaur specimens were damaged or destroyed due to the pair 's rough methods : for example , their diggers often used dynamite to unearth bones ( a method modern paleontologists would find appalling ) . Despite their unrefined methods , the contributions of Cope and Marsh to paleontology were vast : Marsh unearthed 86 new species of dinosaur and Cope discovered 56 , a total of 142 new species . Cope 's collection is now at the American Museum of Natural History in New York , while Marsh 's is on display at the Peabody Museum of Natural History at Yale University . 
 After 1897 , the search for dinosaur fossils extended to every continent , including Antarctica . The first Antarctic dinosaur to be discovered , the ankylosaurid Antarctopelta <unk> , was found on James Ross Island in 1986 , although it was 1994 before an Antarctic species , the theropod Cryolophosaurus ellioti , was formally named and described in a scientific journal . 
 Current dinosaur " hot spots " include southern South America ( especially Argentina ) and China . China in particular has produced many exceptional feathered dinosaur specimens due to the unique geology of its dinosaur beds , as well as an ancient arid climate particularly conducive to fossilization . 
 = = = " Dinosaur renaissance " = = = 
 The field of dinosaur research has enjoyed a surge in activity that began in the 1970s and is ongoing . This was triggered , in part , by John Ostrom 's discovery of Deinonychus , an active predator that may have been warm @-@ blooded , in marked contrast to the then @-@ prevailing image of dinosaurs as sluggish and cold @-@ blooded . Vertebrate paleontology has become a global science . Major new dinosaur discoveries have been made by paleontologists working in previously unexploited regions , including India , South America , Madagascar , Antarctica , and most significantly China ( the amazingly well @-@ preserved feathered dinosaurs in China have further consolidated the link between dinosaurs and their living descendants , modern birds ) . The widespread application of cladistics , which rigorously analyzes the relationships between biological organisms , has also proved tremendously useful in classifying dinosaurs . Cladistic analysis , among other modern techniques , helps to compensate for an often incomplete and fragmentary fossil record . 
 = = = Soft tissue and DNA = = = 
 One of the best examples of soft @-@ tissue impressions in a fossil dinosaur was discovered in <unk> , Italy . The discovery was reported in 1998 , and described the specimen of a small , very young coelurosaur , <unk> <unk> . The fossil includes portions of the intestines , colon , liver , muscles , and windpipe of this immature dinosaur . 
 In the March 2005 issue of Science , the paleontologist Mary Higby Schweitzer and her team announced the discovery of flexible material resembling actual soft tissue inside a 68 @-@ million @-@ year @-@ old Tyrannosaurus rex leg bone from the Hell Creek Formation in Montana . After recovery , the tissue was rehydrated by the science team . When the fossilized bone was treated over several weeks to remove mineral content from the fossilized bone @-@ marrow cavity ( a process called demineralization ) , Schweitzer found evidence of intact structures such as blood vessels , bone matrix , and connective tissue ( bone fibers ) . Scrutiny under the microscope further revealed that the putative dinosaur soft tissue had retained fine structures ( microstructures ) even at the cellular level . The exact nature and composition of this material , and the implications of Schweitzer 's discovery , are not yet clear . 
 In 2009 , a team including Schweitzer announced that , using even more careful methodology , they had duplicated their results by finding similar soft tissue in a duck @-@ billed dinosaur , Brachylophosaurus canadensis , found in the Judith River Formation of Montana . This included even more detailed tissue , down to preserved bone cells that seem even to have visible remnants of nuclei and what seem to be red blood cells . Among other materials found in the bone was collagen , as in the Tyrannosaurus bone . The type of collagen an animal has in its bones varies according to its DNA and , in both cases , this collagen was of the same type found in modern chickens and ostriches . 
 The extraction of ancient DNA from dinosaur fossils has been reported on two separate occasions ; upon further inspection and peer review , however , neither of these reports could be confirmed . However , a functional peptide involved in the vision of a theoretical dinosaur has been inferred using analytical phylogenetic reconstruction methods on gene sequences of related modern species such as reptiles and birds . In addition , several proteins , including hemoglobin , have putatively been detected in dinosaur fossils . 
 In 2015 , researchers reported finding structures similar to blood cells and collagen fibers , preserved in the bone fossils of six Cretaceous dinosaur specimens , which are approximately 75 million years old . 
 = = Cultural depictions = = 
 By human standards , dinosaurs were creatures of fantastic appearance and often enormous size . As such , they have captured the popular imagination and become an enduring part of human culture . Entry of the word " dinosaur " into the common vernacular reflects the animals ' cultural importance : in English , " dinosaur " is commonly used to describe anything that is impractically large , obsolete , or bound for extinction . 
 Public enthusiasm for dinosaurs first developed in Victorian England , where in 1854 , three decades after the first scientific descriptions of dinosaur remains , a menagerie of lifelike dinosaur sculptures were unveiled in London 's Crystal Palace Park . The Crystal Palace dinosaurs proved so popular that a strong market in smaller replicas soon developed . In subsequent decades , dinosaur exhibits opened at parks and museums around the world , ensuring that successive generations would be introduced to the animals in an immersive and exciting way . Dinosaurs ' enduring popularity , in its turn , has resulted in significant public funding for dinosaur science , and has frequently spurred new discoveries . In the United States , for example , the competition between museums for public attention led directly to the Bone Wars of the 1880s and 1890s , during which a pair of feuding paleontologists made enormous scientific contributions . 
 The popular preoccupation with dinosaurs has ensured their appearance in literature , film , and other media . Beginning in 1852 with a passing mention in Charles Dickens ' Bleak House , dinosaurs have been featured in large numbers of fictional works . Jules Verne 's 1864 novel Journey to the Center of the Earth , Sir Arthur Conan Doyle 's 1912 book The Lost World , the iconic 1933 film King Kong , the 1954 Godzilla and its many sequels , the best @-@ selling 1990 novel Jurassic Park by Michael Crichton and its 1993 film adaptation are just a few notable examples of dinosaur appearances in fiction . Authors of general @-@ interest non @-@ fiction works about dinosaurs , including some prominent paleontologists , have often sought to use the animals as a way to educate readers about science in general . Dinosaurs are ubiquitous in advertising ; numerous companies have referenced dinosaurs in printed or televised advertisements , either in order to sell their own products or in order to characterize their rivals as slow @-@ moving , dim @-@ witted , or obsolete . 
 = The Political Cesspool = 
 The Political Cesspool is a weekly far @-@ right talk radio show founded by Tennessean political activist James Edwards and syndicated by the organizations Liberty News Radio Network and Accent Radio Network in the United States . First broadcast in October 2004 twice a week from radio station WMQM , per Edwards it has been simulcast on Stormfront Radio , a service of the white nationalist Stormfront website and as of 2011 is broadcast on Saturday nights on WLRM , a Christian radio station in Millington , Tennessee . Its sponsors include the white separatist Council of Conservative Citizens and the Institute for Historical Review , a Holocaust denial group . 
 According to its statement of principles , the show stands for the " Dispossessed Majority " and represents " a philosophy that is pro @-@ White . " It has attracted criticism — including from The Nation , The New Republic , the Stephen Roth Institute , the Southern Poverty Law Center ( SPLC ) , and the Anti @-@ Defamation League — for its promotion of anti @-@ semitic , white nationalist and white supremacist views . According to the SPLC , the show has featured a " Who 's Who of the radical right " , including members of the Ku Klux Klan ; they say Edwards has probably done more than anyone in America to promote neo @-@ Nazis , Holocaust deniers and other extremists . 
 The show features Edwards and his co @-@ hosts Keith Alexander , Bill Rolen , Winston Smith , and Eddie Miller , as well as producer Art Frith . Former staffers include Geoff Melton , Jess Bonds and co @-@ founder Austin Farley . Its guests have included author Jerome Corsi , Minuteman Project leader Jim Gilchrist , former Constitution Party presidential candidate Michael Peroutka , actor Sonny <unk> , British National Party leader Nick Griffin , Vermont secessionist Thomas Naylor , and paleoconservative activist Pat Buchanan . It is carried by at least three licensed terrestrial radio stations in the United States and on network feeds on the Galaxy 19 communications satellite . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = James Edwards = = = 
 Edwards is a far @-@ right political activist from Memphis , Tennessee , described by the Southern Poverty Law Center as a rising star of the modern white @-@ nationalist movement . They write that he is articulate , charming , and at ease in front of the public , as well as in television and radio studios . He attended <unk> Christian School , a private school in Memphis , and in ninth grade transferred into a Christian @-@ nationalist homeschooling program , a decision that he said led him into political activism . In 2000 he volunteered for Pat Buchanan 's presidential campaign , and in 2002 ran unsuccessfully for the Tennessee House of Representatives . It was during this campaign that he met fellow activist Austin Farley , who was on the ballot against him . In October of that year , he and Farley established The Political Cesspool . 
 In 2007 , Edwards was part of a panel that appeared on CNN 's Paula Zahn Now , along with Roland S. Martin and Jesse Lee Peterson . The purpose was to discuss racial segregation in American cities . He told Zahn that white children should seek out those who share " the same values and traditions and heroes , " and that " forced integration " was a " march toward totalitarianism . " He said : " Crime and violence follow African @-@ Americans wherever they go , and if you think that is racist , then spend some time on the mean streets of south Memphis . " Martin described his remarks as unfit for national television . Edwards made a second appearance on Paula Zahn Now in 2009 , during which he said : " Whites are in for the fight of their lives . America is becoming <unk> . We are being robbed of having a future in the very nation our ancestors carved from the wilderness . " 
 In 2010 , he became involved with a new party , the American Third Position Party , which advocates white nationalism and a form of economic nationalism known as the Third Position . Also in 2010 he self @-@ published a book , Racism , <unk> : How Liberals use the " R " Word to Push the Obama Agenda , distributed by CreateSpace , a self @-@ publishing printer . 
 = = = Staff and show history = = = 
 Other staff at The Political Cesspool include Bill Rolen , Eddie " The Bombardier " Miller , Keith Alexander , and Winston Smith . According to the show 's website , most of the staff claim descent from Confederate soldiers . The show was initially broadcast on AM 1600 WMQM , a Memphis @-@ based radio station , on Tuesdays and Thursdays . Edwards and Farley invited friends Bill Rolen , a board member of the Council of Conservative Citizens , and Jess Bonds as guest hosts , as well as radio technician Art Frith . Frith had previously worked for a number of other radio stations including American Forces Radio and Television Service ( <unk> ) ( in Keflavik , Iceland ; Anchorage , Alaska ; and Nea <unk> , Greece ) , <unk> ( in Anchorage ) , and <unk> ( in Battle Creek , Michigan ) . 
 In 2005 the group moved to WMQM 's Millington @-@ based sister station , AM 1380 WLRM , and switched to a nightly schedule , Monday through Friday . Farley left the program in November of that year . Two years later , Geoff Melton , a former co @-@ host , joined to help set up the show 's website and the show entered syndication with Dixie Broadcasting Radio Network . The program went on hiatus on February 15 , 2008 , because staff members said they needed a break , but returned to the airwaves in June 2008 on WLRM on Saturday nights . One year later , it switched from Republic Broadcasting Network to Liberty News Radio Network . As of August 2009 , Bonds and Melton are no longer affiliated with the program . Frith now lives in Nashville , Michigan , but remains a part of the show 's staff . Since WLRM is not audited by Arbitron , the show 's ratings are unknown . The show is listener @-@ supported and , according to Edwards , receives more donations from Florida than from any other state . 
 = = Statement of principles = = 
 The Political Cesspool describes its philosophy as " pro @-@ White " and " against political centralization " . Its statement of principles , with material borrowed from the Council of Conservative Citizens , reads : 
 The Political Cesspool Radio Program stands for The Dispossessed Majority . We represent a philosophy that is pro @-@ White and are against political centralization . You can trust The Political Cesspool to give you the " other side of the news " — to report on events which are vital to your welfare but which would otherwise be hushed up or distorted by the controlled press . 
 We make no attempt to give you " both sides . " We 'll leave the establishment side to your daily newspaper , television and other radio shows . We will bring to you some of the most renowned thinkers , writers , pundits , activists , entertainers and elected officials each broadcast as our guests . Furthermore , we pledge that The Political Cesspool will correct any meaningful error or fact . Make up your own mind who is being honest with you : the establishment media or The Political Cesspool Radio Program . 
 The United States government should be independent of any international organization of governments and American law should not be imposed by organizations such as the United Nations . 
 America would not be as prosperous , ruggedly individualistic , and a land of opportunity if the founding stock were not Europeans . 
 Since family is the foundation of any strong society , we are against feminism , abortion , and primitivism . 
 Private property rights are inviolable . They come from our God @-@ given right to life . 
 We wish to revive the White birthrate above replacement level fertility and beyond to grow the percentage of Whites in the world relative to other races . 
 Issues such as education , environmental law , and police should be decentralized down to the lowest level to insure natural rights and efficiency . 
 Secession is a right of all people and individuals . It was successful in 1776 and this show honors those who tried to make it successful in 1865 . 
 We are cultural conservatives because we have certain morals to which we adhere . We are against homosexuality , vulgarity , loveless sex , and masochism . 
 We wish for American government to stop interfering politically , militarily , and socially outside of the borders of the United States of America . We want non @-@ interventionism . 
 = = Guests = = 
 The Political Cesspool has over the years featured many guest appearances , including political activists , Holocaust deniers , economists , and musicians . Former Tennessee gubernatorial candidate Carl " <unk> " Whitaker , who claims partial Native @-@ American ancestry and is known for his strong support of the Minuteman movement , has appeared on the show , as has conservative Native @-@ American activist David Yeagley . Filmmakers Merlin Miller ( A Place to Grow , Jericho ) , who is the 2012 presidential nominee of the American Third Position Party , and Craig <unk> ( A Conversation about Race ) have featured . 
 Author Jerome Corsi was interviewed in July 2008 . During the discussion he spoke about his financial newsletter , and promoted his book The Obama Nation , which includes several statements that have been widely described as racist ; for example , he opined that US President Barack Obama identifies more with his " African blood " than his American roots and that the President " rejects everyone white , including his mother and his grandparents " . Corsi scheduled another promotional appearance on The Political Cesspool , but one month later he canceled this appearance , citing " travel plans that changed " . Edwards said that he believed the incident " just goes to show what incredible pressure everyone in public life is under to never have anything to do with anyone who speaks up for the interests of white people . " Fellow authors John Derbyshire and Steve Sailer have also been guests . In July 2011 , WorldNetDaily columnist Ilana Mercer appeared on the show . 
 Constitution Party nominee Michael Peroutka used his appearance in 2004 to promote his presidential campaign . Party member Michael <unk> described the show as " Christian / Constitutionalist " , and " a great blessing to our cause " . Thomas Naylor , of the Vermont secessionist organization Second Vermont Republic , appeared on the show to celebrate Confederate History Month in April 2007 , while American Third Position Party Chairman Bill Johnson appeared to promote his party . 
 On May 8 , 2006 , Minuteman Project leader Jim Gilchrist spoke on the program . Co @-@ host Bill Rolen agreed with Gilchrist 's view that illegal immigrants ' intentions are to " just squat here and plunder whatever social benefits our programs provide them " . However , Rolen disagreed with Gilchrist 's claim that illegal immigration was " the 21st century slave trade " . Gilchrist 's colleague in the Minuteman movement , Chris Simcox , has also been a guest of the show . 
 Paul Babeu , the sheriff of Pinal County , Arizona , appeared on The Political Cesspool on July 10 , 2010 to discuss illegal immigration ; during the interview , he referred to James Edwards as a " great American " . Less than two weeks later , Babeu 's spokesman issued an apology , saying that he had not researched the show thoroughly enough before scheduling the interview and that Babeu has a policy of not conducting interviews with hate groups . Babeu himself said that he was " hoodwinked " into appearing on the show and that he rejects " any hate or bigotry " . Prior to the interview , cohost Eddie Miller said that " Of all the people we ’ ve interviewed on this radio show , I would say the only people that came close to getting me this excited was Dr. David Duke . " Following Babeu 's spokesman 's apology , Edwards alleged that Babeu was aware of the show 's true ideology prior to appearing on the show , saying : " For Sheriff Babeu to change his mind and now regret coming on our show , for whatever reason , is his right . For him to act as though he had no idea of our ideology is a lie . " As a result of the controversy surrounding Babeu 's appearance on the show , Arizona U.S. Senate candidate J. D. Hayworth asked his primary opponent , John McCain , to drop several campaign ads featuring McCain and Babeu . In 2011 , another sheriff , Dennis <unk> of Montezuma County , Colorado , also apologized after appearing on the show without knowing its actual agenda . 
 <unk> activist and former presidential candidate Pat Buchanan has appeared twice as of 2011 . In a June 2008 interview initiated and arranged by his publicist , he promoted his book Churchill , Hitler and the Unnecessary War . During the broadcast , Buchanan defended Charles Lindbergh against charges of antisemitism , stating that his reputation " has been blackened because of a single speech he gave and a couple of paragraphs in it where he said that ... the Jewish community is beating the drums for war but frankly , no one has said what he said was palpably untrue . " At the end of the interview , James Edwards said , " Mr. Buchanan , thank you so much for coming back on our program , for fighting for our people . " Previously , in September 2006 , Buchanan had made an appearance to promote his book State of Emergency ; during this interview , he said that " we are being invaded by people of different cultures " and argued that Americans " cannot survive a bifurcated culture or a heavily Hispanicized culture , tilted towards Mexico ... I think that 's the beginning of the end of the United States . " 
 Self @-@ proclaimed " racial realist " Jared Taylor , whom James Edwards considers to be a close friend , has appeared on at least ten occasions . In an article he wrote for <unk> , Taylor described the program as " racially oriented " . Although describing itself as " America First " , the show has also hosted foreign guests , including Croatian white nationalist Tomislav <unk> , Australian white nationalist Drew Fraser , Russian Austrian School economist Yuri <unk> , British lawyer Adrian Davies , Canadian white supremacist Paul Fromm , Canadian conservative blogger Kathy Shaidle , and British National Party ( BNP ) leaders Simon Darby and Nick Griffin ; Griffin appeared as a guest before and after his election to the European Parliament . During his post @-@ election appearance , Griffin attributed the BNP 's electoral successes to a fear of " creeping process of <unk> " . 
 Actor Mel Gibson 's father , Hutton Gibson , has also appeared on the show . During his appearance , he referred to Pope Benedict XVI as a " homosexual " and claimed that " half the people in the Vatican are queer . " 
 = = Controversy and criticism = = 
 The show has frequently been criticised by anti @-@ racist groups and individuals ( such as the Southern Poverty Law Center ( SPLC ) , Anti @-@ Defamation League ( ADL ) , Stephen Roth Institute , and journalist Max Blumenthal ) over its stated ideology . The Political Cesspool was added to the Southern Poverty Law Center 's hate group watch list in 2006 . James Edwards was " ecstatic " , saying " I don 't think you 've arrived in the conservative movement until you 've made it to the Southern Poverty Law Center 's Hate Watch " . Edwards describes the SPLC as a group composed of " communists and civil rights hustlers " . The SPLC 's <unk> has referred to The Political Cesspool as " an overtly racist , anti @-@ Semitic radio show hosted by [ a ] self @-@ avowed white nationalist " and as " the nexus of hate in America " . The Anti @-@ Defamation League has also criticized the show ; Edwards has attacked the ADL as " America 's most powerful hate group " and has claimed that its definition of a " neo @-@ Nazi [ is ] any white person who disagrees with a Jew " . 
 Author John <unk> , a former speechwriter for Rudy Giuliani , has described The Political Cesspool as " avowedly white supremacist " . Investigative journalist Max Blumenthal , who reported on an attempt by one of the show 's staff to advertise at a rally for Republican vice @-@ presidential candidate Sarah Palin , described The Political Cesspool as having a " racist ideology " , and highlighted anti @-@ Semitic , racist , and homophobic comments that Edwards had made on his blog . The Stephen Roth Institute has also commented on the show , noting that " [ James ] Edwards openly espoused many of his guests ' views and during speeches to extremist audiences , including members of the white supremacist Council of Conservative Citizens and the racist League of the South , he gained the support of a wide array of extremists . " In an article about antisemitism in Belgium , the Institute commented on the show 's interview with Filip Dewinter , a member of the Belgian Parliament and a leader of the extremist Vlaams Belang movement . 
 Newsweek used one of Winston Smith 's statements to argue that the rise in popularity of white nationalism and supremacy is due to the combination of the late @-@ 2000s recession and the election of a black president . Many such groups have been attempting to gain new recruits and increase their political influence by rebranding themselves as defenders of " white heritage " while de @-@ emphasizing their dislike of minorities and Jews . Smith states , " [ t ] he emphasis is different now . We don 't talk as much about what blacks have done to us ; we 're more focused on ourselves and our own culture . " 
 = = = City Park demonstration = = = 
 In 2005 , the staff of The Political Cesspool organized a rally at the Tennessee area known as Confederate Park , which , along with two other Confederacy @-@ themed parks in downtown Memphis , has been the subject of a longtime controversy for honoring Confederate soldiers and ideals . The park had been criticized earlier by a black Shelby County official , which attracted the notice of New York @-@ based activist Al Sharpton , who was invited by the Reverend <unk> Gray to hold a demonstration in Memphis . Sharpton planned a march called the Rally for Dignity from downtown Memphis to another park honoring Confederate Lieutenant General Nathan Bedford Forrest who was involved early in the organization of the Ku Klux Klan . Sharpton canceled the march after Edwards and The Political Cesspool staff obtained a permit to demonstrate in Confederate Park , located along Sharpton 's planned march route . 
 Sharpton settled for a protest at Forrest Park . At the demonstration , he argued that " We need to show the rest of the world that the day for honoring people like this is over " , and said in an interview that his objections were not related to race but to Forrest 's Civil War @-@ era ( 1861 – 1865 ) actions against the United States . Estimates of attendance at the rallies vary ; according to the Southern Poverty Law Center , James Edwards attracted about 200 white counter @-@ demonstrators to the Confederate Park vigil , while Sharpton 's protest at Forrest Park attracted a few dozen black demonstrators , whom Edwards referred to as " rabble " . The Memphis Flyer estimated that Sharpton attracted about 250 supporters . In the aftermath of the city park controversy , show affiliates Edwards , Farley , Bonds , and Rolen received the " Dixie Defender Award " from the Sons of Confederate Veterans . 
 Later that year , Memphis city councilman E. C. Jones awarded Edwards and Farley with a certificate " in appreciation of outstanding contributions to the community " . Edwards and Farley also received an honorary city council membership from Jones , who had previously appeared on The Political Cesspool . According to The Commercial Appeal , Jones had not listened to the show before the incident , and was unaware of its ideology . After a reporter informed him of the program 's agenda , Jones initially refused to apologize . However , after another reporter confronted him with more details about the show 's ideology , he changed his view , saying that he probably would not appear again . Carol <unk> , another member of the Memphis City Council , was also invited to appear on The Political Cesspool , but ultimately declined the invitation after listening to an episode of the show ; <unk> said , " what I heard was about advocating for prostitution ... So I told them I had other commitments . " 
 = = = Le Journal du Dimanche interview = = = 
 In an interview with the French newspaper Le Journal du Dimanche , cohost Eddie " Bombardier " Miller described the United Nations as " Satan on Earth " . 
 = = = Donald Trump Jr. interview = = = 
 In 2016 , Edwards co @-@ hosted a Super Tuesday broadcast that interviewed Donald Trump Jr . , the son of Republican party presidential candidate Donald Trump . Edwards praised the elder Trump and encouraged his supporters to vote for him . 
 = = Radio stations that air the show = = 
 As of 2011 , The Political Cesspool airs on WLRM in Memphis , Tennessee , <unk> in Spanish Fork , Utah ; and the Florida @-@ based Accent Radio Network . The Accent Radio Network and <unk> air a shortened two @-@ hour version of the show , in contrast to the three @-@ hour Liberty News Radio Network ( WLRM ) version . 
 ARN and Liberty News Radio Network broadcasts their feeds on separate channels on the Galaxy 19 communications satellite . 
 = Final Fantasy XII : Revenant Wings = 
 Final Fantasy XII : Revenant Wings ( <unk> <unk> ・ <unk> , Fainaru Fantajī <unk> <unk> ) is a real @-@ time tactical role @-@ playing game developed by Think & Feel and published by Square Enix for the Nintendo DS . It is a sequel to the 2006 PlayStation 2 role @-@ playing game Final Fantasy XII . 
 One year after the events of Final Fantasy XII , the protagonist Vaan is now a sky pirate possessing his own airship . He is joined in a new quest by his friend and navigator Penelo , other returning characters from the original title , along with new characters such as Llyud , a member of the Aegyl race who have wings protruding from their backs . Their treasure @-@ hunting adventures take them to the purvama ( floating continent ) of Lemurés and the ground below , where the story begins . 
 Revenant Wings is the first title announced in the Ivalice Alliance series of video games . The North American release of the game was rebalanced to be more difficult than the Japanese version , and was released on November 20 , 2007 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 After completing a prologue sequence , the player starts the game with an airship , named after their clan ( with a default name of Galbana , or <unk> ( <unk> ) in the Japanese version ) . The airship is used as a base where the player can check on their current mission and view other tasks , customize equipment in the synthesis shop , or travel between the four islands of Lemurés . The airship 's interior can also be customized by the player . 
 = = = Battle system = = = 
 Revenant Wings is a real @-@ time strategy game , but with elements reminiscent of the turn @-@ based Final Fantasy Tactics and Tactics Advance . It can be played entirely with the Nintendo DS stylus . Battles are initiated when the player begins a mission or chooses to fight a melee battle in a particular area . The characters attack automatically once the enemy is within range . The player is given the option to give commands to the characters by tapping on them with the stylus . Possible commands include changing the character 's target , setting their gambit , or using various abilities . 
 Each character is distinguished according to three types : melee , ranged and flying . Melee characters attack at a close range , and ranged from afar , while flying are able to travel unbound to terrain . The types oppose each other in the manner where melee wins over ranged , ranged wins over flying and flying wins over melee . 
 = = = Summoning = = = 
 Summoning magic returns from Final Fantasy XII in Revenant Wings and has a larger role ; director Motomu Toriyama stated that Revenant Wings has more summons , or Espers , than any previous Final Fantasy game . Summon abilities are learned via the new Ring of Pacts system , which is used to allow the summoning of Espers . Each slot in the Ring of Pacts is placed with an Auracite to create a pact with the Esper . The number of summons available to the player is fifty @-@ one , and they are classified in different categories , with each character able to summon a large number depending on the party 's combined capacity . 
 Summoning Espers to aid in battle is accomplished by using a Summon Gate located in the play field area . The ability to summon the different creatures depend on the Affinity of the player characters . Additionally , two Espers per character are automatically summoned at the beginning of each battle where Espers are allowed . Espers can be linked to battle groups using a system reminiscent of the earlier Square game Bahamut Lagoon . Summons are ranked from 1 to 3 , with Rank 1 and 2 able to manifest in large numbers , as opposed to Rank 3 which summons only one entity . Before the battle begins , players can select up to five Espers to possibly summon through Esper Gates in the upcoming battle ( Esper Troupes ) ; one Rank 3 Esper , two Rank 2 Espers , and two Rank 1 Espers . Summons are also differentiated by varying elements , which are fire , water , earth , and lightning . Recovery and non @-@ elemental are two other types . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 An element of alchemy and synthesizing is used in the game , where the player obtains recipes and materials necessary for the synthesis process . Only leader characters can obtain the materials , of which can be synthesized into weapons and armor and the stats of being dependent on the materials ' grade . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 A few locations in the Ivalice of Final Fantasy XII and Final Fantasy Tactics Advance return in Revenant Wings , along with a new setting : Lemurés , described in the official website as a legendary purvama ( floating continent ) raised into the skies by the god Feolthanos long before the events of the game . Because of the effect of <unk> or " Auraliths " , magical stones used to erect barriers , this purvama is shielded from the rest of the world . In time , the " Legend of the Floating Land " became an ambition for sky pirates who seek the island and what riches are on it . The ruins of Lemurés are where the Aegyl reside ; the Aegyl are a human @-@ like race with wings sprouting from their backs and a life @-@ span of forty years . Due to being shielded within Lemurés , the Aegyl have no knowledge of the outside world but what they learn from intruding sky pirates . 
 The magicite in Lemurés are known as Auracite . Fragments of Auralith , <unk> are used in the Ring of Pacts to summon beasts known as the Yarhi , referred by others of Ivalice as Espers . However , extended use of Auracite can purge the user of his or her anima , which becomes a new Yarhi and continues the cycle until the user becomes a soulless shell . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Revenant Wings added four additional main playable characters to the six in Final Fantasy XII : Kytes and Filo , two orphans from Rabanastre ; Llyud , a resident of Lemures ; and Ba 'Gamnan , a sinister bounty hunter who has a grudge against Vaan and company for having involved themselves in his affairs during the first game . Kytes and Filo appeared as a NPCs in XII , while Ba 'Gamnan had been a recurring antagonist . All three characters gain larger roles in this game . 
 Summon designs have also been changed . The lizard design of Salamander , for example , was changed to be boar @-@ like to ensure the designs would come out well and distinguishable within the DS ' graphical capabilities . Each summon has three Ranks , and the designs of each Rank are so that there are relations between one Rank and another . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 Revenant Wings begins a year after the events of Final Fantasy XII , with Vaan flying his own airship with Penelo after Balthier and Fran " stole " the Strahl . The foursome is revisited in <unk> and decide to accompany each other inside to obtain the Cache of Glabados . 
 While obtaining a treasure , two strange crystals , the building begins to collapse on itself . In the ensuing chaos , Vaan loses his airship and are forced to flee the site on Balthier 's airship . Balthier soon drops Vaan and Penelo back in Rabanastre where they , along with Kytes and Filo , witness a strange object flying overhead : a derelict airship . After sneaking aboard the airship and defeating the Bangaa headhunter Ba 'Gamnan , Vaan and company christen the airship whatever the player decides ( default Galbana ) and find themselves on the purvama Lemurés by accident . While looking around the unknown ruins , they meet Llyud of the Aegyl race and learn his people are locked in battle with sky pirates who are raiding the island for treasure . Lemurés is said to possess summoning crystals called Auracite . Deciding to aid the Aegyl in defending Lemurés , Vaan 's group learns the pirates were recruited by the mysterious Judge of Wings , who seeks out the three Auraliths , grand masses of Auracite that protect Lemurés from the outside world . 
 When the group confronts the Judge of Wings at the site of the first auralith , the Judge of Wings destroys the auralith , leading Vaan and his friends to have visions of Balthier confronting the Judge of Wings and losing , after which they hear sky pirates are gathering at the Skysea , and they go there to find Rikken , a friend of Vaan 's . He says he may know something about the Judge of Wings , but to get answers , Vaan must compete in Rikken 's tournament . 
 After saving Rikken , it is revealed Rikken knows nothing about the Judge , but Tomaj discovers there is an auracite shrine beneath the Skysea . When venturing there , the group encounters Ba 'Gamnan who kidnaps Filo , taking her deeper within the shrine . When the group catches up with him , Rikken agrees to help rescue Filo , and once she is rescued , the party moves on to confront the esper <unk> , the <unk> , that was summoned by the Judge of Wings . Once defeated , the Judge summons the massive esper Bahamut , who destroys the Skysea , and the party becomes island @-@ trapped . 
 While stranded , the group meets Velis , a man who was at Nalbina and got lost while searching for his lover , Mydia . After a lot of character development , it is discovered Velis is , in fact , dead , and actually an esper who you later must battle when the Judge of Wings comes and controls him . After Velis is defeated ( as the esper Odin ) , it is discovered the Judge of Wings is Mydia , but she then flees the island . Tomaj runs to the group , tells them the airship is fixed , and that he has spotted the Strahl , Balthier 's ship . 
 When the group finds the ship , they find Fran , who says Balthier is within a mountain on the island they are now on . Once inside , the group discovers an auralith , and the group plus Fran must defeat Mydia and the esper Mateus while protecting Balthier . Once defeated , Mydia flees without destroying the auralith , but Balthier then turns on the group and destroys the auralith , which sends the party into an illusion . 
 While within the illusion , the team discovers the Aegyl are so emotionless because they are <unk> of anima , which is harvested by their god , Feolthanos , and stored in the auraliths . It is discovered this illusion is the world of the espers , and they find Velis , who makes everything clear : Mydia is a body , stripped of its anima , controlled by Feolthanos to reap anima for him , and if the auraliths are destroyed , the Aegyl 's anima will return and as such , they must destroy the auraliths . 
 Once awoken from the illusion , Vaan confronts Balthier , who already knew these newly discovered facts , and Balthier and Fran join the team . The group then finds the Leviathan , the ship of Queen Ashe and Judge Magister Basch , who join the team as they venture through Ivalice , Emperor Larsa also joining . Mydia , as it turns out , is a Feol Viera , more commonly known as an Exiled , of which have white skin and shorter ears and hair as compared to the normal Viera who are darker @-@ skinned and longer @-@ haired . While in Roda Volcano , the team battles Mydia and the esper Chaos , and , as Mydia takes her dying breath , requests the team go to Feolthanos ' palace above Lemurés and kill him . Her anima guides them up as they prepare to open the final chapter of their story . 
 Above Lemurés , the team battles reincarnations of dead Aegyl , and then battle the reincarnated form of Mydia 's anima , while discovering Feolthanos , the god , is , himself , the last auralith . When the team ventures all the way to the seat of Feolthanos ' power , they battle him and the anima @-@ stripped Aegyl he commands . When he is almost defeated , he summons Bahamut to do battle with the team . After his giant shrine is destroyed , there is a one @-@ on @-@ one battle between Vaan and Feolthanos in which Feolthanos is apparently stronger , but as Vaan begins to lose , his friends come to back him up : first Ashe and Basch , Balthier and Fran , then Filo and Kytes , Llyud , and finally <unk> only battle in the game where every group leader is involved . In the end , Llyud deals the final blow to Feolthanos , releasing all the remaining stored anima . 
 After the end of the battle with Feolthanos , the game ends , and the characters going their separate ways as the credits roll is shown . If 100 % game completion is reached then you are treated to an extended ending which shows Vaan and Penelo leaving together as a couple on a new adventure only to be interrupted by Filo , Kytes and Tomaj with some Yarhi and <unk> Sith in toe . 
 = = Development = = 
 The game was directed and its story written by Motomu Toriyama , who also directed Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 and Final Fantasy XIII . According to Toriyama , the game is aimed at Nintendo DS owners who are not experienced with Final Fantasy games , and will remove " overly complicated elements from the battle system ... that will allow [ the player ] to defeat the enemies with minimal controls . " 
 The game features a sprite @-@ based graphics engine with 3D backgrounds and character designs by <unk> Itō ( Final Fantasy Tactics Advance ) . Producer Eisuke Yokoyama cited Warcraft and Age of Empires as sources of inspiration and expressed a desire to " extract the pure ' fun ' of those games " and bring it to Final Fantasy . Itō based some of his designs on those of Final Fantasy XII character designer Akihiko Yoshida . Itō " traded secrets " with him , with the confidence he gained from Final Fantasy XII creator Yasumi Matsuno 's praise on his tampering with Final Fantasy Tactics Advance 's Moogle designs . 
 For the North American localization , Revenant Wings was rebalanced to make it more difficult because the North American market is judged as " more familiar " with the real @-@ time strategy genre . 
 = = Audio = = 
 Revenant Wings was scored by Final Fantasy XII composer Hitoshi Sakimoto , joined by Kenichiro Fukui , who had arranged the English version of " Kiss Me Good @-@ Bye " . Most of the music for the game is arrangements from the previous title . While the Nintendo DS has more technical limitations than the PlayStation 2 , Sakimoto considers it not particularly noticeable in practice . 
 Unlike in Final Fantasy XII , the music is entirely dynamic and context @-@ dependent . Each track possesses different parts , ranging from musical themes of peaceful moments to frantic battle cries , which are activated when the actions of the players require it and are looped until the context is changed again . 
 = = Reception = = 
 As of August 8 , 2008 , Revenant Wings has sold 1 @.@ 04 million units worldwide , with 540 @,@ 000 units sold in Japan , 220 @,@ 000 units in North America , and 280 @,@ 000 in Europe . It was the best @-@ selling Japanese console game in the week of its release , then the second best @-@ selling in the following week . 
 The Japanese version of the game scored 32 / 40 in the Japanese gaming magazine Famitsu . The game also received praise from reviewers of Dengeki DS & Wii Style . Praise was given to the mission @-@ based storyline and battles for being " simple and more involved " . The large number of characters who can enter the fray at one given time gives a sense of involvement for the player as if they were " close to the action " , and the game 's difficulty may appeal even to those who " do not normally play role @-@ playing games " . The only criticism found was with the usage of the stylus , as its usage in selecting areas on the battlefield can be difficult . 
 The North American version of the game scored mainly positive reviews . Nintendo Power gave it a 7 @.@ 5 / 10 , IGN gave it an 8 @.@ 3 / 10 , <unk> gave it a B + , GameSpot and GameZone both gave it an 8 @.@ 5 / 10 , and X @-@ Play gave it a 4 / 5 . 
 Electronic Gaming Monthly also gave it generally favorable reviews , with staff giving it scores of 8 , 7 @.@ 5 , and 6 ( all out of 10 ) . The reviewers praised the game 's combination of role @-@ playing and strategy , but criticized the screen size relative to the amount of action . IGN named it Nintendo DS Game of the Month for November 2007 . 
 = Amon of Judah = 
 Amon of Judah ( Hebrew : <unk> ’ <unk> ; Greek : <unk> ; Latin : Amon ) was a 7th @-@ century BC King of Judah who , according to the biblical account , succeeded his father Manasseh of Judah . Amon is most remembered for his idolatrous practices while king , which led to a revolt against him and eventually his assassination in c . 641 BC . 
 = = Life = = 
 Amon was the son of King Manasseh of Judah and <unk> , a daughter of <unk> of <unk> . Although the date is unknown , the Hebrew Bible records that he married <unk> , the daughter of <unk> of <unk> . Amon began his reign of Judah at the age of 22 , and reigned for two years . Biblical scholar and archeologist William F. Albright has dated his reign to 642 – 640 , while professor E. R. Thiele offers the dates 643 / 642 – 641 / 640 . Thiele 's dates are tied to the reign of Amon 's son Josiah , whose death at the hands of Pharaoh Necho II occurred in the summer of 609 . Josiah 's death , which is independently confirmed in Egyptian history , places the end of Amon 's reign , 31 years earlier , in 641 or 640 and the beginning of his rule in 643 or 642 . 
 The Hebrew Bible records that Amon continued his father Manasseh 's practice of idolatry and set up pagan images as his father had done . II Kings states that Amon " did that which was evil in the sight of <unk> , as did Manasseh his father . And he walked in all the way that his father walked in , and served the idols that his father served , and worshipped them . " Similarly , II Chronicles records that " … he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord , as did Manasseh his father ; and Amon sacrificed unto all the graven images which Manasseh his father had made , and served them . " The Talmudic tradition recounts that " Amon burnt the Torah , and allowed spider webs to cover the altar [ through complete disuse ] ... Amon sinned very much . " Like other textual sources , Flavius Josephus too criticizes the reign of Amon , describing his reign similarly to the Bible . 
 After reigning two years , Amon was assassinated by his servants , who conspired against him , and was succeeded by his son Josiah , who at the time was eight years old . After Amon 's assassination his murderers became unpopular with the people , and were ultimately killed . Some scholars , such as Abraham <unk> , assert that Amon was assassinated because people disliked the heavy influence that Assyria , an age @-@ old enemy of Judah responsible for the destruction of the Kingdom of Israel , had upon him . 
 = = Era = = 
 Amon 's reign was in the midst of a transitional time for the Levant and the entire Mesopotamian region . To the east of Judah , the Assyrian Empire was beginning to disintegrate while the Babylonian Empire had not yet risen to replace it . To the west , Egypt was still recovering under Psamtik I from its Assyrian occupation , transforming from a vassal state to an autonomous ally . In this power vacuum , many smaller states such as Judah were able to govern themselves without foreign intervention from larger empires . 
 = Implacable @-@ class aircraft carrier = 
 The Implacable @-@ class aircraft carrier was a class of two aircraft carriers built for the Royal Navy during World War II . Derived from the design of the Illustrious class , they were faster and carried more aircraft than the older ships . They were initially assigned to the Home Fleet when completed in 1944 and attacked targets in Norway as well as the German battleship Tirpitz . Subsequently they were assigned to the British Pacific Fleet ( BPF ) . 
 Indefatigable was the first ship to go to the Pacific and attacked Japanese @-@ controlled oil refineries in Sumatra en route . She participated in Operation Iceberg , the invasion of Okinawa in March – April 1945 . Implacable 's arrival in the Pacific was delayed by a refit and she did not begin operations against the Japanese until June . The sister ships participated in the attacks on the Japanese Home Islands in July and August . Indefatigable was the only carrier chosen to continue operations after most of the BPF withdrew to prepare for further operations in early August . After the Japanese formal surrender in September , Implacable ferried Allied troops and prisoners of war back to Australia and Canada for the rest of the year . 
 The sisters returned home in 1946 ; Indefatigable was used for the rest of the year to transport troops before being placed in reserve in 1947 and Implacable became the training carrier for Home Fleet . Indefatigable was converted into a training ship and reactivated in 1950 for service with the Home Fleet . Implacable was relegated to the reserve that same year and modified into a training ship in 1952 . The sisters were scheduled for modernisation during the mid @-@ 1950s , but it was cancelled as the modernisation of the carrier in the queue ahead of them proved to be too expensive and lengthy . The sisters were decommissioned in 1954 and sold for scrap in 1955 – 56 . 
 = = Background and description = = 
 The Implacable class had its origin as an improved version of the Illustrious @-@ class aircraft carriers for the 1938 Naval Programme while still remaining within the 23 @,@ 000 long tons ( 23 @,@ 000 t ) available from the tonnage allowed by the Second London Naval Treaty . The initial change was to increase the carriers ' speed to no less than 32 knots ( 59 km / h ; 37 mph ) which required the addition of a fourth steam turbine and associated propeller shaft . <unk> the additional weight of the machinery meant reductions in armour thicknesses in the hangar deck and the bulkheads at the ends of the hangar . At the same time the Director of Naval Construction ( DNC ) was developing a different modified Illustrious design ( Design D ) to carry an additional dozen aircraft ( a total of 48 ) in a lower hangar that also incorporated the additional machinery of the initial design with the sacrifice of even more armour . Hangar height was initially planned as 13 feet 6 inches ( 4 @.@ 1 m ) in the upper hangar to accommodate the new Fairey Albacore torpedo bomber and 16 feet ( 4 @.@ 9 m ) in the lower hangar to accommodate taller amphibious aircraft , but a later change in policy raised the upper hangar height to 14 feet ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) . Design D was submitted to the Board of Admiralty on 2 August 1938 and approved on 17 November . In April 1939 the lower hangar 's height was reduced to 14 feet to compensate for the thickening of the hangar side armour to 2 inches ( 51 mm ) and the idea of carrying amphibians in the hangar was abandoned . 
 The Implacable @-@ class ships were 766 feet 6 inches ( 233 @.@ 6 m ) long overall and 730 feet ( 222 @.@ 5 m ) at the waterline . Their beam was 95 feet 9 inches ( 29 @.@ 2 m ) at the waterline and they had a draught of 29 feet ( 8 @.@ <unk> m ) at deep load . The ships were significantly overweight and displaced 32 @,@ 110 long tons ( 32 @,@ 630 t ) at deep load . Their complement was approximately 2 @,@ 300 officers and enlisted men in 1945 . They had metacentric heights of 4 @.@ 06 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) at light load and 6 @.@ 91 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) at deep load as completed . 
 The ships had four Parsons geared steam turbines , each driving one shaft , using steam supplied by eight Admiralty 3 @-@ drum boilers . The turbines were designed to produce a total of 148 @,@ 000 shp ( 110 @,@ 000 kW ) , enough to give them a maximum speed of 32 @.@ 5 knots ( 60 @.@ 2 km / h ; 37 @.@ 4 mph ) . On sea trials , the ships reached speeds of 31 @.@ 89 – 32 @.@ 06 knots ( 59 @.@ 06 – 59 @.@ 38 km / h ; 36 @.@ 70 – 36 @.@ 89 mph ) with 150 @,@ 935 – 151 @,@ 200 shp ( 112 @,@ 552 – 112 @,@ 750 kW ) . The Implacable class carried a maximum of 4 @,@ 690 – 4 @,@ 810 long tons ( 4 @,@ 770 – 4 @,@ 890 t ) of fuel oil which gave them a range of 6 @,@ 720 – 6 @,@ 900 nautical miles ( 12 @,@ 450 – 12 @,@ 780 km ; 7 @,@ 730 – 7 @,@ 940 mi ) at 20 knots ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) . 
 The 760 @-@ foot ( 231 @.@ 6 m ) armoured flight deck had a maximum width of 102 feet ( 31 @.@ 1 m ) . The arrestor cables , crash barricades , aircraft catapult and lifts were designed to handle aircraft up to 20 @,@ 000 pounds ( 9 @,@ 100 kg ) in weight . The carriers were fitted with nine arrestor cables aft that were designed to stop landing , at speeds of up to 60 knots ( 110 km / h ; 69 mph ) . They were backed up by three crash barricades to prevent landing aircraft from crashing into aircraft parked on the ship 's bow . In case of damage to the rear flight deck , the Implacable @-@ class ships also mounted three additional forward arrestor cables to permit aircraft to land over the bow . A single BH3 hydraulic catapult was fitted on the forward part of the flight deck to launch 20 @,@ 000 @-@ pound aircraft at 56 knots ( 104 km / h ; 64 mph ) ; lighter aircraft could be launched at a maximum speed of 66 knots ( 122 km / h ; 76 mph ) . The ships were equipped with two lifts on the centreline , the forward of which measured 45 by 33 feet ( 13 @.@ 7 by 10 @.@ 1 m ) and served only the upper hangar , and the aft lift ( 45 by 22 feet ( 13 @.@ 7 by 6 @.@ 7 m ) ) which served both hangars . The upper hangar was 458 feet ( 139 @.@ 6 m ) long and the lower hangar was 208 feet ( 63 @.@ 4 m ) long ; both had a uniform width of 62 feet ( 18 @.@ 9 m ) . Both hangars had a height of only 14 feet which precluded storage of Lend @-@ Lease Vought F4U Corsair fighters as well as many post @-@ war aircraft and helicopters . In case of fire the upper hangar could be divided by two fire curtains and the lower hangar had one fire curtain . Designed to stow 48 aircraft in their hangars , the use of a permanent deck park allowed the Implacable class to accommodate up to 81 aircraft . The crewmen , maintenance personnel and facilities needed to support these additional aircraft were housed in the lower hangar . The ships were provided with 94 @,@ 650 imperial gallons ( 430 @,@ 300 l ; 113 @,@ 670 US gal ) of aviation gasoline , only enough for approximately five sorties per aircraft . 
 = = = Armament , electronics , and armour = = = 
 The ships ' main armament consisted of sixteen quick @-@ firing ( QF ) 4 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 110 mm ) dual @-@ purpose guns in eight powered RP 10 Mk II * * twin @-@ gun turrets , four in sponsons on each side of the hull . Unlike the Illustrious @-@ class ships , the roofs of the gun turrets were flat and flush with the flight deck . The gun had a maximum range of 20 @,@ 760 yards ( 18 @,@ 980 m ) at an elevation of + 45 ° and a ceiling of 41 @,@ 000 feet ( 12 @,@ 000 m ) . Their light anti @-@ aircraft defences included five octuple mounts for QF 2 @-@ pounder ( " pom @-@ pom " ) anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) guns , two on the flight deck forward of the island , one on the aft part of the island and two in sponsons on the port side of the hull . A single quadruple 2 @-@ pounder mount was also fitted on the port side of the hull . The 2 @-@ pounder gun had a maximum range of 6 @,@ 800 yards ( 6 @,@ 200 m ) . The two ships were also fitted with approximately sixty Oerlikon 20 mm autocannon in varying numbers of single and twin @-@ gun mounts . These guns had a maximum range of 4 @,@ 800 yards ( 4 @,@ 400 m ) , but many were replaced by 40 mm Bofors AA guns when the ships were transferred to the Pacific Theater as the 20 mm shell was unlikely to destroy a kamikaze before it hit the ship . The Bofors gun had a maximum range of 10 @,@ 750 yards ( 9 @,@ 830 m ) . Two additional quadruple " pom @-@ pom " mounts were added to Implacable before she joined the British Pacific Fleet in 1945 . After the war , more Oerlikons were exchanged for Bofors guns . By April 1946 , the sisters had 11 – 12 Bofors guns and 19 – 30 Oerlikons each . 
 The 4 @.@ 5 @-@ inch guns were controlled by four Mk V * ( M ) fire @-@ control directors , each mounting a Type 285 gunnery radar . Two of the directors were positioned on the flight deck , one each fore and aft of the island , a third was on the island , aft of the funnel , and the fourth director was on the port side of the hull , below the flight deck . Each director sent its data to a Fuze Keeping Clock AA fire @-@ control system for gunnery calculations . Each " pom @-@ pom " was provided with its own Mk IV director that carried a range @-@ only Type 282 gunnery radar . 
 The specifics of the Implacable @-@ class ships ' radar suite is not readily available . They were fitted with the Type 277 surface @-@ search / height @-@ finding radar on top of the bridge and a Type 293 target indicator radar on the foremast . The ships probably carried Type 279 and Type 281B early @-@ warning radars , based on the radars fitted aboard the Illustrious @-@ class carrier Victorious late in the war . 
 The Implacable @-@ class ships had a flight deck protected by 3 inches ( 76 mm ) of armour . The sides of the hangars were designed to be 1 @.@ 5 inches ( 38 mm ) thick to protect the hangar from low @-@ level attacks with 500 @-@ pound ( 230 kg ) semi @-@ armour @-@ piercing bombs , but were supposedly thickened to 2 inches ( 51 mm ) late in the design process at the cost of reducing the height of the lower hangar . Naval historian Norman Friedman wrote : " Ironically , it appears that the ships were actually built with 1 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ... armour . " The ends of the hangars were protected by 2 @-@ inch bulkheads and the armour of the hangar deck ranged from 1 @.@ 5 to 2 @.@ 5 inches ( 38 to 64 mm ) in thickness . 
 The waterline armour belt was 4 @.@ 5 inches ( 114 mm ) thick , but only covered the central portion of the ship to form the armoured citadel . The belt was closed by 1 @.@ 5 to 2 @-@ inch transverse bulkheads fore and aft . The underwater defence system was a layered system of liquid- and air @-@ filled compartments as used in the Illustrious class and was estimated to be able to resist a 750 @-@ pound ( 340 kg ) explosive charge . The magazines for the 4 @.@ 5 @-@ inch guns lay outside the armoured citadel and were protected by 2 to 3 @-@ inch roofs , 4 @.@ 5 @-@ inch sides and 1 @.@ 5 to 2 @-@ inch ends . 
 = = = Planned modernisation = = = 
 The two <unk> were tentatively scheduled to be modernised in 1953 – 55 with Implacable following Victorious . The draft Staff Requirements were drawn up in July 1951 . This included combining the two hangars into a single 17 @-@ foot @-@ 6 @-@ inch ( 5 @.@ 33 m ) hangar , strengthening the flight deck and aircraft handling equipment to deal with 30 @,@ 000 @-@ pound ( 14 @,@ 000 kg ) aircraft , enlarging the lifts to 55 by 32 feet ( 16 @.@ 8 by 9 @.@ 8 m ) , adding a gallery deck between the hangar and the flight deck to accommodate the additional personnel required , the addition of steam catapults , and the increase of her aviation fuel stowage to 240 @,@ 000 imperial gallons ( 1 @,@ 100 @,@ 000 l ; 290 @,@ 000 US gal ) . Other desired improvements were new boilers to increase her endurance , more space for the latest radars , and the replacement of her anti @-@ aircraft armament with the British version of the 3 " / 70 Mark 26 gun and sextuple mounts for the Bofors guns . 
 By October 1951 , the estimated completion date for Victorious 's modernisation was already a year past the initial estimate of April 1954 . Implacable was scheduled to begin her modernisation in April 1953 for completion in 1956 , but the Director of Dockyards pointed out that existing schedules prevented her from beginning any earlier than April 1955 unless the modernisations of two cruisers and the guided missile test ship RFA Girdle Ness were delayed . The Controller of the Navy asked if the time and cost of the reconstruction could be reduced , but the minimum modifications were the most expensive as they involved structural alterations . The Controller ordered the Director of Dockyards to plan for rebuilding Implacable between June 1953 and December 1956 even after the latter protested that even a limited modernisation would require about three @-@ quarters of the structural work of the original plan and that the shortage of skilled workers ( already insufficient for Victorious by herself ) would delay work on both ships . In order to reduce the amount of structural work , the requirement to replace the boilers was cancelled and the ship would receive existing radars instead of systems then still under development . In January 1952 , the ship 's new armament was finalized at six twin @-@ gun 3 " / 70 mounts and three sextuple Bofors mounts . Five months later the Admiralty decided that Victorious would be the last fleet carrier modernised as experience showed that the process would take longer and cost more than was practicable . 
 = = Ships = = 
 = = Construction and service = = 
 Two ships were originally planned , but only one carrier was included in the 1938 Naval Programme as the other was delayed a year by the government . While under construction , the ships had their forward lift enlarged to take non @-@ folding aircraft like the Hawker Sea Hurricane and the early models of the Supermarine Seafire , the flight deck was widened abreast the forward lift , splinter protection was added as were seven diesel generators , each in their own watertight compartment . All these changes increased the ships ' displacement by 540 long tons ( 550 t ) at deep load . 
 Implacable 's construction was suspended in 1940 in favour of escorts needed in the Battle of the Atlantic so that the two carriers were launched within days of each other . She embarked portions of her air wing for training in late August and was assigned to the Home Fleet on 7 October at Scapa Flow after working up . She joined ships searching for Tirpitz a week later and some of her Fairey Fireflies spotted the battleship off Håkøya Island near Tromsø . Subsequently her Fireflies successfully attacked targets in Norway . In late October , the carrier 's Seafires arrived and she participated in Operation Athletic off the Norwegian coast , sinking four warships and two merchant ships and damaging a German submarine . In November and December , Implacable provided air cover for minelaying operations and attacked German shipping off the Norwegian coast . On 15 December she began a refit at Rosyth preparatory to her transfer to the BPF , which included augmenting her light AA armament . 
 When the refit was completed on 10 March 1945 , the ship embarked an enlarged air wing with 81 aircraft ( 48 Seafires , 12 Fireflies , and 21 Grumman TBF Avenger torpedo bombers ) , the largest number of aircraft aboard a British carrier up to that time . Implacable arrived at Sydney , Australia in May and joined the other carriers of the 1st Aircraft Carrier Squadron ( 1st ACS ) at Manus Island after their return from the invasion of Okinawa in June . On 14 – 15 June , the carrier attacked the Japanese naval base at Truk . After working up with the other carriers , the ship sailed with the 1st ACS on 6 July to rendezvous with the American carriers of Task Force 38 off the Japanese home island of Honshu ten days later . The British carriers began flying sorties against Japanese targets on Honshu on 17 July and Implacable 's aircraft , before departing the area on 11 August to replenish , flew over 1 @,@ 000 sorties . She arrived at Sydney on 24 August and spent most of the rest of the year ferrying Allied prisoners of war and soldiers back to Australia and Canada . In January 1946 , together with her sister Indefatigable and several other ships , she made a number of port visits in Australia and New Zealand . The ship was refitted in Sydney in preparation for her return home on 3 June where she became the deck @-@ landing training carrier for the Home Fleet . 
 Implacable temporarily became a trials carrier in October 1947 as her own air group was not yet ready and she was refitted from October to December 1948 in preparation of service as the Home Fleet flagship . She embarked a squadron each of de Havilland Sea Hornets and Blackburn Firebrands in April 1949 and became the flagship of Admiral Sir Philip Vian on 29 April . A squadron of de Havilland Sea Vampires flew from her deck later that year and her air group was augmented by a squadron of Fairey Barracudas in 1950 . Implacable was placed in reserve in September 1950 and slowly converted into a training ship by the addition of extra accommodation and classrooms , including the addition of a deckhouse on her flight deck . She was recommissioned on January 1952 as the flagship of the Home Fleet Training Squadron . Together with Indefatigable , she was present during the Coronation Fleet Review of Queen Elizabeth II on 15 June 1953 . Four months later , Implacable ferried a battalion of troops from Plymouth to Trinidad in response to a crisis in British Guiana . She was decommissioned on 1 September 1954 and sold for breaking up on 27 October 1955 . 
 While Indefatigable was still conducting builder 's trials , a de Havilland Mosquito landed aboard on 25 March 1944 , piloted by Lieutenant Eric Brown . This was the first landing by a twin @-@ engined aeroplane on a carrier . After working up the ship was assigned to the Home Fleet in early July 1944 with an air group of Seafires , Fireflies and Barracudas . On 17 July , she participated in Operation Mascot , an attack on Tirpitz that was foiled by German smoke screens . The following month , Indefatigable 's aircraft provided air cover to minelaying operations and attacked targets in Norway . She was also assigned to a series of attacks on Tirpitz , Operation Goodwood , in late August which failed to significantly damage the battleship . 
 Indefatigable was assigned to the BPF in November and she arrived in Colombo , Ceylon on 10 December where she joined the 1st ACS . Together with the other carriers of the BPF , she attacked oil refineries in Sumatra in January 1945 ( Operation Lentil and Operation Meridian ) before sailing to Sydney to prepare for operations in the Pacific . The BPF joined the American Fifth Fleet at Ulithi on 20 March and attacked airfields on the Sakishima Islands , south of Okinawa , beginning on 26 March , as part of the preparations for Operation Iceberg . During these operations , Indefatigable became the first British carrier to be hit by a kamikaze when one penetrated the combat air patrol ( CAP ) and struck the base of her island on 1 April . The bomb carried by the kamikaze did not detonate and this limited casualties to 21 men killed and 27 wounded . Damage to the ship was minimal and the flight deck was back in operation thirty minutes later . After Okinawa had been secured , the BPF arrived back at Sydney on 7 June and Indefatigable was delayed rejoining operations as she required repairs to her machinery . She departed Manus on 12 July and reached the coast of Japan eight days later . Her aircraft began attacking targets in the Inland Sea on 24 July . Most of the BPF withdrew as planned on 10 August to prepare for Operation Olympic , the invasion of Kyushu scheduled for November , but Indefatigable and several other ships remained to represent Britain at the end of operations . The ship 's aircraft flew missions on 13 and 15 August ; during the last of these missions , her Seafires shot down eight of twelve Mitsubishi A6M Zeros while losing one of their own and an Avenger gunner shot down another Japanese aircraft . After the ceasefire , her aircraft continued to fly CAP and flew reconnaissance missions looking for Allied prisoners of war . 
 Indefatigable arrived at Sydney on 18 September and began a leisurely refit that lasted until 15 November . After touring Australia and New Zealand , she arrived at Spithead on 15 March 1946 where she was modified to accommodate over 1 @,@ 900 passengers . She ferried troops to and from Australia , Ceylon , Singapore and America for the rest of the year before being placed in reserve at the beginning of 1947 . The ship was modified for use as a training ship and recommissioned in 1950 for service with the Home Fleet Training Squadron . She was decommissioned at Rosyth in October 1954 and towed to Gareloch in June 1955 where she was listed for disposal . Indefatigable was sold for scrap in September 1956 and subsequently broken up . 
 = = See Also = = 
 List of ships of the Second World War 
 List of ship classes of the Second World War 
 = The Two Roses = 
 The Two Roses is a 1910 American silent short drama produced by the Thanhouser Company . The film focuses on the young Tony Prolo who goes to deliver lunch to his father of the same name . After arriving and giving him his lunch , the young Tony is hit by a passing vehicle and the father rushes his son home . Mr. Sears , whose car hit the child , receives a demand for $ 10 @,@ 000 by the " Black Hand " . The Sears go to the police and set a trap for the Black Hand , but end up wrongly arresting the child 's father . Tony convinces the police to investigate further and the confusion is cleared up when the real culprit is caught . Mr. Sears compensates the family by purchasing them a house in the countryside . The film features Marie Eline , cast in the role of an Italian boy , along with the leading players Frank H. Crane and Anna Rosemond as the parents . The film was released on June 7 , 1910 . The film survives with new inter @-@ titles that were created to replace the lost materials . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The film begins with a young Italian boy , Tony Prolo , who is preparing to deliver his father 's lunch to him . The boy sets off to the railroad construction area , passing the dangerous terrain without incident . The father , Tony Prolo ( Senior ) , greets his young son and happily takes his lunch . His young son begins tossing rocks across the street and runs out into the road and is knocked down by a passing vehicle . Tony rushes to his son 's aid and the rich man , Mr. Sears gets out the car and attempts to comfort the father . The father rejects him and rushes home , carrying his son in his arms . At home , Tony Prolo and his wife attend to their son and pray for his health . 
 At his residence , Mr. Sears receives a letter by the " Black Hand " demanding $ 10 @,@ 000 for ruining a person 's life . The letter tells him to give the money to a man at a specific street corner who will be carrying a white rose . Sears heads to the police and the detective lays a tray for the Black Hand man . At the same time , Tony Prolo has gone to see the doctor and stops by the florist to get a white rose for his flower @-@ loving son . After he purchases the rose , his path crosses with Mr. Sears and the detective at the street corner , and he is arrested because he is carrying a white rose . The real Black Hand man is hiding behind a door and witnesses the arrest of Tony Prolo , but is discovered by the constable and he is arrested after he was discovered carrying a white rose . 
 Tony Prolo convinces the Sears to have the police investigate his story , and they all are brought to Tony Prolo 's home . The Sears family sees his suffering son and the confusion over the Black Hand is resolved when the constable brings the real suspect into the room . Tony Prolo is released and Mr. Sears compensates the family by purchasing a cottage in the country that is surrounding by white roses . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Marie Eline as Tony , an Italian boy 
 Frank H. Crane as Tony Prolo 
 Anna Rosemond as Tony Prolo 's wife 
 = = Production = = 
 The writer of the scenario is unknown , but it may have been Lloyd Lonergan . Lonergan was an experienced newspaperman still employed by The New York Evening World while writing scripts for the Thanhouser productions . He was the most important script writer for Thanhouser , averaging 200 scripts a year from 1910 to 1915 . The film director is unknown , but two Thanhouser directors are possible . Barry O 'Neil was the stage name of Thomas J. McCarthy , who would direct many important Thanhouser pictures , including its first two @-@ reeler , Romeo and Juliet . Lloyd B. Carleton was the stage name of Carleton B. Little , a director who would stay with the Thanhouser Company for a short time , moving to Biograph Company by the summer of 1910 . Film historian Q. David Bowers does not attribute a cameraman for this production , but two possible candidates exist . Blair Smith was the first cameraman of the Thanhouser company , but he was soon joined by Carl Louis Gregory who had years of experience as a still and motion picture photographer . The role of the cameraman was uncredited in 1910 productions . 
 The role of the Italian father Tony was played by Frank H. Crane . Crane was involved in the very beginnings of the Thanhouser Company and acted in numerous productions before becoming a director at Thanhouser . In the role of Tony 's wife was Anna Rosemond , who was one of two leading ladies for the first year of the company . Marie Eline , played the role of Tony 's son , was concealed in masculine make up and black hair for the role of the Italian boy . The Moving Picture World said , " [ m ] aybe you 'd never recognize her if we did not tip you off . Don 't pass the tip to others in your place , but see if their little favorite doesn 't fool them completely in her masculine makeup . " Other members of the cast have not been identified . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The single @-@ reel drama , approximately 1000 feet long , was released on June 7 , 1910 . This production was the first Tuesday release in the Thanhouser " two a week " releases . The production was advertised as a " A powerful , pathetic , pretty story of life in Little Italy . " The Moving Picture World contained a brief article that used the term " The Thanhouser Kid " to describe Marie Eline ; it was the origin of the nickname for Eline . The film had a wide national release : it was advertised by theaters in Kansas , Indiana , Texas , and Pennsylvania . 
 In 1987 , the film was erroneously claimed to be an adaptation of Charles Dickens serial novel Little Dorrit by H. Philip Bolton in Novels on Stage - Dickens dramatized . Bolton writes , " [ t ] he first film in some sense from the novel - albeit indirectly - would appear to have been a " Two Roses " movie produced in 1910 by Thanhouser . " 
 A mostly complete print of the film survives and has been preserved in its 35 mm state by the Deutsche <unk> - Museum für Film und <unk> in Berlin . The surviving print had only a French language title card " Les Deux Roses " and was devoid of intertitles . New German intertitles were added by <unk> <unk> and Anke <unk> of the Deutsches <unk> based on the published synopsis from The Moving Picture World . The restored work uses an original music composition composed and performed by Günter A. Buchwald . Ned Thanhouser made available an English language translation of the new German intertitles . The film is also released as part of a two @-@ disc DVD set , Screening the Poor , published in the Edition Filmmuseum Series . 
 = Operation Southeast Croatia = 
 Operation Southeast Croatia ( German : Unternehmen <unk> Kroatien ) was a large @-@ scale German @-@ led counter @-@ insurgency operation conducted in the southeastern parts of the Independent State of Croatia ( Croatian : Nezavisna Država Hrvatska , NDH ) , ( modern @-@ day Bosnia and Herzegovina ) during World War II . It was the first of two German @-@ led operations targeting mainly Yugoslav Partisans in eastern Bosnia between 15 January and 4 February 1942 . Several days after the conclusion of Operation Southeast Croatia , a follow @-@ up operation known as Operation Ozren was carried out between the Bosna and Spreča rivers . Both operations also involved Croatian Home Guard and Italian troops and are associated with what is known as the Second Enemy Offensive ( Serbo @-@ Croatian : <unk> neprijateljska ofenziva ) in Yugoslav historiography . 
 The insurgents in the area of operations included some groups led by communist Partisans and some led by Serb – chauvinist Chetniks . Although the Partisans and Chetniks had already irrevocably split in the Territory of the Military Commander in Serbia following Operation Uzice , this had not yet happened in eastern Bosnia and in some areas they were still cooperating . As a result , differentiating between the rank and file of the two groups was difficult , as even the communist @-@ led insurgent groups consisted mainly of Serb peasants who had little understanding of the political aims of their leaders . While there were 20 @,@ 000 Chetnik @-@ led insurgents located within the area of operations , they offered no resistance to the German – NDH forces and many withdrew east across the Drina river to avoid being engaged . This contributed to the complete unravelling of Chetnik – Partisan cooperation in eastern Bosnia . The Partisan main force was able to evade the Germans , infiltrate through the Italian cordon to the south and establish itself around Foča . 
 The failure of the Axis forces to decisively engage the Partisans during these operations necessitated a further major offensive , Operation Trio , in the area immediately south of where Operations Southeast Croatia and Ozren had taken place . 
 = = Background = = 
 On 6 April 1941 the Axis powers invaded Yugoslavia from multiple directions , rapidly overwhelming the under @-@ prepared Royal Yugoslav Army which capitulated 11 days later . In the aftermath of the invasion Yugoslavia was partitioned between the Axis powers through a combination of annexations and occupation zones . Outside of these areas , an Axis puppet state known as the Independent State of Croatia ( NDH ) was established on the territory of modern @-@ day Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina . The NDH was divided by a German – Italian demarcation line , known as the " Vienna Line " , with the Germans occupying the north and northeastern parts of the NDH , and the Italians the south and southwestern sections . The NDH immediately implemented genocidal policies against the Serb , Jewish and Romani population . Armed resistance to the occupation and the NDH initially formed into two loosely cooperating factions , the Partisans who were led by communists , and the Chetniks who were mostly led by Serb – chauvinist officers of the defeated Yugoslav Army . In November and December 1941 , almost all Partisan forces from the Territory of the Military Commander in Serbia had been forced to withdraw into eastern Bosnia where they combined with local Partisan forces . Most of the Chetnik forces in eastern Bosnia were local Serb peasants . The insurgency in eastern Bosnia meant that NDH authorities were unable to retain control of the region . 
 At the end of 1941 , there were six Partisan detachments in eastern Bosnia , with about 7 @,@ 300 fighters operating in the Majevica , Ozren , Birač , Romanija , Zvijezda and Kalinovik areas . According to Enver <unk> , in early January 1942 , the Chetniks controlled a large portion of eastern Bosnia , including the towns of Zvornik , Višegrad , Vlasenica , Srebrenica , Drinjača , Bratunac , Foča , <unk> , Goražde and Čajniče . Due to continuing cooperation between the two groups , the Chetniks also shared control of the towns of Rogatica , Olovo and Han Pijesak with the Partisans . 
 = = Planning = = 
 The orders from General der Artillerie ( Lieutenant General ) Paul Bader , the German Military Commander in Serbia , directed that Operation Southeast Croatia was to be an encirclement operation . All persons encountered within the area of operations were to be treated as the enemy . The population within the area to be targeted by the operation were almost all either Orthodox Serbs or Bosnian Muslims , although there was a small Catholic Croat minority . Bader believed that the Partisans and Chetniks were using the area as winter quarters , and that their presence there was a threat to major transport routes through eastern Bosnia . 
 The operation itself was led by the German 342nd Infantry Division , which had been relieved of its occupation duties in the Territory of the Military Commander in Serbia by Bulgarian troops . The commander of the 342nd Infantry Division , Generalmajor ( Brigadier ) Paul Hoffman , also had the 718th Infantry Division of Generalmajor Johann Fortner under his command for the duration of the operation . The German force was assisted by Croatian Home Guard units including seven infantry battalions and nine artillery batteries . The Axis and allied NDH forces available for the operation were 30 @,@ 000 – 35 @,@ 000 troops in total . Luftwaffe support included reconnaissance aircraft and a combat squadron . The offensive targeted areas held by the Romanija , Zvijezda , Birač , and Ozren Partisan detachments , between Sarajevo , Tuzla , Zvornik and Višegrad . To the south , along the " Vienna Line " separating the German @-@ occupied zone of the NDH from the Italian @-@ occupied zone , the Italians placed a cordon . In total , the area targeted by the operation was estimated by the Germans to contain around 8 @,@ 000 Partisans and 20 @,@ 000 Bosnian Chetniks . 
 On 9 January 1942 , the 718th Infantry Division issued orders to both its regiments that defined the following groups as hostile : all non @-@ residents and residents that had been absent from their localities until recently ; all identifiable Chetniks or communists with or without weapons or ammunition ; and anyone concealing , supplying or providing information to those groups . Any captured Partisans were to be briefly interrogated and summarily shot , as were any other insurgents that had attacked the Germans , been caught carrying ammunition or messages , or who resisted or fled . Also , any houses from which shots were fired at German troops were to be burned . 
 = = = 15 – 18 January = = = 
 Operation Southeast Croatia commenced on 15 January 1942 . The 342nd Infantry Division approached the area of operations from the Drina valley to the east , with the 718th Infantry Division striking east from assembly areas in Sarajevo and Tuzla . 
 In the first days of the operation , the 697th Regiment of the 342nd Infantry Division , supported by NDH units , thrust out of their bridgehead over the Drina at Zvornik and cleared the high ground southwest and south of that town , and south along the Drina valley road , hindered by roadblocks and destroyed bridges . It then followed up the retreating insurgents , mopping up the Drinjača valley , before pushing southwest through the mountains and reaching Vlasenica on 18 January . Parts of the <unk> Regiment of the 342nd Infantry Division fought southwest from Višegrad along the upper Drina valley to <unk> , while other elements pushed west towards Rogatica , followed by an Italian Alpini battalion . The <unk> Regiment of the 342nd Infantry Division advanced along the Drina valley past the confluence with the Drinjača to the area west of Ljubovija , clearing roadblocks as they went . In the area of <unk> , they captured about 400 insurgents , mostly Chetniks loyal to Jezdimir Dangić , along with a tank , two machine guns , about 160 rifles and a large amount of ammunition . The regiment then mopped up the area west to Vlasenica and one battalion cleared the route to Srebrenica . 
 The 738th Regiment of the 718th Infantry Division was reinforced by pioneers , four NDH battalions , four NDH artillery batteries and two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half German mountain gun batteries . It pushed east from Sarajevo along the <unk> valley then through the Romanija mountains towards Rogatica . Fighting in very difficult terrain , it captured 240 insurgents and significant amounts of weapons and ammunition . It also freed 10 Italian and 57 NDH soldiers . The other regiment of the 718th Infantry Division , the 750th Regiment , was reinforced by a German artillery battery , an NDH infantry battalion and an NDH mountain battery . It moved south from an assembly area southwest of Tuzla towards Olovo . It reached Kladanj on 16 January , and spent the following days clearing both sides of the road west towards Vlasenica . It had been planned that the Italian 3rd Mountain Infantry Division Ravenna would provide a cordon to the south , blocking any southerly withdrawal by the insurgents . This did not occur , as the Italians claimed the railroad near Mostar had been damaged , resulting in several weeks delay . 
 When the Chetnik leaders appointed by Draža Mihailović , Majors Boško Todorović and Dangić , became aware of the commencement of Operation Southeast Croatia , they advised other Chetnik commanders that the operation was targeted at the Partisans , and there was no need for the Chetniks to get involved . Following this , their units withdrew from their positions on the front line , let the Germans pass through their areas , or went home . Many withdrew across the Drina into the Territory of the Military Commander in Serbia to avoid being engaged , which severely weakened the Partisan defences with the result that they suffered significant casualties and lost a great deal of territory . These actions severed any remaining cooperative links that remained between the Chetniks and Partisans in eastern Bosnia . 
 The insurgents in the area of operations destroyed villages to deny supplies and shelter to the Germans who were operating in mountainous terrain with snow up to one metre ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) deep and facing extreme temperatures approaching − 30 ° C ( − 22 ° F ) . The Partisans proved very difficult to pin down , aided by excellent communication and supported by the local populace . During the operation , the decisive engagements with the Partisans were mainly in the Romanija region . The Romanija Detachment made up forty percent of all Partisans in eastern Bosnia and bore the brunt of most of the fighting during the operation . 
 = = = 19 – 23 January = = = 
 After their initial advances , the 342nd Infantry Division spent the next few days mopping up the areas they had entered . The 697th Regiment advanced south from Vlasenica through the <unk> Mountains , meeting little resistance and capturing Han Pijesak on 22 January . Elements of the 697th Regiment pushed west towards Olovo the same day . The <unk> Regiment cleared the area around Rogatica , killing 50 and capturing 200 insurgents , and liberating 63 captured Croatian Home Guard soldiers . The <unk> Regiment patrolled the area as far as Vlasenica and Srebrenica . These mopping up operations achieved little , as most of the insurgents had escaped the encirclement before it was completed . 
 The 718th Infantry Division was assisted in their subsequent operations by air support from the ZNDH , which bombed Sokolac on 20 January . On 21 January , the 738th Regiment captured the village of <unk> south of Sokolac , and on the following day elements of the regiment drove through Sokolac and closed on Han Pijesak . On the same day , the 750th Regiment reached Olovo , but the insurgents had withdrawn from the area . 
 On 21 January , Bader dramatically altered his previous orders regarding the treatment of those encountered in the area of operations , directing that those who did not resist and surrendered or merely had weapons in their houses , were to be treated as prisoners of war . It is likely that this change was intended to assist Chetniks in the area of operations to avoid destruction . By the end of January , Bader 's chief of staff was attempting to negotiate a cooperation agreement with Dangić , and in turn Dangić ordered the 4 @,@ 500 – 10 @,@ 000 Chetniks under his command to avoid the Germans or surrender their weapons immediately if they were unable to do so . 
 After temporarily improving the Partisan defences against the German and NDH forces , the Partisan Supreme Headquarters and the 1st Proletarian Brigade were unable to salvage the situation and retreated south towards Foča . The 1st Proletarian Brigade , less two battalions that were accompanying the Supreme Headquarters , crossed the Igman mountain plateau near Sarajevo with temperatures reaching − 32 ° C ( − 26 ° F ) . According to the commander of the 1st Proletarian Brigade , Koča Popović , 172 Partisans suffered severe hypothermic injury and six died . When they approached the German @-@ Italian demarcation line south of Sarajevo , the Partisans were able to infiltrate through the weak Italian cordon . Montenegrin Partisans crossed into the NDH to attack the Chetniks , capturing Foča on 20 January and Goražde on 22 January . The German and NDH forces were successful in recapturing Sokolac , Rogatica , Bratunac , Srebrenica , Vlasenica , Han Pijesak , Olovo , Bosansko Petrovo Selo , and some smaller settlements , and inflicted significant losses on the Partisans . 
 Because the Chetniks failed to assist the Partisans in the battle , the Yugoslav Central Committee ceased all further attempts to cooperate with them and issued a declaration on 22 January to " Bosnians ! Serbs , Muslims , Croats ! " that Chetnik leaders Boško Todorović , <unk> Babić , and others were traitors . It further proclaimed that the Partisans fought alone " all across Bosnia and Herzegovina " and ended with " long live the united people 's liberation struggle of all the peoples of Bosnia ! " . The Romanija Detachment 's commander , Slaviša <unk> @-@ <unk> , was killed in combat against the Germans . A member of the Supreme Headquarters of the Partisans , Svetozar Vukmanović @-@ Tempo , reported that detachment had completely collapsed . 
 However , faced with overly ambitious objectives and atrocious weather , the combined operation failed to destroy the Partisan forces and was called off on 23 January 1942 , with the Germans having suffered casualties of 25 dead , 131 wounded , and one missing , as well as around 300 cases of frostbite . The NDH forces lost 50 soldiers killed or seriously wounded . The Germans captured 855 rifles , 22 machine guns and four artillery pieces , along with livestock and draft animals . The Partisans had lost 531 killed and between 1 @,@ 331 and 1 @,@ 400 captured , in addition to the frostbite casualties suffered by the 1st Proletarian Brigade while crossing Mt . Igman . A total of 168 NDH and 104 Italian troops that had been captured by the Partisans were freed during the operation . The Supreme Headquarters entered Foča on 25 January and stayed there for three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half months . 
 = = Operation Ozren = = 
 Operation Ozren ( German : Unternehmen Ozren ) was aimed at clearing an estimated 2 @,@ 000 Partisans from the area between the Bosna and Spreča rivers , and was effectively an extension of Operation Southeast Croatia employing elements of the force used in that operation . The main force used was Fortner 's 718th Infantry Division reinforced by a regiment of the 342nd Infantry Division , supported by a number of NDH units ( including a battalion of the Ustaše Black Legion ) . The force was also supported by five tank platoons and an armoured train . Around 20 @,@ 000 Axis troops were committed to the operation . It commenced several days after Operation Southeast Croatia ended on 23 January 1942 . 
 The Germans advanced north and west from Kladanj towards a cordon established by ten Croatian Home Guard battalions supported by their own artillery . The Germans believed they had thoroughly sealed off the area , and checked the Croatian cordon every night , but the majority of Partisans were able to evade the cordon and escape by breaking up into small groups and infiltrating through the cordon through seemingly impassable terrain . The Germans also believed that some Partisans merely withdrew into the mountains , concealing their numbers by walking in each other 's <unk> , in order to return to the valleys when the Axis forces left . The operation concluded on 4 February 1942 . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Both operations were hampered by the German need to rely on their Croatian allies as well as the fact that both forces were ill @-@ equipped for operations in mountainous terrain during extreme winter conditions . The Croatian units had proven not to be a useful addition to the operation , as they possessed little in the way of fighting power , had little unit cohesion and suffered from serious supply problems . 
 Operations Southeast Croatia and Ozren were early opportunities for the Germans to learn lessons about the challenges their poorly equipped and often substandard occupation troops faced fighting in the difficult terrain and weather conditions of Bosnia . However , these lessons were to be repeated many more times in the following years as German commanders persisted with their encirclement tactics and unreasonable expectations of what could be achieved in a given time and space . 
 Following the conclusion of Operations Southeast Croatia and Ozren , German and NDH forces conducted Operation Prijedor in northwest Bosnia . The Germans inflicted considerable losses on the Partisans and captured extensive territory and population centres from them ; however , they failed to eliminate them as a military factor and shortly afterwards had to undertake Operation Trio in the region immediately south of the area of operations for Operations Southeast Croatia and Ozren . 
 = William the Conqueror = 
 William I ( Old Norman : <unk> I ; Old English : <unk> I ; c . 1028 – 9 September 1087 ) , usually known as William the Conqueror and sometimes William the Bastard , was the first Norman King of England , reigning from 1066 until his death in 1087 . The descendant of Viking raiders , he had been Duke of Normandy since 1035 . After a long struggle to establish his power , by 1060 his hold on Normandy was secure , and he launched the Norman conquest of England in 1066 . The rest of his life was marked by struggles to consolidate his hold over England and his continental lands and by difficulties with his eldest son . 
 William was the son of the unmarried Robert I , Duke of Normandy , by Robert 's mistress Herleva . His illegitimate status and his youth caused some difficulties for him after he succeeded his father , as did the anarchy that plagued the first years of his rule . During his childhood and adolescence , members of the Norman aristocracy battled each other , both for control of the child duke and for their own ends . In 1047 William was able to quash a rebellion and begin to establish his authority over the duchy , a process that was not complete until about 1060 . His marriage in the 1050s to Matilda of Flanders provided him with a powerful ally in the neighbouring county of Flanders . By the time of his marriage , William was able to arrange the appointments of his supporters as bishops and abbots in the Norman church . His consolidation of power allowed him to expand his horizons , and by 1062 William was able to secure control of the neighbouring county of Maine . 
 In the 1050s and early 1060s William became a contender for the throne of England , then held by the childless Edward the Confessor , his first cousin once removed . There were other potential claimants , including the powerful English earl Harold Godwinson , who was named the next king by Edward on the latter 's deathbed in January 1066 . William argued that Edward had previously promised the throne to him , and that Harold had sworn to support William 's claim . William built a large fleet and invaded England in September 1066 , decisively defeating and killing Harold at the Battle of Hastings on 14 October 1066 . After further military efforts William was crowned king on Christmas Day 1066 , in London . He made arrangements for the governance of England in early 1067 before returning to Normandy . Several unsuccessful rebellions followed , but by 1075 William 's hold on England was mostly secure , allowing him to spend the majority of the rest of his reign on the continent . 
 William 's final years were marked by difficulties in his continental domains , troubles with his eldest son , and threatened invasions of England by the Danes . In 1086 William ordered the compilation of the Domesday Book , a survey listing all the landholders in England along with their holdings . William died in September 1087 while leading a campaign in northern France , and was buried in Caen . His reign in England was marked by the construction of castles , the settling of a new Norman nobility on the land , and change in the composition of the English clergy . He did not try to integrate his various domains into one empire , but instead continued to administer each part separately . William 's lands were divided after his death : Normandy went to his eldest son , Robert , and his second surviving son , William , received England . 
 = = Background = = 
 Norsemen first began raiding in what became Normandy in the late 8th century . Permanent Scandinavian settlement occurred before 911 , when Rollo , one of the Viking leaders , and King Charles the Simple of France reached an agreement surrendering the county of Rouen to Rollo . The lands around Rouen became the core of the later duchy of Normandy . Normandy may have been used as a base when Scandinavian attacks on England were renewed at the end of the 10th century , which would have worsened relations between England and Normandy . In an effort to improve matters , King Æthelred the Unready took Emma of Normandy , sister of Duke Richard II , as his second wife in 1002 . 
 Danish raids on England continued , and Æthelred sought help from Richard , taking refuge in Normandy in 1013 when King Swein I of Denmark drove Æthelred and his family from England . Swein 's death in 1014 allowed Æthelred to return home , but Swein 's son Cnut contested Æthelred 's return . Æthelred died unexpectedly in 1016 , and Cnut became king of England . Æthelred and Emma 's two sons , Edward and Alfred , went into exile in Normandy while their mother , Emma , became Cnut 's second wife . 
 After Cnut 's death in 1035 the English throne fell to Harold Harefoot , his son by his first wife , while Harthacnut , his son by Emma , became king in Denmark . England remained unstable . Alfred returned to England in 1036 to visit his mother and perhaps to challenge Harold as king . One story implicates Earl Godwin of Wessex in Alfred 's subsequent death , but others blame Harold . Emma went into exile in Flanders until Harthacnut became king following Harold 's death in 1040 , and his half @-@ brother Edward followed Harthacnut to England ; Edward was proclaimed king after Harthacnut 's death in June 1042 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 William was born in 1027 or 1028 at Falaise , Normandy , most likely towards the end of 1028 . He was the only son of Robert I , Duke of Normandy , son of Richard II , Duke of Normandy . His mother , Herleva , was the daughter of Fulbert of Falaise ; Fulbert may have been a tanner or embalmer . She was possibly a member of the ducal household , but did not marry Robert . Instead , she later married <unk> de <unk> , with whom she had two sons – Odo of Bayeux and Robert , Count of Mortain – and a daughter whose name is unknown . One of Herleva 's brothers , Walter , became a supporter and protector of William during his minority . Robert also had a daughter , Adelaide of Normandy , by another mistress . 
 Robert became Duke of Normandy on 6 August 1027 , succeeding his elder brother Richard III , who had only succeeded to the title the previous year . Robert and his brother had been at odds over the succession , and Richard 's death was sudden . Robert was accused by some writers of killing his brother , a plausible but now unprovable charge . Conditions in Normandy were unsettled , as noble families despoiled the Church and Alan III of Brittany waged war against the duchy , possibly in an attempt to take control . By 1031 Robert had gathered considerable support from noblemen , many of whom would become prominent during William 's life . They included Robert 's uncle , Robert the archbishop of Rouen , who had originally opposed the duke , Osbern , a nephew of <unk> the wife of Duke Richard I , and Count Gilbert of Brionne , a grandson of Richard I. After his accession , Robert continued Norman support for the English princes Edward and Alfred , who were still in exile in northern France . 
 There are indications that Robert may have been briefly betrothed to a daughter of King Cnut , but no marriage took place . It is unclear if William would have been supplanted in the ducal succession if Robert had had a legitimate son . Earlier dukes had been illegitimate , and William 's association with his father on ducal charters appears to indicate that William was considered Robert 's most likely heir . In 1034 Duke Robert decided to go on pilgrimage to Jerusalem . Although some of his supporters tried to dissuade him from undertaking the journey , Robert convened a council in January 1035 and had the assembled Norman magnates swear fealty to William as his heir before leaving for Jerusalem . He died in early July at Nicea , on his way back to Normandy . 
 = = Duke of Normandy = = 
 = = = Challenges = = = 
 William faced several challenges on becoming duke , including his illegitimate birth and his youth : the evidence indicates that he was either seven or eight years old at the time . He enjoyed the support of his great @-@ uncle , Archbishop Robert , as well as the king of France , Henry I , enabling him to succeed to his father 's duchy . The support given to the exiled English princes in their attempt to return to England in 1036 shows that the new duke 's guardians were attempting to continue his father 's policies , but Archbishop Robert 's death in March 1037 removed one of William 's main supporters , and conditions in Normandy quickly descended into chaos . 
 The anarchy in the duchy lasted until 1047 , and control of the young duke was one of the priorities of those contending for power . At first , Alan of Brittany had custody of the duke , but when Alan died in either late 1039 or October 1040 , Gilbert of Brionne took charge of William . Gilbert was killed within months , and another guardian , <unk> , was also killed around the time of Gilbert 's death . Yet another guardian , Osbern , was slain in the early 1040s in William 's chamber while the duke slept . It was said that Walter , William 's maternal uncle , was occasionally forced to hide the young duke in the houses of peasants , although this story may be an embellishment by Orderic Vitalis . The historian Eleanor Searle speculates that William was raised with the three cousins who later became important in his career – William fitzOsbern , Roger de Beaumont , and Roger of Montgomery . Although many of the Norman nobles engaged in their own private wars and feuds during William 's minority , the viscounts still acknowledged the ducal government , and the ecclesiastical hierarchy was supportive of William . 
 King Henry continued to support the young duke , but in late 1046 opponents of William came together in a rebellion centred in lower Normandy , led by Guy of Burgundy with support from Nigel , Viscount of the Cotentin , and Ranulf , Viscount of the Bessin . According to stories that may have legendary elements , an attempt was made to seize William at Valognes , but he escaped under cover of darkness , seeking refuge with King Henry . In early 1047 Henry and William returned to Normandy and were victorious at the Battle of Val @-@ ès @-@ Dunes near Caen , although few details of the actual fighting are recorded . William of Poitiers claimed that the battle was won mainly through William 's efforts , but earlier accounts claim that King Henry 's men and leadership also played an important part . William assumed power in Normandy , and shortly after the battle promulgated the Truce of God throughout his duchy , in an effort to limit warfare and violence by restricting the days of the year on which fighting was permitted . Although the Battle of Val @-@ ès @-@ Dunes marked a turning point in William 's control of the duchy , it was not the end of his struggle to gain the upper hand over the nobility . The period from 1047 to 1054 saw almost continuous warfare , with lesser crises continuing until 1060 . 
 = = = Consolidation of power = = = 
 William 's next efforts were against Guy of Burgundy , who retreated to his castle at Brionne , which William besieged . After a long effort , the duke succeeded in exiling Guy in 1050 . To address the growing power of the Count of Anjou , Geoffrey Martel , William joined with King Henry in a campaign against him , the last known cooperation between the two . They succeeded in capturing an Angevin fortress , but accomplished little else . Geoffrey attempted to expand his authority into the county of Maine , especially after the death of Hugh IV of Maine in 1051 . Central to the control of Maine were the holdings of the family of Bellême , who held Bellême on the border of Maine and Normandy , as well as the fortresses at Alençon and Domfort . Bellême 's overlord was the king of France , but Domfort was under the overlordship of Geoffrey Martel and Duke William was Alençon 's overlord . The Bellême family , whose lands were quite strategically placed between their three different overlords , were able to play each of them against the other and secure virtual independence for themselves . 
 On the death of Hugh of Maine , Geoffrey Martel occupied Maine in a move contested by William and King Henry ; eventually they succeeded in driving Geoffrey from the county , and in the process , William was able to secure the Bellême family strongholds at Alençon and Domfort for himself . He was thus able to assert his overlordship over the Bellême family and compel them to act consistently in Norman interests . But in 1052 the king and Geoffrey Martel made common cause against William at the same time as some Norman nobles began to contest William 's increasing power . Henry 's volte @-@ face was probably motivated by a desire to retain dominance over Normandy , which was now threatened by William 's growing mastery of his duchy . William was engaged in military actions against his own nobles throughout 1053 , as well as with the new Archbishop of Rouen , Mauger . In February 1054 the king and the Norman rebels launched a double invasion of the duchy . Henry led the main thrust through the county of Évreux , while the other wing , under the French king 's brother Odo , invaded eastern Normandy . 
 William met the invasion by dividing his forces into two groups . The first , which he led , faced Henry . The second , which included some who became William 's firm supporters , such as Robert , Count of Eu , Walter Giffard , Roger of Mortemer , and William de Warenne , faced the other invading force . This second force defeated the invaders at the Battle of Mortemer . In addition to ending both invasions , the battle allowed the duke 's ecclesiastical supporters to depose Mauger from the archbishopric of Rouen . Mortemer thus marked another turning point in William 's growing control of the duchy , although his conflict with the French king and the Count of Anjou continued until 1060 . Henry and Geoffrey led another invasion of Normandy in 1057 but were defeated by William at the Battle of Varaville . This was the last invasion of Normandy during William 's lifetime , and the deaths of the count and the king in 1060 cemented the shift in the balance of power towards William . 
 One factor in William 's favour was his marriage to Matilda of Flanders , the daughter of Count Baldwin V of Flanders . The union was arranged in 1049 , but Pope Leo IX forbade the marriage at the Council of Rheims in October 1049 . The marriage nevertheless went ahead some time in the early 1050s , possibly unsanctioned by the pope . According to a late source not generally considered to be reliable , papal sanction was not secured until 1059 , but as papal @-@ Norman relations in the 1050s were generally good , and Norman clergy were able to visit Rome in 1050 without incident , it was probably secured earlier . Papal sanction of the marriage appears to have required the founding of two monasteries in Caen – one by William and one by Matilda . The marriage was important in bolstering William 's status , as Flanders was one of the more powerful French territories , with ties to the French royal house and to the German emperors . Contemporary writers considered the marriage , which produced four sons and five or six daughters , to be a success . 
 = = = Appearance and character = = = 
 No authentic portrait of William has been found ; the contemporary depictions of him on the Bayeux Tapestry and on his seals and coins are conventional representations designed to assert his authority . There are some written descriptions of a burly and robust appearance , with a guttural voice . He enjoyed excellent health until old age , although he became quite fat in later life . He was strong enough to draw bows that others were unable to pull and had great stamina . Geoffrey Martel described him as without equal as a fighter and as a horseman . Examination of William 's femur , the only bone to survive when the rest of his remains were destroyed , showed he was approximately 5 feet 10 inches ( 1 @.@ 78 m ) in height , quite tall for the time . 
 There are records of two tutors for the young duke during the late 1030s and early 1040s , but the extent of William 's literary education is unclear . He was not known as a patron of authors , and there is little evidence that he sponsored scholarship or other intellectual activities . Orderic Vitalis records that William tried to learn to read Old English late in life , but he was unable to devote sufficient time to the effort and quickly gave up . William 's main hobby appears to have been hunting . His marriage to Matilda appears to have been quite affectionate , and there are no signs that he was unfaithful to her – unusual in a medieval monarch . Medieval writers criticised William for his greed and cruelty , but his personal piety was universally praised by contemporaries . 
 = = = Norman administration = = = 
 Norman government under William was similar to the government that had existed under earlier dukes . It was a fairly simple administrative system , built around the ducal household , which consisted of a group of officers including stewards , butlers , and marshalls . The duke travelled constantly around the duchy , confirming charters and collecting revenues . Most of the income came from the ducal lands , as well as from tolls and a few taxes . This income was collected by the chamber , one of the household departments . 
 William cultivated close relations with the church in his duchy . He took part in church councils and made several appointments to the Norman episcopate , including the appointment of <unk> as Archbishop of Rouen . Another important appointment was that of William 's half @-@ brother Odo as Bishop of Bayeux in either 1049 or 1050 . He also relied on the clergy for advice , including Lanfranc , a non @-@ Norman who rose to become one of William 's prominent ecclesiastical advisors in the late 1040s and remained so throughout the 1050s and 1060s . William gave generously to the church ; from 1035 to 1066 , the Norman aristocracy founded at least 20 new monastic houses , including William 's two monasteries in Caen , a remarkable expansion of religious life in the duchy . 
 = = English and continental concerns = = 
 In 1051 the childless King Edward of England appears to have chosen William as his successor to the English throne . William was the grandson of Edward 's maternal uncle , Richard II , Duke of Normandy . The Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle , in the " D " version , states that William visited England in the later part of 1051 , perhaps to secure confirmation of the succession , or perhaps William was attempting to secure aid for his troubles in Normandy . The trip is unlikely given William 's absorption in warfare with Anjou at the time . Whatever Edward 's wishes , it was likely that any claim by William would be opposed by Godwin , the Earl of Wessex , a member of the most powerful family in England . Edward had married Edith , Godwin 's daughter , in 1043 , and Godwin appears to have been one of the main supporters of Edward 's claim to the throne . By 1050 , however , relations between the king and the earl had soured , culminating in a crisis in 1051 that led to the exile of Godwin and his family from England . It was during this exile that Edward offered the throne to William . Godwin returned from exile in 1052 with armed forces , and a settlement was reached between the king and the earl , restoring the earl and his family to their lands and replacing Robert of Jumièges , a Norman whom Edward had named Archbishop of Canterbury , with Stigand , the Bishop of Winchester . No English source mentions a supposed embassy by Archbishop Robert to William conveying the promise of the succession , and the two Norman sources that mention it , William of Jumièges and William of Poitiers , are not precise in their chronology of when this visit took place . 
 Count Herbert II of Maine died in 1062 , and William , who had betrothed his eldest son Robert to Herbert 's sister Margaret , claimed the county through his son . Local nobles resisted the claim , but William invaded and by 1064 had secured control of the area . William appointed a Norman to the bishopric of Le Mans in 1065 . He also allowed his son Robert Curthose to do homage to the new Count of Anjou , Geoffrey the Bearded . William 's western border was thus secured , but his border with Brittany remained insecure . In 1064 William invaded Brittany in a campaign that remains obscure in its details . Its effect , though , was to destabilise Brittany , forcing the duke , Conan II , to focus on internal problems rather than on expansion . Conan 's death in 1066 further secured William 's borders in Normandy . William also benefited from his campaign in Brittany by securing the support of some Breton nobles who went on to support the invasion of England in 1066 . 
 In England , Earl Godwin died in 1053 and his sons were increasing in power : Harold succeeded to his father 's earldom , and another son , Tostig , became Earl of Northumbria . Other sons were granted earldoms later : Gyrth as Earl of East Anglia in 1057 and Leofwine as Earl of Kent some time between 1055 and 1057 . Some sources claim that Harold took part in William 's Breton campaign of 1064 and that Harold swore to uphold William 's claim to the English throne at the end of the campaign , but no English source reports this trip , and it is unclear if it actually occurred . It may have been Norman propaganda designed to discredit Harold , who had emerged as the main contender to succeed King Edward . Meanwhile , another contender for the throne had emerged – Edward the Exile , son of Edmund Ironside and a grandson of Æthelred II , returned to England in 1057 , and although he died shortly after his return , he brought with him his family , which included two daughters , Margaret and Christina , and a son , Edgar the Ætheling . 
 In 1065 Northumbria revolted against Tostig , and the rebels chose Morcar , the younger brother of Edwin , Earl of Mercia , as earl in place of Tostig . Harold , perhaps to secure the support of Edwin and Morcar in his bid for the throne , supported the rebels and persuaded King Edward to replace Tostig with Morcar . Tostig went into exile in Flanders , along with his wife Judith , who was the daughter of Count Baldwin IV of Flanders . Edward was ailing , and he died on 5 January 1066 . It is unclear what exactly happened at Edward 's deathbed . One story , deriving from the Vita Edwardi , a biography of Edward , claims that Edward was attended by his wife Edith , Harold , Archbishop Stigand , and Robert <unk> , and that the king named Harold as his successor . The Norman sources do not dispute the fact that Harold was named as the next king , but they declare that Harold 's oath and Edward 's earlier promise of the throne could not be changed on Edward 's deathbed . Later English sources stated that Harold had been elected as king by the clergy and magnates of England . 
 = = Invasion of England = = 
 = = = Harold 's preparations = = = 
 Harold was crowned on 6 January 1066 in Edward 's new Norman @-@ style Westminster Abbey , although some controversy surrounds who performed the ceremony . English sources claim that Ealdred , the Archbishop of York , performed the ceremony , while Norman sources state that the coronation was performed by Stigand , who was considered a non @-@ canonical archbishop by the papacy . Harold 's claim to the throne was not entirely secure , however , as there were other claimants , perhaps including his exiled brother Tostig . King Harald Hardrada of Norway also had a claim to the throne as the uncle and heir of King Magnus I , who had made a pact with Harthacnut in about 1040 that if either Magnus or Harthacnut died without heirs , the other would succeed . The last claimant was William of Normandy , against whose anticipated invasion King Harold Godwinson made most of his preparations . 
 Harold 's brother Tostig made probing attacks along the southern coast of England in May 1066 , landing at the Isle of Wight using a fleet supplied by Baldwin of Flanders . Tostig appears to have received little local support , and further raids into Lincolnshire and near the River Humber met with no more success , so he retreated to Scotland , where he remained for a time . According to the Norman writer William of Jumièges , William had meanwhile sent an embassy to King Harold Godwinson to remind Harold of his oath to support William 's claim , although whether this embassy actually occurred is unclear . Harold assembled an army and a fleet to repel William 's anticipated invasion force , deploying troops and ships along the English Channel for most of the summer . 
 = = = William 's preparations = = = 
 William of Poitiers describes a council called by Duke William , in which the writer gives an account of a great debate that took place between William 's nobles and supporters over whether to risk an invasion of England . Although some sort of formal assembly probably was held , it is unlikely that any debate took place , as the duke had by then established control over his nobles , and most of those assembled would have been anxious to secure their share of the rewards from the conquest of England . William of Poitiers also relates that the duke obtained the consent of Pope Alexander II for the invasion , along with a papal banner . The chronicler also claimed that the duke secured the support of Holy Roman Emperor Henry IV and King Sweyn II of Denmark . Henry was still a minor , however , and Sweyn was more likely to support Harold , who could then help Sweyn against the Norwegian king , so these claims should be treated with caution . Although Alexander did give papal approval to the conquest after it succeeded , no other source claims papal support prior to the invasion . Events after the invasion , which included the penance William performed and statements by later popes , do lend circumstantial support to the claim of papal approval . To deal with Norman affairs , William put the government of Normandy into the hands of his wife for the duration of the invasion . 
 Throughout the summer , William assembled an army and an invasion fleet in Normandy . Although William of Jumièges 's claim that the ducal fleet numbered 3 @,@ 000 ships is clearly an exaggeration , it was probably large and mostly built from scratch . Although William of Poitiers and William of Jumièges disagree about where the fleet was built – Poitiers states it was constructed at the mouth of the River Dives , while Jumièges states it was built at Saint @-@ Valery @-@ sur @-@ Somme – both agree that it eventually sailed from Valery @-@ sur @-@ Somme . The fleet carried an invasion force that included , in addition to troops from William 's own territories of Normandy and Maine , large numbers of mercenaries , allies , and volunteers from Brittany , northeastern France , and Flanders , together with smaller numbers from other parts of Europe . Although the army and fleet were ready by early August , adverse winds kept the ships in Normandy until late September . There were probably other reasons for William 's delay , including intelligence reports from England revealing that Harold 's forces were deployed along the coast . William would have preferred to delay the invasion until he could make an unopposed landing . Harold kept his forces on alert throughout the summer , but with the arrival of the harvest season he disbanded his army on 8 September . 
 = = = Tostig and Hardrada 's invasion = = = 
 Harold 's brother Tostig and Harald Hardrada invaded Northumbria in September 1066 and defeated the local forces under Morcar and Edwin at the Battle of Fulford near York . King Harold received word of their invasion and marched north , defeating the invaders and killing Tostig and Hardrada on 25 September at the Battle of Stamford Bridge . The Norman fleet finally set sail two days later , landing in England at Pevensey Bay on 28 September . William then moved to Hastings , a few miles to the east , where he built a castle as a base of operations . From there , he ravaged the interior and waited for Harold 's return from the north , refusing to venture far from the sea , his line of communication with Normandy . 
 = = = Battle of Hastings = = = 
 After defeating Harald Hardrada and Tostig , Harold left much of his army in the north , including Morcar and Edwin , and marched the rest south to deal with the threatened Norman invasion . He probably learned of William 's landing while he was travelling south . Harold stopped in London , and was there for about a week before marching to Hastings , so it is likely that he spent about a week on his march south , averaging about 27 miles ( 43 kilometres ) per day , for the distance of approximately 200 miles ( 320 kilometres ) . Although Harold attempted to surprise the Normans , William 's scouts reported the English arrival to the duke . The exact events preceding the battle are obscure , with contradictory accounts in the sources , but all agree that William led his army from his castle and advanced towards the enemy . Harold had taken a defensive position at the top of Senlac Hill ( present @-@ day Battle , East Sussex ) , about 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 kilometres ) from William 's castle at Hastings . 
 The battle began at about 9 am on 14 October and lasted all day , but while a broad outline is known , the exact events are obscured by contradictory accounts in the sources . Although the numbers on each side were about equal , William had both cavalry and infantry , including many archers , while Harold had only foot soldiers and few , if any , archers . The English soldiers formed up as a shield wall along the ridge and were at first so effective that William 's army was thrown back with heavy casualties . Some of William 's Breton troops panicked and fled , and some of the English troops appear to have pursued the fleeing Bretons until they themselves were attacked and destroyed by Norman cavalry . During the Bretons ' flight rumours swept through the Norman forces that the duke had been killed , but William succeeded in rallying his troops . Two further Norman retreats were feigned , to once again draw the English into pursuit and expose them to repeated attacks by the Norman cavalry . The available sources are more confused about events in the afternoon , but it appears that the decisive event was Harold 's death , about which differing stories are told . William of Jumièges claimed that Harold was killed by the duke . The Bayeux Tapestry has been claimed to show Harold 's death by an arrow to the eye , but that may be a later reworking of the tapestry to conform to 12th @-@ century stories in which Harold was slain by an arrow wound to the head . 
 Harold 's body was identified the day after the battle , either through his armour or marks on his body . The English dead , who included some of Harold 's brothers and his housecarls , were left on the battlefield . Gytha , Harold 's mother , offered the victorious duke the weight of her son 's body in gold for its custody , but her offer was refused . William ordered that Harold 's body was to be thrown into the sea , but whether that took place is unclear . Waltham Abbey , which had been founded by Harold , later claimed that his body had been secretly buried there . 
 = = = March on London = = = 
 William may have hoped the English would surrender following his victory , but they did not . Instead , some of the English clergy and magnates nominated Edgar the Ætheling as king , though their support for Edgar was only lukewarm . After waiting a short while , William secured Dover , parts of Kent , and Canterbury , while also sending a force to capture Winchester , where the royal treasury was . These captures secured William 's rear areas and also his line of retreat to Normandy , if that was needed . William then marched to Southwark , across the Thames from London , which he reached in late November . Next he led his forces around the south and west of London , burning along the way . He finally crossed the Thames at Wallingford in early December . Archbishop Stigand submitted to William there , and when the duke moved on to Berkhamsted soon afterwards , Edgar the Ætheling , Morcar , Edwin , and Archbishop Ealdred also submitted . William then sent forces into London to construct a castle ; he was crowned at Westminster Abbey on Christmas Day 1066 . 
 = = Consolidation = = 
 = = = First actions = = = 
 William remained in England after his coronation and tried to reconcile the native magnates . The remaining earls – Edwin ( of Mercia ) , Morcar ( of Northumbria ) , and Waltheof ( of Northampton ) – were confirmed in their lands and titles . Waltheof was married to William 's niece Judith , daughter of Adelaide , and a marriage between Edwin and one of William 's daughters was proposed . Edgar the Ætheling also appears to have been given lands . Ecclesiastical offices continued to be held by the same bishops as before the invasion , including the uncanonical Stigand . But the families of Harold and his brothers did lose their lands , as did some others who had fought against William at Hastings . By March , William was secure enough to return to Normandy , but he took with him Stigand , Morcar , Edwin , Edgar , and Waltheof . He left his half @-@ brother Odo , the Bishop of Bayeux , in charge of England along with another influential supporter , William fitzOsbern , the son of his former guardian . Both men were also named to earldoms – fitzOsbern to Hereford ( or Wessex ) and Odo to Kent . Although he put two Normans in overall charge , he retained many of the native English sheriffs . Once in Normandy the new English king went to Rouen and the Abbey of <unk> , and then attended the consecration of new churches at two Norman monasteries . 
 While William was in Normandy , a former ally , Eustace , the Count of Boulogne , invaded at Dover but was repulsed . English resistance had also begun , with Eadric the Wild attacking Hereford and revolts at Exeter , where Harold 's mother Gytha was a focus of resistance . FitzOsbern and Odo found it difficult to control the native population and undertook a programme of castle building to maintain their hold on the kingdom . William returned to England in December 1067 and marched on Exeter , which he besieged . The town held out for 18 days , and after it fell to William he built a castle to secure his control . Harold 's sons were meanwhile raiding the southwest of England from a base in Ireland . Their forces landed near Bristol but were defeated by Eadnoth . By Easter , William was at Winchester , where he was soon joined by his wife Matilda , who was crowned in May 1068 . 
 = = = English resistance = = = 
 In 1068 Edwin and Morcar revolted , supported by Gospatric . The chronicler Orderic Vitalis states that Edwin 's reason for revolting was that the proposed marriage between himself and one of William 's daughters had not taken place , but other reasons probably included the increasing power of William fitzOsbern in Herefordshire , which affected Edwin 's power within his own earldom . The king marched through Edwin 's lands and built a castle at Warwick . Edwin and Morcar submitted , but William continued on to York , building castles at York and Nottingham before returning south . On his southbound journey , the king began constructing castles at Lincoln , Huntingdon , and Cambridge . William placed supporters in charge of these new fortifications – among them William Peverel at Nottingham and Henry de Beaumont at Warwick . Then the king returned to Normandy late in 1068 . 
 Early in 1069 , Edgar the Ætheling rose in revolt and attacked York . Although William returned to York and built another castle , Edgar remained free , and in the autumn he joined up with King Sweyn of Denmark . The Danish king had brought a large fleet to England and attacked not only York , but Exeter and Shrewsbury . York was captured by the combined forces of Edgar and Sweyn . Edgar was proclaimed king by his supporters , but William responded swiftly , ignoring a continental revolt in Maine . William symbolically wore his crown in the ruins of York on Christmas Day 1069 , and then proceeded to buy off the Danes . He marched to the River Tees , ravaging the countryside as he went . Edgar , having lost much of his support , fled to Scotland , where King Malcolm III was married to Edgar 's sister Margaret . Waltheof , who had joined the revolt , submitted , along with Gospatric , and both were allowed to retain their lands . But William was not finished ; he marched over the Pennines during the winter and defeated the remaining rebels at Shrewsbury before building castles at Chester and Stafford . This campaign , which included the burning and destruction of part of the countryside that the royal forces marched through , is usually known as the " Harrying of the North " ; it was over by April 1070 , when William wore his crown ceremonially for Easter at Winchester . 
 = = = Church affairs = = = 
 While at Winchester in 1070 , William met with three papal legates – John <unk> , Peter , and <unk> of Sion – who had been sent by Pope Alexander . The legates ceremonially crowned William during the Easter court . The historian David Bates sees this coronation as the ceremonial papal " seal of approval " for William 's conquest . The legates and the king then proceeded to hold a series of ecclesiastical councils dedicated to reforming and reorganising the English church . Stigand and his brother , Æthelmær , the Bishop of Elmham , were deposed from their bishoprics . Some of the native abbots were also deposed , both at the council held near Easter and at a further one near Whitsun . The Whitsun council saw the appointment of Lanfranc as the new Archbishop of Canterbury , and Thomas of Bayeux as the new Archbishop of York , to replace Ealdred , who had died in September 1069 . William 's half @-@ brother Odo perhaps expected to be appointed to Canterbury , but William probably did not wish to give that much power to a family member . Another reason for the appointment may have been pressure from the papacy to appoint Lanfranc . Norman clergy were appointed to replace the deposed bishops and abbots , and at the end of the process , only two native English bishops remained in office , along with several continental prelates appointed by Edward the Confessor . In 1070 William also founded Battle Abbey , a new monastery at the site of the Battle of Hastings , partly as a penance for the deaths in the battle and partly as a memorial to those dead . 
 = = Troubles in England and the continent = = 
 = = = Danish raids and rebellion in the north = = = 
 Although Sweyn had promised to leave England , he returned in spring 1070 , raiding along the Humber and East Anglia toward the Isle of Ely , where he joined up with Hereward the Wake , a local thegn . Hereward 's forces attacked Peterborough Abbey , which they captured and looted . William was able to secure the departure of Sweyn and his fleet in 1070 , allowing him to return to the continent to deal with troubles in Maine , where the town of Le Mans had revolted in 1069 . Another concern was the death of Count Baldwin VI of Flanders in July 1070 , which led to a succession crisis as his widow , <unk> , was ruling for their two young sons , Arnulf and Baldwin . Her rule , however , was contested by Robert , Baldwin 's brother . <unk> proposed marriage to William fitzOsbern , who was in Normandy , and fitzOsbern accepted . But after he was killed in February 1071 at the Battle of Cassel , Robert became count . He was opposed to King William 's power on the continent , thus the Battle of Cassel not only lost the king an important supporter , but also upset the balance of power in northern France . 
 In 1071 William defeated the last rebellion of the north . Earl Edwin was betrayed by his own men and killed , while William built a causeway to subdue the Isle of Ely , where Hereward the Wake and Morcar were hiding . Hereward escaped , but Morcar was captured , deprived of his earldom , and imprisoned . In 1072 William invaded Scotland , defeating Malcolm , who had recently invaded the north of England . William and Malcolm agreed to peace by signing the Treaty of Abernethy , and Malcolm probably gave up his son Duncan as a hostage for the peace . Perhaps another stipulation of the treaty was the expulsion of Edgar the Ætheling from Malcolm 's court . William then turned his attention to the continent , returning to Normandy in early 1073 to deal with the invasion of Maine by Fulk le <unk> , the Count of Anjou . With a swift campaign , William seized Le Mans from Fulk 's forces , completing the campaign by 30 March 1073 . This made William 's power more secure in northern France , but the new count of Flanders accepted Edgar the Ætheling into his court . Robert also married his half @-@ sister Bertha to the king of France , Philip I , who was opposed to Norman power . 
 William returned to England to release his army from service in 1073 but quickly returned to Normandy , where he spent all of 1074 . He left England in the hands of his supporters , including Richard fitzGilbert and William de Warenne , as well as Lanfranc . William 's ability to leave England for an entire year was a sign that he felt that his control of the kingdom was secure . While William was in Normandy , Edgar the Ætheling returned to Scotland from Flanders . The French king , seeking a focus for those opposed to William 's power , then proposed that Edgar be given the castle of Montreuil @-@ sur @-@ Mer on the Channel , which would have given Edgar a strategic advantage against William . Edgar was forced to submit to William shortly thereafter , however , and he returned to William 's court . Philip , although thwarted in this attempt , turned his attentions to Brittany , leading to a revolt in 1075 . 
 = = = Revolt of the Earls = = = 
 In 1075 , during William 's absence , Ralph de Gael , the Earl of Norfolk , and Roger de Breteuil , the Earl of Hereford , conspired to overthrow William in the " Revolt of the Earls " . Ralph was at least part Breton and had spent most of his life prior to 1066 in Brittany , where he still had lands . Roger was a Norman , son of William fitzOsbern , but had inherited less authority than his father held . Ralph 's authority seems also to have been less than his predecessors in the earldom , and this was likely the cause of the revolt . 
 The exact reason for the rebellion is unclear , but it was launched at the wedding of Ralph to a relative of Roger , held at Exning in Suffolk . Another earl , Waltheof , although one of William 's favourites , was also involved , and there were some Breton lords who were ready to rebel in support of Ralph and Roger . Ralph also requested Danish aid . William remained in Normandy while his men in England subdued the revolt . Roger was unable to leave his stronghold in Herefordshire because of efforts by Wulfstan , the Bishop of Worcester , and Æthelwig , the Abbot of Evesham . Ralph was bottled up in Norwich Castle by the combined efforts of Odo of Bayeux , Geoffrey de Montbray , Richard fitzGilbert , and William de Warenne . Ralph eventually left Norwich in the control of his wife and left England , finally ending up in Brittany . Norwich was besieged and surrendered , with the garrison allowed to go to Brittany . Meanwhile , the Danish king 's brother , Cnut , had finally arrived in England with a fleet of 200 ships , but he was too late as Norwich had already surrendered . The Danes then raided along the coast before returning home . William returned to England later in 1075 to deal with the Danish threat , leaving his wife Matilda in charge of Normandy . He celebrated Christmas at Winchester and dealt with the aftermath of the rebellion . Roger and Waltheof were kept in prison , where Waltheof was executed in May 1076 . Before this , William had returned to the continent , where Ralph had continued the rebellion from Brittany . 
 = = = Troubles at home and abroad = = = 
 Earl Ralph had secured control of the castle at Dol , and in September 1076 William advanced into Brittany and laid siege to the castle . King Philip of France later relieved the siege and defeated William at Dol , forcing him to retreat back to Normandy . Although this was William 's first defeat in battle , it did little to change things . An Angevin attack on Maine was defeated in late 1076 or 1077 , with Count Fulk le <unk> wounded in the unsuccessful attack . More serious was the retirement of Simon de Crépy , the Count of Amiens , to a monastery . Before he became a monk , Simon handed his county of the Vexin over to King Philip . The Vexin was a buffer state between Normandy and the lands of the French king , and Simon had been a supporter of William . William was able to make peace with Philip in 1077 and secured a truce with Count Fulk in late 1077 or early 1078 . 
 In late 1077 or early 1078 trouble began between William and his eldest son , Robert . Although Orderic Vitalis describes it as starting with a quarrel between Robert and his two younger brothers , William and Henry , including a story that the quarrel was started when William and Henry threw water at Robert , it is much more likely that Robert was feeling powerless . Orderic relates that he had previously demanded control of Maine and Normandy and had been rebuffed . The trouble in 1077 or 1078 resulted in Robert leaving Normandy accompanied by a band of young men , many of them the sons of William 's supporters . Included among them was Robert of Belleme , William de Breteuil , and Roger , the son of Richard fitzGilbert . This band of young men went to the castle at <unk> , where they proceeded to raid into Normandy . The raiders were supported by many of William 's continental enemies . William immediately attacked the rebels and drove them from <unk> , but King Philip gave them the castle at Gerberoi , where they were joined by new supporters . William then laid siege to Gerberoi in January 1079 . After three weeks , the besieged forces sallied from the castle and managed to take the besiegers by surprise . William was unhorsed by Robert and was only saved from death by an Englishman . William 's forces were forced to lift the siege , and the king returned to Rouen . By 12 April 1080 , William and Robert had reached an accommodation , with William once more affirming that Robert would receive Normandy when he died . 
 Word of William 's defeat at Gerberoi stirred up difficulties in northern England . In August and September 1079 King Malcolm of Scots raided south of the River Tweed , devastating the land between the River Tees and the Tweed in a raid that lasted almost a month . The lack of Norman response appears to have caused the Northumbrians to grow restive , and in the spring of 1080 they rebelled against the rule of Walcher , the Bishop of Durham and Earl of Northumbria . The bishop was killed on 14 May 1080 , and William dispatched his half @-@ brother Odo to deal with the rebellion . William departed Normandy in July 1080 , and in the autumn William 's son Robert was sent on a campaign against the Scots . Robert raided into Lothian and forced Malcolm to agree to terms , building a fortification at Newcastle @-@ on @-@ Tyne while returning to England . The king was at Gloucester for Christmas 1080 and at Winchester for Whitsun in 1081 , ceremonially wearing his crown on both occasions . A papal embassy arrived in England during this period , asking that William do fealty for England to the papacy , a request that William rejected . William also visited Wales during 1081 , although the English and the Welsh sources differ on the exact purpose of the visit . The Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle states that it was a military campaign , but Welsh sources record it as a pilgrimage to St Davids in honour of Saint David . William 's biographer David Bates argues that the former explanation is more likely , explaining that the balance of power had recently shifted in Wales and that William would have wished to take advantage of the changed circumstances to extend Norman power . By the end of 1081 , William was back on the continent , dealing with disturbances in Maine . Although he led an expedition into Maine , the result was instead a negotiated settlement arranged by a papal legate . 
 = = = Last years = = = 
 Sources for William 's actions between 1082 and 1084 are meagre . According to the historian David Bates , this probably means that little happened of note , and that because William was on the continent , there was nothing for the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle to record . In 1082 William ordered the arrest of his half @-@ brother Odo . The exact reasons are unclear , as no contemporary author recorded what caused the quarrel between the half @-@ brothers . Orderic Vitalis later recorded that Odo had aspirations to become pope . Orderic also related that Odo had attempted to persuade some of William 's vassals to join Odo on an invasion of southern Italy . This would have been considered tampering with the king 's authority over his vassals , which William would not have tolerated . Although Odo remained in confinement for the rest of William 's reign , his lands were not confiscated . More difficulties struck in 1083 , when William 's eldest son Robert rebelled once more with support from the French king . A further blow was the death of Matilda , William 's wife , on 2 November 1083 . William was always described as close to his wife , and her death would have added to his problems . 
 Maine continued to be difficult , with a rebellion by Hubert de Beaumont @-@ au @-@ Maine , probably in 1084 . Hubert was besieged in his castle at Sainte @-@ Suzanne by William 's forces for at least two years , but he eventually made his peace with the king and was restored to favour . William 's movements during 1084 and 1085 are unclear – he was in Normandy at Easter 1084 but may have been in England before then to collect the danegeld assessed that year for the defence of England against an invasion by King Cnut IV of Denmark . Although English and Norman forces remained on alert throughout 1085 and into 1086 , the invasion threat was ended by Cnut 's death in July 1086 . 
 = = William as king = = 
 = = = Changes in England – castles , forests , and nobles = = = 
 As part of his efforts to secure England , William ordered many castles , keeps , and mottes built – among them the central keep of the Tower of London , the White Tower . These fortifications allowed Normans to retreat into safety when threatened with rebellion and allowed garrisons to be protected while they occupied the countryside . The early castles were simple earth and timber constructions , later replaced with stone structures . 
 At first , most of the newly settled Normans kept household knights and did not settle their retainers with fiefs of their own , but gradually these household knights came to be granted lands of their own , a process known as <unk> . William also required his newly created magnates to contribute fixed quotas of knights towards not only military campaigns but also castle garrisons . This method of organising the military forces was a departure from the pre @-@ Conquest English practice of basing military service on territorial units such as the hide . 
 By William 's death , after weathering a series of rebellions , most of the native Anglo @-@ Saxon aristocracy had been replaced by Norman and other continental magnates . Not all of the Normans who accompanied William in the initial conquest acquired large amounts of land in England . Some appear to have been reluctant to take up lands in a kingdom that did not always appear pacified . Although some of the newly rich Normans in England came from William 's close family or from the upper Norman nobility , others were from relatively humble backgrounds . William granted some lands to his continental followers from the holdings of one or more specific Englishmen ; at other times , he granted a compact grouping of lands previously held by many different Englishmen to one Norman follower , often to allow for the consolidation of lands around a strategically placed castle . 
 The medieval chronicler William of Malmesbury says that the king also seized and depopulated many miles of land ( 36 parishes ) , turning it into the royal New Forest region to support his enthusiastic enjoyment of hunting . Modern historians have come to the conclusion that the New Forest depopulation was greatly exaggerated . Most of the lands of the New Forest are poor agricultural lands , and archaeological and geographic studies have shown that the New Forest was likely sparsely settled when it was turned into a royal forest . William was known for his love of hunting , and he introduced the forest law into areas of the country , regulating who could hunt and what could be hunted . 
 = = = Administration = = = 
 After 1066 , William did not attempt to integrate his separate domains into one unified realm with one set of laws . His seal from after 1066 , of which six impressions still survive , was made for him after he conquered England and stressed his role as king , while separately mentioning his role as Duke . When in Normandy , William acknowledged that he owed fealty to the French king , but in England no such acknowledgement was made – further evidence that the various parts of William 's lands were considered separate . The administrative machinery of Normandy , England , and Maine continued to exist separate from the other lands , with each one retaining its own forms . For example , England continued the use of writs , which were not known on the continent . Also , the charters and documents produced for the government in Normandy differed in formulas from those produced in England . 
 William took over an English government that was more complex than the Norman system . England was divided into shires or counties , which were further divided into either hundreds or wapentakes . Each shire was administered by a royal official called a sheriff , who roughly had the same status as a Norman viscount . A sheriff was responsible for royal justice and collecting royal revenue . To oversee his expanded domain , William was forced to travel even more than he had as duke . He crossed back and forth between the continent and England at least 19 times between 1067 and his death . William spent most of his time in England between the Battle of Hastings and 1072 , and after that he spent the majority of his time in Normandy . Government was still centred on William 's household ; when he was in one part of his realms , decisions would be made for other parts of his domains and transmitted through a communication system that made use of letters and other documents . William also appointed deputies who could make decisions while he was absent , especially if the absence was expected to be lengthy . Usually this was a member of William 's close family – frequently his half @-@ brother Odo or his wife Matilda . Sometimes deputies were appointed to deal with specific issues . 
 William continued the collection of danegeld , a land tax . This was an advantage for William , as it was the only universal tax collected by western European rulers during this period . It was an annual tax based on the value of landholdings , and it could be collected at differing rates . Most years saw the rate of two shillings per hide , but in crises , it could be increased to as much as six shillings per hide . Coinage between the various parts of his domains continued to be minted in different cycles and styles . English coins were generally of high silver content , with high artistic standards , and were required to be re @-@ minted every three years . Norman coins had a much lower silver content , were often of poor artistic quality , and were rarely re @-@ minted . Also , in England no other coinage was allowed , while on the continent other coinage was considered legal tender . Nor is there evidence that many English pennies were circulating in Normandy , which shows little attempt to integrate the monetary systems of England and Normandy . 
 Besides taxation , William 's large landholdings throughout England strengthened his rule . As King Edward 's heir , he controlled all of the former royal lands . He also retained control of much of the lands of Harold and his family , which made the king the largest secular landowner in England by a wide margin . 
 = = = Domesday Book = = = 
 At Christmas 1085 , William ordered the compilation of a survey of the landholdings held by himself and by his vassals throughout the kingdom , organised by counties . It resulted in a work now known as the Domesday Book . The listing for each county gives the holdings of each landholder , grouped by owners . The listings describe the holding , who owned the land before the Conquest , its value , what the tax assessment was , and usually the number of peasants , ploughs , and any other resources the holding had . Towns were listed separately . All the English counties south of the River Tees and River Ribble are included , and the whole work seems to have been mostly completed by 1 August 1086 , when the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle records that William received the results and that all the chief magnates swore the Salisbury Oath , a renewal of their oaths of allegiance . William 's exact motivation in ordering the survey is unclear , but it probably had several purposes , such as making a record of feudal obligations and justifying increased taxation . 
 = = Death and aftermath = = 
 William left England towards the end of 1086 . Following his arrival back on the continent he married his daughter Constance to Alan <unk> , the Duke of Brittany , in furtherance of his policy of seeking allies against the French kings . William 's son Robert , still allied with the French king Philip I , appears to have been active in stirring up trouble , enough so that William led an expedition against the French Vexin in July 1087 . While seizing Mantes , William either fell ill or was injured by the pommel of his saddle . He was taken to the priory of Saint Gervase at Rouen , where he died on 9 September 1087 . Knowledge of the events preceding his death is confused because there are two different accounts . Orderic Vitalis preserves a lengthy account , complete with speeches made by many of the principals , but this is likely more of an account of how a king should die than of what actually happened . The other , the De <unk> Willelmi , or On the Death of William , has been shown to be a copy of two 9th @-@ century accounts with names changed . 
 William left Normandy to Robert , and the custody of England was given to William 's second surviving son , also called William , on the assumption that he would become king . The youngest son , Henry , received money . After entrusting England to his second son , the elder William sent the younger William back to England on 7 or 8 September , bearing a letter to Lanfranc ordering the archbishop to aid the new king . Other bequests included gifts to the Church and money to be distributed to the poor . William also ordered that all of his prisoners be released , including his half @-@ brother Odo . 
 Disorder followed William 's death ; everyone who had been at his deathbed left the body at Rouen and hurried off to attend to their own affairs . Eventually , the clergy of Rouen arranged to have the body sent to Caen , where William had desired to be buried in his foundation of the Abbaye @-@ aux @-@ Hommes . The funeral , attended by the bishops and abbots of Normandy as well as his son Henry , was disturbed by the assertion of a citizen of Caen who alleged that his family had been illegally despoiled of the land on which the church was built . After hurried consultations the allegation was shown to be true , and the man was compensated . A further indignity occurred when the corpse was lowered into the tomb . The corpse was too large for the space , and when attendants forced the body into the tomb it burst , spreading a disgusting odour throughout the church . 
 William 's grave is currently marked by a marble slab with a Latin inscription dating from the early 19th century . The tomb has been disturbed several times since 1087 , the first time in 1522 when the grave was opened on orders from the papacy . The intact body was restored to the tomb at that time , but in 1562 , during the French Wars of Religion , the grave was reopened and the bones scattered and lost , with the exception of one thigh bone . This lone relic was reburied in 1642 with a new marker , which was replaced 100 years later with a more elaborate monument . This tomb was again destroyed during the French Revolution , but was eventually replaced with the current marker . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The immediate consequence of William 's death was a war between his sons Robert and William over control of England and Normandy . Even after the younger William 's death in 1100 and the succession of his youngest brother Henry as king , Normandy and England remained contested between the brothers until Robert 's capture by Henry at the Battle of Tinchebray in 1106 . The difficulties over the succession led to a loss of authority in Normandy , with the aristocracy regaining much of the power they had lost to the elder William . His sons also lost much of their control over Maine , which revolted in 1089 and managed to remain mostly free of Norman influence thereafter . 
 The impact on England of William 's conquest was profound ; changes in the Church , aristocracy , culture , and language of the country have persisted into modern times . The Conquest brought the kingdom into closer contact with France and forged ties between France and England that lasted throughout the Middle Ages . Another consequence of William 's invasion was the sundering of the formerly close ties between England and Scandinavia . William 's government blended elements of the English and Norman systems into a new one that laid the foundations of the later medieval English kingdom . How abrupt and far @-@ reaching were the changes is still a matter of debate among historians , with some such as Richard Southern claiming that the Conquest was the single most radical change in European history between the Fall of Rome and the 20th century . Others , such as H. G. Richardson and G. O. Sayles , see the changes brought about by the Conquest as much less radical than Southern suggests . The historian Eleanor Searle describes William 's invasion as " a plan that no ruler but a Scandinavian would have considered " . 
 William 's reign has caused historical controversy since before his death . William of Poitiers wrote glowingly of William 's reign and its benefits , but the obituary notice for William in the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle condemns William in harsh terms . In the years since the Conquest , politicians and other leaders have used William and the events of his reign to illustrate political events throughout English history . During the reign of Queen Elizabeth I of England , Archbishop Matthew Parker saw the Conquest as having corrupted a purer English Church , which Parker attempted to restore . During the 17th and 18th centuries some historians and lawyers saw William 's reign as imposing a " Norman yoke " on the native Anglo @-@ Saxons , an argument that continued during the 19th century with further elaborations along nationalistic lines . These various controversies have led to William being seen by some historians either as one of the creators of England 's greatness or as inflicting one of the greatest defeats in English history . Others have viewed William as an enemy of the English constitution , or alternatively as its creator . 
 = = Family and children = = 
 William and his wife Matilda of Flanders had at least nine children . The birth order of the boys is clear , but no source gives the relative order of birth of the daughters . 
 Robert was born between 1051 and 1054 , died 10 February 1134 . Duke of Normandy , married Sybil of Conversano , daughter of Geoffrey of Conversano . 
 Richard was born before 1056 , died around 1075 . 
 William was born between 1056 and 1060 , died 2 August 1100 . King of England , killed in the New Forest . 
 Henry was born in late 1068 , died 1 December 1135 . King of England , married Edith of Scotland , daughter of Malcolm III of Scotland . His second wife was Adeliza of Louvain . 
 Adeliza ( or <unk> , Adelaide ) died before 1113 , reportedly betrothed to Harold II of England , probably a nun of Saint Léger at <unk> . 
 Cecilia ( or Cecily ) was born before 1066 , died 1127 , Abbess of Holy Trinity , Caen . 
 Matilda was born around 1061 , died perhaps about 1086 . Mentioned in Domesday Book as a daughter of William . 
 Constance died 1090 , married Alan IV <unk> , Duke of Brittany . 
 Adela died 1137 , married Stephen , Count of Blois . 
 ( Possibly ) Agatha , the betrothed of Alfonso VI of León and Castile . 
 There is no evidence of any illegitimate children born to William . 
 = Banksia spinulosa = 
 The hairpin banksia ( Banksia spinulosa ) is a species of woody shrub , of the genus Banksia in the Proteaceae family , native to eastern Australia . Widely distributed , it is found as an understorey plant in open dry forest or heathland from Victoria to northern Queensland , generally on sandstone though sometimes also clay soils . It generally grows as a small shrub to 2 metres ( 7 ft ) in height , though can be a straggly tree to 6 metres ( 20 ft ) . It has long narrow leaves with inflorescences which can vary considerably in coloration ; while the spikes are gold or less commonly yellowish , the emergent styles may be a wide range of colours – from black , purple , red , orange or yellow . 
 Banksia spinulosa was named by James Edward Smith in England in 1793 , after being collected by John White , most likely in 1792 . He gave it the common name prickly @-@ leaved banksia , though this has fallen out of use . With four currently recognised varieties , the species has had a complicated taxonomic history , with two varieties initially described as separate species in the early 19th century . A fourth , from the New England region , has only recently been described . However , there has been disagreement whether one , var. cunninghamii , is distinct enough to once again have specific status . The pre @-@ eminent authority on Banksia , Alex George , concedes there is still more work to be done on the Banksia spinulosa complex . 
 The hairpin banksia is pollinated by and provides food for a wide array of vertebrate and invertebrate animals in the autumn and winter months . Its floral display and fine foliage have made it a popular garden plant with many horticultural selections available . With the recent trend towards smaller gardens , compact dwarf forms of Banksia spinulosa have become popular ; the first available , Banksia ' Birthday Candles ' , has achieved a great deal of commercial success and wide recognition , and has been followed by several others . 
 = = Description = = 
 The hairpin banksia usually occurs as a multi @-@ stemmed lignotuberous shrub 1 – 3 metres ( 3 @.@ 3 – 9 @.@ 8 ft ) tall and 1 – 2 metres ( 3 @.@ 3 – 6 @.@ 6 ft ) across . Alternatively , it may be single @-@ stemmed and lacking a lignotuber , in which case it is often taller , up to 5 metres ( 16 feet ) high . It has grey or grey @-@ brown smooth bark with lenticels . The long , narrow leaves are 3 – 10 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 – 3 @.@ 9 in ) in length , 1 – 8 mm wide and more or less linear in shape . Leaf edges are either serrate for the entire leaf length ( collina ) or toward the apex only ( spinulosa ) , though the margins may be recurved and hence serrations not evident as in those from the Carnarvon Gorge . Immature leaves , which may also be seen after bushfire , are broader and serrated . Leaf undersides have fine white hairs in the case of the varieties spinulosa and collina and pale brown in cunninghamii and neoanglica . 
 The distinctive inflorescences or flower spikes occur over a short period through autumn and early winter . A spike may contain hundreds or thousands of individual flowers , each of which consists of a tubular perianth made up of four united tepals , and one long wiry style . Characteristic of the taxonomic section in which it is placed , the styles are hooked rather than straight . The style ends are initially trapped inside the upper perianth parts , but break free at anthesis . In Banksia spinulosa the spikes are cylindrical , about 6 – 7 centimetres ( 2 @.@ 4 – 2 @.@ 8 inches ) wide and 6 – 15 centimetres ( 2 @.@ 4 – 5 @.@ 9 inches ) tall , yellow to golden orange in colour , with styles varying from yellow to pink , maroon , or black . Styles of various colours may be found within metres of each other in some areas such as in the Georges River National Park , and Catherine Hill Bay , while other populations may have uniformly black , red or gold styles . Though not terminal , the flower spikes are fairly prominently displayed . Partly emerging from the foliage , they arise from two- to three @-@ year @-@ old stem nodes . 
 The hairpin banksia 's infructescence is a typical Banksia cone @-@ like structure , with up to 100 crowded embedded follicles which are 1 – 2 @.@ 4 centimetres ( ⅓ – 1 in ) in diameter ; these generally remain closed until burnt by bushfire . The nonlignotuberous subspecies cunninghamii is killed by fire and regenerates from seed , while the others regenerate from buds around the base of the lignotuber . Old flower spikes fade to brown , then grey with age . Old flower parts usually persist for a long time , giving the infructescence a hairy appearance . In Central and North Queensland , old cones of both var. spinulosa and var. collina are generally bare . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The first known specimens of B. spinulosa were collected near Sydney by John White , Surgeon General to the British colony of New South Wales , sometime between 1788 and 1793 . He called it " prickly @-@ leaved banksia " , though this name has fallen out of use . It is uncertain exactly when he first collected the species ; it may have been before 1790 , as there is speculation that a sketch in his 1790 Journal of a Voyage to New South Wales is of a B. spinulosa infructescence . Text accompanying the figure states 
 " [ W ] e cannot with certainty determine the species . The capsules are smooth , at least when ripe , and a little shining . We think this is neither the B. serrata , integrifolia , nor dentata of Linnaeus , nor probably his ericifolia ; so that it seems to be a species hitherto undescribed . The leaves and flowers we have not seen . " 
 English botanist James Edward Smith later tentatively attributed this figure to B. spinulosa : 
 " We suspect the fruit figured in Mr. White 's Voyage , page 225 , fig . I , may belong to this species , but we have no positive authority to assert it . " 
 More recently , however , Alf Salkin has argued that 
 " the cone illustrated by White is probably not as suggested from the B. spinulosa described by Smith but , may be from another member of the complex or from one of the forms of B. ericifolia . " 
 White probably collected the type material of B. spinulosa in 1792 . The following year , the species was formally described by Smith in his A Specimen of the Botany of New Holland . It was thus the seventh Banksia species collected , and the fifth described . Smith gave it the specific epithet spinulosa , a Latin term meaning having minute spines , probably in reference to the leaf tips . Thus the species ' full name is Banksia spinulosa Sm . 
 = = = Placement within Banksia = = = 
 In the first infrageneric arrangement of Banksia , that of Brown in 1830 , B. spinulosa was placed in subgenus Banksia verae , the " true banksias " , because its inflorescence is a typical Banksia flower spike . It was placed next to B. cunninghamii and B. collina , both now considered varieties of B. spinulosa ; these three were placed between B. ericifolia ( heath @-@ leaved banksia ) and B. occidentalis ( red swamp banksia ) . Banksia verae was renamed Eubanksia by Stephan Endlicher in 1847 . Carl Meissner demoted Eubanksia to sectional rank in his 1856 classification , and divided it into four series , with B. spinulosa placed in series Abietinae , while B. cunninghamii and B. collina were placed alongside each other in series Salicinae . When George Bentham published his 1870 arrangement in Flora Australiensis , he discarded Meissner 's series , placing all the species with hooked styles together in a section that he named Oncostylis . B. cunninghamii was reduced to synonymy with B. collina , as was the western species B. littoralis ( western swamp banksia ) . This arrangement would stand for over a century . 
 Alex George published a new taxonomic arrangement of Banksia in his landmark 1981 monograph The genus Banksia L.f. ( Proteaceae ) . Endlicher 's Eubanksia became B. subg . Banksia , and was divided into three sections , one of which was Oncostylis . Oncostylis was further divided into four series , with B. spinulosa placed in series Spicigerae because its inflorescences are cylindrical . 
 In 1996 , Kevin Thiele and Pauline Ladiges published a new arrangement for the genus , after cladistic analyses yielded a cladogram significantly different from George 's arrangement . Thiele and Ladiges ' arrangement retained B. spinulosa in series Spicigerae , placing it alone in B. subser . <unk> . This arrangement stood until 1999 , when George effectively reverted to his 1981 arrangement in his monograph for the Flora of Australia series . 
 Under George 's taxonomic arrangement of Banksia , B. spinulosa 's taxonomic placement may be summarised as follows : 
 Genus Banksia 
 Subgenus Banksia 
 Section Banksia 
 Section Coccinea 
 Section Oncostylis 
 Series Spicigerae 
 B. spinulosa 
 B. spinulosa var. spinulosa 
 B. spinulosa var. collina 
 B. spinulosa var. neoanglica 
 B. spinulosa var. cunninghamii 
 B. ericifolia 
 B. verticillata 
 B. seminuda 
 B. littoralis 
 B. occidentalis 
 B. brownii 
 Series Tricuspidae 
 Series Dryandroidae 
 Series Abietinae 
 Subgenus Isostylis 
 More recent molecular research suggests that B. spinulosa and B. ericifolia may be more closely related to series Salicinae , with Banksia integrifolia and its relatives . 
 In 2005 , Austin Mast , Eric Jones and Shawn Havery published the results of their cladistic analyses of DNA sequence data for Banksia . They inferred a phylogeny very greatly different from the accepted taxonomic arrangement , including finding Banksia to be paraphyletic with respect to Dryandra . A new taxonomic arrangement was not published at the time , but early in 2007 Mast and Thiele initiated a rearrangement by transferring Dryandra to Banksia , and publishing B. subg . Spathulatae for the species having spoon @-@ shaped cotyledons . They foreshadowed publishing a full arrangement once DNA sampling of Dryandra was complete ; in the meantime , if Mast and Thiele 's nomenclatural changes are taken as an interim arrangement , then B. spinulosa is placed in B. subg . Spathulatae . 
 = = = Varieties = = = 
 Four varieties are currently recognised : 
 B. spinulosa var. spinulosa 
 The nominate race is an autonym , a name that was automatically created for the original material of the species as the other subspecies were described . The original hairpin banksia , this plant is coastal in Queensland , seen in such places as <unk> Pyramid ( near Cairns ) , Byfield National Park and the Blackdown Tableland , then again in New South Wales south of the Hawkesbury River , just north of Sydney , down the New South Wales South Coast and into Victoria . Northwards of the Hawkesbury River on Sydney 's northern outskirts there is a gradation between this and B. spinulosa var. collina . It commonly has black , maroon or claret styles on gold spikes but all @-@ gold inflorescences are seen , and leaves are generally narrower than other varieties at 1 – 2 mm in width and have several serrations toward the apex only . 
 B. spinulosa var. collina 
 Known as the hill banksia , it was first published as Banksia collina by Robert Brown in 1810 , and retained species rank until 1981 , when George demoted it to a variety of B. spinulosa . It differs from B. spinulosa var. spinulosa in having broader leaves 3 – 8 mm in width that have serrate margins . The leaf undersides have more prominent venation . Its flower spikes are usually gold , or sometimes gold with red styles , especially in New South Wales . It is found in inland gorges and tablelands such as Carnarvon Gorge , Expedition National Park , Isla Gorge and Dicks Tableland in a remote part of Eungella National Park , in Central Queensland but coastal on the New South Wales <unk> and north coast . 
 B. spinulosa var. cunninghamii 
 This variety was published as B. cunninghamii in 1827 in honour of the botanist Allan Cunningham , and demoted to a variety of B. spinulosa in 1981 . The demotion has not been universally accepted however : in New South Wales it is still given species rank , and B. spinulosa var. neoanglica is considered a subspecies of it . George notes that at locations where both var. spinulosa and var. cunninghamii coexist , such as Fitzroy Falls in Lawson , no intermediate forms occur . This plant is a fast @-@ growing nonlignotuberous shrub or small tree to 6 metres ( 20 feet ) in height , occurring in the Great Dividing Range from southeast Queensland to southern New South Wales and also in Victoria . The juvenile leaves are highly serrated , new branchlets are hairy and leaf undersides are pale brown rather than white as in the two previous varieties . Inflorescences are gold with black styles , though an all @-@ yellow form from Victoria is known . The linear to oblanceolate adult leaves are 2 – 10 cm ( 0 @.@ 79 – 3 @.@ 94 in ) long by 2 – 7 mm wide ; those from Victoria having markedly longer juvenile leaves , and larger cotyledons . 
 B. spinulosa var. neoanglica 
 Known as the New England banksia , it was published by Alex George in 1988 , based on a specimen collected by him in 1986 . In New South Wales it is considered an unnamed subspecies of Banksia cunninghamii . This plant is found in the New England Region of far northern New South Wales and Southeastern Queensland . It is a short lignotuberous shrub to 1 metre ( 3 ft ) in height . Inflorescences are gold with black styles . It has hairy new branchlets and pale brown leaf undersides . 
 Some doubt exists as to whether the current classification accurately represents relationships within the Banksia spinulosa complex . B. spinulosa var. collina is a form of inland gorges and tablelands in central Queensland , but is a coastal plant on the New South Wales central and north coast . B. spinulosa var. spinulosa , on the other hand , is coastal in central Queensland and in New South Wales south of Sydney . Similarly , B. spinulosa var. cunninghamii is widely separated between New South Wales and Victorian forms ( where the longer leaved form was originally called B. <unk> by Meissner ) . Notably both B. spinulosa var. spinulosa and B. spinulosa var. collina in northern Queensland have old spikes bare as opposed to them having persistent old flower parts in New South Wales and Victoria . Mast listed B. spinulosa var. collina and B. spinulosa var. neoanglica as sister clades in 1998 , with B. spinulosa var. spinulosa and B. spinulosa var. cunninghamii flanking these . Alex George also reports that the taxon should be reviewed . A molecular study with specimens of each subspecies from the three mainland eastern states they occur would shed light on this matter . 
 = = = Hybrids = = = 
 Natural hybrids between B. s. var. spinulosa and B. ericifolia subsp. ericifolia have been recorded at Pigeon House Mountain in Morton National Park . Banksia " Giant Candles " was a chance garden hybrid between B. ericifolia and B. spinulosa var. cunninghamii . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The hairpin banksia occurs along the east coast of Australia from the Dandenong Ranges east of Melbourne , Victoria , north through New South Wales and into Queensland . It is common north to Maryborough , with disjunct populations occurring as far north as the Atherton Tableland near Cairns . It occurs in a variety of habitats , from coastal heath ( spinulosa and collina ) and elevated rocky slopes ( neoanglica and spinulosa ) to inland dry sclerophyll forest dominated by eucalypts , where they form part of the understorey . Plants in exposed areas are generally considerably shorter than those in sheltered areas . It usually occurs on sand , but can be found in rocky clays or loams . 
 Banksia spinulosa var. cunninghamii is found in 3 disjunct regions ; the Dandenong Ranges east of Melbourne , East Gippsland between Lakes Entrance and Eden , and in the Great Dividing Range in a band from Jervis Bay to Glen Davis in Central New South Wales , while there have been collections northwards in the Dividing Range up into southeast Queensland . It can be an understorey plant under dense as well as open forest cover . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Like other banksias , Banksia spinulosa plays host to a wide variety of pollinators and is a vital source of nectar in autumn , when other flowers are scarce . Banksias have been the subject of many studies about their pollination ; B. spinulosa is no exception . A 1998 study in <unk> National Park in Northern New South Wales found that B. spinulosa var. collina inflorescences are foraged by a variety of small mammals , including marsupials such as Antechinus flavipes ( yellow @-@ footed antechinus ) , which carry pollen loads comparable to those of nectar @-@ eating birds , making them effective pollinators . The same study noted that , unlike other banksias studied , B. spinulosa var. collina was visited predominantly by native bees rather than the introduced Apis mellifera ( European honeybee ) . 
 A great many bird species have been observed visiting this species . A 1982 study in the New England National Park in North @-@ eastern New South Wales found that a large influx of Acanthorhynchus tenuirostris ( eastern spinebill ) coincided with the start of local B. spinulosa 's flowering . In the Blackdown Tableland , Lichenostomus leucotis ( white @-@ eared honeyeater ) and Lichenostomus melanops ( yellow @-@ tufted honeyeater ) as well as pygmy possums visit B. spinulosa . Brown antechinus , sugar glider , and bush rat are also known to visit flowers . Additional species seen in The Banksia Atlas survey include Phylidonyris nigra ( white @-@ cheeked honeyeater ) , Phylidonyris pyrrhoptera ( crescent honeyeater ) , Meliphaga lewinii ( Lewin 's honeyeater ) , Lichmera indistincta ( brown honeyeater ) , Manorina melanocephala ( noisy miner ) , Philemon corniculatus ( noisy friarbird ) , Anthochaera carunculata ( red wattlebird ) and Eopsaltria australis ( eastern yellow robin ) . 
 Like most other Proteaceae , B. spinulosa has proteoid roots , roots with dense clusters of short lateral rootlets that form a mat in the soil just below the leaf litter . These enhance solubilisation of nutrients , allowing nutrient uptake in low @-@ nutrient soils such as the phosphorus @-@ deficient native soils of Australia . 
 B. spinulosa does not appear to be under threat . It is resistant to Phytophthora cinnamomi dieback , which poses a major threat to many other Banksia species ; and its wide distribution protects against the threat of habitat loss due to land clearing . As a result , it does not appear on the list of threatened Australian plants under the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 . 
 Banksia spinulosa is listed in Part 1 Group 1 of Schedule 13 of the National Parks and Wildlife Act 1974 ; this means that as a common and secure species it is exempted from any licensing or tagging requirements under the 2002 – 2005 management plan to minimise and regulate the use of protected and threatened plants in the cut @-@ flower industry in New South Wales . 
 = = Cultivation = = 
 Banksia spinulosa var. spinulosa was introduced into cultivation in the United Kingdom in 1788 by Joseph Banks who supplied seed to Kew , Cambridge Botanic Gardens and Woburn Abbey among others ; var. collina followed in 1800 and var. cunninghamii in 1822 . It has proven a highly ornamental and bird @-@ attracting plant in cultivation . Southern and montane provenance forms are frost hardy . In general , all forms prefer sandy , well @-@ drained soils with sunny aspect , though some local forms hailing from <unk> shales may tolerate heavier soils . It is resistant to dieback , like most eastern banksias . As it grows naturally on acid soils , Banksia spinulosa is particularly sensitive to iron deficiency . Known as chlorosis , it manifests as yellowing of new leaves with preservation of green veins , and occurs when the plant is grown in soils of higher pH . This can also happen where soil contains quantities of cement , either as landfill or building foundations , and can be treated with iron chelate or sulfate . 
 Regular pruning is important to give the plant an attractive habit and prevent it from becoming leggy . As most cultivated forms of this species have a lignotuber , dormant buds exist below the bark that respond to pruning or fire , and hard @-@ pruning is possible almost to ground level as a plant can readily sprout from old wood . This is not the case for var. cunninghamii which should not be pruned below foliage . Flowering may take up to eight years from germination ; buying an advanced plant may hasten this process , as will getting a cutting @-@ grown plant . Banksia spinulosa can be propagated easily by seed , and is one of the ( relatively ) easier banksias to propagate by cutting . Named cultivars are by necessity propagated by cuttings as this ensures that the plant produced bears the same attributes as the original plant . 
 Both B. s. var. collina and var. spinulosa are commonly seen in nurseries ; given that the varieties can hybridise , attempting to find a local provenance form from a local community nursery , <unk> or Australian Plants Society group is preferable environmentally if they are intended for planting in gardens near bushland where native populations occur . There are some dwarf forms available for the city gardener – ' Stumpy Gold ' is a form of variety collina originally from the Central Coast , while ' Birthday Candles ' , ' Coastal Cushion ' and ' Golden Cascade ' are forms of variety spinulosa from the South Coast of New South Wales . 
 = = = Cultivars = = = 
 There are a number of commercial varieties available from Australian retail nurseries , four have been registered under plant breeders ' rights legislation , and another with the Australian Cultivar Registration Authority . The lack of official names has led to some varieties bearing several different names . 
 B. s. var. collina ' Carnarvon Gold ' is an all @-@ gold flowered form from Carnarvon Gorge in central Queensland with long leaves and revolute margins which grows to around 2 – 5 m ( 6 @.@ 6 – 16 @.@ 4 ft ) in height and 2 – 4 m ( 6 @.@ 6 – 13 @.@ 1 ft ) across . The old flowers fall from the spikes . 
 B. s. var. collina ' Stumpy Gold ' is a spreading form ( 40 centimetres or 16 inches high by up to 1 @.@ 2 metres or 3 @.@ 9 feet across ) with light gold flowers 15 centimetres ( 6 in ) high by 6 centimetres ( 2 in ) across from the vicinity of Catherine Hill Bay on the New South Wales Central Coast , propagated by Richard Anderson of Merricks Nursery . It arises from a silty loam so theoretically should tolerate a heavier soil than ' Coastal Cushion ' . Leaves are a more subdued green with greyish tinge than the south coast NSW spinulosa cultivars . 
 B. s. var. spinulosa ' Birthday Candles ' , the original trailblazer , is a compact plant growing to 45 centimetres ( 18 in ) tall and up to 1 metre ( 3 ft ) across with red @-@ styled gold flowers 15 cm high by 6 cm across . The leaves are narrow with attractive lime green new growth . Stems and branches naturally crooked . It was granted PBR status in 1989 , after an application by Bill Molyneux of <unk> Pty Ltd . The provenance of the original material was an exposed headland hear Ulladulla on the New South Wales South Coast . It appears to fare better in Mediterranean climates with reports of patchy performance in Sydney ( though better in pots ) and unreliability in Brisbane . There are reports of it flowering in alternate years only . It is reported to be an unreliable survivor , although this may be due to it being popular among novices . 
 B. s. var. spinulosa ' Cherry Candles ' , bred by Bill Molyneux from the ' Birthday Candles ' cultivar , is a compact plant growing to 45 cm tall and up to 100 cm across with cherry red @-@ styled gold flowers , darker than its parent , 15 cm high by 6 cm across . It was released commercially in spring 2004 , and granted PBR status in February 2005 , after an application by Molyneux . 
 B. s. var. spinulosa ' Coastal Cushion ' ( = ' Schnapper Point ' ) was originally collected by Neil Marriott and called ' Schnapper Point ' from the same locality as ' Birthday Candles ' . This is a more spreading plant to 50 cm tall and up to 1 @.@ 5 – 2 m across with dark red @-@ styled gold flowers ( a couple of shades darker than ' Birthday Candles ' ) 15 cm high by 6 cm across . It is propagated by Richard Anderson of Merricks Nursery . It appears to be more adaptable to points north than other dwarf forms – growing reliably in southeastern Queensland . This form can be very <unk> , with some plants sporting more than 40 inflorescences at any one time . 
 B. s . ' Coastal Candles ' , propagated by Merv Hodge , came from Philip Vaughan 's ' Schnapper Point ' plant . Some plants are behaving differently , so it may be that not all material is exactly the same clone . 
 B. s. var. spinulosa ' Golden Cascade ' is yet another plant from the same locality as ' Birthday Candles ' ; this is more spreading again , to perhaps 30 cm tall and up to 1 @.@ 5 – 2 m across with red @-@ styled gold flowers 15 cm high by 6 cm across . It is also seen as B. spinulosa ' prostrate ' . Propagated by Gondwana Nursery , this is a relatively new release . 
 B. s. var. spinulosa ' Honey Pots ' is a form with all gold flowers to 20 cm high ( taller than forms listed above ) , however it is a little larger with reports of it growing to 1 m high , with odd reports of it getting taller than this , by 1 @.@ 2 m across . It comes from south coast in Victoria , propagated by Rod Parsons of Carawah Nursery in Victoria . 
 B. s. var. spinulosa ( dwarf forms ) – Rod Parsons of Carawah Nursery in Victoria has two red @-@ styled fairly compact dwarf forms , one ( all serrated – slow @-@ growing , possibly collina ) growing to 1 m , the ( leaf ends serrated only , faster @-@ growing ) other 1 @.@ 5 m – and there are others reported but not named . 
 B. s. var. cunninghamii ' Lemon Glow ' was registered with ACRA in 1982 by Alf Salkin and hails from French Island in Victoria , growing 2 – 3 m ( 6 @.@ 6 – 9 @.@ 8 ft ) with all lemon yellow flowers . Currently propagated by Phillip Vaughan and Kuranga Nursery , both in Melbourne . It is reported to be frost hardy and moderately resistant to drought . 
 There is a form sold as a Banksia ( spinulosa ) cunninghamii variant , propagated by <unk> Plants of Tura Beach on the NSW south coast . The plants reach 70 cm after four years and have black @-@ styled gold inflorescences . The form came from David Shiels of <unk> Nursery in Victoria , who got it from Alf Salkin . It has a white underside ( not brownish ) and has a couple of serrations close to the tip of the leaf , typical of B. s. var. spinulosa . 
 = Hurricane Humberto ( 1995 ) = 
 Hurricane Humberto was the eighth named storm and fourth hurricane of the busy 1995 Atlantic hurricane season . This was the first time that the name " Humberto " was used as it replaced Hugo ( it was retired in 1989 ) . It was a Cape Verde @-@ type hurricane that never approached land as it tracked across the central Atlantic Ocean . 
 The storm developed west of the Cape Verde islands on August 21 and was upgraded to a tropical storm on August 22 and a hurricane on August 23 . For the first several days , it followed the wave that became Iris until a Fujiwhara interaction took place about midway between Cape Verde and the Lesser Antilles on August 25 . Humberto peaked as a strong Category 2 hurricane and remained a hurricane until just before being absorbed by an extratropical cyclone on September 1 . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The system originated out of one of several powerful tropical waves that moved off the west coast of Africa in the second half of August . When the wave came off the African coast , it already had a cyclonic rotation , although it was fairly disorganized . As the wave moved westward into open waters , it developed rapidly . Late on August 21 , it had developed a low @-@ level circulation and was declared Tropical Depression Nine . The system quickly organized itself and was quickly upgraded to Tropical Storm Humberto early on August 22 . Beginning on a west @-@ northwest track , it was clear from the outset that Humberto would not affect land , due to a weakness in the subtropical ridge to the north which would eventually turn the storm northward . An impressive outflow pattern and solid banding quickly formed in a very favorable environment with warm sea surface temperatures and low wind shear . Humberto quickly developed and intensified into a high @-@ end tropical storm on the afternoon and evening of August 22 . Early on August 23 , the storm was upgraded to Hurricane Humberto . 
 Humberto continued to intensify on the morning of the 23rd as the central dense overcast became well defined , despite the lack of a well @-@ defined eye feature . However , the intensification was slowed somewhat by the presence of Iris to the west , whose outflow intercepted with Humberto 's outflow somewhat . Early on August 24 , Humberto strengthened into a Category 2 hurricane , finally forming a well @-@ defined eye , as it slowed down as it entered a Fujiwhara interaction with Iris . That afternoon , while still moving west @-@ northwest , Humberto reached its peak intensity of 110 mph ( 175 km / h ) , just under Category 3 intensity . 
 The Fujiwhara interaction had a profound impact on the track of Humberto , which made a quick turn to the northwest , and then to the north @-@ northwest , early on August 25 . The interaction came to an end that afternoon as Humberto completed the northerly turn , while remaining a Category 2 hurricane in the tropical waters of the central Atlantic . It began to gradually weaken on August 26 due to an increase in southwesterly shear from a nearby upper @-@ level low as it maintained a north @-@ northwest track . The slow weakening trend continued into August 27 as the eye became intermittent in the moderate @-@ shear environment , which was once again impacted by the outflow of Iris to the southwest . That evening , it dropped to a minimal hurricane with 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) winds , which was later confirmed to have been the low point . Operationally , Humberto was downgraded to a tropical storm for a while on August 28 , which was later confirmed to have been underestimated . As it tracked away from Iris and into a more open environment , it turned more to the north @-@ northeast and slowly re @-@ intensified again on August 29 . Its movement was now affected by an incoming mid @-@ latitude trough that turned Humberto northeast early on August 30 . Humberto reached its second intensity peak of 90 mph ( 145 km / h ) at that time . 
 However , cooler waters eventually caught up to Humberto and it began to weaken once again early on August 31 as it tracked into the north Atlantic . That afternoon , Humberto weakened to a tropical storm as its circulation became embedded into a circulation of a nearby extratropical low in a high @-@ shear environment . It continued to weaken that evening , and early on September 1 , the tropical storm was absorbed by the larger system . 
 = = Impact , naming , and records = = 
 Humberto remained in the open Atlantic , and no damage or fatalities were reported . Several ships came in contact with Humberto while it roamed the open waters . The strongest winds came from call sign <unk> , which reported peak winds of 70 mph ( 112 km / h ) in the central Atlantic on August 30 . Three other ships reported tropical storm @-@ force winds . 
 Humberto was the second of four tropical waves in quick succession in the tropical Atlantic that all eventually became tropical storms or hurricanes ; it was preceded by the wave that became Iris , and followed by the waves that became Karen and Luis . It was also the first of three tropical cyclones to form within a 24 @-@ hour period on August 21 and 22 ; Iris formed 12 hours later and Jerry formed 18 hours later . It was also the first of five named storms to form within a seven @-@ day period ; Karen formed on August 26 and Luis on August 27 . 
 = Live Forever as You Are Now with Alan Resnick = 
 Live Forever as You Are Now with Alan Resnick is a television special written , created and directed by Alan Resnick and Ben O 'Brien for Adult Swim . The special is presented as a parody of self @-@ help infomercials , advertising a four @-@ step program for creating a digital avatar that acts a backup of its host . The special is hosted by Alan Resnick as himself , and is presented by Dan Deacon . Both , along with O 'Brien , are members of the Baltimore @-@ based art collective Wham City , who co @-@ produced the episode under their video production division , AB Video Solutions . 
 The special aired on December 24 , 2013 at 4 a.m. on Cartoon Network 's late @-@ night programming block , Adult Swim . The special was viewed by 926 @,@ 000 viewers and received a Nielsen household rating of 0 @.@ 7 . Critical reception was positive , with both the humor and the performances receiving praise . 
 = = Summary = = 
 Alan Resnick ( portrayed by himself ) , an emerging young tech expert and innovator , is introduced to the viewer . He tells the audience of his four @-@ step program to create a digital avatar that acts as a backup of its host , granting " the secret to eternal life " . He tells the audience of his past : two years ago , Resnick was banished to his couch after getting into a lovers ' spat with his wife , Janet . He dreamt of himself in a foggy meadow with an attractive , nude young woman ( portrayed by " <unk> " ) who calls for him to engage in sex . He initially refuses , but then changes his mind , but before they are able to do so , he is shot with a gun by a nameless man ( Ben O 'Brien ) , which totally destroys his face . This gave him the idea to come up with a way to digitally back himself up . Two months pass , and he is able to create a " exact digital copy " of himself who calls himself " Teddy " ( for unknown reasons ) . " Teddy " , a floating avatar head , acts as the co @-@ host for the remainder of the program , often interrupting Resnick 's speech to talk about his " wife " . 
 Resnick goes on to explain the four steps behind his process : 
 Subjects are instructed to look in a mirror every night for five hours and observe their facial features , sketching what they recall while in the dark ; subjects are then instructed to hang up said drawings around their house . 
 The subject comes over to Resnick 's house , where blindingly bright patterns are projected into their eyes and face while they spin around . These patterns will be " queered " by their head form , generating three @-@ point axes , which are then " <unk> " to generate a three @-@ dimensional mesh of their head . Resnick then goes on to explain the " uncanny valley " , which leads him into his third step : 
 The avatars are put through a series of intensive " skin stress tests " , including " ball tests " , " wiggle tests " and " durability and tear testing " . 
 Resnick comes into his subjects ' house for two months to analyze their interests and personality types ; he will ask " hundreds of personal questions " involving friends , furniture , romance , animals , food , events and touch . All the information will be scanned into the USB flash drive of the subject 's computer , which makes the " brain " of their avatar . 
 Various testimonials are then given ; a widower and " textbook salesman " Ryan <unk> ( Steve <unk> ) tells of the reconstruction of his wife Morgan and the creation of his own avatar . Jordan Card , an elderly woman , shows off her digital avatar , who insists that their room " is too cold . " Chester <unk> ( <unk> Couture ) , a young bedridden boy , says that it was his mother 's ( Michelle Word ) idea , and that he would rather play football than go boogie boarding with his avatar . Concluding his seminar , Resnick thanks his audience and " Teddy " , who speaks again of the love for his wife , shown to be a pink morphing sphere . A frustrated Resnick scolds his creation and informs the audience that his avatar is autonomous , and that he is being manipulative and disappointing . He reminds the viewer to purchase his program through the following informational screen . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 The series was originally developed as a comedy sketch by Alan Resnick , as part of his comedy tours with the Baltimore @-@ based art collective Wham City , best known for their work with Dan Deacon . The skit , first conceived in 2009 and roughly modeled after TED Talks , features Resnick telling the audience how to create a complete digital backup of himself . Long @-@ time associate Ben O 'Brien co @-@ produced , directed and edited the special along with Resnick . In addition , both co @-@ produced the episode under their video production division , AB Video Solutions . Resnick , along with set decorator Emma Alamo , transformed Resnick 's house into the set of the special . 
 The collective had pitched a Wham City television sitcom to Adult Swim before , but according to Resnick , the network insisted that " no one would ever watch more than one episode . " Resnick named Mr. Show with Bob and David , The Kids in the Hall and the Upright Citizens Brigade as influences on the special . Dave Hughes , creator of the series Off the Air , who had discussed with the group about developing a series , took note of Resnick 's sketch and helped the collective develop it into an informercial . After airing the special , Wham City featured the skit for their comedy tour of New York City . Resnick informed Network Awesome that they will probably not produce any more fake infomercials , and that O 'Brien is working with the network to create something that viewers will " stumble on unintentionally . " 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 Live Forever as You Are Now with Alan Resnick aired on December 24 , 2013 at 4 a.m. on Adult Swim . It was the third in a series of infomercial parodies broadcast by the network , succeeding <unk> and For @-@ Profit Online University . The early @-@ morning timeslot was chosen since infomercials usually air during such hours . The special was published onto Adult Swim 's YouTube channel the same day . The special was viewed by 926 @,@ 000 viewers and received a Nielsen household rating of 0 @.@ 7 , meaning that approximately 0 @.@ 7 percent of households with a television watched it . A web chat allowing users to converse with " Teddy " was created for the network 's website . 
 The special has received positive critical reception . In talking about Resnick with regards to the special , Baltimore City Paper 's Baynard Woods wrote that it " combines the traditional kind @-@ of @-@ creepy positivity of the infomercial host with the creepy techno @-@ utopian positivity of a TED Talk 's technologist . " He ultimately opined that the humor derived from " the disconnect between what Resnick claims — that his avatar is a complete backup of himself — and the reality that it is not at all like him and is , in fact , extremely limited . " Ezra <unk> of What Weekly , another Baltimore @-@ based publication , praised the special . In particular , he expressed his approval of seeing " success and national exposure for these talented artists . " Lea McLellan of Mountain Xpress called it " hilarious " and " a good representation of their bizarre comedic stylings . " 
 = = Explanatory notes = = 
 = Amiral Charner @-@ class cruiser = 
 The Amiral Charner class was a group of four armoured cruisers built for the French Navy during the 1890s . They were designed to be smaller and cheaper than the preceding design while also serving as commerce raiders in times of war . Three of the ships were assigned to the International Squadron off the island of Crete during the Greco @-@ Turkish War of 1897 to protect French interests and citizens . With several exceptions the sister ships spent most of the first decade of the 20th century serving as training ships or in reserve . Bruix aided survivors of the devastating eruption of Mount Pelée on the island of Martinique in 1902 . Chanzy was transferred to French Indochina in 1906 and ran aground off the Chinese coast in mid @-@ 1907 . She proved impossible to refloat and was destroyed in place . 
 The three survivors escorted troop convoys from French North Africa to France for several months after the beginning of World War I in August 1914 . Unlike her sisters , Bruix was transferred to the Atlantic to support Allied operations against the German colony of Kamerun in September 1914 while Amiral Charner and Latouche @-@ Tréville were assigned to the Eastern <unk> where they blockaded the Ottoman @-@ controlled coast , and supported Allied operations . Amiral Charner was sunk in early 1916 by a German submarine . Latouche @-@ Tréville became a training ship in late 1917 and was decommissioned in 1919 . Bruix was decommissioned in Greece at the beginning of 1918 and recommissioned after the end of the war in November for service in the Black Sea against the Bolsheviks . She returned home in 1919 and was sold for scrap in 1921 . Latouche @-@ Tréville followed her to the breakers five years later . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The Amiral Charner @-@ class ships were designed to be smaller and cheaper than the preceding armored cruiser design , the Dupuy de Lôme . Like the older ship , they were intended to fill the commerce @-@ raiding strategy of the Jeune École . 
 The ships measured 106 @.@ 12 metres ( 348 ft 2 in ) between perpendiculars and had a beam of 14 @.@ 04 metres ( 46 ft 1 in ) . They had a forward draught of 5 @.@ 55 metres ( 18 ft 3 in ) and drew 6 @.@ 06 metres ( 19 ft 11 in ) aft . The Amiral Charner class displaced 4 @,@ 748 tonnes ( 4 @,@ 673 long tons ) at normal load and 4 @,@ 990 tonnes ( 4 @,@ 910 long tons ) at deep load . They were fitted with a prominent plough @-@ shaped ram at the bow . This made the ships very wet forward , although they were generally felt to be reasonably good sea boats and handled well by their captains . Their metacentric height was deemed to be inadequate and all of the surviving ships had their military masts replaced by lighter pole masts between 1910 and 1914 . 
 The Amiral Charner @-@ class ships had two horizontal triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each driving a single propeller shaft . Steam for the engines was provided by 16 Belleville boilers at a working pressure of 17 kg / cm2 ( 1 @,@ 667 kPa ; 242 psi ) and the engines were rated at a total of 8 @,@ 300 metric horsepower ( 6 @,@ 100 kW ) using forced draught . The engines in Bruix were more powerful than those of her sister ships and were rated at 9 @,@ 000 metric horsepower ( 6 @,@ 600 kW ) . The ships had a designed speed of 19 knots ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) , but during sea trials they failed to meet their specified speed , only reaching maximum speeds of 18 @.@ 16 to 18 @.@ 4 knots ( 33 @.@ 63 to 34 @.@ 08 km / h ; 20 @.@ 90 to 21 @.@ 17 mph ) from 8 @,@ 276 to 9 @,@ 107 metric horsepower ( 6 @,@ 087 to 6 @,@ 698 kW ) . They carried up to 535 tonnes ( 527 long tons ) of coal and could steam for 4 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 7 @,@ 400 km ; 4 @,@ 600 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The ships of the Amiral Charner class had a main armament that consisted of two 45 @-@ calibre Canon de 194 mm Modèle 1887 guns that were mounted in single gun turrets , one each fore and aft of the superstructure . The turrets were hydraulically operated in all ships except on Latouche @-@ Tréville , whose turrets were electrically powered . The guns fired 75 – 90 @.@ 3 @-@ kilogram ( 165 – 199 lb ) shells at muzzle velocities ranging from 770 to 800 metres per second ( 2 @,@ 500 to 2 @,@ 600 ft / s ) . 
 Their secondary armament comprised six 45 @-@ calibre Canon de 138 @.@ 6 mm Modèle 1887 guns , each in single gun turrets on each broadside . Their 30 – 35 @-@ kilogram ( 66 – 77 lb ) shells were fired at muzzle velocities of 730 to 770 metres per second ( 2 @,@ 400 to 2 @,@ 500 ft / s ) . For close @-@ range anti @-@ torpedo boat defense , they carried four quick @-@ firing ( QF ) 65 @-@ millimetre ( 2 @.@ 6 in ) guns , four QF 47 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) and eight QF 37 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) five @-@ barreled revolving Hotchkiss guns . They were also armed with four 450 @-@ millimetre ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) pivoting torpedo tubes ; two mounted on each broadside above water . 
 = = = Protection = = = 
 The side of the Amiral Charner class was generally protected by 92 millimetres ( 3 @.@ 6 in ) of steel armor , from 1 @.@ 3 metres ( 4 ft 3 in ) below the waterline to 2 @.@ 5 metres ( 8 ft 2 in ) above it . The bottom 20 centimetres ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) tapered in thickness and the armor at the ends of the ships thinned to 60 millimetres ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) . The curved protective deck of mild steel had a thickness of 40 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) along its centerline that increased to 50 millimetres ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) at its outer edges . Protecting the boiler rooms , engine rooms , and magazines below it was a thin splinter deck . A watertight internal cofferdam , filled with cellulose , ran the length of the ship from the protective deck to a height of 1 @.@ 2 metres ( 4 ft ) above the waterline . Below the protective deck the ship was divided by 13 watertight transverse bulkheads with five more above it . The ship 's conning tower and turrets were protected by 92 millimeters of armor . 
 = = Ships = = 
 = = Service = = 
 Amiral Charner spent most of her career in the Mediterranean , although she was sent to China during the Boxer Rebellion of 1900 – 01 . Together with her sisters , Chanzy and Latouche @-@ Tréville , the ship was assigned to the International Squadron off the island of Crete during the Greco @-@ Turkish War of 1897 to protect French interests and citizens . With the exception of Bruix , the sisters spent most of the first decade of the 20th century as training ships or in reserve . Bruix served in the Atlantic Ocean , the Mediterranean , and in the Far East before World War I. In 1902 she aided survivors of the devastating eruption of Mount Pelée on the island of Martinique and spent several years as guardship at Crete , protecting French interests in the region in the early 1910s . Chanzy was transferred to French Indochina in 1906 . She ran aground off the Chinese coast in mid @-@ 1907 , where she proved impossible to refloat and was destroyed in place after her crew was rescued without loss . 
 The surviving ships escorted troop convoys from French North Africa to France for several months after the beginning of World War I in August 1914 . Amiral Charner and Latouche @-@ Tréville were then assigned to the Eastern Mediterranean where they blockaded the Ottoman @-@ controlled coast and supported Allied operations . During this time , Amiral Charner helped to rescue several thousand Armenians from Syria during the Armenian Genocide of 1915 . She was sunk in early 1916 by a German submarine , with only a single survivor rescued . Latouche @-@ Tréville was lightly damaged in 1915 by an Ottoman shell while providing naval gunfire support during the Gallipoli Campaign . Unlike her sisters , Bruix was transferred to the Atlantic to support Allied operations against the German colony of Kamerun in September 1914 . She was briefly assigned to support Allied operations in the Dardanelles in early 1915 before she began patrolling the Aegean Sea and Greek territorial waters . 
 Latouche @-@ Tréville became a training ship in late 1917 and was decommissioned in 1919 . Bruix was decommissioned in Greece at the beginning of 1918 and recommissioned after the end of the war in November for service in the Black Sea against the Bolsheviks . She returned home later in 1919 and was reduced to reserve before she was sold for scrap in 1921 . Latouche @-@ Tréville was stricken from the navy list in 1920 and was sold for scrap in 1926 . 
 = Ruffed lemur = 
 The ruffed lemurs of the genus Varecia are strepsirrhine primates and the largest extant lemurs within the family Lemuridae . Like all living lemurs , they are found only on the island of Madagascar . Formerly considered to be a monotypic genus , two species are now recognized : the black @-@ and @-@ white ruffed lemur , with its three subspecies , and the red ruffed lemur . 
 Ruffed lemurs are diurnal and arboreal quadrupeds , often observed leaping through the upper canopy of the seasonal tropical rainforests in eastern Madagascar . They are also the most frugivorous of the Malagasy lemurs , and they are very sensitive to habitat disturbance . Ruffed lemurs live in multi @-@ male / multi @-@ female groups and have a complex and flexible social structure , described as fission @-@ fusion . They are highly vocal , and have loud , raucous calls . 
 Ruffed lemurs are seasonal breeders and highly unusual in their reproductive strategy . They are considered an " evolutionary enigma " in that they are the largest of the extant species in Lemuridae , yet exhibit reproductive traits more common in small , nocturnal lemurs , such as short gestation periods ( ~ 102 days ) and relatively large average litter sizes ( ~ 2 – 3 ) . Ruffed lemurs also build nests for their newborns ( the only primates that do so ) , carry them by mouth , and exhibit an absentee parental system by stashing them while they forage . Infants are altricial , although they develop relatively quickly , traveling independently in the wild after 70 days and attaining full adult size by six months . 
 Threatened by habitat loss and hunting , ruffed lemurs are facing extinction in the wild . However , they reproduce readily in captivity , and have been gradually re @-@ introduced into the wild since 1997 . Organizations that are involved in ruffed lemur conservation include the Durrell Wildlife Conservation Trust , the Lemur Conservation Foundation ( LCF ) , the Madagascar Fauna Group ( MFG ) , <unk> Primate Sanctuary in South Africa , Wildlife Trust , and the Duke Lemur Center ( DLC ) . 
 = = Evolutionary history = = 
 Lemurs are not known in the fossil record on Madagascar until the Pleistocene and Holocene epochs . Consequently , little is known about the evolution of ruffed lemurs , let alone the entire lemur clade , which comprises the endemic primate population of the island . 
 Although there is still much debate about the origins of lemurs on Madagascar , it is generally accepted that a single rafting event , similar to the one that brought New World monkeys to South America , occurred around 50 – 80 million years ago and allowed ancestral lemurs to cross the Mozambique Channel and colonize the island , which had already split from Africa ( while it was joined to the Indian subcontinent ) , approximately 160 million years ago . The resulting founder effect and either non @-@ existent or inferior competition resulted in speciation as the lemur ancestors radiated out to fill open or insufficiently guarded niches . Today , the endemic primate fauna of Madagascar contains over three @-@ quarters of the extant species of the suborder Strepsirrhini , which had been abundant throughout Laurasia and Africa during the Paleocene and Eocene epochs . 
 = = = Taxonomic classification = = = 
 The ruffed lemur genus , Varecia , is a member of the family Lemuridae . The extinct genus , Pachylemur most closely resembled the ruffed lemurs but died out after the arrival of humans . The genus Varecia contains two species , red ruffed lemurs and black @-@ and @-@ white ruffed lemurs , the latter having three subspecies . 
 Family Lemuridae 
 Genus Eulemur : true lemurs 
 Genus Hapalemur : lesser bamboo lemurs 
 Genus Lemur : the ring @-@ tailed lemur 
 Genus † Pachylemur 
 Genus Prolemur : the greater bamboo lemur 
 Genus Varecia : ruffed lemurs 
 Black @-@ and @-@ white ruffed lemur , Varecia variegata 
 Variegated black @-@ and @-@ white ruffed lemur , Varecia variegata variegata 
 Southern black @-@ and @-@ white ruffed lemur , Varecia variegata editorum 
 Northern black @-@ and @-@ white ruffed lemur , Varecia variegata subcincta 
 Red ruffed lemur , Varecia rubra 
 = = = Changes in taxonomy = = = 
 Ruffed lemurs , along with several species of brown lemur were once included in the genus Lemur . In 1962 , the ruffed lemurs were reassigned to the genus Varecia . 
 The red ruffed lemur and the black @-@ and @-@ white ruffed lemur were formerly recognized as subspecies , Varecia variegata rubra and Varecia variegata variegata respectively . In 2001 both were elevated to species status , a decision that was later supported by genetic research . Three subspecies of black @-@ and @-@ white ruffed lemur , which had been published decades earlier , were also recognized as variegata , editorum , and subcincta , although studies have not been entirely conclusive . 
 Subfossil remains of two extinct lemur species were previously classified under the genus Varecia . Found at sites in central and southwestern Madagascar , Varecia insignis and V. jullyi were very similar to modern ruffed lemurs , but more robust and assumed to be more terrestrial , and thus more prone to predation by early human settlers . More recent studies have shown that these extinct species had a diet similar to that of modern ruffed lemurs , and that they were also arboreal in nature . Enough differences were demonstrated to merit a separate genus , Pachylemur . These close relatives of ruffed lemurs are now named Pachylemur insignis and P. jullyi . 
 = = Anatomy and physiology = = 
 Ruffed lemurs are the largest extant members of the family Lemuridae , with an average head @-@ body length between 43 to 57 cm ( 17 to 22 in ) and a total length from 100 to 120 cm ( 39 to 47 in ) , while ranging in weight from 3 @.@ 1 to 4 @.@ 1 kg ( 6 @.@ 8 to 9 @.@ 0 lb ) . The thick , furry tail is longer than the body , averaging 60 and 65 cm ( 24 and 26 in ) in length and is used primarily for balance while moving through the trees . Ruffed lemurs exhibit neither sexual dimorphism nor sexual dichromatism , and females have three pairs of mammary glands . 
 Ruffed lemurs are characterized by their long , canine @-@ like muzzle , which includes a significant overbite . The face is mostly black , with furry " ruffs " running from the ears to the neck . Depending on the species , these ruffs are either white ( V. variegata ) or deep reddish ( V. rubra ) . Likewise , the coloration of the fluffy fur also varies by species , while the coloration pattern varies by subspecies in the black @-@ and @-@ white ruffed lemur . There are also intermediates in color variation between the two species . 
 As with all lemurs , the ruffed lemur has special adaptations for grooming , including a toilet @-@ claw on its second toe , and a toothcomb . 
 = = = Locomotion = = = 
 Ruffed lemurs are considered arboreal quadrupeds , with the most common type of movement being above @-@ branch quadrupedalism . While in the canopy leaping , vertical clinging , and suspensory behavior , are also common , while bridging , <unk> movement , and bipedalism are infrequently seen . When moving from tree to tree , ruffed lemurs will look over the shoulder while clinging , launch themselves into the air , and twist mid @-@ air so that their ventral surface lands on the new tree or limb . Suspensory behavior is more common in ruffed lemurs than in other lemur species . When ruffed lemurs come down to the ground , they continue to move quadrupedally , running with bounding hops and the tail held high . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Being highly arboreal and the most frugivorous of the lemurs , they thrive only in primary forest with large fruiting trees , where they spend most of their time in the upper canopy . By spending the majority of their time in the crown of tall forest trees , they are relatively safe from predators such as the fossa . 
 Ruffed lemurs are active primarily during the day ( diurnal ) , during which time they feed primarily on fruits and nectar , often adopting suspensory postures while feeding . The seeds of the fruit they eat pass through their digestive tract and are propagated throughout the rainforests in their feces , helping to ensure new plant growth and a healthy forest ecosystem . These lemurs are also significant pollinators of the traveller 's tree ( Ravenala madagascariensis ) . Without destroying the inflorescence , they lick the nectar from deep inside the flower using their long muzzles and tongues , collecting and transferring pollen on their snouts and fur from plant to plant . This relationship is thought to be a result of co @-@ evolution . 
 = = = Geographic range and habitat = = = 
 Like all lemurs , this genus is found only on the island of Madagascar off the southeastern coast of Africa . Confined to the island 's seasonal eastern tropical rainforests , it is uncommon to rare throughout its range , which historically ran from the Masoala Peninsula in the northeast to the Mananara River in the south . Today , the black @-@ and @-@ white ruffed lemur has a much larger range than the red ruffed lemur , although it is very patchy , extending from slightly northwest of Maroantsetra , on Antongil Bay , in the north down the coast to the Mananara River near Vangaindrano in the south . Additionally , a concentrated population of black @-@ and @-@ white ruffed lemurs , of the subspecies Varecia variegata subcincta , can also be found on the island reserve of Nosy Mangabe in Antongil Bay . It is suspected that this population was introduced to the island in the 1930s . The red ruffed lemur , on the other hand , has a very restricted range on the Masoala Peninsula . 
 Historically , the confluence of the <unk> and Antainambalana Rivers may have been a zone of hybridization between these two species , although no conclusive results have indicated current interbreeding . In general , the Antainambalana River appears to isolate the red ruffed lemurs from the neighboring subspecies of black @-@ and @-@ white ruffed lemur , V. v. subcincta . The subspecies V. v. variegata can be found further south , and V. v. editorum is the southernmost subspecies . The ranges of these two southern subspecies overlap and intermediate forms are reported to exist , although this has not been confirmed . 
 The rainforests in which these animals live are seasonal , with two primary seasons : the hot , wet season ( November through April ) , and the cool , dry season ( May through October ) . The primary habitat for both species , at any season , is in the crowns of trees , where they spend the majority of their time 15 and 25 m ( 49 and 82 ft ) above ground . With the seasonal availability of resources being similar regardless of location , there is little to no difference in tree usage between species . From September through April , more fruit is available , so females prefer the lianas in the crowns of trees . Both sexes prefer the lower , major branches during the hot , rainy season . The tree crowns are predominantly used from May through August , when young leaves and flowers are in abundance . 
 = = = <unk> relations = = = 
 The following lemur species can be found within the same geographic range as ruffed lemurs : 
 Greater dwarf lemur ( Cheirogaleus major ) 
 Eastern lesser bamboo lemur ( Hapalemur griseus griseus ) 
 Weasel sportive lemur ( Lepilemur mustelinus ) 
 <unk> sifaka ( Propithecus diadema ) 
 Common brown lemur ( Eulemur fulvus ) 
 Red @-@ bellied lemur ( Eulemur rubriventer ) 
 Eastern woolly lemur ( Avahi <unk> ) 
 Indri ( Indri indri ) 
 Brown mouse lemur ( Microcebus rufus ) 
 Aye @-@ aye ( Daubentonia madagascariensis ) 
 White @-@ headed lemur ( Eulemur albifrons ) 
 Ruffed lemurs either demonstrate feeding dominance or divide resources by using different forest strata . They are dominant over red @-@ bellied lemurs , while eastern lesser bamboo lemurs avoid encountering them altogether . White @-@ headed lemurs , on the other hand , prefer the understory and lower canopy , below 15 m ( 49 ft ) , while the ruffed lemurs mainly keep to the upper canopy , above 15 m ( 49 ft ) . Play has even been observed between infant ruffed lemurs and white @-@ headed lemurs . 
 = = Behavior = = 
 Ruffed lemurs , on average , spend 28 % of the day feeding , 53 % resting , and 19 % traveling , although differences in resting and feeding durations have been observed between males and females , with females resting less and feeding more . They are diurnal ; although peak activity occurs during the early morning and late afternoon or evening , resting usually occurs around midday . When resting , ruffed lemurs often sit hunched or upright . They are also frequently seen lying prone over a branch or sunbathing in a supine position with the limbs outstretched . When feeding , they will often hang upside @-@ down by their hind feet , a type of suspensory behavior , which allows them to reach fruits and flowers . 
 Being highly arboreal , they spend the majority of their time in the high canopy throughout the day . Ruffed lemurs spend the majority of their time between 15 to 20 m ( 49 to 66 ft ) above the forest floor , followed by 20 to 25 metres ( 66 to 82 ft ) up , and are least frequently seen at 10 to 15 metres ( 33 to 49 ft ) . During the hot season , they will relocate to the lower canopy to help regulate their body temperature . In the cold season , ruffed lemurs are least active and may dedicate 2 % of their resting time to sunbathing in order to warm up . 
 Long @-@ term field research has shown that range size , group size , social systems , and territorial behavior vary widely , and may be greatly affected by food distribution and quality . It is generally agreed that the ruffed lemur social system is multi @-@ male / multi @-@ female with a fission @-@ fusion society , although some populations of black @-@ and @-@ white ruffed lemur have been reported as monogamous . This social flexibility is suspected to improve survivability despite an inflexible feeding ecology . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 Being the most frugivorous members of the family Lemuridae , consuming an average of 74 – 90 % fruit , ruffed lemurs also consume nectar ( 4 – 21 % ) , and supplement the rest of their diet with young leaves ( 3 – 6 % ) , mature leaves ( 1 % ) , flowers ( 3 – 6 % ) , and some seeds . Ruffed lemurs have also been reported to come to the ground to eat fungi and exhibit geophagy . 
 The majority of their diet is made up of relatively few common plant species , with a few species providing more than 50 % of the diet . Fig species of the genus Ficus , for example , account for 78 % of the fruit consumed by red ruffed lemurs on the Masoala Peninsula . Although plant species and diets vary by location , the most common food plants reported from the field include the following : 
 <unk> 
 <unk> 
 <unk> 
 <unk> ( family Lauraceae ) 
 Ficus 
 Eugenia / Syzygium 
 Grewia 
 Fruit trees do not appear to be selected by species , but by availability and accessibility of edible fruit . And despite predominance of a few plant species in the ruffed lemur diet , the remainder of their diet consists of between 80 and 132 other species from 36 plant families . 
 The availability of food reflects the seasonal nature of the forests in which they live . During the hot season , fruit , flowers , and young leaves are more abundant , whereas the cold , wet season offers more young leaves and flowers . Despite this , the diet changes little between seasons , except that females will consume more high @-@ protein , low @-@ fiber items , such as young leaves and flowers , during pregnancy and lactation in order to offset the energy costs of reproduction . Nectar is only available sporadically , yet constitutes a major food source when the flowers bloom . The nectar of the traveller 's palm ( Ravenala madagascariensis ) is a favorite among ruffed lemurs . 
 = = = Social systems = = = 
 The social organization of ruffed lemurs is widely variable in both group organization and group composition , although no notable difference can be seen between the two species . Ruffed lemurs are typically described as multi @-@ male groups with a fission @-@ fusion social structure , although this can vary by season and locality . 
 In a study done at Masoala Peninsula on red ruffed lemurs three levels of organization were identified and defined : communities , core groups , and subgroups . Communities are individuals that affiliated regularly with each other , but rarely with conspecifics outside of the community . Although the entire multi @-@ male / multi @-@ female community lives within a discrete home range , all individuals are never seen in the same location at the same time . Instead , individuals form dispersed social networks , known as core groups , within the community . Core groups are individuals that shared the same core area within a community territory throughout the year . Core groups typically consist of two reproductive females , as well as reproductive males and subadults , ranging in size from two individuals to nine . Females within the groups are cooperative , but male encounters are often agonistic . Subgroups , on the other hand , vary daily in size , composition , and duration , and consist of associated individuals from either the same core group or different core groups , depending on the season . It is from the consistent , daily changes in these subgroups that occur throughout the year , as well as the seasonal formations of core groups in core areas , that demonstrate the fission @-@ fusion nature of ruffed lemur social structure . 
 In another study done at Nosy Mangabe on black @-@ and @-@ white ruffed lemurs a fourth level or organization was defined : affiliates . Affiliates were individuals with more persistent social bonds and more frequent interactions , usually within a core group , but sometimes also between core groups within a subgroup . Adult females typically had many affiliates , whereas adult males rarely interacted with conspecifics , living a more solitary existence . 
 Past studies have reported other social organizations in ruffed lemurs including monogamous pair bonding . This may have been due to the use of short @-@ term , seasonal field studies instead of yearlong studies that take into consideration the effects that changing seasons have on ruffed lemur communities . For instance , during the cold , rainy season , which corresponds with the breeding season , interactions between core groups within a community are significantly reduced . During this time small subgroups form consisting of a mature female , a mature male , and sometimes offspring . This can be misinterpreted as monogamous pair bonding . 
 Ranging behavior can also exhibit seasonal variability . During the hot , wet season , females range widely , either alone or in groups of up to six individuals . In the cool , dry season , smaller core groups stabilize in order to occupy concentrated areas . Therefore , during seasons when fruit is abundant , subgroups are larger while scarcity is met with more solitary behavior . This suggests that although their feeding ecology is inflexible , being tied to widely distributed , patchy , and sometimes scarce fruit , ruffed lemurs instead adapt the social system in order to survive . 
 In terms of dominance , the ruffed lemur 's social structure is not as clear @-@ cut as other lemur societies where female dominance is the norm . Although it is historically reported that " males were subordinate to females , " especially with captive and free @-@ ranging ruffed lemur populations demonstrating this , wild populations cannot be definitively labeled as matriarchal due to inter @-@ group variation . 
 There are also social differences between males and females . Females typically have many affiliates and bond strongly with other females both within and outside their core areas , but do not affiliate with individuals outside the community range , except during mating season . Males , on the other hand , are more solitary , interact with only a couple of conspecifics , have weak social bonds with other males , and rarely associate with others outside their core group . Furthermore , field studies suggest that only females play a role in communal home range defense . Males may scent @-@ mark and remain relatively silent , but otherwise show little involvement during disputes . 
 Community range or territory size can vary widely , from 16 to 197 ha ( 0 @.@ 16 to 2 @.@ 0 km2 ; 0 @.@ 062 to 0 @.@ 76 sq mi ) while group size can range from a single pair to 31 individuals . Population density is also noticeably variable . These wide ranges can be attributed to differing levels of protection and degree of environmental degradation , with better protection and a less degraded environment resulting in higher population density and more moderately sized community ranges . ( The duration and seasonality of the studies involved may also have contributed to low group size estimates and community ranges . A study at the Betampona Reserve , for instance , observed monogamous pairs with two to five infants maintaining ranges of 16 to 43 ha ( 0 @.@ 16 to 0 @.@ 43 km2 ; 0 @.@ 062 to 0 @.@ 17 sq mi ) . ) Core areas at <unk> constituted approximately 10 % of the overall community range and showed a close relationship with the location of the largest fruiting trees . 
 The average daily traveling distance for ruffed lemurs varies between 436 to 2 @,@ 250 metres ( 1 @,@ 430 to 7 @,@ 382 ft ) , averaging 1 @,@ 129 metres ( 3 @,@ 704 ft ) per day . Activity patterns within the community range vary by gender and season . Males generally stay within a core area all year , whereas females only confine themselves to a core area during the cold wet season , then expand their range throughout the community range during the hot , rainy season . Females expand their traveling range slightly after giving birth , still staying within the core area , but gradually range further in December when they begin stashing their infants with other community members while they look for food . Females range the furthest later during the hot , rainy season . Both activity level and reproductive activity can be summarized in the following table . 
 Although males demonstrate little involvement in territorial disputes between neighboring communities , and ruffed lemur communities lack cohesiveness , females communally defend the community range against females of other communities . These disputes occur mostly during the hot , rainy season , when resources are more abundant and occur near the boundaries of community ranges . Spacing is maintained by scent marking and vocal communication . Ruffed lemurs are known for their loud , raucous calls that are answered by neighboring communities and subgroups within the same community . 
 During agonistic encounters between communities , chasing , scent @-@ marking , calling , and occasional physical contact can be seen . Other social behaviors appear to vary between wild and captive ruffed lemurs , as illustrated by the following table . 
 Some affiliative behaviors are seasonal or gender @-@ specific , such as the male squeal approach and anogenital inspections performed during the mating season . Another example is the female greeting behavior , where two females will use their anogenital scent glands to mark each other 's backs , jump over one another , writhe together , and emit squealing vocalizations . This behavior is not seen during the end of the cool , dry season or around gestation . The frequency of other affiliative behaviors can be affected by age . All ruffed lemurs over five months of age <unk> , and , in captivity , subadults participate in play more frequently than adults . 
 = = = Cognitive abilities = = = 
 Historically , relatively few studies of learning and cognition have been performed on strepsirrhine primates , including ruffed lemurs . However , a study at the Myakka City Lemur Reserve demonstrated that ruffed lemurs , along with several other members of the family Lemuridae , could understand the outcome of simple arithmetic operations . 
 = = = Communication = = = 
 = = = = Olfactory communication = = = = 
 As with all strepsirrhine primates , olfactory communication is used extensively by ruffed lemurs – scent marking in territorial defense and disputes , as well as female greeting displays . The scents communicate the sex , location , and identity of their owner . 
 Females predominantly scent mark with their anogenital scent glands , by squatting to rub their anogenital region along horizontal surfaces , such as tree limbs . Males , on the other hand , favor using the glands on their neck , muzzle , and chest , by embracing horizontal and vertical surfaces and rubbing themselves over them . Both sexes will occasionally scent mark in ways characteristic of the opposite sex . 
 In greeting displays , female ruffed lemurs will leap over one another , scent marking the other individual 's back in the process . 
 = = = = Auditory communication = = = = 
 Ruffed lemurs are highly vocal , with an extensive vocal repertoire with calls being used in multiple contexts . Calls can also vary seasonally . During the hot , rainy season , the loud , raucous calls that are a hallmark of ruffed lemurs allow groups to remain in contact and maintain spacing . These loud calls can be heard up to 1 kilometre ( 0 @.@ 6 mi ) away . 
 Ruffed lemurs use alarm calls that differentiate between ground and aerial predators . For instance an abrupt roar or huff alerts the group to an avian predator , and a pulsed squawk or growl @-@ snort communicates the existence of a mammalian ground predator . When sounding these calls , such as the pulsed squawk , adults direct them at the predator after moving to a safe position . Once the alarm call is sounded by one individual , the resulting chorus can even reach the furthest ranging community members . 
 In captivity , ruffed lemur vocalizations have been studied and divided into three general groups : high- , medium- , and low @-@ amplitude calls . 
 The well @-@ known roar / shriek chorus is spontaneous , occurring most often during period of high activity , as well as being contagious , involving communal participation including infants three to four months old . Abrupt roars are also more common during high activity and aside from alerting group members to the presence of an avian predator , they probably also help maintain contact with individuals outside of visual range or indicate an aggressive / defensive response to a disturbance . In the wild , both of these calls are emitted more during the hot , rainy season due to heighten activity . All high @-@ amplitude calls are delivered with from a " taut " body posture . 
 Medium @-@ amplitude calls operate over a shorter range or often involve moderately arousing situations , such as frustration or submission . Low @-@ amplitude calls also generally operate over a short range , yet also cover a wider range of aggravation levels . 
 <unk> are highly variable between individual ruffed lemurs . Cough , grumble , squeak , and squeal have only been observed and researched in the wild . 
 The calls of ruffed lemurs vary only slightly between the two species . In fact , in captivity , it has been documented that red ruffed lemurs understand and even join in the alarm calls of black @-@ and @-@ white ruffed lemurs . One minor difference between the vocal repertoires of these two species is in the pulse rate and frequency of the pulsed squawk , which is much faster and higher in red ruffed lemurs than in black @-@ and @-@ white ruffed lemurs . The difference in this vocalization is only interspecific , showing no signs of significant sexual dimorphism within each species . 
 In black @-@ and @-@ white ruffed lemurs , pulsed squawks sometimes slow down as the group calms down , and integrate with the wail , creating pulsed squawk @-@ wail intermediates listen . 
 = = = Breeding and reproduction = = = 
 Contrary to initial reports of monogamy , ruffed lemurs in the wild exhibit seasonal polygamous breeding behavior , with both males and females mating with more than one partner within a single season . Mating is not restricted to just community members , but also involves members of neighboring communities . Females mate primarily with males with whom they had affiliative relations prior to mating season , although some matings occurred with roaming males from other communities . 
 Shortly before mating season begins , females exhibit swelling of the sex skin , which reaches its peak around the middle of their 14 @.@ 8 day estrous cycle . Male sexual physiology also undergoes its own change , with testicular volume increasing during mating season , peaking around the time of breeding . Aggression also increases during the mating season , both between members of the same sex and by females towards the male attempting to mate with her . Females have been observed grappling , cuffing , and biting the male during copulation . Either sex may approach the other when the female is in estrus . Initially they may roar @-@ shriek with each other . When a male approaches a female he often lowers his head and squeals , inspecting the female 's genitalia by licking or sniffing , scent @-@ marking , and offering a submissive chattering vocalization . When a female approaches a male , she may posture herself for mounting . Mating pairs often copulate many times during the course of a mating bout . 
 The mating season lasts from May through July , during the cold , rainy season , resulting in birth and peak lactation coinciding with the time that fruit is the most plentiful . The gestation period of ruffed lemurs is the shortest of the family Lemuridae , averaging 102 days ( with a range of 90 to 106 days ) . Gestation in the wild last slightly longer than in captivity , averaging 106 days . Just like the mating season , parturition is also seasonal , synchronized to the end of the cold , dry season and the start of the productive hot , rainy season . 
 In addition to an abnormally short gestation period , ruffed lemurs share another feature with small , nocturnal lemurs by producing the largest litters of the family Lemuridae . Litters typically include two or three infants , although up to five have been reported . Birth weights in captivity average between 83 to 101 @.@ 7 g ( 2 @.@ 93 to 3 @.@ 59 oz ) and range from 70 to 140 grams ( 2 @.@ 5 to 4 @.@ 9 oz ) . Ruffed lemur infants are altricial , and are born with their eyes open and a full coat of fur . 
 Ruffed lemurs are the only known primates to build arboreal nests , used exclusively for birth and for the first week or two of life . Starting three weeks prior to birth , females begin constructing the nest from twigs , branches , leaves , and vines , locating it within her core area and 10 to 25 metres ( 33 to 82 ft ) above ground . The nests have only one apparent entry point , and are shallow and dish @-@ shaped . During the first couple of weeks , the mother is mostly solitary and does not travel far from the nest , spending as much as 70 – 90 % of her time with the newborns ( in captivity ) . In order to find food , she will leave the infants alone in the nest or , after the first couple of weeks , will carry them in her mouth and stash them in concealed locations in the canopy while she forages . Since this early developmental period corresponds with the end of the cold , dry season , which offers the least amount of fruit , energy is conserved for lactation while travel is limited . As the hot , rainy season begins , fruit availability rises , lactation demands rise as well , and females increase their travel distance in search of food . 
 Unlike other diurnal primates , which usually carry their infants with them , ruffed lemur mothers will stash their young by concealing them in the canopy foliage , leaving them to rest and sit quietly for several hours while she forages and performs other activities . Mothers continue to transport their offspring by mouth , moving them one at a time by grasping the infant 's belly crosswise . This form of transport usually stops around 2 @.@ 5 months of age when the infants become too heavy to carry . 
 Ruffed lemurs are cooperative breeders , with parental care being shared by all community members . For example , mothers will stash their offspring with other mothers or leave them to be guarded by other community members , including non @-@ breeding individuals of both genders . While the mother is away , community members will not only care for and guard them , but also sound alarm calls if danger is detected or if leaving the infant alone . They will also respond to alarm calls by others . These coordinated vigilance displays further involve communal transmission of the alarm call , with nearby community members repeating the alarm call , potentially summoning the mother back to her offspring . Infant transport by other members of the community has also been recorded . Females have been observed nursing infants of their close relatives , while close kin have adopted rejected infants , acting as foster parents . 
 Male care for infants has been documented in ruffed lemur societies . During early development , adult males may guard the nests of multiple core group females , as well as help care for the infants that were likely fathered by other males . During the season when females practice infant stashing , males effectively lighten the reproductive burden of up to several mothers by guarding , huddling , grooming , travelling , playing with and feeding the young . 
 Female ruffed lemurs produce relatively rich milk compared to other lemurs , and consequently , their young develop faster than those of other lemurs . Infants develop rapidly , attaining approximately 70 – 75 % adult weight by the age of four months . They begin climbing and clinging at one month of age , advancing to the point of independently following their mother and group members through the canopy at heights of 50 to 100 metres ( 160 to 330 ft ) by two to three months . Full adult mobility is attained at three to four months of age . Socially , they begin exchanging contact calls with their mother at three weeks , and select their mother as their play partner 75 – 80 % of the time during the first three months . Participation in greeting displays and more extensive vocalizations commences around four months , while scent marking does not start until six months of age . Infants begin testing solid food starting around 40 days to two months with weaning occurring between four and six months in the wild , although some individuals have continued to nurse until seven to eight months . 
 Infant mortality is often high among ruffed lemurs , but can also be highly variable . In some seasons , as many as 65 % are unable to reach three months of age , possibly due to falls and related injuries , although in some seasons infant mortality is as low as 0 % . For those that do survive to adulthood , sexual maturity is attained at 18 to 20 months in females and 32 to 48 months in males . Sexual maturity may take longer to reach in the wild compared to captivity . For females , the inter @-@ birth interval , or time between successive offspring , is typically one year , and in captivity , females can remain reproductively active until the age of 23 . The life expectancy for both species of ruffed lemur is estimated at 36 years in captivity . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 In a land where approximately 90 % of the original island forest has been destroyed , ruffed lemurs cling to only a small fraction of their original range . Completely dependent upon large fruiting trees , neither species appears to be flexible with its habitat choice , with selective logging resulting in significantly lower population densities . Although they can survive in very disturbed habitats with lower population densities , they are still especially vulnerable to habitat disturbance . Decreased genetic diversity , in tandem with hunting , natural disasters , predation , and disease , can easily wipe out small populations . 
 The black @-@ and @-@ white ruffed lemur was elevated by the IUCN to critically endangered ( <unk> ) status from endangered status in 2008 . They cite that " the species is believed to have undergone a decline of 80 % over a period of 27 years , due primarily to a decline in area and quality of habitat within the known range of the species and due to levels of exploitation . " The total area of all known localities in which black @-@ and @-@ white ruffed lemurs exist is estimated at less than 8 @,@ 000 km2 ( 3 @,@ 100 sq mi ) , while the total wild population is estimated between 1 @,@ 000 and 10 @,@ 000 . 
 The red ruffed lemur was downgraded to endangered status from critically endangered status by the IUCN in 2008 . The justification given includes its limited range , its restriction to only the Masoala Peninsula , and its risk from ongoing habitat loss and hunting . This species occupies a range of no more than 4 @,@ 000 km2 ( 1 @,@ 500 sq mi ) , while the total wild population is estimated between 29 @,@ 000 and 52 @,@ 000 individuals . Red ruffed lemurs are only protected within the boundaries of the Masoala National Park . Historically , this species has been considered more threatened due to its highly restricted range , compared to the widely distributed black @-@ and @-@ white ruffed lemur . However , its protection within the island 's largest national park has slightly improved its chances at survival . Despite this , an assessment done in 2012 and published in 2014 reinstated the critically endangered status for the red ruffed lemur , largely due to the surge in illegal logging in Masoala National Park following the 2009 Malagasy political crisis . 
 There are several organizations involved in ruffed lemur conservation , including the Durrell Wildlife Conservation Trust , the Lemur Conservation Foundation ( LCF ) , the Madagascar Fauna Group ( MFG ) , <unk> Primate Sanctuary in South Africa , Wildlife Trust , and the Duke Lemur Center ( DLC ) . To conservation organizations , the ruffed lemurs are considered indicator , umbrella , and flagship species . 
 = = = Threats in the wild = = = 
 As with other primates , one of the principal threats to both ruffed lemur species is habitat loss due to slash @-@ and @-@ burn agriculture , logging , and mining . Both species appear to be very sensitive to logging , and are thought to be the most vulnerable of rainforest lemurs . The hardwoods that are favored for construction materials and selectively logged are also preferred by ruffed lemurs for their fruits and potentially affect their travel routes through the canopy . Deforestation , on the other hand , is a result of the need to provide firewood and to support subsistence agriculture and cash crops . For red ruffed lemurs , Slash @-@ and @-@ burn agriculture , known locally as tavy , is practiced seasonally on the Masoala peninsula between October and December , and its practice is expanding . Additionally , cattle are sometimes allowed to free @-@ range over these former agricultural clearings , preventing forest re @-@ growth . 
 Another principal threat to the survival of ruffed lemurs is hunting . Local human populations still hunt and trap ruffed lemurs with traditional weapons , using them as a source of subsistence . Studies from villages in the Makira Forest have revealed that ruffed lemur meat is not only a desired food , but is being hunted unsustainably . On the Masoala peninsula , the calls of red ruffed lemurs help hunters locate them . On this peninsula , firearms are used in addition to traditional traps , known as <unk> , which involve a 5 metres ( 16 ft ) strip of cleared forest with snares set on the few remaining branches that allow the lemurs to cross . Although hunting is illegal , the laws are generally not enforced and the local inhabitants show little concern about their hunting practices , which occur mostly from May to September . Hunting is the biggest concern in the Masoala peninsula because it is likely to continue , whereas logging and slash @-@ and @-@ burn agriculture could be curtailed . In other regions , hunters can scare away ruffed lemurs from their favorite food sources , even if they are hunting other prey . Lastly , these animals are taken from their natural habitats to display for tourists or are sold as exotic pets . 
 Frequent cyclones also pose a threat , particularly to concentrated or small populations . In late January 1997 , Cyclone Gretelle destroyed 80 % of the Manombo forest canopy . With their habitat , including most of their food resources , effectively destroyed , the ruffed lemurs of the forest broadened their diet , remaining surprisingly frugivorous . Their body weights dropped and no births were reported for four years , but they managed to stave off starvation . This event demonstrated not only their flexibility in the face of natural disasters , which may highlight the evolutionary reasons behind their reproductive capacity and litter size , but also the threat faced by already stressed populations . 
 Predation in the wild appears to be very rare for ruffed lemurs , probably because living in the high canopy makes them challenging to catch . Evidence of predation by raptors , such as the Henst 's goshawk ( Accipiter <unk> ) suggests it occurs at a low rate . The fossa ( Cryptoprocta ferox ) could present a potential risk if it found an individual lower in the forest canopy , but no confirmation has been presented to indicate that they prey upon ruffed lemurs . Instead , only re @-@ introduced , captive @-@ bred ruffed lemurs have been killed by fossa , likely due to their inexperience with predators . Nesting behavior poses the biggest risk of predation , making them susceptible to carnivorous mammals , such as the ring @-@ tailed mongoose ( <unk> elegans ) and brown @-@ tailed mongoose ( Salanoia concolor ) . 
 = = = Captive breeding and reintroductions = = = 
 Captive populations of both ruffed lemur species exist in American and European zoos , representing a safeguard against extinction . In the United States , captive breeding is managed by the Species Survival Plan ( SSP ) , a program developed by the Association of Zoos and Aquariums ( AZA ) . Although the populations are very limited in their genetic diversity , these species thrive in captivity , making them an ideal candidate for reintroduction into protected habitat , if it is available . Although reintroduction is seen as a last resort among conservationists , a combination of in situ conservation efforts , such as legal protection , public education , the spread of sustainable livelihoods , and reforestation offer hope for ruffed lemurs . In the meantime , reintroductions offer conservation research opportunities and allow the limited genetic diversity maintained by the SSP to improve the genetic diversity of dwindling Malagasy ruffed lemur populations . 
 A captive release first occurred in November 1997 , when five black @-@ and @-@ white ruffed lemurs ( Varecia variegata variegata ) born in the United States were returned to Madagascar for release in the Betampona Strict Nature Reserve in eastern Madagascar . Popularly known as the Carolina Five , these individuals had lived their entire lives in the Natural Habitat Enclosures at the Duke Lemur Center ( DLC ) . Since then , two more groups totaling 13 captive @-@ born ruffed lemurs have been reintroduced into the same reserve , once in November 1998 and again in January 2001 . These latter two groups also received " boot camp training " in the DLC forested free @-@ range enclosures prior to release . So far , the results have shown some success , with 10 surviving longer than one year , 3 individuals integrating into wild groups , and 4 offspring have been born to or sired by released lemurs , all of which were parent @-@ raised . <unk> , a male released with the first group , was reported to be doing well seven years post @-@ release , living in a social group with a wild female and their offspring . Research has been ongoing since the initial release , as illustrated in the 1998 BBC documentary In the Wild : Operation Lemur with John Cleese . The research has provided useful information about their adaptation to life in the wild . 
 = Effects of Hurricane Dennis in Georgia = 
 The effects of Hurricane Dennis in Georgia included two deaths and $ 24 million ( 2005 USD ) in damage . On June 29 , 2005 , a tropical wave emerged off the west coast of Africa . Gradually , the system organized on July 2 and formed a broad low pressure area . The system continued to organize , and it became a tropical depression on July 4 . Tracking westward , it became a tropical storm on July 5 and a hurricane on July 7 . Dennis rapidly intensified to attain Category 4 status on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale before making landfall on Cuba . The storm weakened to Category 1 status before re @-@ emerging in the Gulf of Mexico and intensifying . Dennis made landfall on the Florida Panhandle on July 10 , then tracked over southeast Alabama . 
 Dennis had moderate effects in the state , primarily from flooding . One rainband in particular stalled in southwest portions of the state and produced 4 – 8 inches ( 100 – 200 mm ) of rain , with isolated reports of up to 12 inches ( 300 mm ) . Flash flooding occurred in several areas , damaging hundreds of homes and businesses . Light to moderate wind gusts of 42 miles per hour ( 68 km / h ) combined with saturated ground downed several trees , one of which fell into a house , killing a man near Atlanta . A man also died while working with utility crews to restore power . One tornado was reported , downing 200 trees . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 In anticipation of the storm , the National Weather Service placed much of central , north and western Georgia under a flood watch . A wind advisory was also in effect for Clayton , Cobb , DeKalb and Fulton Counties . As the hurricane 's outer rainbands approached the state , a tornado watch was put into effect for central portions of the state . The Red Cross provided 80 shelters in the state , in addition to hundreds of volunteers . Due to large evacuations in the state , construction projects on Interstates 75 , 85 , and 185 , were postponed . 
 = = Flooding = = 
 Damage from Hurricane Dennis in Georgia was mostly minor to moderate . Moderate to heavy rainfall began on July 10 and persisted into the morning hours of July 11 . One rainband in particular stalled in southwest portions of the state and produced 4 – 8 inches ( 100 – 200 mm ) of rain , with isolated reports of up to 12 inches ( 300 mm ) . Flash flooding occurred in Colquitt County , flooding the <unk> Creek which damaged numerous homes , washed out several roads , and forced people from more than 100 homes to evacuate . Minor flooding occurred along the Flint and Withlacoochee River basins with a few homes affected by high water . In Worth County , a total of 300 homes were evacuated due to rising flood water , with 80 homes being flooded . In Dougherty County , dozens of homes and businesses in lost electric power . Additionally , flooding was confined to both sides of State Highway 82 near the Worth County border . Fishpond Drain in Seminole County flooded with several homes surrounded by rising water . A dam burst caused a torrent of water to overwash a road in Tift County , Georgia . Several rescues were required , particularly in Douglas and Cobb counties . 
 In Baldwin County , torrential rainfall and flooding led to the collapse of a fitness center ; two employees were injured . In Carroll County , more than 20 roads were either washed out or damaged by raging flood waters . A man in Upson County sustained injuries when he drove onto a washed @-@ out road . His vehicle was subsequently swept down the creek . 
 Georgia State Route 279 was also flooded over with more than one foot ( 300 mm ) of water . The Lamar County Emergency Management Director reported that several dirt roads in the county were flooded and some were washed out . De Kalb County had many of its streams and creeks surpass flood stage , causing minor damage to businesses and homes . Spalding County also reported 15 roads with extensive flooding damage . Fourteen mobile homes in Clayton County were damaged beyond repair by the flooding ; 52 residents were evacuated . In Riverdale , several homes were flooded , although damage was generally limited to the basements of the homes . In Fayette County , the historic <unk> Mill was inundated , and water rose to the bridge level on McDonough Road . There was also a dam breach on Lake Fowler , causing $ 300 @,@ 000 dollars ( 2005 USD ) in damage . 
 One of the worst @-@ hit areas was Douglas County , where rainfall reached 10 in ( 250 mm ) . Ten roads in the county required major repair and seven others were flooded and closed for some period of time . 42 trailer homes were either submerged or heavily damaged by flood waters , and six homes sustained minor damage from flood waters . A car dealership was also flooded , damaging about 100 used cars and 20 – 30 new cars . Damage across the county was placed as $ 6 million ( 2005 USD ) . There were unofficial reports that Kings Highway between Interstate 20 southwest of Douglasville and Fouts Mill was flooded . Minor structural damage occurred as up to 4 inches ( 100 mm ) of rain fell in the county . 
 An apartment building in Cherokee County received extensive damage from flooding , forcing the evacuation of its residents by boat . Water was up to the first floor level of many of the apartments of the complex . Also , businesses and hotels were flooded along Interstate 575 near Georgia State Route 92 . About 15 homes suffered severe damage in the area . The Noonday Creek reached a record stage of 16 @.@ 3 ft ( 5 @.@ 0 m ) feet at 1200 UTC , exceeding the previous record stage of 13 @.@ 8 ft ( 4 @.@ 2 m ) feet on September 17 , 2004 during Hurricane Ivan . At least one road in the county was closed due to high waters . Damage in Cherokee County was estimated at $ 1 @.@ 6 million ( 2005 USD ) , primarily from damage to the apartment building . 
 In Worth County , 78 people were displaced by the flooding . A total of 300 homes were evacuated and 80 damaged by the flood waters , causing $ 1 @.@ 8 million ( 2005 USD ) in damage . $ 1 @.@ 3 million ( 2005 USD ) in damage was also reported in Colquitt County due to the flooding of several homes and businesses . In total , over 100 buildings had to be evacuated . 
 = = Wind damage = = 
 The highest winds associated with the storm occurred at Albany , and were clocked at 42 miles per hour ( 68 km / h ) . The lowest barometric pressure also occurred at Albany , dropping to 1007 @.@ 5 mb . A large number counties in western parts of the state reported downed trees and powerlines , with widespread power outages across the region . In Decatur , a man was killed when a large tree fell onto his bedroom . Near the city of Atlanta , there were closures on two major interstate highways due to high water ; at least one bridge was closed south of the city . Also , a tractor trailer overturned on a two @-@ lane road , sending the driver to the hospital and closing the road for several hours . In total , about 55 @,@ 000 customers lost electricity , with 38 @,@ 000 of them being from the Atlanta area . A man also died while working with utility crews to restore power . Also , a large tree fell on a woman 's house , trapping her . Emergency crews managed to safely remove her , although damage to her home was extensive . 
 A large structure in Bartow County was significantly damaged by wind gusts , causing almost $ 10 @,@ 000 dollars ( 2005 USD ) in damage . In Douglas County , a tree fell on a car on Interstate 20 causing damage to the vehicle , although no injuries were reported . In another incident , a tree was blown onto a home on Campbellton Street , causing damage to the structure . Several trees and power lines down in Fulton County , with the worst damage in the southwest portions of the county . Several of trees were also down in the Roswell area . The Roswell Cat Clinic was forced to close when a large tree damaged the facility . Also , a home in North Atlanta was damaged when a large oak tree fell on its deck . U.S. Route 100 had to be closed for a brief period because of downed trees in Hall County . In all , wind damage totaled up to $ 246 @,@ 000 dollars ( 2005 USD ) . 
 = = Tornadoes = = 
