 The White County Emergency Management Director reported that an F0 tornado touched down in the southwest corner of White County near the Hall County line at the <unk> Valley Farms area , which formed on the tail end of a feeder band associated with the remnants of Hurricane Dennis . The tornado path width was estimated to be approximately 1 / 8 to 1 / 4 mile wide . Significant damage was reported at the <unk> Valley Farms facility . Hundreds of trees were uprooted , and two barns were completely destroyed . One structure sustained room damage and a number of trees and power lines were also down along Town Creek road . Overall , in excess of 200 trees were down in the southwest part of the county . 
 = Ultraviolet ( Light My Way ) = 
 " Ultraviolet ( Light My Way ) " is a song by the rock band U2 and the tenth track from their 1991 album Achtung Baby . Ostensibly about love and dependency , the song also lends itself to religious interpretations , with listeners finding allusions to the Book of Job and writers finding spiritual meaning in its invocation of the light spectrum . 
 The song 's composition and recording incorporate both serious and throwaway elements , in keeping with the rest of Achtung Baby . While not released as a single , the song has appeared in two films and a U2 business venture was named after it . " Ultraviolet " played a featured role during the encores of the group 's 1992 – 1993 Zoo TV and 2009 – 2011 U2 360 ° Tours . 
 = = Recording = = 
 " Ultraviolet ( Light My Way ) " began as two different demos , one variously called " Ultraviolet " and " 69 " ( which eventually evolved into the B @-@ side " Lady with the Spinning Head " ) and an alternately arranged demo called " Light My Way " . Over the course of the recording sessions , U2 added various overdubs to the song , but producer Brian Eno believed these additions negatively impacted the track . Eno aided the group in editing down the song , and he explained his assistance as such : " I 'd go in and say , ' The song has gone , whatever it is you liked about this song is not there anymore . Sometimes , for example , the song would have disappeared under layers of overdubs . " 
 = = Composition and interpretation = = 
 " Ultraviolet ( Light My Way ) " is written in a 4 / 4 time signature . The lyrics of " Ultraviolet ( Light My Way ) " are addressed to a lover , and imply that their relationship is threatened by some sort of personal or spiritual crisis , coupled with a sense of unease over obligations . Indeed , lead vocalist Bono has called the song " a little disturbed " . 
 The song opens with 45 seconds of soft synthesizers and ethereal vocals , somewhat akin in atmospherics to the group 's early 1980s songs " Tomorrow " and " Drowning Man " ; during this , Bono laments that " sometimes I feel like checking out . " This is followed by the entrance of drums and guitar in a familiar U2 rhythm , as Bono describes the burdens of love and how he is " in the black ; can 't see or be seen . " Each verse culminates with the refrain " Baby , baby , baby , light my way . " Flood , who engineered and mixed the recording , noted that there was considerable laughter and debate during the sessions about whether Bono could get away with singing the repeated " baby " s , one of the most heavily @-@ used clichés in pop songs and one that he had avoided up to that point in his songwriting ; Flood later commented that " he got away with it alright . " 
 Although the song is ostensibly about love and dependency , like many U2 songs , it also lends itself to religious interpretations . Listeners have heard an allusion to the Book of Job 29 : 2 – 3 and its tale of God serving as a lamp upon Job 's head walking through the darkness . Robyn Brothers suggests that ultraviolet light is " a metaphor for a divine force both unseen to the naked eye and ultimately unknowable to the human intellect . " Conversely , Steve Stockman , author of Walk On : The Spiritual Journey Of U2 , sees " Ultraviolet " as being about Bono 's wife Ali Hewson , and " how when he feels like trash , she makes him clean , " but says there is good reason to interpret the song as being just as much about God . The song 's title supports this view : indigo and violet rarely appear in song lyrics as frequently as other colours , while ultraviolet represents an unseen wavelength beyond the visible spectrum . 
 As such , the title evokes the image of black light or an invisible force permeating the darkness , whose connotations are spiritual and personal , as well as technological , reflecting themes of modern alienation explored elsewhere on Achtung Baby and its follow @-@ up album , Zooropa . Dianne <unk> <unk> , author of A Grand Madness : Ten Years on the Road with U2 , sees the song 's narrator as longing for assistance from any source , religious or secular : " This is a real plea , a bleary worn @-@ down drained wish to disappear . A drowning man desperate to hold hands in the darkness , to have someone else point the way , to be safe and obscure . " Atara Stein sees " Ultraviolet " as one of several selections on the album in which the protagonist in crisis has elevated his lover into an object of worship , desperate for her to " return to her initial role as his guide and salvation . " 
 " Ultraviolet " is also one of several songs Bono has written on the theme of woman as spirit , and it echoes the band 's 1980 song " Shadows and Tall Trees " by juxtaposing love with the image of ceilings . A line in Raymond Carver 's late 1980s poem " <unk> " , about the quiet that comes into a house where no one can sleep , was subconsciously recycled by Bono into the lyric . In Achtung Baby 's running order , " Ultraviolet " serves , with the other two songs at the album 's end , " Acrobat " and " Love Is Blindness " , to explore how couples face the task of reconciling the suffering they have imposed on each other . 
 The song features a Motown sound @-@ style " telegraph key " rhythm , which gave it the feeling of a pop song . This and the " baby , baby " refrain gave the song a throwaway quality that fit in with Achtung Baby 's mission of deconstructing U2 's image . Paradoxically , the arrangement also featured U2 's 1980s " <unk> @-@ riff " guitar style and the rest of the lyric was a serious love song that dealt with themes of anxiety and despair . Bono has described " Ultraviolet " as " an epic U2 song [ but ] the key of it left my voice in a conversational place and allowed a different kind of lyric writing . " Producer Eno wrote that a combination of opposites within each song was a signature characteristic of Achtung Baby and that as part of that , " Ultraviolet " had a " <unk> melancholy " . In Achtung Baby 's album package , " Ultraviolet " is presented next to a photograph of a crumbling Berlin building that has a Trabant parked in front of it . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Rolling Stone noted that " Ultraviolet " was one of the album 's songs that hearkened more to the group 's past than their new sound , saying that Edge 's " soaring peals on [ it ] are instantly recognizable " . Jon Pareles of The New York Times wrote that compared to much of the album 's grim depictions of personal relations , " Ultraviolet " depicts love as a haven . In contrast , U2 write John Jobling sees " Ultraviolet " as continuing the album 's theme of " two people tearing each other apart " , despite its " spectral pop " arrangement . 
 The Boston Globe heard echoes of The Rolling Stones ' 1966 song " Out of Time " in the chorus of " Ultraviolet " . Entertainment Weekly called it the album 's highlight , " where Bono 's soaring voice and the Edge 's <unk> guitar meld to create one of those uplifting moments we listen to U2 for " . Cedarville University literature professor Scott Calhoun says of one lyrical portion of " Ultraviolet " , " That 's so evocative and works as beautiful writing away from the music . It can stand on its own on the page and , of course , it 's even more effective when accompanied by the music . " 
 Other writers were less enthusiastic . Q magazine felt that the song was weak and that " Bono falls back on his old habit of trying to be ' inspirational ' by banging up the heat from simmer to meltdown between the verse and chorus . " U2 chroniclers Bill Graham and Caroline van Oosten de Boer also see the song as a throwback to the group 's earlier sound , but say that " the band doesn 't sufficiently develop the initial idea to warrant the five minutes of ' Ultra Violet ' " . 
 While " Ultraviolet " was not released as a single , it was used in a scene in the 2006 Adam Sandler film Click , and was featured in the 2007 film The Diving Bell and the Butterfly . 
 The name Ultra Violet was also given to one of U2 's improvised mid @-@ 1990s business initiatives , a joint merchandising venture with MCA Inc . ' s Winterland division ; the partnership soon dissolved , but not before producing several hundred thousand pairs of Bono " Fly " glasses . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 " Ultraviolet " is unusual in that the band has only ever played it in concert as part of an encore , usually preceding " With or Without You " . It was first performed at Lakeland Arena in Lakeland , Florida on 29 February 1992 at the start of the Zoo TV Tour , and it remained a staple of the band 's set lists for the first four legs of the tour , often preceded by a prank call by Bono as his alter @-@ egos Mirror Ball Man or Mr. MacPhisto . The Edge played the song on his Gibson Explorer . It was staged with silver @-@ and @-@ mauve lights thrown against two glitter balls , causing light fragments to swirl around the audience , and with lasers flashing in quick rhythms . Anthony DeCurtis of Rolling Stone characterised its essence as " desperately searching " and said that it helped transition the Zoo TV show towards an ambiguous , introspective conclusion . It became writer <unk> 's favourite live song on the tour , with Bono 's intense , unrestrained singing producing a strong communal energy ; she singled out the March 1992 Hampton Coliseum show as one in which Bono 's fervent performance approached the point of emotional breakdown and generated " a transcendent and draining experience for everyone . " Although acknowledging the song is an " epic ... with some gorgeous aspects " , Edge has said the song is unwieldy to play live . During Zoo TV , almost all of the numbers from Achtung Baby ( and the rest of the set list ) were augmented by sequencers to fill out the sound ; on " Ultraviolet " , under @-@ the @-@ stage keyboard tech Des <unk> playing a sampled guitar figure in the background during Edge 's solo parts . Its last performance as part of the tour was on 28 August 1993 in Dublin , after which the song was retired and did not appear on any of U2 's next three subsequent tours ( PopMart , Elevation , and Vertigo ) . 
 The song was revived a decade and a half later with the launch of the U2 360 ° Tour on 30 June 2009 in Barcelona , where it was once again performed as part of the encore . It was introduced by a robotic voice reading excerpts from the poem " Funeral Blues " by W. H. Auden , followed by Bono 's appearance wearing a laser @-@ studded jacket on a darkened stage illuminated only by a glowing steering wheel @-@ shaped microphone that hangs from above . During the performance , Bono would alternatively embrace or hang from the microphone , or twirl around it , or swing it overhead to emphasize the lyrics . The New York Times said its use as " a love song that can double as devotional " helped keep the show 's music and messages in balance , while the Chicago Tribune said that Bono sang the song with fervor as part of an encore during which " the show 's outsized ambitions produced a neon @-@ lighted moment that nearly justified the costly enterprise . " Rolling Stone called the song 's performance " one of the show 's highpoints . " " Ultraviolet " continued to be performed during the encore throughout the first two legs of the tour , with minor changes such as the use of a different introduction . 
 The band also played the song during its television appearance on Saturday Night Live on 26 September 2009 . In an appearance that avoided both their recent singles and best @-@ known hits , " Ultraviolet " was played as the group 's third number , in full 360 ° Tour staging style as the show 's end credits ran by . 
 = = Covers = = 
 The Killers reworked the song for the 2011 tribute album AHK @-@ toong BAY @-@ bi Covered . " Achtung Baby was U2 's ' Holy shit ! ' moment , " remarked drummer Ronnie Vannucci , Jr . " I was in high school when it came out and we 'd drive around in my friend 's mom 's car and rock that shit all the time . When we were asked to record a cover , ' Ultraviolet ' was a unanimous choice . It 's reassuring to know that we 're still on the same page after all these years . We brought it back to its bare bones , dumbed it down a little , took it back to the rock song underneath . " 
 The beginning of the song was also sampled by Enigma in their 1994 song " The Eyes of Truth " . 
 = December 1992 nor 'easter = 
 The December 1992 nor 'easter produced record high tides and snowfall across the northeastern United States . It developed as a low pressure area on December 10 over Virginia , and for two days it remained over the Mid @-@ Atlantic states before moving offshore . In Maryland , the snowfall unofficially reached 48 in ( 1 @,@ 200 mm ) ; if verified , the total would have been the highest in the state 's history . About 120 @,@ 000 people were left without power in the state due to high winds . Along the Maryland coast , the storm was less severe than the Perfect Storm in the previous year , although the strongest portion of the storm remained over New Jersey for several days . In the state , winds reached 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) in Cape May , and tides peaked at 10 @.@ 4 ft ( 3 @.@ 2 m ) in Perth Amboy . The combination of high tides and 25 ft ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) waves caused the most significant flooding in the state since the Ash Wednesday Storm of 1962 . Several highways and portions of the New York City Subway and Port Authority Trans @-@ Hudson systems were closed due to the storm . Throughout New Jersey , the nor 'easter damaged about 3 @,@ 200 homes and caused an estimated $ 750 million in damage ( 1992 USD ) . 
 The nor 'easter increased tides across the northeastern United States for several days due to its slow movement . In New York City , tides reached 8 @.@ 04 ft ( 2 @.@ 45 m ) at Battery Park , which flooded Franklin D. Roosevelt East River Drive . Along Long Island , the nor 'easter destroyed over 130 homes and left 454 @,@ 000 people without power . In New England , 230 @,@ 684 people lost power during the storm . Five houses were destroyed in Massachusetts , and flooding reached 5 ft ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) deep in Boston . Further inland , the storm produced significant snowfall , estimated at around 4 ft ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) in The Berkshires . The high snow totals closed schools for a week in western Massachusetts . Overall , the storm caused between $ 1 – 2 billion in damage ( 1992 USD ) and 19 deaths , of which four were directly related to the storm . In March of the following year , the Storm of the Century caused worse damage across a larger region of the eastern United States . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A storm complex moved eastward from the Texas coast into Georgia on December 9 . On December 9 , the National Weather Service ( NWS ) issued a coastal flood watch in anticipation of the developing storm . On December 10 , an upper @-@ level trough was located along the East Coast of the United States . At around 1200 UTC that day , cyclogenesis – the development of an low pressure area – occurred over southeastern Virginia . The cyclone moved quickly northward through the Chesapeake Bay until reaching a position just west of Chestertown , Maryland on December 11 . By that time , the system had intensified to a pressure of 985 mbar ( 29 @.@ 1 inHg ) , while the parent trough extended from Maryland through the New York metropolitan area to around Cape Cod . On December 11 , the NWS issued gale warnings and advised for boats to avoid the ocean . The storm turned to the southeast and briefly stalled near Georgetown , Delaware . This was due to a high pressure area north of Maine halting its motion . The interaction between the two systems produced strong easterly winds from Virginia to New England . The nor 'easter finally moved offshore on December 12 , and later that day passed to the southeast of Long Island . 
 = = Impact = = 
 The storm affected a large region of the northeastern United States from West Virginia to Massachusetts with heavy snowfall , sleet , rain , and high winds . The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention attributed four deaths to the nor 'easter , but only included those directly related ; the agency did not include storm @-@ induced traffic accidents or heart attacks . The National Climatic Data Center reported 19 deaths related to the nor 'easter , although news reports shortly after the storm reported 20 deaths . Overall damage was estimated between $ 1 – 2 billion ( 1992 USD ) , mostly in New England . 
 The storm 's widespread snowfall ranked it as the equivalence of a Category 2 , or " significant " , on the Regional Snowfall Index scale . 
 = = = Mid @-@ Atlantic = = = 
 In the Eastern Panhandle of West Virginia , the nor 'easter dropped over 30 in ( 760 mm ) of snow . Officials restricted travel on roads to emergency vehicles only in the state 's two easternmost counties . In the state , the storm left 15 @,@ 000 people without power . In northern Virginia , 2 ft ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) of snow stranded 2 @,@ 500 people in Winchester . In western Maryland , snowfall totals unofficially reached 42 in ( 1 @,@ 100 mm ) in Garrett County . If verified , the total would have been the highest snowfall amount in the state 's history . High winds produced up to 20 ft ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) snow drifts , which stranded trucks on Interstate 68 . High winds knocked down trees and power lines , leaving 120 @,@ 000 people across the state without power , including some without any heat . At least 10 people required rescue from their homes . In the Washington Metropolitan Area , the mixture of rain and snow caused hundreds of traffic accidents . 
 The nor 'easter struck about 14 months after the 1991 Perfect Storm produced similarly high tides across the region , and only 11 months after another nor 'easter in January 1992 . In Wilmington , North Carolina , the storm dropped 1 @.@ 79 in ( 45 mm ) of rainfall , which broke the daily rainfall record set in 1888 . High tides damaged much of the dune system along the Assateague Island National Seashore and about a third of the newly installed dunes in Ocean City , Maryland . Along the Maryland coast , the storm dropped heavy rainfall , with a total of 2 @.@ 90 in ( 74 mm ) in Salisbury ; the high rains flooded local streams . At Assateague National Seashore , wind gusts peaked at 54 mph ( 87 km / h ) . The storm struck shortly after a full moon , and the combination of high tides and waves breached dunes in some locations . Despite its longevity , the nor 'easter was less severe than its predecessors along the Delaware Bay , mostly because the stronger northeast quadrant was over the coastline for one tidal cycle , and the predominant southeast winds were blocked by Cape Henlopen . However , there were still high tides and flooding along the Delaware Bay . In Lewes , the nor 'easter produced a high tide of 6 @.@ 33 ft ( 1 @.@ 93 m ) , which at the time was the seventh highest on record . High tides continued in Delaware until December 15 . Several days of high tides caused minor beach erosion and damaged dune systems . In Dewey Beach , there was property damage from coastal flooding . The storm produced significantly more rainfall than the storm in January 1992 , including a total of 3 @.@ 12 in ( 79 mm ) in Wilmington , Delaware . A station in New Castle County reported a record 24 ‑ hour rainfall total of 3 @.@ 25 in ( 83 mm ) . The rains caused flooding and the third highest discharge on record at Duck Creek in Smyrna . Wind in Delaware peaked at 46 mph ( 74 km / h ) at a station along the Indian River . Further north along the Delaware River , a high tide of 7 @.@ 69 ft ( 2 @.@ 34 m ) was reported in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania . High winds in the city broke the steeple of a church , and the resulting debris briefly closed the Ben Franklin Bridge . Hurricane @-@ force wind gusts left about 160 @,@ 000 residents without power . Heavy snowfall spread across the state , reaching 37 in ( 940 mm ) . State College reported a total of 18 @.@ 1 in ( 460 mm ) , which contributed to its snowiest December on record . 
 In contrast to Delaware and Maryland , the strong northeast portion of the nor 'easter affected New Jersey for several days , producing strong winds and record high tides . Wind gusts reached 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) in Cape May , which were the strongest winds in association with the storm . Sustained winds were around 30 mph ( 48 km / h ) in the region . High winds in Atlantic City destroyed the windows of storefronts . Along the Jersey coast , the nor 'easter produced waves of up to 25 ft ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) in height . About 25 mi ( 40 km ) offshore Long Branch , waves reached heights of 44 ft ( 13 m ) . In South Jersey , the storm surge struck the coast near low tide , which restricted flooding . The highest tide in South Jersey was 7 @.@ 89 ft ( 2 @.@ 40 m ) in Ocean City , which broke the previous record of 7 @.@ 53 ft ( 2 @.@ 30 m ) set in 1984 . Further north , the surge coincided with several days of high tides and a lunar tide , causing significant flooding and beach erosion . The highest tide was 10 @.@ 4 ft ( 3 @.@ 2 m ) in Perth Amboy along the Raritan River , which broke the record set in 1960 . In many locations , the storm produced the highest tides since the Ash Wednesday Storm of 1962 . The storm also dropped rainfall across the state , peaking at 3 @.@ 80 in ( 97 mm ) in Morristown , along with gusts peaking at 58 mph ( 93 <unk> ) at Morristown Municipal Airport . The rainfall caused higher discharge rates along rivers . The storm also produced high snowfall totals , including 14 in ( 360 mm ) in Sussex County . Throughout the coastline , the cost to replace the lost beach from erosion was estimated at $ 300 million ( 1992 USD ) . 
 Most of the impact in New Jersey was from the high tides , which caused the worst flooding in 30 years in some locations . In Hoboken , high tides flooded portions of the New York City Subway and Port Authority Trans @-@ Hudson systems , leaving them closed for a few days . High tides destroyed portions of the boardwalks in Bradley Beach and Belmar , and also destroyed a century @-@ old fishing pier in Ocean Grove . Flooding closed portions of roads across North Jersey , including the Garden State Parkway near Cheesequake State Park and six state highways . At Newark International Airport , dozens of flights were canceled . The storm left 102 @,@ 000 customers of Jersey Central Power & Light without power . Damage to short circuits caused house fires in Monmouth County . Damage was heaviest near Raritan , Newark , and Sandy Hook along Raritan Bay . High winds in Jersey City destroyed the roof of an apartment ; the debris struck and killed a woman walking along a nearby sidewalk . Throughout the state , the nor 'easter damaged about 3 @,@ 200 homes , primarily in Monmouth and Ocean counties , and caused an estimated $ 750 million in damage ( 1992 USD ) . Then @-@ governor Jim Florio declared a state of emergency and activated the New Jersey National Guard . About 19 @,@ 000 people were evacuated in six towns in Monmouth County . Statewide , about 2 @,@ 000 people in 20 towns had to be evacuated by helicopter or National Guard truck . The American Red Cross opened at least 30 shelters across the state , housing over 5 @,@ 000 people affected by floods or lack of heat . Damage in the state was less than the nor 'easter of 1962 due to 30 years of disaster mitigation , including beach replenishment , dune construction , and improved building codes . 
 = = = New York and New England = = = 
 Before the storm 's circulation passed the New York area , its associated trough produced sustained easterly winds of 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) along Long Island . Wind gusts reached 77 mph ( 124 km / h ) at LaGuardia Airport . The strong easterly winds produced high tides in the region that increased gradually after three consecutive tidal cycles ; this was due to the nor 'easter 's slow movement . There was a storm surge of about 3 ft ( 1 m ) at Battery Park at the southern end of Manhattan . The same station reported a high tide of 8 @.@ 04 ft ( 2 @.@ 45 m ) above sea level , which was high enough to surpass the sea walls for a few hours . The ensuing flooding submerged portions of Franklin D. Roosevelt East River Drive to about 4 ft ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) deep . At least 50 cars were stuck , and some drivers required rescue . Low @-@ lying neighborhoods of New York City were also flooded . High waves canceled ferry service to Staten Island . A power outage closed the New York City subway system for about five hours . The highest tide in Long Island was 11 @.@ 27 ft ( 3 @.@ 44 m ) at Willets Point , Queens . The tides and flooding decreased after the winds shifted to the north , ending on December 14 . High tides canceled ferry service to Fire Island , and the only bridge onto the island was closed to all but emergency personnel and homeowners . High waves washed away dunes and severely eroded beaches along the island , destroying over 100 summer homes . On nearby Westhampton Beach , 30 homes were destroyed , and about 100 houses were isolated due to two new inlets created during the storm . Flooding closed all three bridges connecting Long Beach Island to the mainland . Flooding up to 8 ft ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) forced about 3 @,@ 000 people to evacuate from one village on northern Long Island . About 700 homes were damaged in Bayville along the north coast . High winds downed trees and power lines , leaving more than 454 @,@ 000 Long Island Lighting Company customers without power . In Mamaroneck to the northeast of New York City , a man drowned after being swept away by floodwaters . In the Albany area , where the storm was known as the <unk> Nor 'easter , there was little snow accumulation during the storm 's closest approach due to above freezing temperatures . After the storm moved by the region and the winds shifted to the north , about 6 in ( 150 mm ) fell in the city . To the west of Albany in the Helderberg Escarpment and the Catskill Mountains , snowfall totals reached 39 in ( 990 mm ) . Heavy snowfall spread across the state , including a total of 14 in ( 360 mm ) in Niagara Falls . 
 In New England , local TV stations named the storm Beth . Across the region , the Northeast Utilities power company reported that 230 @,@ 684 customers lost electricity during the storm , although all outages were restored within three days . In Connecticut , the nor 'easter produced a storm surge of about 3 ft ( 1 m ) , and a high tide of 7 @.@ 2 ft ( 2 @.@ 2 m ) was reported in Bridgeport . This was the highest tide since Hurricane Carol in 1954 . The rising tides killed one man in the state , and there was also one fatality in neighboring Rhode Island . Along Cape Cod , 15 ft ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) waves eroded beaches , and evacuations were recommended in two cities . The storm destroyed four houses on Nantucket and one in Plymouth . During the storm , more than 20 pilot whales were beached along the cape , of which seven died . Boston reported a peak tide of 9 @.@ 35 ft ( 2 @.@ 85 m ) , which was 1 @.@ 05 ft ( 0 @.@ 32 m ) less than the record set in 1978 . The high tides caused up to 5 ft ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) of flooding . The nor 'easter produced 27 in ( 690 mm ) of snowfall in a 24 period to the west of the city . Further west , snowfall totals reached around 4 ft ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) in The Berkshires , which created 10 ft ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) snow drifts . The high accumulations closed schools for a week in the Berkshires , and the cities required National Guard assistance to remove the snow . To the west of the Berkshires , strong east winds prevented significant snow accumulation in valleys . High tides extended as far north as Portland , Maine , which reported a peak of 7 @.@ 71 ft ( 2 @.@ 35 m ) . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 On December 17 , President George H. W. Bush declared three Connecticut counties as disaster areas . The next day , the president declared 12 New Jersey counties as disaster areas , including all of the counties along the Atlantic coast . The declaration allowed for $ 46 million in relief for public damages and $ 265 million for insured damage in the state . On December 21 , the president declared 9 Massachusetts counties and 5 New York counties as disaster areas . On January 15 , 1993 , Sussex County , Delaware was also declared a disaster area . Across the nor 'easter 's path , 25 @,@ 142 people received assistance from Federal Emergency Management Agency , equating to $ 346 @,@ 150 @,@ 356 in federal aid . Only three months after the nor 'easter struck , another nor 'easter caused more severe damage across a larger region of the eastern United States . The March nor 'easter , known as the Storm of the Century , killed 310 people and left over $ 1 @.@ 5 billion in damage ( 1993 USD ) . 
 = Madonna in the Church = 
 Madonna in the Church ( or The Virgin in the Church ) is a small oil panel by the early Netherlandish painter Jan van Eyck . Probably executed between c . 1438 – 40 , it depicts the Virgin Mary holding the Child Jesus in a Gothic cathedral . Mary is presented as Queen of Heaven wearing a jewel @-@ studded crown , cradling a playful child Christ who gazes at her and grips the hem of her red dress in a manner that recalls the 13th @-@ century Byzantine tradition of the <unk> icon ( Virgin of Tenderness ) . Tracery in the arch at the rear of the nave contains wooden carvings depicting episodes from Mary 's life , while a faux bois sculpture in a niche shows her holding the child in a similar pose . Erwin Panofsky sees the painting composed as if the main figures in the panel are intended to be the sculptures come to life . In a doorway to the right , two angels sing psalms from a hymn book . Like other Byzantine depictions of the Madonna , van Eyck depicts a monumental Mary , unrealistically large compared to her surroundings . The panel contains closely observed beams of light flooding through the cathedral 's windows . It illuminates the interior before culminating in two pools on the floor . The light has symbolic significance , alluding simultaneously to Mary 's virginal purity and God 's ethereal presence . 
 Most art historians see the panel as the left wing of a dismantled diptych ; presumably its opposite wing was a votive portrait . Near @-@ contemporary copies by the Master of 1499 and Jan Gossaert pair it with two very different right @-@ hand images : one is of a donor kneeling in an interior setting ; the other is set outdoors , with the donor being presented by St Anthony . Both painters made significant alterations to van Eyck 's composition , which may have brought the image more up to date with contemporary styles , but the copies have been described as " spiritually if not aesthetically disastrous to the original concept " . 
 Madonna in the Church was first documented in 1851 . Since then its dating and attribution have been widely debated amongst scholars . At first thought an early work by Jan van Eyck , and for a period attributed to his brother Hubert van Eyck , it is now definitively attributed to Jan and believed to be a later work , demonstrating techniques present in work from the mid @-@ 1430s and later . The panel was acquired for the Berlin Gemäldegalerie in 1874 . It was stolen in 1877 and soon returned , but without its original inscribed frame , which was never recovered . Today Madonna in the Church is widely considered one of van Eyck 's finest ; Millard Meiss wrote that its " splendor and subtlety of [ its depiction ] of light is unsurpassed in Western art . " 
 = = Attribution and dating = = 
 The attribution of the panel reflects the progression and trends of 19th and 20th @-@ century scholarship on Early Netherlandish art . It is now thought to have been completed c . 1438 – 40 , but there are still arguments for dates as early as 1424 – 29 . As with the pages ascribed to Hand G in the Turin @-@ Milan Hours manuscript , the panel was attributed to Jan 's brother Hubert van Eyck in the 1875 Gemäldegalerie catalogue , and by a 1911 claim by art historian Georges Hulin de Loo . This is no longer considered credible and Hubert , today , is credited with very few works . By 1912 the painting had been definitively attributed to Jan in the museum catalogue . 
 Attempts to date it have undergone similar shifts of opinion . In the 19th century the panel was believed to be an early work by Jan completed as early as c . 1410 , although this view changed as scholarship progressed . In the early 20th century , Ludwig von Baldass placed it around 1424 – 29 , then for a long period it was seen as originating from the early 1430s . Erwin Panofsky provided the first detailed treatise on the work and placed it around 1432 – 34 . However , following research from Meyer Schapiro , he revised his opinion to the late 1430s in the 1953 edition of his Early Netherlandish Painting . A 1970s comparative study of van Eyck 's 1437 Saint Barbara concluded that Madonna in the Church was completed after c . 1437 . In the 1990s , Otto Pächt judged the work as probably a late van Eyck , given the similar treatment of an interior in the 1434 Arnolfini Portrait . In the early 21st century , Jeffrey Chipps Smith and John Oliver Hand placed it between 1426 and 1428 , claiming it as perhaps the earliest extant signed work confirmed as by Jan. 
 = = The panel = = 
 = = = Description = = = 
 At 31 cm × 14 cm , the painting 's dimensions are small enough to be almost considered miniature , consistent with most 15th @-@ century devotional diptychs . A reduced size increased portability and affordability , and encouraged the viewer to approach the piece to more closely see its intricate details . The work shows Mary wearing a dark blue robe – the colour traditionally used to emphasise her humanity – over a red dress of different textured fabrics . Her hem is embroidered in gold with gilded lettering that reads " <unk> " and " LU " , or perhaps <unk> <unk> HEC ES , in all probability , fragments of the Latin words for " sun " ( sole ) and " light " ( lux ) . On her head is an elaborately tiered and jeweled crown and in her arms she carries the infant Jesus , his feet resting on her left hand . <unk> in a white cloth from hips trailing down beyond his feet , his hand rests on her neckline clutching the jeweled hem of his mother 's dress . 
 Further depictions of Mary are found in the church background . They include a statue of the Virgin and Child positioned between two lit candles in the choir screen behind the main figures , and to the right two angels stand in the choir singing her praises ( perhaps singing the hymn inscribed on the frame ) . Above her is an annunciation relief , and in the recessed bay a relief depicting her coronation ; the crucifixion is shown on the rood . Thus , the stages of Mary 's life as mother of Jesus are depicted in the painting . A two @-@ column prayer tablet – similar to the one depicted in Rogier van der Weyden 's large Seven Sacraments Altarpiece ( 1445 – 50 ) – hangs on a pier to the left . It contains words alluding to and echoing the lines on the original frame . The windows of the clerestory overlook flying buttresses , and cobwebs are visible between the arches of the vault . Several different building phases can be seen in the arched gallery , while the choral balcony and transept are depicted in a more contemporary style than the nave . 
 Closely detailed beams of light spill through the high windows and illuminate the interior , filling the portal and flowing across the tiled floors before it hits the clerestory windows . The brilliance of the daylight is juxtaposed with the gentle glow of the candles in the choir screen altar , while the lower portion of the pictorial space is relatively poorly lit . Shadows cast by the cathedral can be seen across the choir steps and near aisle . Their angle is rendered in an unusually realistic manner for early 15th century , and the detail is such that their description is likely based on observation of the actual behaviour of light , a further innovation in 15th @-@ century art . Yet while the light is portrayed as it might appear in nature , its source is not . Panofsky notes that the sunlight enters from the north windows , but contemporary churches normally had east @-@ facing choirs , so the light should enter from the south . He suggests the light is not intended to be natural , but rather to represent the divine , and hence subject to " the laws of symbolism and not those of nature . " 
 = = = Frame and inscriptions = = = 
 According to Elisabeth Dhanens , the shape and rounded top of the original frame is reminiscent of those found on the top register of panels of the Ghent altarpiece , which are accepted as designed by Jan 's brother Hubert . She believes the current frame is too narrow and small , and contains " clumsy marbling " . From a detailed 1851 inventory , we know the text of the hymn inscribed on original frame . The text is written in a poetic form and begun on the lower border and then extended upwards on the vertical borders , ending on the top border . The lower border of the frame read <unk> <unk> <unk> ; the sides and top <unk> HEC EST <unk> <unk> EST <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ( " The mother is the daughter . This father is born . Who has heard of such a thing ? God born a man " ) . The fifth stanza of the hymn ( not included in van Eyck 's transcription ) reads , " As the sunbeam through the glass . <unk> but not <unk> . Thus , the Virgin , as she was . Virgin still <unk> . " The lettering on the hem of her robe echoes the inscription on the frame , words similar to those found on Mary 's dress in van Eyck 's 1436 Virgin and Child with Canon van der Paele , a passage from the Book of Wisdom ( 7 : 29 ) reading EST <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ET <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> . <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ( " For she is more beautiful than the sun , and excels every constellation of the stars . Compared with the light she is found to be superior " ) . 
 Some historians have suggested that the inscriptions were intended to breathe life into the other statues and depictions of Mary . Others , including Craig Harbison , believe they were purely functional ; given that contemporary diptychs were commissioned for private devotion and reflection , the inscriptions were meant to be read as an incantation or were personalised indulgence prayers . Harbison notes that van Eyck 's privately commissioned works are unusually heavily inscribed with prayer , and that the words may have served a similar function to prayer tablets , or more exactly " Prayer Wings " , of the type seen in the reconstructed London Virgin and Child triptych . 
 = = = Architecture = = = 
 Van Eyck 's earlier work often shows churches and cathedrals in older Romanesque style , sometimes to represent the Temple in Jerusalem as an appropriate historical setting , with decoration drawn exclusively from the Old Testament . That is clearly not the case here – the Christ Child occupies the same space as a large rood cross depicting him being crucified . The church in this panel is contemporary Gothic – a choice perhaps intended to associate Mary with the Ecclesia <unk> – while her pose and oversized scale are indebted to the forms and conventions of Byzantine art and the International Gothic . Van Eyck details the architecture with a precision not seen before in northern European painting . 
 The different elements of the cathedral are so specifically detailed and the elements of Gothic and contemporary architecture so well delineated , that art and architecture historians have concluded that van Eyck must have had enough architectural knowledge to make nuanced distinctions . More so , given the finesse of the descriptions , many scholars have tried to link the painting with a particular building . Yet , and as with all buildings in van Eyck 's work , the structure is imagined and probably an idealised formation of what he viewed as a perfect architectural space . This is evident from a number of features that would be unlikely in a contemporary church , such as the placing of a round arched triforium above a pointed colonnade . 
 Several art historians have reasoned why van Eyck did not model the interior on any actual building . Most agree that he sought to create an ideal and perfect space for Mary 's apparition , and aimed for visual impact rather than physical possibility . Buildings suggested as possible ( at least partial ) sources include Saint Nicholas ' Church , Ghent , the Basilica of St Denis , Dijon Cathedral , Liège Cathedral and Cologne Cathedral , as well as the basilica of Our Lady in Tongeren , which contains a very similar triforium gallery and clerestory . Tongeren is one of a minority of churches in the region aligned on a north @-@ east to south @-@ west axis , so that the lighting conditions in the painting can be seen on summer mornings . In addition , the church contains a standing statue of the Virgin and Child ( the Virgin with a tall crown ) , once credited with miraculous powers , though the current statue post @-@ dates van Eyck . 
 Pächt described the work in terms of an " interior illusion " , noting the manner in which the viewer 's eye falls across the nave , the crossing , but " only then , [ is he ] looking through and over the rood screen , the choir . " From this Pächt views the perspective as deliberately lacking cohesion , as " the relationship between the parts of the building is not shown in full ... The transition from foreground to background is ingeniously masked by the figure of the Madonna herself , who obscures the crossing pier ; the middle ground is practically eliminated and our eye crosses over it without our becoming aware of it . " The illusion is enhanced by the use of colour to suggest light : the interior is dim and in shadow while the unseen exterior seems bathed in bright light . 
 = = = Windows and stained glass = = = 
 Unusual for a 13th @-@ century Gothic cathedral , most of the windows are of clear glass . Looking at the windows running along the nave , John L. Ward observed that the window directly above the suspended crucifix is the only one whose uppermost portion is visible . That window directly faces the viewer , revealing intricately designed stained glass panels that show intertwined red and blue flowers . Because the window is so far back in the pictorial space , where perspective is becoming faint , the proximity of the flowers to the crucifix lends them the appearance of coming " forward in space , as if [ they ] had suddenly grown from the top of the crucifix in front of it . " 
 Ward does not believe this a trick of the eye resulting from loss of perspective towards the high reaches of the panel . Instead he sees it as a subtle reference to the iconography and mythology of the Book of Genesis ' Tree of life , which he describes here as " reborn in Christ 's death " . He does acknowledge the subtlety of the illusion , and the fact that neither of the two well known near copies include the motif . The idea of flowers shown as if sprouting from the top of the cross may have been borrowed from Masaccio 's c . 1426 Crucifixion , where flowers are placed on the upper portion of the vertical beam of the cross . Ward concludes than van Eyck took the idea even further by showing the flowers emanating from another source , and sought to depict the actual moment where the tree of life is reborn and " the cross comes to life and sprouts flowers as one watches " . 
 = = Interpretation and iconography = = 
 = = = Light = = = 
 In the early 15th century , Mary held a central position in Christian iconography and was often portrayed as the one in whom the " Word was made flesh " , a direct result of the work of the divine light . During the medieval period , light acted as a visual symbol for both the immaculate conception and Christ 's birth ; it was believed that he was made manifest by God 's light passing through Mary 's body , just as light shines through a window pane . 
 The divine represented by light is a motif in keeping with the sentiment of both the Latin text on the hem of Mary 's dress ( which compares her beauty and radiance to that of divine light ) and on the frame . A separate source of light , which also behaves as if from a divine rather than natural source , illuminates her face . The two pools of light behind her have been described as lending the painting a mystical atmosphere , indicating the presence of God . In the niche behind her , the statues are lit by two candles - symbols of the incarnation , whereas she is bathed in natural light . The artificial light adds to the overall illusion of the interior of the church , which Pächt views as achieved mainly through colour . 
 Light became a popular means for 15th @-@ century Northern painters to represent the mystery of the Incarnation , utilising the idea of light passing through glass without shattering it to convey the paradox of conception and " virgo intacta " . This is reflected in a passage attributed to Bernard of Clairvaux from his " Sermones de <unk> " ; " Just as the brilliance of the sun fills and penetrates a glass window without damaging it , and pierces its solid form with imperceptible subtlety , neither hurting it when entering nor destroying it when emerging : thus the word of God , the splendor of the Father , entered the virgin chamber and then came forth from the closed womb . " 
 Before the early Netherlandish period , divine light was not well described : if a painter wanted to depict heavenly radiance , he typically painted an object in reflective gold . There was a focus on describing the object itself rather than the effect of the light as it fell across it . Van Eyck was one of the first to portray light 's saturation , illuminating effects and gradations as it poured across the pictorial space . He detailed how an object 's colour could vary depending on the amount and type of light illuminating it . This play of light is evident across the panel , and especially seen on Mary 's gilded dress and jewelled crown , across her hair and on her mantle . 
 = = = <unk> icon = = = 
 The panel is , with the Antwerp Madonna at the Fountain , broadly accepted as one of van Eyck 's two late " Madonna and Child " paintings before his death in about 1441 . Both show a standing Virgin dressed in blue . In both works , Mary 's positioning and colourisation contrasts with his earlier surviving treatments of the subject , in which she was typically seated and dressed in red . Models for standing Virgins existed in the icons of Byzantine art , and both paintings also represent modified versions of the <unk> type , sometimes called the Virgin of Tenderness in English , where the Virgin and Child touch cheeks , and the child caresses Mary 's face . 
 During the 14th and 15th centuries , a large number of these works were imported into northern Europe , and were widely copied by the first generation of Netherlandish artists , among others . The iconography of both the late Byzantine – typified by the unknown artist responsible for the Cambrai Madonna – and 14th @-@ century successors such as Giotto favoured presenting the Madonna on a monumental scale . Undoubtedly van Eyck absorbed these influences , though when and through which works is disputed . It is believed that he had first @-@ hand exposure to them during his visit to Italy , which occurred either in 1426 or 1428 , before the Cambrai icon was brought to the North . Van Eyck 's two Madonna panels carried forward the habit of reproduction and were themselves frequently copied by commercial workshops throughout the 15th century . 
 It is possible that the Byzantine flavour to these images was also connected with contemporary attempts through diplomacy to achieve reconciliation with the Greek Orthodox Church , in which van Eyck 's patron Philip the Good took a keen interest . Van Eyck 's Portrait of Cardinal Niccolò Albergati ( c . 1431 ) depicts one of the papal diplomats most involved with these efforts . 
 = = = Mary as the Church = = = 
 Van Eyck gives Mary three roles : Mother of Christ , the personification of the " Ecclesia <unk> " and Queen of Heaven , the latter apparent from her jewel @-@ studded crown . The painting 's near miniature size contrasts with Mary 's unrealistically large stature compared with her setting . She physically dominates the cathedral ; her head is almost level with the approximately sixty feet high gallery . This distortion of scale is found in a number of other van Eyck 's Madonna paintings , where the arches of the mostly gothic interior do not allow headroom for the virgin . Pächt describes the interior as a " throne room " , which envelopes her as if a " carrying case " . Her monumental stature reflects a tradition reaching back to an Italo @-@ Byzantine type – perhaps best known through Giotto 's <unk> Madonna ( c . 1310 ) – and emphasises her identification with the cathedral itself . Till @-@ Holger Borchert says that van Eyck did not paint her as " the Madonna in a church " , but instead as metaphor , presenting Mary " as the Church " . This idea that her size represents her embodiment as the church was first suggested by Erwin Panofsky in 1941 . Art historians in the 19th century , who thought the work was executed early in van Eyck 's career , attributed her scale as the mistake of a relatively immature painter . 
 The composition is today seen as deliberate , and opposite to both his Madonna of Chancellor Rolin and Arnolfini Portrait . These works show interiors seemingly too small to contain the figures , a device van Eyck used to create and emphasise an intimate space shared by donor and saint . The Virgin 's height recalls his Annunciation of 1434 – 36 , although in that composition there are no architectural fittings to give a clear scale to the building . Perhaps reflecting the view of a " relatively immature painter " , a copy of the Annunciation by <unk> van Cleve shows Mary at a more realistic proportion scale to her surroundings . 
 Mary is presented as a Marian apparition ; in this case she probably appears before a donor , who would have been kneeling in prayer in the now lost opposite panel . The idea of a saint appearing before laity was common in Northern art of the period , and is also represented in van Eyck 's Virgin and Child with Canon van der Paele ( 1434 – 36 ) . There , the Canon is portrayed as if having just momentarily paused to reflect on a passage from his hand @-@ held bible as the Virgin and Child with two saints appear before him , as if embodiments of his prayer . 
 = = = Pilgrimage = = = 
 As a prayer tablet placed on a pier was a distinctive trait of pilgrimage churches , Harbison sees the panel as partly concerned with the phenomenon of pilgrimage . This type of tablet contained specific prayers whose recitation in front of a particular image or in the church was believed to attract an indulgence , or remission of time in Purgatory . The statue of the Virgin and Child in the niche behind Mary 's left shoulder might represent such an image , whereas the inscription of a Nativity hymn around the lost frame , ending in <unk> , i.e. " etcetera " , would have told the viewer to recite the whole hymn , perhaps for an indulgence . The purpose of the picture , therefore , may have been to represent and bring the act of pilgrimage to a domestic setting . This would have been attractive to Philip the Good who , though he made many pilgrimages in person , is recorded as paying van Eyck to perform one on his behalf in 1426 , apparently an acceptable practice in Late Medieval celestial accounting . 
 The Virgin and Child at the forefront might represent the background statues coming to life ; at the time such an apparition was considered the highest form of pilgrimage experience . Their poses are similar and her tall crown is typical of those seen on statues rather than either royalty or painted figures of the Virgin . Harbison further suggests that the two pools of light on the floor echo the two candles on either side of one of the statues , and notes that the copies described below retain the prayer tablet , one bringing it nearer to the foreground . 
 = = Lost diptych and copies = = 
 Most art historians believe that there are a number of indicators that the panel was the left @-@ hand wing of a dismantled diptych . The frame contains clasps , implying it was once hinged to a second panel . The work seems composed to be symmetrically balanced towards an accompanying right @-@ hand wing : Mary is positioned slightly to the right of centre , while her downward , almost coy glance is directed at a space beyond the edge of the panel , suggesting that she is looking at , or in the direction of , a kneeling donor in a right @-@ hand wing . The visible architectural features – with the exception of the niches , the crucifixion and the windows directly behind it , which are at a right angle to the nave and centre front , facing the viewer – are at the left of the panel , facing right . 
 Harbison believes the panel is " almost certainly only the left @-@ hand half of a devotional diptych " . Dhanens observes how Mary 's eyeline extends beyond the horizon of her panel , a common feature of Netherlandish diptychs and triptychs , where the saint 's gaze is directed towards an accompanying image of a donor . Other indicators include the unusually oblique architectural aspect of the church , which suggests that its depiction was intended to extend across to a sister wing – in a manner similar to the Master of <unk> 's Annunciation , and especially in van der Weyden 's c . 1452 Braque Triptych , where continuity between the panels is especially emphasised . 
 Two near @-@ contemporary copies , usually attributed to the Ghent Master of 1499 and Jan Gossaert , were completed while the original was in the collection of Margaret of Austria , great @-@ granddaughter of Philip the Good . Both present variants of the Madonna panel as the left wing of a devotional diptych , with a donor portrait as the right wing . However , the two donor panels have very different settings . The 1499 version shows the Cistercian abbot Christiaan de <unk> praying in his luxurious quarters , while Gossaert presents the donor Antonio Siciliano , accompanied by Saint Anthony , in a panoramic landscape setting . It is not known if either work is based on an original left @-@ hand panel painted by van Eyck . 
 The 1499 Madonna panel is a free adaption , in that the artist has changed and repositioned a number of elements . However , art historians usually agree that they are to the detriment of the balance and impact of the composition . The panel attributed to Gossaert shows even more significant , though perhaps more successful , alterations , including shifting the centre of balance by adding a section to the right @-@ hand side , dressing the Virgin entirely in dark blue and changing her facial features . Both copies omit the two pools of bright light on the floor across from her , thus removing the mystical element of van Eyck 's original , perhaps because its significance was not grasped by the later artists . That Gossaert followed other aspects of the original so closely , however , is evidence of the high regard he held for van Eyck 's technical and aesthetic ability , and his version has been seen by some as a homage . The Master of 1499 's admiration for van Eyck can be seen in his left @-@ hand panel , which contains many features reminiscent of van Eyck 's Arnolfini Portrait , including the rendering of the ceiling beams and the colour and texture of the red fabrics . 
 Around 1520 – 30 , the Ghent illuminator and miniaturist Simon Bening produced a half @-@ length Virgin and Child that closely resembles van Eyck 's panel , to the extent that it can be considered a loose copy . However , it can be more closely related to the original Cambrai Madonna especially in its retention of the halo , which was considered old fashioned by the 15th century . Bening 's Madonna is distinct to the two earlier copies of van Eyck ; it was intended as a stand @-@ alone panel , not part of a diptych , and though compositionally similar , radically departs from the original , especially in its colourisation . It is thought that Bening 's work was informed by Gossaert 's panel rather than directly by van Eyck 's . 
 = = Provenance = = 
 The provenance of the work contains many gaps , and even the better @-@ documented periods are often complicated or " murky " , according to Dhanens . There is almost no record from the early 16th century through 1851 , and the theft in 1877 leaves doubt for some as to what exactly was returned . Historian Léon de Laborde documented an altarpiece in a village near Nantes in 1851 – a Madonna in a church nave holding the Christ Child in her right arm – which he described as " painted on wood , very well preserved , still in its original frame " . The description contains a detailing of the frame 's inscription . A document from 1855 records a Virgin in the Church thought to be by Hubert and Jan van Eyck , which may be the same painting . It belonged to a Monsieur Nau , who had bought it for 50 francs from the housekeeper of Francois <unk> , a French diplomat who had acquired a number of paintings from Italy . 
 A panel very similar in description was purchased by the Aachen art collector Barthold <unk> sometime during the 1860s and catalogued in 1869 with a detailing of the frame 's inscription . This work was thought to have come from Nantes , suggesting it was the same as the panel mentioned in 1851 . The <unk> collection was acquired by the Berlin museum in May 1874 , as part of an acquisition of 219 paintings . The painting was stolen in March 1877 , generating worldwide news coverage ; it was recovered ten days later , but without the original frame . The 1875 Berlin museum catalogue attributes a van Eyck imitator ; the 1883 catalogue describes the original as lost and the Berlin painting a copy . Soon after , however , its authenticity was verified , and the 1904 Berlin catalogue attributed Jan. 
 Philip the Good may have been the original patron , given that a painting matching its description was recorded in a 1567 inventory of his great @-@ granddaughter Margaret of Austria , who inherited the majority of Philip 's collection . The description in her record reads , " Un autre tableau de <unk> @-@ Dame , du duc Philippe , qui est venu de <unk> , <unk> de satin <unk> gris , et <unk> <unk> d 'argent <unk> et <unk> de <unk> vert . <unk> de la main Johannes . " From the naming conventions known from the collection 's inventory , " Johannes " probably refers to van Eyck , " duc Philippe " to Philip . 
 = Ape Escape ( video game ) = 
 Ape Escape is a platform video game , developed by SCE Japan Studio and published by Sony Computer Entertainment . It was released for the PlayStation in May 1999 in North America , and June 1999 in Japan . The first in the Ape Escape series , the game tells the story of an ape named Specter who gains enhanced intelligence and a malevolent streak through the use of an experimental helmet . Specter produces an army of apes , which he sends through time in an attempt to rewrite history . Spike , the player character , sets out to capture the apes with the aid of special gadgets . 
 Ape Escape is played from a third @-@ person perspective . Players use a variety of gadgets to pursue and capture the apes , traversing across several environments . The game 's controls are heavily centred around the analog sticks , being the first game to require the use of the PlayStation 's DualShock . Development of Ape Escape lasted over two years , and was generally focused on adapting to the use of the controller , which was a significant challenge for the development team . 
 Ape Escape was met with critical acclaim from professional critics , with praise particularly directed at the innovative use of the dual analog controls , as well as the graphics and music ; the voice acting received minor criticism . The game is widely considered to be one of the greatest on the PlayStation console , and received several re @-@ releases . The game also spawned numerous sequels and spin @-@ offs , beginning with Ape Escape 2 in 2001 . A remake , Ape Escape : On the Loose , was released for the PlayStation Portable in 2005 to mixed reviews . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Ape Escape is a platform game that is viewed from a third @-@ person perspective . Players traverse several different environments to advance through the game . For most of the game , players control Spike — a boy tasked with pursuing and capturing the apes across time , preventing them from rewriting history . Players use various gadgets to pursue and capture the apes , such as the Stun Club , used as an offensive measure against enemies , and the Time Net , used to capture apes and transport them to present day . More gadgets become available as players progress through the game . Players also control vehicles throughout the game , including a rubber raft , which allows travel over water , and the water net , which assists in traversing underwater . The game 's controls are heavily centered around the analog sticks : the left stick is used to move players , while the right stick manipulates the various gadgets . 
 The apes are equipped with helmets , which feature a siren representing their alarm level : blue means relaxed , and unaware of the player characters ' presence ; yellow is alert ; and red indicates fully alarmed , resulting in attempting to escape or becoming hostile . An ape 's personality can also be determined by the colour of shorts : yellow is standard , light blue means timid , and red represents aggressive . Some apes are equipped with weaponry , allowing them to attack players , or binoculars that allow them to identify players from long distances . Players are required to capture a specific amount of apes to clear a level ; remaining apes can be captured upon revisiting the level . 
 Should players take damage , they lose a life . Players can recharge their health by collecting cookies . Throughout the game , players can gather Specter Coins , which can be found in hidden locations in each stage . Collecting enough Specter Coins unlocks three bonus mini @-@ games : Ski Kidz Racing , a skiing game in which players race against opponents ; Galaxy Monkey , a shoot ' em up where players fight against aliens ; and Specter Boxing , a boxing game where players dodge and punch using the analog sticks . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The story begins when Specter , a white @-@ haired monkey at a monkey park , puts on an experimental Pipo Helmet created by a Professor , which increases his intelligence beyond that of a regular monkey , but also twists his mind , turning him evil . Imbued with this new power , Specter gives Pipo Helmets to all the monkeys in the park and sets them loose , having them take over the local laboratory where the Professor and his assistant Katie ( Natalie / Natsumi ) are currently building a time machine . As Spike ( Kakeru ) and his best friend Buzz ( Jake / Hiroki ) arrive at the laboratory , they find themselves transported by Specter , along with all the other monkeys , to the various reaches of time . Realising that leaving the monkeys to their own devices could rewrite history in disastrous ways , the Professor tasks Spike with finding all of the monkeys scattered across time and sending them back to the present . 
 Spike must also face off against Specter , who has not only built himself an advanced Peak Point Helmet further increasing his own intelligence , but has also brainwashed Buzz to his side . After a lengthy series of captures and battles in segments of history ranging from the roam of the dinosaurs , medieval times and present day , Spike is eventually able to capture all of the apes . Spike chases Specter to his deranged theme park , where he is holding a recently captured Professor , Katie , and his friend Buzz . Spike frees Buzz of his and releases both the professor and Katie , and goes on to find Specter in an alternative universe he calls the " Peak Point Matrix " . Spike defeats Specter after a final battle , and he is captured and sent back to the zoo . 
 = = Development = = 
 The development of Ape Escape lasted approximately two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years . Shortly after the development team began conceiving the design and concept for Ape Escape , they attended a meeting regarding the development of the DualShock . Intrigued by the potential of the controller , the team implemented its use in Ape Escape , making it the first video game to require the use of the DualShock for gameplay . <unk> the controls for the controller 's analog sticks was the greatest challenge for the team , and the controls underwent great testing prior to finalization . 
 The game 's music was composed by Soichi Terada . After a game director listened to Terada 's track " Sumo Jungle " , he was given the opportunity to compose the music for Ape Escape . The music changes in @-@ game depending on the situation and level ; for example , should players act stealthily , the music alters slightly to give a mellow atmosphere . Music from the game was included in Ape Escape <unk> Soundtracks , published on November 18 , 2011 by Terada 's label Far East Recording . The gameplay sound effects were designed by Masaaki Kaneko , while the sound effects in the cutscenes were provided by Masatoshi <unk> . The English voice acting was recorded at Dubey Tunes Studios in San Francisco , California , with Sara <unk> and Hunter A. Pipes III serving as voice @-@ over director and producer , respectively . 
 Ape Escape was officially announced in the April 1999 issue of Official U.S. PlayStation Magazine . Promotions for the game were held on Cartoon Network during Sony 's winter holiday marketing campaign of 1999 . A remake of the game , titled Ape Escape : On the Loose , was announced on May 11 , 2004 , during Sony 's press conference at the Electronic Entertainment Expo . It was released as a launch title for the PlayStation Portable ( PSP ) on March 24 , 2005 . The remake features altered controls , due to the lack of a right analog stick on the PSP , as well as some slightly different graphics and mini @-@ games . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Ape Escape received critical acclaim . Metacritic calculated an average score of 90 out of 100 , indicating " universal acclaim " , based on 19 reviews . Japanese publication Famitsu awarded the game 32 out of 40 , based on four reviews . Reviewers praised the game 's use of analog controls , as well as its graphics and music , with minor criticism directed towards the voice acting . 
 Reviewers praised the gameplay , and the game 's use of analog controls . Johnny Liu of Game Revolution wrote that the innovative controls were one of the game 's standout features . GameSpot 's Peter Bartholow declared the controls " beautifully executed " , praising the ease of use . Doug Perry of IGN felt that , while the controls are initially difficult , using the analog sticks became " new and refreshing " . Scott Alan Marriott of AllGame similarly noted the initial difficulty of the controls , but found it easier upon continued play , particularly praising the raft controls . 
 The graphics were met with generally positive comments . GameSpot 's Bartholow praised the visuals , naming the game " a sight to behold " and commending the use of colour and detail . IGN 's Perry wrote that the textures " aren 't terribly stunning " , and found the character design " rather fundamental " , but felt that the game 's lighting and camera blended to create " a fantastic and gratifying effect " . Game Revolution 's Liu named the graphics " good , but not the best " , noting frame rate slowdown . Marriott of AllGame similarly mentioned pop @-@ up issues and other glitches , but ultimately commended the graphics , noting the " distinct Japanese style " . 
 The game 's audio was commended by many reviews . AllGame 's Marriott praised the appropriateness of the music to the game 's setting . GameSpot 's Bartholow echoed similar remarks , applauding the interactivity of the soundtrack . Liu of Game Revolution felt that the music improves as the game progresses , similarly commending its use with gameplay . IGN 's Perry described the soundtrack as " a weird concoction of J @-@ pop and techno @-@ synth " , and noted that the " poppy tunes " were catchier than the " techno tunes " . Conversely , particular criticism was directed at the voice acting in the game ; GameSpot 's Bartholow described it as " uniformly atrocious " , while IGN 's Perry referred to Spike 's voice as " nothing special " . The game 's other sound effects , such as the ape noises , were met with positive reactions . 
 = = = PlayStation Portable version = = = 
 Ape Escape : On the Loose , the game 's remake for PlayStation Portable , was met with mixed reviews . Metacritic calculated a score of 66 out of 100 , indicating " mixed or average reviews " , based on 35 critics . Jeff Gerstmann of GameSpot lamented the loss of the " finely tuned control " of the original , but felt that the game " still has considerable charm " . GameSpy 's David Chapman felt that , despite the noticeable flaws of the game , particularly the controls , it still remains " a lot of fun to play " . Juan Castro of IGN praised the game 's use of colour , noting its enhancement on the PlayStation Portable screen . Castro also warned that " fans of the series will probably miss the second analog stick " , but felt that the gadgets mapped to the PSP 's face buttons would suffice . 1UP 's Jeremy Parish criticised the porting of the game for being outdated , declaring it " a game that was better in another time , on another system , ported simply for cynical convenience " . Parish felt that On the Loose served " to blemish the PSP 's reputation ... as a dumping ground for warmed over 32 @-@ bit offerings far beyond their sell @-@ by date " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Ape Escape is considered one of the most significant titles on the PlayStation console . Doug Perry of IGN declared it " the best 3D platform game on the PlayStation " , and GameSpot 's Peter Bartholow named it " one of the best 3D platformers to date " . Scott Alan Marriott of AllGame described the game as " one of the most enjoyable 3D platform games " on the PlayStation . IGN included Ape Escape in an article documenting the greatest PlayStation 3D platform games , and later named it the eighth greatest game on the console . In March 2004 , Official UK PlayStation Magazine named it the ninth greatest game of all time . Game Informer ranked it 100 on its list of best games in 2001 , praising its gameplay and innovation . 
 Ape Escape spawned a series of games , including sequels and spin @-@ offs . A direct sequel , Ape Escape 2 , was released for the PlayStation 2 ( PS2 ) in July 2001 , followed by Ape Escape 3 for PS2 in July 2005 . Several spin @-@ off titles were released exclusively in Japan : Pipo Saru 2001 in July 2001 and Saru ! Get You ! Million Monkeys in July 2006 for the PS2 , followed by Saru Get You : Pip Saru Racer in December 2006 and Saru ! Get You ! <unk> Big Mission in July 2007 for the PSP . Another spin @-@ off , Ape Quest , was also released worldwide for PSP in January 2008 . A series of party games has also been released : Ape Escape : Pumped & <unk> in July 2004 and EyeToy : Monkey Mania in August 2004 for PS2 , as well as Ape Academy 2 for PSP in December 2005 , and PlayStation Move Ape Escape for the PlayStation 3 in December 2010 . The character of Spike is available as a playable character in PlayStation All @-@ Stars Battle Royale ( 2012 ) , and an ape costume is available as a downloadable outfit in some of the LittleBigPlanet games ( 2008 – 12 ) . A mini @-@ game featuring an ape from Ape Escape is included in Metal Gear Solid 3 : Snake Eater ( 2004 ) . 
 = Tropical Storm Debbie ( 1965 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Debbie of the 1965 Atlantic hurricane season broke the daily rainfall record in Mobile , Alabama , despite dissipating offshore . It developed on September 24 in the western Caribbean Sea , and moved northwestward for several days without intensifying . On September 27 , Debbie turned toward the northeast in the Gulf of Mexico , and the next day briefly attained tropical storm status . However , the intrusion of cooler air imparted weakening , and the storm dissipated on September 30 just off the east coast of Louisiana . It initially threatened areas of Louisiana that sustained significant damage from Hurricane Betsy in early September , although Debbie only caused light rainfall and some flooding in the state . In southern Alabama , the storm dropped 17 @.@ 2 in ( 440 mm ) of rainfall , which resulted in significant flooding of roads and cars . Damage totaled $ 25 million in the Mobile , Alabama area , although there was little damage elsewhere . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A low @-@ pressure area developed into a weak tropical depression on September 24 off the north coast of Honduras in the western Caribbean Sea . It was initially disorganized , without a well @-@ developed circulation . On September 25 , while still a tropical depression , the system was named Debbie . Without intensifying further , the depression crossed the northeastern Yucatán Peninsula on September 26 . The next day , the depression turned toward the north in the central Gulf of Mexico before beginning a northeast motion . On September 28 , Debbie intensified into a tropical storm , attaining peak winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) . This occurred after the storm developed two distinct spiral rainbands . 
 As Debbie approached the northern Gulf Coast , it failed to intensify , despite warm sea surface temperatures , abundant moisture , and an anticyclone aloft . In addition , the storm never developed good outflow , partially due to stable air related to Tropical Storm Hazel in the eastern Pacific Ocean . After maintaining peak winds for about 12 hours , Debbie weakened due to cooler , drier air , deteriorating to a tropical depression on September 29 . That day , it turned to the northwest , passing just east of the Mississippi Delta . On September 30 , the circulation of Debbie dissipated just offshore Mississippi . Its remnants made landfall , accelerated northeastward , and were eventually absorbed by an extratropical cyclone . 
 = = Impact = = 
 The precursor to Debbie produced heavy rainfall across the western Caribbean Sea . Swan Island off the north coast of Honduras reported 5 @.@ 43 in ( 138 mm ) in a 24 @-@ hour period . In Belize City , Belize , the storm produced high tides and 1 @.@ 04 in ( 26 mm ) of rainfall . Grand Cayman reported light rains for two days . The government of Cuba advised residents to restrict boating activities around the country . Similarly , the Weather Bureau issued a small craft warning for the Dry Tortugas and for the Florida Keys through Key Largo . 
 Before Debbie dissipated , local Weather Bureau offices issued a gale warning and a hurricane watch from the mouth of the Mississippi River to Cedar Key , Florida . Small boat owners throughout the region were advised to remain at port . The threat of the storm prompted the evacuation of oil platforms , as well as thousands of residents in low @-@ lying areas of St. Bernard Parish , Louisiana . Along the northern Gulf Coast , no gale force winds were reported inland , although oil rigs and ships off the southeast Louisiana coast reported such winds . Debbie produced above @-@ normal tides that generally ranged upwards to 4 ft ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) above normal ; however , New Orleans reported a storm tide of 6 ft ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) . The tides resulted in flooding along highways in southeastern Louisiana , closing several roads . The storm affected areas that were severely damaged by Hurricane Betsy earlier in September . 
 Despite being a weak storm , Debbie dropped heavy rainfall along the coast , peaking at 17 @.@ 2 in ( 440 mm ) in Mobile , Alabama . Of the total , 15 in ( 380 mm ) fell in 15 hours , which broke the daily rainfall record in the city . The rains resulted in 6 ft ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) of flooding that closed several businesses and roads , causing the worst traffic jam on record in the city . Hundreds of cars were flooded , and more than 200 people had to leave their inundated homes . Damage in the city was estimated at $ 25 million , which was the only significant damage from the storm . Rainfall extended from Louisiana to the east coast of Florida , and as far north as North Carolina . In eastern Georgia near Brunswick , the storm dropped more than 9 in ( 230 mm ) of precipitation , causing flooding in airfields and along canals . 
 = Jon Corzine = 
 Jon Stevens Corzine ( born January 1 , 1947 ) is an American financial executive and former politician . A Democrat , he was a United States Senator from New Jersey from 2001 to 2006 and was the 54th Governor of New Jersey from 2006 to 2010 . He also worked as CEO of Goldman Sachs during the 1990s and was CEO of MF Global from 2010 to 2011 . He was charged by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission ( <unk> ) in connection with MF 's bankruptcy in 2011 . 
 Corzine began his career in banking and finance . In the early and mid @-@ 1970s , he worked for Midwestern banks ( Continental @-@ Illinois National Bank in Chicago , Illinois and BancOhio National Bank in Columbus , Ohio ) during and after his Master of Business Administration ( MBA ) studies at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business . In 1975 he moved to New Jersey to work for Goldman Sachs . He became Chairman and CEO of Goldman Sachs and the leading advocate in the firm 's decision to go public . In 1999 , having lost a power struggle with Henry M. Paulson , Corzine left the firm . After his departure from Goldman Sachs , he earned what has been estimated to be $ 400 million during the 1999 initial public offering of the company . 
 Corzine served five years of a six @-@ year U.S. Senate term representing New Jersey before being elected governor in 2005 . He was defeated for re @-@ election in 2009 by Republican Chris Christie . In March 2010 , Corzine was named chairman and CEO of MF Global Inc . , a financial services firm specializing in futures brokerage . The company filed for bankruptcy protection in October 2011 after losing $ 1 @.@ 6 billion of customer money and Corzine resigned on November 4 , 2011 . 
 = = Early years , education , and early business career = = 
 Corzine was born in central Illinois , the son of Nancy June ( née Hedrick ) and Roy Allen Corzine . He grew up on a small family farm in Willey Station , Illinois , and near Taylorville . After completing high school at Taylorville High School , where he had been the football quarterback and basketball captain , he attended the University of Illinois at Urbana @-@ Champaign , where he was a member of the Phi Delta Theta fraternity , and graduated in 1969 , earning Phi Beta Kappa honors . While in college , he enlisted in the United States Marine Corps Reserve and served from 1969 until 1975 , attaining the rank of sergeant . In 1970 he enrolled in the University of Chicago Booth School of Business , from which he received a Master of Business Administration degree in 1973 . 
 His first business experience was in the bond department of Continental Illinois National Bank , where he worked days while attending the Booth School of Business MBA program at night . He then moved to BancOhio National Bank , a regional bank in Columbus , Ohio , that was acquired in 1984 by National City Bank . Corzine worked at BancOhio until 1975 when he moved his family to New Jersey and was hired as a bond trader for Goldman Sachs . 
 = = Goldman Sachs = = 
 Over the years , he worked his way up to Chairman and CEO of the company in 1994 and successfully converted the investment firm from a private partnership to a publicly traded corporation . Corzine also chaired a presidential commission for Bill Clinton and served on the U.S. Treasury Department 's borrowing committee . As a Goldman Sachs senior partner , he was summoned to help develop a rescue package for the hedge fund Long Term Capital Management when the leveraged fund 's collapse in the fall of 1998 threatened contagion across the U.S. financial system . According to U.S. News & World Report , Corzine did not get along with co @-@ CEO Henry Paulson , who came from the other major area of the bank , investment banking . When Corzine decided to help the bailout , Paulson seized control of the firm . As co @-@ chairman of the firm , he oversaw its expansion into Asia . When Goldman Sachs went public after Corzine 's departure , Corzine made $ 400 million . 
 Corzine has participated in meetings of the Bilderberg Group , a network of leaders in the fields of politics , business , and banking , from 1995 – 1997 , 1999 , 2003 and 2004 . He is a former member of the group 's Steering Committee . 
 Corzine is a member of Kappa Beta Phi . 
 = = U.S. Senate = = 
 = = = 2000 election = = = 
 After being forced from Goldman Sachs in January 1999 , Corzine campaigned for a New Jersey Senate seat after Frank Lautenberg announced his retirement . Despite initially trailing behind his opponent in the Democratic primary by 30 percentage points , Corzine won the nomination and was subsequently elected to the Senate by a four @-@ percent margin over his Republican opponent , four @-@ term United States Congressman Bob Franks , in the November 2000 election and was sworn into the Senate in January 2001 . 
 He spent more than $ 62 million of his own money on his campaign , the most expensive Senate campaign in U.S. history – over $ 33 million of this was spent on the primary election alone , where he defeated former Governor James Florio 58 – 42 % . Franks had been a last @-@ minute choice because New Jersey Governor Christine Todd Whitman had been expected to run for the Senate . The record $ 62 million amount surpassed Michael Huffington , who spent nearly $ 28 million in an unsuccessful 1994 Senate race . 
 During the campaign , Corzine refused to release his income tax return records . He claimed an interest in doing so , but he cited a confidentiality agreement with Goldman Sachs . Skeptics argued that Corzine should have followed the example of his predecessor Robert Rubin , who converted his equity stake into debt upon leaving Goldman . 
 Corzine campaigned for state government programs including universal health care , universal gun registration , mandatory public preschool , and more taxpayer funding for college education . He pushed affirmative action and same @-@ sex marriage . David Brooks opined that Corzine was so liberal that his election , although the fact that his predecessor was also a Democrat , helped push the Senate to the left . 
 During Corzine 's campaign for the United States Senate , he made some controversial off @-@ color statements . When introduced to a man with an Italian name who said he was in the construction business , Corzine quipped : “ Oh , you make cement shoes ! " according to Emanuel Alfano , chairman of the Italian @-@ American One Voice Committee . Alfano reported that when introduced to a lawyer named David Stein , Corzine said : " He 's not Italian , is he ? Oh , I guess he 's your Jewish lawyer who is here to get the rest of you out of jail . " Corzine denied mentioning religion , but did not deny the quip about Italians , stating that some of his own ancestors were probably Italian , or maybe French . 
 Also in 2000 , Corzine denied having made payments to African @-@ American ministers , although the foundation controlled by Jon and Joanne Corzine had paid one influential black church $ 25 @,@ 000 . Rev. Reginald T. Jackson , director of the Black Ministers Council , had campaigned against a form of racial profiling whereby police officers stop minority drivers and had gotten New Jersey state police superintendent , Carl A. Williams , fired . Corzine had donated to Jackson prior to getting what appears to be a reciprocal endorsement . 
 = = = Tenure = = = 
 Corzine entered Congress in a class of ten new senators , eight of whom were Democrats . According to U.S. News & World Report , Corzine , Hillary Clinton and Jean Carnahan were the more notable new Senators in 2000 . During his five @-@ year senatorial career , he was present at 1503 of 1673 votes , co @-@ sponsored 1014 bills , sponsored 145 bills ( only 11 of which made it out of committee ) , and had one sponsored bill enacted . 
 He co @-@ authored the Sarbanes @-@ Oxley Act . In the aftermath of Enron , he co @-@ sponsored ( with Barbara Boxer ) legislation , which was later propounded by Ted Kennedy , that reforms the 401 ( k ) plan to minimize the risk of investment portfolios . The plan was opposed by President George W. Bush and faced strong opposition in Congress . Restrictions on retirement account allocations were in direct opposition to the contemporaneous movement towards self @-@ directed individual retirement accounts for Social Security . 
 Corzine was a sponsor of the Start Healthy , Stay Healthy Act . He supported providing a two @-@ year tax break to victims of the September 11 , 2001 attacks and help grant citizenship to victims who were legal resident aliens . He supported gun control laws , outlawing racial profiling , and subsidies for Amtrak . He was the chief sponsor , along with U.S. Senator Sam Brownback , of the Darfur Accountability Act . He voted against the Iraq War Resolution . Corzine was the prime sponsor , along with fellow New Jersey U.S. Senator Frank Lautenberg , of a federal version of John 's Law , in memory of Navy Ensign John R. Elliott ( a native of New Jersey ) , a U.S. Naval Academy graduate who was killed by a drunk driver . The legislation provides federal highway safety grant incentives to encourage states to impound the cars of DUI suspects . He was an early contributing blogger at The Huffington Post . 
 In the aftermath of the September 11 , 2001 , attacks , Corzine and Peter Fitzgerald attempted to mold a more disciplined bailout of the airline industry , but even the redesigned plan was not entirely satisfactory to Corzine . Corzine opposed the reduction in low @-@ income student eligibility for Pell Grant funding caused by changes in the " expected family contribution " . 
 Corzine tried and failed to introduce legislation for chemical plant regulation six weeks after the September 11 , 2001 attacks . Subsequent efforts by then @-@ Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency and former New Jersey Governor Christine Todd Whitman in 2002 were also squelched . Along with Hillary Clinton , he was one of the few senators who attempted to pressure the Bush administration to clamp down on regulation of the chemical and nuclear @-@ power industries . His efforts helped make New Jersey one of the stricter states in the nation in terms of chemical plant regulation . 
 In 2001 , Corzine coauthored ( with Bob Graham ) a tax @-@ cut proposal aimed at lowering the marginal tax bracket from 15 % to 10 % on the first $ 19 @,@ 000 of taxable income . In 2002 , he proposed a tax cut that exempted the first $ 10 @,@ 000 of income from the $ 765 of Social Security taxes for both employers and employees . Corzine also proposed making dividend payments tax deductible to companies as a form of economic stimulus . 
 While in the Senate , he chaired the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee from 2003 – 2005 . In this role he was influential in convincing certain potential candidates to not run in order to avoid costly primaries in three key states during the 2004 United States Senate elections . He also played a role in the selection of Senator John Edwards as a running mate for Senator John Kerry . In 2002 , Corzine called for the resignation of United States Securities and Exchange Commission Chairman Harvey Pitt . 
 = = = Committee assignments = = = 
 In the Senate , Corzine was a member of the Committees on Banking , Intelligence , the Budget , and Energy and Natural Resources . 
 = = Campaigns for governor = = 
 = = = 2005 = = = 
 Corzine and his opponent , Republican Doug Forrester , spent $ 73 million on their gubernatorial campaigns by the week before Election day . This included $ 38 million by Corzine and $ 19 million by Forrester for the general election . The primaries accounted for the difference . Since Corzine had spent over $ 62 million on his 2000 United States Senate elections , the combined expenditures for Corzine 's run for the Senate and governorship exceeded $ 100 million . The main campaign issues were property taxes and the Bush administration . New Jersey had averaged $ 5 @,@ 500 in 2004 property taxes , and Corzine tried to link his opponent to Bush . 
 The campaign for the post of Governor of New Jersey was successful with 54 % of the vote . Forrester , a businessman and a former Mayor of West Windsor Township , in Mercer County , won 43 % . Corzine received 1 @,@ 224 @,@ 493 votes to Forrester 's 985 @,@ 235 . A total of 80 @,@ 277 votes , or 3 % , were scattered among other candidates . Corzine won 13 of New Jersey 's 21 counties : Atlantic , Bergen , Burlington , Camden , Cumberland , Essex , Gloucester , Hudson , Mercer , Middlesex , Passaic , Salem , and Union . Corzine won the three most populous counties ( Bergen , Essex , and Middlesex ) , five of the top six , and seven of the top nine . 
 = = = 2009 = = = 
 Corzine ran for re @-@ election in the 2009 New Jersey gubernatorial election . Early on , Rasmussen Reports indicated that Republican challenger Chris Christie led Corzine 47 % to 38 % . Later polls showed Corzine closing the gap , and in some cases , ahead . In the end , Corzine lost the race to Christie by a margin of 48 @.@ 5 % to 44 @.@ 9 % , with 5 @.@ 8 % of the vote going to independent candidate Chris Daggett . 
 = = Governor of New Jersey = = 
 Corzine officially declined his $ 175 @,@ 000 salary in 2006 . 
 After taking office in January 2006 , Corzine 's approval numbers were very low . Many polls seemed to indicate that much of this negative polling was a result of the 2006 New Jersey State Government shutdown . An April 26 , 2006 , polls from Quinnipiac University Polling Institute showed Corzine at a 15 % approval with a 72 % disapproval . A February 28 , 2007 , poll from Quinnipiac University showed Corzine at 50 % approval with 34 % disapproval . When Corzine released a controversial plan to monetize the New Jersey Turnpike and the Garden State Parkway , his approval rating fell to 30 % in January 2008 . 
 In conjunction with this fall in approval rating , an initiative to recall the Governor was started for the first and only time ever in New Jersey history . The recall effort failed after gathering less than the required 1 @.@ 2 million signatures . 
 Corzine had long insisted that state employees must bear part of the cost of their health benefits after retirement . As of July 1 , 2007 , in agreements with the Communications Workers of America , the American Federation of State , County , and Municipal Employees , and the International Federation of Professional and Technical Engineers , active State employees in those unions ( as well as certain other non @-@ union employees ) are now required to contribute 1 @.@ 5 % of their salary to offset health care costs . State and local employees ’ contributions to the two largest pension systems increased by 10 % , from 5 % to 5 @.@ 5 % of their annual salaries and increased the retirement benefit age for new public employees , from 55 to 60 years . In 2008 , Corzine approved a law that increased the retirement age from 60 to 62 , required that government workers and teachers earn $ 7 @,@ 500 per year to qualify for a pension , eliminated Lincoln 's Birthday as a state worker holiday , allowed the state to offer incentives not to take health insurance and required municipal employees work 20 hours per week to get health benefits . 
 As part of his attempt to balance the budget , Corzine decreased funding to most programs and localities including state universities and colleges . The first of these decreases came with the 2007 budget . Rutgers University and other New Jersey state universities have raised tuition , cut hundreds of sections of classes , and several sports teams . With the latest decrease in funding for 2009 , most state institutions have less funding than they had a decade ago . Despite the $ 15 million in cuts , Rutgers went ahead with previous agreed upon raises of $ 15 million to their executive faculty . This resulted in Rutgers making $ 30 million in cuts . 
 Corzine has been the only New Jersey governor in recent memory to make any headway in addressing the crisis of municipal funding . While not directly touching the third rail of New Jersey governance – property taxes – Corzine 's reform of the school funding formula ( passed and signed in January 2008 ) resulted in significant relief to many New Jersey towns with outsize school costs but limited tax base . The plan survived a legal challenge and was declared constitutional by the New Jersey Supreme Court on May 28 , 2009 . 
 Corzine championed expanding government health and education programs . He planned to require every resident to enroll in a health plan and have taxpayers help pick up the tab for all the welfare low- and middle @-@ income residents . In June 2008 , state legislators voted for the first phase of that program mandating health care coverage and Corzine signed it into law in July . 
 Corzine spent some $ 200 @,@ 000 of public funds on advertisements to promote a referendum on the 2007 New Jersey ballot to borrow $ 450 million to fund stem cell research . The referendum faced strong opposition and was rejected despite the fact that $ 270 million had previously been approved to build stem cell research centers . 
 Corzine , a death penalty opponent , as governor supported and presided over abolition of capital punishment in New Jersey and replacing it with life imprisonment . After the legislature passed and he signed it into law , New Jersey became the first state to legislatively eliminate capital punishment since 1965 . Although the bill was not passed until late in 2007 , New Jersey had not executed any criminals since 1963 . Because the penalty was never used and often reversed upon appeal , it was viewed as a form of extended suffering for victims ' families by some supporters of its abolition . Before the enactment of the new law , he commuted the death sentences of all death row inmates to life in prison . Corzine also has supported early New Jersey efforts at gun control . 
 Corzine was one of several United States Governors – including Martin O 'Malley of Maryland , Mike Beebe of Arkansas , and Eliot Spitzer of New York – who were early supporters of Hillary Clinton 's 2008 presidential campaign . He raised $ 1 million for her campaign . He , Bill Clinton , Eliot Spitzer , Chuck Schumer , and Charlie Rangel co @-@ hosted Clinton 's October 25 , 2007 60th @-@ birthday party . He remained a committed Clinton superdelegate late into the 2008 Democratic Party presidential primary season . In the event the Democratic National Committee would have decided to recontest the Michigan and Florida primaries , Corzine and Ed Rendell were prepared to spearhead Clinton 's fundraising in for those races . Towards the end of the primary season in April 2008 , Corzine made it clear that although he was a Clinton supporter , his superdelegate vote would be determined by the popular vote . After her win in the April 22 , 2008 Pennsylvania Democratic primary and a calculation of popular votes that excluded caucuses and included the controversial Michigan and Florida Democratic primaries , Corzine reaffirmed his support for her . Once Barack Obama became the presumptive nominee , Corzine became a prominent spokesperson for Obama 's agenda . 
 Corzine was among a group of big ( in terms of population ) state governors , such as Republican Arnold Schwarzenegger , who moved his state Republican and Democratic primaries to February 5 , 2008 , the date of Super Tuesday , 2008 . He was also among a group of prominent Democratic politicians ( that included Ted Kennedy and Barack Obama ) who received political contributions from Norman Hsu that he ended up donating to charity . 
 In November 2008 , in response to the ongoing economic downturn , Corzine proposed an economic recovery package consisting of additional massive spending , accelerated capital improvement spending and reforms and cuts to the corporate income tax . As of December 2008 many elements of the plan had been approved by the Democrats in the NJ Legislature . On January 2 , 2009 , Corzine joined the governors of four other states in urging the federal government to provide $ 1 trillion in aid to the country 's 50 state governments to help pay for education , welfare and infrastructure as states struggle with steep budget deficits amid a deepening recession . 
 = = = Government shutdown = = = 
 Corzine , in attempting to pass the 2007 fiscal year budget , clashed with a few fellow state Democrats in the New Jersey General Assembly , particularly over the proposed increase of the state 's sales tax from 6 % to 7 % . Corzine said that he would not accept a budget that did not include the sales tax increase . After the legislature failed to pass Corzine 's budget by the midnight deadline of July 1 , 2006 , he signed an executive order that immediately closed down all non @-@ essential state government services , such as road construction projects . Legislators failed to resolve the situation by July 4 and casinos , among other governmentally @-@ regulated industries , closed their doors at 8 : 00 am on July 5 . Corzine called the shutdown " deplorable , " though he refused to negotiate with legislators and accept alternate plans that did not increase the sales tax . It is estimated that the state lost several hundred millions of dollars of revenue every day the casinos remained closed , because of the budget impasse . 
 After six days of state government shutdown , Corzine and Assembly Democrats agreed to raise the state sales tax to 7 % with half of the 1 % increase going to the state budget and the other half going to property tax relief . On July 8 , 2006 , the $ 30 billion state budget , with the sales tax agreement , passed both houses and Governor Corzine signed the budget into law ending the budget impasse . 
 = = = Toll hike plan = = = 
 Initially , Corzine opposed privatization of the New Jersey Turnpike . On January 8 , 2008 , to address ongoing structural budget issues , Governor Corzine proposed a four @-@ part proposal including an overall reduction in spending , a constitutional amendment to require more voter approval for state borrowing , an executive order prohibiting the use of one @-@ time revenues to balance the budget and a controversial plan to raise some $ 38 billion by leasing the Garden State Parkway , the New Jersey Turnpike , and other toll roads for at least 75 years to a new public benefit corporation that could sell bonds secured by future tolls , which it would be allowed to raise by 50 % plus inflation every four years beginning in 2010 . Corzine vowed to get that plan through the state legislature by March , but held off for nearly a month before releasing the details . Upon learning how the plan would work , New Jersey native residents railed against it , comparing it to using one credit card to pay off another , pointing out that it would create hardship for commuters and noting that it would actually increase the state 's $ 32 billion debt . 
 = = = Carla Katz = = = 
 Corzine , who was running for the United State Senate in the spring of 1999 , met Carla Katz , the then married president of Local 1034 of the Communications Workers of America ( CWA ) , in the same apartment building where he resided in Hoboken ; the CWA represents the largest number of state workers in New Jersey . As Katz later recalled , Corzine offered her a job on his Senate campaign , but she declined the offer . Corzine and the still married Katz were soon dating , and they began appearing in public as a couple in early 2002 , shortly after Corzine 's unofficial separation from his wife , Joanne . ( The <unk> divorced the following year . ) For more than two years Corzine was romantically involved and living with Katz . She lived with him at his apartment building in Hoboken from April 2002 until August 2004 . 
 After Corzine 's breakup with Katz , their lawyers negotiated a financial payout in November 2004 . According to press accounts , the settlement for Katz exceeded $ 6 million , including cash ( in part used to buy her $ 1 @.@ 1 million condominium in Hoboken ) , a college trust fund to educate her children , a 2005 Volvo sport utility vehicle , and Corzine forgave a $ 470 @,@ 000 loan he had made to Katz in 2002 to buy out her ex @-@ husband 's share of their home in Alexandria Township . Katz enrolled in Seton Hall University School of Law on a full scholarship in 2004 . Corzine later acknowledged he had given $ 15 @,@ 000 to Katz 's brother @-@ in @-@ law , Rocco Riccio , a former state employee who was forced to resign after being accused of examining income tax returns for political purposes . At the time , Katz was president of the CWA Local 1034 , which bargains on behalf of many state employees . 
 In the summer of 2005 , when Corzine was running in the New Jersey gubernatorial election , news first emerged of his relationship with Katz and the money she had received . Corzine was elected governor despite the scandal . In the fall of 2006 , during an impasse in contract negotiations between the Corzine administration and the state 's seven major state employee unions ( including the CWA ) , Katz contacted the governor by phone and e @-@ mail to lobby for a renewal of the negotiations . Their relationship and the financial settlement Katz received after their breakup led to allegations of many potential conflicts of interest in labor negotiations while Corzine was governor . A state ethics panel , acting on a complaint from Bogota mayor Steve Lonegan , ruled in May 2007 that Katz 's contact with Corzine during negotiations did not violate the governor 's code of conduct . 
 Separately , New Jersey Republican State Committee Chairman Tom Wilson filed a lawsuit to release all e @-@ mail correspondence between Corzine and Katz during the contract negotiations . On May 30 , 2008 , New Jersey Superior Court Judge Paul Innes ruled that at least 745 pages of e @-@ mail records should be made public , but Corzine 's lawyers immediately appealed the decision to the New Jersey Supreme Court . 
 Corzine won his case on appeal . On March 18 , 2009 , the New Jersey Supreme Court ruled it would not hear arguments in the case , effectively ending the legal battle to make his e @-@ mails with Katz public . Corzine spent approximately $ 127 @,@ 000 of taxpayer funds to keep the e @-@ mails secret . Nonetheless , on August 1 , 2010 , The Star @-@ Ledger published 123 of the Corzine @-@ Katz e @-@ mails , revealing the extent of their personal contact during negotiations over a new state government workers contract in early 2007 . 
 = = = Appointments = = = 
 Corzine continued to serve in the U.S. Senate while running for governor , which ensured that he could resign from the Senate and appoint a Democrat as his successor if he won and allowed him to retain his Senate seat if he lost . Speculation was that he would appoint a Democrat from one of the congressional districts in New Jersey , perhaps Congressmen Rob Andrews , Rush Holt , or Frank <unk> . He appointed Governor Richard Codey although on November 23 , 2005 , he announced that he was not interested in pursuing the seat . On December 9 , 2005 , Corzine named his friend , who lived and lives in the same apartment building , U.S. Rep. Robert Menendez , a Democrat , to succeed him . 
 One of Corzine 's first nominations was that of <unk> Farber as New Jersey Attorney General . She served for approximately seven months until an ethics investigation concluded that she had acted improperly by going to the location where local police in Fairview , New Jersey had stopped her boyfriend , Hamlet Gore , for driving with a suspended license and an expired vehicle registration . Corzine said he did not ask for Farber 's resignation . 
 On February 9 , 2006 , after many scandals regarding financial mishandling at the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey , Corzine nominated Robert Del <unk> , the former Attorney General of New Jersey and U.S. Attorney , as chairman of the board of trustees . Corzine also nominated Oliver Quinn , Prudential Financial 's vice president and chief ethics officer , as vice chairman of the board . 
 Corzine 's commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection and Chief of Staff , Lisa P. Jackson was nominated as the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency . She was confirmed by the Senate on January 22 , 2009 . 
 = = = Motorcade accident = = = 
 On April 12 , 2007 , Corzine and 25 @-@ year @-@ old aide Samantha Gordon were injured in an automobile accident on the Garden State Parkway near Galloway Township while traveling from the New Jersey Conference of Mayors in Atlantic City to Drumthwacket , his residence in Princeton , to meet with radio personality Don Imus and the Rutgers University women 's basketball team . 
 The New Jersey State Police determined that Corzine 's SUV , driven by a state trooper , was traveling in excess of 90 miles per hour ( 140 km / h ) with its emergency lights flashing when the collision occurred . A pickup truck drifted onto the shoulder and swerved back onto the lane , and another pickup truck swerved to avoid the truck and hit the Governor 's SUV , causing the SUV to hit the guardrail . The State Police reviewed roadside camera recordings and E @-@ ZPass records to track down the driver of the truck ; he was not charged with any violation . 
 Corzine and the trooper were flown by helicopter to Cooper University Hospital in Camden , a Level I trauma center . The aide was taken by ambulance to Atlantic City Medical Center . Neither the NJ State Trooper nor the aide was seriously injured , but Corzine suffered broken bones , including an open fracture of the left femur , 11 broken ribs , a broken sternum , a broken collarbone , a fractured lower vertebra , and a facial cut that required plastic surgery . The Governor was not wearing a seat belt . Friends had long said that they had rarely seen him wear one . When asked why the state trooper who was driving would not have asked Corzine to put on his seat belt , a staffer said the governor was " not always amenable to suggestion " . The Superintendent of State Police has also noted that the trooper could be charged if the crash was preventable . 
 By April 23 , 2007 , Corzine 's doctors had upgraded him from critical to stable condition . He was sedated and unable to speak because of a breathing tube in his throat , and as such , was unable to perform his duties as governor . In accordance with the New Jersey State Constitution , New Jersey Senate President Richard Codey assumed the position of acting governor for the short period from April 12 until May 7 , 2007 . In 2005 , voters had approved an amendment to the state constitution to provide for a lieutenant governor who would succeed the governor in the event of a vacancy or assume gubernatorial duties in the event of incapacitation , but that position would not be filled until 2010 . 
 Corzine left the hospital on April 30 , 2007 . , sped to Drumthwacket , where he recuperated and which had been outfitted with a videoconferencing center ( at his expense ) so he could communicate with legislators . He issued an apology , paid a $ 46 ticket for not wearing a seat belt , and he appeared in a public service announcement advocating seat belts which opened with the words " I 'm New Jersey Governor Jon Corzine , and I should be dead . " 
 It was reported that Corzine would pay his own medical bills rather than bill taxpayers . 
 = = = Public opinion = = = 
 During the first months of his administration , Corzine experienced favorable approval ratings . According to a March 2006 Fairleigh Dickinson PublicMind Poll , 47 % of New Jersey voters approved of the job Corzine was doing , while 16 % disapproved . Peter Woolley , director of the PublicMind , noted , " the numbers are pretty good for a New Jersey governor heading full tilt into an unprecedented budget crisis " . Much of the good will that was indicated by the March poll was quickly diminished , and in April 2006 , a PublicMind poll showed that Corzine 's approval rating had eroded to 39 % while his disapproval rating increased to 36 % . By July 2006 , the Governor 's ratings recovered to some extent from the April decline and in September of the same year it was clear that Corzine 's approvals had not suffered from the summer conflict over the budget and the sales tax hike ; 51 % of New Jersey voters approved of the governor 's handling of his job while 31 % disapproved . His PublicMind poll ratings remained relatively stable and healthy through the rest of 2006 and 2007 with his average approvals at 54 % and his average disapprovals at 29 % . 
 In January 2008 , prior to the State of the State address Corzine was at 48 % approving 32 % disapproving , according to the PublicMind poll . But another <unk> PublicMind poll taken in late January , after the State of the State address , showed that governor 's ratings were slipping ; 41 % of voters approved of the job Corzine was doing while 39 % reported that they disapproved . The decline was largely in response to the governor ’ s plan to raise tolls on the New Jersey Turnpike and the Garden State Parkway . February 2008 was not any kinder , as a PublicMind poll indicated that his numbers continued to slip with disapprovals catching up to approvals with 42 % of voters approving and 43 % of voters disapproving . Woolley remarked on the decline saying , " Considering the beating he has taken on his toll plan , it 's remarkable that his numbers are not a good deal worse . " The governor 's approval ratings showed no recovery through September 2008 with his approvals and disapprovals averaging 42 % and 43 % respectively . <unk> with the presidential campaign , Corzine 's approval ratings saw some improvement . 
 In January 2009 he stood at 46 % approving and 40 % disapproving . Woolley asserted that the governor was faring relatively well in public opinion considering " the enormous and growing pressure on the state budget and on the governor to protect various constituencies " . Come March 2009 , the PublicMind Poll found that , " Gov. Jon Corzine 's standing with the New Jersey public is suffering along with the economy , " and as a result his approvals began to slip with 40 % of voters approving and 43 % disapproving . His approvals continued to decline in April as he contended with the budget and the financial crisis with 40 % approving and 49 % disapproving . At the end of his term , in January 2010 , Corzine ’ s approvals landed at their lowest point during the administration with 33 % approving and 58 % disapproving . 
 = = Post @-@ gubernatorial career = = 
 = = = MF Global = = = 
 Corzine was appointed CEO and Chairman of MF Global , a multinational futures broker and bond dealer , in March 2010 . 
 MF Global 's stock price declined two @-@ thirds in the final week of October 2011 and its credit rating was reduced making its debt high @-@ yield debt following huge quarterly losses . On October 31 , 2011 , trading was halted on shares of MF Global prior to the market opening , and soon thereafter MF Global announced that it had declared Chapter 11 bankruptcy . Shortly afterwards , federal regulators began an investigation into hundreds of millions of dollars in missing customer funds . Corzine resigned as CEO on November 4 , 2011 , after having retained the services of defense attorney Andrew J. Levander . It was reported that Corzine declined a severance package worth $ 12 @.@ 1 million . MF Global 's collapse was one of the ten biggest bankruptcies in U.S. history . 
 Corzine was subpoenaed to appear before a House committee on December 8 , 2011 , to answer questions regarding 1 @.@ 2 billion dollars of missing money from MF Global client accounts . He testified before the committee , " I simply do not know where the money is , or why the accounts have not been reconciled to date " , and that given the number of money transfers in the final days of trading at MF Global , he didn 't know specifics of the movement of the funds . He also denied authorizing any misuse of customer funds . On January 30 , 2012 , it was reported that officials investigating the case believed most of the money is unrecoverable . In March 2012 , Bloomberg reported that a memo produced by congressional investigators quotes an internal company e @-@ mail as saying Corzine gave " direct instructions " to use customer money to cover the company 's own shortfalls prior to bankruptcy . A Corzine spokesperson responded that Corzine " never gave any instruction to misuse customer funds and never intended anyone at MF Global to misuse customer funds " . 
 In February 2013 , a court approved a settlement deal among commodities firm MF Global 's bankruptcy trustees that will reimburse its customers for 93 percent of the value of their accounts , from which about $ 1 @.@ 6 billion had disappeared during the firm 's bankruptcy . 
 In June 2013 , the Commodity Futures Trading Commission filed civil charges against Corzine for using funds from MF 's customer accounts for corporate purposes . " Corzine is charged with one count of failure to segregate and misuse of customer funds and one count of failure to supervise diligently " , a news report said . The commission drew on extensive taped Corzine phone conversations in filing the complaint . Corzine 's attorney Levander issued a statement contesting the charges when they were filed . 
 Corzine , and managers including Bradley <unk> and Henri Steenkamp , are appealing a court ruling calling for 100 percent repayment to customers of the bankrupt brokerage . The ruling was made on November 5 , 2013 , by U.S. Bankruptcy Judge Martin Glenn and would allow all missing customer funds to be returned by the end of the year . 
 = = = J.C. Flowers = = = 
 As of 2010 Corzine served as a partner at J.C. Flowers & Co . , the private equity firm founded by a personal friend , J. Christopher Flowers . Flowers owned a 10 percent stake in MF Global and is also a former Goldman Sachs partner . 
 = = Electoral history = = 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Corzine married his high school sweetheart , Joanne Dougherty , in 1969 at the age of 22 , and their 33 @-@ year marriage produced three children – Jennifer , Josh , and Jeffrey . The couple separated in 2002 and were divorced in November 2003 . Jeffrey Corzine , Jon 's younger son committed suicide on March 13 , 2014 in Mexico , age 31 . 
 Corzine had lived with his wife in Summit , New Jersey . After their separation , Corzine moved to a condominium apartment in Hoboken . 
 In April 2010 , The Huffington Post announced the engagement of Corzine and psychotherapist Sharon <unk> ( née Levine ) , whom he had been dating since 2004 . On November 23 , 2010 , Corzine married <unk> in a ceremony presided over by Chief Justice of the New Jersey Supreme Court Stuart <unk> , according to an announcement in The New York Times . 
 = Postal codes in Canada = 
 A Canadian postal code is a six @-@ character string that forms part of a postal address in Canada . Like British and Dutch <unk> , Canada 's postal codes are alphanumeric . They are in the format A1A 1A1 , where A is a letter and 1 is a digit , with a space separating the third and fourth characters . As of September 2014 , there were 855 @,@ 815 postal codes using Forward <unk> Areas from <unk> in Newfoundland to <unk> in the Yukon . 
 Canada Post provides a free postal code look @-@ up tool on its website , via its mobile application , and sells hard @-@ copy directories and CD @-@ ROMs . Many vendors also sell validation tools , which allow customers to properly match addresses and postal codes . Hard @-@ copy directories can also be consulted in all post offices , and some libraries . 
 When writing out the postal address for a location within Canada , the postal code follows the abbreviation for the province or territory . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = City postal zones = = = 
 Numbered postal zones were first used in Toronto in 1925 . Mail to a Toronto address in zone 5 would be addressed in this format : 
 37 Bloor Street West 
 Toronto 5 , Ontario 
 As of 1943 , Toronto was divided into 14 zones , numbered from 1 to 15 , except that 7 and 11 were unused , and there was a 2B zone . 
 By the early 1960s , other cities in Canada had been divided into postal zones , including Quebec , Montreal , Ottawa , Winnipeg and Vancouver as well as Toronto . For example , an address in Vancouver would be addressed as : 
 804 Robson Street , 
 Vancouver 1 , B. C 
 In the late 1960s , however , the Post Office began implementing a three @-@ digit zone number scheme in major cities to replace existing one and two @-@ digit zone numbers , starting in Montreal , Toronto and Vancouver . For example , an address in Metropolitan Toronto would be addressed as : 
 1253 Bay Street 
 Toronto 185 , Ontario 
 Toronto 's renumbering took effect 1 May 1969 , accompanied by an advertising campaign under the slogan " Your number is up " . However , with impending plans for a national postal code system , Postmaster General Eric <unk> announced that the Post Office would begin cancelling the new three @-@ digit city zone system . Companies changed their mail addressing at their own expense , only to find the new zoning would prove to be short @-@ lived . 
 = = = Planning = = = 
 As the largest Canadian cities were growing in the 1950s and 1960s , the volumes of mail passing through the country 's postal system also grew , reaching billions by the 1950s , and tens of billions by the mid @-@ 1960s . Consequently , it was becoming progressively more difficult for employees who <unk> mail to memorize and keep track of all the individual letter @-@ carrier routes within each city . 
 New technology that allowed mail to be delivered faster also contributed to the pressure for these employees to properly sort the mail . Canada was one of the last Western countries to get a nationwide postal code system . 
 A report tabled in the House of Commons in 1969 dealt with the expected impact of " environmental change " on the Post Office operations over the following 25 years . A key recommendation was the " establishment of a task force to determine the nature of the automation and mechanization the Post Office should adopt , which might include design of a postal code " . 
 = = = Implementation = = = 
 In December 1969 , Communications Minister Eric <unk> announced that a six @-@ character postal code would be introduced , superseding the three @-@ digit zone system . He later tabled a report in February 1970 , entitled " A Canadian Public Address Postal Coding System " , submitted by the firm of Samson , Belair , Simpson , Riddell Inc . 
 The introduction of the postal code with a test in Ottawa on 1 April 1971 . Coding of Ottawa was followed by a provincial @-@ level rollout of the system in Manitoba , and the system was gradually implemented in the rest of the country from 1972 to 1974 , although the nationwide use of the code by the end of 1974 was only 38 @.@ 2 per cent . 
 The introduction of such a code system allowed Canada Post to speed up easily , as well as simplify , the flow of mail in the country , with sorting machines being able to handle 26 640 objects an hour . However , when the automated sorting system was initially conceived , the Canadian Union of Postal Workers and other relevant unions objected to it , mainly because the wages of those who ran the new automated machines were much lower than those who had hand @-@ sorted mail . 
 The unions ended up staging job action and public information campaigns , with the message that they did not want people and business to use postal codes on their mail . The union declared 20 March 1975 National " Boycott the Postal Code " Day , also demanding a reduction in the work week from 40 to 30 hours . The boycott was called off in February 1976 . 
 One 1975 advertisement in the Toronto magazine <unk> generated controversy by showing a man writing a postal code on the bottom of a <unk> woman with the following ditty : 
 " We 're not ' stringing ' you along , 
 Use postal codes — you 'll ' thing our ' thong ' , 
 Don 't be cheeky — you 've all got ' em 
 Please include them on the bottom . " 
 The advertisement was denounced as " sexist garbage " in the House of Commons by NDP MP John Rodriguez , prompting an apology from Postmaster General Bryce <unk> . 
 = = Components of a postal code = = 
 = = = Forward sortation areas = = = 
 A forward sortation area ( FSA ) is a geographical region in which all postal codes start with the same three characters . The first letter of an FSA code denotes a particular " postal district " , which , outside of Quebec and Ontario , corresponds to an entire province or territory . 
 Owing to Quebec 's and Ontario 's large populations , those two provinces are sub @-@ divided into three and five postal districts respectively , and each has at least one urban area so populous that it has a dedicated postal district ( " H " for the Montréal region , and " M " for Toronto ) . On the other hand , the low populations in Nunavut and the Northwest Territories ( NWT ) mean that even after Nunavut separated from the Northwest Territories and became its own territory in 1999 , they continue to share a postal district . 
 The digit specifies if the FSA is urban or rural . A zero indicates a wide @-@ area rural region , while all other digits indicate urban areas . The second letter represents a specific rural region , an entire medium @-@ sized city , or a section of a major metropolitan area . 
 A directory of FSAs is provided , divided into separate articles by postal district . Individual FSA lists are in a tabular format , with the numbers ( known as zones ) going across the table and the second letter going down the table . 
 The FSA lists specify all communities covered by each rural FSA . Medium @-@ sized cities may have one dedicated FSA , while larger cities have more than one FSA within their limits . 
 For FSAs spanning more than one city , the city which is allocated the most codes in each such FSA is listed . For cities with a small number of FSAs ( but more than one ) , the lists specify the relative location of each FSA in those cities . For cities with a large number of FSAs , applicable neighbourhoods and boroughs are specified . 
 = = = Local delivery units = = = 
 The last three characters denote a local delivery unit ( LDU ) . An LDU denotes a specific single address or range of addresses , which can correspond to an entire small town , a significant part of a medium @-@ sized town , a single side of a city block in larger cities , a single large building or a portion of a very large one , a single ( large ) institution such as a university or a hospital , or a business that receives large volumes of mail on a regular basis . 
 LDUs ending in zero correspond to postal facilities , from post offices and small franchised retail postal outlets all the way up to sortation plants . In urban areas , LDUs may be specific postal carriers ' routes . In rural areas where direct door @-@ to @-@ door delivery is not available , an LDU can describe a set of post office boxes or a rural route . LDU <unk> is used exclusively for Business Reply Mail . In rural FSAs , the first two characters are usually assigned in <unk> order by the name of each community . 
 LDU <unk> refers to large regional distribution centre facilities , and is also used as a placeholder , appearing in some regional postmarks such as the " <unk> <unk> " which formerly appeared on purely local mail within the Kingston , Ontario area . 
 = = Number of possible postal codes = = 
 Postal codes do not include the letters D , F , I , O , Q or U , and the first position also does not make use of the letters W or Z. This means the maximum number of FSAs available is 3 @,@ 600 . With 2 @,@ 000 possible LDUs in each FSA , there is a theoretical limit of 7 @.@ 2 million postal codes . The practical limit is a bit lower , as Canada Post reserves some FSAs for special functions , such as for test or promotional purposes , ( e.g. the H0H 0H0 for Santa Claus , see below ) as well as for sorting mail bound for destinations outside Canada . The current Statistics Canada estimate of over 830 @,@ 000 active postal codes represents about 12 % of the entire postal code " space " , leaving more than ample room for expansion . 
 = = Urbanization = = 
 " Urbanization " is the name Canada Post uses to refer to the process where it replaces a rural postal code ( a code with a zero as its second character ) with urban postal codes . The vacated rural postal code can then be assigned to another community or retired . Canada Post decides when to <unk> a certain community when its population reaches a certain level , though different factors may also be involved . 
 For example , in early 2008 , the postal code <unk> <unk> ( covering Sainte @-@ Catherine @-@ de @-@ la @-@ Jacques @-@ Cartier , <unk> @-@ sur @-@ le @-@ Lac and Lac @-@ Saint @-@ Joseph , Quebec ) was urbanized to postal codes beginning with <unk> to remove ambiguities and confusions caused by similar street names . Unique among province @-@ wide districts , New Brunswick ( postal district E ) is completely urbanized , its rural codes having been phased out . 
 = = Santa Claus = = 
 In 1974 , staff at Canada Post 's Montreal office were noticing a considerable number of letters addressed to Santa Claus entering the postal system , and those letters were being treated as <unk> . Since employees handling those letters did not want the writers , mostly young children , to be disappointed at the lack of response , they started answering the letters themselves . 
 The amount of mail sent to Santa Claus increased every Christmas , up to the point that Canada Post established an official Santa Claus letter @-@ response program in 1983 . By 2011 , Santa 's mail was being handled with the assistance of eleven thousand volunteers , mostly current or former postal workers , at multiple locations across Canada devoting an average twenty @-@ one hours to this seasonal task . 
 Approximately one million letters are addressed to Santa Claus each Christmas , including some originating outside of Canada , and all of them are answered in the same language in which they are written . Canada Post introduced a special address for mail to Santa Claus , complete with its own postal code : 
 <unk> <unk> 
 NORTH <unk> H0H 0H0 
 CANADA 
 In French , Santa 's name Père Noël translates as " Father Christmas " , addressed as : 
 <unk> <unk> 
 <unk> NORD H0H 0H0 
 CANADA 
 The postal code H0H 0H0 was chosen for this special seasonal use as it reads as " Ho ho ho " . 
 The H0- prefix is an anomaly : the 0 indicates a very small , rural village , but H is used to designate Montreal , the second @-@ largest city in Canada . As such , the H0- prefix is almost completely empty . <unk> , assigned to the international Akwesasne tribal reserve on the Canada @-@ US border , is the only other H0- postal code in active use . 
 In 2013 , Santa Claus was dragged into the ongoing Arctic sovereignty debate to support Canadian territorial claims extending to the North Pole . In response to attacks from Conservative MP Paul Calandra , parliamentary secretary to then @-@ Prime Minister Stephen Harper , Justin Trudeau , at the time leader of the third party Liberals , stated " Everyone knows that Santa Claus is Canadian . His postal code is H0H 0H0 . " 
 = = Transition points to the Canadian Forces Postal Service = = 
 For transition of mail from the civilian to the Canadian Forces Postal Service , the postal codes of the three corresponding military post offices on Canadian soil are used . These being , depending upon the final destination . 
 the Fleet Mail Offices ( FMO ) in Victoria , BC : <unk> <unk> 
 FMO in Halifax , NS : <unk> <unk> 
 the Canadian Forces Post Office ( CFPO ) in Belleville , ON : <unk> <unk> 
 These postal codes each represent a number of military post offices abroad , which are specified not by postal code but by CFPO or FMO number . The LDUs in this case corresponding not so much to a physical as to a virtual delivery unit since mail is not delivered locally but is forwarded to the actual delivery units at Canadian military bases and ships abroad . 
 Name 
 Slot # 
 PO Box <unk> <unk> Forces 
 Belleville ON <unk> <unk> 
 CANADA 
 In this example , Canada Post will deliver to the CFPO at Belleville and the Canadian Forces Postal System will continue transport to the addressee at CFPO <unk> ( in Geilenkirchen , Germany ) by whatever means and timing the military will deem appropriate . 
 = = Alternate uses = = 
 Postal codes can be correlated with <unk> information from censuses or health registries to create a geographic profile of an area 's population . For instance , postal codes have been used to compare children 's risk of developing cancer and to describe a neighbourhood 's entrenched poverty ( " Vancouver 's Downtown Eastside is Canada 's poorest postal code " ) . 
 As Canadian electoral districts frequently follow postal code areas , citizens can identify their local elected representative using their postal code . Provincial and federal government websites offer an online " look @-@ up " feature based on postal codes . Although A1A 1A1 is sometimes displayed as a generic code for this purpose , it is actually a genuine postal code in use in the Lower Battery , St. John 's Harbour , Newfoundland . Another common " example " code in Canada Post materials , <unk> <unk> , is the valid code for the Canada Post office building in Ottawa . 
 = Green Lantern Coaster = 
 Green Lantern Coaster is a steel roller coaster at Warner Bros. Movie World on the Gold Coast , Queensland , Australia . The ride is themed after DC Comics ' Green Lantern and is located within the park 's DC Comics superhero hub . The ride is an El Loco roller coaster manufactured by S & S Worldwide , characterised by a tight circuit featuring a beyond @-@ vertical drop and an outward banked turn . It holds the record for the steepest drop of any roller coaster in the Southern Hemisphere , and the second steepest in the world . Green Lantern Coaster officially opened on 23 December 2011 . 
 = = History = = 
 In May 2011 , preliminary groundwork began on a plot of land in front of Warner Bros. Movie World . On 31 July 2011 , the firm announced a multimillion @-@ dollar attraction coming before Christmas 2011 . In early September , pieces of S & S Worldwide roller coaster track began appearing in the car park . On 13 September 2011 , Warner Bros. Movie World began releasing cropped images of the ride 's concept art . On 17 September 2011 , the final clues were released before the official announcement that evening . It was announced that the Green Lantern Coaster would feature the steepest drop in the Southern Hemisphere . Also on 17 September 2011 , the DC Super Heroes Store opened adjacent to Batman Adventure : The Ride 2 , Batwing Spaceshot and Green Lantern Coaster . By early October , most of the support structure and the lift hill were complete . By the end of October , the ride 's construction was complete and work had begun on the entrance pathway . In early November , six trains arrived on site . Another was showcased by S & S Worldwide at the 2011 IAAPA Attractions Expo . Kevin Rohwer , an S & S Worldwide spokesman , stated that the ride would be ready on 15 December 2011 . On 28 November 2011 , testing began . The ride entered a soft opening phase on 16 December 2011 , before its official opening on 23 December 2011 . 
 = = = Drop angle = = = 
 When the Green Lantern Coaster was announced , few details were released about the ride 's drop angle other than it would be the Southern Hemisphere 's steepest . On 2 November , Warner Bros. Movie World announced via Facebook that the ride would have a drop angle of 120 ° . On 27 November , Warner Bros. Movie World released the television commercial , which promoted that the ride would have the steepest drop in the world . Later that day they confirmed the drop would be 122 @.@ 4 ° instead of the originally announced 120 ° . Following the soft opening television commercials began advertising the ride . On 20 December , Warner Bros. Movie World revised the angle yet again to 120 @.@ 5 ° ; this was the final measurement given . Only <unk> exceeded it with a drop of 121 ° . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Green Lantern Coaster is an El Loco roller coaster manufactured by S & S Worldwide . Warner Bros. Movie World collaborated with S & S Worldwide to develop an coaster that was unlike the previous models ( Mumbo Jumbo , Steel Hawg and Timber Drop ) . 
 = = = Trains = = = 
 The coaster 's seven trains double the capacity of the traditional El Loco ride from 4 seats per train to 8 seats per train . The trains are articulated in such a way that the first row of four riders moves independently from the second row . Each seat features a pair of stereo speakers in the head rest . These speakers are capable of playing multiple tracks for up to 9 minutes on a single charge . Riders are harnessed to the ride through the use of lap bars . The front of each car features a pulsing LED Green Lantern logo while the back of each car features the Green Lantern oath . All of these operational and thematic characteristics are new for this type of ride and were developed specifically for this coaster . 
 = = = Statistics = = = 
 Green Lantern Coaster features 488 metres ( 1 @,@ 601 ft ) of track on which riders reach speeds of up to 66 kilometres per hour ( 41 mph ) and experience 3 @.@ 5 Gs . The 33 @-@ metre @-@ tall ( 108 ft ) ride features a first drop with an angle of 120 @.@ 5 ° ranking it the steepest drop in the Southern Hemisphere and the second steepest in the world . The track and structure , which weigh approximately 300 tonnes ( 330 tons ) , were shipped to Australia from Italy and China , respectively , in twenty @-@ five 40 @-@ foot ( 12 m ) shipping containers . 
 = = = Theme = = = 
 The Green Lantern Coaster is themed around the Green Lantern series of comic books that originated in 1940 . This theme is showcased throughout the ride 's queue and the station . The ride 's theming was developed by Sculpt Studios . 
 = = Experience = = 
 = = = Queue = = = 
 The queue begins adjacent to the DC Super Heroes Store , opposite Batwing Spaceshot . The queue weaves its way alongside the park 's original boundary wall . Along this route several billboards inform guests of the story behind the Green Lantern . Riders turn left and enter a courtyard featuring 2D cutouts of villains as well as a 3D model of the Green Lantern . The queue turns left again and follows an upwards path to the station . 
 = = = Ride = = = 
 Green Lantern Coaster begins with a u @-@ turn out of the station . It ascends a chain lift hill before going down a small dip and into an s @-@ bend followed by a u @-@ turn . After a slight ascent , the car enters a 120 @.@ 5 ° drop – the steepest in the southern hemisphere . The track then returns to approximately two thirds of its original height before entering the first set of block brakes . These brakes lead into a left turn with reverse or outward banking . It then drops under the block brakes and into the first inversion – a Dive Loop . The inversion begins with half of an inline twist which transitions into half of a vertical loop . Upon exiting the inversion the track inclines into a second set of block brakes . The train then goes around a right u @-@ turn and into the second inversion – a downwards inline twist . This leads into a cutback @-@ style turnaround before entering the final brake run and returning to the station . 
 = = = Exit = = = 
 Upon the completion of the ride , guests exit via a path that runs under the lift hill and alongside the park 's boundary before returning to the DC Super Heroes Store . Inside guests can purchase a variety of merchandise related to Green Lantern , Batman and Superman . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Village Roadshow Theme Parks , the owners of Warner Bros. Movie World attributed a rise in attendance to the opening of the Green Lantern Coaster . The company labelled the launch of the ride as a success . The attraction 's downtime has been reported several times by local media , however , this behaviour is not unusual for amusement rides . Green Lantern Coaster , along with other El Loco roller coasters , ranked 182 out of the 365 steel roller coasters in the worldwide Best Roller Coaster Poll for 2012 . 
 = = Incidents = = 
 On 15 March 2015 , one car of a train became detached from rails when a wheel mechanism broke . A Queensland Fire Service Inspector described it as " a fairly catastrophic failure of the carriage " that was the " first time we 'd ever seen the actual failure of the machinery " . An investigation revealed that there was a design flaw in the wheel assembly dealing with a bolted joint , and that there was " really nothing that Movie World could have done to prevent it . S & S Worldwide redesigned the flawed components , and tested the ride , before it reopened to the public on 16 December 2015 . 
 = A Christmas Carol ( Doctor Who ) = 
 " A Christmas Carol " is an episode of the British science fiction television programme Doctor Who . It is the sixth Doctor Who Christmas special since the programme 's revival in 2005 , and was broadcast on 25 December 2010 on both BBC One and BBC America , making it the first episode to premiere on the same day in both the United Kingdom and United States . It was written by Steven Moffat and directed by Toby Haynes . 
 In the episode , newly wedded companions Amy Pond ( Karen Gillan ) and Rory Williams ( Arthur Darvill ) are trapped on a crashing space liner which has been caught in a strange cloud belt . They call the Doctor ( Matt Smith ) , who lands on the planet below and meets the miserly Kazran Sardick ( Michael Gambon ) , a man who can control the cloud layer but refuses to help . Inspired by Charles Dickens 's A Christmas Carol , the episode has the Doctor attempting to use time travel to alter Kazran 's past and make him kinder so he will save the spaceship . 
 Moffat enjoyed writing the episode and was a fan of Dickens ' story himself . The story features flying sharks and fish , which were things Moffat was afraid of as a child . The episode features the acting debut of Welsh singer Katherine Jenkins , who also sang in the episode with a song written specifically for her . " A Christmas Carol " was filmed through July and August 2010 mainly on sets designed by the show 's new set designer Michael Pickwood . The special was seen by 12 @.@ 11 million viewers in the UK and received generally positive reviews from critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 A space liner carrying 4003 passengers , including Amy Pond ( Karen Gillan ) and Rory Williams ( Arthur Darvill ) on their honeymoon , loses control when passing through strange electrified clouds over a human @-@ inhabited planet . The Doctor ( Matt Smith ) , summoned by Amy , is unable to use the TARDIS to save the ship , and instead lands on the planet and discovers that a spire in the centre of a large city is influencing the atmosphere . Its owner , the bitter and peevish old Kazran Sardick ( Michael Gambon ) , refuses to operate the " isomorphic " controls to deactivate the spire and allow the ship to land safely . The Doctor observes Kazran 's fear of his father who had built the spire , and creates a scheme inspired by Charles Dickens ' A Christmas Carol to make Kazran kinder . 
 He ventures to Kazran 's past and meets him as a kind @-@ hearted young boy , interested in the unique properties of the planet 's atmosphere that allow fish to swim in it . The Doctor experiments with Kazran , leading to a shark entering the room and swallowing the Doctor 's sonic screwdriver . Though the Doctor is able to recover part of the screwdriver , the shark is wounded in the effort , unable to swim back into the atmosphere . Kazran offers a solution by taking him to a cryogenic storeroom where his father has kept people in storage as " security " for loans , including Abigail ( Katherine Jenkins ) , a young woman with whom Kazran has been enamored . Abigail , once released , sings to soothe the shark while the Doctor uses Abigail 's cryo @-@ unit to transport the shark back to the atmosphere . As the Doctor and Kazran return Abigail to storage , Kazran promises her they will see her every Christmas Eve . The Doctor keeps this promise , using the TARDIS to jump forward each year , helping to reunite Kazran and Abigail and watching their relationship blossom with the two falling in love and eventually kissing . However , after one such visit , Abigail tells the now young adult Kazran a secret , and Kazran requests the Doctor end the practice , keeping Abigail in storage indefinitely . Though old Kazran in the present becomes pleased with his new memories , he remains bitter at Abigail 's fate and refuses to help save the ship . As a result of the Doctor 's actions , instead of being cruel and heartless , Kazran is bitter and heartbroken . 
 Old Kazran is soon visited by holographic images of the ship 's crew in the present . After observing the effects of Abigail 's singing , the crew is singing Christmas carols , the sound frequencies of which are helping to stabilise the ship but cannot prevent it from crashing . Amy appears to Kazran and implores his help , but he waves away the holograms . The Doctor appears , and Kazran surmises that he is there to show Kazran his future , but he could not care less if he dies old and alone ; he reveals that Abigail had an incurable disease on entering <unk> and will only have one more day to live . As he cannot decide which day that should be , Kazran chastises the Doctor for believing he could change his mind . Unbeknownst to Kazran , the Doctor has brought young Kazran with him ; the realisation of how much his bitter future self now resembles his feared father causes a change of heart in Kazran ( making his own memory of his future self the show 's version of the ghost of Christmas yet to come ) , and he quickly agrees to release the controls to save the ship . 
 The Doctor finds his changes to Kazran 's past have locked him out from the spire 's controls , but the Doctor devises a solution : by having Abigail sing through one half of the broken sonic screwdriver , the other half , still in the shark , will resonate in the atmosphere and disrupt the storm to allow the ship to land safely . Kazran releases Abigail knowing this will be the last time , but Abigail understands and believes it is time for them to share a Christmas Day . The plan works successfully , and the resulting cloud break @-@ out creates snowfall that falls around the city . As the Doctor rejoins Amy and Rory and prepares to take young Kazran back to the past , old Kazran and Abigail enjoy one last shark @-@ led carriage @-@ ride together . 
 = = = Continuity = = = 
 Several nods to earlier outfits in the series appear in " A Christmas Carol " . Amy Pond wears her kissogram policewoman 's outfit from " The Eleventh Hour " , while Rory wears a Roman centurion 's outfit as seen in " The Pandorica Opens " . In one of the many Christmas Eves the Doctor and Kazran spend with Abigail , they present themselves to her in long , <unk> scarves , the Fourth Doctor 's trademark accessory . The two also appear in fezzes , an item of clothing the Doctor became fond of in " The Big Bang " . Kazran 's controls are " isomorphic " , which means that only he can use them . In Pyramids of Mars ( 1975 ) , the TARDIS 's controls are said to be isomorphic , though in subsequent adventures this feature was retained or ignored as the plot demands . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Writer Steven Moffat , who is also head writer and executive producer of the series , wanted to make the special " really Christmassy " because the previous Christmas special , The End of Time , had been darker than usual as it led to the Tenth Doctor 's ( David Tennant ) regeneration . He stated that he had " never been so excited about writing anything . I was laughing madly as I typed along to Christmas songs in April " . Moffat stated that A Christmas Carol was " probably [ his ] favourite Christmas story " and that it lent itself to Doctor Who , as there was an aspect similar to time travel in the story . He also pointed out that the Doctor intentionally based his reform of Kazran on Dickens ' story ; Dickens exists as a character in the Doctor Who universe , having appeared in the 2005 episode " The Unquiet Dead " . The concept of the sky shark was based on Moffat 's childhood fear of sharks which had evolved to swim outside the water . 
 Moffat noted that Kazran was unlike other villains found in Doctor Who , as he was not completely " wicked " . Instead he was more of a " damaged " character ; the Doctor recognises this when Kazran demonstrates his inability to hit a little boy , due to it reminding him of when his father beat him . This allowed the Doctor to want to change his past and " defrost " his soul . The phrase " halfway out of the dark " is used in the episode , a reference to the fact that the hard winter is almost over as well as a metaphor for Kazran . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Starting with this episode , Arthur Darvill achieved regular status . British actor Michael Gambon was cast in the role of Kazran . Andy Pryor , the casting director , did not believe Gambon would be available , and was surprised when Gambon accepted the role . Smith , Gillan , and Darvill were very honoured to work with him . Moffat stated , " Michael Gambon is as distinguished an actor as I can imagine and the fact that he was Dumbledore means that he is already known to millions of children " . Kazran was played as a boy by Laurence Belcher and as a young adult by Danny Horn . Director Toby Haynes said that acting came naturally to Belcher and he " captured the story " and drew the audience in . 
 The episode also features the acting debut of Welsh singer Katherine Jenkins . Shortly before her 30th birthday in June 2010 , Jenkins was asked about the part , and she accepted . Moffat was unaware that Jenkins had no former acting experience . Jenkins originally was not interested in acting , but thought that she would " like to try " Doctor Who , as it was " such an iconic show " . Producer Sanne <unk> believed that Jenkins was " a perfect fit " for the role . Though she was nervous , Jenkins found the Doctor Who team " encouraging and supportive " and believed she would act again " if the right thing came along " . 
 = = = Filming and effects = = = 
 A read @-@ through took place in Cardiff on Thursday , 8 July and production started on 12 July 2010 and lasted into August 2010 . The episode marked the debut of Michael Pickwood as the new set designer . Pickwood and Haynes worked together to create the town , incorporating elements that would be needed in a society that shared its daily life with fish . Nearly all windows in the town are round , reminiscent of submarines . The structures were made out of metal , filmed at a local steel works . Kazran 's study was designed to be very large , as Kazran spent several scenes in there alone and would feel " dwarfed " by it . The walls were intended to look like copper that had turned green , which when combined with the red drapes created the Christmas colours of red and green . The painting of Kazran 's father was created by taking a picture of Gambon , lightly printing it on a canvas , and painting in the details . Kazran 's controls were inspired by a church organ . 
 The Doctor 's first scene in the episode is falling down the chimney and presenting himself to Kazran . Smith was pleased with the entrance of his character , noting similarities between the Doctor and Santa Claus . However , a stuntman performed the scene . For the scene in which a sky fish <unk> on the sonic screwdriver , the screwdriver was dangled in front of a greenscreen and tapped with a pen to create the effect of the fish nudging it . To maintain secrecy of the episode 's plot , the model shark was given the codename " Clive " . The scenes in which the characters ride through the air in a sleigh pulled by one of the flying sharks was filmed in front of a greenscreen . The sleigh was in fact a rickshaw which crew members rocked back and forth as a wind machine created the effect of flying through the air . As it was impossible to film underneath the rickshaw , a miniature model of the sleigh was used for the shots underneath the sleigh rather than computer @-@ generated effects . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The episode features a song specifically written for Jenkins , titled " Abigail 's Song " . In the script it was written that the song was unique and specific to Doctor Who , and composer Murray Gold was contacted to write the song . Jenkins did a demo and then sang the song while filming the actual scene , as she thought it would look more natural . Afterwards she sang the final version and new , lighter arrangement was composed by the National Orchestra of Wales . Selected pieces of music from this special , as composed by Gold , were released on a soundtrack 21 March 2011 by Silva Screen Records . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " A Christmas Carol " was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC One on Christmas Day 2010 . According to overnight figures , " A Christmas Carol " was tied with Come Fly with Me as the second most @-@ watched programme on Christmas Day in the United Kingdom , behind EastEnders , and with an average viewership of 10 @.@ 3 million peaking at 10 @.@ 7 million . The final rating for BBC One was 12 @.@ 11 , making the episode the fourth highest rated of the entire canon since the series was revived in 2005 , behind previous specials " Voyage of the Damned " ( 13 @.@ 31 million , 2007 ) , " The Next Doctor " ( 13 @.@ 10 million , 2008 ) , and Part Two of The End of Time ( 12 @.@ 27 million , 2010 ) . " A Christmas Carol " was the third highest rated show on all UK TV for the week ending 26 December 2010 . In addition , 716 @,@ 000 watched the show on the BBC 's iPlayer , making it the eighth most downloaded show for December 2010 . This special had an Appreciation Index of 83 . 
 " A Christmas Carol " is the first episode of Doctor Who that was broadcast the same day in the United Kingdom and in the United States on BBC America . In the United States , 727 @,@ 000 viewers watched " A Christmas Carol " , an 8 % increase on the previous holiday special , part one of The End of Time . The special was broadcast in Canada on Space on 26 December and in Australia on ABC1 on the same day , where it had overnight ratings of 880 @,@ 000 viewers . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The episode received generally positive reviews . Dan Martin of The Guardian described the episode as a " sumptuous triumph " . Website Den of Geek 's Simon Brew applauded Moffat for " not taking the easy way out " with the adaptation , saying it was " really quite mad , undoubtedly festive , and it treats the Dickens source material with respect " . However , he also wondered if young children " would have enjoyed ' A Christmas Carol ' quite as much " as adults " . Keith Phipps of The A.V. Club gave the special an A- , naming it the " best Doctor Who Christmas special " he had seen . He praised Gambon , Smith , both actors playing the younger Kazran and thought Gillan and Darvill " [ made ] the most of what they 're given " , though he commented that " Katherine Jenkins is more an ethereal presence with a lovely voice ... than an actress " . 
 Dave Golder of SFX gave the episode four and a half out of five stars , explaining that , although there were " creaky " moments , it was " the most adult Christmas special we 've yet been given , with some complex story @-@ telling techniques , a plot driven by the characters and some quite mind @-@ bending concepts " . He praised Jenkins ' debut and Smith , whom he described as " a force of nature unleashed on screen " . IGN 's Cindy White rated the episode 8 out of 10 , describing it as a " clever remix " of A Christmas Carol and praising Smith , Gambon , and Jenkins . Brad Trechak , writing for TV Squad , praised Moffat 's " expertly woven story " . MTV 's Rick Marshall called it " easily one of the best episodes of the series ' modern era ... populated with just the right amount of humor , drama , scares , and sentimental reverence for the classic story that inspired its narrative " . 
 Sam McPherson of Zap2it said that he " enjoyed ' A Christmas Carol ' more than I have almost any other special that has aired since the series restarted in 2005 " , but thought that " some parts were absolutely silly , and others were absolutely incoherent " due to the frantic pace . While he considered Amy and Rory " criminally underused " , they were responsible for " heavy laughs " and left the Doctor to be the " delight of the episode " . The Daily Telegraph 's Chris Harvey was less enthusiastic about the episode , saying that it " started nicely " , but that " by the time she was singing to the shark , I 'd had enough , " while thinking that , " It 's not really for old <unk> like me , who got more of a kick out of Michael Gambon 's miserly Kazran Sardick when he was sneering and snarling at the beginning of the episode than when he had been thoroughly <unk> by the end . " 
 " A Christmas Carol " was nominated for the 2011 Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation ( Short Form ) , but lost to the preceding series finale " The Pandorica Opens " / " The Big Bang " . 
 = = DVD and Blu @-@ ray release = = 
 " A Christmas Carol " was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray as a standalone in Region 2 on 24 January 2011 , followed by Region 1 release in the two formats on 15 February 2011 . It contained the associated Doctor Who Confidential for the episode , as well as a cut @-@ down version of the Doctor Who Prom . The special was also included in the Complete Sixth Series box set released on 21 November 2011 ( Region 2 ) and 22 November ( Region 1 ) . 
 The ten Christmas specials between " The Christmas Invasion " and " Last Christmas " inclusive were released in a boxset titled Doctor Who – The 10 Christmas Specials on 19 October 2015 . 
 = LIM @-@ 49 Nike Zeus = 
 Nike Zeus was an anti @-@ ballistic missile ( ABM ) system developed by the US Army during the late 1950s and early 1960s , designed to destroy Soviet intercontinental ballistic missile warheads before they could hit targets in the United States . It was designed by Bell 's Nike team , and was initially based on the earlier Nike Hercules anti @-@ aircraft missile . The original Zeus A , given the tri @-@ service identifier <unk> @-@ 49 , was designed to intercept warheads in the upper atmosphere , mounting a 25 kiloton W31 nuclear warhead to guarantee a kill . During development it was greatly enlarged and extended into a totally new design , Zeus B , intended to intercept warheads over a much larger area , and mounting a 400 kiloton <unk> warhead . In several successful tests , the B model proved itself able to intercept warheads , and even satellites . 
 The nature of the strategic threat changed dramatically during the period that Zeus was being developed . Originally expected to face only a few dozen ICBMs , a nationwide defense was feasible , although expensive . In 1957 , growing fears of a Soviet sneak attack led it to be repositioned as a way to protect Strategic Air Command 's bomber bases , ensuring a retaliatory strike force would survive . But when the Soviets claimed to be building hundreds of missiles , the US faced the problem of building enough Zeus missiles to match them . The Air Force suggested they close this missile gap by building more ICBMs of their own instead . Adding to the debate , a number of technical problems emerged that suggested Zeus would have little capability against any sort of sophisticated attack . 
 The system was the topic of intense inter @-@ service rivalry throughout its lifetime . When the ABM role was given to the Army in 1958 , the United States Air Force began a long series of critiques on Zeus , both within defense circles and in the press . The Army returned these attacks in kind , taking out full page advertisements in popular mass market news magazines to promote Zeus , as well as spreading development contracts across many states in order to garner the maximum political support . As deployment neared in the early 1960s , the debate became a major political issue . The question ultimately became whether or not a system with limited effectiveness would be better than nothing at all . 
 The decision whether to proceed with Zeus eventually fell to President John F. Kennedy , who became fascinated by the indecision surrounding the ABM system . In 1963 , the United States Secretary of Defense , Robert McNamara , convinced Kennedy to cancel Zeus . McNamara directed its funding towards studies of new ABM concepts being considered by ARPA , selecting the Nike @-@ X concept which addressed Zeus ' various problems by using an extremely high @-@ speed missile , Sprint , along with greatly improved radars and computer systems . The Zeus test site built at Kwajalein was briefly used as an anti @-@ satellite weapon . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early ABM studies = = = 
 The first known serious study on attacking ballistic missiles with interceptor missiles was carried out by the Army Air Force in 1946 , when two contracts were sent out as Project Wizard and Project Thumper to consider the problem of shooting down missiles of the V @-@ 2 type . These projects identified the main problem being one of detection ; the target could approach from anywhere within of hundreds of miles , and reached their targets in only five minutes . Existing radar systems would have difficulty seeing the missile launch at those ranges , and even assuming one had detected the missile , existing command and control arrangements would have serious problems forwarding that information to the battery in time for them to attack . The task appeared impossible at that time . 
 However , these results also noted that the system might be able to work against longer @-@ ranged missiles . Although these traveled at very high speeds , their higher altitude trajectories made detection simpler , and the longer flight times provided more time to prepare . Both projects were allowed to continue as research efforts , and were transferred to the US Air Force when that force separated from the Army in 1947 . The Air Force faced significant budget constraints and cancelled Thumper in 1949 in order to use its funds to continue their GAPA surface @-@ to @-@ air missile ( SAM ) . The next year they merged the Wizard and GAPA projects to develop a new long @-@ range SAM design , which would emerge a decade later as the CIM @-@ 10 Bomarc . ABM research at the Air Force practically , although not officially , ended . 
 = = = Nike II = = = 
 By the early 1950s the Army was firmly established in the surface @-@ to @-@ air missile field with their Nike and Nike B missile projects . These projects had been led by Bell Labs , working with Douglas . 
 The Army contacted the Johns Hopkins University Operations Research Office ( <unk> ) to consider the task of shooting down ballistic missiles using a Nike @-@ like system . The <unk> report took three years to complete , and the resulting The Defense of the United States Against Aircraft and Missiles was comprehensive . While this study was still progressing , in February 1955 the Army began initial talks with Bell , and in March they contracted Bell 's Nike team to begin a detailed 18 @-@ month study of the problem under the name Nike II . 
 The first section of the Bell study was returned to the Army Ordnance department at the Redstone Arsenal on 2 December 1955 . It considered the full range of threats including existing jet aircraft , future ramjet powered aircraft flying at up to 3 @,@ 000 knots ( 5 @,@ 600 km / h ) , short @-@ range ballistic missiles of the V @-@ 2 type flying at about the same speed , and an ICBM reentry vehicle ( RV ) traveling at 14 @,@ 000 knots ( 26 @,@ 000 km / h ) . They suggested that a missile with a common rocket booster could serve all of these roles by changing between two upper stages ; one with fins for use in the atmosphere against aircraft , and another with vestigial fins and thrust vectoring for use above the atmosphere against missiles . 
 Considering the ICBM problem , the study went on to suggest that the system would have to be effective between 95 and 100 % of the time in order to be worthwhile . They considered attacks against the RV while the missile was in the <unk> , just as it reached the highest point in its trajectory and was traveling at its slowest speed . Practical limitations eliminated this possibility , as it required the ABM to be launched at about the same time as the ICBM in order to meet in the middle , and they could not imagine a way to arrange this . Working at much shorter ranges , during the terminal phase , seemed the only possible solution . 
 Bell returned a further study , delivered on 4 January 1956 , that demonstrated the need to intercept the incoming warheads at 100 @-@ mile ( 160 km ) altitude , and suggested that this was within the abilities of an upgraded version of the Nike B missile . Given a terminal speed up to 5 miles per second ( 18 @,@ 000 miles per hour ( 29 @,@ 000 km / h ) ) , combined with the time it would take an interceptor missile to climb to the RV 's altitude , the system required that the RV be initially detected at about 1 @,@ 000 miles ( 1 @,@ 600 km ) range . Due to the RV 's relatively small size and limited radar signature , this would demand extremely powerful radars . 
 To ensure the destruction of the RV , or at least render the warhead within it unusable , the W31 would have to be fired when it was within a few hundred feet of the RV . Given the angular resolution of existing radars , this limited range significantly . Bell considered an active radar seeker , which improved in accuracy as it flew toward the RV , but these proved too large to be practical . A command guidance system like the early Nikes seemed to be the only solution . 
 The interceptor would lose maneuverability as it climbed out of the atmosphere and its aerodynamic surfaces became less effective , so it would have to be directed onto the target as rapidly as possible , leaving only minor fine tuning later in the engagement . This required that accurate tracks be developed for both the warhead and outgoing missile very quickly in comparison to a system like Nike B where the guidance could be updated throughout the engagement . This demanded new computers and tracking radars with much higher processing rates than the systems used on earlier Nikes . Bell suggested that their transistor offered the solution to the data processing problem . 
 After running 50 @,@ 000 simulated intercepts on analog computers , Bell returned a final report on the concept in October 1956 , indicating that the system was within the state of the art . A 13 November 1956 memo gave new names to the entire Nike series ; the original Nike became Nike Ajax , Nike B became Nike Hercules , and Nike II became Nike Zeus . 
 = = = Army vs. Air Force = = = 
 The Army and Air Force had been involved in interservice fighting over missile systems since they split in 1947 . The Army considered surface @-@ to @-@ surface missiles ( SSM ) an extension of conventional artillery , and surface @-@ to @-@ air designs as the modern replacement for their anti @-@ aircraft artillery . The Air Force considered the nuclear SSM to be an extension of their strategic bombing role , and any sort of long @-@ range anti @-@ aircraft system to be their domain as it would integrate with their fighter fleet . Both forces were developing missiles for both roles , leading to considerable duplication of effort which was widely seen as wasteful . 
 By the mid @-@ 1950s some of these projects were simply tit @-@ for @-@ tat efforts . When the Army 's Hercules began deployment , the Air Force complained that it was inferior to their Bomarc and that the Army was " unfit to guard the nation " . When the Army started its Jupiter missile efforts , the Air Force responded by starting its own <unk> , Thor . So when the Army announced Nike II , the Air Force reactivated Wizard , this time as a long @-@ range anti @-@ ICBM system of much greater performance than Zeus . 
 In a 26 November 1956 memorandum , US Secretary of Defense Charles Erwin Wilson attempted to end the fighting and prevent duplication . His solution was to limit the Army to weapons with 200 @-@ mile ( 320 km ) range , and those involved in surface @-@ to @-@ air defense to only 100 miles ( 160 km ) . The memo also placed limits on Army air operations , severely limiting the weight of the aircraft it was allowed to operate . To some degree this simply formalized what had largely already been the case in practice , but Jupiter fell outside the range limits and the Army was forced to hand them to the Air Force . 
 The result was another round of fighting between the two forces . Jupiter had been designed to be a highly accurate weapon able to attack Soviet military bases in Europe , as compared to Thor , which was intended to attack Soviet cities and had accuracy on the order of several miles . Losing Jupiter , the Army was eliminated from any offensive strategic role . In return , the Air Force complained that Zeus was too long @-@ ranged and the ABM effort should center on Wizard . But the Jupiter handover meant that Zeus was now the only strategic program being carried out by the Army , and its cancellation would mean " virtually the surrender of the defense of America to the <unk> at some future date . " 
 = = = Gaither Report , missile gap = = = 
 In May 1957 , Eisenhower tasked the President 's Science Advisory Committee ( PSAC ) to provide a report on the potential effectiveness of fallout shelters and other means of protecting the US population in the event of a nuclear war . Chaired by Horace Rowan Gaither , the PSAC team completed their study in September , publishing it officially on 7 November as Deterrence & Survival in the Nuclear Age , but today known as the Gaither Report . After ascribing an expansionist policy to the USSR , along with suggestions that they were more heavily developing their military than the US , the Report suggested that there would be a significant gap in capability in the late 1950s due to spending levels . 
 While the report was being prepared , in August 1957 the Soviets launched their R @-@ 7 <unk> ( SS @-@ 6 ) ICBM , and followed this up with the successful launch of Sputnik 1 in October . Over the next few months , a series of intelligence reviews resulted in ever increasing estimates of the Soviet missile force . National Intelligence Estimate ( NIE ) 11 @-@ 10 @-@ 57 , issued in December 1957 , stated that the Soviets would have perhaps 10 prototype missiles in service by mid @-@ 1958 . But after Nikita Khrushchev claimed to be producing them " like sausages " , the numbers began to rapidly inflate . NIE 11 @-@ 5 @-@ 58 , released in August 1958 , suggested there would be 100 ICBMs in service by 1960 , and 500 by 1961 or 1962 at the latest . 
 With the NIE reports suggesting the existence of the gap Gaither predicted , near panic broke out in military circles . In response , the US began to rush its own ICBM efforts , centered on the SM @-@ 65 Atlas . These missiles would be less susceptible to attack by ICBM than bombers , especially in future versions which would be launched from underground silos . But even as Atlas was rushed , it appeared there would be a missile gap ; NIE estimates made during the late 1950s suggested the Soviets would have significantly more ICBMs than the US between 1959 and 1963 , at which point US production would finally catch up . 
 With even a few hundred <unk> , the Soviets could afford to target every US bomber base . With no warning system in place , a sneak attack could destroy a significant amount of the US bomber fleet on the ground . The US would still have the airborne alert force and its own small ICBM fleet , but the USSR would have its entire bomber fleet and any missiles they did not launch , leaving them with a massive strategic advantage . To ensure this could not happen , the Report called for the installation of active defenses at SAC bases , Hercules in the short term and an ABM for the 1959 period , along with new early warning radars for ballistic missiles to allow alert aircraft to get away before the missiles hit . Even Zeus would come too late to cover this period , and some consideration was given to an adapted Hercules or a land based version of the Navy 's RIM @-@ 8 Talos as an interim ABM . 
 = = = Zeus B = = = 
 Douglas Aircraft had been selected to build the missiles for Zeus , known under the company designation DM @-@ 15 . This was essentially a scaled @-@ up Hercules with an improved , more powerful single piece booster replacing Hercules ' cluster of four smaller boosters . <unk> could take place at the limits of the Wilson requirements , at ranges and altitudes of about 100 miles ( 160 km ) . Prototype launches were planned for 1959 . For more rapid service entry there had been some consideration given to an interim system based on the original Hercules missile , but these efforts were dropped . Likewise , early requirements for a secondary anti @-@ aircraft role were also eventually dropped . 
 Wilson signaled his intention to retire in early 1957 , and Eisenhower began looking for a replacement . During his exit interview , only four days after Sputnik , Wilson told Eisenhower that " trouble is rising between the Army and the Air Force over the ' anti @-@ missile @-@ missile ' . " The new Secretary of Defense , Neil McElroy , took office on 9 October 1957 . McElroy was previously president of Procter & Gamble and was best known for the invention of the concept of brand management and product differentiation . He had little federal experience , and the launch of Sputnik left him little time to ease into the position . 
 Shortly after taking office , McElroy formed a panel to investigate ABM issues . The panel examined the Army and Air Force projects , and found the Zeus program considerably more advanced than Wizard . McElroy told the Air Force to stop work on ABM missiles and use Wizard funding for the development of long @-@ range radars for early warning and raid identification . These were already under development as the BMEWS network . The Army was handed the job of actually shooting down the warheads , and McElroy gave them free hand to develop an ABM system as they saw fit , free of any range limitations . 
 The team designed a much larger missile with a greatly enlarged upper fuselage and three stages , more than doubling the launch weight . This version extended range , with interceptions taking place as far as 200 miles ( 320 km ) downrange and over 100 miles ( 160 km ) in altitude . An even larger booster took the missile to hypersonic speeds while still in the lower atmosphere , so the missile fuselage had to be covered over completely with a phenolic ablative heat shield to protect the airframe from melting . Another change was to combine the aerodynamic controls used for control in the lower atmosphere with the thrust vectoring engines , using a single set of movable jet vanes for both roles . 
 The new DM @-@ 15B Nike Zeus B ( the earlier model retroactively becoming the A ) received a go ahead for development on 16 January 1958 , the same date the Air Force was officially told to stop all work on a Wizard missile . On 22 January 1958 , the National Security Council gave Zeus S @-@ Priority , the highest national priority . Additional funds were requested to the Zeus program to ensure an initial service date in the fourth quarter of 1962 , but these were denied , delaying service entry until some time in 1963 . 
 = = = Exchange ratio and other problems = = = 
 With their change of fortunes after McElroy 's 1958 decision , Army General James M. Gavin publicly stated that Zeus would soon replace strategic bombers as the nation 's main deterrent . In response to this turn of events , the Air Force stepped up their policy by press release efforts against the Army , as well as agitating behind the scenes within the Defense Department . 
 As part of their Wizard research , the Air Force had developed a formula that compared the cost of an ICBM to the ABM needed to shoot it down . The formula , later known as the cost @-@ exchange ratio , could be expressed as a dollar figure ; if the cost of the ICBM was less than that figure , the economic advantage was in favor of the offense - they could build more ICBMs for less money than the ABMs needed to shoot them down . A variety of scenarios demonstrated that it was almost always the case that the offense had the advantage . The Air Force ignored this inconvenient problem while they were still working on Wizard , but as soon as the Army was handed sole control of the ABM efforts , they immediately submitted it to McElroy . McElroy identified this as an example of interservice fighting , but was concerned that the formula might be correct . 
 For an answer , McElroy turned to the Re @-@ entry Body Identification Group ( RBIG ) , a sub @-@ group of the Gaither Committee led by William E. Bradley , Jr. that had been studying the issue of penetrating a Soviet ABM system . The RBIG had delivered an extensive report on the topic on 2 April 1958 which suggested that defeating a Soviet ABM system would not be difficult . Their primary suggestion was to arm US missiles with more than one warhead , a concept known as Multiple Re @-@ entry Vehicles ( MRV ) . Each warhead would also be modified with radiation hardening , ensuring only a near miss could damage it . This would mean that the Soviets would have to launch at least one interceptor for each US warhead , while the US could launch multiple warheads without building a single new missile . If the Soviets added more interceptors to counter the increased number of US warheads , the US could counter this with a smaller number of new missiles of their own . The cost balance was always in favor of the offense . This basic concept would remain the primary argument against ABMs for the next two decades . 
 Turning this argument about , the RBIG delivered a report to McElroy that agreed with the Air Force 's original claims on the ineffectiveness of ABMs based on cost . But then they went on to consider the Zeus system itself , and noted that its use of mechanically steered radars , with one radar per missile , meant that Zeus could only launch a small number of missiles at once . If the Soviets also deployed MRV , even a single ICBM would cause several warheads to arrive at the same time , and Zeus would simply not have time to shoot at them all . They calculated that only four warheads arriving within one minute would result in one of them hitting the Zeus base 90 % of the time . Thus one or two Soviet missiles would destroy 100 Zeus 's . The RBIG noted that an ABM system " demands such a high rate of fire from an active defense system , in order to intercept the numerous reentry bodies which arrive nearly simultaneously , that the expense of the required equipment may be prohibitive " . They went on to question the " ultimate impossibility " of an ABM system . 
 = = = Project Defender = = = 
 McElroy responded to the RBIG report in two ways . First , he turned to the newly created ARPA group to examine the RBIG report . APRA , directed by Chief Scientist Herbert York , returned another report broadly agreeing with everything they said . Considering both the need to penetrate a Soviet ABM and a potential US ABM system , York noted that : 
 When this report was received , McElroy then charged ARPA to begin studying long term solutions to the ICBM defense , looking for systems that would avoid the apparently insurmountable problem presented by the exchange ratio . 
 ARPA responded by forming Project Defender , initially considering a wide variety of far out concepts like particle beam weapons , lasers and huge fleets of space @-@ borne interceptor missiles , the latter known as Project <unk> . In May 1958 , York also began working with Lincoln Labs , MIT 's radar research lab , to begin researching ways to distinguish warheads from decoys by radar or other means . This project emerged as the Pacific Range Electromagnetic Signature Studies , or Project <unk> . 
 = = = More problems = = = 
 In the midst of the growing debate over Zeus ' abilities , the US conducted its first high yield , high altitude tests – Hardtack <unk> on 1 August 1958 , and Hardtack Orange on 12 August . These demonstrated a number of previously unknown or underestimated effects , notably that nuclear fireballs grew to very large size and caused all of the air in or immediately below the fireball to become opaque to radar signals , an effect that became known as nuclear blackout . This was extremely worrying for any system like Zeus , which would not be able to track warheads in or behind such a fireball , including those of the Zeus ' own warheads . 
 If this were not enough , there was a growing awareness that simple radar reflectors could be launched along with the warhead that would be indistinguishable to Zeus ' radars . This problem was first alluded to in 1958 in public talks that mentioned Zeus ' inability to discriminate targets . If the decoys spread apart further than the lethal radius of the Zeus ' warhead , several interceptors will be required to guarantee that the warhead hiding among the decoys will be destroyed . <unk> are lightweight , and would slow down when they began to reenter the upper atmosphere , allowing them to be picked out , or <unk> . But by that time it would be so close to the Zeus base that there might not be time for the Zeus to climb to altitude . 
 In 1959 the Defense Department ordered one more study on the basic Zeus system , this time by the PSAC . They put together a heavyweight group with some of the most famous and influential scientists forming its core , including Hans Bethe who had worked on the Manhattan Project and later on the hydrogen bomb , Wolfgang Panofsky , the director of the High @-@ Energy Physics Lab at Stanford University , and Harold Brown , director of the Lawrence Livermore weapons lab , among similar luminaries . The PSAC report was almost a repeat of the RBIG . They recommended that Zeus should not be built , at least without significant changes to allow it to better deal with the emerging problems . 
 Throughout , Zeus was the focus of fierce controversy in both the press and military circles . Even as testing started , it was unclear if development would continue . President Eisenhower 's defense secretaries , McElroy ( 1957 – 59 ) and Thomas S. Gates , Jr . ( 1959 – 61 ) , were unconvinced that the system was worth the cost . Eisenhower was highly skeptical , questioning whether an effective ABM system could be developed in the 1960s . Another harsh critic on cost grounds was Edward Teller , who simply stated that the exchange ratio meant the solution was to build more ICBMs . 
 = = = Kennedy and Zeus = = = 
 John F. Kennedy campaigned on the platform that Eisenhower was weak on defense and that he was not doing enough to solve the looming missile gap . After his win in the 1960 elections he was flooded with calls and letters urging that Zeus be continued . This was a concentrated effort on the part of the Army , who fought back against similar Air Force tactics . They also deliberately spread the Zeus contracts over 37 states in order to gain as much political and industrial support as possible , while taking out advertisements in major mass @-@ market magazines like Life and The Saturday Evening Post promoting the system . 
 Kennedy appointed Army General Maxwell D. Taylor as his Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff . Taylor , like most Army brass , was a major supporter of the Zeus program . Kennedy and Taylor initially agreed to build a huge Zeus deployment with seventy batteries and 7 @,@ 000 missiles . McNamara was also initially in favor of the system , but suggested a much smaller deployment of twelve batteries with 1 @,@ 200 missiles . A contrary note was put forth by Jerome Wiesner , recently appointed as Kennedy 's scientific advisor , and chair of the 1959 PSAC report . He began to educate Kennedy on the technical problems inherent to the system . He also had lengthy discussions with David Bell , the budget director , who came to realize the enormous cost of any sort of reasonable Zeus system . 
 Kennedy was fascinated by the Zeus debate , especially the way that scientists were lined up on diametrically opposed positions for or against the system . He commented to Wiesner , " I don ’ t understand . Scientists are supposed to be rational people . How can there be such differences on a technical issue ? " His fascination grew and he eventually compiled a mass of material on Zeus which took up one corner of a room where he spent hundreds of hours becoming an expert on the topic . In one meeting with Edward Teller , Kennedy demonstrated that he knew more about the Zeus and ABMs than Teller . Teller then expended considerable effort to bring himself up to the same level of knowledge . Wiesner would later note that the pressure to make a decision built up until " Kennedy came to feel that the only thing anybody in the country was concerned about was Nike @-@ Zeus . " 
 To add to the debate , it was becoming clear that the missile gap was fictional . The first Corona spy satellite mission in August 1960 put limits on their program that appeared to be well below the lower bound of any of the estimates , and a follow @-@ up mission in late 1961 clearly demonstrated the US had a massive strategic lead . A new intelligence report published in 1961 reported that the Soviets had no more than 25 ICBMs and would not be able to add more for some time . 
 Nevertheless , Zeus continued slowly moving towards deployment . On 22 September 1961 , McNamara approved funding for continued development , and approved initial deployment of a Zeus system protecting twelve selected metropolitan areas . These included Washington / Baltimore , New York , Los Angeles , Chicago , Philadelphia , Detroit , Ottawa / Montreal , Boston , San Francisco , Pittsburgh , St. Louis , and Toronto / Buffalo . However , the deployment was later overturned , and in January 1962 only the development funds were released . 
 = = = Nike @-@ X = = = 
 In 1961 , McNamara agreed to continue development funding through <unk> , but declined to provide funds for production . He summed up both the positives and the concerns this way : 
 Looking for a near term solution , McNamara once again turned to ARPA , asking it to consider the Zeus system in depth . The agency returned a new report in April 1962 that contained four basic concepts . First was the Zeus system in its current form , outlining what sort of role it might play in various war fighting scenarios . Zeus could , for instance , be used to protect SAC bases , thereby requiring the Soviets to expend more of their ICBMs to attack the base . This would presumably mean less damage to other targets . Another considered the addition of new passive electronically scanned array radars and computers to the Zeus , which would allow it to attack dozens of targets at once over a wider area . Finally , in its last concept , ARPA replaced Zeus with a new very high speed , short range missile designed to intercept the warhead at altitudes as low as 20 @,@ 000 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 km ) , by which time any decoys or fireballs would be long gone . This last concept became Nike @-@ X , an ad hoc name suggested by Jack <unk> while describing the ARPA report to the President 's Science Advisory Committee ( PSAC ) . 
 = = = Perfect or nothing = = = 
 As work on Nike @-@ X began , high @-@ ranking military and civilian officials began to press for Zeus deployment as an interim system in spite of the known problems . They argued the system could be upgraded in @-@ place as the new technologies became available . McNamara was opposed to early deployment , while Congressman Daniel J. Flood would be a prime force for immediate deployment . 
 McNamara 's argument against deployment rested on two primary issues . One was the apparent ineffectiveness of the system , and especially its benefit @-@ cost ratio compared to other options . For instance , fallout shelters would save more Americans for far less money , and in an excellent demonstration of his approach to almost any defense issue , he noted : 
 The second issue , ironically , came about due to concerns about a Soviet ABM system . The US 's existing SM @-@ 65 Atlas and SM @-@ 68 Titan both used re @-@ entry vehicles with blunt noses that greatly slowed the warheads as they entered the lower atmosphere and made them relatively easy to attack . The solution was the LGM @-@ 30 Minuteman missile , which used new sharp nosed reentry shapes that traveled at much higher terminal speeds , and included a number of decoy systems that were expected to make interception very difficult for the Soviet ABMs . If there was a budget choice to be made , McNamara supported Minuteman , although he tried not to say this . 
 In one particularly telling exchange between McNamara and Flood , McNamara initially refuses to choose one option over the other : 
 Flood : Which comes first , the chicken or the egg ? Which comes first , Minuteman because he may develop a good Zeus , or our own Zeus ? 
 McNamara : I would say neither comes first . I would carry on each simultaneously with the maximum rate of activity that each could benefit from . 
 But later , Flood managed to get a more accurate statement out of him : 
 Flood : I thought we had broken through this problem in this country , of wanting things to be perfect before we send them to the troops . I have an enemy who can kill me and I cannot defend myself against him , and I say I should hazard all risks within the rule of reason , to advance this by 2 or 3 years . 
 McNamara : We are spending hundreds of millions of dollars , not to stop things but to accelerate the development of an anti @-@ ICBM system ... I do not believe it would be wise for us to recommend the procurement of a system which might not be an effective anti @-@ ICBM device . That is exactly the state in which we believe the Zeus rests <unk> : ... You may not be aware of it , but you have just about destroyed the Nike @-@ Zeus . That last paragraph did that . 
 = = = Cancellation and the ABM gap = = = 
 By 1963 McNamara had convinced Kennedy that the Zeus was simply not worth deploying . The earlier concerns about cost and effectiveness , as well as new difficulties in terms of attack size and decoy problems , led McNamara to cancel the Zeus project on 5 January 1963 . In its place they decided to continue work on Nike @-@ X. Nike @-@ X development was based in the existing Nike Zeus Project Office until their name was changed to Nike @-@ X on 1 February 1964 . 
 While reporting to the Senate Armed Services Committee in February , McNamara noted that they expected the Soviets to have an initial ABM system deployed in 1966 , and then later stated that the Nike @-@ X would not be ready for use until 1970 . Noting a " defensive gap " , Strom Thurmond began an effort to deploy the existing Zeus as an interim system . Once again the matter spilled over into the press . 
 On 11 April 1963 , Thurmond led Congress in an effort to fund deployment of Zeus . In the first closed session of the Senate in twenty years , Zeus was debated and the decision was made to continue with the planned development of Nike @-@ X with no Zeus deployment . The Army continued the testing program until December 1964 at White Sands Missile Range , and May 1966 at Kwajalein Missile Range . 
 = = Testing = = 
 As the debate over Zeus raged , the Nike team was making rapid progress developing the actual system . Test firings of the original A models of the missile began in 1959 at White Sands Missile Range . The first attempt on 26 August 1959 was of a live booster stage and dummy sustainer , but the booster broke up shortly before booster / sustainer separation . A similar test on 14 October was a success , followed by the first two @-@ stage attempt on 16 December . The first complete test of both stages with active guidance and thrust vectoring was successfully carried out on 3 February 1960 . Data collected from these tests led to changes to the design to improve speed during the ascent . The first test of the Zeus B took place in May 1961 . A number of Zeus missiles broke up during early test flights due to excessive heating of the control surfaces , and numerous changes were worked into the system to address this . 
 Additional tracking tests were carried out by Target Tracking Radars ( TTRs ) at Bell 's Whippany , NJ labs and an installation on Ascension Island . The latter was first used in an attempt to track a SM @-@ 68 Titan on 29 March 1961 , but the data download from Cape Canaveral simulating Zeus Acquisition Radar ( ZAR ) information failed . A second test on 28 May was successful . Later in the year the Ascension site tracked a series of four test launches , two Atlas , two Titan , generating tracking information for as long as 100 seconds . A ZAR at White Sands reached initial operation in June 1961 , and was tested against balloons , aircraft , parachutes deployed from sounding rockets and Hercules missiles . A TTR was completed at White Sands in November , and testing with the complete system of ZAR , TTR and MTR ( " all @-@ up " tests ) began that month . On 14 December a Zeus passed within 100 feet ( 30 m ) of a Nike Hercules being used as a test target , a success that was repeated in March 1962 . On 5 June 1963 , President Kennedy and Vice President Lyndon Johnson visited White Sands to view missile launches , including a Zeus launch . 
 The need to test Zeus against targets flying realistic ICBM profiles presented a problem . While White Sands was fine for testing the basic missile and guidance systems , it was too small to test Zeus at its maximum range . Such testing began at Point Mugu in California. where the Zeus missiles could fly out over the Pacific . Consideration was given to using Point Mugu to launch against ICBMs flying from Cape Canaveral , but range safety requirements placed limits on the potential tests . The Atlantic Test Range , to the northeast of Canaveral , had a high population density and little land available for building accurate downrange tracking stations , Ascension being the only suitable location . 
 Eventually Kwajalein Island was selected , as it was 4 @,@ 800 miles from California , perfect for ICBMs , and already had a US Navy base with considerable housing stocks and an airstrip . The Zeus site , known as the Kwajalein Test Site , was officially established on 1 October 1960 . As it grew in size , it eventually led to the entire island complex being handed over to the Army from the Navy on 1 July 1964 . The site took up a considerable amount of the empty land to the north side of the airfield . The launchers were located on the far southwestern corner of the island , with the Target Tracking Radars , Missile Tracking Radars ( MTRs ) and various control sites and generators running along the northern side of the airfield . The ZAR transmitter and receiver were some distance away , off the northeastern edge of the airfield . 
 A minor Army @-@ Air Force fight then broke out about what targets would be used for the Kwajalein tests . The Army favored using its Jupiter design , fired from Johnston Atoll in the Pacific , while the Air Force recommended using Atlas fired from Vandenberg AFB in California . The Army had already begun converting the former Thor launchers to Jupiter when an Ad Hoc Panel formed by the Department of Defense considered the issue . On 26 May 1960 they decided in favor of Atlas , and this was made official on 29 June when the Secretary of Defense ended pad conversion and additional Jupiter production earmarked for Zeus testing . 
 A key development of the testing program was a miss @-@ distance indicator system , which independently measured the distance between the Zeus and the target at the instant the computers initiated the detonation of the warhead . There were concerns that if the Zeus ' own radars were used for this ranging measure , any systematic error in ranging would also be present in the test data , and thus would be hidden . The solution was the use of a separate UHF @-@ frequency transmitter in the warhead reentry vehicle , and a receiver in the Zeus . The received signal was retransmitted to the ground , where its Doppler shift was examined to extract the range information . These instruments eventually demonstrated that the Zeus ' own tracking information was accurate . For visual tracking , a small conventional warhead was used , which provided a flash that could be seen on long exposure photographs of the interceptions . 
 On 24 January 1962 , the Zeus Acquisition Radar at Kwajalein achieved its first returns from an ICBM target , and on 18 April was used to track Kosmos 2 . On the 19 January it reacquired Kosmos 2 and successfully transferred the track to one of the TTRs . On 26 June the first all @-@ up test against an Atlas target was attempted . The ZAR began successfully tracking the target at 446 nautical miles ( 826 km ) and properly handed off to a TTR . The TTR switched tracks from the missile fuselage to the warhead at 131 nautical miles ( 243 km ) . When the fuselage began to break up , the computer switched to clutter mode , which watched the TTR data for any derivation from the originally calculated trajectory , which would indicate that it had begun tracking debris . It also continued to predict the location of the warhead , and if the system decided it was tracking debris , it would wait for the debris and warhead to separate enough to begin tracking them again . However , the system failed to properly record when the warhead was lost , and tracking was never regained . 
 A second test on 19 July was a partial success , with the Zeus passing within 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) of the target . The control system ran out of hydraulic fluid during the last 10 seconds of the approach , causing the large miss distance , but the test was otherwise successful . The guidance program was updated to stop the rapid control cycling that led to the fluid running out . A third attempt on 12 December successfully brought the missile to very close distances , but the second missile of the planned two missile salvo failed to launch due to an instrument problem . A similar test on 22 December also suffered a failure in the second missile , but the first passed only 200 metres ( 660 ft ) from its target . 
 Of the tests carried out over the two year test cycle , ten of them were successful in bringing the Zeus within its lethal range . 
 = = Anti @-@ satellite use = = 
 In April 1962 , McNamara asked the Nike team to consider using the Zeus site on Kwajalein as an operational anti @-@ satellite base after the main Zeus testing had completed . The Nike team responded that a system could be readied for testing by May 1963 . The concept was given the name Project Mudflap . 
 Development was a straightforward conversion of the DM @-@ 15B into the DM @-@ 15S . The changes were mainly concerned with providing more upper stage maneuverability through the use of a new two @-@ stage hydraulic pump , batteries providing 5 minutes of power instead of 2 , and an improved fuel in the booster to provide higher peak altitudes . A test of the new booster with a DM @-@ 15B upper was carried out at White Sands on 17 December 1962 , reaching an altitude of 100 nautical miles ( 190 km ) , the highest of any launch from White Sands to that point . A second test with a complete DM @-@ 15S on 15 February 1963 reached 151 nautical miles ( 280 km ) . 
 Testing then moved to Kwajalein . The first test on 21 March 1963 failed when the MTR failed to lock onto the missile . A second on 19 April also failed when the missile 's tracking beacon failed 30 seconds before intercept . The third test , this time using an actual target consisting of an Agena @-@ D upper stage equipped with a Zeus miss @-@ distance transmitter , was carried out on 24 May 1963 , and was a complete success . From that point until 1964 , one DM @-@ 15S was kept in a state of instant readiness and teams continually trained on the missile . 
 After 1964 the Kwajalein site was no longer required to be on alert , and returned primarily to Zeus testing . The system was kept active in a non @-@ alert role between 1964 and 1967 , known as Program 505 . In 1967 it was replaced by a Thor based system , Program 437 . A total of 12 launches , including those at White Sands , were carried out as part of the 505 program between 1962 and 1966 . 
 = = Description = = 
 Nike Zeus was originally intended to be a straightforward development of the earlier Hercules system giving it the ability to hit ICBM warheads at about the same range and altitude as the maximum performance of the Hercules . In theory , hitting a warhead is no more difficult than an aircraft ; the interceptor does not have to travel any further or faster , the computers that guide it simply have to select an intercept point farther in front of the target to compensate for the target 's much higher speed . In practice , the difficulty is detecting the target early enough that the intercept point is still within range of the missile . This demands much larger and more powerful radar systems , and faster computers . 
 = = = Early detection = = = 
 When Zeus was still in the early stages of design , Bell Labs suggested using two similar radars to provide extended range tracking and improve reaction times . Located at the Zeus bases would be the Local Acquisition Radar ( LAR ) , a UHF monopulse radar able to track between 50 and 100 targets . The Forward Acquisition Radar ( FAR ) would be positioned 300 to 700 miles ( 480 – 1 @,@ 130 km ) ahead of the Zeus bases to provide early warning of up to 200 to 300 seconds of tracking data on up to 200 targets . The FAR would broadcast 10 MW pulses at UHF between 405 – 495 MHz , allowing it to detect a 1 square metre radar reflection at 1 @,@ 020 nautical miles ( 1 @,@ 890 km ) or a more typical 0 @.@ 1 m2 target at 600 nautical miles ( 1 @,@ 100 km ) . Each track would be stored as a 200 bit file including location , velocity , time of measure and a measure of the quality of the data . Clouds of objects would be tracked as a single object with additional data indicating the width and length of the cloud . Tracks could be updated every five seconds while the target was in view , but the antenna rotated at a relatively slow 4 RPM so targets moved significantly between rotations . Each FAR could feed data to up to three Zeus sites . 
 By the time the Zeus plans were being finalized in 1957 , plans for FAR were deemphasized , and LAR had been upgraded to become the Zeus Acquisition Radar ( ZAR ) which provided wide area early warning and initial tracking information . This enormously powerful radar was driven by multiple 1 @.@ 8 MW klystrons and broadcast through three 80 @-@ foot ( 24 m ) wide antennas arranged as the outside edges of a rotating equilateral triangle . The ZAR spun at 10 RPM , but with three antennas it simulated a single antenna rotating three times as fast . Each target was scanned every two seconds , providing much more data than the earlier FAR / LAR concept . 
 The signal was received on a separate set of three antennas , situated at the centre of an 80 foot ( 24 m ) diameter <unk> lens , which rotated synchronously with the broadcaster under a 120 @-@ foot ( 37 m ) diameter dome . Multiple feed horns were used in the receiver to allow reception from many vertical angles at once . Around the receiver dome was a large field of wire mesh , forming a flat ground plane reflector . The ZAR operated in the UHF on various frequencies between 495 – 605 MHz , giving it frequency agility . ZAR had detection range on the order of 460 nautical miles ( 850 km ) on a 0 @.@ 1 m2 target . 
 The entire transmitter was surrounded by a 65 @-@ foot ( 20 m ) high clutter fence located 350 feet ( 110 m ) away from the antenna , which reflected the signal away from local objects on the ground that would otherwise create false returns . The ZDR was so powerful that the microwave energy at close range was far beyond the mandated safety limits and potentially lethal within 100 yards ( 91 m ) . In order to allow for maintenance while the radar was operating , the equipment areas were shielded in a partial Faraday cage of metal foil , and a metal tunnel was run from the outside of the clutter fence , which blocked the signal outside the fence line . The other radars completing the system featured similar protection . 
 = = = Battery layout = = = 
 Data from the <unk> were passed to the appropriate Zeus Firing Battery to attack , with each ZAR being able to send its data to up to ten batteries . Each battery was self @-@ contained after handoff , including all of the radars , computers and missiles needed to perform an intercept . In a typical deployment , a single Zeus Defense Center would be connected to three to six batteries , spread out by as much as 100 miles ( 160 km ) . 
 Targets picked out by the ZAR were then illuminated by the Zeus Discrimination Radar ( ZDR , also known as Decoy Discrimination Radar , DDR or DR ) . ZDR imaged the entire cloud using a <unk> signal that allowed the receiver to accurately determine range within the cloud by passing each frequency in the chirp to a separate range gate . The range resolution was 0 @.@ 25 microseconds , about 75 metres ( 246 ft ) . As the signal was spread out over the entire cloud , it had to be very powerful ; the ZDR produced 40 MW 2 µs pulses in the L @-@ band between 1270 – 1400 MHz . To ensure no signal was lost by scanning areas that were empty , the ZDR used a Cassegrain reflector that could be moved to focus the beam as the cloud approached to keep the area under observation constant . 
 Data from the ZDR was passed to the All @-@ Target Processor ( ATP ) , which ran initial processing on as many as 625 objects in a cloud . As many as 50 of these could be picked out for further processing in the Discrimination and Control Computer ( DCC ) , which ran more tests on those tracks and assigned each one a probability of being the warhead or decoy . The DCC was able to run 100 different tests . For exoatmospheric signals the tests included measure of radar return pulse @-@ to @-@ pulse to look for tumbling objects , as well as variations in signals strength due to changes in frequency . Within the atmosphere , the primary method was examining the velocities of the objects to determine their mass . 
 Any target with a high probability was then passed to the Battery Control Data Processor ( <unk> ) , which selected missiles and radars for an attack . This started with the assignment of a Target Tracking Radar ( TTR ) to a target passed to it from the DCC . TTRs operated in the C @-@ band from <unk> – <unk> MHz at 10 MW , allowing tracking of a 0 @.@ 1 m2 target at 300 nautical miles ( 560 km ) , a range they expected to be able to double with a new maser @-@ based receiver design . Once targets were being successfully tracked and a firing order was received , the <unk> selected available Zeus missiles for launch and assigned a Missile Tracking Radar ( MTR ) to follow them . These were much smaller radars operating in the X @-@ band between 8500 – 9600 MHz and assisted by a transponder on the missile , using only 300 kW to provide missile tracking to 200 nautical miles ( 370 km ) . The wide variety of available frequencies allowed up to 450 MTRs to be operating in a single Defense Center . Information from the ZDR , TTR and <unk> was all fed to the Target Intercept Computer ( TIC ) which handled the interceptions . This used <unk> memory for ROM and core memory for RAM . Guidance commands were sent to the missiles in @-@ flight via modulation of the MTR signal . 
 The nominal battery consisted of a single DR , three TTRs , two <unk> driving six <unk> , and 24 missiles . This basic battery layout could attack three warheads at once , normally using two missiles per salvo in case one failed in flight . More typically , two targets would be attacked while the third system stood by as a hot backup that could take over in @-@ flight . A maximally expanded battery included three <unk> , ten TTRs , six <unk> driving eighteen MTRs and 72 missiles . Sites requiring higher traffic handling would not build larger systems , but instead deploy additional batteries fed from the same ZAR and Defense Center . 
 It was expected that the ZAR would take 20 seconds to develop a track and hand off a target to one of the TTRs , and 25 seconds for the missile to reach the target . With these sorts of salvo rates , a fully expanded Zeus installation was expected to be able to successfully attack 14 " bare " warheads per minute . Its salvo rate against warheads with decoys is not recorded , but would depend on the ZDR 's processing rate more than any physical limit . The actual engagement would normally take place at about 75 nautical miles ( 139 km ) due to accuracy limitations , beyond that missiles could not be guided accurately enough to bring them within their lethal 800 foot ( 240 m ) range against a shielded warhead . 
 = = = Zeus missiles = = = 
 The original Zeus A was similar to the original Hercules , but featured a revised control layout and gas <unk> for maneuvering at high altitudes where the atmosphere was too thin for the aerodynamic surfaces to be effective . The Zeus B interceptor was longer at 14 @.@ 7 metres ( 48 ft ) , 2 @.@ 44 metres ( 8 ft 0 in ) wide , and 0 @.@ 91 metres ( 3 ft 0 in ) in diameter . This was so much larger than the earlier Hercules that no attempt was made to have them fit into the existing Hercules / Ajax launchers . Instead , the B models were launched from silos , thus the change of numbering from MIM ( mobile surface launched ) to LIM ( silo launched ) . Since the missile was designed to intercept its targets in space , it did not need the large maneuvering fins of the A model . Rather , it featured a third rocket stage with small control jets to allow it to maneuver in space . Zeus B had a maximum range of 250 miles ( 400 km ) and altitude of 200 miles ( 320 km ) . 
 Zeus A was designed to attack warheads through shock effects , like the Hercules , and was to be armed with a relatively small nuclear warhead . As the range and altitude requirements grew , along with a better understanding of weapons effects at high altitude , the Zeus B was intended to attack its targets through the action of neutron heating . This relied on the interceptor 's warhead releasing a huge number of high energy neutrons ( similar to the neutron bomb ) , some of which would hit the enemy warhead . These would cause fission to occur in some of the warhead 's own nuclear fuel , rapidly heating the " primary " , hopefully enough to cause it to melt . For this to work , the Zeus mounted the <unk> , a 400 kt enhanced radiation warhead , and had to maneuver within 1 km of the target warhead . Against shielded targets , the warhead would be effective to as little as 800 feet ( 0 @.@ 24 km ) . 
 = = Specifications = = 
 There are at least five Zeus models mentioned in various sources , A , B , C , S and X2 , the last of which became Spartan . None of the sources explicitly list the differences of all of these in a single table . Different sources appear to confuse measures between the Zeus A , B and Spartan . The A and Spartan figures are taken from US Strategic and Defensive Missile Systems 1950 – 2004 , B from the Bell Labs history . 
 = English cricket team in Bangladesh in 2009 – 10 = 
 The England cricket team toured Bangladesh at the end of the 2009 – 10 cricket season , playing three One Day Internationals ( ODI ) and two Test matches . Regular England captain Andrew Strauss controversially missed the tour to rest for the 2010 – 11 Ashes series , so the team was led by Alastair Cook . Bangladesh were captained by all @-@ rounder Shakib Al Hasan . 
 England whitewashed Bangladesh in both the Test and ODI series , maintaining their record as the only Test @-@ playing nation not to have been beaten by the Bangladeshis . England gave debuts to five players during the series , including South African @-@ born Craig Kieswetter , which drew criticism over the number of foreign @-@ born players in the England team , particularly from former England captain Michael Vaughan . 
 = = Background = = 
 In the 12 previous matches between the two sides – four Test matches and eight ODIs – England had a 100 % winning record against Bangladesh , the only international team able to boast such a record . The previous year , Bangladesh had claimed their first Test series victory against a senior Test nation , though it came against a West Indies side that was heavily weakened because of an industrial dispute . England came into the tour on the back of a two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ month series against South Africa in which they had tied the Test and Twenty20 International series , and secured a 2 – 1 ODI series win . 
 = = Squads = = 
 The England and Wales Cricket Board ( ECB ) announced in September 2009 that it " [ had ] to prioritise " and would most likely be sending a weakened squad to tour Bangladesh . The press theorised that possible candidates to be rested included captain Andrew Strauss , Paul Collingwood , Stuart Broad and James Anderson . When the squad was officially announced in January 2010 , only Strauss and Anderson were omitted from the touring squad . The reason given for Anderson 's break was to give him opportunity to undergo a specialist review and rehabilitation for a chronic injury to his right knee , to enable him to return to full fitness for the 2010 ICC World Twenty20 . The decision to rest Strauss was rationalised by national selector Geoff Miller as " the selectors feel it is important that he takes a break ahead of an extremely busy programme of international cricket " . This decision was not universally accepted , with former England captains Ian Botham and Michael Atherton among those who spoke out against the move ; Botham claimed : " As captain you need to be there with your team ... I think it ’ s a major mistake . " 
 England called up three uncapped players , naming bowlers Ajmal Shahzad and James Tredwell in both squads , and opening batsman Michael Carberry in the Test squad . Following a string of impressive performances for the England Lions , South African @-@ born wicket @-@ keeper batsman Craig Kieswetter was added to the ODI squad . Kieswetter had only completed his qualification period for England on the day before his first Lions match , and had previously represented South Africa Under @-@ 19s . Former England captain Michael Vaughan was unhappy with the inclusion of Kieswetter in the squad , and said that in an ideal world he would like to see " 11 complete Englishmen in the team , " and complained that he had " a problem , that we have almost got a ' ship @-@ in ' system of looking at talent " . Injuries to Ryan Sidebottom , Graham Onions and Broad prompted England to call up Steven Finn as cover for the Test series , and Tim Bresnan remained with the squad after originally only being part of the ODI squad . 
 In contrast to the selection issues and injury problems surrounding England , Bangladesh came into the tour with a relatively stable squad . <unk> players Nasir Hossain and <unk> Shuvo were both named in the ODI squad , and Mashrafe Mortaza was fit to play after making it through the warm @-@ up game against England for the BCB XI , having not played since July 2009 due to a knee injury . After playing in the first ODI , Mortaza withdrew from the squad for the remaining ODIs and Test matches , citing a disagreement over his fitness . The Bangladesh chairman of selectors , <unk> Alam , announced that Mortaza had withdrawn himself " to be by the side of his ailing mother " . Mohammad Ashraful , Bangladesh 's most @-@ capped player , was omitted from the Test squad as he had failed to convince the selectors that he was in the right frame of mind for international cricket . The day after the squad had been announced , Bangladesh 's preparations for the opening Test match were " thrown into disarray " when <unk> Hasan announced his retirement from international cricket at the age of 22 . It was reported that the retirement was due to <unk> 's displeasure at being omitted from the provisional squad for the 2010 ICC World Twenty20 . <unk> Jahurul Islam was called into the squad to replace him . 
 = = ODI series = = 
 = = = 1st ODI = = = 
 After winning the toss , England opted to put Bangladesh into bat , but their new @-@ ball bowlers failed to maintain a good line and length , providing opener Tamim Iqbal with plenty of bad deliveries to put away for boundaries . Their breakthrough came in the 10th over , when Bresnan bowled a slower ball to Imrul Kayes who found a leading edge and was caught by Luke Wright at mid @-@ on . Two more wickets followed closely as Junaid Siddique hit a half @-@ volley softly to the fielder at square leg in the next over , and then Aftab Ahmed was run out in the 13th over , leaving Bangladesh with 82 runs for the loss of three wickets ( 82 / 3 ) . Captain Shakib Al Hasan and vice @-@ captain Mushfiqur Rahim both provided Tamim with some support , but both were undone by their own rashness ; Shakib advanced down the wicket to Graeme Swann and provided an edge for Matt Prior to catch behind the stumps , while Mushfiqur attempted a run which was never available and presented Kevin Pietersen with his second run out of the match . Tamim alone provided resistance , showing " imperious strokeplay all around the ground " and a measure of maturity in his innings . His 125 came off 120 balls , including 13 fours and 3 sixes , eventually being dismissed in the 43rd over , bowled by Broad , with Bangladesh on 214 / 9 . The final two batsmen lasted three overs , adding 14 to score , leaving England requiring 229 to win . 
 In England 's reply , captain Alastair Cook played in a fashion reminiscent of the man he had replaced for the tour , Strauss , as he played an <unk> innings to score 64 . Kieswetter , who had been brought into the team to provide firepower at the start of the innings was outscored by Cook 4 to 1 , and was nearly dismissed twice in his first over , offering an edge to wicket @-@ keeper Mushfiqur Rahim , and two balls later he was caught in front , but umpire Rod Tucker ruled that he was not out . Kieswetter was dismissed in the 13th over for 19 , completely missing a drive ; presenting Mushfiqur with an easy stumping . An over later , Kevin Pietersen fell for just one run , leaving England on 74 / 2 . Cook and new man Collingwood put on 22 runs before the opener was adjudged leg before wicket ( LBW ) though replays indicated that the ball was missing the stumps on the leg side . Collingwood then anchored the chase with Eoin Morgan , the pair adding 88 runs to the score . After the dismissal of Morgan on 33 , it was left to Prior to join Collingwood to add the required runs , and England won with four overs to spare . 
 = = = 2nd ODI = = = 
 Both sides made changes going into the second ODI ; for England , Sidebottom made way as England opted to hand a debut to Tredwell in order to play two spinners , while Bangladesh called on Shuvo and Rubel Hossain , dropping Siddique and Mortaza . For the second consecutive match , England won the toss and chose to field . The match began in similar fashion to the first ODI , with two quick wickets in the 10th and 11th overs taking Bangladesh from 46 / 0 to 56 / 2 . However , a third @-@ wicket partnership of 90 between Kayes and Rahim steadied the innings and helped Bangladesh to gain confidence . After Imrul Kayes ' dismissal , Rahim increased his scoring @-@ rate with a series of boundaries to take the score past 200 , and was dismissed by a slower ball from Bresnan with the score at 211 / 5 . Some late swinging from the tail saw Bangladesh finish on 260 / 6 , their highest total in ODIs against England . 
 England lost opener Kieswetter in the first over ; caught at first slip off the third ball of the innings , having been dropped by the keeper the ball before . Pietersen and Collingwood were both trapped LBW by Abdur Razzak without passing 20 , and Morgan joined Cook in the middle with the score at 68 / 3 . Initially , Morgan supported his captain by rotating the strike , but when Cook was dismissed for a 61 @-@ ball 60 , he played with more freedom . A partnership of 90 with wicket @-@ keeper Prior brought England close to 200 , but Wright , Bresnan and Swann all fell cheaply , leaving England requiring 31 runs off 26 balls with only two wickets remaining . With England " seemingly in disarray " , Morgan took control of the match , and completed the run @-@ chase with three boundaries in five balls . Morgan finished the game with 110 not out , his first century for England . 
 = = = 3rd ODI = = = 
 The third ODI saw a change of venue ; the teams moving from Dhaka to the coastal town of Chittagong . England again made two bowling changes , seamers Shahzad and Liam Plunkett coming into the team with the injured Broad and spinner Tredwell making way . Bangladesh remained unchanged from the second ODI . The hosts won their first toss of the series , and put England into bat . Kieswetter bucked his natural game and played cautiously : when partner Cook was dismissed for 32 in the 13th over , he had scored 20 off 33 balls . The opener continued to accumulate runs carefully until he reached his half @-@ century in the 33rd over . After passing the milestone , he began to score quicker , cutting and driving as he shared a 74 @-@ run partnership with Collingwood . He reached his century with a scampered run off Rubel Hossain , his first in international cricket , in his third ODI appearance . At 22 years and 97 days old , he became the second youngest England batsman to score an ODI century after David Gower . In contrast to the " all @-@ action " style that had been expected from him , Kieswetter accrued his century with resolve , saying after the match that : " In the first two games I wasn 't quite aware tactically of how I was going to pace my innings , [ in terms of ] helping the team win the game . Today I tried to pace myself a bit more , and try to get myself in more before playing big shots . " His dismissal soon after his century brought Wright to the crease with the freedom to make an aggressive cameo , notching 32 runs off just 13 balls to help England towards a total of 284 . 
 In response , Bangladesh lost Tamim Iqbal for a duck in the first over , giving debutant Ajmal Shahzad his first ODI wicket from his third ball of the match . Bresnan removed the other Bangladeshi opener in the 10th over , the first of his four wickets in the match . This wicket brought together Mushfiqur Rahim and Aftab Ahmed , who both played aggressively , putting on 56 together in the next ten overs , but when Aftab Ahmed was run out looking for a non @-@ existent run , Bangladesh started to struggle . Rahim and Shakib Al Hasan both fell after making good starts and the required run rate started to rise , making a Bangladeshi victory look improbable . Slow scoring between Naeem Islam and Mahmudullah took victory further away , and Bangladesh eventually finished 45 runs short of their target , granting England a series whitewash . 
 = = Test series = = 
 = = = 1st Test = = = 
 The teams remained in Chittagong for the first Test , in which England gave Test debuts to Finn and Carberry . Bangladesh 's preparations for the match were disrupted when middle @-@ order batsman Hasan announced his retirement from international cricket two days earlier , and although Jahurul Islam was called into the squad to replace him , it was Aftab Ahmed who took his place in the team for the Test . Bangladesh won the toss , and made " among the most unfathomable calls " , putting England into bat on a surface that looked certain to deteriorate . Cook capitalised on the decision , being " barely troubled " as he remained 158 not out at the close of the first day , having faced 244 balls . Debutant Carberry out @-@ scored Cook early on , but fell on 30 going for an ambitious sweep against Mahmudullah . His wicket brought in Jonathan Trott who scored slowly but confidently until he was wrongly dismissed on 39 . A bouncing ball hit his helmet and was caught by wicket @-@ keeper Rahim , prompting the umpire to give him out caught . Pietersen , who had been struggling against left @-@ arm spin bowling , adjusted his style of play during his innings , staying more leg @-@ side of the ball . He scored 99 runs , falling just short of a century when he was bowled by left @-@ arm spinner Razzak . Collingwood , who scored 145 runs , and Ian Bell , who added 84 runs , increased the run rate during the second day to propel England to 599 for 6 , at which point they declared , half an hour before the tea interval . 
 England took advantage of bowling at their hosts before tea , with Broad dismissing Kayes and Siddique with bouncers . Shortly after the break , Swann claimed the wicket of Aftab Ahmed in his first over ; caught at short leg . Bangladesh had lost three wickets with only 51 runs scored , but a partnership of 94 by Iqbal and Mahmudullah brought their side back into the match . Mahmudullah was caught in the slips just after reaching his half @-@ century , and his captain Shakib Al Hasan followed before the end of the day . Iqbal was dismissed in the third over of the following day , and nine overs later <unk> Hossain was also dismissed , leaving Bangladesh 416 runs behind with only three wickets remaining . Thoughts of a quick victory were quashed by a Bangladesh record partnership for the eighth @-@ wicket by Rahim and Naeem Islam , who added 113 runs together . Rahim played defiantly , batting for 152 balls to reach score his 79 runs , and was described by ESPNcricinfo 's Andrew McGlashan as a " lesson to the more impetuous of his team @-@ mates " . The partnership was eventually broken by a run out by Carberry , and Bangladesh added no more runs for the final two wickets to finish on 296 : over 300 runs behind . 
 As they were playing a four @-@ man bowling attack , and had spent longer in the field than they had wanted , England opted not to enforce the follow @-@ on . Batting again , England pressed to score quickly , but were pegged back by regular dismissals : no batsman scored more than 40 runs , and the run rate was much the same as their first innings . Shakib Al Hasan claimed four wickets , and England batting 50 minutes into the fourth morning before declaring on 209 for 7 , leaving Bangladesh requiring 513 runs in their second innings to win . 
 Bangladesh lost wickets at regular intervals at the start of their innings ; by the end of the 38th over , they had lost five wickets . Rahim joined Siddique after the fifth wicket fell , and the pair batted patiently together to see their side through to force the match into its final day . The partnership continued to battle during the fifth morning of the match , and Siddique reached his first Test century , coming from 262 deliveries . Shortly after , Prior failed to take a difficult catch , but Siddique did not capitalise on the mistake , adding no more runs before he was caught in the slips shortly after lunch . The bowler , Swann , swore at Siddique as he walked off the pitch , something he later apologised for , saying that it was " a testament to him that he did get everyone frustrated . " Rahim was bowled by Swann four overs later , and despite a late assault by Naeem Islam , who scored three fours and three sixes before being becoming Swann 's 10th victim of the match , England won by 181 runs . Swann , who took five wickets in each innings , was the first English off spinner since Jim Laker in 1956 to take 10 wickets in a match . His performance in the match led to him rising to second place in the ICC Test bowling rankings . 
 = = = 2nd Test = = = 
 The teams returned to Dhaka for the second Test , and made three changes ; Bangladesh selected Shafiul Islam and Jahurul Islam to replace Aftab Ahmed and <unk> Hossain , while England added a second spinner , with Carberry making way for Tredwell . The toss was once again won by Bangladesh , who opted to bat first . Tamim Iqbal , on his 21st birthday , scored runs with freedom on the first morning , reaching a half @-@ century from 34 balls . He was dropped twice before that , by Collingwood and Cook , but his innings was described by David Hopps in Wisden Cricketers ' <unk> as " taking something normally sedate and slightly forbidding , and making it wild and intoxicating . " Tamim 's batting drew interest that he could become the fifth player in Test history to score a century on the first morning , but he was dismissed by Tredwell for 85 , attempting a sweep . Swann , who had been particularly expensive against Tamim , took wickets either side of lunch to leave Bangladesh on 167 for 4 . Shakib and Mahmudullah steadied the innings , scoring 59 runs together , before both were dismissed in close succession . Another patient partnership between Mushfiqur Rahim and Naeem Islam took Bangladesh past 300 runs . On the second morning , Bangladesh pressed aggressively , particularly through Shafiul Islam , who scored a half @-@ century at just quicker than a run @-@ a @-@ ball . Cook 's captaincy was criticised in Wisden where Hopps claimed that Cook 's fields " defied logic " , while ESPNcricinfo 's Sahil Dutta described his captaincy as " more robotic than insightful " . Naeem Islam remained 59 not out as Bangladesh were bowled out for 419 . 
 In England 's response , Shakib opted to use his spinners to minimise scoring opportunities , a tactic which led to Cook 's dismissal for 21 . His fellow opener , Trott , scored his first run from his 33rd delivery , and continued to bat circumspectly throughout the second day . Pietersen attempted to score more quickly , though it took a bad over from Razzak to allow him to do so . A misjudged shot after leaving his crease resulted in him being caught , and Collingwood followed soon after , leg before wicket from his third delivery . Bell joined Trott in the middle , and the pair added 67 runs together before Trott was dismissed for 64 . Prior capitalised on more bad bowling from Razzak to reach his half @-@ century , but fell shortly after , giving Bangladesh hope of a first @-@ innings lead . Bell and Bresnan took England to the brink of a lead , adding 143 runs together , including a century for Bell . It was the first occasion on which Bell had scored a century in Test cricket without a team @-@ mate having already done so in the innings , a statistic that had been used to suggest he could not score run in tough conditions . Speaking about his century , Bell alluded to that statistic , stating that he had " put a few things to bed . " After his dismissal , Bresnan batted with the tail , taking his score to 91 , and England 's to 496 , a lead of 77 runs . After the third day , Bangladesh 's captain , Shakib , criticised the Bangladesh Cricket Board for not paying for the use of the Umpire Decision Review System . He believed that a number of the umpiring decisions had gone against his side , and the technology could have given his side a better chance of their first Test win over England . 
 Bangladesh 's second innings started in similar fashion to their first ; they lost the early wicket of Imrul Kayes , and Tamim scored a quick half @-@ century . The latter was dropped three times before being caught by Broad for 52 runs . Junaid and Jahurul both made good starts for Bangladesh , but were out for 34 and 43 respectively , which along with low scores for Mahmudullah and Mushfiqur left Bangladesh on 172 for six at the end of the fourth day . On the final morning , Shakib batted <unk> with the lower @-@ order batsmen and narrowly missed out on a century ; he was the last man out , stumped attempting to score a boundary to reach the landmark . His batting had helped establish a 208 run lead for Bangladesh , which resulted in England requiring just under four runs per over to reach the total . 
 In England 's chase , Trott was the only batsman dismissed , run out for 19 , although replays suggested that it was possibly the wrong decision . Cook scored his second century of the series , and Pietersen finished on 74 , scored at just under a run @-@ a @-@ ball . Bangladesh 's bowling attack was tired , and rarely threatened England ; Pietersen even opted to switch hit some deliveries . In Wisden , Hopps , who had described the second morning as being possibly " England 's lowest point of a long winter " , contrastingly said of the final day ; " England 's supremacy had rarely looked so marked . " Despite England 's victory , which maintained their one hundred percent winning record against Bangladesh , Shakib was named as man of the match . 
 = = Tour matches = = 
 = = = 50 @-@ over tour matches : Bangladesh Cricket Board XI v England XI = = = 
 England won both of their one @-@ day warm @-@ up matches against the Bangladesh Cricket Board XI comfortably . In the first match , England batted first and scored 370 runs , during which Kieswetter and Collingwood both posted centuries while scoring quicker than a @-@ run @-@ a @-@ ball . ESPNcricinfo described Kieswetter 's century as ensuring " he will be making his England debut in the first ODI " . In the next match , which was shortened to 37 overs per side , England bowled first and restricted their hosts to 151 runs . Tredwell bowled particularly economically , allowing just 17 runs from his seven overs . In their response , England reached the winning total with 70 balls to spare . Cook and Prior both scored half @-@ centuries . 
 = = = 3 @-@ day tour match : Bangladesh A v England XI = = = 
 = Jimmy Greaves = 
 James Peter " Jimmy " Greaves ( born 20 February 1940 ) is a former England international footballer . He is England 's fourth highest international goalscorer ( 44 goals ) , Tottenham Hotspur 's highest ever goalscorer ( 266 goals ) , the highest goalscorer in the history of English top @-@ flight football ( 357 goals ) , and has also scored more hat @-@ tricks ( six ) for England than anyone else . He finished as the First Division 's top scorer in six seasons . He is a member of the English Football Hall of Fame . 
 Greaves began his professional career at Chelsea in 1957 , and played in the following year 's FA Youth Cup final . He scored 124 First Division goals in just four seasons before being sold on to Italian club A.C. Milan for £ 80 @,@ 000 in April 1961 . His stay in Italy was not a happy one and he returned to England with Tottenham Hotspur for a fee of £ 99 @,@ 999 in December 1961 . Whilst with Spurs he won the FA Cup in 1961 – 62 and 1966 – 67 , the Charity Shield in 1962 and 1967 , and the European Cup Winners ' Cup in 1962 – 63 ; he never won a league title but did help Spurs to a second @-@ place finish in 1962 – 63 . He moved to West Ham United in a player @-@ exchange in March 1970 and retired the following year . After a four @-@ year absence he returned to football at the non @-@ league level , despite suffering from alcoholism . In a five @-@ year spell he played for Brentwood , Chelmsford City , Barnet , and Woodford Town . 
 Greaves scored 13 goals in 12 England under @-@ 23 internationals and scored 44 goals in 57 full England internationals between 1959 and 1967 . He played in the 1962 and 1966 FIFA World Cup , but was injured in the group stage of the 1966 World Cup and lost his first team place to Geoff Hurst , who kept Greaves out of the first team in the final . England won the World Cup , but Greaves was not given his medal until a change of FIFA rules in 2009 . 
 After retiring as a player Greaves went on to enjoy a career in broadcasting , most notably working alongside Ian St. John on Saint and Greavsie from 1985 to 1992 . During this period , he also made regular appearances on TV @-@ am . He worked on a number of other sport shows on ITV during this period , including Sporting Triangles . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Chelsea = = = 
 Greaves was born in Manor Park and raised in Hainault . He was scouted playing football while a schoolboy by Chelsea 's Jimmy Thompson , and in 1955 was signed on as an apprentice to become one of " Drake 's Ducklings " ( Drake 's Ducklings were named after manager Ted Drake in response to Manchester United 's " Busby Babes " ) . He soon made an impression at youth level , scoring 51 goals in the 1955 – 56 season and 122 goals in the 1956 – 57 season under the tutelage of youth team coach Dickie Foss . Greaves scored in the 1958 FA Youth Cup final , but Chelsea lost the two @-@ legged tie 7 – 6 on aggregate after Wolverhampton Wanderers turned round a four @-@ goal deficit with a 6 – 1 win in the second leg . He turned professional in the summer of 1957 , though spent eight weeks working at a steel company to supplement his income during the summer break . 
 Aged 17 , Greaves scored on his First Division debut on 24 August 1957 against Tottenham Hotspur in a 1 – 1 draw at White Hart Lane . He was an instant success , as the News Chronicle reported that he " showed the ball control , confidence and positional strength of a seasoned campaigner " and compared his debut to the instant impact the young Duncan Edwards had as a teenager . The " Blues " played attacking football during the 1957 – 58 campaign , resulting in high @-@ scoring matches , and Greaves ended the season as the club 's top scorer with 22 goals in 37 appearances . Drake rested him for six weeks from mid @-@ November as he did not wish the praise Greaves was receiving to go to his head ; Greaves marked his return to the first team at Stamford Bridge with four goals in a 7 – 4 victory over Portsmouth on Christmas Day . 
 Greaves scored five goals in a 6 – 2 win against league champions Wolverhampton Wanderers in the third match of the 1958 – 59 season . Chelsea remained inconsistent , though despite his team finishing in 14th place Greaves managed to finish as the division 's top scorer with 32 goals in 44 league games . Greaves scored 29 goals in 40 league matches in the 1959 – 60 campaign , five of which came in a 5 – 4 victory over Preston North End . Despite his goalscoring exploits , the club could manage only an 18th @-@ place finish , three places and three points above the relegation zone . 
 In the 1960 – 61 season , Greaves scored hat @-@ tricks against Wolves , Blackburn Rovers and Manchester City ; he scored four goals against Newcastle United and Nottingham Forest ; and hit five goals in a 7 – 1 win over West Bromwich Albion . His hat @-@ trick against Manchester City on 19 November included his 100th league goal , making him the youngest player to pass the 100 @-@ goal mark , at the age of 20 years and 290 days . However , he became increasingly disillusioned at Chelsea as , despite his goals , the team also conceded goals with regularity , and were never consistent enough to mount a title challenge . They also exited the FA Cup by losing 2 – 1 at home to Fourth Division side Crewe Alexandra . Club chairman Joe Mears agreed to sell Greaves as Chelsea were in need of extra cash . His last game was the final game of the 1960 – 61 season on 29 April ; he was made captain for the day and scored all four goals in a 4 – 3 win against Nottingham Forest . This took his tally for the season to a club record 41 goals in 40 league games , making him the division 's top scorer . 
 = = = A.C. Milan = = = 
 Greaves was signed by Italian Serie A club A.C. Milan in June 1961 for an £ 80 @,@ 000 fee , and was given a three @-@ year contract on £ 140 a week with a £ 15 @,@ 000 signing bonus . He became unhappy at the thought of leaving London and tried to cancel the move before it was fully confirmed , but " Rossoneri " manager Giuseppe <unk> refused to annul the deal . Greaves scored on his debut in a 2 – 2 draw with Botafogo at the San Siro . However , he did not get on well with new head coach Nereo Rocco , who insisted on keeping the players in a strict training regime with little personal freedom . Greaves scored nine goals in 14 appearances , including one against Inter Milan in the Milan derby . During a match against Sampdoria , Greaves kicked a player who had spat in his face . Sampdoria equalised from the resulting free kick , for which Rocco blamed Greaves , despite him having scored Milan 's opener and set up the second . Due to his low morale , Greaves was transfer @-@ listed and Brazilian attacker Dino Sani was signed as his replacement . Both Tottenham Hotspur and Chelsea made £ 96 @,@ 500 bids , which were both accepted . After he left , the club went on to win the league title in 1961 – 62 . 
 = = = Tottenham Hotspur = = = 
 After protracted negotiations , Bill Nicholson signed Greaves for Tottenham Hotspur in December 1961 for £ 99 @,@ 999 – the unusual fee was intended to relieve Greaves of the pressure of being the first £ 100 @,@ 000 player in British football . He joined Spurs just after they became the first club in England to complete the First Division and FA Cup double during the 20th century . He played his first game in a Spurs shirt for the reserve team on 9 December 1961 , and scored twice in a 4 – 1 win over Plymouth Argyle Reserves at Home Park . He scored a hat @-@ trick on his first team debut , including a flying scissor kick , in a 5 – 2 win over Blackpool at White Hart Lane . He went on to feature against Benfica in the semi @-@ finals of the European Cup ; in the first leg at the Estádio da Luz he had a goal disallowed for offside , and in the return fixture he had another goal another disallowed for offside . He played in all seven games of the club 's FA Cup run , scoring nine goals in the competition as they beat Birmingham City ( after a replay ) , Plymouth Argyle , West Bromwich Albion , Aston Villa and Manchester United to reach the 1962 FA Cup Final against Burnley at Wembley . Greaves opened the scoring against Burnley on 3 minutes when he hit a low shot past goalkeeper Adam <unk> from a tight angle , and Spurs went on to win the game 3 – 1 . They finished the league in third place in 1961 – 62 , four points behind champions Ipswich Town . 
 Greaves scored twice in the 1962 FA Charity Shield , as Spurs secured the trophy with a 5 – 1 win over Ipswich at Portman Road . In the 1962 – 63 season Greaves scored hat @-@ tricks in victories over Manchester United , Ipswich Town and Liverpool , as well as four goals in a 9 – 2 win over Nottingham Forest . Spurs finished the league campaign in second place , six points behind champions Everton . Greaves scored 37 goals in 41 league games , finishing as the division 's top scorer . In the European Cup Winners ' Cup , Tottenham beat Rangers ( Scotland ) , ŠK Slovan Bratislava ( Czechoslovakia ) and OFK Beograd ( Yugoslavia ) to reach the final , where they met Spanish club Atlético Madrid at De Kuip . In the first leg of the semi @-@ final against Beograd in Belgrade , Greaves was sent off for violent conduct ( his first and only red card ) after attempting to punch centre @-@ back <unk> <unk> . Greaves served a one match ban and was able to play in the final , where he opened the scoring after an assist from Cliff Jones and later added a fourth in a 5 – 1 victory ( John White and Terry Dyson getting the other goals ) . In winning the competition , Tottenham Hotspur became the first British team to win a European trophy . 
 Manager Bill Nicholson and his assistant Eddie Baily then began a period of transition at White Hart Lane – key players such as Danny Blanchflower , John White and Dave Mackay would all leave the club within the space of a few years and had to be replaced . Greaves remained a consistent goalscorer though , and in the 1963 – 64 season he scored hat @-@ tricks in victories over Nottingham Forest , Blackpool , Birmingham City and Blackburn Rovers . Spurs finished in fourth place , six points behind champions Liverpool , and exited the FA Cup and Cup Winners ' Cup at the opening stages . Greaves scored 35 goals in 41 league games to again finish as the division 's top scorer . Strike partner Bobby Smith left the club in the summer , though Greaves felt the partnership he went on to form with new signing Alan Gilzean was even more effective . 
 Spurs finished sixth in 1964 – 65 , though Greaves scored 29 goals in 41 league games to finish as the division 's joint top scorer ( with Andy McEvoy ) . He also scored two hat @-@ tricks in the FA Cup – against Torquay United and Ipswich Town – to take his total tally to 35 goals in 45 appearances . He missed three months at the start of the 1965 – 66 season after being diagnosed with hepatitis , but recovered to end the campaign with 16 goals in 31 matches , remaining the club 's top scorer as they finished the league campaign in eighth place whilst failing to make it past the Fifth Round of the FA Cup . 
 Greaves scored 31 goals in 47 appearances in the 1966 – 67 campaign , helping Spurs to launch a title challenge that ended with a third @-@ place finish , four points behind Manchester United . They also won the FA Cup after knocking out Millwall , Portsmouth , Bristol City , Birmingham City and Nottingham Forest to reach the 1967 FA Cup Final with Chelsea . Though he did not score in the final itself , a 2 – 1 victory , with six goals in eight games Greaves was the competition 's leading scorer . The 1967 – 68 season was a disappointing one for Spurs following their 3 – 3 draw with Manchester United at Old Trafford in the 1967 FA Charity Shield . They finished seventh in the league , exited the FA Cup in the Fifth Round and were knocked out of the Cup Winners ' Cup in the Second Round . Greaves had a poor season by his own standards , though with 29 goals in 48 appearances he was still the club 's top scorer . Nicholson bought Greaves a new strike partner in Martin Chivers from Southampton for a club record £ 125 @,@ 000 fee , with Gilzean dropping further back into midfield to accommodate , but Greaves and Chivers were not as effective together as Nicholson had hoped . 
 In 1968 – 69 , Greaves scored 27 goals in 42 league games to finish as the First Division 's leading scorer for the sixth and final time . He scored four of his goals in one match against Sunderland , and also scored hat @-@ tricks against Burnley and Leicester City . His nine goals in cup competitions , including a hat @-@ trick against Exeter City , left him with an overall goal tally of 36 in 52 games . Spurs performed inconsistently in the 1969 – 70 season , and Greaves was dropped from the first team after playing in an FA Cup defeat to Crystal Palace at Selhurst Park on 28 January 1970 . He was never recalled to the starting line @-@ up , but still ended the season as the club 's joint top scorer ( with Martin Chivers ) , having scored 11 goals in 33 matches . 
 Greaves was given a testimonial match by Spurs on 17 October 1972 in a 2 – 1 win over Feyenoord at White Hart Lane ; he made £ 22 @,@ 000 from the occasion . He was inducted into the Tottenham Hotspur Hall of Fame in 2015 . 
 = = = West Ham United = = = 
 In March 1970 , Greaves joined West Ham United as part @-@ exchange in Martin Peters ' transfer to White Hart Lane . Brian Clough 's Derby County had also been interested in Greaves , but he did not want to move away from London . In hindsight Greaves felt that Clough may have helped him revive his career , as he had done for Greaves ' former Tottenham team mate Dave Mackay . Greaves later admitted his regret in making the move to Upton Park . He scored two goals on his " Hammers " debut on 21 March , in a 5 – 1 win against Manchester City at Maine Road . 
 In January 1971 , with Bobby Moore , Brian Dear and Clyde Best , Greaves was involved in late @-@ night drinking , against the wishes of manager Ron Greenwood , prior to an FA Cup tie away to Blackpool . On arriving in Blackpool , Greaves and his team @-@ mates had been informed by members of the press that the game , the following day , was unlikely to go ahead due to a frozen pitch and the likelihood of frost that night . Believing that there would be no game the following day , Greaves drank 12 lagers in a club owned by Brian London and did not return to the team hotel until <unk> In fact , the match went ahead and West Ham lost 4 – 0 . Greaves claimed the defeat was not a result of the late night , the drinking or the frozen pitch , but because the West Ham team in which he was playing was not good enough . As a result , the players were fined and dropped by the club . 
 Greaves was struggling with his fitness and his motivation . He felt he had become a journeyman footballer and lost motivation as he believed that apart from Moore , Geoff Hurst , Billy Bonds and Pop Robson , few of his team @-@ mates could play good football . Towards the end of his career with West Ham Greaves began to drink more and more alcohol , often going straight from training in Chadwell Heath to a pub in Romford , where he would remain until closing time . He later admitted that he was in the early stages of alcoholism . His final game came on 1 May 1971 in a 1 – 0 home defeat to Huddersfield Town . Greaves scored 13 goals in 40 games in all competitions for West Ham . 
 = = = Later career and alcoholism = = = 
 After leaving West Ham , Greaves put on weight and did not attend a match as either a player or a spectator for two years . Drinking formed a large part of his life and he became an alcoholic ; at times he was drinking 20 pints of lager during the day and consuming a bottle of vodka in the evening . He later admitted that he was also regularly driving whilst drunk during this period . Seeking an answer to his alcoholism , Greaves decided to return to football at a lower level where he would not be required to be as fit as he had been whilst playing in the Football League . He started playing for his local side , Brentwood , and made his debut on 27 December 1975 in a 2 – 0 defeat to Witham Town . 
 His return to football was successful enough that he signed for Chelmsford City in the Southern League for the 1976 – 77 season . He played for only a few months with Chelmsford . He was still struggling with alcoholism and delirium tremens and sought out help from Alcoholics Anonymous . He was also hospitalised in the alcoholics ' ward of Warley Psychiatric Hospital . 
 In August 1977 and still coping with alcoholism , Greaves made his debut for Barnet in a 3 – 2 win against Atherstone Town . Playing from midfield in 1977 – 78 , Greaves netted 25 goals ( 13 in the Southern League ) and was their player of the season . He chose to leave the " Bees " early in the 1978 – 79 season to focus on his business interests and beating his alcoholism , despite manager Barry Fry 's attempts to get him to stay at Underhill . Greaves went on to make several appearances for semi @-@ professional side Woodford Town before retiring . 
 = = International career = = 
 Greaves made his debut for the England under @-@ 23 team in a 6 – 2 win over Bulgaria at Stamford Bridge on 25 September 1957 ; he scored two goals , and missed out on a hat @-@ trick after failing to convert a penalty . 
 Greaves won his first England cap on 17 May 1959 against Peru at the Estadio Nacional , scoring England 's only goal in a 4 – 1 defeat . The tour of the American continents was not considered a success by the British media , as England also lost to Brazil and Mexico , but Greaves mostly escaped criticism in the press as he was still a teenager and showed promise with his performances . He scored consecutive hat @-@ tricks on 8 October 1960 and 19 October , in victories at Northern Ireland and Luxembourg . On 15 April 1961 , Greaves scored another hat @-@ trick in a 9 – 3 victory over Scotland at Wembley , and also had a fourth goal disallowed for offside . 
 He played in all four of England 's games at the 1962 FIFA World Cup in Chile , scoring one goal in the 3 – 1 victory over Argentina before playing in the quarter @-@ final defeat to Brazil . During the defeat to Brazil a stray dog ran onto the pitch and evaded all of the players ' efforts to catch it until Greaves got down on all fours to beckon the animal . The Brazilian player <unk> thought the incident was so amusing that he took the dog home as a pet . 
 On 20 November 1963 , he scored four goals in an 8 – 3 win over Northern Ireland . The following year , on 3 October , he scored another hat @-@ trick against the same team . He scored four goals again on 29 June 1966 , in a 6 – 1 friendly win over Norway , and in doing so ensured himself a starting place in the 1966 FIFA World Cup . 
 At the World Cup he played all three group games against Uruguay , Mexico and France , however in the win against France midfielder Joseph <unk> racked his studs down Greaves ' shin , causing a wound that required 14 stitches and left a permanent scar . His replacement , Geoff Hurst , scored the winner in the quarter @-@ final against Argentina and kept his place all the way to the final , where Hurst scored a hat @-@ trick as England won the tournament . Greaves was fit to play in the final , but manager Alf Ramsey opted against changing a winning team . Only the 11 players on the pitch at the end of the 4 – 2 win over West Germany received medals . Following a Football Association @-@ led campaign to persuade FIFA to award medals to all the winners ' squad members , Greaves was presented with his medal by Gordon Brown at a ceremony at 10 Downing Street on 10 June 2009 . In November 2014 , Greaves ' medal was sold at auction for £ 44 @,@ 000 . 
 Greaves played only three more times for England after the 1966 World Cup , scoring a single goal . His final cap came in a 1 – 0 win over Austria on 27 May 1967 . He retired from international football early the following year after telling Ramsey that he had no intention of becoming a bit @-@ part player in the England squad . In total he scored 44 goals in 57 appearances for England . He is in fourth place on the all @-@ time list of England goalscorers , behind Bobby Charlton , Gary Lineker and Wayne Rooney . Greaves holds the record for most hat @-@ tricks for England – six in all . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 Greaves was a prolific goalscorer , and cited his relaxed attitude as the reason for his assured composure and confidence . He also had great acceleration and pace , as well as great positional skills . 
 = = Broadcasting career = = 
 Greaves became a columnist at The Sun newspaper in the early 1980s . He continued to write his column for 30 years until it was cancelled , at which point he began working as a columnist for The Sunday People . He worked as a pundit on Star Soccer from 1980 , and later worked on The Saturday Show before he was selected as a pundit for ITV 's coverage of the 1982 FIFA World Cup . From there he worked on World of Sport and On the Ball , where he struck up a partnership with Ian St. John . Greg Dyke also hired Greaves to work as a television reviewer and presenter on TV @-@ am in what Dyke admitted was a way of " dumbing down " the programme to attract more viewers . From October 1985 to April 1992 he and St. John presented a popular Saturday lunchtime football show called Saint and Greavsie . He went on to work as a team captain on Sporting Triangles , opposite Andy Gray and Emlyn Hughes . His career in television came to an end as the Premier League was starting up , and he believed that his light @-@ hearted approach to football was not considered serious enough for television bosses at the time . 
 Greaves went into semi @-@ retirement after Saint and Greavsie was cancelled , making only occasional television appearances and after @-@ dinner speeches . He released his autobiography , Greavsie , in 2003 . Greaves has also written numerous books in partnership with his lifelong friend , the journalist and author Norman <unk> . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Greaves married Irene Barden at Romford register office on 26 March 1958 , and though the pair went through a divorce process during the height of his alcoholism , it was never finalised and they reunited after three months apart . They had four children , Lynn , Mitzi , Danny ( who was a professional footballer with Southend United ) , and Andrew . They also had another son , Jimmy Greaves Jr , who died before his first birthday . 
 Whilst playing for Tottenham Hotspur Greaves took out a £ 1 @,@ 000 bank loan to start a packing business with his brother @-@ in @-@ law . By the end of his playing career this company had an annual turnover of over £ 1 million . He had a number of different business interests , including a travel agency . Greaves entered the 1970 London to Mexico World Cup Rally . In his first ever rally , alongside co @-@ driver , Tony Fall , Greaves drove a Ford Escort to a sixth @-@ place finish out of the 96 entrants . 
 Greaves underwent surgery on an artery in his neck after suffering a mild stroke in February 2012 . After a full recovery , he experienced a severe stroke in May 2015 which left him unable to speak . He was placed in intensive care and , according to doctors , was expected to undergo a slow recovery . He left hospital after a month , his health having " improved considerably " according to Greaves ' friend and agent Terry Baker . In February 2016 , although slowly recovering from the stroke , Greaves was in a wheelchair and had been told that he would never walk again . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Club statistics = = = 
 = = = International caps and goals = = = 
 England 's goal tally first . 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 Chelsea 
 FA Youth Cup runner @-@ up : 1958 
 AC Milan 
 Serie A winner : 1961 – 62 
 Tottenham Hotspur 
 FA Cup winner : 1961 – 62 & 1966 – 67 
 Football League First Division runner @-@ up : 1962 – 63 
 FA Charity Shield winner : 1962 & 1967 ( shared ) 
 European Cup Winners Cup winner : 1962 – 63 
 = = = International = = = 
 England 
 British Home Championship winner : 1959 – 60 ( shared ) , 1960 – 61 , 1963 – 64 ( shared ) , 1964 – 65 & 1965 – 66 
 British Home Championship runner @-@ up : 1961 – 62 , 1962 – 63 & 1966 – 67 
 FIFA World Cup winner : 1966 ( medal awarded retrospectively in 2009 ) 
 = Annie Hall = 
 Annie Hall is a 1977 American romantic comedy film directed by Woody Allen from a screenplay he co @-@ wrote with Marshall Brickman . Produced by Allen 's manager , Charles H. Joffe , the film stars the director as Alvy " Max " Singer , who tries to figure out the reasons for the failure of his relationship with the film 's eponymous female lead , played by Diane Keaton in a role written specifically for her . 
 Principal photography for the film began on May 19 , 1976 on the South Fork of Long Island , and filming continued periodically for the next ten months . Allen has described the result , which marked his first collaboration with cinematographer Gordon Willis , as " a major turning point " , in that unlike the farces and comedies that were his work to that point , it introduced a new level of seriousness . Academics have noted the contrast in the settings of New York City and Los Angeles , the stereotype of gender differences in sexuality , the presentation of Jewish identity , and the elements of psychoanalysis and modernism . 
 Annie Hall was screened at the Los Angeles Film Festival in March 1977 , before its official release on April 20 , 1977 . The film received widespread critical acclaim , and along with winning the Academy Award for Best Picture , it received Oscars in three other categories : two for Allen ( Best Director and , with Brickman , Best Original Screenplay ) , and Keaton for Best Actress . The film additionally won four BAFTA awards and a Golden Globe , the latter being awarded to Keaton . Its North American box office receipts of $ 38 @,@ 251 @,@ 425 are fourth @-@ best in the director 's oeuvre when not adjusted for inflation . Often listed among the greatest film comedies , it ranks 31st on AFI 's list of the top feature films in American cinema , fourth on their list of top comedy films and number 28 on Bravo 's " 100 Funniest Movies . " Film critic Roger Ebert called it " just about everyone 's favorite Woody Allen movie " . The film has been named the funniest screenplay by the Writers Guild of America in its list of the " 101 Funniest Screenplays . " 
 = = Plot = = 
 The comedian Alvy Singer ( Woody Allen ) is trying to understand why his relationship with Annie Hall ( Diane Keaton ) ended a year ago . Growing up in New York , he vexed his mother with impossible questions about the emptiness of existence , but he was precocious about his innocent sexual curiosity . 
 Annie and Alvy , in a line for The Sorrow and the Pity , overhear another man deriding the work of Federico Fellini and Marshall McLuhan ; McLuhan himself steps in at Alvy 's invitation to criticize the man 's comprehension . That night , Annie shows no interest in sex with Alvy . Instead , they discuss his first wife ( Carol Kane ) , whose ardor gave him no pleasure . His second marriage was to a New York writer who didn 't like sports and was unable to reach orgasm . 
 With Annie , it is different . The two of them have fun making a meal of boiled lobster together . He teases her about the unusual men in her past . He met her playing tennis doubles with friends . Following the game , awkward small talk led her to offer him first a ride up town and then a glass of wine on her balcony . There , what seemed a mild exchange of trivial personal data is revealed in " mental subtitles " as an escalating flirtation . Their first date follows Annie 's singing audition for a night club ( " It Had to be You " ) . He suggests they kiss first , to get it out of the way . After their lovemaking that night , Alvy is " a wreck " , while she relaxes with a joint . 
 Soon Annie admits she loves him , while he buys her books on death and says that his feelings for her are more than just love . When she moves in with him , things become very tense . Eventually , he finds her arm in arm with one of her college professors and the two begin to argue whether this is the " flexibility " they had discussed . They eventually break up , and he searches for the truth of relationships , asking strangers on the street about the nature of love , questioning his formative years , until he casts himself in Snow White opposite Annie 's Evil Queen . 
 Alvy returns to dating , but the effort is marred by neurosis , bad sex , and finally an interruption from Annie , who insists he come over immediately . It turns out she needs him to kill a spider . A reconciliation follows , coupled with a vow to stay together come what may . However , their separate discussions with their therapists make it evident there is an unspoken divide . When Alvy accepts an offer to present an award on television , they fly out to Los Angeles , with Alvy 's friend , Rob ( Tony Roberts ) . However , on the return trip , they agree that their relationship is not working . After losing her to her record producer , Tony Lacey ( Paul Simon ) , he unsuccessfully tries rekindling the flame with a marriage proposal . Back in New York , he stages a play of their relationship but changes the ending : now she accepts . 
 The last meeting for them is a wistful coda on New York 's Upper West Side , when they have both moved on to someone new . Alvy 's voice returns with a summation : love is essential , especially if it is neurotic . Annie sings " Seems Like Old Times " and the credits roll . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Truman Capote has a cameo as the Winner of the Truman Capote look @-@ alike contest . 
 Several actors who went on to more fame had small parts in the movie : John Glover as Annie 's actor boyfriend , Jerry ; Jeff Goldblum as a man who " forgot [ his ] mantra " at Tony Lacey 's Christmas party ; and Sigourney Weaver in the closing sequence as Alvy 's date at the movie theater . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 The idea for what would become Annie Hall was developed as Allen walked around New York City with co @-@ writer Marshall Brickman . The pair discussed the project on alternate days , sometimes becoming frustrated and rejecting the idea . Allen wrote a first draft of a screenplay within a four @-@ day period , sending it to Brickman to make alterations . According to Brickman , this draft centered on a man in his forties , someone whose life consisted " of several strands . One was a relationship with a young woman , another was a concern about the banality of life we all live , and a third an obsession with proving himself and testing himself to find out what kind of character he had . " Allen himself turned forty in 1975 , and Brickman suggests that " advancing age " and " worries about his death " had influenced Allen 's philosophical , personal approach to complement his " commercial side " . Allen made the conscious decision to " sacrifice some of the laughs for a story about human beings " . He recognized that for the first time he had the courage to abandon the safety of complete broad comedy and had the will to produce a film of deeper meaning which would be a nourishing experience for the audience . He was also influenced by Federico Fellini 's 1963 comedy @-@ drama 8 ½ , created at a similar personal turning point , and similarly colored by each director 's psychoanalysis . 
 Brickman and Allen sent the screenplay back and forth until they were ready to ask United Artists for $ 4 million . Many elements from the early drafts did not survive . It was originally a drama centered on a murder mystery with a comic and romantic subplot . According to Allen , the murder occurred after a scene that remains in the film , the sequence in which Annie and Alvy miss the Ingmar Bergman film Face to Face . Although they decided to drop the murder plot , Allen and Brickman made a murder mystery many years later : 1993 's Manhattan Murder Mystery , also starring Diane Keaton . The draft that Allen presented to the film 's editor , Ralph Rosenblum , concluded with the words , " ending to be shot . " It was " like a first draft of a novel ... from which two or three films could possibly be assembled , " Rosenblum says . Allen suggested <unk> , a term for the inability to experience pleasure , as a working title , but United Artists considered this and Brickman 's suggested alternatives : It Had to Be Jew , Rollercoaster Named Desire and Me and My Goy unmarketable . An advertising agency , hired by UA , embraced Allen 's choice of an obscure word by suggesting advertising in tabloid newspapers using vague slogans such as " <unk> Strikes Cleveland " . However , Allen experimented with several titles over five test screenings , including Anxiety and Alvy and Me , before settling on Annie Hall . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Several references in the film to Allen 's own life have invited speculation that it is autobiographical . Both Alvy and Allen were comedians . His birthday appears on the blackboard in a school scene ; certain features of his childhood are found in Alvy Singer 's ; Allen went to New York University and so did Alvy . Diane Keaton 's real surname is " Hall " and " Annie " was her nickname , and she and Allen were once romantically involved . However , Allen is quick to dispel these suggestions . " The stuff that people insist is autobiographical is almost invariably not , " Allen said . " It 's so exaggerated that it 's virtually meaningless to the people upon whom these little nuances are based . People got it into their heads that Annie Hall was autobiographical , and I couldn 't convince them it wasn 't " . Contrary to various interviewers and commentators , he says , Alvy is not the character that is closest to himself ; he identified more with the mother ( Eve , played by Geraldine Page ) in his next film , Interiors . Despite this , Keaton has stated that the relationship between Alvy and Annie was partly based on her relationship with the director . 
 The role of Annie Hall was written specifically for Keaton , who had worked with Allen on Play It Again , Sam ( 1972 ) , Sleeper ( 1973 ) and Love and Death ( 1975 ) . She considered the character an " affable version " of herself — both were " semi @-@ articulate , dreamed of being a singer and suffered from insecurity " — and was surprised to win an Oscar for her performance . The film also marks the second film collaboration between Allen and Tony Roberts , their previous project being Play It Again , Sam . 
 Federico Fellini was Allen 's first choice to appear in the cinema lobby scene because his films were under discussion , but Allen chose cultural academic Marshall McLuhan after both Fellini and Luis Buñuel declined the cameo . Some cast members , Baxter claims , were aggrieved at Allen 's treatment of them . The director " acted coldly " towards McLuhan , who had to return from Canada for reshooting , and Mordecai <unk> , who played Alvy 's father , claimed that Allen never spoke to him . However , during the production , Allen began a two @-@ year relationship with Stacey Nelkin , who appears in a single scene . 
 = = = Filming , editing and music = = = 
 Principal photography began on May 19 , 1976 on the South Fork of Long Island with the scene in which Alvy and Annie boil live lobsters ; filming continued periodically for the next ten months , and deviated frequently from the screenplay . There was nothing written about Alvy 's childhood home lying under a roller coaster , but when Allen was scouting locations in Brooklyn with Willis and art director Mel Bourne , he " saw this roller @-@ coaster , and ... saw the house under it . And I thought , we have to use this . " Similarly , there is the incident where Alvy scatters a trove of cocaine with an accidental sneeze : although not in the script , the joke emerged from a rehearsal happenstance and stayed in the movie . In audience testing , this laugh was so big that a re @-@ edit had to add a hold so that the following dialogue was not lost . 
 Rosenblum 's first assembly of the film in 1976 left Brickman disappointed . At two hours and twenty minutes , it dwelt " on issues just touched in passing in the version we know " , featuring the " surrealistic and abstract adventures of a neurotic Jewish comedian who was reliving his highly flawed life and in the process satirizing much of our culture , ... a visual monologue , a more sophisticated and visual version of Take the Money and Run " . Annie Hall herself didn 't stand out , and Brickman found it " nondramatic and ultimately uninteresting , a kind of cerebral exercise . " He suggested a more linear narrative . Fortunately , the shooting schedule was budgeted for two weeks of post @-@ production photography , so even though the first cut had " some of the free @-@ est , funniest and most sophisticated material that Woody had ever created , and it hurt him to lose it " , late 1976 saw three separate shoots for the final segment , two of which appear in some form . One featured Annie Hall taking her new boyfriend to The Sorrow and the Pity , which she had reluctantly seen with Alvy ; the other , Alvy 's monologue featuring the joke about ' we all need the eggs ' , was conceived during a cab journey to an early preview . 
 The credits call the film " A Jack Rollins and Charles H. Joffe Production " ; the two men were Allen 's managers and received this same credit on his films from 1969 to 1993 . However , for this film Joffe took producer credit and therefore received the Academy Award for Best Picture . The title sequence features a black background with white text in the Windsor Light Condensed typeface , a design that Allen would use on his subsequent films . Stig Björkman sees some similarity to Ingmar Bergman 's simple and consistent title design , although Allen says that his own choice is a cost @-@ saving device . 
 Very little background music is heard in the film , a departure for Allen influenced by Ingmar Bergman . Diane Keaton performs twice in the jazz club : " It Had to be You " and " Seems Like Old Times " ( the latter reprises in voiceover on the closing scene ) . The other exceptions include a boy 's choir " Christmas Medley " played while the characters drive through Los Angeles , the Molto allegro from Mozart 's Jupiter Symphony ( heard as Annie and Alvy drive through the countryside ) , Tommy Dorsey 's performance of " Sleepy Lagoon " , and the anodyne cover of the Savoy Brown song " A Hard Way to Go " playing at a party in the mansion of Paul Simon 's character . 
 = = Style and technique = = 
 Technically , the film marked an advance for the director . He selected Gordon Willis as his cinematographer — for Allen " a very important teacher " and a " technical wizard , " saying , " I really count Annie Hall as the first step toward maturity in some way in making films . " At the time , it was considered an " odd pairing " by many , Keaton among them . The director was known for his comedies and farces , while Willis was known as " the prince of darkness " for work on dramatic films like The Godfather . Despite this , the two became friends during filming and continued the collaboration on several later films , including <unk> , which earned Willis his first Academy Award nomination for Best Cinematography . 
 Willis described the production for the film as " relatively easy . " He shot in varying styles ; " hot golden light for California , grey overcast for Manhattan and a forties Hollywood glossy for ... dream sequences , " most of which were cut . It was his suggestion which led Allen to film the dual therapy scenes in one set divided by a wall instead of the usual split screen method . He tried long takes , with some shots , unabridged , lasting an entire scene , which , for Ebert , add to the dramatic power of the film : " Few viewers probably notice how much of Annie Hall consists of people talking , simply talking . They walk and talk , sit and talk , go to shrinks , go to lunch , make love and talk , talk to the camera , or launch into inspired monologues like Annie 's free @-@ association as she describes her family to Alvy . This speech by Diane Keaton is as close to perfect as such a speech can likely be ... all done in one take of brilliant brinksmanship . " He cites a study that calculated the average shot length of Annie Hall to be 14 @.@ 5 seconds , while other films made in 1977 had an average shot length of 4 – 7 seconds . Peter Cowie suggests that " Allen breaks up his extended shots with more orthodox cutting back and forth in conversation pieces , so that the forward momentum of the film is sustained . " Bernd <unk> notes the innovation in the use of the split screen during the dinner scene to powerfully exaggerate the contrast between the Jew and the gentile family . 
 Although the film is not essentially experimental , at several points it undermines the narrative reality . James <unk> notes Allen 's way of opening the film by facing the camera , which immediately intrudes upon audience involvement in the film . In one famous scene , Allen 's character , in line to see a movie with Annie , listens to a man behind him deliver misinformed <unk> on the significance of Fellini 's and Marshall McLuhan 's work . Allen pulls McLuhan himself from just off camera to personally correct the man 's errors . Later in the film , when we see Annie and Alvy in their first extended talk , " mental subtitles " convey to the audience the characters ' nervous inner doubts . An animated scene — with artwork based on the comic strip Inside Woody Allen — depicts Alvy and Annie in the guise of the Wicked Queen from Snow White . Although Allen uses each of these techniques only once , the " fourth wall " is broken several other times when characters address the camera directly . In one , Alvy stops several passers @-@ by to ask questions about love , and in another he shrugs off writing a happy ending to his relationship with Annie in his autobiographical first play as forgivable " wish @-@ fulfillment . " Allen chose to have Alvy break the fourth wall , he explained , " because I felt many of the people in the audience had the same feelings and the same problems . I wanted to talk to them directly and confront them . " 
 = = Critical analysis = = 
 = = = Love , sexuality , and Jewish identity = = = 
 Sociologists Virginia Rutter and Pepper Schwartz consider Alvy and Annie 's relationship to be a stereotype of gender differences in sexuality . The nature of love is a repeating subject for Allen and co @-@ star Tony Roberts described this film as " the story of everybody who falls in love , and then falls out of love and goes on . " Alvy searches for love 's purpose through his effort to get over his depression about the demise of his relationship with Annie . Sometimes he <unk> through his memories of the relationship , at another point he stops people on the sidewalk , with one woman saying that " It 's never something you do . That 's how people are . Love fades , " a suggestion that it was no one 's fault , they just grew apart and the end was inevitable . By the end of the film , Alvy accepts this and decides that love is ultimately " irrational and crazy and absurd " , but a necessity of life . Christopher Knight points out that Annie Hall is framed through Alvy 's experiences . " Generally , what we know about Annie and about the relationship comes filtered through Alvy , an intrusive narrator capable of halting the narrative and stepping out from it in order to entreat the audience 's interpretative favor . " He suggests that because Allen 's films blur the protagonist with " past and future protagonists as well as with the director himself " , it " makes a difference as to whether we are most responsive to the director 's or the character 's framing of events " . Knight believes Alvy 's quest upon meeting Annie is carnal , whereas hers is on an emotional note . Despite the narrative 's framing , " the joke is on Alvy . " 
 Richard Brody of The New Yorker notes the film 's " Eurocentric art @-@ house self @-@ awareness " and Alvy Singer 's " psychoanalytic obsession in baring his sexual desires and frustrations , romantic disasters , and neurotic inhibitions " . Annie Hall is viewed as the definitive Woody Allen film in displaying neurotic humor . Singer is identified with the stereotypical neurotic Jewish male , and the differences between Alvy and Annie are often related to the perceptions and realities of Jewish identity . Vincent Brook notes that " Alvy dines with the WASP @-@ y Hall family and imagines that they must see him as a Hasidic Jew , complete with <unk> ( ear locks ) and a large black hat . " Robert M. Seltzer and Norman J. Cohen highlight the scene in which Annie remarks that Annie 's grandmother " hates Jews . She thinks they just make money , but she ’ s the one . Is she ever , I ’ m telling you . " , revealing the hypocrisy in her grandmother 's stereotypical American view of Jews by arguing that " no stigma attaches to the love of money in America " . Bernd <unk> also considers Allen 's joke , " I would like to but we need the eggs " , to the doctor at the end when he suggests putting him in a mental institution , to be a paradox of not only the persona of the urban neurotic Jew but also of the film itself . 
 Emanuel Levy believes that Alvy Singer became synonymous with the public perception of Woody Allen in the United States . 
 = = = Location = = = 
 Annie Hall " is as much a love song to New York City as it is to the character , " reflecting Allen 's adoration of the island of Manhattan . It was a relationship he explored repeatedly , particularly in films like Manhattan ( 1979 ) and Hannah and Her Sisters ( 1986 ) . Annie Hall 's apartment , which still exists on East 70th Street between Lexington Avenue and Park Avenue is by Allen 's own confession his favorite block in the city . Peter Cowie argues that the film shows " a romanticized view " of the borough , with the camera " linger [ ing ] on the Upper East Side [ ... and where ] the fear of crime does not trouble its characters . " By contrast , California is presented less positively , and David Halle notes the obvious " invidious intellectual comparison " between New York City and Los Angeles . While Manhattan 's movie theaters show classic and foreign films , Los Angeles theaters run less @-@ prestigious fare such as House of Exorcism and Messiah of Evil . Rob 's demonstration of adding canned laughter to television demonstrates the " cynical artifice of the medium " . New York serves as a symbol of Alvy 's personality ( " gloomy , claustrophobic , and socially cold , but also an intellectual haven full of nervous energy " ) while Los Angeles is a symbol of freedom for Annie . 
 = = = Psychoanalysis and modernism = = = 
 Annie Hall has been cited as a film which uses both therapy and analysis for comic effect . Sam B. Girgus considers Annie Hall to be a story about memory and retrospection , which " dramatizes a return via narrative desire to the repressed and the unconscious in a manner similar to psychoanalysis " . He argues that the film constitutes a self @-@ conscious assertion of how narrative desire and humor interact in the film to reform ideas and perceptions and that Allen 's deployment of Freudian concepts and humor forms a " pattern of skepticism toward surface meaning that compels further interpretation " . Girgus believes that proof of the pervasiveness of Sigmund Freud in the film is demonstrated at the beginning through a reference to a joke in Jokes and Their Relation to the Unconscious , and makes another joke about a psychiatrist and patient , which Girgus argues is also symbolic of the dynamic between humor and the unconscious in the film . Further Freudian concepts are later addressed in the film with Annie 's recall of a dream to her psychoanalyst in which Frank Sinatra is smothering her with a pillow , which alludes to Freud 's belief in dreams as " visual representations of words or ideas " . 
 Peter Bailey in his book The Reluctant Film Art of Woody Allen , argues that Alvy displays a " genial denigration of art " which contains a " significant equivocation " , in that in his self @-@ deprecation he invites the audience to believe that he is leveling with them . Bailey argues that Allen 's devices in the film , including the subtitles which reveal Annie 's and Alvy 's thoughts " extend and reinforce Annie Hall ' s winsome ethos of plain @-@ dealing and ingenuousness " . He muses that the film is full of <unk> emblems such as <unk> 's magical appearance which provide quirky humor , and that the " disparity between mental projections of reality and actuality " drives the film . He considers self @-@ reflective cinematic devices to intelligently dramatize the difference between surface and substance , with visual emblems " incessantly distilling the distinction between the world mentally constructed and reality " . 
 In his discussion of the film 's relation to modernism , Thomas Schatz finds the film an unresolved " examination of the process of human interaction and interpersonal communication " and " immediately establishes [ a ] self @-@ referential stance " that invites the spectator " to read the narrative as something other than a sequential development toward some transcendent truth " . For him , Alvy " is the victim of a tendency toward <unk> of meaning -- or in modernist terms ' the tyranny of the signified ' -- and his involvement with Annie can be viewed as an attempt to establish a spontaneous , intellectually unencumbered relationship , an attempt which is doomed to failure . " Marcus Geduld cites the flashback to Alvy as a child ( in a therapist 's office with his mother ) as an example of basic problems ( poverty , discordant parents ) being masked by a supposed existential crisis . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Annie Hall was shown at the Los Angeles Film Festival in March 1977 , before its official release on April 20 , 1977 . The film ultimately earned $ 38 @,@ 251 @,@ 425 ( $ 143 @,@ 228 @,@ 400 in 2013 dollars ) in the United States against a $ 4 @-@ million budget , making it the 11th highest @-@ grossing picture of 1977 . On raw figures , it currently ranks as Allen 's fourth @-@ highest @-@ grossing film , after Manhattan , Hannah and Her Sisters and Midnight in Paris ; when adjusted for inflation , the gross figure makes it Allen 's biggest box office hit . It was first released on Blu @-@ ray on January 24 , 2012 alongside Allen 's 1979 film Manhattan . Both releases include the films ' original theatrical trailers . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Annie Hall was met with widespread critical acclaim upon its release . Tim Radford of The Guardian called the film " Allen 's most closely focused and daring film to date " . The New York Times ' Vincent Canby preferred Annie Hall to Allen 's second directorial effort , Take the Money and Run , since the former is more " humane " while the latter is more a " cartoon " . Several critics have compared the film favorably to Bergman 's Scenes from a Marriage ( 1973 ) , including Joseph McBride in Variety , who found it Allen 's " most three @-@ dimensional film to date " with an ambition equal to Bergman 's best even as the co @-@ stars become the " contemporary equivalent of ... Tracy @-@ Hepburn . " 
 More critically , Peter Cowie commented that the film " suffers from its profusion of cultural references and asides " . Writing for New York Magazine , the hard @-@ to @-@ please critic John Simon called the film " unfunny comedy , poor moviemaking , and embarrassing self @-@ revelation , " and wrote that Keaton 's performance was " in bad taste to watch and indecency to display , " saying the part should have been played by Robin Mary Paris , the actress who appears briefly in the scene where Alvy Singer has written a two @-@ character play nakedly based on himself and Annie Hall . Simon 's review of Annie Hall made a general assessment that didn 't pan out : " It is a film so shapeless , sprawling , repetitious , and aimless as to seem to beg for oblivion . " 
 After more than a quarter century , the film has continued to receive positive reviews . In his 2002 <unk> , Roger Ebert noted with surprise that the film had " an instant familiarity " despite its age , and Slant writer Jaime N. <unk> found the one @-@ liners " still gut @-@ busting after 35 years " . A later Guardian critic , Peter Bradshaw , named it the best comedy film of all time , commenting that " this wonderfully funny , unbearably sad film is a miracle of comic writing and inspired film @-@ making " . John Marriott of the Radio Times believed that Annie Hall was the film where Allen " found his own singular voice , a voice that echoes across events with a mixture of exuberance and introspection " , referring to the " comic delight " derived from the " spirited playing of Diane Keaton as the kooky innocent from the Midwest , and Woody himself as the fumbling New York neurotic " . Empire magazine rated the movie five out of five stars , calling it a " classic " . At Rotten Tomatoes , the film has an approval rating of 98 % based on 65 reviews , with an average rating of 8 @.@ 9 out of 10 . The site 's consensus reads " Filled with poignant performances and devastating humor , Annie Hall represents a quantum leap for Woody Allen and remains an American classic " . 
 = = = Awards and accolades = = = 
 Annie Hall won four Oscars at the 50th Academy Awards on April 3 , 1978 , and was nominated for five in total . Producer Charles H. Joffe received the statue for Best Picture , Allen for Best Director and , with Brickman , for Best Original Screenplay , and Keaton for Best Actress . Allen was also nominated for Best Actor . Many had expected Star Wars to win the major awards , including Brickman and Executive Producer Robert <unk> . 
 The film was also honored four times at the BAFTA awards . Along with the top award for Best Film , Keaton won for Best Actress , Allen won for Best Direction and Best Original Screenplay alongside Brickman . The film received only one Golden Globe Award , for Best Film Actress in a Musical or Comedy ( Diane Keaton ) , despite nominations for three other awards : Best Motion Picture ( Musical or Comedy ) , Best Director , and Best Film Actor in a Musical or Comedy ( Woody Allen ) . 
 In 1992 , the United States ' Library of Congress selected the film for preservation in its National Film Registry that includes " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " films . The film is often mentioned among the greatest comedies of all time . The American Film Institute lists it 31st in American cinema history . In 2000 , they named it second greatest romantic comedy in American cinema . Keaton 's performance of " Seems Like Old Times " was ranked 90th on their list of greatest songs included in a film , and her line " La @-@ dee @-@ da , la @-@ dee @-@ da . " was named the 55th greatest movie quote . The screenplay was named the sixth greatest screenplay by the Writers Guild of America , West while IGN named it the seventh greatest comedy film of all time . In 2000 , readers of Total Film magazine voted it the forty @-@ second greatest comedy film of all time , and the seventh greatest romantic comedy film of all time . Several lists ranking Allen 's best films have put Annie Hall among his greatest work . 
 In June 2008 , AFI revealed its 10 Top 10 — the best ten films in ten classic American film genres — after polling over 1 @,@ 500 people from the creative community and Annie Hall was placed second in the romantic comedy genre . AFI also ranked Annie Hall on multiple other lists . In November 2008 , Annie Hall was voted in at No. 68 on Empire magazine 's list of The 500 Greatest Movies of All Time . It is also ranked # 2 on Rotten Tomatoes ' 25 Best Romantic Comedies , second only to The Philadelphia Story . In 2012 , the film was listed as the 127th best film of all time by the Sight & Sound critics ' poll . The film was also named the 132nd best film by the Sight & Sound directors ' poll . In October 2013 , the film was voted by the Guardian readers as the second best film directed by Woody Allen . In November 2015 , the film was named the funniest screenplay by the Writers Guild of America in its list of 101 Funniest Screenplays . 
 = = = = American Film Institute recognition = = = = 
 1998 : AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movies – # 31 
 2000 : AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Laughs – # 4 
 2002 : AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Passions – # 11 
 2004 : AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Songs : 
 " Seems Like Old Times " – # 90 
 2005 : AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movie Quotes : 
 Annie Hall : " La @-@ dee @-@ da , la @-@ dee @-@ da . " – # 55 
 Alvy Singer : " I don 't want to move to a city where the only cultural advantage is being able to make a right turn on a red light . " – Nominated 
 Alvy Singer : " Don 't knock masturbation . It 's sex with someone I love . " – Nominated 
 2007 : AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movies ( 10th Anniversary Edition ) – # 35 
 2008 : AFI 's 10 Top 10 : 
 # 2 Romantic Comedy Film 
 = = = Legacy and influence = = = 
 Although the film received critical acclaim and several awards , Allen himself was disappointed with it , and said in an interview , " When Annie Hall started out , that film was not supposed to be what I wound up with . The film was supposed to be what happens in a guy 's mind ... Nobody understood anything that went on . The relationship between myself and Diane Keaton was all anyone cared about . That was not what I cared about ... In the end , I had to reduce the film to just me and Diane Keaton , and that relationship , so I was quite disappointed in that movie " . Allen has repeatedly declined to make a sequel , and in a 1992 interview stated that " <unk> has become an annoying thing . I don 't think Francis Coppola should have done Godfather III because Godfather II was quite great . When they make a sequel , it 's just a thirst for more money , so I don 't like that idea so much " . 
 Diane Keaton has stated that Annie Hall was her favorite role and that the film meant everything to her . When asked if being most associated with the role concerned her as an actress , she replied , " I 'm not haunted by Annie Hall . I 'm happy to be Annie Hall . If somebody wants to see me that way , it 's fine by me " . Costume designer Ruth Morley , working with Keaton , created a look which had an influence on the fashion world during the late @-@ 70s , with women adopting the style : layering oversized , mannish blazers over vests , billowy trousers or long skirts , a man 's tie , and boots . The look was often referred to as the " Annie Hall look " . Some sources suggest that Keaton herself was mainly responsible for the look , and Ralph Lauren has often claimed credit , but only one jacket and one tie were purchased from Ralph Lauren for use in the film . Allen recalled that Lauren and Keaton 's dress style almost did not end up in the film . " She came in , " he recalled in 1992 , " and the costume lady on Annie Hall said , ' Tell her not to wear that . She can 't wear that . It 's so crazy . ' And I said , ' Leave her . She 's a genius . Let 's just leave her alone , let her wear what she wants . ' " 
 James <unk> states that the film is " one of the very few romantic comedy @-@ dramas of the New Hollywood era and one that has rightly taken its place among the classics of that reverted genre " , likening the seriocomic meditation on the couple relationship to George Cukor 's Adam 's Rib ( 1949 ) , starring Katharine Hepburn and Spencer Tracy . Since its release , other romantic comedies have inspired comparison . When Harry Met Sally ... ( 1989 ) , Chasing Amy ( 1997 ) , 500 Days of Summer ( 2009 ) and Allen 's 2003 film , Anything Else , are among them , while film director Rian Johnson said in an interview for the book , The Film That Changed My Life , that Annie Hall inspired him to become a film director . Karen Gillan stated that she watched Annie Hall as part of her research for her lead role in Not Another Happy Ending . 
 = William Burnet ( colonial administrator ) = 
 William Burnet ( March 1687 / 8 – 7 September 1729 ) was a British civil servant and colonial administrator who served as governor of New York and New Jersey ( 1720 – 1728 ) and Massachusetts and New Hampshire ( 1728 – 1729 ) . Born into a position of privilege ( his godfather became William III of England not long after his birth , and his father Gilbert Burnet was later Bishop of Salisbury ) , Burnet was well educated , tutored among others by Isaac Newton . 
 Active for most of his life in intellectual pursuits ( he was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1705 / 6 ) , he occupied no posts of importance until financial considerations and political connections brought him the governorships of New York and New Jersey . His tenure in New Jersey was without major controversies , although he set a precedent there for accepting what were effectively bribes in exchange for his assent to legislation . In New York he sought unsuccessfully to end the fur trade between Albany and Montreal in order to implement a colonial policy preferring direct trade with the Native Americans in central North America . His New York rule was marked by an increase in political divisions between land owners ( with whom Burnet sided ) and merchants . After the death of King George I , King George II appointed Burnet governor of New Hampshire and Massachusetts . 
 Although his New Hampshire tenure was inconsequential , he engaged in a nasty dispute with the Massachusetts assembly over the issue of his salary , holding the legislative body in session for six months and relocating it away from Boston . The dispute held up other colonial business , and was ongoing in September 1729 when Burnet died ; his death was apparently caused by illness contracted after his carriage overturned and dumped him in water . 
 = = Early life = = 
 William Burnet was born in The Hague , a leading city of the Dutch Republic , in March 1687 / 8 . He was the first child of Mary ( Scott ) Burnet and Gilbert Burnet , the leading theologian in the Dutch court of William , Prince of Orange ( who was Burnet 's godfather ) and his wife Mary . Mary Scott Burnet was the heiress of a Scottish family which had settled in the Netherlands and acquired great wealth : her marriage to Gilbert however was generally agreed not to be for money , but a genuine love match on both sides . There were six younger children , of whom four survived infancy . 
 Later in 1688 William led an army across the English Channel in the Glorious Revolution , and William and Mary ascended to the English throne as <unk> . Burnet 's father gave the coronation sermon , was later elevated to Bishop of Salisbury , and was an ongoing influence in the English court during King William 's reign . He fell out of favour when Queen Anne took the throne in 1702 . 
 Burnet 's mother died of smallpox in 1698 ; in accordance with her dying request his father two years later remarried her close friend Elizabeth Blake , who proved a kindly stepmother to William and his siblings . All of them were devoted to Gilbert , " the best of fathers " . On Gilbert 's death in 1715 William inherited one third of the estate , which given his mother 's wealth , must have been considerable . 
 Burnet was an excellent but undisciplined scholar . He entered Oxford at the age of 13 , but was dismissed for disciplinary reasons . His later education came from private tutoring ( including Isaac Newton as a tutor ) , and he was ultimately admitted to the bar . In 1712 he married Mary , the daughter of George Stanhope , the Dean of Canterbury . They had one child , a boy , before she died in 1717 . 
 = = Intellectual pursuits = = 
 Burnet 's rarefied education brought him a lifelong interest in scientific and mathematical pursuits . He was proposed for membership in the Royal Society by Isaac Newton in 1705 , and was enrolled as a fellow in February 1705 / 6 . He was acquainted with the mathematician Gottfried Leibniz , and was a regular correspondent on a wide array of scientific subjects with Philadelphia merchant and politician James Logan . He reported to the Royal Society observations of the Grindelwald Glacier in Switzerland , and on an unusual instance of Hungarian conjoined twins he saw while resident in The Hague in 1708 . Observations he made of eclipses of the moons of Jupiter while he was governor of New York were used to more precisely determine New York City 's longitude . During his tenure in New York he was relatively starved for intellectual discourse ; he briefly met a young Benjamin Franklin and encouraged him in his intellectual pursuits . 
 Like his teacher Isaac Newton , Burnet also wrote on religious subjects . In 1724 he anonymously published An Essay on Scripture Prophecy , Wherein it is <unk> to Explain the three periods <unk> 'd in the <unk> Chapter of the Prophet Daniel With some Arguments to make it Probable that the FIRST of the <unk> did <unk> in the Year 1715 . In this work he put forward a <unk> argument that Jesus Christ would return to Earth in 1790 , based on his numerological interpretation of the Book of Daniel . 
 = = Governor of New York and New Jersey = = 
