 = = = Soul Caddy and mainstream decline ( 2000 ) = = = 
 In the fall of 1999 , the Daddies returned to the studio to record their fourth album , Soul Caddy . A loose concept album reflecting Perry 's disillusionment over the cultural zeitgeist and his experience with fame ( as he described it , a " bittersweet " record about " being alienated and hoping to connect " ) , Soul Caddy marked a continuation of the band 's musically varied format , intended to introduce a truer perspective of the Daddies ' sound and personality to both their swing @-@ based fans and a wider audience . Drawing from the rock and pop of the 1960s and 1970s , Soul Caddy <unk> swing and ska with glam rock , soul , psychedelic pop , folk and funk . 
 Despite allowing the Daddies creative control over Soul Caddy 's production , Mojo 's response to the album was marginal . Claiming that the new material was not like " the Cherry Poppin ' Daddies people know and love " , the label did little to promote either the album or its glam @-@ styled single " Diamond Light Boogie " , at one point releasing the latter without the band 's name on it , allegedly due to hesitancy over marketing a rock single from a band primarily known for swing music . With virtually no promotion , Soul Caddy was quietly released on October 3 , 2000 . 
 Met by an audience largely unaware of the Daddies ' eclectic background , Soul Caddy was received negatively by both fans and critics , one of the more prevalent criticisms being its lack of swing tracks . Many reviewers chastised the band for what was being seen as an abandonment of their swing " roots " in favor of a <unk> sound , while some criticized the Daddies ' entire musical aesthetic — UGO 's Hip Online stated bluntly , " covering five or six genres on one album is just insane " . The Los Angeles Daily News placed Soul Caddy on their list of the 10 worst albums of 2000 , the reviewer wondering what made a swing band " think it could get away with an album of recycled psychedelic pop " . 
 Despite some moderate critical praise including a glowing review from AllMusic , who called the album 's " impressively surprising " array of sounds " refreshing coming from a band who was assumed to be generic retro swing " , Soul Caddy failed to achieve the chart success or commercial attention of its predecessor . The Daddies ' accompanying national tour fared just as poorly , showing a marked decline in attendance and negative audience reactions towards the band 's decreased focus on playing swing music . Speaking retrospectively in a 2002 interview , Perry recalled " we went out on tour and most people saw us as a swing band because of the success of Zoot Suit Riot ... we felt this tension to be something we weren 't " . Facing low ticket sales and their own dissatisfaction over the tour 's outcome , the Daddies brought their scheduled tour to an early close , eventually reaching a mutual decision upon taking an indefinite hiatus in December 2000 . " A lot of it was just fatigue " , Perry explained , " We 'd be on the road for a long time and we had no life outside of Cherry Poppin ' Daddies . I think everybody was interested in doing other things " . The Daddies were released from Mojo shortly thereafter , though Jason Moss would later comment that the band were kicked " to the curb " after Soul Caddy 's poor commercial performance . 
 = = = Hiatus and limited touring ( 2001 – 2006 ) = = = 
 With nearly a decade of full @-@ time band activity come to a rest , the Daddies parted ways to pursue other musical endeavors , remaining active in various local bands . Perry and Moss formed the theatrical glam punk group White Hot Odyssey , releasing an album on Jive Records in 2004 and later becoming a regular opening act for the Daddies ' local concerts until their disbandment in 2005 . Dan Schmid and keyboardist Dustin Lanker formed the piano rock trio The Visible Men , recording two independent albums and touring extensively throughout the Northwest in the early and mid @-@ 2000s , while Lanker worked steadily as a touring member of the California ska punk band Mad Caddies . Drummer Tim Donahue , after a stint with The Visible Men , worked as a session musician , recording on albums for artists including TobyMac and Shawn McDonald and playing in Yngwie Malmsteen 's band for his 2001 European tour . 
 Over the next few years , all Daddies activity was put on further hold as the members returned to their family lives and full @-@ time jobs , while Perry chose to resume his education at the University of Oregon , eventually graduating in 2004 with a B.S. in molecular biology . In February 2002 , the Daddies spontaneously regrouped to play a sporadic series of music festivals in the Northwest , though immediately announced no future plans for recording new material or carrying out any extensive tours . Favoring a change of pace from their formerly exhaustive touring habits , the Daddies began scheduling their performances entirely around the band members ' desire and personal availability , playing as few as eight to ten shows a year and limiting their appearances largely to Northwest shows or commissions for one @-@ off " swingin ' hits " concerts at various fairs and festivals across the United States . 
 = = = Susquehanna and return to independent label ( 2006 – 2009 ) = = = 
 Following several years of relative inactivity as the band maintained their relaxed touring pace , Perry began writing material for a new Daddies album in early 2006 , claiming to have come to the realization of a cathartic reliance on songwriting . In an April 2006 radio interview , he confirmed that the band was in preparation over recording a new studio album , noting that the music would cover new territory for the Daddies , drawing heavily on tropical themes . This was followed shortly thereafter by the band 's first U.S. tour since 2000 , where much of this new material was debuted . 
 Self @-@ produced and recorded in Eugene during the summer of 2007 , the Daddies ' fifth album , Susquehanna , was released via digital download exclusively through the band 's website in February 2008 , receiving a limited CD release several months later . Taking the shape of a narrative concept album which Perry detailed as a portrait of " various relationships in decay " , Susquehanna featured prominent strains of Latin and Caribbean @-@ influenced music , incorporating flourishes of flamenco , Latin rock and reggae into the band 's traditional fare of swing and ska . While its low @-@ profile DIY release went mostly unnoticed by the mainstream media , response from internet @-@ based publications ranged from mixed to positive , with reviewers once again polarized over the album 's eclectic blend of genres . The Daddies embarked on another full @-@ length tour in support of Susquehanna in mid @-@ 2008 , followed by a headline tour of Europe , their first visit to the continent since 1998 . 
 In July 2009 , the Daddies announced having signed to independent label Rock Ridge Music for the release and national distribution of two albums , a re @-@ issue of Susquehanna and Skaboy JFK : The Skankin ' Hits of the Cherry Poppin ' Daddies , a compilation of the band 's ska material . Perry explained that fans had been suggesting the concept of a ska collection for years , and that such an album might help show a different side of the Daddies than the " swing band " persona they 're generally recognized for . Skaboy JFK was released in September 2009 to a largely positive critical reception , followed by further touring into 2010 , taking the Daddies back across Europe and the United States , as well as appearing alongside Fishbone and The Black Seeds at the 11th Victoria Ska Fest in British Columbia , where the band played the first all @-@ ska set of their career . 
 = = = White Teeth , Black Thoughts ( 2010 – 2013 ) = = = 
 Shortly after the release of Skaboy JFK , Perry already began announcing plans for the Daddies ' next studio album , revealing the band would be returning to swing music for their first all @-@ swing album since Zoot Suit Riot . Initial production on the album , titled White Teeth , Black Thoughts , began in March 2011 , though lasted infrequently throughout the year as the Daddies continued to carry out several more successful international tours , including two separate sold @-@ out tours of Australia in 2011 and 2012 . During this time , the band experienced major changes within their touring line @-@ up after longtime keyboardist Dustin Lanker departed the group in 2012 , prompting the Daddies to decide to continue touring without a live keyboardist . Several months later , trombonist Joe <unk> was added to the band , marking the first time the Daddies have ever included a full @-@ time trombone player in their official line @-@ up . 
 In mid @-@ 2012 , Perry finally elaborated on the production status of the new album , revealing that the band had written enough material to release White Teeth , Black Thoughts as a double album , consisting of the main all @-@ swing album and a bonus disc of " Americana " -influenced rock songs in styles including rockabilly , country , bluegrass and western swing , the latter disc featuring guest appearances from accordionist Buckwheat Zydeco on a zydeco song and former Captain Beefheart guitarist Zoot Horn Rollo on a psychobilly track . On June 20 , 2012 , the Daddies launched a PledgeMusic campaign to help finance the final stages of the album 's production , successfully reaching its target on August 14 and continuing to collect pledges into the following year , ultimately raising 133 % of its goal . 
 Preceded by the release of two singles and music videos for the songs " I Love American Music " and " The <unk> " , White Teeth , Black Thoughts was released on July 16 , 2013 . Following the low @-@ key DIY release and promotion of Susquehanna , the Daddies worked to heavily publicize White Teeth , Black Thoughts , receiving coverage by major news outlets including Billboard and USA Today , while the band later appeared on the Fox @-@ owned KTTV program Good Day L.A. to perform " I Love American Music " , their first major television appearance since the 1990s . Despite not experiencing any chart success , the album received generally positive critical reviews , and the Daddies carried out a brief fifteen @-@ city tour of the United States during the summer . 
 In January 2014 , it was announced that the Eugene Ballet Company had collaborated with the Daddies for production entitled Zoot Suit Riot , a dance show set to the music of and featuring live accompaniment from the band , featuring choreographed dance routines set to thirteen of the Daddies ' songs , ranging from their biggest swing hits to their lesser @-@ known rock , pop and psychedelic songs . Zoot Suit Riot played at Eugene 's Hult Center for the Performing Arts on April 12 and 13 , 2014 . 
 = = = Covers trilogy and future ( 2014 @-@ present ) = = = 
 During the initial writing and recording period of White Teeth , Black Thoughts , the Daddies began playing select shows billed as " The Cherry Poppin ' Daddies Salute the Music of the Rat Pack " , playing an equal mix of the band 's own swing songs as well as covers of songs popularized by the " Rat Pack " of Frank Sinatra , Dean Martin and Sammy Davis , Jr .. In a July 2013 interview with Billboard magazine , Perry revealed that the band had concurrently recorded a tribute album featuring these songs and would be releasing it after touring behind White Teeth , Black Thoughts . Please Return the Evening — the Cherry Poppin ' Daddies Salute the Music of the Rat Pack ! was released on July 29 , 2014 , promoted by music videos for the album 's covers of the Sinatra staples " Come Fly with Me " and " Fly Me to the Moon " . 
 The following December , Perry expressed plans on the Daddies ' official Facebook page to further explore the band 's swing and jazz influences with another cover album , this time centered on the hot jazz of the Cotton Club era of the 1920s and 1930s . Production on what would be entitled The Boop @-@ A @-@ Doo began in Spring 2015 in Eugene , utilizing vintage recording techniques as well as the use of pre @-@ 1940s instruments . In April , the Daddies updated their press biography to include mention of The Boop @-@ A @-@ Doo being " the second of a planned trilogy of cover tunes designed to outline for fans some of the Daddies ' swing influences " , though declined to reveal plans for the band 's third tribute album . The Boop @-@ A @-@ Doo was released on January 22 , 2016 , promoted by a music video for the 1930 Eubie Blake / Andy <unk> song " That Lindy Hop " directed by Perry . 
 Perry has announced ongoing work on the Daddies ' next album of originals . In a 2014 interview with The Huffington Post , he described his intent with the next album was to do a " psychobilly / Zappa / American Idiot / R. Crumb type record that paints a picture of the American socio political scene " , and has since described it as " a little like Ferociously Stoned 2 " , featuring a primary emphasis on rock and funk . 
 Additionally , Perry mentioned in a radio interview that he had recently obtained the rights to Zoot Suit Riot from Jive Records and was considering releasing a remixed and remastered edition , expressing a desire to revisit the original recordings with contemporary production values . 
 = = Musical style and lyricism = = 
 The Daddies are generally labeled as swing and / or ska band by the media , and their music is largely composed of various interpretations of both genres , ranging from traditional jazz and big band @-@ influenced forms to modernized pop and rock fusions . During their commercial breakthrough in the 1990s , critics conceived terms such as " punk swing " , " power swing " and " big band punk rock " to describe the Daddies ' unique approach to these fusions , mixing " the propulsion of swing beats and rabbit @-@ punch bursts of brass with grimy rebel @-@ rock guitars to give the <unk> ' jive sound a much @-@ needed facelift " . The Pacific Northwest <unk> wrote of this style in 1994 , " atop the swing of the band 's jazz you can hear strains of Parliament @-@ Funkadelic , crumbs of barrelhouse rhythm and blues , snippets of ska , and huge <unk> of in @-@ your @-@ face punk rock " , likening the Daddies to " Cab Calloway @-@ meets @-@ Johnny Rotten , or the Duke Ellington Orchestra pumped up on steroids and caffeine " . 
 The Daddies themselves used to facetiously classify their music as " swing @-@ core " , exemplified by the fast tempos and frequent use of guitar distortion in their swing material , as well as " third wave swing " , owing to their prominent ska influence . In recent years , however , Perry has dismissed attempts to apply labels to the Daddies ' music , often casually describing them in vaguer terms as " a rock band with horns " or " a dance band that uses jazz a bit " . Perry has compared the Daddies ' style of musical eclecticism with that of Fishbone , Mink DeVille and Oingo Boingo , while also citing major influence from The Specials and Roxy Music , as well as from Fletcher Henderson , Jimmie Lunceford and Duke Ellington on his composing and arrangements . 
 Alongside the constants of swing , ska , and on earlier recordings , funk , each of the Daddies ' studio albums feature a collective assortment of varied and often diametrically opposed genres of music . Some of the musical styles the band has experimented with include blues , country , disco , Dixieland , flamenco , folk , glam rock , hardcore punk , jump blues , lounge , psychedelic pop , rhythm and blues , reggae , rockabilly , soca , soul , western swing and zydeco . As opposed to playing fusions , the Daddies perform each genre separately , contrasting one style against another so that the album 's musical texture may continually change . Perry has explained that the group 's " <unk> " of using vastly different genres is both a means for band experimentation and evolution beyond their typically swing and ska @-@ oriented live shows , as well as an artistic choice , lending each song a distinctive musical personality and using certain genres to effectively fit – or ironically contradict – the tone of the lyrics . 
 = = = Lyrical = = = 
 Steve Perry is the Daddies ' sole lyricist , and writes the majority of his songs in a fictional narrative format he credits as being influenced by Randy Newman , Ray Davies and Jarvis Cocker , often told about or through the unreliable perspective of downtrodden characters struggling against adversity . Recurring themes in the Daddies ' lyrics include sex , death , alcoholism , family dysfunction , loneliness and alienation , often utilizing satire . Perry has also incorporated political themes into his music , most overtly on the Daddies ' 2013 album White Teeth , Black Thoughts , which addressed issues relating to the 2008 financial crisis through a variety of American character perspectives . The Register @-@ Guard has described Perry 's lyrics as " ribald [ and ] often despairing " , " [ probing ] the underbelly of society , stabbing at oppressors such as ... the pressure to conform " , while The New York Times has lauded them as " vivid poetry " containing " an inventiveness missing from the other swing bands ' lyrics " . 
 The Daddies have often been criticized for their seeming juxtaposition of lurid subject matter and profanity with jazz and swing music , though Perry has boldly defended the band 's predilection towards " darker " lyricism and visuals , calling to attention his interest in the era 's film noir and avant @-@ garde artistic movements . A prominent example of this includes the two music videos for the Daddies ' hit single " Zoot Suit Riot " , which – in addition to being written about the 1943 race riots – both featured pervasive surrealist imagery inspired by the films of Luis Buñuel , specifically his 1929 short Un Chien Andalou . " We wanted to be darker , weirder and stranger " , Perry stated in a 2012 interview , " and unfortunately , with other [ swing ] bands it was ' Back then everyone dressed nice and was nice ' . That 's not true . You don 't know anything about that era at all " . 
 Most of the Daddies ' studio albums are written to varying extents as concept albums , featuring either recurring lyrical themes or an abstract progressive narrative . According to Perry , this lyrical interconnectedness is intended as means of providing an album with threads of thematic stability against wildly varying musical styles . 
 = = Reception , criticism and influence = = 
 In their native Oregon , the Daddies have been called " a Northwest institution " , having been inducted into the Oregon Music Hall of Fame in 2009 . The Register @-@ Guard has credited the band with shaping Eugene 's alternative musical culture in the 1990s , while Eugene Weekly added likewise , " when some people think of the Northwest music scene , they think of grunge . If you ’ re a <unk> , however , you might think of swing , thanks to [ the ] Cherry Poppin ' Daddies " . Seattle 's The Rocket commented on the band 's influence in 1997 , stating " [ t ] he Daddies were busting out the swing before the Squirrel Nut <unk> , stirring cocktails before Combustible Edison and skating the ska before Sublime ... the band shakes out an incredible variety of sounds with peerless verve and polish . " 
 In addition to the controversies surrounding the early years of their career , the band has also drawn a fair amount of professional criticism in their home state . The Portland Mercury have been frequent detractors of the Daddies , deriding them as " at best , an edgeless recycle of a rather particular musical fashion movement ; at worst , a self @-@ conscious parody of the genre they purport to love " , while the Willamette Week , in an article detailing the band 's polarizing reception , described the negative consensus of the Daddies as " an annoying white @-@ boy funk rock band who , seeing the opportunity , milked the swing revival for all it was worth " . Jazz critic and author Scott Yanow vociferously criticized the band as the choice " whipping boy for the Retro Swing movement " in his 2000 book Swing ! , writing them off as " a punk rock band who has chosen to masquerade as Swing , at least until a better fad comes along " , spotlighting the Daddies ' " mediocre " rhythm section and profane lyricism as a case for making them " a band to avoid " . 
 The Daddies are more widely recognized , however , as one of the first bands to revive swing music in the musical mainstream , helping spearhead the swing revival of the late 1990s which paved the way for the larger successes of Big Bad Voodoo Daddy and the Brian Setzer Orchestra . Although the Daddies have been cited as an influence on ska punk bands the Mad Caddies and Spring Heeled Jack U.S.A. , SF Weekly claims the group has " never gotten the accolades it deserves " for their eclectic funk @-@ ska repertoire . The Phoenix New Times expressed similar sentiments , listing the " woefully unsung " Daddies as among the bands that defined the Northwest 's " alternative to alternative " , " [ delivering ] rock with more complexity than three @-@ chord guitar riffs and social critique without heavy @-@ handed cynicism " . In a 2008 retrospective feature posted on <unk> 's The Capri Lounge , a blog run by the editors of Rolling Stone magazine , the Daddies were declared as " one of the most misunderstood bands of the nineties " . 
 = = = Band name = = = 
 More dubiously , the Daddies have also retained a particular pop cultural legacy for their provocative and often contentious band name which has persisted beyond the initial controversies that pegged the band 's early years . The Daddies frequently appear on lists of the worst band names of all time , including those by Pitchfork , the Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer , the Toronto Sun and VH1 , who called it " quite possibly the most offensive band name ever , made all the more ridiculous by the fact that these outwardly bragging virgin @-@ <unk> had a completely innocuous mainstream hit song " . A 2009 issue of Blender magazine placed the Daddies third with Limp Bizkit in a bracket chart of the worst band names , with comedian Steve <unk> commenting " Because ' Virgin @-@ Fuckin ' Date Rapists ' was taken " and Eugene Mirman concurring " it 's a horrible name " . In 2013 , Rolling Stone included the Daddies on their list of " The Thirteen Dumbest Band Names in Rock History " , dwelling on the potentially incestuous interpretation as " the last thing anyone wants to visualize while listening to music " . 
 Steve Perry has expressed ambivalence towards the lasting vilification of the Daddies ' name , admitting it 's " probably the most heinous name in the history of rock " while emphasizing a disparate delineation between the band 's roots in the " bubble " of Eugene 's punk subculture and their unexpected longevity in the wider cultural mainstream : " I started this band a long time ago , and we just used [ the name ] . We didn 't know that in 10 years we 'd turn into some sort of happy , peppy , feel @-@ good things " . Though Perry has occasionally voiced regret over not having changed the Daddies ' name earlier in their career , he has nevertheless <unk> embraced the name as his " Holden Caulfield red hunting hat " , while outright dismissing critics who choose to demonize the name based on literal interpretation than the jazz @-@ era jive slang it drew from . " It gives outrage addicts another soapbox they can jump up on " , Perry said , " If people want to just look at it [ in that context ] , then that 's their problem , but I don 't write it that way " ... " I assure you we don 't cruise high schools for dates " . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Studio albums 
 Compilations 
 Zoot Suit Riot : The Swingin ' Hits of the Cherry Poppin ' Daddies ( 1997 ) 
 Skaboy JFK : The Skankin ' Hits of the Cherry Poppin ' Daddies ( 2009 ) 
 = = Band members = = 
 Current members 
 Steve Perry ( MC Large Drink ) – lead vocals , rhythm guitar ( formation – present ) 
 Dan Schmid ( Dang <unk> ) – bass guitar ( formation – 1996 , 1998 – present ) 
 Dana Heitman – trumpet ( formation – present ) 
 Willie <unk> – tenor saxophone ( 2010 – present ) 
 Joe <unk> – trombone ( 2012 – present ) 
 Paul Owen – drums ( 2013 – present ) 
 Andy Page – alto saxophone ( 2013 – present ) 
 Zak Johnson - guitar , banjo ( 2015 – present ) 
 Former members 
 Tim Arnold – drums ( formation – 1990 ) 
 James Gossard – guitar ( formation – 1990 ) 
 John Fohl – guitar ( 1990 – 1992 ) 
 James Phillips – tenor saxophone ( formation – 1992 , 1996 ) ( deceased , 1961 – 2011 ) 
 Brooks Brown – alto saxophone ( formation – 1994 ) 
 Adrian P. Baxter – tenor saxophone ( 1993 – 1996 ) 
 Adam <unk> – drums ( 1996 ) 
 Sean Oldham – drums ( 1996 ) 
 Jason Palmer – drums ( 1996 ) ( 2009 – studio recordings ) 
 Brian West – drums ( 1990 – 1996 ) 
 Chris <unk> – keyboards ( 1990 – 1997 ) 
 Rex Trimm – alto saxophone ( 1996 – 1997 ) 
 Hans Wagner – drums ( 1996 – 1997 ) 
 Darren Cassidy – bass ( 1996 – 1998 ) 
 Johnny <unk> – keyboards ( 1998 – 2000 ) 
 Ian Early – alto saxophone ( 1997 – 2006 ) 
 Tim Donahue – drums ( 1997 – 2008 ) 
 Sean Flannery – tenor saxophone ( 1996 – 2008 ) 
 Jesse Cloninger – tenor saxophone ( 2008 – 2010 ) 
 Jason Moss – guitar ( 1992 – 2010 ) 
 Dustin Lanker – keyboards , backing vocals ( 1997 – 1998 , 2000 – 2012 ) 
 Kevin Congleton – drums ( 2008 – 2013 ) 
 Joe Manis – alto and baritone saxophones ( 2006 – 2013 ) 
 William Seiji Marsh – guitar , backing vocals ( 2010 – 2014 ) 
 Chris Ward – guitar , banjo ( 2014 – 2015 ) 
 = Yellowstone National Park = 
 Yellowstone National Park is a national park located primarily in the U.S. state of Wyoming , although it also extends into Montana and Idaho . It was established by the U.S. Congress and signed into law by President Ulysses S. Grant on March 1 , 1872 . Yellowstone , the first National Park in the U.S. and widely held to be the first national park in the world , is known for its wildlife and its many geothermal features , especially Old Faithful Geyser , one of the most popular features in the park . It has many types of ecosystems , but the subalpine forest is the most abundant . It is part of the South Central Rockies forests ecoregion . 
 Native Americans have lived in the Yellowstone region for at least 11 @,@ 000 years . Aside from visits by mountain men during the early @-@ to @-@ mid @-@ 19th century , organized exploration did not begin until the late 1860s . Management of the park originally fell under the jurisdiction of the Secretary of the Interior . However , the U.S. Army was subsequently commissioned to oversee management of Yellowstone for a 30 @-@ year period between 1886 and 1916 . In 1917 , administration of the park was transferred to the National Park Service , which had been created the previous year . Hundreds of structures have been built and are protected for their architectural and historical significance , and researchers have examined more than 1 @,@ 000 archaeological sites . 
 Yellowstone National Park spans an area of 3 @,@ 468 @.@ 4 square miles ( 8 @,@ 983 km2 ) , comprising lakes , canyons , rivers and mountain ranges . Yellowstone Lake is one of the largest high @-@ elevation lakes in North America and is centered over the Yellowstone Caldera , the largest supervolcano on the continent . The caldera is considered an active volcano . It has erupted with tremendous force several times in the last two million years . Half of the world 's geothermal features are in Yellowstone , fueled by this ongoing volcanism . Lava flows and rocks from volcanic eruptions cover most of the land area of Yellowstone . The park is the centerpiece of the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem , the largest remaining nearly @-@ intact ecosystem in the Earth 's northern temperate zone . 
 Hundreds of species of mammals , birds , fish and reptiles have been documented , including several that are either endangered or threatened . The vast forests and grasslands also include unique species of plants . Yellowstone Park is the largest and most famous megafauna location in the Continental United States . Grizzly bears , wolves , and free @-@ ranging herds of bison and elk live in the park . The Yellowstone Park bison herd is the oldest and largest public bison herd in the United States . Forest fires occur in the park each year ; in the large forest fires of 1988 , nearly one third of the park was burnt . Yellowstone has numerous recreational opportunities , including hiking , camping , boating , fishing and sightseeing . Paved roads provide close access to the major geothermal areas as well as some of the lakes and waterfalls . During the winter , visitors often access the park by way of guided tours that use either snow coaches or snowmobiles . 
 = = History = = 
 The park is at the headwaters of the Yellowstone River , from which it takes its historical name . Near the end of the 18th century , French trappers named the river " Roche Jaune " , which is probably a translation of the Hidatsa name " Mi tsi a @-@ da @-@ zi " ( Rock Yellow River ) . Later , American trappers rendered the French name in English as " Yellow Stone " . Although it is commonly believed that the river was named for the yellow rocks seen in the Grand Canyon of the Yellowstone , the Native American name source is unclear . 
 The human history of the park begins at least 11 @,@ 000 years ago when Native Americans began to hunt and fish in the region . During the construction of the post office in Gardiner , Montana , in the 1950s , an obsidian projectile point of Clovis origin was found that dated from approximately 11 @,@ 000 years ago . These Paleo @-@ Indians , of the Clovis culture , used the significant amounts of obsidian found in the park to make cutting tools and weapons . Arrowheads made of Yellowstone obsidian have been found as far away as the Mississippi Valley , indicating that a regular obsidian trade existed between local tribes and tribes farther east . By the time white explorers first entered the region during the Lewis and Clark Expedition in 1805 , they encountered the Nez Perce , Crow , and Shoshone tribes . While passing through present day Montana , the expedition members heard of the Yellowstone region to the south , but they did not investigate it . 
 In 1806 , John Colter , a member of the Lewis and Clark Expedition , left to join a group of fur trappers . After splitting up with the other trappers in 1807 , Colter passed through a portion of what later became the park , during the winter of 1807 – 1808 . He observed at least one geothermal area in the northeastern section of the park , near Tower Fall . After surviving wounds he suffered in a battle with members of the Crow and Blackfoot tribes in 1809 , Colter described a place of " fire and brimstone " that most people dismissed as delirium ; the supposedly imaginary place was nicknamed " Colter 's Hell " . Over the next 40 years , numerous reports from mountain men and trappers told of boiling mud , steaming rivers , and petrified trees , yet most of these reports were believed at the time to be myth . 
 After an 1856 exploration , mountain man Jim Bridger ( also believed to be the first or second European American to have seen the Great Salt Lake ) reported observing boiling springs , spouting water , and a mountain of glass and yellow rock . These reports were largely ignored because Bridger was a known " spinner of yarns " . In 1859 , a U.S. Army Surveyor named Captain William F. Raynolds embarked on a two @-@ year survey of the northern Rockies . After wintering in Wyoming , in May 1860 , Raynolds and his party – which included naturalist Ferdinand Vandeveer Hayden and guide Jim Bridger – attempted to cross the Continental Divide over Two Ocean Plateau from the Wind River drainage in northwest Wyoming . Heavy spring snows prevented their passage , but had they been able to traverse the divide , the party would have been the first organized survey to enter the Yellowstone region . The American Civil War hampered further organized explorations until the late 1860s . 
 The first detailed expedition to the Yellowstone area was the Cook – Folsom – Peterson Expedition of 1869 , which consisted of three privately funded explorers . The Folsom party followed the Yellowstone River to Yellowstone Lake . The members of the Folsom party kept a journal and based on the information it reported , a party of Montana residents organized the Washburn @-@ Langford @-@ Doane Expedition in 1870 . It was headed by the surveyor @-@ general of Montana Henry Washburn , and included Nathaniel P. Langford ( who later became known as " National Park " Langford ) and a U.S. Army detachment commanded by Lt. Gustavus Doane . 
 The expedition spent about a month exploring the region , collecting specimens and naming sites of interest . A Montana writer and lawyer named Cornelius Hedges , who had been a member of the Washburn expedition , proposed that the region should be set aside and protected as a national park ; he wrote detailed articles about his observations for the Helena Herald newspaper between 1870 and 1871 . Hedges essentially restated comments made in October 1865 by acting Montana Territorial Governor Thomas Francis Meagher , who had previously commented that the region should be protected . Others made similar suggestions . In an 1871 letter from Jay Cooke to Ferdinand V. Hayden , Cooke wrote that his friend , Congressman William D. Kelley had also suggested " Congress pass a bill reserving the Great Geyser Basin as a public park forever " . 
 = = = Park creation = = = 
 In 1871 , eleven years after his failed first effort , Ferdinand V. Hayden was finally able to explore the region . With government sponsorship , he returned to the region with a second , larger expedition , the Hayden Geological Survey of 1871 . He compiled a comprehensive report , including large @-@ format photographs by William Henry Jackson and paintings by Thomas Moran . The report helped to convince the U.S. Congress to withdraw this region from public auction . On March 1 , 1872 , President Ulysses S. Grant signed The Act of Dedication law that created Yellowstone National Park . 
 Hayden , while not the only person to have thought of creating a park in the region , was its first and most enthusiastic advocate . He believed in " setting aside the area as a pleasure ground for the benefit and enjoyment of the people " and warned that there were those who would come and " make merchandise of these beautiful specimens " . Worrying the area could face the same fate as Niagara Falls , he concluded the site should " be as free as the air or Water . " In his report to the Committee on Public Lands , he concluded that if the bill failed to become law , " the vandals who are now waiting to enter into this wonder @-@ land , will in a single season despoil , beyond recovery , these remarkable curiosities , which have required all the cunning skill of nature thousands of years to prepare " . 
 Hayden and his 1871 party recognized Yellowstone as a priceless treasure that would become rarer with time . He wished for others to see and experience it as well . Eventually the railroads and , some time after that , the automobile would make that possible . The Park was not set aside strictly for ecological purposes ; however , the designation " pleasure ground " was not an invitation to create an amusement park . Hayden imagined something akin to the scenic resorts and baths in England , Germany , and Switzerland . 
 THE ACT OF <unk> 
 AN ACT to set apart a certain tract of land lying near the headwaters of the Yellowstone River as a public park . Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled , That the tract of land in the Territories of Montana and Wyoming ... is hereby reserved and withdrawn from settlement , occupancy , or sale under the laws of the United States , and dedicated and set apart as a public park or pleasuring ground for the benefit and enjoyment of the people ; and all persons who shall locate , or settle upon , or occupy the same or any part thereof , except as hereinafter provided , shall be considered trespassers and removed there from ... Approved March 1 , 1872 . 
 Signed by : 
 JAMES G. <unk> , Speaker of the House . 
 <unk> <unk> , Vice @-@ President of the United States and President of the Senate . 
 <unk> S. <unk> , President of the United States . 
 There was considerable local opposition to the Yellowstone National Park during its early years . Some of the locals feared that the regional economy would be unable to thrive if there remained strict federal prohibitions against resource development or settlement within park boundaries and local entrepreneurs advocated reducing the size of the park so that mining , hunting , and logging activities could be developed . To this end , numerous bills were introduced into Congress by Montana representatives who sought to remove the federal land @-@ use restrictions . 
 After the park 's official formation , Nathaniel Langford was appointed as the park 's first superintendent in 1872 . He served for five years but was denied a salary , funding , and staff . Langford lacked the means to improve the land or properly protect the park , and without formal policy or regulations , he had few legal methods to enforce such protection . This left Yellowstone vulnerable to poachers , vandals , and others seeking to raid its resources . He addressed the practical problems park administrators faced in the 1872 Report to the Secretary of the Interior and correctly predicted that Yellowstone would become a major international attraction deserving the continuing stewardship of the government . In 1875 , Colonel William Ludlow , who had previously explored areas of Montana under the command of George Armstrong Custer , was assigned to organize and lead an expedition to Montana and the newly established Yellowstone Park . Observations about the lawlessness and exploitation of park resources were included in Ludlow 's Report of a Reconnaissance to the Yellowstone National Park . The report included letters and attachments by other expedition members , including naturalist and mineralogist George Bird Grinnell . 
 Grinnell documented the poaching of buffalo , deer , elk , and antelope for hides . " It is estimated that during the winter of 1874 – 1875 , not less than 3 @,@ 000 buffalo and mule deer suffer even more severely than the elk , and the antelope nearly as much . " 
 As a result , Langford was forced to step down in 1877 . Having traveled through Yellowstone and witnessed land management problems first hand , <unk> Norris volunteered for the position following Langford 's exit . Congress finally saw fit to implement a salary for the position , as well as to provide a minimal funding to operate the park . Norris used these funds to expand access to the park , building numerous crude roads and facilities . 
 In 1880 , Harry Yount was appointed as a gamekeeper to control poaching and vandalism in the park . Yount had previously spent decades exploring the mountain country of present @-@ day Wyoming , including the Grand Tetons , after joining F V. Hayden 's Geological Survey in 1873 . Yount is the first national park ranger , and Yount 's Peak , at the head of the Yellowstone River , was named in his honor . However , these measures still proved to be insufficient in protecting the park , as neither Norris , nor the three superintendents who followed , were given sufficient manpower or resources . 
 The Northern Pacific Railroad built a train station in Livingston , Montana , connecting to the northern entrance in the early 1880s , which helped to increase visitation from 300 in 1872 to 5 @,@ 000 in 1883 . Visitors in these early years faced poor roads and limited services , and most access into the park was on horse or via stagecoach . By 1908 visitation increased enough to attract a Union Pacific Railroad connection to West Yellowstone , though rail visitation fell off considerably by World War II and ceased around the 1960s . Much of the railroad line was converted to nature trails , among them the Yellowstone Branch Line Trail . 
 During the 1870s and 1880s Native American tribes were effectively excluded from the national park . Under a half @-@ dozen tribes had made seasonal use of the Yellowstone area , but the only year @-@ round residents were small bands of Eastern Shoshone known as " Sheepeaters " . They left the area under the assurances of a treaty negotiated in 1868 , under which the Sheepeaters ceded their lands but retained the right to hunt in Yellowstone . The United States never ratified the treaty and refused to recognize the claims of the Sheepeaters or any other tribe that had used Yellowstone . 
 The Nez Perce band associated with Chief Joseph , numbering about 750 people , passed through Yellowstone National Park in thirteen days during late August 1877 . They were being pursued by the U.S. Army and entered the national park about two weeks after the Battle of the Big Hole . Some of the Nez Perce were friendly to the tourists and other people they encountered in the park ; some were not . Nine park visitors were briefly taken captive . Despite Joseph and other chiefs ordering that no one should be harmed , at least two people were killed and several wounded . One of the areas where encounters occurred was in Lower Geyser Basin and east along a branch of the Firehole River to Mary Mountain and beyond . That stream is still known as Nez Perce Creek . A group of <unk> entered the park in 1878 , alarming park Superintendent <unk> Norris . In the aftermath of the Sheepeater Indian War of 1879 , Norris built a fort to prevent Native Americans from entering the national park . 
 Ongoing poaching and destruction of natural resources continued unabated until the U.S. Army arrived at Mammoth Hot Springs in 1886 and built Camp Sheridan . Over the next 22 years the army constructed permanent structures , and Camp Sheridan was renamed Fort Yellowstone . On May 7 , 1894 , the Boone and Crockett Club , acting through the personality of George G. Vest , Arnold Hague , William Hallett Phillips , W. A. Wadsworth , Archibald Rogers , Theodore Roosevelt , and George Bird Grinnell were successful in carrying through the Park Protection Act , which so saved the Park . The Lacey Act of 1900 provided legal support for the officials prosecuting poachers . With the funding and manpower necessary to keep a diligent watch , the army developed their own policies and regulations that permitted public access while protecting park wildlife and natural resources . When the National Park Service was created in 1916 , many of the management principles developed by the army were adopted by the new agency . The army turned control over to the National Park Service on October 31 , 1918 . 
 = = = Later history = = = 
 By 1915 , 1 @,@ 000 automobiles per year were entering the park , resulting in conflicts with horses and horse @-@ drawn transportation . Horse travel on roads was eventually prohibited . 
 The Civilian Conservation Corps ( CCC ) , a New Deal relief agency for young men , played a major role between 1933 and 1942 in developing Yellowstone facilities . CCC projects included reforestation , campground development of many of the park 's trails and campgrounds , trail construction , fire hazard reduction , and fire @-@ fighting work . The CCC built the majority of the early visitor centers , campgrounds and the current system of park roads . 
 During World War II , tourist travel fell sharply , staffing was cut , and many facilities fell into disrepair . By the 1950s , visitation increased tremendously in Yellowstone and other national parks . To accommodate the increased visitation , park officials implemented Mission 66 , an effort to modernize and expand park service facilities . Planned to be completed by 1966 , in honor of the 50th anniversary of the founding of the National Park Service , Mission 66 construction diverged from the traditional log cabin style with design features of a modern style . During the late 1980s , most construction styles in Yellowstone reverted to the more traditional designs . After the enormous forest fires of 1988 damaged much of Grant Village , structures there were rebuilt in the traditional style . The visitor center at Canyon Village , which opened in 2006 , incorporates a more traditional design as well . 
 The 1959 Hebgen Lake earthquake just west of Yellowstone at Hebgen Lake damaged roads and some structures in the park . In the northwest section of the park , new geysers were found , and many existing hot springs became turbid . It was the most powerful earthquake to hit the region in recorded history . 
 In 1963 , after several years of public controversy regarding the forced reduction of the elk population in Yellowstone , United States Secretary of the Interior Stewart Udall appointed an advisory board to collect scientific data to inform future wildlife management of the national parks . In a paper known as the Leopold Report , the committee observed that culling programs at other national parks had been ineffective , and recommended management of Yellowstone 's elk population . 
 The wildfires during the summer of 1988 were the largest in the history of the park . Approximately 793 @,@ 880 acres ( 321 @,@ 272 ha ; 1 @,@ 240 sq mi ) or 36 % of the parkland was impacted by the fires , leading to a systematic re @-@ evaluation of fire management policies . The fire season of 1988 was considered normal until a combination of drought and heat by mid @-@ July contributed to an extreme fire danger . On " Black Saturday " , August 20 , 1988 , strong winds expanded the fires rapidly , and more than 150 @,@ 000 acres ( 61 @,@ 000 ha ; 230 sq mi ) burned . 
 The expansive cultural history of the park has been documented by the 1 @,@ 000 archeological sites that have been discovered . The park has 1 @,@ 106 historic structures and features , and of these Obsidian Cliff and five buildings have been designated National Historic Landmarks . Yellowstone was designated an International Biosphere Reserve on October 26 , 1976 , and a UN World Heritage Site on September 8 , 1978 . The park was placed on the List of World Heritage in Danger from 1995 to 2003 due to the effects of tourism , infection of wildlife , and issues with invasive species . In 2010 , Yellowstone National Park was honored with its own quarter under the America the Beautiful Quarters Program . 
 Justin Ferrell explores three moral sensibilities that motivated activists in dealing with Yellowstone . First came the utilitarian vision of maximum exploitation of natural resources , characteristic of developers in the late 19th century . Second was the spiritual vision of nature inspired by the Romanticism and the transcendentalists the mid @-@ 19th century . The twentieth century saw the <unk> moral vision that focuses on the health of the ecosystem as theorized by Aldo Leopold , which <unk> to the expansion of federally protected areas and to the surrounding ecosystems . 
 = = = Heritage and Research Center = = = 
 The Heritage and Research Center is located at Gardiner , Montana , near the north entrance to the park . The center is home to the Yellowstone National Park 's museum collection , archives , research library , historian , archeology lab , and herbarium . The Yellowstone National Park Archives maintain collections of historical records of Yellowstone and the National Park Service . The collection includes the administrative records of Yellowstone , as well as resource management records , records from major projects , and donated manuscripts and personal papers . The archives are affiliated with the National Archives and Records Administration . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Approximately 96 percent of the land area of Yellowstone National Park is located within the state of Wyoming . Another three percent is within Montana , with the remaining one percent in Idaho . The park is 63 miles ( 101 km ) north to south , and 54 miles ( 87 km ) west to east by air . Yellowstone is 2 @,@ 219 @,@ 789 acres ( 898 @,@ 317 ha ; 3 @,@ 468 @.@ 420 sq mi ) in area , larger than the states of Rhode Island or Delaware . Rivers and lakes cover five percent of the land area , with the largest water body being Yellowstone Lake at 87 @,@ 040 acres ( 35 @,@ 220 ha ; 136 @.@ 00 sq mi ) . Yellowstone Lake is up to 400 feet ( 120 m ) deep and has 110 miles ( 180 km ) of shoreline . At an elevation of 7 @,@ 733 feet ( 2 @,@ 357 m ) above sea level , Yellowstone Lake is the largest high altitude lake in North America . Forests comprise 80 percent of the land area of the park ; most of the rest is grassland . 
 The Continental Divide of North America runs diagonally through the southwestern part of the park . The divide is a topographic feature that separates Pacific Ocean and Atlantic Ocean water drainages . About one third of the park lies on the west side of the divide . The origins of the Yellowstone and Snake Rivers are near each other but on opposite sides of the divide . As a result , the waters of the Snake River flow to the Pacific Ocean , while those of the Yellowstone find their way to the Atlantic Ocean via the Gulf of Mexico . 
 The park sits on the Yellowstone Plateau , at an average elevation of 8 @,@ 000 feet ( 2 @,@ 400 m ) above sea level . The plateau is bounded on nearly all sides by mountain ranges of the Middle Rocky Mountains , which range from 9 @,@ 000 to 11 @,@ 000 feet ( 2 @,@ 700 to 3 @,@ 400 m ) in elevation . The highest point in the park is atop Eagle Peak ( 11 @,@ 358 feet or 3 @,@ 462 metres ) and the lowest is along Reese Creek ( 5 @,@ 282 feet or 1 @,@ 610 metres ) . Nearby mountain ranges include the Gallatin Range to the northwest , the Beartooth Mountains in the north , the Absaroka Range to the east , and the Teton Range and the Madison Range to the southwest and west . The most prominent summit on the Yellowstone Plateau is Mount Washburn at 10 @,@ 243 feet ( 3 @,@ 122 m ) . 
 Yellowstone National Park has one of the world 's largest petrified forests , trees which were long ago buried by ash and soil and transformed from wood to mineral materials . This ash and other volcanic debris are believed to have come from the park area itself . This is largely because Yellowstone is actually a massive caldera of a supervolcano . There are 290 waterfalls of at least 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) in the park , the highest being the Lower Falls of the Yellowstone River at 308 feet ( 94 m ) . 
 Three deep canyons are located in the park , cut through the volcanic tuff of the Yellowstone Plateau by rivers over the last 640 @,@ 000 years . The Lewis River flows through Lewis Canyon in the south , and the Yellowstone River has carved two colorful canyons , the Grand Canyon of the Yellowstone and the Black Canyon of the Yellowstone in its journey north . 
 = = Geology = = 
 = = = History = = = 
 Yellowstone is at the northeastern end of the Snake River Plain , a great U @-@ shaped arc through the mountains that extends from Boise , Idaho some 400 miles ( 640 km ) to the west . This feature traces the route of the North American Plate over the last 17 million years as it was transported by plate tectonics across a stationary mantle hotspot . The landscape of present @-@ day Yellowstone National Park is the most recent manifestation of this hotspot below the crust of the Earth . 
 The Yellowstone Caldera is the largest volcanic system in North America . It has been termed a " supervolcano " because the caldera was formed by exceptionally large explosive eruptions . The magma chamber that lies under Yellowstone is estimated to be a single connected chamber , about 37 miles ( 60 km ) long , 18 miles ( 29 km ) wide , and 3 to 7 miles ( 5 to 12 km ) deep . The current caldera was created by a cataclysmic eruption that occurred 640 @,@ 000 years ago , which released more than 240 cubic miles ( 1 @,@ 000 km ³ ) of ash , rock and pyroclastic materials . This eruption was more than 1 @,@ 000 times larger than the 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens . It produced a caldera nearly five eighths of a mile ( 1 km ) deep and 45 by 28 miles ( 72 by 45 km ) in area and deposited the Lava Creek Tuff , a welded tuff geologic formation . The most violent known eruption , which occurred 2 @.@ 1 million years ago , ejected 588 cubic miles ( 2 @,@ 450 km ³ ) of volcanic material and created the rock formation known as the Huckleberry Ridge Tuff and created the Island Park Caldera . A smaller eruption ejected 67 cubic miles ( 280 km ³ ) of material 1 @.@ 3 million years ago , forming the Henry 's Fork Caldera and depositing the Mesa Falls Tuff . 
 Each of the three climactic eruptions released vast amounts of ash that blanketed much of central North America , falling many hundreds of miles away . The amount of ash and gases released into the atmosphere probably caused significant impacts to world weather patterns and led to the extinction of some species , primarily in North America . 
 A subsequent caldera @-@ forming eruption occurred about 160 @,@ 000 years ago . It formed the relatively small caldera that contains the West Thumb of Yellowstone Lake . Since the last <unk> , a series of smaller eruptive cycles between 640 @,@ 000 and 70 @,@ 000 years ago , has nearly filled in the Yellowstone Caldera with > 80 different eruptions of rhyolitic lavas such as those that can be seen at Obsidian Cliffs and basaltic lavas which can be viewed at Sheepeater Cliff . Lava strata are most easily seen at the Grand Canyon of the Yellowstone , where the Yellowstone River continues to carve into the ancient lava flows . The canyon is a classic V @-@ shaped valley , indicative of river @-@ type erosion rather than erosion caused by glaciation . 
 Each eruption is part of an eruptive cycle that climaxes with the partial collapse of the roof of the volcano 's partially emptied magma chamber . This creates a collapsed depression , called a caldera , and releases vast amounts of volcanic material , usually through fissures that ring the caldera . The time between the last three cataclysmic eruptions in the Yellowstone area has ranged from 600 @,@ 000 to 800 @,@ 000 years , but the small number of such climactic eruptions cannot be used to make an accurate prediction for future volcanic events . 
 = = = Geysers and the hydrothermal system = = = 
 The most famous geyser in the park , and perhaps the world , is Old Faithful Geyser , located in Upper Geyser Basin . Castle Geyser , Lion Geyser and Beehive Geyser are in the same basin . The park contains the largest active geyser in the world — Steamboat Geyser in the Norris Geyser Basin . A study that was completed in 2011 found that at least 1283 geysers have erupted in Yellowstone . Of these , an average of 465 are active in a given year . Yellowstone contains at least 10 @,@ 000 geothermal features altogether . Half the geothermal features and two @-@ thirds of the world 's geysers are concentrated in Yellowstone . 
 In May 2001 , the U.S. Geological Survey , Yellowstone National Park , and the University of Utah created the Yellowstone Volcano Observatory ( <unk> ) , a partnership for long @-@ term monitoring of the geological processes of the Yellowstone Plateau volcanic field , for disseminating information concerning the potential hazards of this geologically active region . 
 In 2003 , changes at the Norris Geyser Basin resulted in the temporary closure of some trails in the basin . New fumaroles were observed , and several geysers showed enhanced activity and increasing water temperatures . Several geysers became so hot that they were transformed into purely steaming features ; the water had become superheated and they could no longer erupt normally . This coincided with the release of reports of a multiple year United States Geological Survey research project which mapped the bottom of Yellowstone Lake and identified a structural dome that had uplifted at some time in the past . Research indicated that these uplifts posed no immediate threat of a volcanic eruption , since they may have developed long ago , and there had been no temperature increase found near the uplifts . On March 10 , 2004 , a biologist discovered 5 dead bison which apparently had inhaled toxic geothermal gases trapped in the Norris Geyser Basin by a seasonal atmospheric inversion . This was closely followed by an upsurge of earthquake activity in April 2004 . In 2006 , it was reported that the Mallard Lake Dome and the Sour Creek Dome — areas that have long been known to show significant changes in their ground movement — had risen at a rate of 1 @.@ 5 to 2 @.@ 4 inches ( 3 @.@ 8 to 6 @.@ 1 cm ) per year from mid – 2004 through 2006 . As of late 2007 , the uplift has continued at a reduced rate . These events inspired a great deal of media attention and speculation about the geologic future of the region . Experts responded to the conjecture by informing the public that there was no increased risk of a volcanic eruption in the near future . However , these changes demonstrate the dynamic nature of the Yellowstone hydrothermal system . 
 = = = Earthquakes = = = 
 Yellowstone experiences thousands of small earthquakes every year , virtually all of which are undetectable to people . There have been six earthquakes with at least magnitude 6 or greater in historical times , including a 7 @.@ 5 ‑ magnitude quake that struck just outside the northwest boundary of the park in 1959 . This quake triggered a huge landslide , which caused a partial dam collapse on Hebgen Lake ; immediately downstream , the sediment from the landslide dammed the river and created a new lake , known as Earthquake Lake . Twenty @-@ eight people were killed , and property damage was extensive in the immediate region . The earthquake caused some geysers in the northwestern section of the park to erupt , large cracks in the ground formed and emitted steam , and some hot springs that normally have clear water turned muddy . A 6 @.@ 1 ‑ magnitude earthquake struck inside the park on June 30 , 1975 , but damage was minimal . 
 For three months in 1985 , 3 @,@ 000 minor earthquakes were detected in the northwestern section of the park , during what has been referred to as an earthquake swarm , and has been attributed to minor subsidence of the Yellowstone caldera . Beginning on April 30 , 2007 , 16 small earthquakes with magnitudes up to 2 @.@ 7 occurred in the Yellowstone Caldera for several days . These swarms of earthquakes are common , and there have been 70 such swarms between 1983 and 2008 . In December 2008 , over 250 earthquakes were measured over a four @-@ day span under Yellowstone Lake , the largest measuring a magnitude of 3 @.@ 9 . In January 2010 , more than 250 earthquakes were detected over a two @-@ day period . Seismic activity in Yellowstone National Park continues and is reported hourly by the Earthquake Hazards Program of the U.S. Geological Survey . 
 On March 30 , 2014 , a magnitude 4 @.@ 8 earthquake struck almost the very middle of Yellowstone near the Norris Basin at <unk> ; reports indicated no damage . This was the largest earthquake to hit the park since February 22 , 1980 . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 Yellowstone National Park is the centerpiece of the 20 million acre / 31 @,@ 250 square @-@ mile ( 8 @,@ 093 @,@ 712 ha / 80 @,@ 937 km2 ) Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem , a region that includes Grand Teton National Park , adjacent National Forests and expansive wilderness areas in those forests . The ecosystem is the largest remaining continuous stretch of mostly undeveloped pristine land in the continental United States , considered the world 's largest intact ecosystem in the northern temperate zone ( although the area is mostly not temperate but subalpine , and all the national forest lands surrounding the National Park are not intact ) . With the successful wolf reintroduction program , which began in the 1990s , virtually all the original faunal species known to inhabit the region when white explorers first entered the area can still be found there . 
 = = = Flora = = = 
 Over 1 @,@ 700 species of trees and other vascular plants are native to the park . Another 170 species are considered to be exotic species and are non @-@ native . Of the eight conifer tree species documented , Lodgepole Pine forests cover 80 % of the total forested areas . Other conifers , such as Subalpine Fir , Engelmann Spruce , Rocky Mountain Douglas @-@ fir and Whitebark Pine , are found in scattered groves throughout the park . As of 2007 , the whitebark pine is threatened by a fungus known as white pine blister rust ; however , this is mostly confined to forests well to the north and west . In Yellowstone , about seven percent of the whitebark pine species have been impacted with the fungus , compared to nearly complete infestations in northwestern Montana . Quaking Aspen and willows are the most common species of deciduous trees . The aspen forests have declined significantly since the early 20th century , but scientists at Oregon State University attribute recent recovery of the aspen to the reintroduction of wolves which has changed the grazing habits of local elk . 
 There are dozens of species of flowering plants that have been identified , most of which bloom between the months of May and September . The Yellowstone Sand Verbena is a rare flowering plant found only in Yellowstone . It is closely related to species usually found in much warmer climates , making the sand <unk> an enigma . The estimated 8 @,@ 000 examples of this rare flowering plant all make their home in the sandy soils on the shores of Yellowstone Lake , well above the waterline . 
 In Yellowstone 's hot waters , bacteria form mats of bizarre shapes consisting of trillions of individuals . These bacteria are some of the most primitive life forms on earth . Flies and other arthropods live on the mats , even in the middle of the bitterly cold winters . Initially , scientists thought that microbes there gained sustenance only from sulfur . In 2005 researchers from the University of Colorado at Boulder discovered that the sustenance for at least some of the diverse hyperthermophilic species is molecular hydrogen . 
 Thermus aquaticus is a bacterium found in the Yellowstone hot springs that produces an important enzyme ( <unk> polymerase ) that is easily replicated in the lab and is useful in replicating DNA as part of the polymerase chain reaction ( PCR ) process . The retrieval of these bacteria can be achieved with no impact to the ecosystem . Other bacteria in the Yellowstone hot springs may also prove useful to scientists who are searching for cures for various diseases . In 2016 , researchers from Uppsala University reported the discovery of a class of <unk> , <unk> , in Yellowstone 's Culex Basin . These organisms are capable of converting carbon monoxide and water to carbon dioxide and oxygen . 
 Non @-@ native plants sometimes threaten native species by using up nutrient resources . Though exotic species are most commonly found in areas with the greatest human visitation , such as near roads and at major tourist areas , they have also spread into the backcountry . Generally , most exotic species are controlled by pulling the plants out of the soil or by spraying , both of which are time consuming and expensive . 
 = = = Fauna = = = 
 Yellowstone is widely considered to be the finest megafauna wildlife habitat in the lower 48 states . There are almost 60 species of mammals in the park , including the gray wolf , the threatened lynx , and grizzly bears . Other large mammals include the bison ( often referred to as buffalo ) , black bear , elk , moose , mule deer , white @-@ tailed deer , mountain goat , pronghorn , bighorn sheep , and mountain lion . 
 The Yellowstone Park bison herd is the largest public herd of American bison in the United States . The relatively large bison populations are a concern for ranchers , who fear that the species can transmit bovine diseases to their domesticated cousins . In fact , about half of Yellowstone 's bison have been exposed to brucellosis , a bacterial disease that came to North America with European cattle that may cause cattle to miscarry . The disease has little effect on park bison , and no reported case of transmission from wild bison to domestic livestock has been filed . However , the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service ( APHIS ) has stated that bison are the " likely source " of the spread of the disease in cattle in Wyoming and North Dakota . Elk also carry the disease and are believed to have transmitted the infection to horses and cattle . Bison once numbered between 30 and 60 million individuals throughout North America , and Yellowstone remains one of their last strongholds . Their populations had increased from less than 50 in the park in 1902 to 4 @,@ 000 by 2003 . The Yellowstone Park bison herd reached a peak in 2005 with 4 @,@ 900 animals . Despite a summer estimated population of 4 @,@ 700 in 2007 , the number dropped to 3 @,@ 000 in 2008 after a harsh winter and controversial brucellosis management sending hundreds to slaughter . The Yellowstone Park bison herd is believed to be one of only four free roaming and genetically pure herds on public lands in North America . The other three herds are the Henry Mountains bison herd of Utah , at Wind Cave National Park in South Dakota and in Elk Island National Park in Alberta . 
 To combat the perceived threat of brucellosis transmission to cattle , national park personnel regularly harass bison herds back into the park when they venture outside of the area 's borders . During the winter of 1996 – 97 , the bison herd was so large that 1 @,@ 079 bison that had exited the park were shot or sent to slaughter . Animal rights activists argue that this is a cruel practice and that the possibility for disease transmission is not as great as some ranchers maintain . Ecologists point out that the bison are merely traveling to seasonal grazing areas that lie within the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem that have been converted to cattle grazing , some of which are within National Forests and are leased to private ranchers . APHIS has stated that with vaccinations and other means , brucellosis can be eliminated from the bison and elk herds throughout Yellowstone . 
 Starting in 1914 , in an effort to protect elk populations , the U.S. Congress appropriated funds to be used for the purposes of " destroying wolves , prairie dogs , and other animals injurious to agriculture and animal husbandry " on public lands . Park Service hunters carried out these orders , and by 1926 they had killed 136 wolves , and wolves were virtually eliminated from Yellowstone . Further exterminations continued until the National Park Service ended the practice in 1935 . With the passing of the Endangered Species Act in 1973 , the wolf was one of the first mammal species listed . After the wolves were extirpated from Yellowstone , the coyote then became the park 's top canine predator . However , the coyote is not able to bring down large animals , and the result of this lack of a top predator on these populations was a marked increase in lame and sick megafauna . 
 By the 1990s , the Federal government had reversed its views on wolves . In a controversial decision by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service ( which oversees threatened and endangered species ) , northwestern wolves , imported from Canada , were reintroduced into the park . Reintroduction efforts have been successful with populations remaining relatively stable . A survey conducted in 2005 reported that there were 13 wolf packs , totaling 118 individuals in Yellowstone and 326 in the entire ecosystem . These park figures were lower than those reported in 2004 but may be attributable to wolf migration to other nearby areas as suggested by the substantial increase in the Montana population during that interval . Almost all the wolves documented were descended from the 66 wolves reintroduced in 1995 – 96 . The recovery of populations throughout the states of Wyoming , Montana and Idaho has been so successful that on February 27 , 2008 , the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service removed the Northern Rocky Mountain wolf population from the endangered species list . 
 An estimated 600 grizzly bears live in the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem , with more than half of the population living within Yellowstone . The grizzly is currently listed as a threatened species , however the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service has announced that they intend to take it off the endangered species list for the Yellowstone region but will likely keep it listed in areas where it has not yet recovered fully . Opponents of delisting the grizzly are concerned that states might once again allow hunting and that better conservation measures need to be implemented to ensure a sustainable population . Black bears are common in the park and were a park symbol due to visitor interaction with the bears starting in 1910 . Feeding and close contact with bears has not been permitted since the 1960s to reduce their desire for human foods . Yellowstone is one of the few places in the United States where black bears can be seen coexisting with grizzly bears . Black bear observations occur most often in the park 's northern ranges and in the Bechler area which is in the park 's southwestern corner . 
 Population figures for elk are in excess of 30 @,@ 000 — the largest population of any large mammal species in Yellowstone . The northern herd has decreased enormously since the mid ‑ 1990s ; this has been attributed to wolf predation and causal effects such as elk using more forested regions to evade predation , consequently making it harder for researchers to accurately count them . The northern herd migrates west into southwestern Montana in the winter . The southern herd migrates southward , and the majority of these elk winter on the National Elk Refuge , immediately southeast of Grand Teton National Park . The southern herd migration is the largest mammalian migration remaining in the U.S. outside of Alaska . 
 In 2003 the tracks of one female lynx and her cub were spotted and followed for over 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) . Fecal material and other evidence obtained were tested and confirmed to be those of a lynx . No visual confirmation was made , however . Lynx have not been seen in Yellowstone since 1998 , though DNA taken from hair samples obtained in 2001 confirmed that lynx were at least transient to the park . Other less commonly seen mammals include the mountain lion and wolverine . The mountain lion has an estimated population of only 25 individuals <unk> . The wolverine is another rare park mammal , and accurate population figures for this species are not known . These uncommon and rare mammals provide insight into the health of protected lands such as Yellowstone and help managers make determinations as to how best to preserve habitats . 
 Eighteen species of fish live in Yellowstone , including the core range of the Yellowstone cutthroat trout — a fish highly sought by anglers . The Yellowstone cutthroat trout has faced several threats since the 1980s , including the suspected illegal introduction into Yellowstone Lake of lake trout , an invasive species which consume the smaller cutthroat trout . Although lake trout were established in Shoshone and Lewis lakes in the Snake River drainage from U.S. Government stocking operations in 1890 , it was never officially introduced into the Yellowstone River drainage . The cutthroat trout has also faced an ongoing drought , as well as the accidental introduction of a parasite — whirling disease — which causes a terminal nervous system disease in younger fish . Since 2001 , all native sport fish species caught in Yellowstone waterways are subject to a catch and release law . Yellowstone is also home to six species of reptiles , such as the painted turtle and Prairie rattlesnake , and four species of amphibians , including the Boreal Chorus Frog . 
 311 species of birds have been reported , almost half of which nest in Yellowstone . As of 1999 , twenty @-@ six pairs of nesting bald eagles have been documented . Extremely rare sightings of whooping cranes have been recorded , however only three examples of this species are known to live in the Rocky Mountains , out of 385 known worldwide . Other birds , considered to be species of special concern because of their rarity in Yellowstone , include the common loon , harlequin duck , osprey , peregrine falcon and the trumpeter swan . 
 = = Forest fires = = 
 As wildfire is a natural part of most ecosystems , plants that are indigenous to Yellowstone have adapted in a variety of ways . Douglas @-@ fir have a thick bark which protects the inner section of the tree from most fires . Lodgepole Pines — the most common tree species in the park — generally have cones that are only opened by the heat of fire . Their seeds are held in place by a tough resin , and fire assists in melting the resin , allowing the seeds to disperse . Fire clears out dead and downed wood , providing fewer obstacles for lodgepole pines to flourish . Subalpine Fir , Engelmann Spruce , Whitebark Pine , and other species tend to grow in colder and moister areas , where fire is less likely to occur . Aspen trees sprout new growth from their roots , and even if a severe fire kills the tree above ground , the roots often survive unharmed because they are insulated from the heat by soil . The National Park Service estimates that in natural conditions , grasslands in Yellowstone burned an average of every 20 to 25 years , while forests in the park would experience fire about every 300 years . 
 About thirty @-@ five natural forest fires are ignited each year by lightning , while another six to ten are started by people — in most cases by accident . Yellowstone National Park has three fire lookout towers , each staffed by trained fire fighters . The easiest one to reach is atop Mount Washburn , though it is closed to the public . The park also monitors fire from the air and relies on visitor reports of smoke and / or flames . Fire towers are staffed almost continuously from late June to mid @-@ September — the primary fire season . Fires burn with the greatest intensity in the late afternoon and evening . Few fires burn more than 100 acres ( 40 ha ) , and the vast majority of fires reach only a little over an acre ( 0 @.@ 5 ha ) before they burn themselves out . Fire management focuses on monitoring dead and down wood quantities , soil and tree moisture , and the weather , to determine those areas most vulnerable to fire should one ignite . Current policy is to suppress all human caused fires and to evaluate natural fires , examining the benefit or detriment they may pose on the ecosystem . If a fire is considered to be an immediate threat to people and structures , or will burn out of control , then fire suppression is performed . 
 In an effort to minimize the chances of out of control fires and threats to people and structures , park employees do more than just monitor the potential for fire . Controlled burns are prescribed fires which are deliberately started to remove dead timber under conditions which allow fire fighters an opportunity to carefully control where and how much wood is consumed . Natural fires are sometimes considered prescribed fires if they are left to burn . In Yellowstone , unlike some other parks , there have been very few fires deliberately started by employees as prescribed burns . However , over the last 30 years , over 300 natural fires have been allowed to burn naturally . In addition , fire fighters remove dead and down wood and other hazards from areas where they will be a potential fire threat to lives and property , reducing the chances of fire danger in these areas . Fire monitors also regulate fire through educational services to the public and have been known to temporarily ban campfires from campgrounds during periods of high fire danger . The common notion in early United States land management policies was that all forest fires were bad . Fire was seen as a purely destructive force and there was little understanding that it was an integral part of the ecosystem . Consequently , until the 1970s , when a better understanding of wildfire was developed , all fires were suppressed . This led to an increase in dead and dying forests , which would later provide the fuel load for fires that would be much harder , and in some cases , impossible to control . Fire Management Plans were implemented , detailing that natural fires should be allowed to burn if they posed no immediate threat to lives and property . 
 1988 started with a wet spring season although by summer , drought began moving in throughout the northern Rockies , creating the driest year on record to that point . Grasses and plants which grew well in the early summer from the abundant spring moisture produced plenty of grass , which soon turned to dry tinder . The National Park Service began firefighting efforts to keep the fires under control , but the extreme drought made suppression difficult . Between July 15 and 21 , 1988 , fires quickly spread from 8 @,@ 500 acres ( 3 @,@ 400 ha ; 13 @.@ 3 sq mi ) throughout the entire Yellowstone region , which included areas outside the park , to 99 @,@ 000 acres ( 40 @,@ 000 ha ; 155 sq mi ) on the park land alone . By the end of the month , the fires were out of control . Large fires burned together , and on August 20 , 1988 , the single worst day of the fires , more than 150 @,@ 000 acres ( 61 @,@ 000 ha ; 230 sq mi ) were consumed . Seven large fires were responsible for 95 % of the 793 @,@ 000 acres ( 321 @,@ 000 ha ; 1 @,@ 239 sq mi ) that were burned over the next couple of months . A total of 25 @,@ 000 firefighters and U.S. military forces participated in the suppression efforts , at a cost of 120 million dollars . By the time winter brought snow that helped extinguish the last flames , the fires had destroyed 67 structures and caused several million dollars in damage . Though no civilian lives were lost , two personnel associated with the firefighting efforts were killed . 
 Contrary to media reports and speculation at the time , the fires killed very few park animals — surveys indicated that only about 345 elk ( of an estimated 40 @,@ 000 – 50 @,@ 000 ) , 36 deer , 12 moose , 6 black bears , and 9 bison had perished . Changes in fire management policies were implemented by land management agencies throughout the United States , based on knowledge gained from the 1988 fires and the evaluation of scientists and experts from various fields . By 1992 , Yellowstone had adopted a new fire management plan which observed stricter guidelines for the management of natural fires . 
 = = Climate = = 
 Yellowstone climate is greatly influenced by altitude , with lower elevations generally found to be warmer year round . The record high temperature was 99 ° F ( 37 ° C ) in 2002 , while the coldest temperature recorded is − 66 ° F ( − 54 ° C ) in 1933 . During the summer months of June through early September , daytime highs are normally in the 70 to 80 ° F ( 21 to 27 ° C ) range , while night time lows can go to below freezing ( 0 ° C ) especially at higher altitudes . Summer afternoons are frequently accompanied by thunderstorms . Spring and fall temperatures range between 30 and 60 ° F ( − 1 and 16 ° C ) with nights in the teens to single digits ( − 5 to − 20 ° C ) . Winter in Yellowstone is accompanied by high temperatures usually between zero and 20 ° F ( − 20 to − 5 ° C ) and nighttime temperatures below 0 ° F ( − 18 ° C ) for most of the winter . 
 Precipitation in Yellowstone is highly variable and ranges from 15 inches ( 380 mm ) annually near Mammoth Hot Springs , to 80 inches ( 2 @,@ 000 mm ) in the southwestern sections of the park . The precipitation of Yellowstone is greatly influenced by the moisture channel formed by the Snake River Plain to the west that was , in turn , formed by Yellowstone itself . Snow is possible in any month of the year , but most common between November and April , with averages of 150 inches ( 3 @,@ 800 mm ) annually around Yellowstone Lake , to twice that amount at higher elevations . 
 Tornadoes in Yellowstone are rare ; however , on July 21 , 1987 , the most powerful tornado recorded in Wyoming touched down in the Teton Wilderness of Bridger @-@ Teton National Forest and hit Yellowstone National Park . Called the Teton – Yellowstone tornado , it was classified as an F4 , with wind speeds estimated at between 207 and 260 miles per hour ( 333 and 418 km / h ) . The tornado left a path of destruction 1 to 2 miles ( 1 @.@ 6 to 3 @.@ 2 km ) wide , and 24 miles ( 39 km ) long , and leveled 15 @,@ 000 acres ( 6 @,@ 100 ha ; 23 sq mi ) of mature pine forest . 
 Both high elevation areas are classified as humid continental ( Dfb ) , according to Köppen @-@ Geiger climate classification . 
 = = Recreation = = 
 Yellowstone ranks among the most popular national parks in the United States . Since the mid @-@ 1960s , at least 2 million tourists have visited the park almost every year . In 2010 , a record number of visitors came to the park in July : 975 @,@ 000 . July is the busiest month for Yellowstone National Park . At peak summer levels , 3 @,@ 700 employees work for Yellowstone National Park concessionaires . <unk> manage nine hotels and lodges , with a total of 2 @,@ 238 hotel rooms and cabins available . They also oversee gas stations , stores and most of the campgrounds . Another 800 employees work either permanently or seasonally for the National Park Service . 
 Park service roads lead to major features ; however , road reconstruction has produced temporary road closures . Yellowstone is in the midst of a long term road reconstruction effort , which is hampered by a short repair season . In the winter , all roads aside from the one which enters from Gardiner , Montana , and extends to Cooke City , Montana , are closed to wheeled vehicles . Park roads are closed to wheeled vehicles from early November to mid April , but some park roads remain closed until mid @-@ May . The park has 310 miles ( 500 km ) of paved roads which can be accessed from five different entrances . There is no public transportation available inside the park , but several tour companies can be contacted for guided motorized transport . In the winter , concessionaires operate guided snowmobile and snow coach tours , though their numbers and access are based on quotas established by the National Park Service . Facilities in the Old Faithful , Canyon and Mammoth Hot Springs areas of the park are very busy during the summer months . Traffic jams created by road construction or by people observing wildlife can result in long delays . 
 The National Park Service maintains 9 visitor centers and museums and is responsible for maintenance of historical structures and many of the other 2 @,@ 000 buildings . These structures include National Historical Landmarks such as the Old Faithful Inn built from 1903 to 1904 and the entire Fort Yellowstone – Mammoth Hot Springs Historic District . An historical and educational tour is available at Fort Yellowstone which details the history of the National Park Service and the development of the park . Campfire programs , guided walks and other interpretive presentations are available at numerous locations in the summer , and on a limited basis during other seasons . 
 Camping is available at a dozen campgrounds with more than 2 @,@ 000 campsites . Camping is also available in surrounding National Forests , as well as in Grand Teton National Park to the south . Backcountry campsites are accessible only by foot or by horseback and require a permit . There are 1 @,@ 100 miles ( 1 @,@ 800 km ) of hiking trails available . The park is not considered to be a good destination for mountaineering because of the instability of volcanic rock which predominates . Visitors with pets are required to keep them on a leash at all times and are limited to areas near roadways and in " <unk> " zones such as drive in campgrounds . Around thermal features , wooden and paved trails have been constructed to ensure visitor safety , and most of these areas are handicapped accessible . The National Park Service maintains a year @-@ round clinic at Mammoth Hot Springs and provides emergency services throughout the year . 
 Hunting is not permitted , though it is allowed in the surrounding national forests during open season . Fishing is a popular activity , and a Yellowstone Park fishing license is required to fish in park waters . Many park waters are fly fishing only and all native fish species are catch and release only . Boating is prohibited on rivers and creeks except for a 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) stretch of the Lewis River between Lewis and Shoshone Lake , and it is open to non @-@ motorized use only . Yellowstone Lake has a marina , and the lake is the most popular boating destination . 
 In the early history of the park , visitors were allowed , and sometimes even encouraged , to feed the bears . Visitors welcomed the chance to get their pictures taken with the bears , who had learned to beg for food . This led to numerous injuries to humans each year . In 1970 , park officials changed their policy and started a vigorous program to educate the public on the dangers of close contact with bears , and to try to eliminate opportunities for bears to find food in campgrounds and trash collection areas . Although it has become more difficult to observe bears in recent years , the number of human injuries and deaths has taken a significant drop and visitors are in less danger . The eighth recorded bear @-@ related death in the park 's history occurred in August 2015 . 
 Other protected lands in the region include Caribou @-@ Targhee , Gallatin , Custer , Shoshone and Bridger @-@ Teton National Forests . The National Park Service 's John D. Rockefeller , Jr . Memorial Parkway is to the south and leads to Grand Teton National Park . The famed Beartooth Highway provides access from the northeast and has spectacular high altitude scenery . Nearby communities include West Yellowstone , Montana ; Cody , Wyoming ; Red Lodge , Montana ; Ashton , Idaho ; and Gardiner , Montana . The closest air transport is available by way of Bozeman , Montana ; Billings , Montana ; Jackson ; Cody , Wyoming , or Idaho Falls , Idaho . Salt Lake City , 320 miles ( 510 km ) to the south , is the closest large metropolitan area . 
 = = Legal jurisdiction = = 
 The entire park is within the jurisdiction of the United States District Court for the District of Wyoming , making it the only federal court district that includes portions of more than one state ( Idaho , Montana , and Wyoming ) . Law professor Brian C. Kalt has argued that it may be impossible to <unk> a jury in compliance with the Vicinage Clause of the Sixth Amendment for a crime committed solely in the unpopulated Idaho portion of the park ( and that it would be difficult to do so for a crime committed solely in the lightly populated Montana portion ) . One defendant , who was accused of a wildlife @-@ related crime in the Montana portion of the park , attempted to raise this argument but eventually pleaded guilty . 
 = Manley Power = 
 Lieutenant General Sir Manley Power , KCB , <unk> ( 1773 – 7 July 1826 ) was a British military leader who fought in a number of campaigns for Britain and rose to the rank of Lieutenant General . He is chiefly remembered for leading a brigade of Portuguese troops under The Duke of Wellington in the Iberian Peninsular War . He is also remembered for jointly causing the removal of Sir George Prevost , governor @-@ in @-@ chief of British North America , for Prevost 's refusal to press the attack on Plattsburgh , New York , in 1814 , during the War of 1812 . After his active military service Sir Manley Power was appointed Lieutenant Governor of Malta . 
 = = Early life = = 
 His grandfather , Sir Henry Power , was a captain of the Battle @-@ Axe Guards . His father , Captain Lieutenant Bolton Power , served in the 20th Regiment of Foot and fought in all battles of the Seven Years ' War , and later in the American Revolutionary War under Guy Carleton and John Burgoyne . Manley Power followed in his forefather 's footsteps and was a career soldier , starting as an ensign in his father 's old regiment , the 20th Regiment of Foot , on 27 August 1783 , when he was either 9 or 10 years old . He served in Halifax , Nova Scotia ( 1795 – 1797 ) , Holland ( 1799 ) , and Minorca ( 1800 ) . He was part of the force under the command of Sir Ralph Abercromby at the Battle of Alexandria ( 1801 ) , and later served with the Royal Horse Guards ( 1803 – 1805 ) . After rising to Lieutenant Colonel of the 32nd Regiment of Foot , he entered the Peninsular War and was attached to the Portuguese army under the command of Sir William Beresford and was promoted to Lieutenant General in 1813 . 
 = = Peninsular war = = 
 One of Portugal 's strategies during the Peninsular War was to place troops under British command . Portuguese troops were poorly trained , but under Manley Power 's leadership , Power 's Portuguese were eventually regarded as equivalent to hardened British units , and saw much action , including the Battle of Salamanca , the Battle of Vitoria , the Battle of Fuentes de Onoro , the Battle near Torres Vedras , and the Battle of Nivelle . Power 's Portuguese formed part of the 3rd Division when it was led by Pakenham at Torres Vedras and Salamanca , and when it was led by Sir Thomas Picton at Fuentes de Onoro and Badajoz . Brigadier @-@ general Manley Power was specifically mentioned by Parliament for distinguished exertions during the bloody siege of Badajoz where the 3rd was ordered to distract the enemy through a diversionary attack with ladders against the high walls of the fortress away from the main gates , but pressed the action to the point where it became the breakthrough into the fortress ( Picton was wounded scaling the ladders but continued on ) . Picton also led the 3rd when it broke through at Vitoria . According to Picton , the fighting by the 3rd was so intense at the Battle of Vitoria , that the division lost 1 @,@ 800 men ( over one third of all British losses at the battle ) having taken a key bridge and village , where they were subjected to fire by 40 to 50 cannons , and a counter @-@ attack on the right flank ( which was open because the rest of the army had not kept pace ) . Finally the 3rd was under the command of Charles Colville at the Battle of Nivelle where it took part in the main attack and then captured the bridge at Amotz under heavy resistance . 
 = = War of 1812 = = 
 Manley Power and two other successful Peninsular War veteran brigade leaders , Thomas Brisbane and Frederick Philipse Robinson , were sent to bolster British forces in the War of 1812 in North America ( and therefore did not participate in the Battle of Waterloo ) . The veteran brigade leaders were deeply disappointed by Sir George Prevost 's caution at the Battle of Plattsburgh . Prevost had placed Francis de <unk> in charge of infantry , with the brigades under his command ( Power with 3500 , Brisbane with 3500 , and Robinson with 2500 troops ) . The brigade leaders were dismayed with the decision to withdraw from battle because they felt they could have easily captured Plattsburgh despite the unsuccessful British naval action . Their opinions carried significant weight in Britain , which led to the removal of Prevost as Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , North America . The Duke of Wellington wrote on 30 October 1814 @,@ 
 It is very obvious to me that you must remove Sir George Prevost . I see he has gone to war about trifles with the general officers I sent him , which are certainly the best of their rank in the army ; and his subsequent failure and distresses will be aggravated by that circumstance ; and will probably with the usual fairness of the public be attributed to it . 
 In December , Wellington 's former Quartermaster General , Sir George Murray , was sent to Canada with the local rank of Lieutenant General , specifically to order Prévost to return to London to explain his conduct of the Plattsburg campaign . Another Peninsular War veteran and Manley Power 's previous commanding officer , Sir Edward Pakenham , became the commander of the British North American army . Manley Power took part in the Battle of New Orleans , where Pakenham was killed , which unbeknown to its participants occurred after the war had already been settled in Belgium . 
 = = Occupation of France = = 
 He was then reassigned to Europe in 1815 to rejoin the 3rd Division , which was still under the command of Charles Colville , to lead the 2nd Brigade , as part of the British army force occupying Flanders and France . 
 On 25 October 1818 , General Murray appointed him to be the commanding officer at Calais to oversee the evacuation of British troops from France . When it was completed , the mayor of Calais wrote a letter to express thanks for his " considerate treatment of the French and of the town of Calais during the embarkation . " 
 = = Later life = = 
 Sir Manley Power later served as the Lieutenant Governor of Malta for six years . Manley Power would have been familiar with the island , having been previously stationed there in 1802 with the 20th Regiment of Foot . 
 In addition to his battle honours , for his role in Peninsular War , Portugal conferred on him Knight Commander of the Order of the Tower and Sword . The honour Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath was conferred on him on 2 January 1815 . 
 When in England , Manley Power and his family lived in Hill Court Manor , Walford , near Ross @-@ on @-@ Wye , Herefordshire . Based on Burke 's records , he was likely Lord of the Manor of Walford , Ross , Ross Foreign , Aston Ingham , and Wilton . Sir Manley Power died on 7 July 1826 , in Bern , Switzerland , after a few hours illness while returning from Malta to England . He is buried at Bath Abbey in England . 
 A march named Sir Manley Power was the official quick march used by the 57th ( West Middlesex ) Regiment of Foot ( " the Die Hards " — a nickname earned at the Battle of Albuera ) ; presumably adopting the march sometime after serving in the 2nd Division during the Peninsular war , continuing to use it as the Middlesex Regiment formed in 1881 , and later as part of the 4th Battalion ( Middlesex ) of the Queen 's Regiment . 
 = Shane Hurlbut = 
 Shane Hurlbut ( born 1964 ) , also credited as L. Shane Hurlbut , is an American cinematographer . Originally from Ithaca , New York , he grew up near Cayuga Lake , and graduated from Southern Cayuga High School in 1982 . Hurlbut studied film at Emerson College , graduating with a degree in film and television in 1986 . His early career included work on music videos for Gloria Estefan and Smashing Pumpkins . He met director Rob Cohen while working on a music video for the 1996 disaster film Daylight , and again worked with Cohen as cinematographer for the television pilot of The Guardian . 
 Hurlbut received a nomination for an award from the American Society of Cinematographers for his work as director of cinematography on the 1998 television movie The Rat Pack – he was the youngest cinematographer ever to have been nominated for an American Society of Cinematographers award for a debut film . 
 He has received positive comments from film critics for his cinematography work on films including Drumline and Mr. 3000 , and in a review of the film Into the Blue Roger Ebert highlighted Hurlbut 's work . In a review of the 2005 film The Greatest Game Ever Played Joan E. Vadeboncoeur of The Post @-@ Standard described Hurlbut as a " splendid cinematographer " who contributed " beauty and atmosphere " to the film 's shots . His work on the 2006 romantic comedy Something New where he collaborated with director Sanaa Hamri was positively received in The Times @-@ Picayune and The Journal News , and his cinematography work on the 2006 film Waist Deep with director Vondie Curtis @-@ Hall was well received in The Seattle Times . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Hurlbut was raised in Ithaca , New York . His mother taught sixth grade , and his father worked as a professor 's assistant at Cornell University . He grew up on a 250 @-@ acre ( 1 @.@ 0 km2 ) farm in Aurora , New York near Cayuga Lake , and graduated from Southern Cayuga High School in 1982 . He married Lydia <unk> , a fellow graduate of Southern Cayuga . 
 Hurlbut attended Herkimer County Community College , graduating with a degree in radio and television broadcasting in 1984 , and he was inducted into the Alumni Hall of Honor by the Herkimer County Community College Alumni Association on April 4 , 2008 . Hurlbut received a bachelor 's degree from Emerson College , where he majored in film and television . He graduated from Emerson College in 1986 . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = 1987 – 2004 = = = 
 Hurlbut moved to Los Angeles in 1987 , where he began work in film as a driver , key grip , and gaffer , before becoming a cinematographer . He was a grip truck driver for the 1988 film Phantasm II . His early career included work on music videos for Gloria Estefan and Smashing Pumpkins , photo shoot work with photographer Herb Ritts for an April 1997 Absolut Vodka spread in Vogue magazine , and work on a Nissan " Enjoy the Ride " commercial . He met director Rob Cohen while working on the Donna Summer / Bruce Roberts music video for the 1996 disaster film Daylight . Hurlbut again worked with Cohen as cinematographer for the 1997 NBC television pilot The Guardian . In 1997 Hurlbut 's career focused on light as applied to photography and film , and he owned a lighting business in Pasadena , California . Hurlbut assisted friends from Southern Cayuga in their film careers , including Dan Wade and Tim Carr . 
 Cohen selected Hurlbut as his cinematographer for the 1998 television movie The Rat Pack , which was Hurlbut 's feature film debut . His lighting style for the movie was heavily influenced by the glamour photography of George Hurrell . Hurlbut received a nomination for an award from the American Society of Cinematographers for his cinematography work on the movie , becoming the youngest cinematographer ever to have been nominated for an American Society of Cinematographers award for a debut film . Hurlbut worked again with Cohen on the 2000 film The Skulls , which was his first theatrical feature film . 
 He received positive comments for his work on the 2002 film Drumline , directed by Charles Stone III . Lou Lumenick of the New York Post wrote that the film was " <unk> photographed by Shane Hurlbut " . " With 300 students dancing , running , jumping , singing and playing , Stone and cinematographer Shane Hurlbut bring you right inside the brassy band , nudged between the tubas , saxophones and clarinets , " wrote Clint O 'Connor of The Plain Dealer . Charles Taylor of Salon commented " The movie was shot by Shane Hurlbut and none of the shots call attention to themselves . Instead you 're struck by the beauty of watching a row of drummers ' hands as they blur with the rhythm their sticks are beating out . " Hurlbut worked with director Barry Levinson , as cinematographer for The Adventures of Seinfeld & Superman advertisements for American Express . 
 In 2004 , Hurlbut teamed up with director Charles Stone III again to work on the film Mr. 3000 . In a positive review of the film , Harper Barnes of the St. Louis Post @-@ Dispatch highlighted Hurlbut , noting he had previously worked with the film 's editor , Bill Pankow , on Drumline . In a review of Mr. 3000 for The Manhattan Mercury , arts critic G.W. Clift specifically highlighted Hurlbut 's work on the film , commenting : " Mr. 3000 has several attractions , even unexpected ones like Shane Hurlbut 's heart @-@ stopping photography . ... one doesn 't mind that it lingers over scenes , in part because the scenes look so very good . " In his review Mr. 3000 for the Intelligencer Journal , Jack Roberts also highlighted Hurlbut 's work on the film . 
 = = = 2005 – present = = = 
 Hurlbut 's cinematography work on the 2005 film Into the Blue received positive reception from film critic Roger Ebert . In a review of Into the Blue for the San Francisco Chronicle , Peter Hartlaub noted " director of photography Shane Hurlbut does some nice work in tight places " . Lou Lumenick wrote in the New York Post that the " watery interludes " in Into the Blue were " gorgeously photographed by Shane Hurlbut " . Though Associated Press writer David Germain gave a negative review overall of Into the Blue , he wrote positively of Hurlbut 's cinematography work , commenting : " Shane Hurlbut 's cinematography buoys the movie , but his lovely pictures of the actors swimming among jellyfish and shimmery aquatic vegetation cannot compensate for everything else . " 
 Bob Strauss of the Los Angeles Daily News also wrote positively of Hurlbut 's work in his review of Into the Blue , writing : " The undersea photography , much of it shot amid schools of wild sharks , is exquisite ... " Strauss also commented positively on Hurlbut 's work on the 2005 film The Greatest Game Ever Played , writing he " does a great job of making golf look cinematic " . Soren Andersen of The News Tribune wrote of Hurlbut 's work on The Greatest Game Ever Played : " Shot by cinematographer Shane Hurlbut , the picture is extraordinarily handsome , with its velvety green fairways and its burnished , candlelit interiors . " Joan E. Vadeboncoeur of The Post @-@ Standard was critical of the film 's script , but praised Hurlbut 's work : " Director Bill Paxton does have a splendid cinematographer , Shane Hurlbut , contributing beauty and atmosphere . " 
 In 2005 , Hurlbut became the first cinematographer to utilize the <unk> process developed by <unk> , while working on the film Something New . In 2006 , Hurlbut became a member of the American Society of Cinematographers . Hurlbut 's cinematography work on the 2006 romantic comedy was positively received by film critic Michael H. <unk> of The Times @-@ Picayune , who wrote : " Cinematographer Shane Hurlbut finds interesting angles from which to shoot and photographs a formal cotillion with panache . " Kevin Canfield of The Journal News noted that Hurlbut assisted director Sanaa Hamri with " one lovely scene of the lovers bathed in the <unk> light of morning and another , shot from overhead , of couples twirling on a dance floor " . 
 Hurlbut worked on the 2006 film Waist Deep with director Vondie Curtis @-@ Hall , and Tom Keogh of The Seattle Times described their work on shots prior to a kidnapping scene in the film as " close to breathtaking " . Hurlbut worked as cinematographer on the 2008 film Semi @-@ Pro starring Will Ferrell , and Steven Boone of The Star @-@ Ledger noted : " ... Shane Hurlbut 's widescreen sports cinematography does conspire with two notorious disco covers of classical music to give us a thrill along with the cheap laughs . " Hurlbut collaborated with director McG as director of photography on the 2006 film We Are Marshall . Hurlbut and McG decided to use vintage lenses and film stock from the time period to evoke a feeling of the 1970s . 
 In 2008 , Hurlbut again worked with director McG , as director of photography on the film Terminator Salvation . During shooting for the film in July 2008 , Hurlbut faced an expletive @-@ ridden tirade from actor Christian Bale , who berated Hurlbut for walking into a scene involving Bale and actress Bryce Dallas Howard . Hurlbut responded calmly and apologized several times to Bale , and continued shooting for seven hours after the incident . On February 6 , 2009 , Bale told KROQ @-@ FM radio that he and Hurlbut talked after the incident and " resolved this completely " . Bale acknowledged the two worked together for several hours after the incident , and " at least a month after that " , and noted " I 've seen a rough cut of the movie and he has done a wonderful job . It looks fantastic " . 
 Charles Stone III , director of the original " Whassup ? " commercial campaign for Anheuser @-@ Busch Budweiser beer , remembered Hurlbut from their work together on Drumline , and contacted him in 2008 to make a video in support of Barack Obama 's 2008 campaign for President . The video , " Wassup 2008 " was posted to YouTube in October 2008 and received over 1 @.@ 8 million views . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = Emily Dickinson = 
 Emily Elizabeth Dickinson ( December 10 , 1830 – May 15 , 1886 ) was an American poet . Dickinson was born in Amherst , Massachusetts . Although part of a prominent family with strong ties to its community , Dickinson lived much of her life highly introverted . After studying at the Amherst Academy for seven years in her youth , she briefly attended the Mount Holyoke Female Seminary before returning to her family 's house in Amherst . Considered an eccentric by locals , she developed a noted penchant for white clothing and became known for her reluctance to greet guests or , later in life , to even leave her bedroom . Dickinson never married , and most friendships between her and others depended entirely upon correspondence . 
 While Dickinson was a prolific private poet , fewer than a dozen of her nearly 1 @,@ 800 poems were published during her lifetime . The work that was published during her lifetime was usually altered significantly by the publishers to fit the conventional poetic rules of the time . Dickinson 's poems are unique for the era in which she wrote ; they contain short lines , typically lack titles , and often use slant rhyme as well as unconventional capitalization and punctuation . Many of her poems deal with themes of death and immortality , two recurring topics in letters to her friends . 
 Although Dickinson 's acquaintances were most likely aware of her writing , it was not until after her death in 1886 — when Lavinia , Dickinson 's younger sister , discovered her cache of poems — that the breadth of her work became apparent to the public . Her first collection of poetry was published in 1890 by personal acquaintances Thomas Wentworth Higginson and Mabel Loomis Todd , though both heavily edited the content . A complete , and mostly unaltered , collection of her poetry became available for the first time when scholar Thomas H. Johnson published The Poems of Emily Dickinson in 1955 . Despite some unfavorable reception and skepticism over the late 19th and early 20th centuries regarding her literary prowess , Dickinson is now almost universally considered to be one of the most significant of all American poets . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Family and early childhood = = = 
 Emily Elizabeth Dickinson was born at the family 's homestead in Amherst , Massachusetts , on December 10 , 1830 , into a prominent , but not wealthy , family . Two hundred years earlier , her patrilineal ancestors had arrived in the New World — in the Puritan Great Migration — where they prospered . Emily Dickinson 's paternal grandfather , Samuel Dickinson , had almost single @-@ handedly founded Amherst College . In 1813 , he built the homestead , a large mansion on the town 's Main Street , that became the focus of Dickinson family life for the better part of a century . Samuel Dickinson 's eldest son , Edward , was treasurer of Amherst College for nearly forty years , served numerous terms as a State Legislator , and represented the Hampshire district in the United States Congress . On May 6 , 1828 , he married Emily Norcross from Monson . They had three children : 
 William Austin ( 1829 – 1895 ) , known as Austin , Aust or Awe 
 Emily Elizabeth 
 Lavinia Norcross ( 1833 – 1899 ) , known as Lavinia or Vinnie 
 By all accounts , young Emily was a well @-@ behaved girl . On an extended visit to Monson when she was two , Emily 's Aunt Lavinia described Emily as " perfectly well & contented — She is a very good child & but little trouble . " Emily 's aunt also noted the girl 's affinity for music and her particular talent for the piano , which she called " the <unk> " . 
 Dickinson attended primary school in a two @-@ story building on Pleasant Street . Her education was " ambitiously classical for a Victorian girl " . Her father wanted his children well @-@ educated and he followed their progress even while away on business . When Emily was seven , he wrote home , reminding his children to " keep school , and learn , so as to tell me , when I come home , how many new things you have learned " . While Emily consistently described her father in a warm manner , her correspondence suggests that her mother was regularly cold and aloof . In a letter to a confidante , Emily wrote she " always ran Home to Awe [ Austin ] when a child , if anything befell me . He was an awful Mother , but I liked him better than none . " 
 On September 7 , 1840 , Dickinson and her sister Lavinia started together at Amherst Academy , a former boys ' school that had opened to female students just two years earlier . At about the same time , her father purchased a house on North Pleasant Street . Emily 's brother Austin later described this large new home as the " mansion " over which he and Emily presided as " lord and lady " while their parents were absent . The house overlooked Amherst 's burial ground , described by one local minister as treeless and " forbidding " . 
 = = = Teenage years = = = 
 Dickinson spent seven years at the Academy , taking classes in English and classical literature , Latin , botany , geology , history , " mental philosophy , " and arithmetic . Daniel Taggart Fiske , the school 's principal at the time , would later recall that Dickinson was " very bright " and " an excellent scholar , of exemplary deportment , faithful in all school duties " . Although she had a few terms off due to illness — the longest of which was in 1845 – 1846 , when she was enrolled for only eleven weeks — she enjoyed her strenuous studies , writing to a friend that the Academy was " a very fine school " . 
 Dickinson was troubled from a young age by the " deepening menace " of death , especially the deaths of those who were close to her . When Sophia Holland , her second cousin and a close friend , grew ill from typhus and died in April 1844 , Emily was traumatized . Recalling the incident two years later , Emily wrote that " it seemed to me I should die too if I could not be permitted to watch over her or even look at her face . " She became so melancholic that her parents sent her to stay with family in Boston to recover . With her health and spirits restored , she soon returned to Amherst Academy to continue her studies . During this period , she first met people who were to become lifelong friends and correspondents , such as Abiah Root , Abby Wood , Jane Humphrey , and Susan Huntington Gilbert ( who later married Emily 's brother Austin ) . 
 In 1845 , a religious revival took place in Amherst , resulting in 46 confessions of faith among Dickinson 's peers . Dickinson wrote to a friend the following year : " I never enjoyed such perfect peace and happiness as the short time in which I felt I had found my savior . " She went on to say that it was her " greatest pleasure to commune alone with the great God & to feel that he would listen to my prayers . " The experience did not last : Dickinson never made a formal declaration of faith and attended services regularly for only a few years . After her church @-@ going ended , about 1852 , she wrote a poem opening : " Some keep the Sabbath going to Church – / I keep it , staying at Home " . 
 During the last year of her stay at the Academy , Emily became friendly with Leonard Humphrey , its popular new young principal . After finishing her final term at the Academy on August 10 , 1847 , Dickinson began attending Mary Lyon 's Mount Holyoke Female Seminary ( which later became Mount Holyoke College ) in South Hadley , about ten miles ( 16 km ) from Amherst . She was at the seminary for only ten months . Although she liked the girls at Holyoke , Dickinson made no lasting friendships there . The explanations for her brief stay at Holyoke differ considerably : either she was in poor health , her father wanted to have her at home , she rebelled against the evangelical fervor present at the school , she disliked the discipline @-@ minded teachers , or she was simply homesick . Whatever the specific reason for leaving Holyoke , her brother Austin appeared on March 25 , 1848 , to " bring [ her ] home at all events " . Back in Amherst , Dickinson occupied her time with household activities . She took up baking for the family and enjoyed attending local events and activities in the budding college town . 
 = = = Early influences and writing = = = 
 When she was eighteen , Dickinson 's family befriended a young attorney by the name of Benjamin Franklin Newton . According to a letter written by Dickinson after Newton 's death , he had been " with my Father two years , before going to Worcester – in pursuing his studies , and was much in our family . " Although their relationship was probably not romantic , Newton was a formative influence and would become the second in a series of older men ( after Humphrey ) that Dickinson referred to , variously , as her tutor , preceptor or master . 
 Newton likely introduced her to the writings of William Wordsworth , and his gift to her of Ralph Waldo Emerson 's first book of collected poems had a liberating effect . She wrote later that he , " whose name my Father 's Law Student taught me , has touched the secret Spring " . Newton held her in high regard , believing in and recognizing her as a poet . When he was dying of tuberculosis , he wrote to her , saying that he would like to live until she achieved the greatness he foresaw . Biographers believe that Dickinson 's statement of 1862 — " When a little Girl , I had a friend , who taught me Immortality – but venturing too near , himself – he never returned " — refers to Newton . 
 Dickinson was familiar not only with the Bible but also with contemporary popular literature . She was probably influenced by Lydia Maria Child 's Letters from New York , another gift from Newton ( after reading it , she gushed " This then is a book ! And there are more of them ! " ) . Her brother smuggled a copy of Henry Wadsworth Longfellow 's Kavanagh into the house for her ( because her father might disapprove ) and a friend lent her Charlotte Brontë 's Jane Eyre in late 1849 . Jane Eyre 's influence cannot be measured , but when Dickinson acquired her first and only dog , a Newfoundland , she named him " Carlo " after the character St. John Rivers ' dog . William Shakespeare was also a potent influence in her life . Referring to his plays , she wrote to one friend " Why clasp any hand but this ? " and to another , " Why is any other book needed ? " 
 = = = Adulthood and seclusion = = = 
 In early 1850 , Dickinson wrote that " Amherst is alive with fun this winter ... Oh , a very great town this is ! " Her high spirits soon turned to melancholy after another death . The Amherst Academy principal , Leonard Humphrey , died suddenly of " brain congestion " at age 25 . Two years after his death , she revealed to her friend Abiah Root the extent of her depression : 
 some of my friends are gone , and some of my friends are sleeping – sleeping the churchyard sleep – the hour of evening is sad – it was once my study hour – my master has gone to rest , and the open leaf of the book , and the scholar at school alone , make the tears come , and I cannot brush them away ; I would not if I could , for they are the only tribute I can pay the departed Humphrey . 
 During the 1850s , Emily 's strongest and most affectionate relationship was with her sister @-@ in @-@ law , Susan Gilbert . Emily eventually sent her over three hundred letters , more than to any other correspondent , over the course of their friendship . Susan was supportive of the poet , playing the role of " most beloved friend , influence , muse , and adviser " whose editorial suggestions Dickinson sometimes followed , Sue played a primary role in Emily 's creative processes . " Sue married Austin in 1856 after a four @-@ year courtship , though their marriage was not a happy one . Edward Dickinson built a house for Austin and Sue naming it the Evergreens , a stand of which was located on the west side of the Homestead . There is controversy over how to view Emily 's friendship with Susan ; according to a point of view first promoted by Mabel Loomis Todd , Austin 's longtime mistress , Emily 's missives typically dealt with demands for Sue 's affection and the fear of unrequited admiration . Todd believed that because Sue was often aloof and disagreeable , Emily was continually hurt by what was mostly a tempestuous friendship . However , the notion of a " cruel " Susan — as promoted by her romantic rival — has been questioned , most especially by Sue and Austin 's surviving children , with whom Emily was close . 
 Until 1855 , Dickinson had not strayed far from Amherst . That spring , accompanied by her mother and sister , she took one of her longest and farthest trips away from home . First , they spent three weeks in Washington , where her father was representing Massachusetts in Congress . Then they went to Philadelphia for two weeks to visit family . In Philadelphia , she met Charles Wadsworth , a famous minister of the Arch Street Presbyterian Church , with whom she forged a strong friendship which lasted until his death in 1882 . Despite seeing him only twice after 1855 ( he moved to San Francisco in 1862 ) , she variously referred to him as " my Philadelphia " , " my Clergyman " , " my dearest earthly friend " and " my Shepherd from ' Little Girl <unk> " . 
 From the mid @-@ 1850s , Emily 's mother became effectively bedridden with various chronic illnesses until her death in 1882 . Writing to a friend in summer 1858 , Emily said that she would visit if she could leave " home , or mother . I do not go out at all , lest father will come and miss me , or miss some little act , which I might forget , should I run away – Mother is much as usual . I Know not what to hope of her " . As her mother continued to decline , Dickinson 's domestic responsibilities weighed more heavily upon her and she confined herself within the Homestead . Forty years later , Lavinia stated that because their mother was chronically ill , one of the daughters had to remain always with her . Emily took this role as her own , and " finding the life with her books and nature so congenial , continued to live it " . 
 Withdrawing more and more from the outside world , Emily began in the summer of 1858 what would be her lasting legacy . Reviewing poems she had written previously , she began making clean copies of her work , assembling carefully pieced @-@ together manuscript books . The forty fascicles she created from 1858 through 1865 eventually held nearly eight hundred poems . No one was aware of the existence of these books until after her death . 
 In the late 1850s , the Dickinsons befriended Samuel Bowles , the owner and editor @-@ in @-@ chief of the Springfield Republican , and his wife , Mary . They visited the Dickinsons regularly for years to come . During this time Emily sent him over three dozen letters and nearly fifty poems . Their friendship brought out some of her most intense writing and Bowles published a few of her poems in his journal . It was from 1858 to 1861 that Dickinson is believed to have written a trio of letters that have been called " The Master Letters " . These three letters , drafted to an unknown man simply referred to as " Master " , continue to be the subject of speculation and contention amongst scholars . 
 The first half of the 1860s , after she had largely withdrawn from social life , proved to be Dickinson 's most productive writing period . Modern scholars and researchers are divided as to the cause for Dickinson 's withdrawal and extreme seclusion . While she was diagnosed as having " nervous prostration " by a physician during her lifetime , some today believe she may have suffered from illnesses as various as agoraphobia and epilepsy . 
 = = = Is " my Verse ... alive ? " = = = 
 In April 1862 , Thomas Wentworth Higginson , a literary critic , radical abolitionist , and ex @-@ minister , wrote a lead piece for The Atlantic Monthly entitled , " Letter to a Young Contributor " . Higginson 's essay , in which he urged aspiring writers to " charge your style with life " , contained practical advice for those wishing to break into print . Dickinson 's decision to contact Higginson suggests that by 1862 she was contemplating publication and that it may have become increasingly difficult to write poetry without an audience . Seeking literary guidance that no one close to her could provide , Dickinson sent him a letter which read in full : 
 Mr Higginson , 
 Are you too deeply occupied to say if my Verse is alive ? 
 The Mind is so near itself – it cannot see , distinctly – and I have none to ask – 
 Should you think it breathed – and had you the leisure to tell me , I should feel quick gratitude – 
 If I make the mistake – that you dared to tell me – would give me <unk> honor – toward you – 
 I enclose my name – asking you , if you please – Sir – to tell me what is true ? 
 That you will not betray me – it is needless to ask – since Honor is it 's [ sic ] own pawn – 
 This highly nuanced and largely theatrical letter was unsigned , but she had included her name on a card and enclosed it in an envelope , along with four of her poems . He praised her work but suggested that she delay publishing until she had written longer , being unaware that she had already appeared in print . She assured him that publishing was as foreign to her " as <unk> to Fin " , but also proposed that " If fame belonged to me , I could not escape her " . Dickinson delighted in dramatic self @-@ characterization and mystery in her letters to Higginson . She said of herself , " I am small , like the wren , and my hair is bold , like the chestnut bur , and my eyes like the sherry in the glass that the guest leaves . " She stressed her solitary nature , stating that her only real companions were the hills , the sundown , and her dog , Carlo . She also mentioned that whereas her mother did not " care for Thought " , her father bought her books , but begged her " not to read them – because he fears they <unk> the Mind " . 
 Dickinson valued his advice , going from calling him " Mr. Higginson " to " Dear friend " as well as signing her letters , " Your Gnome " and " Your Scholar " . His interest in her work certainly provided great moral support ; many years later , Dickinson told Higginson that he had saved her life in 1862 . They corresponded until her death , but her difficulty in expressing her literary needs and a reluctance to enter into a cooperative exchange left Higginson nonplussed ; he did not press her to publish in subsequent correspondence . Dickinson 's own ambivalence on the matter militated against the likelihood of publication . Literary critic Edmund Wilson , in his review of Civil War literature , surmised that " with encouragement , she would certainly have published " . 
 = = = The woman in white = = = 
 In direct opposition to the immense productivity that she displayed in the early 1860s , Dickinson wrote fewer poems in 1866 . Beset with personal loss as well as loss of domestic help , Dickinson may have been too overcome to keep up her previous level of writing . Carlo died during this time after providing sixteen years of companionship ; Dickinson never owned another dog . Although the household servant of nine years , Margaret O Brien , had married and left the Homestead that same year , it was not until 1869 that her family brought in a permanent household servant , Margaret Maher , to replace the old one . Emily once again was responsible for chores , including the baking , at which she excelled . 
 Around this time , Dickinson 's behavior began to change . She did not leave the Homestead unless it was absolutely necessary and as early as 1867 , she began to talk to visitors from the other side of a door rather than speaking to them face to face . She acquired local notoriety ; she was rarely seen , and when she was , she was usually clothed in white . Dickinson 's one surviving article of clothing is a white cotton dress , possibly sewn circa 1878 – 1882 . Few of the locals who exchanged messages with Dickinson during her last fifteen years ever saw her in person . Austin and his family began to protect Emily 's privacy , deciding that she was not to be a subject of discussion with outsiders . Despite her physical seclusion , however , Dickinson was socially active and expressive through what makes up two @-@ thirds of her surviving notes and letters . When visitors came to either the Homestead or the Evergreens , she would often leave or send over small gifts of poems or flowers . Dickinson also had a good rapport with the children in her life . Mattie Dickinson , the second child of Austin and Sue , later said that " Aunt Emily stood for indulgence . " MacGregor ( Mac ) Jenkins , the son of family friends who later wrote a short article in 1891 called " A Child 's Recollection of Emily Dickinson " , thought of her as always offering support to the neighborhood children . 
 When Higginson urged her to come to Boston in 1868 so that they could formally meet for the first time , she declined , writing : " Could it please your convenience to come so far as Amherst I should be very glad , but I do not cross my Father 's ground to any House or town " . It was not until he came to Amherst in 1870 that they met . Later he referred to her , in the most detailed and vivid physical account of her on record , as " a little plain woman with two smooth bands of reddish hair ... in a very plain & exquisitely clean white pique & a blue net worsted shawl . " He also felt that he never was " with any one who drained my nerve power so much . Without touching her , she drew from me . I am glad not to live near her . " 
 = = = Posies and poesies = = = 
 Scholar Judith Farr notes that Dickinson , during her lifetime , " was known more widely as a gardener , perhaps , than as a poet " . Dickinson studied botany from the age of nine and , along with her sister , tended the garden at Homestead . During her lifetime , she assembled a collection of pressed plants in a sixty @-@ six page leather @-@ bound herbarium . It contained 424 pressed flower specimens that she collected , classified , and labeled using the Linnaean system . The Homestead garden was well @-@ known and admired locally in its time . It has not survived but efforts to revive it have begun . Dickinson kept no garden notebooks or plant lists , but a clear impression can be formed from the letters and recollections of friends and family . Her niece , Martha Dickinson Bianchi , remembered " carpets of lily @-@ of @-@ the @-@ valley and pansies , platoons of <unk> , hyacinths , enough in May to give all the bees of summer dyspepsia . There were ribbons of peony hedges and drifts of daffodils in season , marigolds to distraction — a butterfly utopia " . In particular , Dickinson cultivated scented exotic flowers , writing that she " could inhabit the Spice Isles merely by crossing the dining room to the conservatory , where the plants hang in baskets " . Dickinson would often send her friends bunches of flowers with verses attached , but " they valued the posy more than the poetry " . 
 = = = Later life = = = 
 On June 16 , 1874 , while in Boston , Edward Dickinson suffered a stroke and died . When the simple funeral was held in the Homestead 's entrance hall , Emily stayed in her room with the door cracked open . Neither did she attend the memorial service on June 28 . She wrote to Higginson that her father 's " Heart was pure and terrible and I think no other like it exists . " A year later , on June 15 , 1875 , Emily 's mother also suffered a stroke , which produced a partial lateral paralysis and impaired memory . Lamenting her mother 's increasing physical as well as mental demands , Emily wrote that " Home is so far from Home " . 
 Otis Phillips Lord , an elderly judge on the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court from Salem , in 1872 or 1873 became an acquaintance of Dickinson 's . After the death of Lord 's wife in 1877 , his friendship with Dickinson probably became a late @-@ life romance , though as their letters were destroyed , this is surmised . Dickinson found a kindred soul in Lord , especially in terms of shared literary interests ; the few letters which survived contain multiple quotations of Shakespeare 's work , including the plays Othello , Antony and Cleopatra , Hamlet and King Lear . In 1880 he gave her Cowden Clarke 's Complete Concordance to Shakespeare ( 1877 ) . Dickinson wrote that " While others go to Church , I go to mine , for are you not my Church , and have we not a Hymn that no one knows but us ? " She referred to him as " My lovely Salem " and they wrote to each other religiously every Sunday . Dickinson looked forward to this day greatly ; a surviving fragment of a letter written by her states that " Tuesday is a deeply depressed Day " . 
 After being critically ill for several years , Judge Lord died in March 1884 . Dickinson referred to him as " our latest Lost " . Two years before this , on April 1 , 1882 , Dickinson 's " Shepherd from ' Little Girl <unk> " , Charles Wadsworth , also had died after a long illness . 
 = = = Decline and death = = = 
 Although she continued to write in her last years , Dickinson stopped editing and organizing her poems . She also exacted a promise from her sister Lavinia to burn her papers . Lavinia , who also never married , remained at the Homestead until her own death in 1899 . 
 The 1880s were a difficult time for the remaining Dickinsons . <unk> alienated from his wife , Austin fell in love in 1882 with Mabel Loomis Todd , an Amherst College faculty wife who had recently moved to the area . Todd never met Dickinson but was intrigued by her , referring to her as " a lady whom the people call the Myth " . Austin distanced himself from his family as his affair continued and his wife became sick with grief . Dickinson 's mother died on November 14 , 1882 . Five weeks later , Dickinson wrote " We were never intimate ... while she was our Mother – but Mines in the same Ground meet by tunneling and when she became our Child , the Affection came . " The next year , Austin and Sue 's third and youngest child , Gilbert — Emily 's favorite — died of typhoid fever . 
 As death succeeded death , Dickinson found her world upended . In the fall of 1884 , she wrote that " The <unk> have been too deep for me , and before I could raise my Heart from one , another has come . " That summer she had seen " a great darkness coming " and fainted while baking in the kitchen . She remained unconscious late into the night and weeks of ill health followed . On November 30 , 1885 , her feebleness and other symptoms were so worrying that Austin canceled a trip to Boston . She was confined to her bed for a few months , but managed to send a final burst of letters in the spring . What is thought to be her last letter was sent to her cousins , Louise and Frances Norcross , and simply read : " Little Cousins , Called Back . Emily " . On May 15 , 1886 , after several days of worsening symptoms , Emily Dickinson died at the age of 55 . Austin wrote in his diary that " the day was awful ... she ceased to breathe that terrible breathing just before the [ afternoon ] whistle sounded for six . " Dickinson 's chief physician gave the cause of death as Bright 's disease and its duration as two and a half years . 
 Dickinson was buried , laid in a white coffin with vanilla @-@ scented heliotrope , a Lady 's Slipper orchid , and a " knot of blue field violets " placed about it . The funeral service , held in the Homestead 's library , was simple and short ; Higginson , who had met her only twice , read " No Coward Soul Is Mine " , a poem by Emily Brontë that had been a favorite of Dickinson 's . At Dickinson 's request , her " coffin [ was ] not driven but carried through fields of buttercups " for burial in the family plot at West Cemetery on Triangle Street . 
 = = Publication = = 
 Despite Dickinson 's prolific writing , fewer than a dozen of her poems were published during her lifetime . After her younger sister Lavinia discovered the collection of nearly 1800 poems , Dickinson 's first volume was published four years after her death . Until Thomas H. Johnson published Dickinson 's Complete Poems in 1955 , Dickinson 's poems were considerably edited and altered from their manuscript versions . Since 1890 Dickinson has remained continuously in print . 
 = = = Contemporary = = = 
 A few of Dickinson 's poems appeared in Samuel Bowles ' Springfield Republican between 1858 and 1868 . They were published anonymously and heavily edited , with conventionalized punctuation and formal titles . The first poem , " Nobody knows this little rose " , may have been published without Dickinson 's permission . The Republican also published " A narrow Fellow in the Grass " as " The Snake " , " Safe in their Alabaster Chambers – " as " The Sleeping " , and " Blazing in the Gold and quenching in Purple " as " Sunset " . The poem " I taste a liquor never brewed – " is an example of the edited versions ; the last two lines in the first stanza were completely rewritten . 
 In 1864 , several poems were altered and published in Drum Beat , to raise funds for medical care for Union soldiers in the war . Another appeared in April 1864 in the Brooklyn Daily Union . 
 In the 1870s , Higginson showed Dickinson 's poems to Helen Hunt Jackson , who had coincidentally been at the Academy with Dickinson when they were girls . Jackson was deeply involved in the publishing world , and managed to convince Dickinson to publish her poem " Success is counted sweetest " anonymously in a volume called A Masque of Poets . The poem , however , was altered to agree with contemporary taste . It was the last poem published during Dickinson 's lifetime . 
 = = = Posthumous = = = 
 After Dickinson 's death , Lavinia Dickinson kept her promise and burned most of the poet 's correspondence . Significantly though , Dickinson had left no instructions about the 40 notebooks and loose sheets gathered in a locked chest . Lavinia recognized the poems ' worth and became obsessed with seeing them published . She turned first to her brother 's wife and then to Mabel Loomis Todd , her brother 's mistress , for assistance . A feud ensued , with the manuscripts divided between the Todd and Dickinson houses , preventing complete publication of Dickinson 's poetry for more than half a century . 
 The first volume of Dickinson 's Poems , edited jointly by Mabel Loomis Todd and T. W. Higginson , appeared in November 1890 . Although Todd claimed that only essential changes were made , the poems were extensively edited to match punctuation and capitalization to late 19th @-@ century standards , with occasional rewordings to reduce Dickinson 's obliquity . The first 115 @-@ poem volume was a critical and financial success , going through eleven printings in two years . Poems : Second Series followed in 1891 , running to five editions by 1893 ; a third series appeared in 1896 . One reviewer , in 1892 , wrote : " The world will not rest satisfied till every scrap of her writings , letters as well as literature , has been published " . 
 Nearly a dozen new editions of Dickinson 's poetry , whether containing previously unpublished or newly edited poems , were published between 1914 and 1945 . Martha Dickinson Bianchi , the daughter of Susan and Edward Dickinson , published collections of her aunt 's poetry based on the manuscripts held by her family , whereas Mabel Loomis Todd 's daughter , Millicent Todd Bingham , published collections based on the manuscripts held by her mother . These competing editions of Dickinson 's poetry , often differing in order and structure , ensured that the poet 's work was in the public 's eye . 
 The first scholarly publication came in 1955 with a complete new three @-@ volume set edited by Thomas H. Johnson . Forming the basis of later Dickinson scholarship , Johnson 's variorum brought all of Dickinson 's known poems together for the first time . Johnson 's goal was to present the poems very nearly as Dickinson had left them in her manuscripts . They were untitled , only numbered in an approximate chronological sequence , strewn with dashes and irregularly capitalized , and often extremely elliptical in their language . Three years later , Johnson edited and published , along with Theodora Ward , a complete collection of Dickinson 's letters , also presented in three volumes . 
 In 1981 , The Manuscript Books of Emily Dickinson was published . Using the physical evidence of the original papers , the poems were intended to be published in their original order for the first time . Editor Ralph W. Franklin relied on smudge marks , needle punctures and other clues to reassemble the poet 's packets . Since then , many critics have argued for thematic unity in these small collections , believing the ordering of the poems to be more than chronological or convenient . 
 Dickinson biographer Alfred <unk> wrote in My Wars Are Laid Away in Books : The Life of Emily Dickinson ( 2001 ) that " The consequences of the poet 's failure to disseminate her work in a faithful and orderly manner are still very much with us " . 
 = = Poetry = = 
 See : Emily Dickinson at Wikisource for complete poetic works 
 Dickinson 's poems generally fall into three distinct periods , the works in each period having certain general characters in common . 
 Pre @-@ 1861 . These are often conventional and sentimental in nature . Thomas H. Johnson , who later published The Poems of Emily Dickinson , was able to date only five of Dickinson 's poems before 1858 . Two of these are mock valentines done in an ornate and humorous style , and two others are conventional lyrics , one of which is about missing her brother Austin . The fifth poem , which begins " I have a Bird in spring " , conveys her grief over the feared loss of friendship and was sent to her friend Sue Gilbert . 
 1861 – 1865 . This was her most creative period — these poems are more vigorous and emotional . Johnson estimated that she composed 86 poems in 1861 , 366 in 1862 , 141 in 1863 , and 174 in 1864 . He also believed that this is when she fully developed her themes of life and death . 
 Post @-@ 1866 . It is estimated that two @-@ thirds of the entire body of her poetry was written before this year . 
 = = = Structure and syntax = = = 
 The extensive use of dashes and unconventional capitalization in Dickinson 's manuscripts , and the idiosyncratic vocabulary and imagery , combine to create a body of work that is " far more various in its styles and forms than is commonly supposed " . Dickinson avoids pentameter , opting more generally for trimeter , tetrameter and , less often , <unk> . Sometimes her use of these meters is regular , but oftentimes it is irregular . The regular form that she most often employs is the ballad stanza , a traditional form that is divided into quatrains , using tetrameter for the first and third lines and trimeter for the second and fourth , while rhyming the second and fourth lines ( <unk> ) . Though Dickinson often uses perfect rhymes for lines two and four , she also makes frequent use of slant rhyme . In some of her poems , she varies the meter from the traditional ballad stanza by using trimeter for lines one , two and four , while only using tetrameter for line three . 
 Since many of her poems were written in traditional ballad stanzas with <unk> rhyme schemes , some of these poems can be sung to fit the melodies of popular folk songs and hymns that also use the common meter , employing alternating lines of iambic tetrameter and iambic trimeter . Familiar examples of such songs are " O Little Town of Bethlehem " and " Amazing Grace ' " . 
 Dickinson scholar and poet Anthony Hecht finds resonances in Dickinson 's poetry not only with hymns and song @-@ forms but also with psalms and riddles , citing the following example : " Who is the East ? / The Yellow Man / Who may be Purple if he can / That carries the Sun . / Who is the West ? / The Purple Man / Who may be Yellow if He can / That lets Him out again . " 
 Late 20th @-@ century scholars are " deeply interested " by Dickinson 's highly individual use of punctuation and <unk> ( line lengths and line breaks ) . Following the publication of one of the few poems that appeared in her lifetime – " A narrow Fellow in the Grass " , published as " The Snake " in the Republican – Dickinson complained that the edited punctuation ( an added comma and a full stop substitution for the original dash ) altered the meaning of the entire poem . 
 As Farr points out , " snakes instantly notice you " ; Dickinson 's version captures the " breathless immediacy " of the encounter ; and The Republican 's punctuation renders " her lines more commonplace " . With the increasingly close focus on Dickinson 's structures and syntax has come a growing appreciation that they are " aesthetically based " . Although Johnson 's landmark 1955 edition of poems was relatively unaltered from the original , later scholars critiqued it for deviating from the style and layout of Dickinson 's manuscripts . Meaningful distinctions , these scholars assert , can be drawn from varying lengths and angles of dash , and differing arrangements of text on the page . Several volumes have attempted to render Dickinson 's handwritten dashes using many typographic symbols of varying length and angle . R. W. Franklin 's 1998 variorum edition of the poems provided alternate wordings to those chosen by Johnson , in a more limited editorial intervention . Franklin also used typeset dashes of varying length to approximate the manuscripts ' dashes more closely . 
 = = = Major themes = = = 
 Dickinson left no formal statement of her aesthetic intentions and , because of the variety of her themes , her work does not fit conveniently into any one genre . She has been regarded , alongside Emerson ( whose poems Dickinson admired ) , as a Transcendentalist . However , Farr disagrees with this analysis , saying that Dickinson 's " relentlessly measuring mind ... deflates the airy elevation of the Transcendental " . Apart from the major themes discussed below , Dickinson 's poetry frequently uses humor , puns , irony and satire . 
 Flowers and gardens : Farr notes that Dickinson 's " poems and letters almost wholly concern flowers " and that allusions to gardens often refer to an " imaginative realm ... wherein flowers [ are ] often emblems for actions and emotions " . She associates some flowers , like gentians and anemones , with youth and humility ; others with prudence and insight . Her poems were often sent to friends with accompanying letters and nosegays . Farr notes that one of Dickinson 's earlier poems , written about 1859 , appears to " conflate her poetry itself with the <unk> " : " My nosegays are for Captives – / Dim – long expectant eyes – / Fingers denied the plucking , / Patient till Paradise – / To such , if they sh 'd whisper / Of morning and the moor – / They bear no other errand , / And I , no other prayer " . 
 The Master poems : Dickinson left a large number of poems addressed to " Signor " , " Sir " and " Master " , who is characterized as Dickinson 's " lover for all eternity " . These confessional poems are often " searing in their self @-@ inquiry " and " harrowing to the reader " and typically take their metaphors from texts and paintings of Dickinson 's day . The Dickinson family themselves believed these poems were addressed to actual individuals but this view is frequently rejected by scholars . Farr , for example , contends that the Master is an unattainable composite figure , " human , with specific characteristics , but godlike " and speculates that Master may be a " kind of Christian muse " . 
 Morbidity : Dickinson 's poems reflect her " early and lifelong fascination " with illness , dying and death . Perhaps surprisingly for a New England spinster , her poems allude to death by many methods : " crucifixion , drowning , hanging , suffocation , freezing , premature burial , shooting , stabbing and <unk> " . She reserved her sharpest insights into the " death blow aimed by God " and the " funeral in the brain " , often reinforced by images of thirst and starvation . Dickinson scholar Vivian Pollak considers these references an autobiographical reflection of Dickinson 's " thirsting @-@ starving persona " , an outward expression of her needy self @-@ image as small , thin and frail . Dickinson 's most psychologically complex poems explore the theme that the loss of hunger for life causes the death of self and place this at " the interface of murder and suicide " . 
 Gospel poems : Throughout her life , Dickinson wrote poems reflecting a preoccupation with the teachings of Jesus Christ and , indeed , many are addressed to him . She stresses the Gospels ' contemporary <unk> and recreates them , often with " wit and American colloquial language " . Scholar Dorothy <unk> finds that the " salient feature uniting Christian poets ... is their reverential attention to the life of Jesus Christ " and contends that Dickinson 's deep structures place her in the " poetic tradition of Christian devotion " alongside Hopkins , Eliot and Auden . In a Nativity poem , Dickinson combines lightness and wit to revisit an ancient theme : " The Savior must have been / A docile Gentleman – / To come so far so cold a Day / For little <unk> / The Road to Bethlehem / Since He and I were Boys / Was leveled , but for that <unk> be / A rugged billion Miles – " . 
 The Undiscovered Continent : Academic Suzanne <unk> considers that Dickinson saw the mind and spirit as tangible visitable places and that for much of her life she lived within them . Often , this intensely private place is referred to as the " undiscovered continent " and the " landscape of the spirit " and embellished with nature imagery . At other times , the imagery is darker and forbidding — castles or prisons , complete with corridors and rooms — to create a dwelling place of " oneself " where one resides with one 's other selves . An example that brings together many of these ideas is : " Me from Myself – to banish – / Had I Art – / Impregnable my Fortress / Unto All Heart – / But since myself — assault Me – / How have I peace / Except by subjugating / Consciousness . / And since We 're mutual Monarch / How this be / Except by Abdication – / Me – of Me ? " . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The surge of posthumous publication gave Dickinson 's poetry its first public exposure . Backed by Higginson and with a favorable notice from William Dean Howells , an editor of Harper 's Magazine , the poetry received mixed reviews after it was first published in 1890 . Higginson himself stated in his preface to the first edition of Dickinson 's published work that the poetry 's quality " is that of extraordinary grasp and insight " , albeit " without the proper control and chastening " that the experience of publishing during her lifetime might have conferred . His judgment that her opus was " incomplete and unsatisfactory " would be echoed in the essays of the New Critics in the 1930s . 
 Maurice Thompson , who was literary editor of The Independent for twelve years , noted in 1891 that her poetry had " a strange mixture of rare individuality and originality " . Some critics hailed Dickinson 's effort , but disapproved of her unusual non @-@ traditional style . Andrew Lang , a British writer , dismissed Dickinson 's work , stating that " if poetry is to exist at all , it really must have form and grammar , and must rhyme when it professes to rhyme . The wisdom of the ages and the nature of man insist on so much " . Thomas Bailey Aldrich , a poet and novelist , equally dismissed Dickinson 's poetic technique in The Atlantic Monthly in January 1892 : " It is plain that Miss Dickinson possessed an extremely unconventional and grotesque fancy . She was deeply tinged by the mysticism of Blake , and strongly influenced by the mannerism of Emerson ... But the incoherence and formlessness of her — <unk> are fatal ... an eccentric , dreamy , half @-@ educated recluse in an out @-@ of @-@ the @-@ way New England village ( or anywhere else ) cannot with impunity set at defiance the laws of gravitation and grammar " . 
 Critical attention to Dickinson 's poetry was meager from 1897 to the early 1920s . By the start of the 20th century , interest in her poetry became broader in scope and some critics began to consider Dickinson as essentially modern . Rather than seeing Dickinson 's poetic styling as a result of lack of knowledge or skill , modern critics believed the irregularities were consciously artistic . In a 1915 essay , Elizabeth Shepley Sergeant called the poet 's inspiration " daring " and named her " one of the rarest flowers the sterner New England land ever bore " . With the growing popularity of modernist poetry in the 1920s , Dickinson 's failure to conform to 19th @-@ century poetic form was no longer surprising nor distasteful to new generations of readers . Dickinson was suddenly referred to by various critics as a great woman poet , and a cult following began to form . 
 In the 1930s , a number of the New Critics – among them R. P. Blackmur , Allen Tate , Cleanth Brooks and Yvor Winters – appraised the significance of Dickinson 's poetry . As critic Roland <unk> pointed out , their " affirmative and prohibitive tenets turned out to be of special relevance to Dickinson scholarship " . Blackmur , in an attempt to focus and clarify the major claims for and against the poet 's greatness , wrote in a landmark 1937 critical essay : " ... she was a private poet who wrote as <unk> as some women cook or knit . Her gift for words and the cultural predicament of her time drove her to poetry instead of <unk> ... She came ... at the right time for one kind of poetry : the poetry of sophisticated , eccentric vision . " 
 The second wave of feminism created greater cultural sympathy for her as a female poet . In the first collection of critical essays on Dickinson from a feminist perspective , she is heralded as the greatest woman poet in the English language . Biographers and theorists of the past tended to separate Dickinson 's roles as a woman and a poet . For example , George Whicher wrote in his 1952 book This Was a Poet : A Critical Biography of Emily Dickinson , " Perhaps as a poet [ Dickinson ] could find the fulfillment she had missed as a woman . " Feminist criticism , on the other hand , declares that there is a necessary and powerful conjunction between Dickinson being a woman and a poet . Adrienne Rich theorized in Vesuvius at Home : The Power of Emily Dickinson ( 1976 ) that Dickinson 's identity as a woman poet brought her power : " [ she ] chose her seclusion , knowing she was exceptional and knowing what she needed ... She carefully selected her society and controlled the disposal of her time ... neither eccentric nor quaint ; she was determined to survive , to use her powers , to practice necessary economics . " 
 Some scholars question the poet 's sexuality , theorizing that the numerous letters and poems that were dedicated to Susan Gilbert Dickinson indicate a lesbian romance , and speculating about how this may have influenced her poetry . Critics such as John Cody , Lillian Faderman , Vivian R. Pollak , Paula Bennett , Judith Farr , Ellen Louise Hart , and Martha Nell Smith have argued that Susan was the central erotic relationship in Dickinson 's life . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 In the early 20th century , Dickinson 's legacy was promoted in particular by Martha Dickinson Bianchi and Millicent Todd Bingham . Bianchi , who had inherited The Evergreens as well as the copyright for her aunt 's poetry from her parents , published works such as Emily Dickinson Face to Face and Letters of Emily Dickinson , which stoked public curiosity about her aunt . Her books perpetrated the myths surrounding her aunt , while combining family tradition , personal recollections , and pieces of correspondence . In comparison , Millicent Todd Bingham 's works provided a more distant and realistic perspective of the poet . 
 Emily Dickinson is now considered a powerful and persistent figure in American culture . Although much of the early reception concentrated on Dickinson 's eccentric and secluded nature , she has become widely acknowledged as an innovative , pre @-@ modernist poet . As early as 1891 , William Dean Howells wrote that " If nothing else had come out of our life but this strange poetry , we should feel that in the work of Emily Dickinson , America , or New England rather , had made a distinctive addition to the literature of the world , and could not be left out of any record of it . " Twentieth @-@ century critic Harold Bloom has placed her alongside Walt Whitman , Wallace Stevens , Robert Frost , T. S. Eliot , and Hart Crane as a major American poet , and in 1994 listed her among the 26 central writers of Western civilization . 
 Dickinson is taught in American literature and poetry classes in the United States from middle school to college . Her poetry is frequently anthologized and has been used as texts for art songs by composers such as Aaron Copland , Nick <unk> , John Adams and Michael Tilson Thomas . Several schools have been established in her name ; for example , two Emily Dickinson Elementary Schools exist in Bozeman , Montana , and Redmond , Washington . A few literary journals — including The Emily Dickinson Journal , the official publication of the Emily Dickinson International Society — have been founded to examine her work . An 8 @-@ cent commemorative stamp in honor of Dickinson was issued by the United States Postal Service on August 28 , 1971 as the second stamp in the " American Poet " series . A one @-@ woman play entitled The Belle of Amherst first appeared on Broadway in 1976 , winning several awards ; it was later adapted for television . 
 Dickinson 's herbarium , which is now held in the Houghton Library at Harvard University , was published in 2006 as Emily Dickinson 's Herbarium by Harvard University Press . The original work was compiled by Dickinson during her years at Amherst Academy , and consists of 424 pressed specimens of plants arranged on 66 pages of a bound album . A digital facsimile of the herbarium is available online . The town of Amherst Jones Library 's Special Collections department has an Emily Dickinson Collection consisting of approximately seven thousand items , including original manuscript poems and letters , family correspondence , scholarly articles and books , newspaper clippings , theses , plays , photographs and contemporary artwork and prints . The Archives and Special Collections at Amherst College has substantial holdings of Dickinson 's manuscripts and letters as well as a lock of Dickinson 's hair and the original of the only positively identified image of the poet . In 1965 , in recognition of Dickinson 's growing stature as a poet , the Homestead was purchased by Amherst College . It opened to the public for tours , and also served as a faculty residence for many years . The Emily Dickinson Museum was created in 2003 when ownership of the Evergreens , which had been occupied by Dickinson family heirs until 1988 , was transferred to the college . 
 = = Modern influence and inspiration = = 
 Emily Dickinson 's life and works have been the source of inspiration to artists , particularly to feminist orientated artists , of a variety of mediums . A few notable examples are as follows : 
 The feminist artwork The Dinner Party , by Judy Chicago , first exhibited in 1979 , features a place setting for Dickinson . 
 Jane Campion 's film The Piano and its novelization ( co @-@ authored by Kate Pullinger ) were inspired by the poetry of Emily Dickinson as well as the novels by the Bronte Sisters . The soundtrack to the film , written and composed by Michael Nyman contained songs with titles directly extracted from Dickinson 's poetry such as Big My Secret and most famously The Heart Asks Pleasure First . The former is one of Nyman 's most notable works to date and a signature piece of his repertoire . 
 The cello rock band <unk> drew inspiration from Dickinson for their 2010 album Sister Kinderhook . The songs Sweet Sister Temperance and My Porcelain Life are based specifically on the life of Dickinson . Dickinson has also played a role of personal inspiration for <unk> 's front woman Melora <unk> for a number of years . 
 = = = Editions of poetry = = = 
 Franklin , R. W. ( ed ) . 1999 . The Poems of Emily Dickinson . Cambridge : Belknap Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 674 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 
 Johnson , Thomas H. ( ed ) . 1960 . The Complete Poems of Emily Dickinson . Boston : Little , Brown & Co . 
 = = = Archival sources = = = 
 Emily Dickinson Papers , 1844 – 1891 ( 3 microfilm reels ) are housed at the Sterling Memorial Library at Yale University . 
 = Magnificat in E @-@ flat major , BWV 243a = 
 The Magnificat in E @-@ flat major , BWV 243a , by Johann Sebastian Bach is a musical setting of the Latin text of the Magnificat , the canticle from the Gospel of Luke . It was composed in 1723 and is in twelve movements . Bach revised the work ten years later , transposing it from E @-@ flat major to D major , and creating the version mostly performed today , BWV 243 . The work is scored for five vocal parts ( two sopranos , alto , tenor and bass ) and a Baroque orchestra of trumpets , timpani , oboes , strings and basso continuo including bassoon . 
 The work was first performed in Leipzig in 1723 . In May that year Bach assumed his position as Thomaskantor and embarked on an ambitious series of compositions . The Magnificat was sung at vesper services on feast days , and , according to recent research , Bach 's setting was written for a performance on 2 July , celebrating the Marian feast of the Visitation . For Christmas the same year , he performed it at the Nikolaikirche with the insertion of four seasonal movements . 
 As a regular part of vespers , the canticle Magnificat was often set to music for liturgical use . Bach , as some of his contemporaries , devotes individual expression to every verse of the canticle , one even split in two for a dramatic effect . In a carefully designed structure , four choral movements are evenly distributed ( 1 , 4 , 7 , 11 ) . They frame sets of two or three movements sung by one to three voices , with individual instrumental colour . The work is concluded by a choral doxology ( 12 ) , which ends in a recapitulation of the beginning on the text " as it was in the beginning " . In Bach 's Leipzig period , Magnificat is the first major work on a Latin text and for five vocal parts . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Bach 's beginning in Leipzig = = = 
 Bach composed the Magnificat in 1723 , his first year as Thomaskantor in Leipzig , music director of the main Lutheran churches in the city . He had worked previously as an organist in Arnstadt , Mühlhausen and Weimar , where he was promoted to Konzertmeister ( director of music ) in 1714 . From 1717 to 1723 he held a secular position at the court of Köthen . He applied for the post in Leipzig on 7 February 1723 , performing two cantatas written for the audition on Estomihi or Quinquagesima , the last Sunday before Lent . In April he was accepted for the post , which he assumed on the first Sunday after Trinity , presenting a new cantata in 14 movements , Die Elenden sollen essen , BWV 75 , on 30 May . A week later he led the new cantata Die Himmel erzählen die Ehre Gottes , BWV 76 , again in 14 movements . The feast of the Visitation , celebrated always on 2 July , was a few weeks later the first Marian feast day of his tenure in Leipzig . 
 = = = Magnificat = = = 
 The canticle Magnificat , one of three New Testament canticles , has long been a regular part of the liturgy in daily vesper services . After the Reformation , Martin Luther kept the Magnificat in the liturgy . He provided a German translation of the canticle , " Meine Seele erhebt den Herren " ( which Bach used as the basis for his chorale cantata Meine Seel erhebt den Herren , BWV 10 ) . However , the Latin text was also permitted in Lutheran worship . The canticle was often set to music . Contemporary extended settings include works by Heinichen and by Vivaldi . 
 Bach had an audience familiar with the text and its background . In Leipzig , a Latin Magnificat was sung on the high holidays ( Christmas , Easter and Pentecost , then performed on two of the three days of celebration ) and on the three Marian feasts Annunciation , Visitation and Purification . According to some scholars , further feast days included New Year 's Day , Epiphany , Feast of the Ascension , Trinity Sunday , St. John 's Day and St. Michael 's Day , and the vespers before the feast days . 
 = = Composition history = = 
 Bach composed the work in 1723 , his first year as Thomaskantor in Leipzig , probably for the feast of the Visitation . For the occasion , he presented the Magnificat as his first work on a Latin text and his first five @-@ part choral setting in Leipzig . Otherwise , he used five voices in the funeral motet Jesu , meine Freude , the Missa in B minor , composed in 1733 for the court of Dresden , from which he derived the derived cantata Gloria in excelsis Deo , BWV 191 , and in the Mass in B minor . Richard D. P. Jones notes : " Without exception these works lie outside the normal routine of Bach 's sacred vocal works " . 
 Bach probably first performed the Magnificat on the feast day , 2 July . Until 2003 , most musicologists believed that Bach wrote the Magnificat for his first Christmas in Leipzig . Then Andreas Glöckner published Bachs Es @-@ Dur @-@ Magnificat BWV 243a – eine genuine <unk> ? ( Bach 's Magnificat in E @-@ flat major , BWV 243a – a genuine Christmas music ? ) in the Bach @-@ Jahrbuch ( Bach yearbook ) 89 , questioning the Christmas date in favour of Visitation the same year . Older sources naturally still have Christmas as the first performance , for example Neil Jenkins , the editor of an edition for Novello in 2000 . He writes that the " new Thomaskantor was obviously intending to impress his new employer and the congregation " , which makes even more sense at the beginning of Bach 's tenure . Not all scholars follow Glöckner 's arguments , but Jones agrees with Glöckner : " ... may well have received its first performance at the Feast of the Visitation on 2 July 1723 , only five weeks after he took up his Leipzig post . " 
 For Christmas the same year , Bach performed his Magnificat with four inserted laudes , songs of praise related to Christmas , partly in German , partly in Latin . In a vespers service on 25 December 1723 , he performed the cantata Christen , ätzet diesen Tag , BWV 63 , and the Magnificat at the Nikolaikirche , on 26 December the cantata Darzu ist erschienen der Sohn Gottes , BWV 40 , in the Thomaskirche . 
 Bach used as a cantus firmus in movement 10 the chant associated with Luther 's German version of the Magnificat canticle , " Meine Seele erhebt den Herren " . A year later Bach composed for the feast of the Visitation the chorale cantata Meine Seel erhebt den Herren , BWV 10 , based on the German Magnificat . The musicologist Alberto <unk> compared the two settings which were possibly performed in one service on 2 July 1724 . 
 For Visitation of 1733 , Bach revised his Magnificat , creating the version better known today . In that version , transposed to D major , the laudes interpolations were abandoned . Limited differences in instrumentation include replacing the recorders by flutes and including these in the tutti movements . Changes in musical texture were even smaller , mellowing the harmony near the end of the Omnes generationes movement being the most noticeable . 
 Bach 's son Carl Philipp Emanuel Bach followed the example of an extended setting , composing a Magnificat in nine movements in 1749 , at the end of his father 's life . 
 = = Scoring and structure = = 
 Bach scored the work festively . The autograph reads : " J.J. Magnificat à 3 Trombe Tamburi 2 Hautb . Basson . 2 Violini . Viola 5 Voci è Continuo " , translating to : Jesu <unk> ( " Jesus , help ! " ) / Magnificat for three trumpets , timpani , two oboes , bassoon , two violins , viola , five voices , continuo ) . The five voices are two sopranos ( SI , SII ) , alto ( A ) , tenor ( T ) and bass ( B ) ) . The instruments of the Baroque orchestra are listed in the first publication by Simrock in 1811 as " due violini , due oboe , tre <unk> , tamburi , <unk> , viola e basso continuo " , i.e. two violins , two oboes , three trumpets ( in E @-@ flat ) , timpani ( E @-@ flat and B @-@ flat ) , bassoon , viola and basso continuo . Two recorders ( flauto dolce ) are required for aria No. 9 Esurientes . 
 = = = Movements = = = 
 Bach structured the text in eleven movements for the canticle ( Luke 1 : 46 – 55 ) , concluded by a twelfth doxology movement . Each verse of the canticle is assigned to one movement , except verse 48 , beginning with a soprano solo in the role of Mary ( third movement ) , then switching to the fourth movement sung by the chorus when " all generations " are mentioned . The structure , alternating choral and solo movements , is similar to " contemporary Italian concerted settings of the Magnificat " . The four Christmas hymn movements are placed after the second , fifth , seventh and ninth movement on the Magnificat text . 
 Choral movements are evenly distributed in the structure , numbers 1 , 4 , 7 , and 11 within the canticle , and the concluding doxology as movement 12 . Choral movements 1 , 7 and 12 are accompanied by the full orchestra ( tutti ) , with the exceptions of the recorders which add specific colour only in movement 9 . The movements for one to three solo voices are accompanied by an obbligato instrument or only strings or even only continuo , as in Bach 's church cantatas . In two consecutive solo movements , the second one is often in richer scoring . The work contains , other than typical cantatas on Baroque poetry , no da capo arias . Similar to the first two Leipzig cantatas , BWV 75 and BWV 76 , it is a complex structure of rather short movements . 
 The following table shows the title , voices and instruments , time , key and text sources for the twelve movements for Visitation and the inserted movements for Christmas . Note that the timpani are no wind instruments but always go with the trumpets . The basso continuo is not listed , playing almost throughout . The first Christmas chorale is a four @-@ part setting with no continuo . In Suscepit Israel , the lowest line played by violins and viola in unison has been described as a bassett and an " unusual continuo " . The last column , Dig , provides a link to the Bach Digital database , for more details such as scoring and the text . The Christmas interpolations are highlighted in colour , as are the choral movements , the movements with trumpets , and those movements of the canticle that are in major mode . 
 = = = The twelve movements of the Magnificat canticle = = = 
 = = = = 1 = = = = 
 The opening movement Magnificat anima mea ( My soul magnifies the Lord ) is performed by all voices and all instruments except the recorders . The instruments present the material with almost continuous runs in the upper parts , octaves and broken triads in the bass . The sopranos enter first , in third parallels : they sing the first word " Magnificat " ( literally : makes great ) with a melisma on the first syllable , ending in a figure like a trill , then a stressed dotted note on the stressed syllable " <unk> " , and relaxing on " <unk> " . The motif is abbreviated to a " fanfare figure " of just four notes , a low upbeat followed by three same notes , with the first one dotted . The sopranos sing it twice , reaching first E @-@ flat , then G. The interplay of the fanfare and the melismas shapes the movement . One measure after the sopranos , alto and tenor begin to imitate the sopranos , another measure later , the bass adds the short motif as an octave up . The text remains Magnificat for most of the movement . After the voices conclude with " Dominum " , the instruments close in a shortened version of their opening . 
 = = = = 2 = = = = 
 Et exultavit spiritus meus ( And my spirit rejoices in God my Saviour ) is an aria , as an image of personal celebration , sung by soprano II , accompanied by the strings . The major @-@ mode and motifs of joy in the instruments illustrate the exultation . Et exultavit ( And exults ) begins with a broken upward triad followed by a rest , suggesting a <unk> spiritus meus ( my spirit ) is a sequence of 16th notes , two for every syllable . Longer melismas illustrate <unk> ( salvation ) . 
 A note in the autograph requests the insertion of the first Christmas interpolation here : " <unk> folget der Choral : Vom Himmel hoch , da kom ich her " ( Here follows the chorale : Vom Himmel hoch , da kom ich her ) . 
 = = = = 3 = = = = 
 Quia respexit <unk> ( For He has regarded the lowliness [ of His handmaiden . ] is an aria sung by soprano I with an obbligato oboe . Looking at the humility , the aria contrast to the preceding one in slow movement and the minor mode . Hogwood writes : " Humility is a downwards gesture , and so everything takes a long , s @-@ shaped movement downwards , with a little rise at the end " , and comments that the use of limited resources of one wind instrument and the voice have " a subservient feel to it . " Steinberg comments that voice and instrument first share the material in a " contemplative duet " , but on <unk> enim ex hoc beatam ( Behold , from henceforth , I will be called blessed ) the voice changes to a " simpler , more declamatory style " . " All the phrases turn upwards " in what <unk> describes as " an internalised dialogue " , expecting that " nobody in the church would have been expecting the sudden burst of ' omnes ' " . 
 = = = = 4 = = = = 
 The continuation of the verse and completion of the sentence , Omnes generationes ( by all generations ) is given to the chorus , expressing the fullness of the praise . Hogwood compares the " crowd effect " to Bach 's the crowds in Bach 's Passions . The movement is a fugue which follows the stretto principle from the start and throughout . Beginning in measure 10 , the voices enter , again half a measure apart , with the bass beginning . From measure 15 , every entrance is one note higher , covering an octave as a symbol of completeness ( omnes ) , again in the fast succession of half a measure : A , SII , SI , T , B , SII , SI , A. In a final sequence beginning in measure 21 , the voices enter from bottom to top on the same note , only one beat apart . After a " very triumphal , but unfinished , chord " and a general pause , the movement concludes repeating the theme in homophony . Steinberg comments that Bach took the idea of separating the two words from the rest of the verse from earlier models , but filled it with an " exciting sense of drama " by the piled @-@ up entrances in a " tremendous march across key after key " , leading to " tense dissonances " , finally a " dramatic pause " before the last statement . 
 = = = = 5 = = = = 
 Quia fecit mihi magna qui potens est ( For the Mighty One has done great things for me ) is an aria sung by the bass , accompanied only by the continuo . The motif , again beginning with repeated notes , is introduced by four measures of the continuo , then repeated by the voice . A ritornello is repeated throughout the movement , with a downward leap of a sixth and a downward scale of an octave which appears in the voice on the word " sanctum " ( holy ) , in et sanctum nomen eius ( and holy is His name ) . God 's might shows in the bass voice and the dominant key of B @-@ flat major . 
 A note in the autograph requests the insertion of the second Christmas interpolation here : " <unk> folget Freut euch u. jubilirt " ( <unk> follows Freut euch u. jubilirt ) . 
 = = = = 6 = = = = 
 Et misericordia a <unk> in progenies , <unk> <unk> ( His mercy is for those who fear Him from generation to generation ) begins in great contrast softly with undulating movement in 12 / 8 time , played by the violins . It is a duet of alto and tenor , beginning in parallels of sixths and staying in homophony for most of the movement . The theme resembles the sarabande of Bach 's first French Suite in D minor , BWV 812 . Hogwood compares the music to the pastoral sinfonia beginning Part II of Bach 's Christmas Oratorio , " creating a romantic , soft @-@ edged , almost comforting sound " . Jones remarks that <unk> <unk> " ( who fear him ) is " full of pathos and built over a partly chromatic , quasi @-@ ostinato bass " , while the " divine quality of mercy is expressed in beatific parallel thirds of the violins in the ritornello " . 
 = = = = 7 = = = = 
 Fecit potentiam ( He has shown strength ) shares key , scoring and dotted motifs with the first movement . Based on a continuo line of octaves and repeated 16th notes , strength is expressed by irregular coloraturas in one voice and homophonic simultaneous calls of the other voices . The tenor begins the coloraturas of four measures , followed by alto , SII , bass and SI , leading to the climax of the movement , two homophonic calls . The new text , <unk> ( He has scattered ) , appears in various voices as broken triads , juxtaposed to material from the first section , but then isolated , in a sequence from the highest voice to the lowest and in downward triads . Joes describes : " ... the fugue is dispersed ( ' <unk> ' ) in favour of a highly graphic , dramatic portrayal of the words ' He has scattered ... ' " . The conclusion , mente cordis sui ( in the thoughts of their hearts ) , is marked Adagio and illustrates the text in pompous long chords , with accents in the trumpets . Hogwood notes that Bach shows " complete imagination " in " very strange , incomplete yet wonderful harmonies " , the trumpet playing their highest available note as an image of " rich people ’ s hearts , who have been misled by worldly promises " . 
 A note in the autograph requests the insertion of the third Christmas interpolation here : " <unk> <unk> das Gloria in excelsis Deo " ( Here belongs the Gloria in excelsis Deo ) . 
 = = = = 8 = = = = 
 Deposuit potentes ( He has brought down the powerful ) is an aria for tenor , accompanied by only the violins ( and continuo ) united in powerful unison . The instrumental ritornello of 14 measures presents the material . The first motif , later sung on " Deposuit " , begins with a short upbeat and a long note , followed by a straight downward scale and a final leap up , while the continuo presents a broken triad , straight upward one octave . The second motif , later sung on " potentes " , begins with an upbeat of three 16th , followed by a rhythmic pattern which expands both the lowest as the highest note , while the continuo moves in steady steps down . For the third motif , sung on " de sede " ( from their thrones ) , the continuo picks up the rhythm of the second motif , while the violins play a more ornamented downward motion in sixteen continuous 16th . A fourth motif is a sequence of three measures , each a sequence of a figure of a figure of four 16th which is slowly moving upwards . When the singer takes over , the violins accent the end of each motif one to three by a broken downward triad . 
 The second thought of the verse , " et exaltavit humiles " ( and lifted up the lowly ) , is sung without introduction as a melisma of four measures , which includes downward runs but in a steadily rising sequence and ending similarly to the sequence of motif four , on " exaltavit " , but a modest downward line on " humiles " ( the lowly ) . After a shorter ritornello , the tenor sings the complete text again , the first part in a slightly modified version , but the exaltation considerably expanded . Nonetheless , the ritornello in full length is repeated at the end . 
 = = = = 9 = = = = 
 Esurientes implevit bonis ( He has filled the hungry with good things ) is sung by the alto , accompanied by two recorders which may symbolise the need of the hungry . Bach used recorders also in his later cantata Brich dem Hungrigen dein Brot , BWV 39 . They often play in parallels of sixths and thirds . The ritornello of eight measures introduces a motif moving up , on a continuo of steady quarter note , for four measures , later sung on Esurientes implevit bonis , while downward lines and a continuo moving in eighth notes later go with et <unk> dimisit ( and sent the rich away empty ) . In Latin , the last word is <unk> ( empty ) , which Bach sometimes separates by rests . The continuo is plucked in " the emptiest sound " , even on the last note , on which the recorders are silent . 
 A note in the autograph requests the insertion of the fourth Christmas interpolation here : " <unk> folget Virga Jesse floruit " ( <unk> follows Virga Jesse floruit ) . 
 = = = = 10 = = = = 
 Suscepit Israel <unk> suum ( He has helped His servant Israel ) is scored for an unusual combination of the three highest voices , violins and violas in unison and trumpet . The text continues recordatus <unk> <unk> ( in remembrance of His mercy ) . The cantus firmus played by the trumpet is the melody of the traditional setting of Luther 's German version of the Magnificat , a ninth psalm tone variant . The strings , as the only other instruments , play repeated notes in every measure , moving one step down or up in the next . The voices imitate each other , also in gentle movement , the first a fifth up in a long upbeat , the second a fifth down one measure later , the third up again , another measure later , described as " scale themes " . In contrast , the second idea of the verse , recordatus , is on a " disjunct theme " . Bach repeats the figure , with a downward quart on each syllable , in the Et incarnatus est of his Mass in B minor . It has been interpreted as a symbol of the cross , because a line drawn from the first to the fourth note crosses one from the second to the third . Jones assumes that the " bassett " of the unison strings symbolizes the divine quality of mercy . 
 = = = = 11 = = = = 
 Sicut locutus est ad patres <unk> ( According to the promise He made to our ancestors ) , the last line of the Magnificat canticle , is written in stile antico , the old style of the musical " fathers " , as a strict fugue , one voice following the other as one generation follows the other . The theme has four distinctly different measures : the first repeated notes , the second flowing eighth notes , the third quarter notes in leaps , the fourth half notes leaping up a sixth . The countersubject has leaps down and up an octave in the second measure , the flowing eighth notes in the third measure . When the theme is developed the first time , four voices enter from bottom to top . In the second development , soprano I begins , followed by alto , tenor and bass . The movements ends with a more homophonic section in which the bass has the theme once more , while soprano I sings long suspended notes covering almost an octave down . Hogwood sees Bach alluding to his musical " forefathers " : " He portrays , in a very square fugue , exactly how square he thought the forefathers of German music were . Four bars follows four bars , each voice coming in predictably and on time , all according to the rulebook , unimaginative and extremely dull ! " 
 = = = = 12 = = = = 
 The work is concluded by the doxology , Gloria Patri ( Glory to the Father ) , performed by the ensemble in two parts . The first part addresses the Trinity . Glory is given three times . Bach shapes the movement again as a " crowd " scene . Gloria is first presented as the major chord repeated three times , with a dotted note on the first syllable . In the second Gloria , leading to Patri , the voices sing the first syllable as an extended melisma in triplets , as another symbol of the Trinity , beginning in upward moving lines , for three measures in the basses , half a measure less for each following voice . In the third Gloria , leading to <unk> ( to the Son ) , in a similar pattern soprano I begins , followed by alto , soprano II , tenor and bass . In the fourth Gloria , leading to et <unk> sancto ( and to the Holy Spirit ) , in again similar pattern the voices follow each other from top to bottom , ending in a long cadenza . 
 The second part , Sicut erat in principio ( as it was in the beginning ) repeats material from the beginning of the work but shortened , as a frame . Jones points out that the " <unk> " of it was already used by Monteverdi . 
 Jones remarks that Bach observes a pattern of a bipartite structure of firstly contrasting homophonic blocks and " florid triplet rhythms " , secondly " a lighter , quicker conclusion in triple time " . He remarks that Bach used a similar pattern again the following year in the Sanctus for Christmas 1724 which later was included as the Sanctus of the Mass in B minor . 
 = = = The four Christmas interpolations = = = 
 The four hymns Bach inserted in the Magnificat for the Christmas vespers had a tradition in Leipzig . A setting by Bach 's predecessor Kuhnau in a Christmas cantata is extant . They can be connected to scenic display of the Christmas story , representing the annunciation to the shepherds , first by one angel ( A , B ) , then by the multitude ( C ) , finally a cradle song ( <unk> , D ) . In Bach 's autograph , the four movements are grouped at the back of the volume . They are written in older musical styles than most of the Magnificat movements . 
 = = = = A = = = = 
 Vom Himmel hoch , da komm ich her ( From heaven on high I come here ) is the first stanza of a hymn by Martin Luther , Vom Himmel hoch , da komm ich her , a paraphrase of the Annunciation to the shepherds . It is set for four parts in E @-@ flat major and alla @-@ breve as an a capella motet , with the soprano singing the melody in long notes , the lower voices in imitation of the motifs . 
 = = = = B = = = = 
 Freut euch und <unk> ( Rejoice and celebrate ) is set for <unk> in B @-@ flat major and common time . In polyphony on an independent basso continuo , with pairs of voices in parallels , it resembles a setting by Sethus Calvisius , a former Thomaskantor . 
 = = = = C = = = = 
 Gloria in excelsis Deo ( Glory to God in the highest ) is set for SSATB and violins in E @-@ flat major , on the text from the Christmas story , the Annunciation to the Shepherds ( Luke 2 : 14 ) . It is written in " chordal fashion " , a style found in Giacomo <unk> , Johann <unk> ( also a Thomaskantor ) and Kuhnau , among others . 
 = = = = D = = = = 
 Virga Jesse floruit ( The branch of Jesse flowers ) is an " operatic " duet for soprano and bass in F major in 12 / 8 time . The text is part of a longer hymn , beginning like Virga Jesse floruit . Only the first 30 measures of this movement are extant . Bach used the music again in 1725 on a different text in his Christmas cantata Unser Mund sei voll Lachens , BWV 110 , from which the missing part can be deducted . It was Alfred Dürr who noticed the similarity of the continuo parts of both pieces . 
 = = Reception history = = 
 = = = Publication = = = 
 The earliest sources are autographs for the performances on 2 July and 25 December 1723 , including the Christmas parts , kept by the Staatsbibliothek zu Berlin . 
 The score of the E @-@ flat major version of Bach 's Magnificat was first published by Simrock in 1811 , edited by Georg <unk> , however without the Christmas hymns . These were published in 1862 , in the appendix of Volume 11 / 1 of the Bach @-@ Gesellschaft Ausgabe , a publication that contained the D major version of the Magnificat ( and not the E @-@ flat major version ) . 
 The Neue Bach Ausgabe published the E @-@ flat major version in 1955 , edited by Alfred Dürr . Novello published an edition in 2000 , edited by Neil Jenkins . Bärenreiter published a critical edition based on Dürr 's 1955 edition again in 2014 / 15 . 
 = = = Selected recordings = = = 
 Bach composed the work for five soloists : two sopranos , alto , tenor and bass . The soloists are listed in the table in the order SATB . For some recordings , only one soprano soloist is listed . Recordings with orchestras on period instruments in historically informed performances are highlighted . The first recordings in the 1960s combined the version in D major ( BWV 243 ) with transposed Christmas interpolations . The type of orchestra is shown for an ensemble with period instruments in historically informed performance by green background . 
 The first recording by Rilling , of the D major version with Christmas interpolations , with a performance time of 40 : 06 , was reissued under the title Christmas Magnificats , and also issued in comparison to a recording of the Magnificat in D by Kurt Thomas under the title Compare . <unk> 's D major recording with Christmas interpolations appeared on a CD titled J.S. Bach : Cantatas 142 , 65 & Magnificat . 
 The Leipziger <unk> recording by the Collegium Vocale Gent , conducted by Philippe Herreweghe , was reviewed as with " bracing but not rushed tempos , infectiously energetic and technically solid contributions from the chorus , and an intelligently paced flow from movement to movement . " The Guardian wrote : " Herreweghe 's accounts are typically thoughtful , not at all theatrical or dramatically driven , and that slightly laid @-@ back approach takes the edge off the Magnificat too , though the quality of the solo and choral singing , and the careful shaping of the orchestral lines are all exemplary . " 
 In 2015 John Butt and the Dunedin Consort released a recording of the E @-@ flat major version in the context of a reconstructed Christmas service as it might have been heard in Leipzig in 1723 . The recording includes organ music and congregational hymn singing . 
 = U.S. Route 136 in Iowa = 
 U.S. Highway 136 ( US 136 ) is a short U.S. Highway in Keokuk , Iowa . The highway begins on a bridge over the Des Moines River within sight of its mouth at the Mississippi River . It runs above the northern bank of the Mississippi towards downtown Keokuk . There , it turns southeast where it meets the southern end of US 218 . The highway leaves Iowa on the Keokuk – Hamilton Bridge over the Mississippi River . 
 The route was designated nationally in 1951 and has remained largely unchanged through Keokuk since then . The highway originally crossed the Mississippi on the Keokuk Rail Bridge , which was the second bridge built and operated by Andrew Carnegie 's Keokuk & Hamilton Bridge Company in that location . While it was designed for wagons and early automobiles , crossing the rail bridge became difficult in larger modern vehicles , specifically semi trucks . As a result , a new automobile @-@ only bridge was built directly to the south of the older span . The Keokuk – Hamilton Bridge opened in 1985 eight months early and under budget . 
 = = Route description = = 
 US 136 begins on a bridge over the Des Moines River with US 61 . The river 's mouth on the Mississippi River is visible to the southeast of the bridge . After landing on the Iowa side of the river , the two routes curve to the east . US 61 splits off to the north and its business route begins along US 136 . Entering the town from the west along 7th Street , the highway passes between two pillars which mark the northeastern corner of Rees Park . 
 The routes continue east past an old school which hides the city 's 4 @-@ million @-@ US @-@ gallon ( 15 ML ) water tower . The 160 @-@ foot @-@ high ( 49 m ) tower was the second largest elevated storage tank in the United States when it came online in December 2011 . It then crosses a bridge which connects two bluffs , underneath which a single line of the Keokuk Junction Railway passes . The routes descend a hill as they head towards downtown ; they climb another until the intersection with Main Street . 
 At Main Street , US 136 and US 61 Business part ways . The business route turns to the northwest onto US 218 which begins its 320 @-@ mile ( 510 km ) journey northward . US 136 turns to the southeast towards the Mississippi River . At the intersection with US 218 , there are no directional signs for US 136 . Instead , because of the southeast – to – northwest orientation of the city , westbound US 136 direction is listed as Missouri and eastbound Illinois . After running through the southern part of downtown , it crosses the Mississippi on the Keokuk – Hamilton Bridge , which is adjacent to the older Keokuk Rail Bridge . From both bridges , Lock and Dam No. 19 and its hydroelectric power plant dominate the northern view of the river . 
 = = History = = 
 In the late 1860s , Andrew Carnegie 's Keystone Bridge Company built the original Keokuk and Hamilton Bridge in the same location as the Keokuk Rail Bridge . It was a 20 @-@ foot @-@ wide ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) , steel truss bridge that had one set of tracks and two lanes for wagon traffic . Pedestrian traffic was cantilevered out five feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) on either side of the trusses . A swing span on the Keokuk side allowed river traffic to cross . When the bridge opened in 1871 , the first locomotive to cross the bridge crushed the pivot point of the swing span . It was replaced a few days later . Ten years later , War Eagle , a river steamer sank after it collided with a fixed span of the bridge . Both the ship and bridge span were destroyed . Until the span was replaced , a wooden , covered bridge was built in its place . 
 The second bridge , now known as the Keokuk Rail Bridge , was built in the 1910s when modern trains were pushing the bridge 's 35 @-@ short @-@ ton ( 32 t ) load capacity . Keokuk businessmen coerced Carnegie 's Keokuk & Hamilton Bridge Company , the owners of the original bridge who thought their bridge was adequate , to rebuild their bridge by threatening to build a new span on the new dam being built near the bridge . However , a new bridge over the new dam would require congressional approval , in the form of House Resolution <unk> . After hearings before the House Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce , the committee chairman urged " the Keokuk & Hamilton Bridge Co. would reconstruct its bridge , or he would recommend passage of House Resolution <unk> . " The bridge company relented and planning began almost immediately . 
 The bridge company contracted with Ralph Modjeski to design the new bridge . Modjeski determined that the original bridge was indeed overstressed for rail traffic . He proposed two options : a single @-@ track rail bridge with a roadway above the tracks or a bridge similar to the original but built to modern standards . The latter option was chosen . The piers of the bridge were cut down five feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) and recapped . The 20 @-@ foot @-@ 6 @-@ inch @-@ wide ( 6 @.@ 25 m ) bridge was built between 1914 and 1915 and opened for traffic in 1916 . The original roadway was made of wood , but was replaced by steel mesh in 1956 . 
 US 136 was designated nationally in 1951 . In the Keokuk area , it was overlaid upon US 61 from west of Alexandria , Missouri , over the Des Moines River into Iowa , and into downtown Keokuk . South of downtown , it replaced Iowa 161 , which crossed the Mississippi River on the Keokuk Rail Bridge . Since its designation , the route has largely remained the same . However , the eastern end changed slightly with the opening of the Keokuk – Hamilton Bridge in 1985 . 
 In the 1970s , politicians on both sides of the river began to seek funding to build a new road bridge across the river . The rail bridge , while still adequate for rail traffic , it proved to be a challenge for drivers . The western terminus of the bridge featured a curve which was navigated easily by wagons and early automobiles , but was dangerous for semi trucks . Governor Terry Branstad was convinced a new bridge was needed after riding in a railcar to view the underside of the road deck . The new , four @-@ lane Keokuk – Hamilton bridge opened on November 23 , 1985 , nearly eight months ahead of schedule and under budget . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Porbeagle = 
 The porbeagle ( Lamna nasus ) is a species of mackerel shark in the family Lamnidae , distributed widely in the cold and temperate marine waters of the North Atlantic and Southern Hemisphere . In the North Pacific , its ecological equivalent is the closely related salmon shark ( L. <unk> ) . The porbeagle typically reaches 2 @.@ 5 m ( 8 @.@ 2 ft ) in length and a weight of 135 kg ( 298 lb ) ; North Atlantic sharks grow larger than Southern Hemisphere sharks and differ in coloration and aspects of life history . Gray above and white below , the porbeagle has a very stout midsection that tapers towards the long , pointed snout and the narrow base of the tail . It has large pectoral and first dorsal fins , tiny pelvic , second dorsal , and anal fins , and a crescent @-@ shaped caudal fin . The most distinctive features of this species are its three @-@ cusped teeth , the white blotch at the aft base of its first dorsal fin , and the two pairs of lateral keels on its tail . 
 The porbeagle is an opportunistic hunter that preys mainly on bony fishes and cephalopods throughout the water column , including the bottom . Most commonly found over food @-@ rich banks on the outer continental shelf , it makes occasional forays both close to shore and into the open ocean to a depth of 1 @,@ 360 m ( 4 @,@ 460 ft ) . It also conducts long @-@ distance seasonal migrations , generally shifting between shallower and deeper water . The porbeagle is fast and highly active , with physiological adaptations that enable it to maintain a higher body temperature than the surrounding water . It can be solitary or gregarious , and has been known to perform seemingly playful behavior . This shark is aplacental viviparous with oophagy , developing embryos being retained within the mother 's uterus and subsisting on non @-@ viable eggs . Females typically bear four pups every year . 
 Only a few shark attacks of uncertain provenance have been attributed to the porbeagle . It is well regarded as a game fish by recreational anglers . The meat and fins of the porbeagle are highly valued , which has led to a long history of intense human exploitation . However , this species cannot sustain heavy fishing pressure due to its low reproductive capacity . Direct commercial fishing for the porbeagle , principally by Norwegian longliners , led to stock collapses in the eastern North Atlantic in the 1950s , and the western North Atlantic in the 1960s . The porbeagle continues to be caught throughout its range , both intentionally and as bycatch , with varying degrees of monitoring and management . The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has assessed the porbeagle as Vulnerable worldwide , and as either Endangered or Critically Endangered in different parts of its northern range . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The etymology of the word " porbeagle " is obscure . A common suggestion is that it combines " porpoise " and " beagle " , referencing this shark 's shape and tenacious hunting habits . Another is that it is derived from the Cornish <unk> , meaning " harbor " , and <unk> , meaning " shepherd " . The Oxford English Dictionary states that the word was either borrowed from Cornish or formed from a Cornish first element with the English " beagle " ; however , none of the proposed Cornish root words is fully satisfactory . The Dictionary also notes that there is no evidence for a connection to the French <unk> , meaning " swine " , or to porpoise , as has been proposed . Other common names for the porbeagle include Atlantic mackerel shark , Beaumaris shark , bottle @-@ nosed shark , and blue dog . 
 The first scientific description of the porbeagle was authored by French naturalist Pierre Joseph Bonnaterre in the 1788 Tableau encyclopédique et <unk> des trois règnes de la nature , and based on an earlier 1769 account by Welsh naturalist Thomas Pennant . Bonnaterre named the shark Squalus nasus , the specific epithet nasus being Latin for " nose " . In 1816 , French naturalist Georges Cuvier placed the porbeagle into its own subgenus , Lamna , which later authors elevated to the rank of full genus . 
 = = Phylogeny and evolution = = 
 Several phylogenetic studies , based on morphological characters and mitochondrial DNA sequences , have established the sister species relationship between the porbeagle and the salmon shark ( L. <unk> ) , which occurs in place of it in the North Pacific . The genus Lamna evolved 65 – 45 Ma . When its two extant species diverged from each other is uncertain , though the precipitating event was likely the formation of the ice cap over the Arctic Ocean , which would have isolated sharks in the North Pacific from those in the North Atlantic . 
 Fossilized porbeagle remains are known from Late Miocene epoch ( c . 7 @.@ 2 Ma ) deposits in Belgium and the Netherlands , Pliocene epoch ( 5 @.@ 3 – 2 @.@ 6 Ma ) deposits in Belgium , Spain , and Chile , and Pleistocene epoch ( 2 @.@ 6 Ma to 12 @,@ 000 BP ) deposits in the Netherlands . However , Lamna teeth that closely resemble those of the porbeagle have been found in the La Meseta Formation on Seymour Island off the Antarctic Peninsula , which date to the middle to late Eocene epoch ( 50 – 34 Ma ) . There is much taxonomic confusion regarding Lamna in the fossil record due to the high degree of variability in adult tooth morphology within species . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The porbeagle has an almost global <unk> distribution , i.e. it is absent from the tropics ; in the North Pacific , its niche is assumed by the salmon shark . It is found mostly within 30 – 70 ° N and 30 – 50 ° S latitudes . In the North Atlantic , the northern limit of its range extends from the Newfoundland Grand Banks off Canada , through southern Greenland , to Scandinavia and Russia ; the southern limit of its range extends from New Jersey and Bermuda , through the Azores and Madeira , to Morocco . It is found in the Mediterranean Sea , but not the Black Sea . Normally , North Atlantic sharks only stray as far south as South Carolina and the Gulf of Guinea , but pregnant females from the western North Atlantic population are known to range into the Sargasso Sea , almost as far as Hispaniola , to give birth . In the Southern Hemisphere , the porbeagle apparently occupies a continuous band bound in the south by the Antarctic Convergence , and extending as far north as Chile and Brazil , the Western Cape province of South Africa , Australia to southern Western Australia and southern Queensland , and New Zealand . It is speculated that the porbeagle colonized the Southern Hemisphere during the Quaternary glaciation ( beginning c . 2 @.@ 6 Ma ) , when the tropical climate zone was much narrower than it is today . 
 Offshore fishing banks are the favored habitat of the porbeagle , though it can be found anywhere from a depth of 1 @,@ 360 m ( 4 @,@ 460 ft ) in oceanic basins to littoral ( close to shore ) waters less than 1 m ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) deep , over the entire water column . There is a single , anomalous record from brackish water , of a juvenile in Mar Chiquita in Argentina . A tracking study off the British Isles has found substantial variation in the short @-@ term movements of this species , both between and within individuals . Vertical movements tended to increase with water depth and corresponding temperature stratification : in shallow , <unk> waters , sharks either showed no pattern in changing depth or made reverse diel movements , spending the day in shallow water and descending at night . In deeper , stratified waters , the sharks performed a regular diel migration , spending the day below the thermocline and rising towards the surface at night . The porbeagle favors water temperatures of 5 to 10 ° C ( 41 to 50 ° F ) , though it has been reported across a temperature range of 1 to 23 ° C ( 34 to 73 ° F ) . 
 Porbeagle populations in the Northern and Southern Hemispheres appear to be completely separate . There are two stocks in the North Atlantic , east and west , that seldom mix ; only one individual is known to have crossed the Atlantic , covering 4 @,@ 260 km ( 2 @,@ 650 mi ) from Ireland to Canada . Several discrete stocks are likely present in the Southern Hemisphere as well . This species segregates by size and sex in the North Atlantic , and at least by size in the South Pacific . For example , males outnumber females 2 : 1 off Spain , females are 30 % more numerous than males off Scotland , and immature males are predominant in the Bristol Channel . Older , larger sharks may frequent higher latitudes than younger individuals . 
 Seasonal migrations have been observed in porbeagles from both hemispheres . In the western North Atlantic , much of the population spends the spring in the deep waters of the Nova Scotia continental shelf , and migrates north a distance of 500 – 1 @,@ 000 km ( 310 – 620 mi ) to spend late summer and fall in the shallow waters of the Newfoundland Grand Banks and the Gulf of St. Lawrence . In December , large mature females migrate south over 2 @,@ 000 km ( 1 @,@ 200 mi ) into the Sargasso Sea for pupping , keeping deeper than 600 m ( 2 @,@ 000 ft ) during the day and 200 m ( 660 ft ) at night so as to stay in the cooler waters beneath the Gulf Stream . In the eastern North Atlantic , porbeagles are believed to spend spring and summer in shallow continental shelf waters , and disperse northwards to overwinter in deeper waters offshore . Migrating sharks may travel upwards of 2 @,@ 300 km ( 1 @,@ 400 mi ) , though once they reach their destination they tend to remain within a relatively localized area . In the South Pacific , the population shifts north past 30 ° S latitude into subtropical waters in winter and spring , and retreats south past 35 ° S latitude in summer , when sharks are frequently sighted off subantarctic islands . 
 = = Description = = 
 The porbeagle is a very stout @-@ bodied shark with a fusiform ( spindle @-@ like ) shape . The long , conical snout tapers to a sharp point , and is supported by enlarged , highly calcified rostral cartilages . The eyes are large and black , without nictitating membranes ( protective third eyelids ) . The small , S @-@ shaped nostrils are positioned in front of and below the level of the eyes . The mouth is large and strongly curved , with moderately protrusible jaws . North Atlantic sharks have 28 – 29 upper tooth rows and 26 – 27 lower tooth rows , while Southern Hemisphere sharks have 30 – 31 upper tooth rows and 27 – 29 lower tooth rows . Each tooth has a strongly arched base and a nearly straight , awl @-@ like central cusp , which is flanked by a pair of smaller cusplets in all but the smallest individuals . The five pairs of gill slits are long and precede the pectoral fin bases . 
 The pectoral fins are long and narrow . The first dorsal fin is large and high , with a rounded apex , and originating just behind the pectoral fin bases . The pelvic fins are much smaller than the first dorsal fin . The second dorsal and anal fins are smaller still , and placed about even with each other on narrow bases that allow pivoting from side to side . The sides of the caudal peduncle are expanded into prominent lateral keels . A second , shorter pair of keels are present below the main keels . The caudal fin is large and crescent @-@ shaped , with the lower lobe almost as long as the upper ; there are both dorsal and ventral depressions ( precaudal pits ) at the caudal fin base , and a deep ventral notch near the tip of the upper caudal fin lobe . The skin is soft and covered by tiny , flattened dermal denticles ( scales ) , lending a velvety texture . Each denticle has three horizontal ridges that lead to teeth on the posterior margin . 
 The dorsal coloration is a medium to dark gray or slate , extending to the bases of the pectoral fins . The underside is white ; adults in the Southern Hemisphere often have dark coloring under the head and dusky blotches scattered over the belly . The free rear tip of the first dorsal fin is abruptly light gray or white , a feature unique to this species . The porbeagle may attain a length of 3 @.@ 7 m ( 12 ft ) , though this is uncertain and may have resulted from confusion with other mackerel shark species . A more typical length is 2 @.@ 5 m ( 8 @.@ 2 ft ) . Female sharks grow larger than males in the North Atlantic , with maximum confirmed fork lengths ( snout tip to caudal fin fork ) of 2 @.@ 5 m ( 8 @.@ 2 ft ) for males and 3 @.@ 0 m ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) for females . Southern Hemisphere sharks are smaller and the two sexes are similar in size , with males and females attaining fork lengths of 2 @.@ 0 m ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) and 2 @.@ 1 m ( 6 @.@ 9 ft ) respectively . Most porbeagles weigh no more than 135 kg ( 298 lb ) , with the record being a 230 kg ( 510 lb ) individual caught off Caithness , Scotland in 1993 . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 Fast and energetic , the porbeagle can be found singly or in groups . Its fusiform body , narrow caudal peduncle with lateral keels , and crescent @-@ shaped tail are adaptations for efficiently sustaining speed , which have also been independently evolved by tunas , billfishes , and several other groups of active fishes . It and the salmon shark are the thickest @-@ bodied members of their family ( length @-@ depth ratio approaching 4 @.@ 5 ) , and consequently have the stiffest swimming style : they oscillate their tails while holding their bodies mostly rigid , which confers propulsive power with high energy efficiency , but at the cost of maneuverability . The large gill surface area of the porbeagle allows more oxygen to be delivered to its tissues . It also has a short band of aerobic " red muscle " along each side , which can contract independently of the regular " white muscle " at a lower energy cost , enhancing the shark 's stamina . 
 <unk> are among the few fishes that exhibit apparent play behavior . There are reports , principally off the Cornish coast , of this species rolling and repeatedly wrapping itself in long kelp fronds near the surface ; this activity may have an exploratory or self @-@ stimulatory purpose , though alternately the shark may be attempting to feed on small kelp organisms or scrape off parasites . In addition , porbeagles within a group have been seen chasing each other , and they will reportedly " play with anything floating on the water " : individuals have been observed prodding , tossing , or biting natural and artificial objects , including pieces of driftwood and balloon floats used by anglers . 
 Great white sharks ( Carcharodon carcharias ) and killer whales ( Orcinus orca ) are plausible , albeit undocumented , predators of the porbeagle . There is a record of a small individual caught off Argentina that bore bite marks from a copper shark ( Carcharhinus brachyurus ) or similar species , but it is uncertain whether the porbeagle was the target of attempted predation or if the two were simply involved in interspecific aggression . Known parasites of this species include the tapeworms <unk> <unk> and <unk> <unk> , and the copepods <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> @-@ <unk> , and Pandarus floridanus . Natural annual mortality is low , estimated to be 10 % for juveniles , 15 % for adult males , and 20 % for adult females in the western North Atlantic . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 The porbeagle is an active predator that predominantly ingests small to medium @-@ sized bony fishes . It chases down pelagic fishes such as lancet fish , mackerel , pilchards , herring , and sauries , and forages near the bottom for <unk> such as cod , hake , <unk> , dories , sand lances , <unk> , and flatfish . Cephalopods , particularly squid , also form an important component of its diet , while smaller sharks such as spiny dogfish ( Squalus acanthias ) and <unk> sharks ( <unk> galeus ) are rarely taken . Examinations of porbeagle stomach contents have also found small shelled molluscs , crustaceans , echinoderms , and other invertebrates , which were likely ingested incidentally , as well as inedible debris such as small stones , feathers , and garbage fragments . 
 In the western North Atlantic , porbeagles feed mainly on pelagic fishes and squid in spring , and on <unk> in the fall ; this pattern corresponds to the spring @-@ fall migration of these sharks from deeper to shallower waters , and the most available prey types in those respective habitats . Therefore , the porbeagle seems to be an opportunistic predator without strong diet specificity . During spring and summer in the Celtic Sea and on the outer Nova Scotian Shelf , porbeagles congregate at tidally induced thermal fronts to feed on fish that have been drawn by high concentrations of zooplankton . Hunting porbeagles regularly dive from the surface all the way to the bottom , cycling back every few hours ; this vertical movement may aid in the detection of olfactory cues . There is a report of a one @-@ year @-@ old porbeagle 1 m ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) long , which had fed on krill and polychaete worms . 
 = = = Life history = = = 
 The timing of the porbeagle 's reproductive cycle is unusual in that it is largely similar in both hemispheres , rather than being offset by six months . This suggests that its reproduction is not significantly affected by temperature or day length , perhaps owing to its endothermic physiology . Mating takes place mainly between September and November , though females with fresh mating scars have been reported as late as January off the Shetland Islands . The male bites at the female 's pectoral fins , gill region , and flanks while courting and to hold on for copulation . Two mating grounds are known for western North Atlantic porbeagles , one off Newfoundland and the other on Georges Bank in the Gulf of Maine . Adult females have a single functional ovary , on the right , and two functional uteruses . They probably reproduce every year . The litter size is typically four , with two embryos oriented in opposing directions sharing each uterus ; on rare occasions a litter may contain as few as one or as many as five pups . The gestation period is 8 – 9 months . 
 Like other members of its family , the porbeagle is aplacental viviparous with oophagy , i.e. the main source of embryonic nutrition are unfertilized eggs . During the first half of pregnancy , the mother ovulates enormous numbers of tiny ova , packed into capsules up to 7 @.@ 5 cm ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) long , into her uteruses . A newly conceived embryo is sustained by a yolk sac and emerges from its egg capsule at 3 @.@ 2 – 4 @.@ 2 cm ( 1 @.@ 3 – 1 @.@ 7 in ) long . At this time , the embryo has well @-@ developed external gills and a spiral valve intestine . When the embryo is 4 @.@ 2 – 9 @.@ 2 cm ( 1 @.@ 7 – 3 @.@ 6 in ) long , it has resorbed its external gills and most of its yolk sac , but cannot yet feed as it lacks the means to open egg capsules . At a length of 10 – 12 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 – 4 @.@ 7 in ) , the embryo grows two massive , recurved " fangs " in the lower jaw for tearing open capsules , as well as two much smaller teeth in the upper jaw . It begins to feed voraciously on yolk , acquiring an enormously distended stomach ; to accommodate this , the muscles on the belly split down the middle and the skin on the abdomen stretches greatly . 
 At 20 – 21 cm ( 7 @.@ 9 – 8 @.@ 3 in ) long , the embryo appears pink because it lacks pigment except in its eyes , and its head and gill region are laterally enlarged and gelatinous . The yolk stomach can comprise up to 81 % of the embryo 's total weight when it is 30 – 42 cm ( 12 – 17 in ) long . The embryo gains pigment and sheds its fangs at a length of 34 – 38 cm ( 13 – 15 in ) . Around this time , the mother stops producing ova . From then on , the embryo relies mainly on the yolk stored in its stomach , though it may continue to feed on remaining eggs by <unk> the capsules between its jaws or swallowing them whole . It begins to transfer its energy stores from its stomach to its liver , causing the former to shrink and the latter to grow exponentially . The embryo is essentially fully pigmented by a length of 40 cm ( 16 in ) , and has assumed its newborn appearance by a length of 58 cm ( 23 in ) . By then , its stomach has shrunk enough for the abdominal muscles to close , leaving what has been termed an " umbilical scar " or " yolk sac scar " ( neither is accurate ) . Several series of single @-@ cusped teeth grow in both jaws , though they lie flat and remain non @-@ functional until birth . 
 Newborn porbeagles measure 58 – 67 cm ( 23 – 26 in ) long and do not exceed 5 kg ( 11 lb ) . Up to a tenth of the weight is made up of the liver , though some yolk also remains in its stomach and continues to sustain the pup until it learns to feed . The overall embryonic growth rate is 7 – 8 cm ( 2 @.@ 8 – 3 @.@ 1 in ) per month . Sometimes one pup in a uterus is much smaller than the other , but otherwise normal . These " runts " may result from a dominant , forward @-@ facing embryo eating most of the eggs as they arrive , and / or the mother being unable to provide an adequate egg supply for all her offspring . Birthing occurs from April to September , peaking in April and May ( spring @-@ summer ) for North Atlantic sharks and June and July ( winter ) for Southern Hemisphere sharks . In the western North Atlantic , birth occurs well offshore in the Sargasso Sea at depths of around 500 m ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) . 
 Both sexes grow at similar rates until the onset of maturation , with females maturing later and at a larger size than males . In the first four years of life , the annual growth rate is 16 – 20 cm ( 6 @.@ 3 – 7 @.@ 9 in ) and similar in both hemispheres ; thereafter , sharks from the western South Pacific begin to grow slower than those from the North Atlantic . In the North Atlantic , males mature at a fork length of 1 @.@ 6 – 1 @.@ 8 m ( 5 @.@ 2 – 5 @.@ 9 ft ) and an age of 6 – 11 years , and females at a fork length of 2 @.@ 0 – 2 @.@ 2 m ( 6 @.@ 6 – 7 @.@ 2 ft ) and an age of 12 – 18 years . In the Southwest Pacific , males mature at a fork length of 1 @.@ 4 – 1 @.@ 5 m ( 4 @.@ 6 – 4 @.@ 9 ft ) and an age of 8 – 11 years , and females at a fork length of 1 @.@ 7 – 1 @.@ 8 m ( 5 @.@ 6 – 5 @.@ 9 ft ) and an age of 15 – 18 years . The oldest porbeagle on record was 26 years of age and measured 2 @.@ 5 m ( 8 @.@ 2 ft ) long . The maximum lifespan of this species appears to be 30 – 40 years in the Atlantic , but could be as much as 65 years in the South Pacific . 
 = = = Thermoregulation = = = 
 Like other members of its family , the porbeagle is endothermic : metabolic heat generated by its red muscles is conserved within the body by specialized systems of blood vessels called retia mirabilia ( Latin for " wonderful nets " ; singular rete mirabile ) , that act as highly efficient countercurrent heat exchangers . The porbeagle has several rete mirabile systems : the orbital retia accessing its brain and eyes , the lateral cutaneous retia accessing its swimming muscles , the <unk> rete accessing its viscera , and the kidney rete . 
 Among sharks , the porbeagle 's capacity for elevating body temperature is second only to the salmon shark 's . Its red muscles are located deep within the body , adjacent to the spine , and its lateral rete is composed of over 4 @,@ 000 small arteries arranged in bands . It has one of the highest core temperatures within its family , 8 – 10 ° C ( 14 – 18 ° F ) warmer than that of the surrounding water . Being warm @-@ bodied may allow this shark to maintain higher cruising speeds , hunt in deep water for extended periods of time , and / or enter higher latitudes during winter to exploit food resources not available to other sharks . The orbital retia of the porbeagle can raise the temperature of its brain and eyes by 3 – 6 ° C ( 5 – 11 ° F ) , and likely serve to buffer those sensitive organs against the large temperature shifts that accompany changes in depth ; potential benefits of this include increased visual acuity and reduced response times . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 The porbeagle has very rarely , if ever , bitten swimmers or boats . As of 2009 , the International Shark Attack File attributes three bites to this species , one provoked and none fatal , and two on boats . One older anecdote tells of a fisherman who provoked a porbeagle into leaping from the water and tearing his clothes . In another account of a swimmer bitten by a " mackerel shark " , the species responsible could easily have been a misidentified shortfin mako or great white shark . Recently in the North Sea , adult porbeagles have been filmed charging at divers working on oil platforms , sometimes even brushing lightly against them without doing harm . These rushes do not appear to have predatory intent and may instead be motivated by curiosity or defense . 
 At one time , porbeagles were regarded as nuisances by some commercial fishers because they damaged lighter fishing gear intended for smaller species and stole hooked fish from lines . This shark is highly valued as a game fish by sport fishers in Ireland , the United Kingdom , and the United States . It fights strongly on hook @-@ and @-@ line , but does not usually jump into the air like the related shortfin mako . Novice anglers often mistake this shark for the mako , which has earned it the affectionate moniker " <unk> " in New England . The International Game Fish Association keeps records on the porbeagle . 
 = = = Commercial fishing = = = 
 Prized for its meat and fins , the porbeagle has long been under heavy fishing pressure . The meat is sold fresh , frozen , or dried and salted , and ranks among the most valuable of any shark : in 1997 and 1998 it had a wholesale price of EUR 5 – 7 / kg , four times that of the blue shark ( Prionace glauca ) . Most of the demand comes from Europe , though the United States and Japan also import this species . The fins are shipped to East Asia for use in shark fin soup . The remainder of the shark may also be utilized , for production of leather , liver oil , and fishmeal . International trade in the porbeagle appears to be significant , but remains unquantified as shark products tend not to be reported to the species level , and many consist of a mix of various species . This shark is caught most readily on longlines , but is also susceptible to gillnets , driftnets , trawls , and handlines . It is valuable enough to be generally retained when caught as bycatch ; if storage space cannot be spared it may be finned and the carcass discarded . 
 Intensive fishing for the porbeagle dates back the 1930s , when Norway and to a lesser extent Denmark began operating longline vessels in the western North Atlantic . The Norwegian annual catch rose from 279 tons in 1926 to 3 @,@ 884 tons in 1933 , and peaked at around 6 @,@ 000 tons in 1947 , with the resumption of fishing after World War II . Soon after the stock collapsed : Norwegian annual catches declined steadily to 1 @,@ 200 – 1 @,@ 900 tons from 1953 to 1960 , 160 – 300 tons in the early 1970s , and 10 – 40 tons in the late 1980s to early 1990s . Similarly , Danish annual catches fell from 1 @,@ 500 tons in the early 1950s to under 100 tons in the 1990s . Presently , many European countries continue to catch porbeagles in the eastern North Atlantic , with Norway , Denmark , France , and Spain foremost among them . France and Spain began to target porbeagles in the eastern North Atlantic in the 1970s . French fishers operate mainly in the Celtic Sea and the Bay of Biscay , and saw a decline from an annual catch of over 1 @,@ 000 tons in 1979 to 300 – 400 tons in the late 1990s . Catches by Spanish fishers have been highly variable , ranging from negligible to over 4 @,@ 000 tons per year , which may reflect shifts of fishing effort into historically less @-@ exploited waters . 
 As porbeagles had become scarce in the eastern North Atlantic , in the 1960s the Norwegian fishing fleet moved west to the waters off New England and Newfoundland . A few years later , they were joined by longline vessels from the Faroe Islands . Norwegian annual catches rose from 1 @,@ 900 tons in 1961 to over 9 @,@ 000 tons in 1965 ; the catch was largely exported to Italy , where porbeagle ( <unk> ) is an extremely popular food fish . Again , the stock collapsed , this time in only six years : by 1970 Norwegian catches had fallen to under 1 @,@ 000 tons per year , and Faroese catches observed a similar trend . With the population decimated , most fishers moved on or switched to other species . Porbeagle numbers gradually recovered in the ensuing 25 years , to about 30 % of pre @-@ exploitation levels . In 1995 , Canada established an Exclusive Economic Zone ( EEZ ) and became the primary fisher of porbeagles in the region . Between 1994 and 1998 , Canadian fishing vessels landed 1 @,@ 000 – 2 @,@ 000 tons per year , which depleted the population to 11 – 17 % of pre @-@ exploitation levels by 2000 . Strict regulations and greatly reduced fishing quotas introduced in 2000 have since begun to reverse the stock decline , though recovery of the stock is projected to take decades due to the low productivity of the species . There is evidence that incidental artificial selection caused by heavy fishing has led to a compensatory growth response , i.e. faster growth and earlier maturation . 
 In the Southern Hemisphere , commercial fishing for the porbeagle is mostly undocumented . Substantial numbers are caught incidentally by pelagic longline fisheries targeting more valuable species such as southern bluefin tuna ( Thunnus <unk> ) , swordfish ( Xiphius gladius ) , and Patagonian toothfish ( <unk> <unk> ) , including vessels operated by Japan , Uruguay , Argentina , South Africa , and New Zealand . Porbeagle catches by the Uruguayan tuna pelagic longline fishery peaked in 1984 with 150 tons landed . Records of catch per unit effort ( CPUE ) for this fishery have shown a 90 % decline in porbeagle landings from 1988 to 1998 , though it is uncertain whether this reflects a real population decline or changing fishing habits . New Zealand has reported annual catches of 150 – 300 tons , mostly of immature individuals , from 1998 to 2003 . 
 = = = Conservation = = = 
 The rapid collapse of porbeagle stocks on both sides of the North Atlantic is often cited as archetypal of the " boom and bust " pattern of most shark fisheries . Factors including a small litter size , long maturation time , and the capture of multiple age classes all contribute to this shark 's susceptibility to overfishing . The International Union for Conservation of Nature has assessed the porbeagle globally as Vulnerable , Endangered in the western North Atlantic ( including the Baltic ) , and Critically Endangered in the eastern North Atlantic and Mediterranean Sea . 
 The porbeagle is listed on Annex 1 ( Highly Migratory Species ) of the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea ( UNCLOS ) and on Annex 1 of the Conservation of Migratory Species ( CMS ; also known as the Bonn Convention ) Migratory Shark Memorandum of Understanding . This species benefits from bans on shark finning instituted by several nations and supranational entities , including Canada , the United States , Brazil , Australia , the European Union , and the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas ( <unk> ) . Although the Animals Committee of the UN Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora ( CITES ) recommended additional conservation actions for the porbeagle , CITES rejected proposals to list the species in 2008 and again in 2010 . In March 2013 , the porbeagle was listed on Appendix II of CITES , allowing for increased regulation in the international trade of this species . 
 In March 2015 , The National Marine Fisheries Service responded to a court order to compile information as to whether the shark will be listed as threatened or endangered under The Endangered Species Act . 
 = = = = Southern Hemisphere = = = = 
 The only regulation of porbeagle catches in the Southern Hemisphere is New Zealand 's total allowable catch ( TAC ) of 249 tons per year , instituted in 2004 . 
 = = = = Eastern North Atlantic and Mediterranean Sea = = = = 
 In the eastern North Atlantic , porbeagle fisheries have never been restricted despite well @-@ documented historical declines . Since 1985 , Norway and the Faroe Islands are allowed annual quotas of 200 tons and 125 tons respectively from European Community waters . Although these quotas are lower than the originals set in 1982 ( 500 tons for Norway and 300 tons for the Faroe Islands ) , they are still consistently higher than the yearly total porbeagle catch in the region and thus have no practical effect . 
 In the Mediterranean Sea , the porbeagle is on the verge of extinction , with a population decline of over 99 @.@ 99 % since the mid @-@ 20th century . Its range has contracted to the waters around the Italian Peninsula , where there may be a nursery area . Only a few dozen specimens have been recorded in the past few decades , from scientific surveys , swordfish fishery bycatch , and sport fishers . In 1995 , it was included in Annex III ( " species whose exploitation is regulated " ) of the Barcelona Convention Protocol on protected areas and biodiversity in the Mediterranean , which has not been ratified . In 1997 , it was listed on Appendix III of the Bern Convention ( the Convention on the Conservation of European Wildlife and Natural Habitats ) . However , these listings have yet to result in the implementation of new management plans , despite the recognized need for urgent action . 
 The European Union prohibits EU vessels from fishing for , retaining , boarding , <unk> or landing porbeagle sharks in all waters since January 2012 . It is subject to a zero total allowable catch in EU waters by any vessel . 
 = = = = Western North Atlantic = = = = 
 The western North Atlantic porbeagle population has a more positive prospect than in the eastern North Atlantic . Fishing in Canadian waters was originally regulated by the 1995 Fisheries Management Plan for pelagic sharks in Atlantic Canada , which established an annual quota of 1 @,@ 500 tons , restricted the time , place , and gear types allowed for commercial fishing , and set limits for bycatch and recreational fishing . In 2000 – 2001 , Fisheries and Oceans Canada ( <unk> ) prepared a detailed population model and concluded that a quota of 200 – 250 tons would allow for population growth , resulting in a quota of 250 tons being adopted for the period of 2002 – 2007 . The mating ground off of Newfoundland was also closed to shark fishing . In 2004 , the Committee on the Status of Endangered Wildlife in Canada ( COSEWIC ) listed the porbeagle as Endangered , largely on the basis of the low population abundance ( < 25 % of original numbers ) . Canada decided not to list the species under its Species At Risk Act , but further reduced the total fishing quota to 185 tons . In US waters , the 1993 Fishery Management Plan for Sharks of the Atlantic Ocean sets an annual quota of 92 tons ( post @-@ processing ) for the porbeagle . In 2006 , this species was listed as a Species of Concern by the National Marine Fisheries Service ( NMFS ) , meaning that it merits conservation concern but there is insufficient data for inclusion on the US Endangered Species Act . 
 = Röyksopp = 
 Röyksopp ( Norwegian pronunciation : [ <unk> ] ) are a Norwegian electronic music duo from Tromsø , formed in 1998 . Since their inception , the band has consisted of Svein Berge and Torbjørn Brundtland . 
 Berge and Brundtland were introduced to each other through a mutual friend in Tromsø , Norway . They both enjoyed the same films and music , and both shared an interest in electronics . The two experimented with various forms of electronic music , and bought a drum machine together during the Tromsø techno scene before going their separate ways . Several years later , the two met up again and formed Röyksopp during the Bergen Wave . After experimenting with different genres of electronic music , the band solidified their place in the electronica scene with their 2001 debut album , Melody A.M. , released on the Wall of Sound record label . 
 Röyksopp consistently experimented with various genres pertaining to electronic music . Stylistically , the band makes use of various genres , including ambient , house music and synthpop . The band is also known for its elaborate concert performances , which often feature eccentric outfits . 
 Since their 1998 debut , the duo gained critical acclaim and popular success around the world . To date , Röyksopp has been nominated for one Grammy Award , won seven Spellemannprisen awards , performed worldwide tours , and produced albums which have topped the charts in several countries , including four consecutive number @-@ one albums in their native Norway . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 1990 – 97 : Origins = = = 
 Svein Berge and Torbjørn Brundtland were introduced at a friend 's house in Tromsø , Norway , and began experimenting with electronic instruments in the early 1990s as a part of the Tromsø techno scene . The two met when Berge was 12 years old and Brundtland was 13 , and the two began playing music together due to a shared interest in electronica . Their childhood in Tromsø and the natural scenery of Northern Norway have often been mentioned as some of their most important inspirations . The pair separated before obtaining any popular success with their music , but reunited with each other in 1998 in Bergen , Norway . 
 Bergen , a city of 212 @,@ 944 people in 1990 , had overtaken Tromsø 's position as the most vital scene for underground electronic music in Norway , and Röyksopp worked with other Norwegian musicians like Frost , Those Norwegians , Drum Island , and Kings of Convenience 's guitarist and singer Erlend Øye in what was called the Bergen Wave . During this time , the duo befriended Geir Jenssen . Under the tutelage of Jenssen , the duo started a band called Aedena Cycle with Gaute <unk> and <unk> <unk> . In 1994 Aedena Cycle recorded a vinyl EP called Traveler 's Dreams . The EP was released under the R & S Records sublabel Apollo . Following the release of the EP , Jenssen almost convinced the band to sign a full record deal with Apollo Records . 
 = = = 1998 – 2000 : Early years = = = 
 After recording as part of Aedena Cycle , Berge and Brundtland left the group to form their own band , Röyksopp . The word <unk> is a stylized version of the Norwegian word for the puffball mushroom , " <unk> " . The band has stated that the word could also evoke the mushroom cloud resulting from an atomic blast . 
 Röyksopp 's debut single was released by local Bergen Wave @-@ era independent label Tellé . Röyksopp 's first single " So Easy " , which was later re @-@ released on their first album , was the second record released by Tellé . After being used in a UK T @-@ Mobile advertisement , " So Easy " became popular in the UK market and was later re @-@ released , combined with their later hit single " Remind Me " . 
 = = = 2001 – 04 : Melody A.M. and early success = = = 
 After leaving Tellé , the band signed with British label Wall of Sound and released Melody A.M. , which became certified platinum in the band 's native Norway and sold over a million copies worldwide . The album peaked at number one in Norway , and produced the UK Top 40 singles " Eple " , " Poor Leno " , and " Remind Me " . A final single , " Sparks " , was also released . Eple ( IPA : [ <unk> ] ) – meaning " apple " in Norwegian – was licensed by Apple Inc. for use as the welcome music to the company 's Mac OS X Panther operating system , playing the first time a user booted a new Apple @-@ brand computer . 
 The band 's popularity was boosted by several graphically experimental music videos , many of which were put into heavy rotation by MTV . The music video for " Remind Me " , featuring an infographic @-@ style video by French company H5 , won the 2002 MTV Europe Music Award for best music video . In this same event the duo was nominated in three more categories : " Best Nordic Act " , " Best New Artist " and " Best Dance Act " . The duo performed the song " Poor Leno " at the event . One year later they received a nomination for " Best Group " at the Brit Awards . 
 During this period Röyksopp slowly gained popularity in the United States . " Remind Me " , one of the two Röyksopp and Erlend Øye collaborations found on Melody A.M. , was featured in a Geico car insurance commercial . The commercial was the fourth of the " It 's so easy a caveman could do it " ads , and featured said caveman riding a moving sidewalk in an airport terminal when he comes across a poster displaying the advertisement campaign . 
 During this time , Röyksopp were approached to compose the soundtrack for The Matrix Reloaded , although they declined the offer . 
 = = = 2005 – 08 : The Understanding = = = 
 Röyksopp 's second studio album , The Understanding , was released on 12 July 2005 , preceded by the single " Only This Moment " on 27 June 2005 . The single managed to peak at number 33 in the United Kingdom . The video for " Only This Moment " is closely based on the events of the Paris 1968 riots , and elements of propaganda are found throughout the video clip . The album 's second single , " 49 Percent " , with the vocals of <unk> R. Jones was released on 26 September 2005 . A third single , " What Else Is There ? " , including vocals from Swedish singer Karin Dreijer " Fever Ray " Andersson of The Knife , became the album 's biggest hit , peaking at number 32 in the United Kingdom , and at number four in Norway . " Beautiful Day Without You " was the album 's fourth single , and a non @-@ album track , " Curves " , was also released . 
 Building upon the success of Melody A.M. , The Understanding was very successful in Europe . The album peaked at number one in Norway , and at number 13 in the UK . During this time , Röyksopp 's popularity continued to increase in the United States . The album charted on many Billboard charts , and peaked at number two on the Top Electronic Albums chart , number 22 on the Top Heatseekers chart , and number 32 on the Top Independent Albums . 
 After the release of The Understanding , some of Röyksopp 's singles were licensed for movie appearances . " What Else Is There ? " was featured during a scene in the 2007 American film Meet Bill and during the end credits of the 2006 British film <unk> , and " Circuit Breaker " was used in the 2007 snowboard film Picture This . 
 On 19 June 2006 , Röyksopp released a nine @-@ track live album called Röyksopp 's Night Out . Notably , the album contains a reinterpretation of the song " Go with the Flow " , originally by Queens of the Stone Age . 
 On 5 March 2007 , Röyksopp compiled their favourite tracks by other artists for the Back to Mine series . Called Back to Mine : Röyksopp , the album was released in the US on 5 March 2007 , and in the UK on 27 April 2007 . The album also includes their own track " Meatball " , released under the pseudonym " Emmanuel Splice " . Svein Berge also contributed as a board member for the celebration of the Grieg year , as Norway celebrated their famous composer Edvard Grieg . 
 On the tenth anniversary of Röyksopp 's formation — 15 December 2008 — the band released a new track , " Happy Birthday " , for free to celebrate the event . The song was released for free streaming on the band 's website . 
 = = = 2009 – 11 : Junior and Senior = = = 
 Röyksopp 's third studio album , Junior , was released on 23 March 2009 , featuring the single " Happy Up Here " . The song debuted on BBC Radio 1 's Pete Tong show on 9 January 2009 . It was officially released digitally on 16 March 2009 . The music video for " Happy Up Here " , made by Reuben Sutherland , features elements from the arcade game Space Invaders . Both the single and the video were met with positive reactions from the press and fans . 
 " The Girl and the Robot " , the second single from the album Junior , featuring vocals from Swedish singer Robyn , was released on 15 June 2009 . The vinyl and digital versions of the single included remixes of the song by Kris Menace , Chateau Marmont and Spencer & Hill . At the 52nd Grammy Awards , the Jean Elan remix of " The Girl and the Robot " was nominated for Best Remixed Recording , Non @-@ Classical . " This Must Be It " is the third single from the album , including vocals from Swedish singer Karin Dreijer Andersson of The Knife and Fever Ray . The single also featuring remixes by Thin White Duke , <unk> , Rex the Dog and <unk> , among others . The band later released the stems for the song " Tricky Tricky " as part of a remix competition and the winning entries were released on 27 October 2009 . 
 Junior was a success around the world . The album peaked at number one in Norway , the band 's third consecutive release to do so . Junior also peaked at number 21 on the UK Albums Chart and charted on many Billboard charts , including the Billboard 200 – the first Röyksopp release to do so – where it peaked at number 126 . The album also peaked at number four on the Top Electronic Albums chart and number two on the Top Heatseekers chart . 
 Junior was followed by Senior , which is more quiet , " withdrawn and introspective " and " create [ s ] an atmosphere and an ambiance " . Senior is the duo 's first album to consist solely of instrumental tracks . The first single from the album , " The Drug " , was released on 9 August 2010 . The album itself was released on 13 September 2010 , and was successful in the band 's native Norway , peaking at number one , the band 's fourth consecutive release to do so . 
 = = = 2013 – 16 : Do It Again , The Inevitable End and Star Wars Headspace = = = 
 In January 2013 , Röyksopp released a song called " Running to the Sea " , a collaboration with Norwegian artist Susanne Sundfør . According to the band , the song was written and recorded in two days for a televised performance . The single was released on 16 December 2013 , with a B @-@ side containing a song called " Something In My Heart " , featuring Jamie McDermott from The <unk> . Röyksopp and Sundfør also collaborated in creating a cover version of Depeche Mode 's " Ice Machine " for their Late Night Tales compilation album , Late Night Tales : Röyksopp . 
 On 14 April 2014 , Röyksopp announced a collaborative EP with Robyn titled Do It Again to coincide with their joint tour . A snippet of one of the five tracks set to be released on the album , " Monument " , was released the same day . The album was released on 26 May through Don Triumph , Wall of Sound , and Cooking Vinyl . The duo stated that a re @-@ worked version of " Monument " would form a part of their next album . 
 On 29 September 2014 , Röyksopp announced that their next album , titled The Inevitable End , would explore darker subject matter with emphasis on the lyrical content , and would be their last LP , though they will not stop making music . The album was released on 7 November 2014 by Dog Triumph . The special edition of the album includes new versions of the previously released tracks " Running to the Sea " , " Do It Again " and " Monument " as well as the original version of " Something In My Heart " . Some singles did precede the release of the album : " Skulls " , " Sordid Affair " and the new version of " Monument " . " Skulls " and " Monument " were accompanied by two new video clips . The video for " I Had This Thing " was shared on 11 May 2015 . The track features vocals by Jamie <unk> and comes with a series of remixes . 
 In early 2015 , it was announced that the band have composed a musical accompaniment to a comedic work based upon the novels of Franz Kafka . The project debuted at the Bergen International Festival in the same year . 
 Also in 2015 , the Norwegian public broadcaster NRK introduced a series of new jingles by Röyksopp for the TV output of the NRK Nyheter news division , as part of a comprehensive redesign of the sub @-@ brand . 
 On 8 February 2016 , Röyksopp announced that a new track titled " Bounty Hunters " would be included on the Star Wars Headspace compilation . The album was released on 19 February 2016 . 
 = = Style = = 
 = = = Musical style = = = 
 Röyksopp 's music is often referred to as " warm " , a reference to the band 's downbeat electronica that combines elements of house music and Afro @-@ American sounds . 
 A notable component of Röyksopp 's song repertoire relies on the use of multiple lead vocalists . For instance , Melody A.M. features the vocal talents of Anneli <unk> and Erlend Øye , The Understanding features Kate Havnevik , <unk> R. Jones , and Karin Dreijer Andersson , and Junior features Robyn , Anneli <unk> , Karin Dreijer Andersson , and Lykke Li . 
 Röyksopp enjoys using classic synthesizers , including the monophonic Korg MS @-@ 20 , the polyphonic Roland Juno @-@ 106 , and multiple members of the Akai Sampler Series . The band has stated that they prefer using analogue synthesizers over digital ones . Svein Berge said , " It 's fairly limited the fun you can have with the use of a mouse . We like to mix . " 
 In addition to writing their own music , the duo enjoy remixing songs . Berge said , " It 's obviously fun remixing people like Coldplay , artists of such a big calibre . Whenever people approach us for a remix it 's very nice ; being approached by Roots Manuva , The Streets , and even Peter Gabriel is quite fun . " The band was also asked by Britney Spears for a remix , but had to turn down the offer due to scheduling conflicts . 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 As they grew up in northern Norway , Svein Berge and Torbjørn Brundtland listened to local artists like Bel Canto and Biosphere . The band has also expressed their interest in the music of Kraftwerk , Brian Eno , Giorgio Moroder , Art of Noise , Vangelis , Erik Satie , and Francis Lai . Svein Berge has also stated that he is very fond of the production and programming skills of <unk> , who produced a remix of the Röyksopp single " Happy Up Here " . 
 Röyksopp often include references and homages to their musical influences . For instance , " Röyksopp Forever " pays homage to famous electronic pioneers of the 70s , including , " the likes of Vangelis and these people , and Krautrock , like Tangerine Dream and even Pink Floyd and King Crimson . " 
 = = = Live performances = = = 
 Röyksopp is known for its elaborate concert performances . Marc Hogan of Pitchfork Media said that " Those who have heard Röyksopp 's two albums ... won 't be surprised to learn the Norwegian duo 's live set is much better and more <unk> than hunching next to the speakers at yer local Crate & Barrel " . 
 When performing live , the duo often appear in eccentric outfits . Ari Stein , of Electronic Beats , said , that during one particular live set , " Röyksopp returned with two separate encores , one which included Berge playing " Eple " with a space suit capsule on his head " . 
 <unk> use different vocalists as part of their live act . During their 2015 summer tour they are joined by Swedish singer Jonna Lee from iamamiwhoami , Susanne Sundfør and Jamie McDermott . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Melody A.M. ( 2001 ) 
 The Understanding ( 2005 ) 
 Junior ( 2009 ) 
 Senior ( 2010 ) 
 Late Night Tales : Röyksopp ( 2013 ) 
 Do It Again with Robyn ( 2014 ) 
 The Inevitable End ( 2014 ) 
 = = Reception and awards = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 In addition to sales success , Röyksopp has garnered generally positive critical reception from many music critics . The band has also been nominated for many prestigious awards , including multiple <unk> and a Grammy . 
 The tracks " What Else Is There ? " and " Eple " were chosen among the top 500 tracks of the decade by Pitchfork Media and placed in 375th and 336th place respectively . Another track written by Röyksopp , Annie 's " Heartbeat " , was placed 17th on the same list . On 24 November 2009 , Melody A.M. was named the best Norwegian album of the decade by Norway 's largest newspaper , Verdens Gang . The Understanding came 5th on the same list . In a ranking of the top 10 Norwegian tracks of the decade by VG , " Eple " and " What Else Is There ? " were placed 3rd and 6th respectively . 
 However , some criticism has been aimed at the repetitive nature of the band and the trip hop genre in general . Robert Christgau said that , " chill @-@ out tends toward waiting @-@ room music for plastic surgeons who really want you to order that butt implant . Where once [ Röyksopp ] were extolled for their subtle melodicism , here their schlock candidly attacks the jugular . If they 're Air , Goldie was Tricky . " Pitchfork Media , in their review of Senior , said that " the kind of downtempo stuff that makes up the majority of Röyksopp 's vocal @-@ less compositions just doesn 't hold up to concentrated , repeated listens like many other forms of instrumental electronic music . " 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 = Schwalbe @-@ class cruiser = 
 The Schwalbe class of unprotected cruisers were the first ships of the type built for the German Kaiserliche Marine ( Imperial Navy ) . The class comprised two ships , Schwalbe , the lead ship , and Sperber . They were designed for service in Germany 's recently acquired colonial empire , and were built between 1886 and 1889 . They were armed with a main battery of eight 10 @.@ 5 @-@ centimeter ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) guns and could steam at a speed of 13 @.@ 5 knots ( 25 @.@ 0 km / h ; 15 @.@ 5 mph ) . 
 Schwalbe and Sperber spent their active careers abroad , usually in Germany 's African colonies or in the Pacific . The two cruisers assisted in the suppression of the Abushiri Revolt in German East Africa in 1889 – 1890 . By the end of the 1890s , both ships had been overhauled and decommissioned in Germany . They returned to service at the turn of the century for another tour overseas ; Schwalbe joined the forces that battled the Boxer Rebellion in China in 1900 before being decommissioned a second time in 1902 . Sperber remained in Africa until 1911 , when she too was decommissioned . Schwalbe was used as a training ship after 1912 and Sperber was used as a target ship during World War I. Both vessels were sold in 1920 and broken up in 1922 . 
 = = Design = = 
 The ships of the Schwalbe class were designed for use in Germany 's recently acquired overseas colonies . These newly conquered territories required warships to police them , and at the time , the German Kaiserliche Marine ( Imperial Navy ) possessed a motley collection of older sailing ships that were suitable only for training purposes . The design was prepared in 1886 – 1887 , under the tenure of General Leo von Caprivi , the Chief of the Kaiserliche Marine ; Caprivi sought new cruisers that would have strong fighting capabilities in addition to traditional overseas cruiser characteristics . The Schwalbe class was the first unprotected cruiser design built in Germany , and along with several other small warships , they permitted Caprivi to retire five old sailing frigates and modernized the German cruiser force . 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 The ships of the Schwalbe class were 62 @.@ 59 meters ( 205 ft 4 in ) long at the waterline and 66 @.@ 90 m ( 219 ft 6 in ) long overall . They had a beam of 9 @.@ 36 m ( 30 ft 9 in ) , though over the sponsons for the main guns , the beam increased to 10 @.@ 1 m ( 33 ft ) . The ships had a draft of 4 @.@ 4 m ( 14 ft ) forward and 4 @.@ 72 m ( 15 ft 6 in ) aft . They displaced 1 @,@ 111 metric tons ( 1 @,@ 093 long tons ; 1 @,@ 225 short tons ) as designed and up to 1 @,@ 359 t ( 1 @,@ 338 long tons ) at full combat load . The ships ' hulls were constructed with a transverse framing composed of steel , wood , and copper . Their stem and stern were made of wood , and a bronze ram was mounted at the bow . The hull was divided into eleven watertight compartments . 
 The two cruisers were good sea boats , and were very maneuverable . They suffered from severe weather helm , and tended to roll badly in a beam sea ; their metacentric height was <unk> m ( 2 ft 2 @.@ 2 in ) . They lost little speed in a head sea . Schwalbe and Sperber each had a crew of 9 officers and 108 enlisted men . They carried a number of small boats , including one picket boat , one cutter , one yawl , and one dinghy . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 Their propulsion system consisted of two horizontal 2 @-@ cylinder double @-@ expansion steam engines powered by four coal @-@ fired cylindrical water @-@ tube boilers trunked into a single funnel . The engines drove a pair of 3 @-@ bladed screw propellers that were 2 @.@ 80 m ( 9 ft 2 in ) wide in diameter . The ships ' engines provided a design speed of 13 @.@ 5 knots ( 25 @.@ 0 km / h ; 15 @.@ 5 mph ) and a range of approximately 3 @,@ 290 nautical miles ( 6 @,@ 090 km ; 3 @,@ 790 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . On trials , both ships exceeded their rated speeds , with Schwalbe reaching 14 @.@ 1 knots ( 26 @.@ 1 km / h ; 16 @.@ 2 mph ) and Sperber making 14 @.@ 3 knots ( 26 @.@ 5 km / h ; 16 @.@ 5 mph ) . At these speeds , the cruising radius fell to 1 @,@ 630 nmi ( 3 @,@ 020 km ; 1 @,@ 880 mi ) . To supplement the steam engines , the ships were fitted with a barquentine rig . Steering was controlled by a single rudder . Schwalbe was fitted with one electricity generator rated at 5 kilowatts ( 6 @.@ 7 hp ) at 67 volts during her modernization in 1903 . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Since Caprivi sought overseas cruisers that would still have significant combat power , the ships were armed with a relatively heavy battery — for ships of their size — of eight 10 @.@ 5 cm K L / 35 guns . These guns were placed in single pedestal mounts and were supplied with 765 rounds of ammunition in total . They had a range of 8 @,@ 200 m ( 26 @,@ 900 ft ) . Four of the guns were mounted in sponsons , with two side by side forward and aft . The remaining four guns were placed amidships in gun ports . Four guns were mounted on each broadside . The gun armament was rounded out by five 3 @.@ 7 cm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) revolver cannon . 
 = = Ships = = 
 = = Service history = = 
 Schwalbe and Sperber spent the majority of their careers on Germany 's colonial stations , where they policed the colonies , suppressed unrest , and showed the flag . Both ships were initially called to German East Africa to help put down the Abushiri Revolt in 1889 – 1890 . Schwalbe remained in the colony after the rebellion was suppressed , but Sperber left for the South Seas Station in German New Guinea . In mid @-@ 1893 , Schwalbe was recalled to Germany for a major overhaul , and Sperber was similarly ordered to return at the end of the year , but while en route she was sent to German Southwest Africa instead . Sperber finally returned to Germany in late 1897 for her overhaul , which was completed the following year . Both ships were decommissioned after their overhauls were finished . 
 In April 1898 , Schwalbe was recommissioned for another tour abroad . She first returned to German East Africa , where the Second Boer War threatened regional stability ; British warships began seizing German vessels suspected of carrying contraband to the Boers . This created a major diplomatic incident and Schwalbe was sent to protect German shipping in the area . The outbreak of the Boxer Rebellion in Qing China in 1900 proved to be more pressing , and so Schwalbe was sent to join the Eight Nation Alliance that had formed to crush the Boxers . During her deployment to China , she helped blockade the Yangtze and sent landing parties ashore to control unrest in Ningpo . In mid @-@ 1902 , she was recalled to Germany for a second time , was overhauled , and was again decommissioned . 
 Sperber meanwhile had been reactivated in December 1902 in response to the Venezuela Crisis of 1902 – 03 ; she was sent there in January 1903 , though by the time she arrived the crisis had subsided and she was no longer necessary . She was therefore transferred first to German East Africa , where she remained only briefly before being moved again , this time to the East Asia Squadron . She served in the unit from late 1903 to early 1905 , when she was reassigned to German Southwest Africa . She returned to Germany in early 1911 and was decommissioned in July . In October 1911 Schwalbe was recommissioned for use as a special purposes ship . Initially , she was to be a survey ship , but the Navy instead decided to use her to replace the old aviso Grille as a training ship . Sperber was stricken from the naval register in 1912 and used as a target ship through World War I. Schwalbe continued on as a training ship during the war until 1918 , when she too was employed as a gunnery training target . Both ships were sold for scrapping in August 1920 and were broken up in 1922 in Hamburg . 
 = Save the Last One = 
 " Save the Last One " is the third episode of the second season of the post @-@ apocalyptic horror television series The Walking Dead . It first aired on AMC in the United States on October 30 , 2011 . The episode was written by Scott M. Gimple and directed by Phil Abraham . In the episode , Shane Walsh ( Jon Bernthal ) and Otis ( Pruitt Taylor Vince ) desperately attempt to flee the walker @-@ infested high school in order to deliver supplies to a dying Carl Grimes ( Chandler Riggs ) . Meanwhile , Daryl Dixon ( Norman Reedus ) and Andrea ( Laurie Holden ) continue to search for Sophia Peletier ( Madison Lintz ) . 
 Production for the episode occurred in July 2011 at Newnan High School in Newnan , Georgia , after receiving approval from the city council and the Coweta County School System . " Save the Last One " was critically acclaimed by television critics , who praised the storyline and the episode 's conclusion . Upon its initial airing , it was watched by 6 @.@ 095 million viewers and garnered a 3 @.@ 1 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , according to Nielsen ratings . 
 = = Plot = = 
 With Shane Walsh ( Jon Bernthal ) and Otis ( Pruitt Taylor Vince ) missing for hours , Hershel Greene ( Scott Wilson ) informs Rick Grimes ( Andrew Lincoln ) and his wife Lori ( Sarah Wayne Callies ) that he must perform the surgery on their son Carl ( Chandler Riggs ) without the necessary equipment . 
 Andrea ( Laurie Holden ) and Daryl Dixon ( Norman Reedus ) go out in search of Sophia Peletier ( Madison Lintz ) , following her mother Carol ( Melissa McBride ) weeping for her loss . Daryl tells Andrea about his childhood , and expresses hope that they will successfully locate Sophia . They stumble upon an abandoned campsite , encountering an undead walker in the process ( a person who had committed suicide by hanging himself from a tree ) . Daryl insists that they leave the walker alone , but Andrea firmly refuses . He asks her if she wants to continue living , to which she exclaims uncertainty . Before returning to the camp , Daryl euthanizes the walker . Upon returning to the camp , Dale Horvath ( Jeffrey DeMunn ) attempts to reconcile with Andrea by returning her handgun . 
 Glenn ( Steven Yeun ) and T @-@ Dog ( IronE Singleton ) journey to the Greene home . Upon arrival , Glenn begins to pray for the well @-@ being of his fellow survivors , while T @-@ Dog receives medical treatment for blood poisoning . Meanwhile Carl goes in and out of consciousness , and briefly recalls What Lies Ahead before going into a seizure . A distraught Lori opines to Rick about ending Carl 's suffering , but Rick insists on keeping him alive . 
 At the high school , Shane and Otis split up after struggling against a horde of walkers . Shane injures his leg while attempting to jump out of a second @-@ story window and Otis hurts his leg after jumping from some retracted bleachers . Upon regrouping , Shane and Otis seemingly are out of options for survival . They begin to limp back to their truck , eventually running low on ammo . 
 Rick and Lori decide to do the operation without the necessary equipment . As they prepare for the operation , Shane arrives with the medical supplies , but without Otis . He claims that Otis sacrificed himself in order to save Carl . But it is later revealed that Shane actually betrayed Otis , shooting him in the leg and leaving him as bait for the walkers . The episode ends with Shane shaving his head , wiping out evidence of scuffling with Otis . 
 = = Production = = 
 Similar to its preceding episode , " Bloodletting " , principal photography for " Save the Last One " commenced in Newnan , Georgia at Newnan High School in July 2011 , after receiving approval from the city council and the Coweta County School System . Site preparation initiated on July 1 , and filming began at the gymnasium of the school over a period of four days from July 7 – 8 and again from July 11 – 12 . The location was temporarily renovated to mirror an abandoned Federal Emergency Management Agency camp . Michael Riley , the production manager for the episode , contacted the Newnan Police Department to collaborate with producers . Because of the large size of the filming location , Riley 's production company notified surrounding neighborhoods to ease inconvenience . 
 " Save the Last One " marked the final appearance of Pruitt Taylor Vince , whose character was killed off in the episode after Shane shoots him ; this subsequently marks a turning point for him as a false protagonist . In an interview with Entertainment Weekly , writer Robert Kirkman explained the reaction of Jon Bernthal to the particular scene : 
 " Jon Bernthal is a tremendous talent and he ’ s got a lot of professionalism . A lot of the actors came in to the room as we were starting this season and Bernthal was one of those actors . He was aware of a lot of the things that were coming up and we talked to him about his character and what we had planned for him this season and he was on board with a lot of it . It was nice being able to run though scenarios with him and get his opinion on how he perceived his character . Because actors , a lot of times , think about their characters more than the writers because they ’ re focused on that single character for months of their lives , if not years . He was all prepared for this . " 
 Kirkman expressed that the death of Otis was a " somewhat justifiable homicide " , and retorted that " Otis was slowing him down , and Carl 's life hangs in the balance . " He continued : " It 's [ The Walking Dead ] and we 're existing in that gray area and we 're really pushing the boundaries of that . But at the end of the day , Shane shot that guy and left him for dead and ran off . It 's a pretty dark moment and it informs Shane 's character and sets up a lot of things that are going to be happening moving forward . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Save the Last One " was originally broadcast on October 30 , 2011 in the United States on AMC . It was viewed by 6 @.@ 095 million viewers , and attained a 3 @.@ 1 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , according to Nielsen ratings . The episode was the highest @-@ rated program of the day , garnering considerably higher ratings than a stock car racing event as part of the 2011 NASCAR Sprint Cup Series on ESPN and Next Iron Chef on Food Network . Similarly , the episode became the second highest @-@ rated cable program of the week dated October 30 , attaining significantly higher ratings that WWE Raw but scoring considerably lower than a game between the Baltimore Ravens and the Jacksonville Jaguars as part of the 2011 NFL season . Total viewership and ratings for " Save the Last One " moderately declined from the previous episode , " Bloodletting " , which was viewed by 6 @.@ 70 million viewers and received a 3 @.@ 6 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 " Save the Last One " was critically acclaimed by television critics . IGN 's Eric Goldman praised the episode , giving it a nine out of ten , signifying an " amazing " rating . He opined that it was his favorite episode since the series ' pilot episode , " Days Gone Bye " , and added that " it had scary zombie scenes , good action , interesting character interaction and a revelation at the end that gave us a whole lot to process . " John Serba of The Grand Rapids Press was split on " Save the Last One " ; while asserting that it was " imminently watchable " , he felt that the episode was unbalanced as a whole and criticized the dialogue . Serba wrote : " The show continues to display a disproportionate amount of dialogue compared to the development of its characters . It needs to do a better job of biding its time between crowd @-@ pleasing zombie attacks . " HitFix 's Alan Sepinwall echoed similar thoughts , opining , " the characters need more depth . The show seems to be setting itself out to be a slow @-@ burning character study in the context of a zombie apocalypse — and with enough chase scenes and other scares to entice folks who just want brain @-@ eating action — and the characters need to be more complex than they 've been shown to be so far . " 
 The Baltimore Sun journalist Andrew Conrad commended the episode , citing that the episodic pace was faster than the preceding episode . Josh Wigler of MTV opined : " Tonight 's episode was all about pairs . Shane and Otis , two soldiers in a foxhole . Rick and Lori , two parents at odds over how to handle their son 's failing condition . Glenn and Maggie , two strangers desperate to make a connection . Andrea and Daryl , two opposites trying to find a reason to move on . Great scenes with all of these duos , and it really goes to show just how fantastic The Walking Dead cast is , both in the loud and quiet moments . " Zack Handlen from The A.V. Club awarded the episode a ' B + ' grade , and felt that the episode was superior to the previous episode . In contrast , Aaron Rutkoff of The Wall Street Journal was less enthusiastic about the episode , expressing , " truth be told , after three episodes very little has happened so far this season . " TV Fanatic 's Sean McKenna asserted that despite not having any direction , " Save the Last One " managed to retain the " tension and action that makes this show a thrill ride every week . " He added : " I 'm sure for some the slow pace in real time is something of a bother , but for me it adds to the intensity of the characters ' situation and the show itself . " McKenna ultimately gave the episode a 4 @.@ 5 out of 5 stars . Similarly , Morgan Jeffrey of Digital Spy stated that the episode was the strongest installment of the season as well as amongst the series ' best installments . 
 Critics praised the character development of Shane in the episode , as well as the execution of Otis . Nate Rawlings of Time felt that it was a dark moment for the series , and felt that it added anticipation to future development . He wrote : " At some point , Shane will have to come clean with Rick about what happened to Otis . Given Rick ’ s extremely rigid morale [ sic ] code and Shane ’ s now demonstrated willingness to do whatever it takes to survive , the showdown promises to be bigger than just a battle of two alpha males . The Rick / Shane divide is a battle of two leaders with different ideas of humanity and survival . " Mark Maurer of The Star @-@ Ledger opined that " both the multi @-@ layered opening [ ... ] illustrates how Shane ’ s impulsive nature makes him a valuable if ruthless warrior . " Handlen appreciated the character development of Shane , writing , " Shane has long been the dark horse of the group , the one most likely to go off the morality reservation , and this reveal works well to bring him that much closer to darkness . It 's not the subtlest moment [ ... ] but , given how friendly and cool Otis was , and given how well the two seemed to be working together , it 's a strong twist . " He added that because of the death of Otis , the show now has a sense of direction . " His decision to sacrifice Otis is easy enough to rationalize ; somebody had to get back for Carl 's sake , Shane was faster , and both of them probably weren 't going to make it . That 's the beauty of it . In a certain light , he made the right choice . " Morgan Jeffrey wrote : " This week 's installment delivered even more scares than usual — Shane 's escape from the high school was almost unbearably tense . " 
 = M @-@ 27 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 27 is a north – south state trunkline highway in the extreme north of the Lower Peninsula of the US state of Michigan . The trunkline runs between Interstate 75 ( I @-@ 75 ) just north of Indian River and Cheboygan , where it meets US Highway 23 ( US 23 ) near Lake Huron . It remains as a relic of the old US 27 which disappeared north of Grayling after being supplanted by I @-@ 75 , which lies close to old US 27 between Grayling and Indian River . 
 = = Route description = = 
 I @-@ 75 takes a more direct route between Indian River and Mackinaw City . M @-@ 27 follows old US 27 through Topinabee and Cheboygan . With US 23 it is a scenic , if indirect , alternative to I @-@ 75 on its approach to the Mackinac Bridge . M @-@ 27 runs along the western shore of Mullett Lake and forms the main street of Topinabee . The highway intersects M @-@ 33 near the confluence of the Cheboygan and Black rivers . North of the M @-@ 33 junction , M @-@ 27 runs parallel to the Cheboygan River on the west river bank into downtown Cheboygan . 
 M @-@ 27 has the local road name of Main Street in Cheboygan and Straits Highway outside of the city . State Street ( US 23 ) and Main Street ( M @-@ 27 ) form the two major streets in the Cheboygan street grid . The main downtown businesses are located along Main Street south to the city limits . The highway has not been listed on the National Highway System , a network of roads important to the country 's defense , economy and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Previous alignment = = = 
 This is the second time a highway was designated M @-@ 27 in Michigan . The original M @-@ 27 was located in The Thumb , running from the Mount Clemens area east and north through New Baltimore to Port Huron . There it ran through <unk> and Minden City to Harbor Beach and along Lake Huron to Port Austin . This version of M @-@ 27 was designated by July 1 , 1919 , and would last until 1926 . All of the original M @-@ 27 was given to other contemporary highways including M @-@ 29 ( Mount Clemens to Port Huron ) , M @-@ 51 ( Port Huron to M @-@ 83 ) , and M @-@ 29 ( Harbor Beach to Port Austin ) . 
 = = = Current alignment = = = 
 In the late 1950s , US 27 was the main highway connection between Grayling , Gaylord , and Cheboygan . After the construction of the Mackinac Bridge , US 27 was extended north to St. Ignace . The construction of I @-@ 75 in the early 1960s obsoleted the northern portion of US 27 . Between Grayling and Indian River , I @-@ 75 replaced US 27 as the main highway in the area . North of Indian River , I @-@ 75 was built along a different routing . Where US 27 ran northwest through Topinabee to Cheboygan and then concurrently along US 23 to Mackinaw City , I @-@ 75 was built due north of Indian River before turning northwest parallel and several miles inland from Lake Huron , bypassing Cheboygan completely . M @-@ 27 was designated in the latter half of 1961 on the current alignment replacing US 27 which was truncated back to Grayling . Today , the stretch from Grayling to about Wolverine is known as Old 27 , and from there to Indian River , it is called Straits Highway . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is in Cheboygan County . 
 = Ernie Fletcher = 
 Ernest Lee " Ernie " Fletcher ( born November 12 , 1952 ) is an American physician and politician . In 1998 , he was elected to the first of three consecutive terms in the United States House of Representatives ; he resigned in 2003 after being elected the 60th Governor of Kentucky and served in that office until 2007 . Prior to his entry into politics , Fletcher was a family practice physician and a Baptist lay minister . He is the second physician to be elected Governor of Kentucky ; the first was Luke P. Blackburn in 1879 . He is a member of the Republican Party . 
 Fletcher graduated from the University of Kentucky and joined the United States Air Force to pursue his dream of becoming an astronaut . He left the Air Force after budget cuts reduced his squadron 's flying time and earned a degree in medicine , hoping to earn a spot as a civilian on a space mission . Deteriorating eyesight eventually ended those hopes , and he entered private practice as a physician and conducted services as a Baptist lay minister . He became active in politics and was elected to the Kentucky House of Representatives in 1994 . Two years later he ran for a seat in the U.S. House of Representatives , but lost to incumbent Scotty Baesler . When Baesler retired to run for a seat in the U.S. Senate , Fletcher again ran for the congressional seat and defeated Democratic state senator Ernesto Scorsone . He soon became one of the House Republican caucus ' top advisors regarding health care legislation , particularly the Patients ' Bill of Rights . 
 Fletcher was elected governor in 2003 over state Attorney General Ben Chandler . Early in his term , Fletcher achieved some savings to the state by reorganizing the executive branch . He proposed an overhaul to the state tax code in 2004 , but was unable to get it passed through the General Assembly . When Republicans in the state senate insisted on tying the reforms to the state budget , the legislature adjourned without passing either , and the state operated under an executive spending plan drafted by Fletcher until 2005 , when both the budget and the reforms were passed . Later in 2005 , Attorney General Greg Stumbo , the state 's highest @-@ ranking Democrat , launched an investigation into whether the Fletcher administration 's hiring practices violated the state 's merit system . A grand jury returned several indictments against members of Fletcher 's staff , and eventually against Fletcher himself . Fletcher issued pardons for anyone on his staff implicated in the investigation , but did not pardon himself . Though the investigation was ended by an agreement between Fletcher and Stumbo in late 2006 , it continued to overshadow Fletcher 's re @-@ election bid in 2007 . After turning back a challenge in the Republican primary by former Congresswoman Anne Northup , Fletcher lost the general election to Democrat Steve Beshear . After his term as governor , he returned to the medical field as founder and CEO of Alton Healthcare . He is married and has two grown children . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Ernest Lee Fletcher was born in Mount Sterling , Kentucky on November 12 , 1952 . He was the third of four children born to Harold Fletcher , Sr. and his wife , Marie . The family owned a farm and operated a general store near the community of Means . Harold Fletcher also worked for Columbia Gas . When Ernie was three weeks old , Harold was transferred to Huntington , West Virginia . Two years later , the Fletchers returned to Robertson County , Kentucky , where they lived until Ernie Fletcher began the first grade . The family moved once more and finally settled in Lexington . 
 Fletcher attended Lafayette High School in Lexington where he was a member of the National Beta Club . During his senior year , he was an all @-@ state saxophone player and was elected prom king . After graduating in 1970 , he enrolled at the University of Kentucky . He pledged and became a member of the Delta Tau Delta fraternity . After his freshman year , he married his high school sweetheart , Glenna Foster . The couple had two children , Rachel and Ben , and four grandchildren . 
 Fletcher aspired to become an astronaut , and joined the Air Force Reserve Officer Training Corps . In 1974 , he earned a Bachelor of Science degree in mechanical engineering , graduating with top honors . After graduation , he joined the U.S. Air Force . After flight training in Oklahoma , he was stationed in Alaska where he served as a F @-@ 4E Aircraft commander and NORAD Alert Force commander . During the Cold War , his duties included commanding squadrons to intercept Soviet military aircraft . In 1980 , as budget cutbacks were reducing his squadron 's flying time , Fletcher turned down a regular commission in the Air Force . He left the Air Force with the rank of captain , having received the Air Force Commendation Medal and the Outstanding Unit Award . 
 Fletcher enrolled in the University of Kentucky College of Medicine , hoping that a medical degree , along with a military background , would earn him a civilian spot on a space mission . In 1984 , he graduated medical school with a Doctor of Medicine degree , but his deteriorating eyesight forced him to abandon his dreams of becoming an astronaut . 
 In 1983 , the Lexington Primitive Baptist church that Fletcher attended ordained him as a lay minister . In 1984 , he opened a family medical practice in Lexington . Along with former classmate Dr. James D. B. George , he co @-@ founded the South Lexington Family Physicians in 1987 . For two years , he concurrently held the title of chief executive officer of the Saint Joseph Medical Foundation , an organization that solicits private gifts to Saint Joseph Regional Medical Center in Lexington . In 1989 , Fletcher 's church called him to become its unpaid pastor , but over the years , he grew to question some of the church 's doctrines , desiring it to become more evangelistic . Consequently , he left the Primitive Baptist denomination in 1994 and joined the Porter Memorial Baptist Church , a Southern Baptist congregation . 
 = = Legislative career = = 
 Through his church ministry , Fletcher became acquainted with a group of social conservatives that gained control of the Fayette County Republican Party in 1990 . ( Fayette County and the city of Lexington operate under the merged Lexington @-@ Fayette Urban County Government ) . Fletcher accepted an invitation to become a member of the county Republican committee . In 1994 , he was elected to the Kentucky House of Representatives , defeating incumbent Democrat Leslie Trapp . He represented Kentucky 's 78th District and served on the Kentucky Commission on Poverty and the Task Force on Higher Education . He was also chosen by Governor Paul E. Patton to assist with reforming the state 's health @-@ care system . 
 As a result of legislative redistricting in 1996 , Fletcher 's district was consolidated with the one represented by fellow Republican Stan Cave . Rather than challenge a member of his own party , Fletcher decided to run for a seat representing Kentucky 's 6th District in the U.S. House of Representatives later that year . After winning a three @-@ way Republican primary by 4 votes over his closest opponent , he was defeated by incumbent Democrat Scotty Baesler by just over 25 @,@ 000 votes . In 1998 , Baesler resigned his seat to run for the U.S. Senate seat vacated due to the retirement of Senator Wendell H. Ford . Fletcher won the Republican primary for Baesler 's seat by a wide margin . In the general election , Fletcher faced Democrat Ernesto Scorsone . The Lexington Herald @-@ Leader billed the race as " a classic joust between the left and the right " . Fletcher was strongly opposed to abortion , advocated a " flatter , fairer , simpler " tax system , and called for returning most federal education funding to local communities . Scorsone supported abortion rights , called a flat tax " too regressive " , and favored national educational testing and standards . Fletcher defeated Scorsone by a vote of 104 @,@ 046 to 90 @,@ 033 , with third @-@ party candidate W. S. <unk> garnering 1 @,@ 839 votes . 
 Within months of arriving in Washington , D.C. , Fletcher was selected as the leadership liaison for the 17 @-@ member freshman class of Republican legislators . He was appointed to the Committee on Education and Workforce , and John Boehner , chair of the committee 's employer / employee relations subcommittee , chose Fletcher as his vice @-@ chair . The committee 's purpose is to oversee the rules for employer @-@ paid health plans , among other issues , and although it is rare for a freshman legislator to attain a committee leadership post , Boehner cited Fletcher 's experience in the medical field and work on reforming the Kentucky health care system as reasons for the appointment . Fletcher also served as a member of the House Committees on the Budget and Agriculture . In June 1999 , he sponsored an amendment to a youth violence bill that allowed school districts to use federal funds to develop curricula which included elements designed to promote and enhance students ' moral character ; the amendment passed 422 — 1 . Later , Fletcher was assigned to the Committee on Energy and Commerce and was selected as chairman of the Policy Subcommittee on Health . 
 During the debate over the proposed Patients ' Bill of Rights legislation , Fletcher opposed a Democratic proposal that would have allowed individuals to sue their health maintenance organizations ( HMOs ) , favoring instead a more limited bill drafted by Republican leadership that expanded the patient 's ability to appeal HMO decisions . Many doctors in the Republican legislative caucus felt their party 's bill did not go far enough ; Fletcher and Tennessee Senator Bill Frist were notable exceptions . Fletcher 's position cost him the support of the Kentucky Medical Association ( KMA ) . After contributing to his campaign against Scorsone in 1998 , KMA backed Scotty Baesler 's bid to regain his old seat from Fletcher in 2000 . However , Baesler only captured 35 percent of the vote to Fletcher 's 53 percent . The remaining 12 percent went to third @-@ party candidate Gatewood Galbraith . 
 After the 2000 election , Fletcher crafted a compromise bill that allowed patients to sue their HMOs in federal court , capped pain and suffering awards at $ 500 @,@ 000 , and eliminated punitive damage awards . Despite an eventual compromise allowing patient lawsuits to go to state courts under certain circumstances and heavy lobbying in favor of Fletcher 's bill by President George W. Bush , the House refused to pass it , favoring an alternative proposal by Georgia 's Charlie Norwood that was less restrictive on patient lawsuits . 
 Fletcher faced no major @-@ party opposition in his re @-@ election bid in 2002 after the only Democrat in the race , 24 @-@ year @-@ old Roy Miller Cornett Jr . , withdrew his candidacy . Independent Gatewood Galbraith again made the race ; Libertarian Mark Gailey also mounted a challenge . In the final vote tally , Fletcher received 115 @,@ 522 votes to Galbraith 's 41 @,@ 853 and Gailey 's 3 @,@ 313 . 
 = = 2003 gubernatorial election = = 
 In 2002 , Fletcher was encouraged by Senator Mitch McConnell , the leader of Kentucky 's Republican Party , to run for governor and formed an exploratory committee the same year . On December 2 , 2002 , he announced that he would run on a ticket with McConnell aide Hunter Bates . Early in 2003 , a Republican college student named Curtis Shain challenged Bates ' candidacy on grounds that he did not meet the residency requirements set forth for the lieutenant governor in the state constitution . Under the constitution , candidates for both governor and lieutenant governor must be citizens of the state for at least six years prior to the election . From August 1995 to February 2002 , Bates and his wife rented an apartment in Alexandria , Virginia while Bates was working for a law firm in Washington , D.C. , and later , as McConnell 's chief of staff . Bob Heleringer , a former state representative from suburban Louisville and the running mate of Republican gubernatorial candidate Steve Nunn , joined the suit as a plaintiff . In March 2003 , an Oldham County judge ruled that Bates had not established residency in Kentucky . He cited the fact that from 1995 to 2002 , Bates held a Virginia driver 's license , paid Virginia income taxes , and " regularly " slept in his apartment in Virginia . Bates did not appeal the ruling because by allowing the judge to declare a vacancy on the ballot , Fletcher was able to name a replacement running mate , an option that would not have been afforded him had Bates withdrawn . 
 Fletcher chose Steve Pence , United States Attorney for the Western District of Kentucky , as his new running mate . Heleringer continued his legal challenge , first claiming that Bates ' ineligibility should have invalidated the entire Fletcher / Bates ticket and then that Fletcher should not have been allowed to name a replacement for an unqualified candidate . The Kentucky Supreme Court rejected that argument on May 7 , 2003 , though the justices ' reasons for doing so varied and the final opinion conceded that " [ t ] his is a close case on the law , and Heleringer has presented legal issues worthy of this court 's time and attention " . The state Board of Elections instructed all county clerks to count absentee ballots cast for Fletcher and Bates as votes for Fletcher and Pence . 
 In the Republican primary , Fletcher received 53 percent of the vote , besting Nunn , Jefferson County judge / executive Rebecca Jackson , and state senator Virgil Moore . In the Democratic primary , Attorney General Ben Chandler defeated Speaker of the House Jody Richards . Chandler , the grandson of former governor A. B. " Happy " Chandler , was hurt in the closing days of the campaign when a third challenger , businessman Bruce Lunsford dropped out of the race and endorsed Richards . Chandler won the Democratic primary by just 3 @.@ 7 percentage points and was forced to reorganize his campaign . Consequently , Fletcher entered the general election as the favorite . 
 Due to the funding from the Republican Governors Association , Fletcher held a two @-@ to @-@ one fundraising advantage over Chandler . A sex @-@ for @-@ favors scandal that ensnared sitting Democratic governor Paul Patton , as well as a predicted $ 710 million shortfall in the upcoming budget , damaged the entire Democratic slate of candidates ' chances for election . Fletcher capitalized on these issues , promising to " clean up the mess " in Frankfort , and won the election by a vote of 596 @,@ 284 to 487 @,@ 159 . In all , Republicans captured four of the seven statewide constitutional offices in 2003 ; Trey Grayson was elected Secretary of State and Richie Farmer was elected Commissioner of Agriculture . Fletcher resigned his seat in the House on December 8 , 2003 and assumed the governorship the following day . Fletcher 's victory made him the first Republican elected governor of Kentucky since 1971 , and his margin of victory was the largest ever for a Republican in a Kentucky gubernatorial election . 
 = = Governor of Kentucky = = 
 Fletcher made economic development a priority , and Kentucky ranked fourth among all U.S. states in number of jobs created during his administration . One of his first actions as governor was to reorganize the executive branch , condensing the number of cabinet positions from fourteen to nine . He dissolved the former Kentucky Horse Racing Commission and instead created the Kentucky Horse Racing Authority to promote and regulate the state 's horse racing industry . To improve the state 's management of Medicaid , he rolled back some of the program 's requirements and unveiled a plan to focus on improvements in care , benefit management , and technology . Fletcher also launched " Get Healthy Kentucky ! , " an initiative to promote healthier lifestyles for Kentuckians . 
 = = = 2004 state budget dispute = = = 
 Throughout Fletcher 's term , the Kentucky Senate was controlled by Republicans , while Democrats held a majority in the state House of Representatives . Consequently , Fletcher had difficulty getting legislation enacted in the General Assembly . Early in the 2004 legislative session , he presented a plan for tax reform that he claimed was " revenue neutral " and would " modernize " the state tax code . The plan was drafted with input from seven Democratic legislators in the House , none of them in leadership roles , leading to claims that Fletcher was trying to circumvent House leadership . As the session wore on , Republicans insisted on tying the tax reform package to the proposed state budget , while Democrats wanted to vote on the measures separately . Despite last minute attempts at a compromise as the session drew to a close , the Assembly passed neither the tax reform package nor a state budget . The contentious session ended with only a few accomplishments , including passage of a fetal homicide law , an anti @-@ price gouging measure , and a law barring the state public service commission from regulating broadband Internet providers beyond what restrictions were put in place by the Federal Communications Commission . 
 The 2004 session marked the second consecutive session in which the General Assembly had failed to pass a biennial budget ; the first occurred in 2002 under Governor Patton . When the fiscal year ended without a budget in place , responsibility for state expenditures fell to Fletcher . As it had been in 2002 , spending was governed by an executive spending plan created by the governor . Democratic Attorney General Greg Stumbo filed suit asking for a determination on the extent of Fletcher 's ability to spend without legislative approval . A similar suit , filed after the 2002 session ended in deadlock , was rendered moot when the legislature passed a budget in a special session prior to the conclusion of the lawsuit . A judicial review by a Franklin County circuit court judge approved Fletcher 's spending plan but forbade spending on new capital projects and programs . In late December 2004 , a judge ruled that Fletcher 's plan could continue to govern spending until the end of the fiscal year on June 30 , 2005 , but " thereafter " executive spending was to be limited to " funds demonstrated to be for limited and specific essential services . " 
 On May 19 , 2005 , the Kentucky Supreme Court issued a 4 – 3 decision stating that the General Assembly had acted unconstitutionally by not passing a budget and that Fletcher had acted outside his constitutional authority by spending money not specifically appropriated by the legislature . The majority opinion rejected the lower court 's exception for " specific essential services " , saying " If the legislative department fails to appropriate funds deemed sufficient to operate the executive department at a desired level of services , the executive department must serve the citizenry as best it can with what it is given . If the citizenry deems those services insufficient , it will exercise its own constitutional power — the ballot . " Chief Justice Joseph Lambert dissented , claiming the executive spending plan was necessary . Two other justices , in a separate opinion , disagreed with the majority that federal and state constitutional mandates should still be funded in the absence of a budget . In their dissent , they argued that the threat of a government shutdown would act as an impetus for the General Assembly to engage in timely budget @-@ making . The decision took no retroactive steps to change the actions it ruled unconstitutional , but it served as a precedent for any future cases of budgetary gridlock . 
 = = = Legislative interim and 2005 legislative session = = = 
 In June 2004 , Fletcher 's aircraft caused a security scare that triggered a brief evacuation of the U.S. Capitol and Supreme Court building . Shortly after takeoff en route to memorial services for former president Ronald Reagan , the transponder on Fletcher 's plane malfunctioned , leading officials at Reagan National Airport to report an unauthorized aircraft entering restricted airspace . Two F @-@ 15 fighters were dispatched to investigate , and Fletcher 's plane was escorted to its destination by two Blackhawk helicopters . The plane , a 33 @-@ year @-@ old Beechcraft King Air , was the oldest of its model still in operation . An investigation by the Federal Aviation Administration ( FAA ) found that the crew of Fletcher 's plane maintained radio contact with air traffic officials and received clearance to enter the restricted air space . The investigation determined that miscommunication by air traffic controllers sparked the panic , and in the aftermath of the incident , the FAA adopted policies to prevent future errors of a similar nature . 
 In July 2004 , Fletcher announced a plan to unify the state 's branding to improve its public perception . Shortly after the announcement , late @-@ night comedians Craig Kilborn and Jay Leno made some tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek suggestions for the new slogan on The Late Late Show and The Tonight Show , respectively . In response , Fletcher wrote a letter to both comedians taking exception to the jokes and was invited to appear on both programs . Citing Leno 's larger audience and earlier time slot , Fletcher agreed to appear on The Tonight Show , where he presented Leno with a Louisville Slugger baseball bat and traded jocular barbs about the relative advantages of Kentucky and Los Angeles where The Tonight Show is taped . Eventually , four slogans were chosen to be voted on online as well as at interstate travel centers . In December 2004 , " Kentucky : Unbridled Spirit " was chosen as the winning slogan and was printed on road signs , state documents , and souvenirs . A 2007 study determined that 88 @.@ 9 % of Kentuckians could correctly identify the slogan and its logo . Further , 64 % of those surveyed across a ten @-@ state region recognized the slogan and logo , higher than any other brand tested in the study . 
 In the second half of 2004 , Fletcher proposed changes to the health benefits of state workers and retirees . Fletcher 's plan provided discounts for members who engaged in healthier behavior , which he called a transition from a sickness initiative to a wellness initiative . Acknowledging that out @-@ of @-@ pocket expenses would rise , Fletcher proposed a 1 % salary increase to offset the additional costs . State employees , particularly public school teachers , broadly opposed Fletcher 's plan , and the Kentucky Educators Association called for an indefinite strike , to begin October 27 , 2004 . To address the opposition , Fletcher called a special session of the legislature to begin October 5 , 2004 . Although the state was still operating under an executive spending plan , Fletcher did not include the budget or his tax reform proposal in the session 's agenda , a move praised by both parties , allowing them to focus only on concerns over the health plan . In a fifteen @-@ day session , the General Assembly passed a plan that allocated $ 190 million more to health insurance for state workers and restored many of the most popular benefits in the previous insurance plan . Immediately after the session adjourned , the Kentucky Educators Association voted to cancel their proposed strike . 
 On November 8 , 2004 , Fletcher signed a death warrant for Thomas Clyde Bowling , who was convicted of a double murder in 1990 and sentenced to death by lethal injection . A group of doctors requested an investigation by the Kentucky Board of Medical <unk> to determine whether Fletcher 's medical license should be revoked for that action . Kentucky requires doctors to follow the guidelines of the American Medical Association , which forbid doctors from participating in an execution . On January 13 , 2005 , the Board of Medical <unk> found that Fletcher was acting in his capacity as governor , not as a doctor , when he signed the warrant and ruled that his license was not subject to forfeiture by that action . 
 During the General Assembly 's 2005 session , Fletcher again proposed his tax reform plan , and late in the session , both houses passed it . The plan raised sin taxes on cigarettes and alcohol , as well as upping taxes on satellite television service and motel rooms . Businesses were also subjected to a gross receipts tax . In exchange , corporate taxes were lowered , as were income taxes for individuals who earned less than $ 75 @,@ 000 annually ; 300 @,@ 000 low @-@ wage earners were dropped from the income tax rolls altogether . The Assembly also passed a budget for the remainder of the biennium , abolished the state 's public campaign finance laws , and passed new school nutrition guidelines . 
 = = = Merit system investigation = = = 
 In May 2005 , Attorney General Stumbo began an investigation of allegations that the Fletcher administration circumvented the state merit system for hiring , promoting , demoting and firing state employees by basing decisions on employees ' political loyalties . The investigation was prompted by a 276 @-@ page complaint filed by Douglas W. <unk> , the assistant personnel director for the Kentucky Transportation Cabinet . Fletcher , who was on a trade mission in Japan when news of the investigation broke , conceded via telephone news conference that his office may have made " mistakes " with regard to hiring that stemmed from not having a formal process for handling employment recommendations . Upon his return from Japan , Fletcher denied that the " mistakes " by his administration were illegal and called the investigation by Stumbo " the beginning of the 2007 governor 's race " , an allusion to Stumbo 's potential candidacy in 2007 . Stumbo denied any plans to run for governor in 2007 , although he eventually became gubernatorial candidate Bruce Lunsford 's running mate in the election , losing in the Democratic primary . 
 A grand jury was empaneled in June 2005 to investigate the charges against Fletcher 's administration . By August , the jury had returned indictments against nine administration officials , including state Republican Party chairman Darrell Brock Jr. and acting Transportation Secretary Bill Nighbert . All of the indictments were for misdemeanors such as conspiracy except those against Administrative Services Commissioner Dan <unk> , who was charged with 22 felonies ( 20 counts of physical evidence tampering and 2 counts of witness tampering ) in addition to 13 misdemeanors . On August 29 , Fletcher granted pardons to the nine indicted administration officials and issued a blanket pardon for " any and all persons who have committed , or may be accused of committing , any offense " with regard to the investigation . Fletcher exempted himself from the blanket pardon . The next day , Fletcher was called to testify before the grand jury , but refused to answer any questions , invoking his Fifth Amendment right against self @-@ incrimination . 
 In mid @-@ September , after Fletcher issued the pardons , a Courier @-@ Journal poll found Fletcher 's approval rating at 38 percent , tying the lowest rating reached by his predecessor , Paul E. Patton , during the sex scandal that tarnished his administration . On September 14 , 2005 , Fletcher fired nine employees , including four of the nine he pardoned two weeks earlier . The firings were praised by Fletcher critic Charles Wells of the Kentucky Association of State Employees , who said : " When all else fails , the governor did the right thing . " However , Democratic state senator and former governor Julian Carroll criticized Fletcher for not firing the indicted officials when he issued the pardons . Fletcher also called for the firing of state Republican Party chair Darrell Brock , Jr. due to Brock 's role in the merit scandal . The state Republican executive committee met on September 17 , but did not act on Fletcher 's call to fire Brock . 
 The grand jury continued its investigation , issuing five more indictments after Fletcher issued his blanket pardon . Two were returned against members of Fletcher 's staff , and two were against unpaid advisors to Fletcher . The fifth was issued against Acting Secretary Nighbert for retaliation against a whistleblower . Only the additional charge against Nighbert was alleged to have occurred after Fletcher issued the pardon . On October 24 , 2005 , Fletcher filed a motion asking Franklin Circuit Court Judge William Graham to order the grand jury to stop issuing indictments for offenses that occurred prior to the blanket pardon ; only the names of indicted officials could be included in the jury 's final report . On November 16 , Graham ruled that the grand jury could continue issuing indictments , but in a separate ruling , dismissed the indictments against Fletcher 's staff and volunteer advisors on grounds that they were covered by the pardon . Graham did not rule on the latest indictment against Nighbert . The Kentucky Court of Appeals affirmed Graham 's ruling on December 16 . Immediately after the Court of Appeals ' ruling , Fletcher announced his intent to appeal the ruling to the Kentucky Supreme Court . 
 = = = 2006 legislative session = = = 
 On February 12 , 2006 , shortly after the beginning of the General Assembly 's legislative session , Fletcher was hospitalized with abdominal pain . Doctors at St. Joseph East hospital in Lexington found a gallstone in his common bile duct and also diagnosed him with an inflamed pancreas and gallbladder disease . After surgery to remove the gallbladder , Fletcher developed a blood infection that slowed his recovery , but was discharged from the hospital on March 1 . Days later , he returned to St. Joseph 's with a blood clot which had to be dissolved , resulting in another five @-@ day stay in the hospital . Fletcher staffers insisted that his absence did not have a negative impact on his ability to get legislation passed during the session . A right @-@ to @-@ work law and a repeal of the state 's prevailing wage law – both advocated by Fletcher – failed early in the session , but both had been considered unlikely to pass before the session started . Among the bills that did pass the session were a mandatory seat belt law , a law requiring children under 16 years old to wear a helmet when operating an all @-@ terrain vehicle , and legislation allowing the Ten Commandments to be posted on Capitol grounds in a historical context . 
 The Assembly passed a biennial budget , but did not allow enough time in the session to reconvene and potentially override any of Fletcher 's vetoes . In an attempt to avoid " excessive debt " , Fletcher used his line @-@ item veto to trim $ 370 million in projects from the budget passed by the Assembly . Although falling far short of his initial prediction of vetoing $ 938 million , Fletcher used the line @-@ item veto more than any other governor in state history . One project not vetoed by Fletcher was $ 11 million for the University of the Cumberlands to build a pharmacy school . LGBT rights groups had asked Fletcher to veto the funds because the university , a private Baptist school , had expelled a student for being openly gay . 
 One of Fletcher 's priorities that was not resolved during the session was the correction of unintended tax increases on businesses that resulted from the tax reform plan passed in 2005 . Fletcher called a special legislative session for mid @-@ June so that the legislature could amend the plan and also authorize tax breaks designed to lure a proposed <unk> power plant to Henderson . Republican Senate President David L. Williams asked Fletcher to include tax breaks for other businesses as well , but Fletcher insisted on a sparse legislative agenda . The session convened for five days and passed the tax breaks and amended tax reform plan unanimously in both houses . Fletcher applauded the legislature 's efficiency . 
 = = = Investigation concludes = = = 
 As the Kentucky Supreme Court prepared to hear Fletcher 's appeal on whether the grand jury could continue to indict people covered by his blanket pardon , two of the court 's seven justices recused themselves from the case , citing conflicts of interest . Kentucky 's constitution provides that , in the case of more than one recusal on the court , the governor is to appoint special justices to replace them . Accordingly , Fletcher named two replacements , but one of those – Circuit Judge Jeffrey Burdette – declined to serve on grounds that he had contributed to Fletcher 's 2003 gubernatorial campaign . Fletcher then named another special justice to replace Burdette , consistent with a precedent set by former Democratic Governor Brereton Jones . Stumbo challenged this third appointment , claiming that Burdette 's refusal to serve created only one vacancy on the court , and that the case could be tried with six justices . The Kentucky Supreme Court sustained Stumbo 's complaint . In a 4 – 2 ruling issued May 18 , 2006 , the Kentucky Supreme Court barred the grand jury from issuing further indictments against individuals covered by Fletcher 's blanket pardon , reversing the Court of Appeals . The ruling did not affect indictments for crimes allegedly committed after the pardon was issued . The Supreme Court also held that the grand jury could issue a general report of its findings at the conclusion of its investigation , but left open the question of whether the names of unindicted individuals could appear in the report . A later decision by the Court of Appeals found that unindicted individuals could not be named in the report . 
 Just prior to the Supreme Court 's ruling , the grand jury handed down indictments against Fletcher for three misdemeanors – conspiracy , official misconduct , and political discrimination . Fletcher did not appear at his arraignment on June 9 because he was on vacation in Florida ; his attorney entered " not guilty " pleas to all three charges on his behalf . On August 11 , 2006 , Special Judge David E. Melcher ruled that because the personnel violations were allegedly committed while Fletcher was acting in his official capacity as governor , he was protected by executive immunity and could not be prosecuted until he left office . Melcher asked that the two sides work together to reach a settlement in the case . On August 24 , Fletcher and Stumbo announced such an agreement . Under the settlement , Fletcher acknowledged that evidence " strongly indicate [ d ] wrongdoing by his administration " but did not admit any wrongdoing personally . Fletcher also acknowledged that Stumbo 's prosecution of the case " [ was a ] necessary and proper [ exercise ] of his constitutional duty " and ensured that abuses of the merit system would be ended . In addition to dropping the charges against Fletcher , Stumbo conceded that any violations by Fletcher 's administration were " without malice " . Four members of the state Personnel Board who were appointed by Fletcher were required to step down . Their replacements would be chosen by Fletcher from a list provided by Stumbo . 
 The grand jury issued its report on the investigation in October 2006 , and a judge ordered it released to the public on November 16 . The report categorized the Fletcher administration 's actions as " a widespread and coordinated plan to violate merit hiring laws . " It charged that " This investigation was not about a few people here and there who made some mistakes as Governor Ernie Fletcher had claimed , " and lamented that the blanket pardon issued by Fletcher , coupled with Fletcher taking the Fifth , made it " difficult to get to the bottom of the facts of this case .... As a result , [ the grand jury was ] in part forced to rely on documentary evidence to piece together the facts of the case . " Fletcher opined that the allegations in the report were inconsistent with his settlement with Stumbo , which acknowledged that Fletcher 's administration acted " without malice . " 
 = = 2007 gubernatorial election = = 
 In early 2005 , Fletcher announced his intent to run for re @-@ election . Shortly after Fletcher was indicted by the grand jury in 2006 , Lieutenant Governor Pence announced that he would not be Fletcher 's running mate during his re @-@ election bid . Fletcher asked for Pence 's immediate resignation as lieutenant governor . Pence declined , but did tender his resignation as head of the Justice Cabinet . Fletcher named his executive secretary , Robbie Rudolph , as his new running mate . 
 Although Fletcher 's agreement with Stumbo to end the investigation was announced in late 2006 , the scandal continued to plague his re @-@ election bid , and he drew two challengers in the Republican primary – former Third District Congresswoman Anne Northup and multi @-@ millionaire Paducah businessman Billy Harper . Senator Mitch McConnell , the consensus leader of the Kentucky Republican Party , declined to make an endorsement in the primary , but conceded that Northup was " a formidable opponent " . Northup campaigned on the idea that Fletcher 's involvement in the hiring scandal had made him " unelectable " . Northup secured the endorsements of Jim Bunning , Kentucky 's other Republican senator , and Lieutenant Governor Pence . In the primary , Fletcher garnered over 50 % of the vote and secured the party 's nomination . His rival Northup struggled with name recognition and found few areas of support outside the Louisville district she represented in Congress . She garnered 36 @.@ 5 % of the vote , with the remaining 13 @.@ 4 % going to Billy Harper . Democrats nominated former Lieutenant Governor Steve Beshear to challenge Fletcher . 
 In the midst of the primary campaign , the 2007 General Assembly convened . Among the accomplishments of the session were raising the state 's minimum wage to $ 7 @.@ 25 per hour , increasing the speed limit on major state highways to 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) , and implementing new safety requirements for social workers and coal miners . Additional legislation stalled after negotiations over how to make the state 's retirement system solvent reached an impasse . Fletcher indicated that he would consider calling the Assembly into special session later in the year . In July , Fletcher called the session and included 67 items on its agenda . Democrats in the state House of Representatives maintained that none of the items were urgent enough to warrant a special session . They claimed the call was an attempt by Fletcher to boost his sagging poll numbers against Beshear , and the House adjourned after only 90 minutes without acting on any of Fletcher 's agenda . Fletcher denied the claims and insisted that a tax incentive program was needed immediately to keep the state in the running for a proposed coal gasification plant to be built by Peabody Energy . After negotiating with legislators , Fletcher called another session for August ; the session included only the tax incentive program , which the Assembly passed . 
 In the general election campaign , Fletcher attempted to make the expansion of casino gambling , rather than the merit system investigation , the central issue . Beshear favored holding a referendum on a constitutional amendment to allow expanded casino gambling in the state , while Fletcher maintained that expanded gambling would bring an increase in crime and societal ills . The gambling issue failed to gain as much traction as the hiring scandal , however , and Beshear defeated Fletcher by a vote of 619 @,@ 686 to 435 @,@ 895 . 
 After the election , Fletcher founded Alton Healthcare , a consulting firm that helps healthcare providers make efficient use of technology in their practice . He has served as CEO of the company , which is based in Cincinnati , Ohio , since 2008 . 
 = Land Question = 
 The ' Land Question ' , as it pertains to the history of Prince Edward Island , Canada , related to the question of the system of ownership of land on the island . Proprietors , the owners of the land parcels on Prince Edward Island , favoured a system of renting to tenants , whilst the tenants preferred a system of freehold . In 1767 the British government divided all land in Prince Edward Island into lots to be owned by ' proprietors ' who would collect rent from the settlers , or ' tenants ' . Problems soon arose with this scheme , and low numbers of tenants resulted in proprietors collecting little rent , which in turn led to many proprietors defaulting on their quitrents . An attempt at compulsorily acquiring the land by the Prince Edward Island government from rent defaulters in 1781 resulted in Colonial Office intervention in 1783 . In 1786 , Governor Walter Patterson , who set in motion the compulsory acquisition , was removed from office . 
 In 1797 , the Escheat Movement was born with the goal of convincing the Crown to acquire land from the proprietors and sell it back to the tenants . In 1803 , members of this Movement won seats in the General Assembly of Prince Edward Island , but their attempts to set in motion the escheat scheme were blocked by the British government . In the following years , a number of General Assemblies attempted to acquire land from the proprietors , but were repeatedly blocked by the British government . Following an unsuccessful attempt at civil disobedience in 1864 @-@ 65 , the proprietors gradually pulled out of the real estate market , selling their land piece @-@ by @-@ piece back to the local governments of the Island for sale to the occupants of their land . In 1873 , Prince Edward Island joined the Canadian Confederation on the condition that the proprietors / tenants system be scrapped , ending the ' Land Question ' in the province . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1763 , the Treaty of Paris resulted in the transfer of Prince Edward Island from France to the United Kingdom . In 1767 , a system of land ownership was established in which the island was divided into 67 lots of about 20 @,@ 000 acres ( 81 km2 ) each , with settlers living on parcels of this land rented out by the proprietors , or the owners of the lots of land . Ownership of the lots of land was determined by a lottery held in London , the winners of which were mostly political , business and military figures with connections to those in the British government . In 1769 , under pressure from the proprietors who worried that a Nova Scotia legislature would force them to give up their property rights , the British government granted Prince Edward Island autonomy . 
 = = Initial conflict = = 
 Almost immediately after the establishment of the new system , conflict arose . The American Revolutionary War drove potential settlers away from Prince Edward Island . This caused two problems - firstly , it made it difficult for proprietors to fulfill an obligation attached to their grants , to settle one person per 200 acres ( 81 ha ) within ten years of the system 's commencement , and secondly , it meant that the proprietors were not being paid much rent , as there were not many tenants to pay it . This meant that the proprietors were unable , or at least not willing , to pay the required <unk> to the Crown . Conflict also arose between the tenants and the proprietors . As the lottery for Prince Edward Island land was held in London , and most of the proprietors were important figures from the United Kingdom , most of the proprietors did not actually live in British North America . This meant that many neglected their obligations to the settlers . 
 In 1774 , the government of Prince Edward Island passed the Quit Rent Act 1774 to force the proprietors to pay their dues to maintain civil infrastructure on the island . However , many proprietors continued to simply not pay their <unk> . In 1781 , the government , led by Governor Walter Patterson , compulsory acquires approximately half of the island using a process known as escheat . That same year , the government held a public auction to sell off the land that had been compulsorily acquired . However , following a concerted effort by the proprietors to get the Colonial Office to reverse the action , the Crown overturned the sales conducted at the auction in 1783 . The proprietors requested that Governor Patterson be removed from his office , and the Colonial Office did so in 1786 . 
 = = Escheat Movement = = 
 In 1797 the Escheat Movement was born . Under the scheme proposed by the movement , land would be forfeited to the Crown should proprietors default on their quitrents , and tenants would be given the option of either purchasing part of the forfeited land or leasing it from the Crown . Members of the movement won a large majority in the General Assembly of Prince Edward Island in 1802 , and in 1803 a law to implement escheat was passed by the legislature . However , the government of the United Kingdom would not abandon its principle of supporting property rights and refused to grant the bill Royal Assent . 
 In 1832 , a tax was placed on land owned by the proprietors . In exchange for collecting the tax , the government promised to abandon its attempts to enforce the payment of quitrents . In 1836 , a bill was passed to place a penal tax on unoccupied land . Although the Colonial Office initially refused to recommend Royal Assent , comments by Lord Durham led the Privy Council to give Royal Assent to the bill in 1838 . Despite the change in property arrangements in Prince Edward Island with the introduction of these taxes , tenants were still unable to take possession of their land . In 1830 , Roman Catholics were given the vote , and in 1838 the Escheat Party won a large majority in the General Assembly . Another bill to implement escheat passed the lower house , but was rejected by the Legislative Council . The leader of the Escheat Party , William Cooper , travelled to London to meet the Colonial Secretary , but he was turned away without a meeting . Instead , the Secretary advised the Lieutenant Governor of Prince Edward Island that the government would not recommend assent to any bill advocating escheat . The Escheat Movement disintegrated . 
 = = Settlement ( Sulivan and Stewart ) = = 
 In 1851 , the Liberals gained office on Prince Edward Island . They immediately went about putting in place measures to gradually dismantle the proprietor / tenant system , although their efforts generally had limited effect largely because Samuel Cunard , who owned one @-@ sixth of the Island , refused to sell any of his land . In 1864 , the tenants organised into the Tenant League , and vowed to resist the collection of rent by their proprietors . Efforts by law enforcement to quell this rebellion had little effect , so the government of the island requested the assistance of British troops to enforce the collection of rent . In 1865 , British troops arrived in the colony and successfully enforced the collection of the unpaid rent , and the Tenant League crumbled . It appeared that the operation of the Tenant League was a matter of principle rather than practical necessity ; the rent paid by tenants to the proprietors was to the amount of one shilling per acre , and the proprietors allowed rent to go unpaid for years at a time . 
 In the following years , many of the proprietors pulled out of the real estate market and voluntarily sold their property to the government so that sale to the land 's occupiers could be facilitated . In 1873 , Prince Edward Island joined the Canadian Confederation . One of the terms of the Island joining the Confederation was the sale of the estates of land to their occupiers . The agreement to join the Confederation contained a clause outlining the possibility that the federal government of Canada could provide a grant of up to CA $ 800 @,@ 000 to the provincial government to facilitate the purchase of the land from the proprietors . In 1875 , through the ' The Commissioners Appointed Under The Provisions of The Land Purchase Act , 1875 ' all of the outstanding proprietor @-@ owned land was compulsorily purchased by the provincial government , at rates decided by a ' Commission of Enquiry ' . 
 The two largest landholders to be ' bought @-@ out ' by the new Canadian province , in 1875 , did not readily agree with their forced sale , facilitated by the articles of the Land Purchase Act ( 1875 ) . On Monday , August 23rd , 1875 , The ‘ Commission of Enquiry ’ began its enquiry of the largest estate , of an ' absentee ' landowner , that of ( Laurence Sulivan ) Charlotte Antonia Sulivan of some 66 @,@ 937 acres . She being awarded : $ 81 @,@ 500 CAD 1875 , at $ 1 @.@ 22 per acre , Miss Sulivan challenged the authority of the Commissioners in their proceedings against her , she seeing the award set aside on appeal to the Supreme Court of PEI . She claiming $ 239 @,@ 185 CAD 1875 , the Province , appealing , for The Commissioner of Public Lands , took her challenge to the Supreme Court of Canada , it being The Court ’ s first case , Kelly v Sulivan , sustained the forced sale and award . 
 On Friday , August 27th , 1875 , The ‘ Commission of Enquiry ’ enquired as to the estate of Robert Bruce Stewart , then the largest ‘ resident ’ proprietor on PEI , owning some 66 @,@ 727 acres . Upon his father 's death in 1852 , Robert Bruce Stewart inherited , by title , Lots 7 , 10 , 12 , and 30 as well as parts of Lots 27 , 46 , and 47 . He having fought long and hard against the legislation enabling the Land Purchase Act 1875 , against a claim of $ 240 @,@ 905 , the ‘ Commission of Enquiry ’ awarded him just $ 76 @,@ 500 CAD 1875 , the lowest per acre award , at $ 1 @.@ 15 per acre . > 
 = French battleship Patrie = 
 Patrie was a pre @-@ dreadnought battleship of the French Navy built in the early 1900s . She had one sister ship , République . Patrie was laid down at the La Seyne shipyard in April 1902 , launched in December 1903 , and completed three years later in December 1906 , the same time as the revolutionary British battleship HMS Dreadnought . Armed with a main battery of four 305 mm ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) guns , she was outclassed by Dreadnought , which mounted ten guns of the same caliber , by the time she entered service . 
 Patrie served in the Mediterranean Fleet for the duration of her career . She accidentally torpedoed République during fleet maneuvers in 1910 . After the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , she covered troop convoys from Algeria to France , and participated in the sinking of the Austro @-@ Hungarian cruiser SMS Zenta later that month . She spent the majority of the war in Corfu at the mouth of the Adriatic Sea , to keep the Austro @-@ Hungarian fleet bottled up in the Adriatic . In May 1916 , she shot down a German zeppelin off Salonica . The ship was eventually stricken in 1921 and broken up for scrap thereafter . 
 = = Design = = 
 Patrie was laid down at the La Seyne shipyard on 1 April 1902 , launched on 17 December 1903 , and completed in December 1906 , at the same time as the revolutionary British battleship HMS Dreadnought , which rendered the pre @-@ dreadnoughts like Patrie outdated . The ship was 133 @.@ 81 meters ( 439 ft 0 in ) long between perpendiculars and had a beam of 24 @.@ 26 m ( 79 ft 7 in ) and a full @-@ load draft of 8 @.@ 41 m ( 27 ft 7 in ) . She displaced 14 @,@ 900 metric tons ( 14 @,@ 700 long tons ; 16 @,@ 400 short tons ) at full load , slightly more than her sister République . She had a crew of between 766 and 825 officers and enlisted men . She was powered by three vertical triple expansion engines with twenty @-@ four Niclausse boilers . They were rated at 18 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 13 @,@ 000 kW ) and provided a top speed of 19 knots ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) . Coal storage amounted to 1 @,@ 800 t ( 1 @,@ 800 long tons ; 2 @,@ 000 short tons ) . 
