 The cromlech at Parc le Breos Cwm is one of 120 – 30 sites identified as belonging to the category of long barrow tomb known as the Severn @-@ Cotswold or Cotswold @-@ Severn group . Excavations show these tombs to have been built on sites that had already " gained some significance " . Archaeologist Julian Thomas theorises that these sites may have been " very long @-@ lived woodland clearances " that had become landmarks and meeting @-@ places . 
 Constructed during the Neolithic , cairns in the Severn @-@ Cotswold tradition share several characteristics : an elongated trapezoidal ( or wedge ) shape up to 328 feet ( 100 m ) long ; a cairn ( a mound of deliberately placed stones or rocks erected as a memorial or marker ) ; a revetment ( retaining wall ) of carefully constructed dry @-@ stone walling that also defines a horned forecourt at the widest end ; huge capstones supported by <unk> ; and a chamber ( or chambers ) in which human remains were placed , accessible after the cairn was completed by way of a gallery ( passageway ) . Diverse internal transept chamber plans exist within the group . The earlier tombs contained multiple chambers set laterally , or pairs of transept chambers leading from a central passageway ; the later , terminally chambered tombs , contained a single chamber . 
 As the name implies , Severn @-@ Cotswold cairns are concentrated mainly to the east of the River Severn , in and around the Cotswolds , in present @-@ day England . However , similar Severn @-@ Cotswold type structures have been identified in south east Wales – between Brecon , Gower and Gwent – and in Capel Garmon ( near Betws @-@ y @-@ Coed , Conwy , north Wales ) , Wayland 's Smithy ( Oxfordshire , England ) and Avebury ( Wiltshire , England ) . As well as monuments to house and to honour their departed ancestors , these <unk> may have been communal and ceremonial sites where , according to archaeologist Francis Pryor , people met " to socialise , to meet new partners , to acquire fresh livestock and to exchange ceremonial gifts " . 
 Parc Cwm long cairn is one of six chambered tombs discovered on Gower and one of 17 in what is commonly known as Glamorgan . Severn @-@ Cotswold cairns are the oldest surviving examples of architecture in Great Britain – Parc Cwm long cairn was built about 1 @,@ 500 to 1 @,@ 300 years before either Stonehenge or the Great Pyramid of Giza , Egypt was completed . 
 = = Features = = 
 The megalithic cromlech at Parc le Breos Cwm , known as Parc Cwm long cairn ( <unk> hir Parc Cwm ) , is a Severn @-@ Cotswold type chambered tomb , built around 5850 BP ( during the early Neolithic ) in what is now known as Gower – about eight miles ( 13 km ) west of Swansea , Wales , and about 1 1 ⁄ 4 miles ( 2 km ) north of the Bristol Channel . Alternative names include Parc le Breos burial chamber ( <unk> <unk> Parc le Breos ) , the Long Cairn and the Giant 's Grave . 
 The cromlech consists of a north – south aligned long mound of locally obtained rocks and cobbles , mainly of limestone , revetted by two coursed , dry @-@ stone kerbs of " a fine standard " . The inner wall was built using a heavier stone . <unk> @-@ shaped and about 72 feet ( 22 m ) long , the cromlech tapers from 43 feet ( 13 m ) wide at its southern entrance to about 20 feet ( 6 m ) at its northern end . The wall at the front , right section , is missing or has collapsed , and the rubble has tumbled out leaving a previously covered <unk> exposed . 
 At the entrance to the tomb the kerbs sweep inwards to form a pair of deep protrusions , or horns , forming a narrow bell @-@ shaped forecourt . A straight central passageway ( or gallery ) , 21 feet ( 6 m ) long by 3 feet ( 1 m ) wide , orientated north – south , leads from the forecourt into the cairn . Each side of the passageway is lined with thin limestone slabs known as <unk> , placed on end and up to 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) high with a coursed dry @-@ stone infill between the slabs . Two pairs of rectangular transept chambers lead from the passageway , averaging 5 1 ⁄ 2 feet ( 1 @.@ 6 m ) , east – west , by 3 1 ⁄ 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 0 m ) ; or " 6 ft by 2 ft " , according to Archaeologia Cambrensis in 1886 . Each , except the south west chamber , has shallow limestone <unk> at its entrance . 
 Archaeologist R J C Atkinson believed that ( unusually among cairns in the Severn @-@ Cotswold tradition ) Parc Cwm long cairn had been built beside a stream that now flows underground . He noted that the stones on the eastern side had " marked signs of erosion and rounding by silt @-@ laden flood @-@ water " . 
 Originally , the transept chambers would have been covered with one large ( or several smaller ) capstones , enclosing the chambers containing human remains . The earth covering and the upper part of the cromlech have been removed , leaving the passageway and lateral chambers fully exposed . There is no record of a capstone having been discovered . 
 = = Excavation = = 
 Workmen digging for road stone discovered the site in 1869 . John Lubbock and Hussey Vivian excavated it that year , believing it to be a round barrow . The excavation revealed human bones that were " much broken and in no regular arrangement " , animal remains ( " deer and swine 's teeth " ) , and sherds of " plain Western Neolithic pottery " . The bones , initially thought to <unk> been disturbed by repeated access or subsequent interments , were at first thought to be from 20 – 24 individuals , all of whom except three were adults . Archaeologists Alasdair Whittle and Michael Wysocki note that such estimates were commonly based on the " numbers of skulls or mandibles " , and recent analysis has shown the bones to be from at least 40 individuals . Following the excavation , most of the human remains were reburied in clay pots beneath their original contexts , some are held in the Ashmolean Museum , University of Oxford , England – with the animal and pottery remains – and the whereabouts of the remainder are unrecorded . 
 An excavation led by Professor Glyn Daniel in 1937 identified the site as a chambered long barrow . However , more recently , long barrows have been defined as having long earthen mounds with wooden internal structures , whereas chambered tombs , while also being covered by a long mound , have internal chambers built of stone . No long barrows with wooden internal structures have been identified in southeast Wales , perhaps because long barrows were usually built where there was no suitable stone . 
 At Parc Cwm long cairn a variety of mortuary practices was evident and the deliberate ordering of skeletal parts noticeable . Whittle and Wysocki ( 1998 ) note cremated human remains were placed only in the front , right ( south – east ) chamber , where females and males , and all age ranges were represented . The south – east chamber was also unusual in that it contained nearly three times as many individuals as in each of the other chambers , which contained the remains of all representative groups except younger children and infants . At the forecourt entrance Atkinson recorded finds , deposited in groups , including : flint <unk> , lithic cores and a <unk> ( burnt and unburnt ) ; a leaf @-@ shaped arrowhead ( burnt ) ; pieces of quartz ; pieces of stalactite ( now missing ) ; sherds of Neolithic pottery ; and cremated bone fragments . Atkinson speculated that the stalactite originated from Cat Hole cave , which ( along with Tooth Hole cave ) Whittle and Wysocki note as a possible source of the quartz too . 
 Following the excavation led by R J C Atkinson in 1960 , the cromlech was placed under the guardianship of the then Ministry of Public Building and Works and , in 1961 , was partly restored . Atkinson made " minimal " excavation records , and no report of it was published until Whittle and Wysocki 's detailed report in 1998 . In it , they suggest that corpses may have been placed in caves near the cromlech until they decomposed , when the bones were moved to the tomb ; a process known as excarnation . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 Few human remains survive in Great Britain from the early Neolithic ( c . 6400 – c . 5850 BP ) , although they are comparatively well preserved in the Black Mountains ( Mynydd Du ) , Gower and the Vale of Glamorgan ( Bro Morgannwg ) where up to 50 individuals have been interred – men , women and children – in each cromlech . 
 The skeletal remains of over 40 individuals were recovered from the cromlech at Parc le Breos Cwm , some of which showed evidence of weathering and of biting and gnawing by animals . This suggests the corpses lay exposed to decompose and were interred in the burial chambers <unk> , as parcels of bone . Skeletal remains from the passageway were part – articulated , showing no sign of animal scavenging , suggesting they were placed in the cromlech as fleshed corpses . Whittle and Wysocki note that among the human remains are the bones of " 8 dogs , a cat , a red deer , pig , sheep and cattle " . They speculate that the two caves near the cromlech were used as depositories for the corpses prior to decomposition , and that when the bones were collected from the caves for reinterment others already lying in the cave were unwittingly gathered too . 
 Radiocarbon dated samples from the cromlech show the tomb was accessed by many generations over a period of 300 – 800 years , and that the human bones are the disarticulated remains ( i.e. , not complete skeletons ) of at least 40 individuals : male and female adults , adolescents , children , and infants . One of the red deer bones has been radiocarbon dated to between 2750 BP and 2150 BP , showing that at least some of the bones entered long after the site had been deserted . 
 = = = Lifestyle indicators = = = 
 Examination of the bones from which stature could be estimated , indicate that the male mortuary population were " big men " – the 1869 report notes males of " gigantic proportions " – whereas the females were " short and gracile " . Pollard notes that males analysed from Parc Cwm long cairn were " particularly robust " when compared to females . 
 Prior to the publication of Whittle and Wysocki 's 1998 report , bones and teeth of the mortuary population of Parc Cwm long cairn were re @-@ examined for indications of lifestyle and diet . 
 Musculoskeletal analysis showed significant gender lifestyle variation . Greater leg muscle development was found in males of the Parc Cwm cromlech , possibly the result of hunting or herding , confirming the sexual dimorphism found in previous analyses of the remains . In contrast , no such variation was noticeable in the remains found during excavations from other nearby sites , for example the <unk> burial chamber , in the Vale of Glamorgan . The variation in musculoskeletal stress markers may indicate a mobile lifestyle for at least some of the males analysed . 
 Evidence obtained from stable isotope analysis shows plant foods , including cereals , formed only a small proportion of their dietary protein . The majority derived from animals – i.e. , meat , and milk or blood – and contained none from marine sources . 
 Remains of human teeth were analysed for evidence of arrested development and decay . Arrested development implies periods of nutritional shortage , which could indicate failed harvests . Decay implies either periods of food shortage , or a diet consisting of high proportions of carbohydrate or softer cooked meat , or both . Dental analyses showed no sign of periods of decay or arrested development , even where there was " considerable wear " , indicating a lifestyle that was not dependent on farming cereals . The 1887 bone report notes the " good condition of the teeth " . Whittle and Wysocki noted the " slight " presence of tartar , and that only one tooth had been lost before death , a mandibular incisor . 
 Whittle and Wysocki conclude , from the skeletal and dental analyses , that the lifestyles of the people who were to be interred in the cromlech either continued to be one of hunting and gathering or , more likely , a pastoral life of herding , rather than one of agrarian @-@ based farming . 
 = = Cathole Cave = = 
 The Cathole Cave , Cat Hole Cave or Cathole Rock Cave , is a steep limestone outcrop , about 200 yards ( 180 m ) north of the cromlech along the Parc le Breos Cwm valley and near the top of the gorge , about 50 feet ( 15 m ) from the valley floor . The cave is a deep triangular fissure penetrating the hillside and narrowing towards the top . It has two entrances , with a natural platform outside the larger of the two . 
 The cave was used as a shelter by bands of Mesolithic hunters and as a Neolithic ossuary . During the first excavation of the cave in 1864 , finds were made only from the Mesolithic to medieval periods . In his " The Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society vol.25 ( 1959 ) , pp. 260 – 69 " , archaeologist Charles McBurney notes that " In the Post Glacial period the cave was much used by Mesolithic hunters " ; a conclusion confirmed by John Campbell 's excavation of 1977 . 
 A 1984 excavation by <unk> @-@ Green revealed the earliest finds from the cave , two <unk> points that may date to c . 28 @,@ 000 BP , an interglacial period during the Late Pleistocene roughly contemporaneous with the Red Lady of Paviland . The " lady " was discovered in a cave between Port <unk> and <unk> , about eight miles ( 13 km ) west of Cathole Cave , and has been radiocarbon dated to c . 29 @,@ 000 BP , the oldest known human burial in Great Britain . 
 Rock art from the Upper Paleolithic , thought to represent a reindeer , was discovered on the back wall of Cathole Cave in September 2010 . The engraving , measuring approximately 15 x 11 cm , has been radiocarbon dated to 14 @,@ 505 ± 560 BP . According to George Nash , the archeologist who made the discovery , it is " the oldest rock art in the British Isles , if not north @-@ western Europe " . 
 Late glacial tool finds from the Upper Palaeolithic date to c . 12 @,@ 000 BP : flint blades known as Cheddar points ; smaller <unk> known as Cresswell points ; scrapers ; burins or lithic flakes ; flint and bone awls ; and a bone needle . Flint rarely occurs in Wales other than in drifts , or as small pebbles on beaches . Flint tools would therefore have to have been brought to Gower from other areas , such as those now known as southern or eastern England , or Antrim , either as finished tools or as incomplete , or unworked , nodules . Remains of red fox , Arctic fox , brown bear , tundra vole , and possibly reindeer , were found at the same level as the Upper Palaeolithic tools , providing evidence of the climate c . 12 @,@ 000 BP . Other animal remains excavated during the 19th century , which may predate the Late glacial finds , include mammoth , woolly rhinoceros , red deer and giant deer . 
 Several finds date to the Bronze Age , including a bronze socketed axe , two human skeletons , and sherds of pottery from burial urns and other vessels . 
 = = <unk> Tooth Cave = = 
 An excavation of the <unk> Tooth Cave , or Tooth Hole cave , a Bronze Age ossuary site at a cave about 1 @,@ 500 yards ( 1 @.@ 4 km ) north , north west of the cromlech , was carried out by D. P. Webley and J. Harvey in 1962 . It revealed the disarticulated remains of six people , dated to the Early Bronze Age or Beaker culture . Other contemporary finds , now held at the <unk> Cymru – National Museum Wales , Cardiff , include collared urn pottery , flaked knives , a scraper , flint flakes , a bone spatula , a needle and bead , and animal bones – the remains of domesticated animals , including cat and dog . Whittle and Wysocki note that this period of occupation may be " significant " , with respect to Parc Cwm long cairn , as it is " broadly contemporary with the secondary use of the tomb " . 
 = = Location = = 
 The Neolithic cromlech at Parc le Breos is about seven 1 ⁄ 2 miles ( 12 km ) west south – west of Swansea , Wales , near the centre of Gower , midway between the villages of <unk> and Bishopston . Its nearest village is <unk> , a small rural settlement about one mile ( 1 @.@ 5 km ) to the south – east . 
 Parc Cwm long cairn lies on the floor of a dry , narrow , limestone gorge , at an elevation of about 50 feet ( 15 m ) above sea level , less than 1 1 ⁄ 4 miles ( 2 km ) from the south coast of Gower . It is in about 500 acres ( 200 ha ) of woodland called Coed y Parc , the remnants of a former medieval deer park ( Parc le Breos ) from which the cromlech derives its alternative name : Parc le Breos burial chamber . Established as an enclosed area of about 2 @,@ 000 acres ( 810 ha ) by John de Braose , Marcher Lord of Gower , in about 1221 – 32 CE , the park is now mainly farmland . A 19th @-@ century hunting lodge about 1 @,@ 200 yards ( 1 @.@ 1 km ) north – east of Parc Cwm long cairn has been converted into a hotel and pony trekking ( horse riding ) centre called Parc le Breos . 
 Coed y Parc is owned and managed by Forestry Commission Wales . The site is open to the public free of charge and has parking for 12 – 15 cars about 750 feet ( 230 m ) away . Facing the car park on the opposite side of the lane , a kissing gate allows wheelchair access to a level asphalt track running past the cromlech down the length of the gorge , passing within about 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) of the cairn . Parc Cwm long cairn is maintained by Cadw ( English : to keep ) , the Welsh Government 's historic environment division . 
 = Ray Ray = 
 Ray Ray is the second studio album by American recording artist Raphael Saadiq , released October 5 , 2004 , on his record label Pookie Entertainment . After being dropped from Universal Records , Saadiq formed the label and worked on the album , for which he sought looser , 1970s @-@ inspired direction than his debut album Instant Vintage ( 2002 ) . He produced Ray Ray with Michael Angelo , Jake and the Phatman , and Kelvin Wooten . 
 Titled after Saadiq 's childhood nickname , Ray Ray has a looser , more conventional style than his debut album and incorporates funk . Its groove @-@ oriented songs exhibit Saadiq 's characteristic fusion of programmed beats , strings , neo soul melodies , and live guitar . They are arranged in a song cycle and touch on lighthearted romantic themes and socially conscious messages . 
 The album debuted at number 86 on the U.S. Billboard 200 chart , but fell off the next week . Upon its release , Ray Ray received generally positive reviews from music critics . Although some were ambivalent towards its loose blaxploitation concept and Saadiq 's songwriting , critics praised the album 's production quality and vintage musical approach . It is currently out of print . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 2002 , Saadiq released his debut solo album Instant Vintage , which received critical acclaim and earned him five Grammy Award nominations . However , despite attaining a following among listeners in Europe , it was largely ignored by contemporary R & B listeners in the United States and did not sell well . After its release , he was dropped by his record label Universal Records . 
 Saadiq subsequently formed his own label , Pookie Entertainment , on which he released the double live album All Hits at the House of Blues in 2003 . The live album showcased Saadiq 's solo material and songs he recorded as a part of Tony ! Toni ! Toné ! during the late 1980s and 1990s . Saadiq also continued working as a producer for other recording artists , including Erykah Badu , Kelis , Jill Scott , Nappy Roots , Earth , Wind & Fire , Sunshine Anderson , and Jaguar Wright . 
 = = Recording = = 
 Having fulfilled his creative ambition with Instant Vintage , he sought a looser direction for a follow @-@ up studio album . He said of the direction for Ray Ray in an interview for Rolling Stone , " You only get to make a first statement one time , and I had definite ideas of how I wanted it to sound . Ray Ray represents a more fun side of what I do . I wanted to have a good time with it . " In an interview for The Baltimore Sun , Saadiq discussed the inspiration behind the album 's blaxploitation concept , stating : 
 Saadiq recorded the album with producers Michael Angelo , Focus ... , and Jake and the Phatman , among others . He also worked with singer @-@ songwriter Joi , former Tony ! Toni ! Toné ! member D 'wayne Wiggins , singer @-@ songwriter <unk> Moses , singer Dawn Robinson , formerly of Saadiq 's other group Lucy Pearl , singer @-@ songwriter Babyface , and rapper Allie Baba , Saadiq 's nephew . The album 's title is a reference to his mother 's nickname for him , also a childhood name . Its cover artwork was inspired by the blaxploitation films of the 1970s . It shows Saadiq dressed in a vintage cornflower blue suit , knicker pants , and lime green argyle socks , while leaning on a white 1967 Mercury Cougar . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 The album contains a more funk @-@ oriented sound than Instant Vintage , while it features romantic and some message @-@ oriented themes . In comparison to that album , Saadiq has called Ray Ray " more aggressive , more radio @-@ friendly ... one of those good , Saturday @-@ playing records " . It incorporates R & B , funk , and soul styles , as well as elements of gospel and hip hop music . 
 As with his debut album , Ray Ray features Saadiq 's characteristic fusion of programmed beats , strings , neo soul melodies , and live guitars . The songs are mostly mid @-@ tempo and groove @-@ based , and also feature rubbery bass lines and horns . Allmusic 's Andy Kellman views that the album 's music is " a little funkier and a lot more energetic than 2002 's Instant Vintage , yet just as full of Saadiq 's stylish flourishes . " He writes of the album 's subject matter , " for every song that 's charmingly simple and full of lighthearted romantic sentiments , there 's something message @-@ oriented " . Ken Capobianco of The Boston Globe characterizes the album 's mood as " playful " and writes that it is composed as " a bouncy song cycle that 's a throwback to ' 70s funk . " 
 The album 's first two tracks , " Blaxploitation " and " Ray Ray Theme " , serve as audio vignettes introducing Saadiq 's alter ego as the main character of a faux @-@ Blaxploitation soundtrack . The latter track has singer Joi calling upon the character , addressing him as " soul brother number one " , to " shoot me with your bop gun " . Both songs help establish the character as a ladies ' man with a penchant for fast cars . However , the concept is not sustained in the following songs on the album . " I Know Shuggie Otis " is a tribute to psychedelic recording artist Shuggie Otis and features a screeching guitar solo . " This One " features orchestral pop and gleeful tones . " Chic Like You " contains elements of G @-@ funk , gospel @-@ styled , vocal " <unk> " and fluid , funky keyboards . Its lyrics depict sensual images : " She soaks in green tea lotion / Her legs are so outspoken " . 
 " Not a Game " features a spare hip hop beat and an emotional vocal delivery by Saadiq . " Rifle Love " utilizes the sounds of barrel clicks and gunshots as a rhythm section in its chorus . Both " Live Without You " and " I Want You Back " are pleas to an ex @-@ lover and have romantic crooning by Saadiq over a gritty funk groove . " I Want You Back " also features elements of Miami bass and electro @-@ styled synthesizers . Saadiq adopts a falsetto / high tenor singing voice on " Grown Folks " . It features socially conscious lyrics and a Latin @-@ tinged arrangement . " Save Us " has a theme of disillusionment and features sparse keyboard and a somber refrain . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Ray Ray was released by Pookie Entertainment on October 5 , 2004 , in the United States . Two singles were released in promotion of the album , " Chic Like You " and " I Want You Back " . The album debuted on the U.S. Billboard 200 chart in the week of October 23 . It was the album 's only week on the chart . Ray Ray also spent eight weeks on the Billboard Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums , on which it peaked at number 18 . It eventually went out of print in the U.S. In France , the album charted for two weeks and reached number 145 . 
 Ray Ray received generally positive reviews from critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream publications , the album received an average score of 66 , based on six reviews . Phil Johnson of The Independent called it " madder and badder " than Saadiq 's debut record and found its sound " more radical " , stating " no one can distress a production like Raphael , whose multi @-@ instrumental talents and Stevie Wonder @-@ ish voice make him a Prince for the Noughties . " Andria Lisle of Paste commended Saadiq 's " versatility " and found the album " softer than Cee @-@ lo and sexier than Ricky <unk> " . Neil Drumming of Entertainment Weekly complimented Saadiq 's " bass virtuosity " and " grown and sexy " vibe , although he viewed some of his songwriting as " amateur " . The Boston Globe 's Ken Capobianco observed an " overriding sense of joy and mischief throughout jams " , and found Saadiq 's " musical exuberance ... infectious " . 
 Although he found it lacking a " centerpiece track " , Capobianco ultimately praised the album as a " funk " departure from most of the contemporary soul he found " studied and overly reverent " . Slant Magazine editor Sal Cinquemani found it flawed as a concept album , but commended Saadiq for " conjuring soul greats like Stevie Wonder ( ' Live Without You ' ) , Curtis Mayfield ( ' Grown Folks ' ) , and Prince ( ' I Know Shuggie Otis ' ) throughout " , and stated , " just because the storyline ( s ) ... ceases to exist after the first few songs that doesn 't mean the rest of the tracks aren 't good . " Geoffrey Himes of The Washington Post noted Saadiq for having " a rare gift for linking seductive melodies to slinky grooves " and stated , " Ray Ray is just a collection of disconnected songs ... failing to establish a narrative . But what terrific songs they are . " 
 Allmusic 's Andy Kellman complimented its " varied " subject matter and wrote in summation , " Ray Ray occasionally loses focus , slipping into moments that are either undercooked or worthy of the cutting room , but it 's enjoyable enough to keep his followers happy and will certainly act as a remedy for those who don 't like the gold @-@ bricked path being taken by mainstream R & B. " Ethan Brown of New York stated , " Despite its faults — and there are many ... Ray Ray is a startlingly inventive record " , and found Saadiq " at his best when he revives the sad soul of Sam Cooke " on songs like " Not a Game " . Andrew Simon of Vibe found a " handful " of songs to be poorly conceived and viewed that the album 's strength was Saadiq 's " crisp " production and bass playing , writing that " On a dime , the thick tones of the multi @-@ instrumentalist 's <unk> of choice go from low and rumbly to high and tight . " He ultimately commended Saadiq 's intentions with the album 's concept , stating " Ray Ray hits more than it misses in its celebration of a time when George was making the mothership connection and Marvin just wanted to get it on . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Credits adapted from liner notes . 
 • ( co . ) Co @-@ producer 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits for Ray Ray adapted from liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = The National ( Scotland ) = 
 The National is a Scottish daily newspaper owned by Newsquest that began publication on 24 November 2014 , and the first daily newspaper in Scotland to support Scottish independence . Launched as a response to calls from Newsquest 's readership for a pro @-@ independence paper in the wake of the 2014 Scottish independence referendum , it is a sister paper of The Herald and the Sunday Herald , and is edited by Callum Baird . Initially published on weekdays , a Saturday edition was added in May 2015 . The National is printed in tabloid format , and is also available via online subscription . 
 Details of its launch were announced on 21 November , with further information given at a Scottish National Party ( SNP ) rally the following day . It was launched on a five @-@ day trial basis against the backdrop of a general decline in newspaper sales , with an initial print @-@ run of 60 @,@ 000 copies for its first edition , but this was increased the following day as a result of public demand , and Newsquest decided to print it on a permanent basis after healthy sales continued throughout the first week . By January 2015 , daily sales had fallen to below 20 @,@ 000 . The first front page carried a story about charities urging devolution of powers over welfare legislation to Scotland . 
 Reception to the newspaper 's launch was mixed in both media and political circles . Libby Brooks of The Guardian praised the depth of its news coverage , but suggested announcing its launch at an SNP event could prove " auspicious " , while the Labour peer George Foulkes branded it " <unk> " . However , the Scottish journalist and broadcaster Lesley Riddoch was more positive , feeling its launch could be a " sound business move " by its publishers . Upon its launch , The National stated that it is a separate entity from the SNP . 
 = = Background = = 
 The National describes itself as " the newspaper that supports an independent Scotland " , and has a masthead depicting a map of Scotland . Details of the newspaper were revealed on 21 November 2014 after The Guardian obtained a copy of a letter being circulated to retailers by Newsquest announcing its forthcoming publication . A sister paper of The Herald and the Sunday Herald , The National would be the first daily newspaper in Scotland to support Scottish independence , and was being piloted in response to a request from Herald readers for a pro @-@ independence newspaper . During the 2014 independence referendum , the Sunday Herald had been the only newspaper to support the " Yes " campaign , and saw an increase in its circulation — with sales rising by 60 % in the week preceding the referendum and 111 % in the week afterwards . Richard Walker , editor of the Sunday Herald , was announced as the new paper 's editor . On 22 November , Walker told a gathering of Scottish National Party ( SNP ) supporters assembled at Glasgow 's SSE Hydro that The National 's publishers would trial the newspaper for five days , but that it would become a permanent addition to the market if there was demand for it . Copies would cost 50p , while an online version would also be available via subscription . 
 The paper was launched with an initial print @-@ run of 60 @,@ 000 , and was edited by a skeleton staff during the trial run , with plans to employ more journalists if it became a permanent publication . Initial contributors included Sunday Herald journalists Jamie Maxwell and Peter Geoghegan , as well as freelance reporter Sarah Cooper . During the initial week of publication , Walker spoke of his belief that The National would continue beyond the trial period , but said the decision was in the hands of its publishers . Following healthy sales in the first few days , Newsquest executives decided on 27 November to continue printing the newspaper , and to allocate it additional resources . On the same day , Neil Mackay , The National 's news editor , confirmed that the paper would be published on a permanent basis . Publication then continued on weekdays until the introduction of a Saturday edition in May 2015 . 
 On 27 November 2014 , Alex Salmond , the former First Minister of Scotland , publicly endorsed The National when he took a copy of it on stage to accept The Spectator 's award for Politician of the Year . On 27 January 2015 , Newsquest area manager Tim Blott announced that the newspaper 's website would be relaunched in February , while Callum Baird would be appointed as assistant editor . The first Saturday edition of The National was published on 9 May to provide coverage of the results of the 2015 UK general election . Walker subsequently described the response as " very strong " and said that the newspaper would continue to be printed on a Saturday for " as long as there ’ s a public demand for it . " In September 2015 Walker announced his resignation from Newsquest , and consequently the Sunday Herald and The National , but he agreed to continue with The National as a consulting editor . He was succeeded as editor by Callum Baird . As Scotland prepared to welcome its first batch of refugees from the Syrian Civil War an edition of the newspaper published on 17 November 2015 carried the headline " Welcome to Scotland " . The Independent reported that an image of the front page was subsequently shared multiple times among users of social media . 
 = = Launch = = 
 Launched as a 32 @-@ page newspaper , and printed in tabloid format , The National was first published on Monday 24 November 2014 , and according to its editor received an " amazing response " from readers , with its print @-@ run for the following day 's edition increased to 100 @,@ 000 . The Press Gazette reported that 80 @,@ 000 copies were produced on the third day , while 12 @,@ 000 online digital subscriptions had been registered at a price of £ 1 @.@ 50 per week . Other sources , including The Guardian , and subsequently The National itself , put the online subscription figure at 11 @,@ 000 . On 27 November , The Guardian reported that of the 100 @,@ 000 copies printed on 25 November , unofficial sales figures indicated that only 50 @,@ 000 had been sold , and that daily sales were stabilising at around the 50 @,@ 000 mark . Sales figures for the first Friday edition , published on 28 November , were reported as 40 @,@ 000 by The Guardian , with an average daily sale for the first week of 44 @,@ 000 copies . On 3 December , The Guardian reported that unofficial industry sales figures indicated 36 @,@ 000 copies were sold for the Monday edition of the second week . On 27 January 2015 , The Guardian reported that daily sales had fallen to below 20 @,@ 000 — a figure consisting of around 15 @,@ 000 print sales , with a further 2 @,@ 500 to 3 @,@ 000 digital subscriptions . 
 On 27 November 2014 , Newsquest announced plans for the Friday edition , published the following day , to be expanded to 40 pages to accommodate news coverage of the Smith Commission 's report into increased devolution for Scotland , which was published on 27 November , and due to a large demand for space from advertisers . The 28 November edition also included an editorial thanking readers for backing the new publication . Speaking to The Guardian shortly after its launch , Walker said that the initial print run had been set as 30 @,@ 000 , but a last @-@ minute decision was taken to double it , something he described as " in hindsight , a good decision " . The National 's launch and success came at a time of general decline in the print media industry , where news providers were cutting staff and resources due to a downturn in newspaper sales . Douglas Beattie of the New Statesman and Alex Massie of The Spectator reported that copies of the first edition , which sold out , were being auctioned on eBay for at least £ 10 . The Financial Times reported that pro @-@ independence campaigners used social media to help potential readers locate available copies of the paper when the first edition had sold out in many areas . 
 However , the launch was not without its problems when three major supermarkets did not stock copies . On launch day , Sainsbury 's said that its tills had not been updated in time to enable them to sell the paper , but that it would begin doing so from the following day , while Tesco and Morrisons planned to monitor sales before deciding whether or not to stock it . Morrisons also said that it did not have the space to sell the newspaper without doing so at the expense of local titles . On 27 November , The Guardian reported that the distribution issues had been resolved , while STV News suggested the distribution problems were responsible for the fewer number of printed copies in the latter part of the launch week . Stewart Kirkpatrick , the former digital chief of Yes Scotland noted that The National had no digital presence at the time of its launch , something that prompted him to observe " We 're in the age of ' digital first ' not ' digital when we get round to it ' . " 
 The first edition of The National carried the headline " Give Scotland the powers to cut child poverty " , an article in which charities urged the Smith Commission to devolve welfare powers to the Scottish Parliament . The newspaper also included a mixture of national and international stories , with Libby Brooks of The Guardian noting the international coverage was " [ stronger ] than one is used to from a Scottish title [ with ] stories from Tunisia and Gaza as well as a profile of [ Iranian President ] Hassan Rouhani " . There was also sport and business coverage , but the BBC 's Jamie McIvor wrote of the first edition that " stories related to independence , Scottish politics and issues which featured in the referendum campaign characterise the news pages " . The newspaper 's opening edition also set out its mission statement : 
 The status quo is no longer an option and there is an unquenchable desire for greater devolution . Quite simply , the Scottish people want to be more directly and deeply involved in the decisions that affect them and the generations to come . It is with this uppermost in mind that today we launch The National , a daily newspaper that will fly a vibrant flag for independence and the right for Scots to govern themselves . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Despite having details of its launch announced at an SNP political event , the newspaper has stated that it is politically independent of that party . Its inaugural editorial says that being a mouthpiece for the party " would not be a healthy course to follow . We will be critical where appropriate and complimentary when merited . " But in The Guardian , Brooks suggested that launching The National at an SNP political rally " might not have been the most auspicious of starts " for the newspaper , while Labour peer George Foulkes quickly dubbed it " <unk> " , a reference to the political newspaper associated with the Communist Party of Russia . Damian Thompson , an associate editor with The Spectator , described the launch event as " creepy " . McIvor wrote that the calibre of its stablemates together with a respected editor had ensured The National was being taken seriously in political and media circles , but that the onus was on it to prove its credibility as a publication that supports independence rather than being viewed as " a propaganda organ , a cynical business exercise or the old media equivalent of some pro @-@ independence websites " . Alan Roden , political editor of the Scottish Daily Mail , claimed it had " rehashed SNP press releases " and was too expensive for its size . 
 Writing for The Guardian , the journalist and broadcaster Lesley Riddoch took a different view , suggesting that the launch of a pro @-@ independence newspaper in a country where 45 % of the population had recently voted for independence " may be a large but calculated risk and a very sound business move " , and that " Perhaps the novelty and sheer boldness of the National newspaper will match the national mood " . Kirkpatrick , although critical of its online shortfalls , was positive about the paper 's content , describing it as " a lively mix of briefs and longer pieces " . Douglas Beattie of the New Statesman said The National " has a clear raison d ’ <unk> and will be welcomed by a large number of the 1 @.@ 6 million Scots who voted Yes " . Stephen Daisley of STV News wrote that it was " both frustratingly light [ and ] <unk> worthy " , but drew favourable comparisons with the Scottish Standard , a weekly pro @-@ independence paper launched in 2005 that ceased publication after just seven issues , suggesting The National would succeed because it had more financial backing , and as there was a latent demand for a news sheet supporting independence . Writing in The Guardian , the journalist and author Peter Preston said there were " many good things to say about the National " including its editor , who was leading a newspaper that " helps to reflect public opinion better " . 
 = Jan Mayensfield = 
 Jan Mayensfield ( ICAO : <unk> ) is an aerodrome serving Olonkinbyen in Jan Mayen , Norway . Operated by the Norwegian Armed Forces , it serves the island 's only population at the combined military and meteorological station . It has a 1 @,@ 500 @-@ meter ( 4 @,@ 921 ft ) dirt runway numbered 06 – 24 . 
 The airfield was built in connection with the LORAN @-@ C transmitter at Olonkinbyen and was completed in 1960 . Jan Mayensfield is served eight times per year by Lockheed C @-@ 130 Hercules aircraft of the 335 Squadron from Bodø Main Air Station , which provide supplies and change crew at the outpost . The nearby Beerenberg volcano can cause a Kármán wind , which creates difficult landing conditions . 
 = = History = = 
 North Atlantic Treaty Organization ( NATO ) and the Norwegian Armed Forces started construction of a military communications outpost at Olonkinbyen in 1958 . At first a LORAN @-@ A transmitter was built , followed by a LORAN @-@ C transmitter in 1960 . In August , it was announced that the island would receive an airfield to allow continual operation of the transmitter . Originally , the aerodrome consisted of a 1 @,@ 200 by 30 metres ( 3 @,@ 937 by 98 ft ) section of the island 's dirt road . This was chosen to reduce the bureaucracy of construction . The first aircraft to land was a Consolidated PBY Catalina of the Royal Norwegian Air Force on 17 September 1960 . 
 The first civilian aircraft was a Douglas DC @-@ 4 operated by Braathens SAFE , which landed with some journalists on board on 29 October 1961 . Other early aircraft operating to Jan Mayen were the Grumman HU @-@ 16 Albatross and the Douglas DC @-@ 6 . The head officer of the Norwegian military 's communications division was later criticized by Chief of Defence Bjarne Øen , who concluded : " Gentlemen , I will not have any construction of airports on Norwegian soil by the Communications Division without the plans being presented to the Central Command . " 
 In 1970 , a sudden eruption in Beerenberg forced the immediate evacuation of the station . A Hercules was dispatched to the island and successfully landed on the strip . Thereafter the Hercules became the regular military aircraft at Jan Mayen . Aircraft gradually took over more of the transport to the island , and from 1973 all supplies except diesel and special freight was transported by ship . From 1975 the 333 Squadron would occasionally drop mail and supplies using the P @-@ 3 Orion as a supplement to the landings of the Hercules . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 Jan Mayensfield 's single regular service is the Royal Norwegian Air Force 's Lockheed C @-@ 130 Hercules , which operate to the island eight times per year . The aircraft are part of the 335 Squadron , based at Gardermoen Air Station , although the flights from Jan Mayen operate from Bodø Main Air Station . The runway is not open for commercial traffic , although it can be used for research and search and rescue operations . 
 The dirt runway is 1 @,@ 500 by 30 meters ( 4 @,@ 921 by 98 ft ) being aligned 06 – 24 . Jan Mayensfield has variable weather conditions , a lot of fog and often has a Kármán wind . The Kármán wind is created in the wake of the Beerenberg volcano , resulting in regular vortex streets and lee @-@ waves . This can cause sudden change to the wind direction on the island . 
 = = Accidents and incidents = = 
 In 1991 , a C @-@ 130 Hercules aircraft from the Royal Norwegian Air Force almost crashed after take off due to Karman wind suddenly shifting . 
 A WWII plane crash site is also near the airfield . 
 = Bruno Rossi = 
 Bruno Benedetto Rossi ( 13 April 1905 – 21 November 1993 ) was an Italian experimental physicist . He made major contributions to particle physics and the study of cosmic rays . A 1927 graduate of the University of Bologna , he became interested in cosmic rays . To study them , he invented an improved electronic coincidence circuit , and travelled to Eritrea to conduct experiments that showed that cosmic ray intensity from the West was significantly larger than that from the East . 
 Forced to emigrate in October 1938 because of the Italian Racial Laws , Rossi moved to Denmark , where he worked with Niels Bohr , then to Britain , where he worked with Patrick Blackett at the University of Manchester , and finally to the United States , where he worked with Enrico Fermi at the University of Chicago , and later at Cornell University . Rossi stayed in the United States , and became an American Citizen . 
 During World War II , Rossi worked on radar at the MIT Radiation Laboratory , and he played a pivotal role in the Manhattan Project , heading the group at the Los Alamos Laboratory that carried out the RaLa Experiments . After the war , he was recruited by Jerrold Zacharias at MIT , where Rossi continued his pre @-@ war research into cosmic rays . 
 In the 1960s , he pioneered X @-@ ray astronomy and space plasma physics . His instrumentation on Explorer 10 detected the magnetopause , and he initiated the rocket experiments that discovered Scorpius X @-@ 1 , the first extra @-@ solar source of X @-@ rays . 
 = = Italy = = 
 Rossi was born to a Jewish family in Venice , Italy . He was the eldest of three sons of Rino Rossi and Lina <unk> . His father was an electrical engineer , who participated in the electrification of Venice . Rossi was tutored at home until the age of fourteen , after which he attended the Ginnasio and the Liceo in Venice . After beginning his university studies at the University of Padua , he began advanced work at the University of Bologna , where he received a <unk> in Physics in 1927 . His thesis advisor was Quirino Majorana , who was a well @-@ known experimentalist and uncle of the physicist Ettore Majorana . 
 = = = Florence = = = 
 In 1928 , Rossi began his career at the University of Florence , as assistant to Antonio Garbasso , who founded the University 's Physics Institute in 1920 . It was located in Arcetri , on a hill overlooking the city . When Rossi arrived , Garbasso was <unk> of Florence , appointed by Benito Mussolini 's fascist government of Italy . However , he brought to the institute a group of brilliant physicists which included Enrico Fermi and Franco Rasetti before they moved to Rome , as well as Gilberto Bernardini , Enrico Persico , and Giulio <unk> . In 1929 , Rossi 's first graduate student , Giuseppe Occhialini , was awarded the doctoral degree . 
 In search of pioneering research , Rossi turned his attention to cosmic rays , which had been discovered by Victor Hess in manned balloon flights in 1911 and 1912 . In 1929 , Rossi read the paper of Walther Bothe and Werner <unk> , which described their discovery of charged cosmic ray particles that penetrated 4 @.@ 1 centimetres ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) of gold . This was astonishing , for the most penetrating charged particles known at the time were electrons from radioactive decay , which could penetrate less than a millimetre of gold . In Rossi 's words it 
 came like a flash of light revealing the existence of an unsuspected world , full of mysteries , which no one had yet begun to explore . It soon became my overwhelming ambition to participate in the exploration . 
 = = = Rossi coincidence circuit = = = 
 In 1954 , Bothe was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics " for the coincidence method and his discoveries made therewith " . However , his implementation of this method was very cumbersome , for it involved visual correlation of photographed pulses . Within a few weeks of reading his paper with <unk> , Rossi invented an improved electronic coincidence circuit , which made use of triode vacuum tubes . The Rossi coincidence circuit has two major advantages : it offers very precise temporal resolution and it can detect coincidences among any number of pulse sources . These features make it possible to identify interesting events that produce coincident pulses in several counters . These rare events stand out even in the presence of high rates of unrelated background pulses in the individual counters . The circuit not only provided the basis for electronic instrumentation in nuclear and particle physics , but also implemented the first electronic AND circuit , which is a fundamental element of the digital logic that is ubiquitous in modern electronics . 
 At the time , an improved tubular version of the original Geiger counter , invented by Hans Geiger in 1908 , had just been developed by his student Walther Müller . These Geiger – Müller tubes ( GM tubes or counters ) made possible Bothe 's investigations . With Occhialini 's help in the construction of GM tubes , and with the aid of a practical coincidence circuit , Rossi confirmed and extended the results of Bothe , who invited him to visit Berlin in the summer of 1930 . Here , with financial support arranged by Garbasso , Rossi collaborated on further investigations of cosmic ray penetration . He also studied Carl Størmer 's mathematical description of the trajectories of charged particles in the Earth 's magnetic field . On the basis of these studies , he realised that the intensity of cosmic rays coming from eastward directions might be different from that of westward ones . From Berlin , he submitted the first paper suggesting that observations of this East @-@ West effect could not only confirm that cosmic rays are charged particles , but also determine the sign of their charge . 
 = = = Rome conference = = = 
 In the fall of 1931 , Fermi and Orso Mario Corbino organized in Rome an international conference on nuclear physics , which was sponsored by the Royal Academy of Italy . Fermi invited Rossi to give an introductory talk on cosmic rays . In the audience were Robert Millikan and Arthur Compton , both of whom had won the Nobel prize in physics , in 1923 and 1927 , respectively . During the 1920s , Millikan , who is famous for his oil drop experiment , made extensive measurements of the mysterious radiation discovered by Hess . He coined the name " cosmic rays " and proposed that they were photons created by the fusion of hydrogen in interstellar space . He was not pleased by the presentation of evidence that most observed cosmic rays are energetic charged particles . Later , Rossi wrote : 
 Millikan clearly resented having his beloved theory torn to pieces by a mere youth , so much so that from that moment on he refused to recognise my existence . ( In retrospect , I must admit that I might have been more tactful in my presentation . ) 
 Compton , who is famous for the Compton effect , had a more positive reaction , for he told Rossi later that the talk had motivated him to begin his own research on cosmic rays . 
 = = = Rossi curve = = = 
 Immediately after the Rome conference , Rossi carried out two experiments that led to a significant advance in the understanding of cosmic rays . Both involved triple coincidences of pulses from three Geiger counters ; but in the first , the counters were aligned and separated by blocks of lead , while in the second , they were placed in a triangular configuration such that all three could not be traversed by a single particle travelling in a straight line . Results from the first configuration demonstrated the existence of cosmic @-@ ray particles capable of penetrating 1 metre ( 3 ft 3 in ) of lead . 
 With the second configuration enclosed in a lead box , the results showed that some cosmic rays interact in lead to produce multiple secondary particles . In an extension of the second experiment , he measured the rate of triple coincidences as a function of the amount of the lead above the counters . A plot of this rate against thickness , which came to be known as the Rossi curve , showed a rapid rise as the lead layer was increased , followed by a slow decline . These experiments showed that ground @-@ level cosmic rays consist of two components : a " soft " component which is capable of prolific generation of multiple particle events , and a " hard " component which is capable of traversing great thicknesses of lead . At the time , the physical nature of both was a mystery , for they did not yet fit into the growing body of knowledge about nuclear and particle physics . 
 Late in 1931 , Rossi arranged for Occhialini to work in the Cavendish Laboratory at the University of Cambridge with Patrick Blackett , whom he had met in Berlin . With the aid of the new technique of electronic coincidence , Occhialini helped Blackett develop the first counter @-@ controlled cloud chamber , with which they confirmed Carl Anderson 's discovery of the positron and deduced that the positive electrons are produced in association with negative ones by pair production . Up to 23 positive and negative electrons were observed in some events , which were clearly related to the showers of Rossi 's soft component . 
 = = = Padua = = = 
 In 1932 , Rossi won a competition for an academic position in an Italian university , and was appointed professor of experimental physics at the University of Padua . Soon after Rossi arrived , the rector asked him to oversee the design and construction of Padua 's new Physics Institute . Although this task diverted his attention from research and teaching , he complied willingly , and the institute opened in 1937 . 
 = = = East @-@ West effect = = = 
 In spite of this distraction , Rossi was able to complete , in 1933 , an experiment on the East @-@ West effect that he had begun before leaving Arcetri . Because this effect is more prominent near the equator , he organised an expedition to Asmara in Eritrea , which was then an Italian colony on the Red Sea at a latitude of 15 ° N. With Sergio De <unk> , he set up a " cosmic ray telescope " , which consisted of two separated GM counters in coincidence , whose axis of maximum sensitivity could be pointed in any direction . It soon became apparent that cosmic ray intensity from the West was significantly larger than that from the East . This meant that there was a larger influx of positive primary particles than of negative ones . At the time , this result was surprising , because most investigators held the preconceived notion that the primaries would be negative electrons . 
 Just as Rossi left Eritrea , he received news of two observations of a similar East @-@ West effect . These were published in the Physical Review . One was by Thomas H. Johnson , and the other was by Compton and his student , Luis Alvarez , who reported observations at Mexico City , where the latitude is 19 ° N. Because others had carried out the first experimental exploitation of his important idea of 1930 , Rossi was disappointed , but published his results immediately after returning to Padua . Later , with Frederick C. <unk> , Alvarez and Rossi patented a " Vertical Determination Device " , which made use of cosmic ray telescopes . 
 In Eritrea , Rossi discovered another phenomenon that would become a principal theme of his postwar cosmic ray research : extensive cosmic ray air showers . The discovery occurred during tests to determine the rate of accidental coincidences between the Geiger counters of his detector . To assure that no single particle could trigger the counters he spread them out in a horizontal plane . In this configuration , the frequency of coincidences was greater than that calculated on the basis of the individual rates and the resolving time of the coincidence circuit . Rossi concluded that : 
 … once in a while the recording equipment is struck by very extensive showers of particles , which cause coincidences between counters , even placed at large distances from one another . 
 In 1937 , Rossi became acquainted with Nora Lombroso , the daughter of Ugo Lombroso , a professor of physiology at the University of Palermo , and Silvia Forti . Her grandfather was the renowned physician and criminologist Cesare Lombroso , and her aunts , Gina Lombroso and Paola Lombroso Carrara , were well known Italian writers and educators . In April 1938 , Bruno and Nora married and set up a household in Padua . 
 Although Rossi avoided politics , some of Rossi 's associates were active opponents of the fascist state . For example , he mentored Eugenio <unk> , who became a member of the communist party , while completing a degree at Padua . Later , in 1943 , <unk> joined the resistance in Milan , and in 1945 , was assassinated by soldiers of the Republic of Salò a German puppet state . Similarly , Ettore <unk> , who received his PhD under Rossi in 1938 , spent the war years alternating between cosmic ray research and active participation in the Italian resistance movements of Padua and Venice . 
 Because of these associations , and because both Rossis were Jewish , they became apprehensive as Italy 's antisemitism grew under the influence of Nazi Germany . Eventually , as a result of anti @-@ Jewish laws resulting from the Manifesto of Race , Rossi was dismissed from his professorship . In his words : 
 Eventually , in September of 1938 , I learned that I no longer was a citizen of my country , and that , in Italy , my activity as a teacher and a scientist had come to an end . 
 = = Exile = = 
 With this setback , Rossi began an important phase of his career . He summarised this period in a memoir : " The Decay of ' <unk> ' ( 1939 – 1943 ) : Experimental Particle Physics in the Age of Innocence " , which he presented in a symposium at Fermilab in 1980 . On 12 October 1938 , the Rossis left for Copenhagen , where the Danish physicist , Niels Bohr , had invited him to study . The couple had no intention of returning to Italy , and Bohr facilitated Rossi 's search for a more secure position by sponsoring a conference attended by leading physicists . He hoped that one of them would find Rossi a job , and soon , Rossi received an invitation to come to the University of Manchester , where Blackett was developing a major center of cosmic ray research . After a pleasant two months in Denmark , Rossi and Nora arrived in Manchester . 
 = = = Manchester = = = 
 Rossi 's stay in Manchester was brief , but productive . At this time , a clear understanding of the soft component was available . In 1934 , Hans Bethe and Walter Heitler published a quantitative description not only of the production of electron @-@ positron pairs by energetic photons , but also of the production of photons by energetic electrons and positrons . At Manchester , Rossi collaborated with Ludwig <unk> on an experiment which demonstrated the correctness of the Bethe @-@ Heitler theory of the second process , which had not yet been fully confirmed . This experiment also introduced the technique of anti @-@ coincidence , which has become a ubiquitous feature of instruments for detecting and analyzing energetic particles . 
 By this time , cloud chamber observations had clarified the nature of the hard component . In 1936 , Anderson and his student , Seth Neddermeyer , discovered cosmic ray particles with mass intermediate between those of the electron and the proton , which Anderson called " mesotrons " . The mesotron subsequently became the known as the " μ meson " , which was shortened to " muon " . Just before the Copenhagen conference , Blackett suggested that observed variations of cosmic ray intensity with atmospheric temperature could be an indication that mesotrons are unstable , and he held intense discussions with Rossi on this subject . As a result , Rossi left Manchester determined to confirm their decay and to measure the lifetime . 
 = = = Chicago = = = 
 With war looming over Europe , Blackett and others advised Rossi to leave Britain . Consequently , he wrote to Compton , who invited him to attend a summer symposium in Chicago , and hinted that a job might become available . In June 1939 , the Rossis sailed for New York , where they were greeted by Fermi and his wife Laura , who had also left Italy because of the racial laws . After a brief reunion with the <unk> , the Rossis were offered a ride to Chicago by Bethe . They gratefully accepted , and arrived at the University of Chicago in mid @-@ June 1939 . 
 = = = <unk> decay = = = 
 Immediately after a symposium session on mesotron instability reached a consensus that more definitive observations were needed , Rossi and Compton began to plan an experiment . Because the intensity of the hard component increases with altitude , while the density of air decreases , Compton suggested that the investigations should be carried out on Mount Evans in Colorado , where he had worked in the early 1930s , and where access to a research site at 4 @,@ 310 metres ( 14 @,@ 140 ft ) elevation is provided by the Mount Evans Scenic Byway , the highest paved road in North America . He urged Rossi to begin a series of experiments that summer , before snow blocked the road , and to help , enlisted two of his friends , Norman <unk> and J. Barton Hoag , and a student , Winston Bostick . Rossi and his helpers hurriedly assembled equipment and loaded it onto a dilapidated bus that Compton borrowed from the Zoology department . 
 By this time , it was known that the main process by which mesotrons lose energy is ionisation energy loss , which is described by the Bethe formula , and is proportional to the mass per unit area of the layer of material traversed . If this were the only process , the intensity of the hard component passing through a layer of solid material would decrease by the same amount as in an equivalent layer of air . Rossi and his collaborators found that the decrease was significantly larger in the atmosphere than in a corresponding layer of solid carbon . Because the distance traversed in air was much larger than that in carbon , they interpreted this result as evidence for decay of the mesotron , and taking into account the effect of relativistic time dilation , estimated its mean life at rest as roughly 2 microseconds . 
 The next summer , Rossi returned to Mount Evans where he performed experiments near Echo Lake at an elevation 3 @,@ 230 metres ( 10 @,@ 600 ft ) . With the use of anti coincidence techniques , the apparatus made it possible to measure the mean free path before decay of two groups of mesotrons with different average momentum . The results , published with David B. Hall , not only confirmed the proportionality between particle momentum and the mean free path of mesotrons before decay that is expected on the basis of relativity theory , but also presented an improved estimate of the lifetime at rest : ( 2 @.@ 4 ± 0 @.@ 3 ) microseconds . These results and those of the previous year were not only the first to show definitively that mesotrons are unstable , but also the first experimental confirmation of the time dilation of moving clocks predicted by relativity theory . 
 = = = Cornell = = = 
 At Chicago , Rossi 's position as research associate was not permanent , and Compton was unable to secure him a better one . Consequently , he began a job search , during which he gave a seminar at Cornell University , where coincidentally , death had created a vacancy in the Physics department . After Bethe suggested that Rossi should be invited to fill this position , he was appointed associate professor at Cornell . In the fall of 1940 , after returning to Chicago from Colorado , the Rossis left for Ithaca . 
 At Cornell , Rossi met his first American graduate student , Kenneth Greisen , with whom he wrote an article , " Cosmic @-@ Ray Theory " , which was published in the Reviews of Modern Physics and became known among cosmic @-@ ray researchers as " The Bible " . During the summer of 1941 , Greisen and physicists from Denver and Boulder accompanied Rossi to Mount Evans , where they refined the knowledge of proportionality between mesotron momentum and lifetime before decay . Greisen and Rossi also carried out experiments , which showed , in terms of processes documented in the " Bible " , that not all particles of the soft component , could be produced by mesotrons of the hard component . They interpreted this as evidence for primary electrons or photons , but it became evident later that the soft excess arises from the decay of neutral pions . 
 After the 1941 expedition to Colorado , Rossi decided that the question of whether mesotrons decay had been answered . However , he was not satisfied with the precision with which the lifetime had been determined , for existing estimates depended on mesotron mass , which was not accurately known . To perform a more direct measurement , he designed apparatus to measure the time interval between the arrival of a mesotron in an absorber , where it stopped , and the emission of an electron when the mesotron decayed . To assist , he obtained the help of graduate student Norris <unk> . At the heart of their experiment , was a " chronometer " , which was an electronic circuit that produced a pulse whose height was accurately proportional to the time interval , and which could be recorded by photographing an oscilloscope trace . 
 This was the first time @-@ to @-@ amplitude converter , another of Rossi 's contributions to electronic techniques of experimental physics . With absorbers of lead and brass , the number of decays was plotted against time . These decay curves had the same exponential form as those of ordinary radioactive substances , and gave a mean lifetime of 2 @.@ 3 ± 0 @.@ 2 microseconds , which was later refined to 2 @.@ 15 ± 0 @.@ 07 microseconds . After the war , Rossi discovered that his Italian colleagues , Marcello <unk> and Oreste <unk> , had performed experiments very similar to his and measured a lifetime consistent with his result . 
 Looking back on what he called the " Age of Innocence " , Rossi wrote : 
 How is it possible that results bearing on fundamental problems of elementary particle physics could be achieved by experiments of an almost childish simplicity , costing only a few thousand dollars and requiring only the help of one or two graduate students ? 
 = = Los Alamos = = 
 With the completion of his work on mesotrons , Rossi turned his attention toward the war effort . In 1942 , while commuting from Ithaca to Cambridge , Massachusetts , he became a consultant on radar development at the Radiation Laboratory of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology . Here , along with Greisen , he invented a " range tracking circuit " , which was patented after the war . 
 In early July 1943 , Bethe invited Rossi to join the Manhattan Project . Within a month , he reported for duty at Los Alamos Laboratory . A few weeks later , Nora and their three @-@ year @-@ old daughter , Florence , joined Rossi in Los Alamos , New Mexico . The laboratory 's director , Robert Oppenheimer , asked Rossi to form a group to develop diagnostic instruments needed to create the atomic bomb . He soon realized that there already existed a group with a similar mission headed by the Swiss physicist Hans H. Staub . The two decided to merge their efforts into a single " Detector Group " . They were assisted by approximately twenty young researchers , including Matthew Sands an " electronic wizard " , who later earned a PhD under Rossi , and David B. Nicodemus , whom Staub brought from Stanford University , who was an expert on particle detectors . 
 = = = Fast ionization chamber = = = 
 Bomb development called for large detectors of ionising radiation , whose response is proportional to the energy released in the detector and follows rapid changes in radiation intensity . From the earliest research on radioactivity , radiation had been measured in terms of Ionisation , but existing Ionisation chambers were slow to respond to changes . To address this problem , Rossi and Staub carried out a careful analysis of the pulses that result when individual charged particles create ions within an ionisation chamber . They realised that the high mobility of free electrons removed from ionised atoms means that the pulses produced by single particles can be very brief . With James S. Allen , Rossi found gas mixtures of high electron mobility and low electron attachment . On the basis of these investigations , Allen and Rossi invented the " fast ionisation chamber " , which they patented after the war . It was a crucial factor in the success of the Manhattan Project and became widely used in postwar research on particle physics . 
 = = = RaLa experiments = = = 
 In April 1944 , the Manhattan project experienced a crisis , when Emilio Segrè 's group discovered that plutonium made in reactors would not work in a gun @-@ type plutonium weapon like the " Thin Man " . In response , Oppenheimer completely reorganised the laboratory to focus on development of an implosion @-@ type weapon . 
 Rossi was enlisted to implement a method to test various weapon designs to arrive at one that produced an accurately symmetrical spherical implosion . The tests measured changes of the absorption of gamma rays in a metal sphere as it underwent implosive compression . The gamma rays were emitted by a pellet of the short @-@ lived radioisotope Lanthanum @-@ 140 positioned in the center of the sphere . The term RaLa experiment is a contraction of Radioactive Lanthanum . As compression progressed , the rapid increase in absorption was detected as a decrease of gamma ray intensity recorded outside of the assembly . 
 The RaLa experiments revealed many pitfalls on the way to a successful implosion . To understand problematic jets that plagued early implosion designs , other test methods were necessary , but the RaLa experiments played a primary role in the design of explosive lenses . In his history of the Los Alamos project , David Hawkins wrote : " RaLa became the most important single experiment affecting the final bomb design " . 
 = = = Trinity diagnostics = = = 
 On 16 July 1945 , an implosion @-@ type plutonium device was detonated at the Trinity site near Alamogordo , New Mexico . The code name for this device was " The gadget " , and its design was very similar to the Fat Man weapon that was dropped on Nagasaki twenty four days later . 
 In preparation for Trinity , Rossi designed instrumentation to record gamma radiation during the chain reaction , whose duration was expected to be approximately 10 nanoseconds . Observations on this time scale were almost beyond the state of the art in 1945 , but Rossi designed and built a large cylindrical ionisation chamber whose speed of response was adequate because its coaxial electrodes were separated by a narrow gap of only 1 centimetre ( 0 @.@ 39 in ) . 
 To record the signal , he installed a very fast oscilloscope , provided as a prototype by DuMont Laboratories , in an underground bunker several hundred feet from the Gadget , where it was photographed . To bring the signal to the oscilloscope , he devised an oversized coaxial transmission line , whose inner conductor was made smaller as it went from chamber to oscilloscope . Because this configuration enhanced the signal reaching the oscilloscope , there was no need for amplification . To confirm this surprising behaviour , Rossi consulted with Harvard professor Edward Purcell . 
 A few days after the test , Rossi went into the darkroom with Fermi , and before the newly developed film was dry , they were able to compute the initial growth rate of nuclear activity , which was crucial information for future weapons development . Of three attempts to measure this rate at Trinity , Rossi 's was the only one that was fully successful . 
 = = MIT = = 
 With the success of the Manhattan Project and the Radiation Laboratory , MIT moved into a new era of " big science " funded by the US government . MIT 's expansion in nuclear physics was spearheaded by Jerrold R. Zacharias , who went to Los Alamos late in the war , and recruited Viki Weisskopf and Rossi as MIT professors . Rossi left Los Alamos for Cambridge on 6 February 1946 . 
 Within the new Laboratory for Nuclear Science , headed by Zacharias , Rossi was delegated to create a cosmic ray research group at MIT . To help , he recruited four young scientists who had been at Los Alamos as PhD candidates : Herbert Bridge , Matthew Sands , Robert Thompson and Robert Williams . Two who had been in the Radiation Laboratory also came to work with him : John <unk> and Robert <unk> . All six were more mature than typical graduate students , for they had several years of wartime research experience . Consequently , they were paid a stipend similar to that of a postdoctoral researcher , which was funded by the Office of Naval Research and enabled them to support families during their graduate studies . 
 For this new phase of his activities , Rossi made a fundamental change of approach . In his words : 
 In my new position , my activity would be very different from what it had been in past years . Then , working alone or , at most , with the help of a few students I would build the instruments , take them to the place where they had to be used , make the measurements and analyze the results . Now , I had the responsibility of an entire group , and what mattered was not my own work , but the work of the group . My task was to identify the most promising research programs among those that were within our reach , to help where help was needed in the planning of the instrumentation or in the evaluation of experimental results , all of this without discouraging the individual initiative of the researchers . 
 = = = Elementary Particles = = = 
 With the discovery of the pion in 1947 , the search for new elementary particles became a popular research topic . By operating fast ionization chambers within a cloud chamber , Herbert showed that the bursts of ionization they recorded were primarily produced by relatively low energy cosmic rays , whose nuclear interactions typically involve the ejection of several heavily ionising nuclear fragments . On the basis of this effect , he and Rossi demonstrated that the behaviour of these interactions is similar to that of penetrating showers . 
 Rossi 's group focused on the use of cloud chambers to study their properties and interactions . In 1948 , with the aid of a multi @-@ plate cloud chamber in which lead plates alternated with aluminium ones , Gregory , Rossi and <unk> showed that the source of the electromagnetic component of cosmic ray interactions was predominantly energetic photons , rather than electrons . This result confirmed Oppenheimer 's suggestion of 1947 that neutral pions are produced in interactions , along with charged ones , and that this component arises from their rapid decay into photons . 
 To study the new elementary particles , Bridge and Martin Annis operated a large rectangular multi plate cloud chamber at Echo Lake . This investigation provided the basis for a 1951 PhD thesis by Annis , supervised by Rossi . The next year , these authors , with another student of Rossi 's , Stanislaw Olbert , showed how to derive information on particle energies from measurements of their multiple scattering . This added another way to use cloud chambers to measure the properties of elementary particles . In early 1953 , with Bridge , Richard Safford and Charles <unk> , Rossi published results of a comprehensive cloud chamber study of the elementary particles that became known as <unk> . <unk> was a visitor from at the École Polytechnique , where he had obtained an accurate value of the muon mass in 1947 , and Safford was Rossi 's student . 
 = = = Bagnères @-@ de @-@ Bigorre conference = = = 
 By 1952 , a bewildering " zoo " of elementary particles had been reported , with various masses , decay schemes , nomenclature and reliability of identification . To deal with this situation , Blackett and Leprince @-@ Ringuet organized an International Cosmic Ray Conference at Bagnères @-@ de @-@ Bigorre in 1953 . According to James Cronin , " this conference can be placed in importance in the same category as two other famous conferences , the Solvay congress of 1927 and the Shelter Island Conference of 1948 . " 
 Leprince @-@ Ringuet asked Rossi to give a summary of new information presented at the conference and to propose nomenclature for the new particles . Before the conference , in response to the latter assignment , Rossi circulated a suggestion that particles with mass smaller than that of a neutron be designated by small Greek letters and those with larger mass be designated by capital Greek letters . In his talk , on 11 July 1953 , he reported that conference results , which he had compiled with the aid of Powell and <unk> , were consistent with this scheme , which was commonly used afterwards . 
 A highlight was Leprince @-@ Ringuet 's declaration in his closing talk that : " ... in the future we must use particle accelerators . " With the 3 GeV Cosmotron already in operation at Brookhaven National Laboratory , this declaration reflected a consensus among the participants . As a result , Rossi 's group began to wind down their cloud chamber experiments . However , in 1954 , Bridge , Hans Courant , Herbert <unk> , Jr. and Rossi reported on an unusual event in which a stopping singly charged particle decayed into three photons whose energies totaled more than the proton rest energy . This is the signature of an antiproton annihilation . The next year , a group led by Owen Chamberlain and Emilio Segrè detected antiprotons , for which they were awarded Nobel Prize in Physics in 1960 . 
 = = = Extensive air showers = = = 
 By the time of the Bagnères @-@ de @-@ Bigorre conference , Rossi had already turned his attention toward the astrophysical implications of cosmic ray phenomena , particularly extensive air showers . After Rossi 's recognition , in Eritrea , that these events exist , they were extensively studied by Pierre Auger , and by Williams . At this time , the extremely fast response of the newly developed scintillation counters offered a new way to study the structure of air showers . To do this , Rossi enlisted his student , George W. Clark , who completed a PhD in 1952 , and Piero Bassi , who was a visitor from the University of Padua . Because solid scintillating material was unavailable , they decided to use terphenyl dissolved in benzine , which is an efficient liquid scintillator . With the aid of three counters deployed on the roof of the MIT Physics building during the winter of 1952 / 53 , they found that shower particles arrived within only one or two meters of a disk , which travels at nearly the speed of light in the direction of the shower axis . 
 This result showed that scintillation counters can not only determine of the arrival times of shower disks at many detectors spread over a large area , but also to estimate the number of particles striking each detector . These capabilities combine the " fast @-@ timing " method of determining shower arrival directions with the density sampling method of determining their size and the location of their axes . 
 = = = = Agassiz experiment = = = = 
 With this progress , Rossi 's group began a major experiment that could measure both primary energies and arrival directions of extensive air showers . Participating in this effort were : George Clark , William Kraushaar , John Linsley , James Earl , and Frank Scherb . Kraushaar came to MIT from Cornell in 1949 , after earning his PhD under Kenneth Greisen . With the support of Professor Donald Menzel who was director of the Harvard College Observatory , Rossi 's group deployed fifteen liquid scintillators , of area 1 square metre ( 11 sq ft ) on the wooded grounds of the observatory 's Agassiz station . The signals were brought on cables to a Quonset hut , where they were displayed on fifteen <unk> and recorded photographically . 
 Shortly after the experiment began to record shower data , lightning ignited the flammable liquid of one of the counters . Local firemen quickly extinguished the resulting fire before it spread to nearby trees , which were soaked with rain water . Because the trees played an essential role in suppressing atmospheric convection that would degrade telescopic observations , Harvard and MIT carried out tense negotiations , until an elaborate system of fire protection was installed , and the experiment was allowed to resume . To eliminate the threat of fire , Clark , Frank Scherb and William B. Smith created a " factory " that made nonflammable plastic scintillator disks , whose thickness was 10 centimetres ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) and whose diameter was approximately 1 metre ( 3 ft 3 in ) . 
 After a switch to plastic in the late spring of 1956 , the experiment ran continuously . Its findings were reported in Nature and the Physical Review . The most important results were summarized by Rossi as : 
 1 . A precise measurement of the density of shower particles as a function of distance from the shower center . 
 2 . A measurement of the energy spectrum of the primary particles responsible for the showers from 1015 electron volts to 1018 electron volts . 
 3 . The proof that these particles arrive in practically equal numbers from all directions . 
 4 . The observation of a particle with an energy close to 1019 electron volts . 
 As the Agassiz experiment came to an end , the group realized that observations near the equator and in the southern hemisphere were needed to extend their conclusion that air shower arrival directions are nearly isotropic . Consequently , Clark , in collaboration with Vikram Sarabhai , ran his smaller experiment at Kodaikanal , India , at a latitude of 10 ° N , and confirmed the absence of anisotropies . Later , at the suggestion of Ismael Escobar , the Agassiz equipment was moved to El Alto at 4200 meters on the Bolivian plateau at 16 ° S. Here , Clark , Escobar and Juan <unk> found no anisotropies , but they showed that the structure of air showers at their maximum development is different from that at sea level . 
 = = = = Volcano Ranch experiment = = = = 
 The maximum energy of a particle recorded by Agassiz experiment , 1019 electron volts , is close to energies beyond which charged particles can not be confined to the galactic disc by typical interstellar magnetic fields of 10 − 5 gauss . A detector array of very large dimensions is needed to detect showers of these energies . John Linsley agreed to take on responsibility for building such an array . He came to MIT in 1954 from the University of Minnesota , where he completed a PhD under Edward P. Ney . Soon , he was joined by Livio Scarsi , whom Rossi had recruited from Occhialini 's group at the University of Milan . 
 Because no large enough tract of open land was available near Boston , the array was constructed on a semi @-@ desert property known <unk> Ranch , about 16 miles ( 26 km ) west of Albuquerque , New Mexico , at an altitude of 1 @,@ 770 metres ( 5 @,@ 810 ft ) . During 1957 and 1958 , Linsley and Scarsi deployed 19 scintillation counters , which used fluorescent plastic disks similar to those of the Agassiz detectors , except that each counter incorporated four disks viewed by four photomultipliers . Initially the area of the array was 2 @.@ 5 * 106 m2 , which is to be compared with Agassiz 's 105 m2 , but in 1960 , after Scarsi had returned to Milan , Linsley spread the detectors over an area of 107 m2 . 
 Results from the Volcano Ranch experiment showed that the cosmic @-@ ray intensity decreases smoothly with energy from 1017 - 1018 electron <unk> and that primaries in this range arrive isotropically . Of particular significance was the detection of a single particle whose energy of 1020 electron volts is larger than the maximum that could be contained in the galactic disc by galactic magnetic fields . Particles of these energies can only originate in the galactic halo or from beyond the galaxy , and their existence is not consistent with the Greisen @-@ <unk> @-@ Kuzmin limit . 
 = = = Space Plasma Research = = = 
 On 4 October 1957 , the Soviet Union launched the first artificial Earth satellite , Sputnik 1 . This event created a " wave of near @-@ hysteria " among a surprised American public . In response , the U.S. government increased funding for the National Science Foundation , and in 1958 , created both the National Aeronautics and Space Administration ( NASA ) and the Advanced Research Projects Agency , which was renamed the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency ( DARPA ) in 1972 . On 4 June 1958 , two days after legislation creating NASA was introduced , Detlev W. <unk> , chairman of the National Academy of Sciences , met with the heads of these three agencies to create a new advisory body , the Space Science Board , to provide advice for the expansion of space research and to make sure that funding of fundamental science would be properly emphasized . 
 The Board convened for its first meeting on 27 June 1958 . Only four members were already engaged in space research : Rossi , Leo Goldberg , John Simpson , and James Van Allen . Rossi formed a subcommittee which included Thomas Gold , Philip Morrison and biologist Salvador Luria , who agreed that investigations of plasma in interplanetary space would be desirable . Consequently , Rossi decided to turn his group 's efforts towards its study . With Herbert Bridge , Rossi designed and tested a plasma probe based on the classical Faraday cup . However , to enhance the instrument 's response to positively charged protons and to suppress its response to <unk> produced by sunlight , four grids were deployed within the cup . A key innovation was a modulating voltage applied to one of the grids , which converted the signal into an alternating current , proportional to the proton flux and uncontaminated by any contribution of <unk> . 
 After intense lobbying of Homer Newell , NASA 's deputy director of space flight programs , Rossi secured a flight opportunity on Explorer 10 , " Goddard 's first home @-@ grown satellite " . The unannounced goal was to hit the moon , but after launch on 25 March 1961 , the satellite went into a highly elongated orbit around Earth , whose apogee , at 70 % of the distance to the moon , was well short of this goal . 
 Nevertheless , during 52 hours of data recorded by the MIT probe before battery power ran out , Rossi 's group found a transition between two distinct regions around earth . Near <unk> there were fairly strong and well organised magnetic fields , but no indication of interplanetary protons . At 22 earth radii , the spacecraft entered a region where magnetic fields were weaker and more irregular , and where a substantial flux of protons was observed coming from the general direction of the Sun . On several occasions during the rest of the flight , this flux disappeared and then reappeared again , which indicated that the spacecraft was flying close to the boundary between the two regions and that this boundary was moving irregularly . Eventually , this boundary became known as the magnetopause . 
 Under Bridge and Rossi , the MIT space plasma group included Frank Scherb , Edwin Lyon , Alan Lazarus , Alberto <unk> , Alberto <unk> , John Belcher and Constance Dilworth , who was Occhialini 's wife . Its Faraday cups have collected data on plasma throughout the solar system : near Earth on OGO @-@ 1 , OGO 3 and IMP 8 , in interplanetary space on <unk> , and in the Heliosphere and <unk> on Voyager 1 and Voyager 2 . 
 = = = X @-@ Ray astronomy = = = 
 As a consultant to American Science and Engineering , Inc . , Rossi initiated the rocket experiments that discovered the first extra @-@ solar source of X @-@ rays , Scorpius X @-@ 1 . Rossi was made Institute Professor at MIT in 1966 . 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 Rossi retired from MIT in 1970 . From 1974 to 1980 he taught at the University of Palermo . In retirement he wrote a number of monographs , and a 1990 autobiography , Moments in the Life of a Scientist , which was published by Cambridge University Press . He died from a cardiac arrest at his home in Cambridge on 21 November 1993 . He was survived by his wife , Nora , daughters Florence and Linda and son Frank . He was cremated , and his ashes are in the graveyard of the church of San <unk> al Monte , which overlooks Florence and the hill of Arcetri . 
 = = Honors and awards = = 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Wolf Prize in Physics for his role in the development of X @-@ ray astronomy ( 1987 ) 
 National Medal of Science ( 1985 ) 
 Rumford Prize award of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences for " discoveries concerning the nature and origins of cosmic radiations " ( 1976 ) 
 Elliott Cresson Medal ( 1974 ) 
 Gold Medal of the Italian Physical Society ( 1970 ) 
 Doctors honoris causa from the universities of Palermo , Durham , and Chicago 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Rossi X @-@ ray Timing Explorer , a NASA satellite X @-@ ray observatory launched in 1995 . 
 Bruno Rossi Prize of the High Energy Astrophysics division of the American Astronomical Society . 
 There is an endowed chair named in honor of Bruno Rossi at MIT . It is currently held by Prof. Claude R. <unk> . 
 = = Books = = 
 Rossi , Bruno ( 1952 ) . High @-@ energy Particles . New York : Prentice @-@ Hall . OCLC <unk> . 
 Rossi , Bruno ( 1964 ) . Cosmic Rays . New York : McGraw @-@ Hill . 
 Rossi , Bruno ; S. Olbert ( 1970 ) . Introduction to the Physics of Space . New York : McGraw @-@ Hill . 
 Rossi , Bruno ( 1990 ) . Moments in the Life of a Scientist . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 521 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 Rossi , Bruno ( 1957 ) . Optics . Reading , MA : Addison Wesley . 
 Rossi , Bruno ( 1959 ) . " High @-@ energy cosmic rays " . Sci . Am . ( Nov 1959 ) 201 ( 5 ) : 135 – 46 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1038 / <unk> @-@ 134 . PMID <unk> . 
 = SpongeBob SquarePants ( season 7 ) = 
 The seventh season of the American animated television series SpongeBob SquarePants , created by marine biologist and animator Stephen Hillenburg , originally aired on Nickelodeon in the United States from July 19 , 2009 to June 11 , 2011 . It contained 26 episodes , beginning with the episodes " Tentacle Vision " and " I Heart Dancing " . The series chronicles the exploits and adventures of the title character and his various friends in the fictional underwater city of Bikini Bottom . 
 The season was executive produced by series creator Hillenburg and writer Paul Tibbitt , who also acted as the showrunner . In 2011 , Legends of Bikini Bottom , an anthology series consists of five episodes from the season , was launched . A number of guest stars appeared on the season 's episodes . Several compilation DVDs that contained episodes from the season were released . The SpongeBob SquarePants : Complete Seventh Season DVD was released in Region 1 on December 6 , 2011 , Region 2 on September 17 , 2012 , and Region 4 on September 12 , 2012 . 
 The series won the 2010 Kids ' Choice Awards in the category of Favorite Cartoon . The episode " That Sinking Feeling " was nominated at the 63rd Primetime Emmy Awards for Outstanding Short @-@ format Animated Program . Furthermore , at the 38th Annie Awards , the show won for Best Animated Television Production for Children . 
 = = Production = = 
 The season aired on Nickelodeon , which is owned by Viacom , and was produced by United Plankton Pictures and Nickelodeon . The season 's executive producers were series creator Stephen Hillenburg and Paul Tibbitt , who also acted as the series ' showrunner . On March 13 , 2008 , during the broadcast of the sixth season , the network renewed the show for a seventh season , with 26 episodes in order . Cyma Zarghami , president of Nickelodeon & MTVN Kids and Family Group , said , " The strength of the Nickelodeon brand comes from how we embrace everything important to kids , and how we are with them virtually everywhere they want us to be . Our open philosophy to give audiences access to everything they love , and our commitment to making relevant and innovative content , have put us at the top of cable , VOD and online . Nickelodeon has strong momentum as a brand and as a business , and we have a great foundation built on great talent and relationships with some of the best creative leaders in our industry . " 
 In a statement , Brown Johnson , president of animation for Nickelodeon , said , " We are thrilled to be making another season of SpongeBob SquarePants – a series we hope to make for a long time . " On July 19 , 2009 , the season premiered with the episodes " Tentacle @-@ Vision " and " I Heart Dancing " . The former was written by Luke Brookshier , Nate Cash and Derek Iversen , with Alan Smart serving as animation director . The episode " I Heart Dancing " was written by Casey Alexander , Zeus Cervas , Mr. Lawrence , and was directed by Tom Yasumi . 
 In 2011 , Nickelodeon debuted an anthology series , Legends of Bikini Bottom , of five seventh season episodes in the show . It was released on January 27 , 2011 on the online social networking service Facebook before it aired on the cable channel Nickelodeon . " <unk> " was the first episode to air on Facebook and was written by Aaron Springer and Richard Pursel , with Andrew Overtoom serving as animation director . Nickelodeon said on January 27 that SpongeBob SquarePants has more than 16 million " friends " on Facebook . The decision of airing the series online was aimed at attracting " the young and the restless hooked to the internet and the social media . " In a press release , Brown Johnson said , " The anthology format of Legends of Bikini Bottom provides a great opportunity to try something new where we can give SpongeBob 's 16 million fans on Facebook a first look , in addition to new content on @-@ air " . Each episode was available for two weeks on Facebook . The other four episodes called " Sponge @-@ Cano ! " , " The Main Drain " , " The Monster Who Came to Bikini Bottom " and " Welcome to the Bikini Bottom Triangle " premiered on Nickelodeon in an hour @-@ long special on January 28 , 2011 . 
 Animation was handled overseas in South Korea at Rough Draft Studios . Animation directors credited with episodes in the seventh season included Andrew Overtoom , Alan Smart , and Tom Yasumi . Episodes were written by a team of writers , which consisted of Casey Alexander , Steven Banks , Luke Brookshier , Nate Cash , Zeus Cervas , Sean Charmatz , Derek <unk> , Mr. Lawrence , Dani Michaeli , Richard Pursel , and Aaron Springer . The season was storyboarded by Alexander , Brookshier , Cash , Cervas , Charmatz , and Springer . 
 = = Cast = = 
 The seventh season had a cast of six main actors . Tom Kenny provided the voice of the title character SpongeBob SquarePants and his pet snail Gary . SpongeBob 's best friend , a starfish named Patrick Star , was voiced by Bill Fagerbakke , while Rodger Bumpass played the voice of Squidward Tentacles , an arrogant and ill @-@ tempered octopus . Other members of the cast were Carolyn Lawrence as Sandy Cheeks , a squirrel from Texas ; Clancy Brown as Mr. Krabs , a miserly crab obsessed with money who is SpongeBob 's boss at the Krusty Krab ; and Mr. Lawrence as Plankton , a small green copepod and Mr. Krabs ' business rival . The season had a number of secondary characters including Jill Talley as Plankton 's computer wife , Karen ; Mary Jo Catlett as Mrs. Puff , SpongeBob 's driving instructor ; Lori Alan as Pearl , Mr. Krabs ' daughter ; and Brian Doyle @-@ Murray as the Flying Dutchman . 
 In addition to the regular cast members , episodes feature guest voices from many ranges of professions , including actors , musicians , and artists . For instance , in the episode " Back to the Past " , Ernest Borgnine and Tim Conway returned , reprising their respective roles as Mermaid Man and Barnacle Boy . The episode is also guest starred by the original Batman series stars Adam West as the young Mermaid Man and Burt Ward as the young Barnacle Boy . <unk> and Conway later voiced their recurring roles in the episode " The Bad Guy Club for Villains " . Comedian and actress Laraine Newman voices the character of Plankton 's Grandma in " <unk> 's Secret Recipe " . In the anthology series Legends of Bikini Bottom , actresses Amy Sedaris and Ginnifer Goodwin guest star . Sedaris appears in the episode " <unk> " as the voice of Ma Angler . Goodwin also guest stars as the voice of a purple @-@ haired mermaid in the episode " Welcome to the Bikini Bottom Triangle " . She lends her voice to a teenage mermaid who steals from others through Bikini Bottom 's version of the Bermuda Triangle . In " The Curse of Hex " , Saturday Night Live 's Kristen Wiig guest stars as the voice of Madame <unk> . Marion Ross voiced her recurring role as Grandma SquarePants , SpongeBob 's grandmother , in the episode " The Abrasive Side " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The series has received recognition , including the 2010 Kids ' Choice Awards for Favorite Cartoon . The series also won the same category at the succeeding year 's Kids ' Choice Awards and at the 2010 and 2011 Indonesia Kids ' Choice Awards . At the Kids ' Choice Awards Mexico 2010 and Kids ' Choice Awards Argentina 2011 , the show was nominated for Favorite Cartoon , but did not win . The episode " That Sinking Feeling " was nominated at the 63rd Primetime Emmy Awards for Outstanding Short @-@ format Animated Program . Furthermore , at the 38th Annie Awards , the show won for Best Animated Television Production for Children , while the crew members , Jeremy Wakefield , Sage Guyton , Nick Carr and Tuck Tucker , won the Music in a Television Production category . SpongeBob SquarePants also won at the 2011 ASCAP Film and Television Awards for Top Television Series . At the 2010 and 2011 TP de Oro , the series won the Best Children and Youth Program category . 
 In his review of the seventh season for DVD Talk , Ian Jane wrote that the series " is one of those rare animated shows that can be enjoyed equally as much by both adults and children . " He described the concept of the show as " utterly ludicrous . " He cited the episodes " SpongeBob 's Last Stand " and " Tentacle @-@ Vision " as " interesting stand outs , " while the episodes " The Inside Job " , " Back To The Past " , " Gary in Love " , and " The Abrasive Side " as " memorable episodes this time around . " However , Jane said that the season is not as good as the previous seasons , writing " It 's not that this more recent material isn 't fun , because it is , but by this point in time storylines are beginning to get a little repetitive and as such , the series doesn 't seem quite as fresh and original as it once did . " Jane " recommended " the DVD set , writing " This latest collection of episodes is not a high point in the series but it 's still decent enough family friendly entertainment , even if it does get too repetitive for its own good . " 
 Josh Rode of DVD Verdict said that the season " has its moments " , but is " by far the least consistently funny season of the venerable cartoon . " Rode also said that the characters of SpongeBob SquarePants and Patrick Star " have become the least engaging parts of the show , which is a problem since they dominate screen time . " He perceived that Patrick " has been dumbed down too far . " As for the character of SpongeBob , he criticized his changing voice that has become " more nasal over the years . " He described the character " like a happy , fun @-@ loving , not @-@ overly @-@ intelligent sponge , " but said that " [ He ] has entirely lost the naïveté which has long been the basis of his charm . " 
 = = Episodes = = 
 Key 
 The following episodes listed in the chart are arranged according to their production order , rather than by their original air dates . 
 = = DVD release = = 
 The DVD boxset for season seven was released by Paramount Home Entertainment and Nickelodeon in the United States and Canada in December 2011 , six months after the season had completed broadcast on television . The DVD release features bonus materials , including " animated shorts . " 
 = Joe Biden presidential campaign , 1988 = 
 Joseph Robinette " Joe " Biden , Jr . , a Democratic United States Senator from Delaware at the time , was a candidate for President of the United States in the 1988 United States presidential election . 
 Biden announced his candidacy in June 1987 , and was considered one of the potentially strongest candidates in the field . However , in September 1987 , newspaper stories stated he had plagiarized a speech by British politician Neil Kinnock . Other allegations of past law school plagiarism and exaggerating his academic record soon followed . Biden withdrew from the race later that month . 
 = = Leading up to the announcement = = 
 = = = Development of a candidacy = = = 
 Biden had been mentioned among possible contenders in the 1984 presidential election . He had considered the notion in 1983 , urged on by pollster Pat Caddell , who thought there was space for a young candidate . A fiery speech he gave to several Democratic audiences had simultaneously scolded Democrats for outdated thinking and encouraged them regarding future directions , and had gained him some notice in the party . However , Biden did not enter the race that season . Nonetheless , he won one vote at the 1984 Democratic National Convention . 
 Biden was active on the party speaking circuit from 1985 on , and was considered one of the best orators among the potential presidential candidates for 1988 . The declared absence of Senator Ted Kennedy from the field , to whom Biden was sometimes compared , was also encouraging to a possible Biden candidacy . 
 Biden received considerable attention in the summer of 1986 when he excoriated Secretary of State George Shultz at a Senate hearing because of the Reagan administration 's support of South Africa , which continued to support a system of apartheid . 
 = = = Status among candidates = = = 
 Biden was initially considered one of the potentially strongest candidates as campaigning began in 1987 . This was because of his moderate image , his speaking ability on the stump ( rated second only to that of Jesse Jackson ) , his appeal to Baby Boomers , his high profile position as chair of the Senate Judiciary committee , looming for the Robert Bork confirmation hearings , and his fundraising appeal — his $ 1 @.@ 7 million raised in the first quarter of 1987 was more than any other candidate . By the end of April he had raised $ 2 million , using not just contributions from Delaware but also establishing a base of support among young professionals and Jewish voters in a number of <unk> and suburban @-@ oriented states . He had no campaign debt , and Fortune magazine termed his " most impressive start " a " surprise " . 
 When the campaign began , former Senator Gary Hart , who had made a strong nomination run four years earlier , was considered the clear front @-@ runner . Indeed , The Wall Street Journal referred to the eight @-@ person Democratic field as " Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs " . The field 's chances were greatly improved once Hart withdrew from the race in May 1987 , following revelations of Donna Rice and Monkey Business . 
 However , Biden did not see a rise in his poll numbers immediately after the Hart withdrawal , and was particularly stagnant in polls for the Iowa caucuses . Nevertheless , Biden had confidence that he could prevail ; on the eve of his announcement , he said : " I 'm going to win this thing . I really am . I just know it , I can feel it in my fingertips . " Some political professionals saw Biden as believing that he could simply will himself to win the race , but his continued ability to raise campaign funds gave him credibility as a candidate . 
 = = Announcement = = 
 At age of 45 , Biden became one of the official candidates for Democratic nomination , formally declaring his candidacy at the Wilmington train station on June 9 , 1987 . 
 In his speech , Biden said that Americans should rise above " the mere accumulation of material things " . In language intended to recall John F. Kennedy , he said , " For too long in this society , we have celebrated unrestrained individualism over common community . For too long as a nation , we have been lulled by the anthem of self @-@ interest . For a decade , led by Ronald Reagan , self @-@ aggrandizement has been the full @-@ throated cry of this society : ' I 've got mine so why don 't you get yours ' and ' What 's in it for me ? ' ... We must rekindle the fire of idealism in our society , for nothing suffocates the promise of America more than unbounded cynicism and indifference . " 
 Biden also laid out the platform he was running on , which included a middle stance between protectionism and free trade , opposition to the Reagan Strategic Defense Initiative , and support for child welfare , reduction of poverty , and the war against illegal drugs . Biden also emphasized the need for integrity in government . 
 = = Campaign staff and policy team = = 
 Biden 's campaign manager was Tim Ridley , his press secretary was Larry <unk> , and his pollster and strategist was Pat Caddell . Biden 's Senate chief @-@ of @-@ staff Ted Kaufman served as the campaign treasurer and principle fundraiser . John <unk> served as a political consultant and Tom <unk> served as another strategist . Biden 's sister Valerie Biden Owens also served a major role in running the campaign , as she had in all of his Senate campaigns , and was considered " first among equals " in making decisions . 
 = = Campaign developments 1987 = = 
 = = = Summer 1987 = = = 
 Once underway , Biden 's campaign messaging became confused due to staff rivalries and bickering . Four different themes were presented , sometimes simultaneously : " Pepsi Generation " , " Voice of optimism " , " Save the children " , and " <unk> the voters " . Pollster Pat Caddell in particular was a disruptive force within the campaign , but he had been Biden 's friend for 15 years . Another of the themes was generational change ; Biden hoped to inspire a new generation , as John F. Kennedy had inspired his . But that theme was not catching on especially well . Biden was also hurt by his never having been a player in the Washington social scene . 
 By August 1987 , Biden 's campaign had begun to lag behind those of Michael Dukakis and Richard Gephardt , although he had still raised more funds than all candidates but Dukakis , and was seeing an upturn in Iowa polls . 
 = = = Kinnock controversy = = = 
 Major controversy beset Biden 's candidacy , beginning on September 12 , 1987 with high @-@ profile articles in The New York Times and The Des Moines Register . Biden was accused of plagiarizing a speech by Neil Kinnock , leader of the British Labour Party . Kinnock 's speech , delivered to a Welsh Labour Party conference on May 15 , 1987 , and then rebroadcast during the UK 1987 general election , included the lines : 
 While Biden 's speech included the lines : 
 Biden went on to duplicate other parts of Kinnock 's speech , such as their forebears ' ability to read and write poetry , their strength in working for hours underground in a mine only to come up and play football afterward , and their being limited by lack of a " platform " upon which to stand . 
 Biden had in fact cited Kinnock as the source for the formulation on previous occasions . But he made no reference to the original source at the August 23 Democratic debate at the Iowa State Fair being reported on , nor in an August 26 interview for the National Education Association . Moreover , while political speeches often appropriate ideas and language from each other , Biden 's use came under more scrutiny because he fabricated aspects of his own family 's background in order to match Kinnock 's . 
 Following the Kinnock attention , reports came from the San Jose Mercury News of Biden giving a February 3 , 1987 , speech to the California Democratic Party that reused without credit passages from a 1967 speech by Robert F. Kennedy , and of Biden giving 1985 and 1986 speeches that did the same with a passage from a 1976 speech by Hubert H. Humphrey . In the Kennedy case – which got the greater attention , since there was film footage of both versions that television news programs could play side @-@ by @-@ side – Pat Caddell stated that the reuse without credit was his own fault , and that he had never informed Biden of the source of the material . It was also reported that the California speech had taken a short phrase from the 1961 inaugural address of John F. Kennedy . 
 After Biden withdrew from the race , it was learned that he had indeed correctly credited Kinnock on other occasions . But in the Iowa speech that was recorded and distributed to reporters ( with a parallel video of Kinnock ) by aides to Michael Dukakis , the eventual nominee , he failed to do so . Dukakis , who disowned any knowledge of the Kinnock video , fired John Sasso , his campaign manager and long @-@ time Chief of Staff , but Biden 's campaign could not recover . 
 = = = Academic revelations = = = 
 As a part of the Kinnock controversy , it was revealed that Biden had been involved in a similar incident during his first year at Syracuse University School of Law in 1965 . Biden initially received an “ F ” in an introductory class on legal methodology for writing a paper relying almost exclusively on a single Fordham Law Review article , which he had cited only once . Biden was allowed to repeat the course and passed with high marks . Though the then @-@ dean of the law school , as well as Biden 's former professor , downplayed the incident , they did find that Biden drew " chunks of heavy legal prose directly from " the article in question . Biden said it was inadvertent due to his not knowing the proper rules of citation . After ending his Presidential campaign , Biden requested the Board of Professional Responsibility of the Delaware Supreme Court review the issue . The Board concluded on December 21 , 1987 , after Biden had withdrawn , that the senator had not violated any rules , although Biden did not release this result until May 1989 . 
 As revealed by a video shown on C @-@ SPAN , when questioned by a New Hampshire resident about his grades in law school , Biden had replied " I think I probably have a much higher IQ than you do , I suspect , " and then inaccurately recollected graduating in the " top half " of his class when he actually graduated 76th from 85 , that he had attended law school on a full scholarship , and had received three degrees in college . In fact , he had earned a single B.A. with a double major in history and political science , and had received a half scholarship to law school based on financial need with some additional assistance based in part upon academics . During this time , Biden also released his undergraduate grades , which were unexceptional . 
 = = = Withdrawal = = = 
 The Kinnock and academic revelations were magnified by the limited amount of other news about the nomination race at the time , when most of the public were not yet paying attention to any of the campaigns ; Biden thus fell into what Washington Post writer Paul Taylor described as that year 's trend , a " trial by media ordeal " . Biden lacked a strong demographic or political group of support to help him survive the crisis . The controversy also hit Biden in his most vulnerable area , accentuating the notion that he lacked mental and verbal discipline . 
 Biden withdrew from the nomination race on September 23 , 1987 , saying his candidacy had been overrun by " the exaggerated shadow " of his past mistakes . His formal campaign had lasted only three and a half months . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Because of his early withdrawal , Biden did not participate in the 1988 caucuses and primaries , in which Governor Michael Dukakis defeated Jesse Jackson , Senators Al Gore and Paul Simon , and other longer @-@ standing contenders . 
 In retrospect , Biden would take the blame for his mistakes during the campaign . On one , he said , " All I had to say was ' Like Kinnock . ' If I 'd just said those two words , ' Like Kinnock , ' and I didn 't . It was my fault , nobody else 's fault . " On another , he ruefully recalled , " ' Hey pal , you want to compare IQs ? ' What an immature thing to say . " 
 Biden had felt poorly physically during parts of the campaign , suffering repeated headaches and at one point in September 1987 having to halt a speech in New Hampshire for 15 minutes after feeling faint . In February 1988 , he suffered the first of two brain aneurysms that required life @-@ saving surgery and seven months away from the Senate in order to convalesce . Biden and others would speculate that had his campaign not ended early , the aneurysms might have been more severe or detected later and that he might not have lived out the year . 
 In any case , Biden would not run again for the presidency until his 2008 campaign , twenty years later . This time he made it to the Iowa caucuses , but withdrew after a poor showing . Meanwhile , Biden and Kinnock had become close friends after the plagiarism incident . Meeting in August 2008 , after Biden had been chosen by Democratic nominee Barack Obama as his running mate , Biden introduced Kinnock to his Senate staff by saying : “ Hey , you people ! Do you know this guy ? He used to be my greatest speechwriter . ” Obama and Biden proceeded to win the general election against the Republican ticket of John McCain and Sarah Palin ; Biden 's 1988 campaign lapses were never a significant issue in the race , and Biden invited Kinnock to the inauguration . 
 = Olive baboon = 
 The olive baboon ( Papio <unk> ) , also called the Anubis baboon , is a member of the family Cercopithecidae ( Old World monkeys ) . The species is the most wide @-@ ranging of all baboons , being found in 25 countries throughout Africa , extending from Mali eastward to Ethiopia and Tanzania . Isolated populations are also present in some mountainous regions of the Sahara . It inhabits savannahs , steppes , and forests . The common name is derived from its coat color , which is a shade of green @-@ grey at a distance . A variety of communications , vocal and non @-@ vocal , facilitate a complex social structure . 
 = = Physical characteristics = = 
 The olive baboon is named for its coat , which , at a distance , is a shade of green @-@ grey . Its alternative name comes from the Egyptian god Anubis , who was often represented by a dog head resembling the dog @-@ like muzzle of the baboon . At closer range , its coat is multicolored , due to rings of yellow @-@ brown and black on the hairs . The hair on the baboon 's face , however , is coarser and ranges from dark grey to black . This coloration is shared by both sexes , although males have a mane of longer hair that tapers down to ordinary length along the back . 
 Besides the mane , the male olive baboon differs from the female in terms of size and weight , and canine tooth size ; males are , on average , 70 cm ( 28 in ) tall while standing and females measure 60 cm ( 24 in ) in height . The olive baboon is one of the largest species of monkey ; only the chacma baboon and the mandrill attain similar sizes . The head @-@ and @-@ body length can range from 50 to 114 cm ( 20 to 45 in ) , with a species average of around 85 cm ( 33 in ) . At the shoulder on all fours , females average 55 cm ( 22 in ) against males , which average 70 cm ( 28 in ) . The typical weight range for both sexes is reportedly 10 – 37 kg ( 22 – 82 lb ) , with males averaging 24 kg ( 53 lb ) and females averaging 14 @.@ 7 kg ( 32 lb ) . Some males may weigh as much as 50 kg ( 110 lb ) . 
 Like other baboons , the olive baboon has an elongated , dog @-@ like muzzle . In fact , along with the muzzle , the animal 's tail ( 38 – 58 cm or 15 – 23 in ) and four @-@ legged gait can make baboons seem very canine . The tail almost looks as if it is broken , as it is erect for the first quarter , after which it drops down sharply . The bare patch of a baboon 's rump , famously seen in cartoons and movies , is a good deal smaller in the olive baboon . The olive baboon , like most <unk> , has a cheek pouch with which to store food . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The species inhabits a strip of 25 equatorial African countries , very nearly ranging from the east to west coasts of the continent . The exact boundaries of this strip are not clearly defined , as the species ' territory overlaps with that of other baboon species . In many places , this has resulted in cross @-@ breeding between species . For example , considerable hybridization has occurred between the olive baboon and the hamadryas baboon in Ethiopia . Cross @-@ breeding with the yellow baboon and the Guinea baboon has also been observed . Although this has been noted , the hybrids have not as yet been well studied . 
 Throughout its wide range , the olive baboon can be found in a number of different habitats . It is usually classified as savanna @-@ dwelling , living in the wide plains of the grasslands . The grasslands , especially those near open woodland , do make up a large part of its habitat , but the baboon also inhabits rainforests and deserts . Uganda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo , for instance , both support olive baboon populations in dense tropical forests . 
 = = Behaviour and ecology = = 
 = = = Social structure = = = 
 The olive baboon lives in groups of 15 to 150 , made up of a few males , many females , and their young . Each baboon has a social ranking somewhere in the group , depending on its dominance . Female dominance is hereditary , with daughters having nearly the same rank as their mothers , and adult females forming the core of the social system . Female relatives form their own subgroups in the troop . Related females are largely friendly to each other . They tend to stay close together and groom one another , and team up in aggressive encounters within the troop . Female kin form these strong bonds because they do not emigrate from their natal groups . 
 Occasionally , groups may split up when they become so large that competition for resources is problematic , but even then , members of matrilines tend to stick together . Dominant females procure more food , matings , and supporters . Among olive baboons in Tanzania , high @-@ ranking females give birth at shorter intervals to infants with a higher survival rate , and their daughters tend to mature faster than low @-@ ranking females . However , these high @-@ ranking females also appear to have a higher probability of miscarriages and some high @-@ ranking matrilines have inexplicably low fertility . One theory suggests this occurs due to stress on the high @-@ ranking females , although this theory is controversial . 
 A female often forms a long @-@ lasting social relationship with a male in her troop , known as a " friendship " . These nonsexual affiliative friendships benefit both the male and female . Males benefit from these relationships because they are usually formed soon after he <unk> into a new group , and helps the male integrate into the group more easily . He could also potentially end up mating with his female friend in the future . Females gain protection from threats to themselves and their infants ( if they have any ) . Males occasionally " baby @-@ sit " for their female friends , so she can feed and forage freely without the burden of having to carry or watch the infant . Sexually receptive females and newly immigrated males can form such friendships . These relationships are sometimes enduring and the pair grooms and remains close to each other . They also travel , forage , sleep , and raise infants together , as well as fight together against aggressive conspecifics . 
 Males establish their dominance more forcefully than females . A male disperses , or leaves his natal group and joins another group , after reaching sexual maturity . Adult males are very competitive with each other and fight for access to females . Higher dominance means better access to mating and earlier access to food , so naturally a great deal of fighting over rank occurs , with younger males constantly trying to rise in position . Because females stay with their groups their entire lives , and males emigrate to others , often a new male challenges an older one for dominance . Frequently , when older baboons drop in the social hierarchy , they move to another tribe . The younger males who pushed them down often bullies and harasses them . Older males tend to have more supportive and equal relationships than those of the younger males . The former may form coalitions against the latter . 
 Despite being hierarchical , baboons appear to be " democratic " when it comes to deciding the direction of collective movement . Individuals are more likely to follow when multiple decision @-@ makers agree on what direction to go rather than simply following dominant individuals . 
 = = = Reproduction and parenting = = = 
 Females are sexually mature at seven to eight years old , and males at seven to 10 years . The beginning of a female 's ovulation is a signal to the males that she is ready to mate . During ovulation , the skin of the female 's anogenital area swells and turns a bright red / pink . The swelling makes it difficult to move and increases the female 's chance of microbial or parasitic infection . Females with more swollen anogenital areas reproduce while younger , produce more offspring per year , and those offspring have a better chance of surviving . These females also attract more males , and are more likely to cause aggressive fights between them . Olive baboons tend to mate promiscuously . A male forms a mating consortship with an estrous female , staying close to and copulating with her . Males guard their partner against any other male trying to mate with her . Unless a female is in a <unk> consortship , she often copulates with more than one male each day . Multiple copulations are not necessary for reproduction , but may function to make the actual paternity of the female 's offspring ambiguous . This lack of paternal certainty could help reduce the occurrence of infanticide . Occasionally , male olive baboons monopolize a female for her entire period of probable conception . The male protects his female from being mated by other males during consortship . 
 Newborns have black natal coats and bright pink skin . Females are the primary caregivers of infants , but males also play a role . In its first few days , the infant may be unable to stay attached to its mother and relies on her for physical support . However , its grasp grows stronger by its first week and it is able to cling to its mother 's fur by itself . By two weeks , the infant begins to explore its surroundings for short periods , but stays near her . The distance the infant spends away from its mother increases the older it gets . In general , higher @-@ ranking females are usually more relaxed parents than females of lower rank , which usually keep their offspring close to them . However , this difference only lasts for approximately the first eight weeks of an infant 's life . Olive baboons do not seem to practice co @-@ operative parenting , but a female may groom an infant that is not hers . Subadult and juvenile females are more likely to care for another 's young , as they have not yet produced offspring of their own . One theory for why immature females tend to seek out infants is that they can prepare for their future roles as mothers . Infant baboons born to first @-@ time mothers suffer higher mortality than those born to experienced mothers , which suggests that prior experience in caring for infants is important . Adult males in the groups also care for the infants , as they are likely to be related to them . Males groom infants , reducing the amount of parasites they may have , and calm them when they are stressed . They may also protect them from predators , such as chimpanzees . However , adult males exploit infants and use them to reduce the likelihood that other males will threaten them . 
 = = = Communication = = = 
 Olive baboons communicate with various vocalizations and facial expressions . Throughout the day , baboons of all ages emit the " basic grunt " . Adults give a range of calls . The " <unk> " is made by adult males displaying to each other . The " cough @-@ bark " , and the " cough <unk> " are made when low @-@ flying birds or humans they do not know are sighted . A " wa @-@ hoo " call is made in response to predators or neighboring groups at night and during stressful situations . Other vocalizations include " broken grunting " ( low @-@ volume , quick series of grunts made during relatively calm aggressive encounters ) , " pant @-@ grunts " ( made when aggressive encounters escalate ) , " shrill barks " ( loud calls given when potential threats appear suddenly ) , and " screams " ( continuous high @-@ pitch sounds responding to strong emotions ) . The most common facial expression of the olive baboon is " <unk> " , which is associated with a number of behaviors . " Ear flattening " , " eyes narrowed " , " head shaking " , " jaw @-@ clapping " , <unk> , and " tongue protrusion " are used when baboons are greeting each other , and are sometimes made with a " rear present " . " Eyebrow raising " , " molar grinding " , " staring " , and " yawning " are used to threaten other baboons . A submissive baboon responds with displays such as the " fear grin " , the " rigid crouch " , and " tail erect " . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 One major reason for its widespread success is that the olive baboon is omnivorous . As such it is able to find nutrition in almost any environment , and it is able to adapt with different foraging tactics . For instance , the olive baboon in grassland goes about finding food differently from one in a forest . The baboon forages on all levels of an environment , above and beneath the ground and in the canopy of forests . Most animals only look for food at one level ; an arboreal species such as a lemur does not look for food on the ground . The olive baboon searches as wide an area as it can , and it eats virtually everything it finds . 
 The diet typically includes a large variety of plants , and invertebrates and small mammals , as well as birds . The olive baboon eats leaves , grass , roots , bark , flowers , fruit , lichens , tubers , seeds , mushrooms , corms , and rhizomes . <unk> and rhizomes are especially important in times of drought , because grass loses a great deal of its nutritional value . In dry , arid regions , such as the northeastern deserts , small invertebrates like insects , spiders , and scorpions fill out its diet . 
 The olive baboon also actively hunts prey , from small rodents and hares to foxes and other primates . Its limit is usually small antelope , such as Thomson 's gazelle and also , rarely , sheep , goats , and live chickens , which may amount to 33 @.@ 5 % of its food from hunting . Hunting is usually a group activity , with both males and females participating . Interestingly , this systematic predation was apparently developed recently . In a field study , such behavior was observed as starting with the males of one troop and spreading through all ages and sexes . 
 In Eritrea , the olive baboon has formed a symbiotic relationship with that country 's endangered elephant population . The baboons use the water holes dug by the elephants , while the elephants use the tree @-@ top baboons as an early warning system . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 The olive baboon is listed as least concern by the IUCN because " this species is very widespread and abundant and although persecuted as a crop raider there are no major threats believed to be resulting in a range @-@ wide population decline " . Despite persecution , the baboon is still widespread and numerous . However , competition and disease have possibly led to fewer baboons in closed forests . It has been actively persecuted as a pest . 
 = Action of 4 August 1800 = 
 The Action of 4 August 1800 was a highly unusual naval engagement that took place off the Brazilian coast during the French Revolutionary Wars . A French frigate force that had been raiding British commerce off West Africa approached and attempted to attack a convoy of valuable East Indiamen , large and heavily armed merchant vessels sailing from Britain to British India and China , two ships sailing for Botany Bay , and a whaler sailing for the South Seas ' whale fishery . The small British ship of the line HMS Belliqueux escorted the convoy , which otherwise had to rely on the ships ' individual armament to protect them from attack . Due to their large size , the East Indiamen could be mistaken for ships of the line at a distance , and the French commander Commodore Jean @-@ François Landolphe was un @-@ <unk> when the convoy formed a line of battle . Assuming his target to be a fleet of powerful warships he turned to escape and the British commander , Captain Rowley Bulteel , immediately ordered a pursuit . To preserve the impression of warships he also ordered four of his most powerful East Indiamen to join the chase . 
 Belliqueux rapidly out ran Landolphe 's flagship Concorde , leaving Landolphe with no option but to surrender without any serious resistance . The rest of the French squadron continued to flee separately during the night , each pursued by two East Indiamen . After an hour and a half in pursuit , with darkness falling , the East Indiaman Exeter came alongside the French Médée , giving the impression by use of lights that she was a large ship of the line . Believing himself outgunned , Captain Jean @-@ Daniel Coudin surrendered , only discovering his assailant 's true identity when he came aboard . The action is the only occasion during the war in which a British merchant vessel captured a large French warship . 
 = = Background = = 
 By 1800 , the British and French had been at war for seven years and the British dominated the sea , following a number of significant victories over the French , Dutch and Spanish fleets . Off every French port , large squadrons of British ships of the line and frigates awaited French movements and whenever possible intercepted and destroyed French merchant vessels and warships . While British trading ships travelled in large , well @-@ armed convoys , French ships were forced to slip between harbours to avoid the British blockade . To counter British control of the seas , the French periodically despatched squadrons of ships to raid British trade lanes , particularly off West Africa and in the South Atlantic , where the stretched Royal Navy maintained only minimal forces . 
 The large convoys of East Indiamen were among the principal targets for any French raider . These huge ships sailed from Britain with general cargo , or often military stores and troops , to India or other ports in the Indian Ocean , South East Asia , or China . There they would sell their cargoes and take on spices , tea , silk and other luxury goods before making the return journey to Britain . A round trip took over a year and an East Indiaman sailing to Britain would routinely carry hundreds of thousands of pounds worth of trade goods ; one large convoy that sailed from Canton in January 1804 was worth over £ 8 million . East Indiamen were well @-@ protected , armed with up to 30 guns , and generally travelled in large convoys in which the ships could provide one another with mutual protection . Such convoys often had a Royal Navy escort , usually including a ship of the line . 
 On 6 March 1799 , a French squadron had sailed from Rochefort . Consisting of the frigates Concorde , under Commodore Jean @-@ François Landolphe , Médée , under Captain Jean @-@ Daniel Coudin , and Franchise , under Captain Pierre Jurien , it was a powerful force , capable of inflicting significant damage on lightly defended merchant shipping . <unk> the blockade force off Rochefort , the squadron sailed southwards until it reached the coast of West Africa . There Landolphe 's ships began an extended commerce raiding operation , inflicting severe damage on the West African trade during the rest of the year . Eventually the strain of serving in tropical waters told on the ships and all three were forced to undergo an extensive refit in the nearest available allied shipyards , which were located in the Spanish @-@ held River Plate in South America . Repairs continued for six months , until Landolphe considered the squadron once again ready to sail in the early summer of 1800 . The squadron almost immediately captured an American schooner , which it fitted out as a tender . At the time , France and the United States had been engaged for two years in the Quasi War . 
 = = Battle = = 
 The British convoy consisted of the East Indiamen Bombay Castle , Exeter , Dorsetshire , Coutts , and Neptune , the Botany Bay ships Royal Admiral and Ann , and the whaler Seringapatam . The sole British warship was Belliqueux . On 4 August they were near the island of Trinidade off the Brazilian coast . From there the East Indiamen would catch the westerly trade winds that would carry them to Saint Helena , the Cape of Good Hope , and their destinations . 
 At 07 : 00 on 4 August , while the French squadron was cruising off the Brazilian coast , lookouts sighted sails on the horizon . Uncertain of the identity of the strange ships , the French gradually closed the distance during the morning . Landolphe could see that there were seven large vessels and three smaller ships , all unmistakably British . He was unable however to tell whether they were naval ships of the line or East Indiamen . Initially he thought they might be merchant ships , but at noon he sighted double rows of gunports along the side of each ship and called off the attack , turning away and signalling for his squadron to split up , assuming the enemy to be large warships easily capable of destroying his small force . Captain Jurien protested Landolphe 's order , insisting that the convoy was composed of merchant ships and not warships , but Landolphe over @-@ ruled Jurien 's protests . In fact , Jurien was correct . 
 With the French in full flight , Bulteel determined to continue the ruse that his convoy consisted of warships . While he and Belliqueux pursued Concorde , he signalled for his largest East Indiamen to follow the other French ships to ensure that they did not return and counterattack the convoy while Belliqueux was engaged . Exeter , under Captain Henry Meriton , and Bombay Castle , under Captain John Hamilton , were to follow Médée while Coutts , under Captain Robert <unk> , and Neptune , under Captain Nathaniel Spens , were to follow Franchise . All four vessels were over 1200 tons burthen ( bm ) and carried 30 cannon each , but none had more than 130 crew aboard and could not compete in accuracy or rate of fire with the 315 men aboard each of the French ships . Throughout the afternoon the chase continued , with Belliqueux steadily gaining on the French flagship while Franchise , accompanied by the American schooner , gained on her pursuers . At 17 : 20 , Bulteel was within long range of Landolphe 's ship , which returned fire when possible . During the exchange of gunfire neither side suffered damage or casualties , but the ship of the line was clearly gaining on the frigate and within ten minutes Landolphe surrendered rather than see his ship destroyed and his men killed in an unequal combat . 
 By 19 : 00 , Franchise had dumped her lifeboats and a large quantity of guns and supplies overboard , lightening the ship enough for her to far outstrip the pursuit . As night fell the French frigate made a full escape from the British force . Médée however had not escaped . Although Bombay Castle was many miles behind , only distantly visible on the horizon , Exeter had been able to follow the frigate closely . Meriton was aware of the disparity between the French warship and his own merchant vessel , but believed that as the frigate had made no effort to fight , her commander must believe Exeter to be a ship of the line . To reinforce this image in the rapidly approaching darkness , Meriton arranged lights behind every gunport , whether or not it contained a cannon , creating an effect described as " a fearsome , leering jack @-@ o ' -lantern " . As his ship drew level with the French frigate , Meriton hailed to the enemy 's deck , calling on them to surrender . Intimidated by this large and seemingly powerful enemy , Coudin decided that his only option was to strike his flag and come aboard the British ship to surrender formally . Arriving on board , he was astonished to see far fewer and smaller guns than a warship normally carried . When Coudin asked to whom he had surrendered , Meriton is said to have replied " To a merchantman " . Appalled , Coudin demanded to be allowed to return to his ship and conduct a formal naval battle , but Meriton refused . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In the engagement on 4 August 1800 neither side had a single man killed or wounded ; the action still inflicted a severe naval defeat on a powerful French frigate force , ending its cruise . Although Franchise spent another three weeks off the Brazilian coast before returning to France . On 9 August he encountered the merchantman Wellesley , which was on her way to the Cape , but after an engagement of about an hour , the British ship succeeded in driving off her attacker . Jurien followed Wellesley for two days but then gave up the chase ; he then did not see another sail until he left the area . 
 Bulteel 's convoy continued on , pausing at Rio de Janeiro on 12 August to resupply . The East Indiamen then went on to Saint Helena on their way to Asia . The two Botany Bay ships sailed on to Australia and the whaler Seringapatam sailed for the South Seas . 
 The captured frigates were valuable prizes but the Royal Navy only acquired <unk> , which it took into service as HMS <unk> , which it never commissioned but instead used as a prison ship for a few years before selling her in 1805 . The frigates had come into port shortly before the Peace of Amiens and thus were deemed surplus to Navy requirements . The ships and their stores and equipment were sold privately ; the proceeds from the sale were paid in February 1803 , in addition to the head @-@ money , a financial award for each French sailor captured during the engagement . 
 Bulteel and Meriton were commended . Meriton was to fight two more naval battles against the French , serving at the successful defence of the China Fleet at the Battle of Pulo Aura in February 1804 , and eventually being badly wounded and captured by a French frigate squadron after a fierce defence at the Action of 3 July 1810 . 
 = Ryan Van Bergen = 
 Ryan Charles Van Bergen , sometimes ( mis ) spelled Ryan <unk> , ( born March 18 , 1989 ) is a free agent American football defensive end . He had signed as an undrafted free agent with the Carolina Panthers following the 2012 NFL Draft but did not make the roster for the team . He played college football for the Michigan Wolverines football team . As a fifth @-@ year senior for the 2011 Wolverines he was a preseason Hendricks Award watchlist candidate and after posting at least two tackles for a loss ( TFL ) s in each of his final three 2011 Big Ten season games he was recognized as a postseason honorable mention All @-@ Big Ten Conference performer . He started at defensive tackle for the 2009 Wolverines before switching to defensive end in 2010 . In 2011 , he started at end as well as tackle and led the team in quarterback sacks and tackles for a loss . He was awarded the 2007 Detroit Athletic Club Michigan High School Male Athlete of the Year for his performances in football , basketball and track and field . 
 = = High school = = 
 Van Bergen attended Shadow Ridge High School in Las Vegas for his freshman year and started on the varsity football team . His family moved to Whitehall , Michigan for his sophomore season . He was the 2007 Detroit Athletic Club Michigan High School Male Athlete of the Year in recognition of his accomplishments in Football , Track & Basketball for Whitehall High School . He was a scholar in high school who maintained a 3 @.@ 7 average and was a member of the National Honor Society . 
 In track , Van Bergen competed in the discus throw . He went undefeated during the regular season of his junior year and placed 13th at the 2006 Michigan High School Athletic Association ( MHSAA ) Division 2 Lower Peninsula State championships with a throw of 145 feet 11 inches ( 44 @.@ 48 m ) and 5th in the 2007 MHSAA Division 2 finals with a throw of 154 feet 7 inches ( 47 @.@ 12 m ) . Entering the state finals he had been seeded 7th as a junior based on a qualifying throw of 155 feet 11 inches ( 47 @.@ 52 m ) and 9th as a senior with a throw of 151 feet 1 inch ( 46 @.@ 05 m ) . He qualified with these throws as the MHSAA regional champion as both a junior and senior , while also placing in the shot put . Although Van Bergen only ran a 5 @.@ 40 second 40 @-@ yard dash as a freshman , he got the time down to 4 @.@ 89 prior to his senior season . 
 Van Bergen attended the 2005 and 2006 Michigan Summer Football Camps . He was ranked as the 8th and 18th best class of 2007 high school football defensive end by Scout.com and Rivals.com , respectively . Rivals also rated him as the 10th best high school football player in the state of Michigan . ESPN.com rated him as the 13th best tight end in the country . Van Bergen was originally a recruit of Michigan head coach Lloyd Carr . 
 = = College = = 
 Van Bergen made one start as a redshirt freshman for the 2008 Wolverines on October 11 against Toledo . Following the 2008 season , Michigan had to replace three starting senior co @-@ captain defensive linemen : Terrance Taylor , Tim Jamison and Will Johnson . Van Bergen started every game for the 2009 Wolverines at defensive tackle . He totaled 40 tackles , 6 @.@ 5 TFs , five quarterback sacks , one fumble recovery , and four pass breakups as a redshirt sophomore in 2009 . He also posted a touchdown on a fumble recovery against Wisconsin on November 14 . His mid 4th quarter sack against Indiana on September 26 , 2009 set up a 3rd and 23 , a 4th down punt and the subsequent game @-@ winning drive in the 36 – 33 victory . 
 As a fourth @-@ year junior , Van Bergen started every game for the 2010 Wolverines at defensive end following the departure of defensive end Brandon Graham . He totaled 37 tackles , 8 @.@ 5 TFLs , five sacks and one pass breakup in 2010 . Van Bergen had two solo TFLs on November 13 against Purdue and three solo TFLs in the rivalry game against Ohio State on November 27 . He achieved his first seven tackle ( five solo and two assist ) outing in the January 1 , 2011 Gator Bowl against Mississippi State . 
 Van Bergen started at both defensive end and defensive tackle in 2011 . He was a 2011 preseason watchlists honoree for the Hendricks Award . He was named the Big Ten Conference Co @-@ defensive Player of the Week on November 14 , 2011 for his 2 @.@ 5 quarterback sack performance against the Illinois Fighting Illini on November 12 . In addition to the two solo and one assist sacks , he had an assist on a TFL and achieved his second seven @-@ tackle effort ( four solo and three assist ) . Van Bergen also was recognized by the College Football Performance Awards as the national defensive performer of the week and defensive lineman of the week . The following week , he had two solo TFLs against Nebraska . In the regular season finale against Ohio State on November 26 he tallied seven tackles one more time ( five solo and two assist ) , including a solo TFL and two assist TFLs . Thus , he concluded his Big Ten career with at least two TFLs in each of his last three regular season games . He was an honorable mention 2011 All @-@ Big Ten Conference selection by both the coaches and the media for the 2011 Wolverines . Van Bergen finished among the conference leaders in several statistics : sacks / game ( .42 , t @-@ 9th ) , tackles for a loss / game ( <unk> , t @-@ 10th ) and fumbles recovered / game ( <unk> , t @-@ 3rd ) . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 Prior to the draft , the Houston Texans informed Van Bergen , that they were targeting him with their sixth round pick , but the team picked up two defensive linemen in earlier rounds ( Whitney <unk> and Jared Crick ) . Van Bergen signed with the Carolina Panthers minutes after the draft ended . Van Bergen 's tweet actually came one minute before the National Football League tweeted Mr. Irrelevant . Van Bergen was informed by the Panthers late in the draft that " he was their No. 1 free agent target " . Van Bergen was cut on August 31 . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Van Bergen is known as a media favorite , according to AnnArbor.com 's Kyle <unk> . He worked in maintenance in high school at Erdman Machine Co . , an aerospace tool manufacturer . At the time of his induction into the Michigan High School Football Association Coaches Hall of Fame , he thanked several members of his extended family including his grandparents Cliff and Gloria <unk> and Al and Doris Van Bergen . He also mentioned his brother Tyler , who was three classes behind him and went on to play football at Grand Valley State University . Tyler went on to anchor MHSAA regional champions in the 4 × 100 metres relay ( 2009 ) and 4 × 200 metres relay ( 2010 ) . Their parents are Charles and Toni Van Bergen , from Hart , Michigan . His father , who was raised on a farm , is a retired United States Air Force veteran . Charles has eleven older siblings who are from the West Michigan region . 
 = Seal of Dartmouth College = 
 The Seal of Dartmouth College is the official insignia of Dartmouth College , an Ivy League university located in Hanover , New Hampshire , United States . Anglo @-@ American law generally requires a corporate body to seek official government sanction , usually in the form of a charter , in order to operate . Such chartered bodies normally authenticate their official acts by marking them with a distinctive seal . The seal 's design is usually complicated to avoid counterfeiting , but it can also express something about the institution 's history or mission . Dartmouth College is one such chartered body , and it obtained its official seal in 1773 . 
 = = Design and creation = = 
 Dartmouth College received a royal charter on December 13 , 1769 through New Hampshire 's colonial governor John Wentworth . The charter required a seal that was to be : 
 Nevertheless , on March 13 , 1770 , founder Eleazar Wheelock wrote to the trustees of the English fund that was supporting the College ( rather than the American trustees of the institution itself , as the charter stipulated ) to suggest that his : 
 The English trustees , including Lord Dartmouth , did not take up the suggestion . Evidence exists that they were annoyed with Wheelock 's acquisition of a charter for a college ; they were under the impression that the funds under their control were to be used to support Wheelock 's efforts at educating and Christianizing Native Americans at Moor 's Indian Charity School at Lebanon , Connecticut . Wheelock then designed a seal for his college bearing a striking resemblance to the seal of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel , a missionary society founded in London in 1701 , in order to maintain the illusion that his college was more for mission work than for higher education . Wheelock arranged for Nathaniel Hurd , a Boston silversmith , to engrave the seal . Hurd had engraved many coats of arms and appears in a John Singleton Copley portrait of ca . 1765 with two books , one of which is A Display of Heraldry by John <unk> ( 1610 ) . Wheelock wrote to Governor Wentworth on May 22 , 1772 , saying " I hope that Mr Hurd will have the College Seal compleated by Commencement . " The seal ( a single @-@ sided " female " die used to form impressions in wax ) was ready by Commencement of 1773 , and Portsmouth resident and former Chief Justice and Treasurer of the Province of New Hampshire George Jaffrey donated it to the College . The trustees officially accepted the seal on August 25 , 1773 , describing it as : 
 = = History and revisions = = 
 Former College Librarian William Woodward hid the seal from Dartmouth 's officers along with the charter and four account books after the state of New Hampshire purported to take over the operation of Dartmouth College ( and purported to make Woodward Treasurer of Dartmouth University ) . The Dartmouth College Case named Woodward as the defendant and technically sought to recover the items that he had hidden . The College 's success in the Supreme Court returned the seal to its possession and extinguished the University . 
 In 1876 , the College switched from having its seal impress wax to having it impress paper . This required a second , " male " die to fit under the original . The seal design was also carved in sandstone on the exterior of Rollins Chapel in 1886 ( see above ) and in wood on the interior of Commons in the Collis Center in 1901 ( see right ) . 
 On October 28 , 1926 , the trustees affirmed the charter 's reservation of the seal for official corporate documents alone . The College Publications Committee under Ray Nash commissioned typographer W. A. Dwiggins to create a line @-@ drawing version of the seal in 1940 that saw widespread use . 
 Dwiggins ' design was modified during 1957 to change the date from " 1770 " to " 1769 , " to accord with the date of the College Charter . The trustees commissioned a new set of dies with a date of " 1769 " to replace the old dies , now badly worn after almost two hundred years of use . The 1957 design continues to be used under trademark number 2305032 . 
 = <unk> = 
 The cyclol hypothesis is the first structural model of a folded , globular protein . It was developed by Dorothy Wrinch in the late 1930s , and was based on three assumptions . Firstly , the hypothesis assumes that two peptide groups can be crosslinked by a cyclol reaction ( Figure 1 ) ; these crosslinks are covalent analogs of non @-@ covalent hydrogen bonds between peptide groups . These reactions have been observed in the <unk> and other compounds . Secondly , it assumes that , under some conditions , amino acids will naturally make the maximum possible number of cyclol crosslinks , resulting in cyclol molecules ( Figure 2 ) and cyclol fabrics ( Figure 3 ) . These cyclol molecules and fabrics have never been observed . Finally , the hypothesis assumes that globular proteins have a tertiary structure corresponding to Platonic solids and semiregular polyhedra formed of cyclol fabrics with no free edges . Such " closed cyclol " molecules have not been observed either . 
 Although later data demonstrated that this original model for the structure of globular proteins needed to be amended , several elements of the cyclol model were verified , such as the cyclol reaction itself and the hypothesis that hydrophobic interactions are chiefly responsible for protein folding . The cyclol hypothesis stimulated many scientists to research questions in protein structure and chemistry , and was a precursor of the more accurate models hypothesized for the DNA double helix and protein secondary structure . The proposal and testing of the cyclol model also provides an excellent illustration of empirical falsifiability acting as part of the scientific method . 
 = = Historical context = = 
 By the mid @-@ 1930s , analytical ultracentrifugation studies by Theodor Svedberg had shown that proteins had a well @-@ defined chemical structure , and were not aggregations of small molecules . The same studies appeared to show that the molecular weight of proteins fell into a few well @-@ defined classes related by integers , such as Mw = <unk> Da , where p and q are nonnegative integers . However , it was difficult to determine the exact molecular weight and number of amino acids in a protein . Svedberg had also shown that a change in solution conditions could cause a protein to disassemble into small subunits , now known as a change in quaternary structure . 
 The chemical structure of proteins was still under debate at that time . The most accepted ( and ultimately correct ) hypothesis was that proteins are linear polypeptides , i.e. , unbranched polymers of amino acids linked by peptide bonds . However , a typical protein is remarkably long — hundreds of amino @-@ acid residues — and several distinguished scientists were unsure whether such long , linear macromolecules could be stable in solution . Further doubts about the polypeptide nature of proteins arose because some enzymes were observed to cleave proteins but not peptides , whereas other enzymes cleave peptides but not folded proteins . Attempts to synthesize proteins in the test tube were unsuccessful , mainly due to the chirality of amino acids ; naturally occurring proteins are composed of only left @-@ handed amino acids . Hence , alternative chemical models of proteins were considered , such as the <unk> hypothesis of Emil <unk> . However , no alternative model had yet explained why proteins yield only amino acids and peptides upon hydrolysis and proteolysis . As clarified by Linderstrøm @-@ Lang , these proteolysis data showed that denatured proteins were polypeptides , but no data had yet been obtained about the structure of folded proteins ; thus , denaturation could involve a chemical change that converted folded proteins into polypeptides . 
 The process of protein denaturation ( as distinguished from coagulation ) had been discovered in 1910 by Harriette Chick and Charles Martin , but its nature was still mysterious . Tim Anson and Alfred Mirsky had shown that denaturation was a reversible , two @-@ state process that results in many chemical groups becoming available for chemical reactions , including cleavage by enzymes . In 1929 , Hsien Wu hypothesized correctly that denaturation corresponded to protein unfolding , a purely conformational change that resulted in the exposure of amino @-@ acid side chains to the solvent . Wu 's hypothesis was also advanced independently in 1936 by Mirsky and Linus Pauling . Nevertheless , protein scientists could not exclude the possibility that denaturation corresponded to a chemical change in the protein structure , a hypothesis that was considered a ( distant ) possibility until the 1950s . 
 X @-@ ray crystallography had just begun as a discipline in 1911 , and had advanced relatively rapidly from simple salt crystals to crystals of complex molecules such as cholesterol . However , even the smallest proteins have over 1000 atoms , which makes determining their structure far more complex . In 1934 , Dorothy Crowfoot Hodgkin had taken crystallographic data on the structure of the small protein , insulin , although the structure of that and other proteins were not solved until the late 1960s . However , pioneering X @-@ ray fiber diffraction data had been collected in the early 1930s for many natural fibrous proteins such as wool and hair by William Astbury , who proposed rudimentary models of secondary structure elements such as the alpha helix and the beta sheet . 
 Since protein structure was so poorly understood in the 1930s , the physical interactions responsible for stabilizing that structure were likewise unknown . Astbury hypothesized that the structure of fibrous proteins was stabilized by hydrogen bonds in β @-@ sheets . The idea that globular proteins are also stabilized by hydrogen bonds was proposed by Dorothy Jordan Lloyd in 1932 , and championed later by Alfred Mirsky and Linus Pauling . At a 1933 lecture by Astbury to the Oxford Junior Scientific Society , physicist Frederick Frank suggested that the fibrous protein α @-@ keratin might be stabilized by an alternative mechanism , namely , covalent crosslinking of the peptide bonds by the cyclol reaction above . The cyclol crosslink draws the two peptide groups close together ; the N and C atoms are separated by ~ 1 @.@ 5 Å , whereas they are separated by ~ 3 Å in a typical hydrogen bond . The idea intrigued J. D. Bernal , who suggested it to the mathematician Dorothy Wrinch as possibly useful in understanding protein structure . 
 = = Basic theory = = 
 Wrinch developed this suggestion into a full @-@ fledged model of protein structure . The basic cyclol model was laid out in her first paper ( 1936 ) . She noted the possibility that polypeptides might <unk> to form closed rings ( true ) and that these rings might form internal crosslinks through the cyclol reaction ( also true , although rare ) . Assuming that the cyclol form of the peptide bond could be more stable than the amide form , Wrinch concluded that certain cyclic peptides would naturally make the maximal number of cyclol bonds ( such as cyclol 6 , Figure 2 ) . Such cyclol molecules would have hexagonal symmetry , if the chemical bonds were taken as having the same length , roughly 1 @.@ 5 Å ; for comparison , the N @-@ C and C @-@ C bonds have the lengths 1 @.@ 42 Å and 1 @.@ 54 Å , respectively . 
 These rings can be extended indefinitely to form a cyclol fabric ( Figure 3 ) . Such fabrics exhibit a long @-@ range , quasi @-@ crystalline order that Wrinch felt was likely in proteins , since they must pack hundreds of residues densely . Another interesting feature of such molecules and fabrics is that their amino @-@ acid side chains point axially upwards from only one face ; the opposite face has no side chains . Thus , one face is completely independent of the primary sequence of the peptide , which Wrinch conjectured might account for sequence @-@ independent properties of proteins . 
 In her initial article , Wrinch stated clearly that the cyclol model was merely a working hypothesis , a potentially valid model of proteins that would have to be checked . Her goals in this article and its successors were to propose a well @-@ defined testable model , to work out the consequences of its assumptions and to make predictions that could be tested experimentally . In these goals , she succeeded ; however , within a few years , experiments and further modeling showed that the cyclol hypothesis was untenable as a model for globular proteins . 
 = = Stabilizing energies = = 
 In two tandem Letters to the Editor ( 1936 ) , Wrinch and Frank addressed the question of whether the cyclol form of the peptide group was indeed more stable than the amide form . A relatively simple calculation showed that the cyclol form is significantly less stable than the amide form . Therefore , the cyclol model would have to be abandoned unless a compensating source of energy could be identified . Initially , Frank proposed that the cyclol form might be stabilized by better interactions with the surrounding solvent ; later , Wrinch and Irving Langmuir hypothesized that hydrophobic association of nonpolar sidechains provides stabilizing energy to overcome the energetic cost of the cyclol reactions . 
 The lability of the cyclol bond was seen as an advantage of the model , since it provided a natural explanation for the properties of denaturation ; reversion of cyclol bonds to their more stable amide form would open up the structure and allows those bonds to be attacked by proteases , consistent with experiment . Early studies showed that proteins denatured by pressure are often in a different state than the same proteins denatured by high temperature , which was interpreted as possibly supporting the cyclol model of denaturation . 
 The Langmuir @-@ Wrinch hypothesis of hydrophobic stabilization shared in the downfall of the cyclol model , owing mainly to the influence of Linus Pauling , who favored the hypothesis that protein structure was stabilized by hydrogen bonds . Another twenty years had to pass before hydrophobic interactions were recognized as the chief driving force in protein folding . 
 = = <unk> complementarity = = 
 In her third paper on cyclols ( 1936 ) , Wrinch noted that many " physiologically active " substances such as steroids are composed of fused hexagonal rings of carbon atoms and , thus , might be sterically complementary to the face of cyclol molecules without the amino @-@ acid side chains . Wrinch proposed that steric complementarity was one of chief factors in determining whether a small molecule would bind to a protein . 
 Wrinch speculated that proteins are responsible for the synthesis of all biological molecules . Noting that cells digest their proteins only under extreme starvation conditions , Wrinch further speculated that life could not exist without proteins . 
 = = Hybrid models = = 
 From the beginning , the cyclol reaction was considered as a covalent analog of the hydrogen bond . Therefore , it was natural to consider hybrid models with both types of bonds . This was the subject of Wrinch 's fourth paper on the cyclol model ( 1936 ) , written together with Dorothy Jordan Lloyd , who first proposed that globular proteins are stabilized by hydrogen bonds . A follow @-@ up paper was written in 1937 that referenced other researchers on hydrogen bonding in proteins , such as Maurice Loyal Huggins and Linus Pauling . 
 Wrinch also wrote a paper with William Astbury , noting the possibility of a keto @-@ enol isomerization of the > <unk> and an amide carbonyl group > C = O , producing a crosslink > <unk> @-@ C ( <unk> ) < and again converting the oxygen to a hydroxyl group . Such reactions could yield five @-@ membered rings , whereas the classic cyclol hypothesis produces six @-@ membered rings . This keto @-@ enol crosslink hypothesis was not developed much further . 
 = = Space @-@ enclosing fabrics = = 
 In her fifth paper on cyclols ( 1937 ) , Wrinch identified the conditions under which two planar cyclol fabrics could be joined to make an angle between their planes while respecting the chemical bond angles . She identified a mathematical simplification , in which the non @-@ planar six @-@ membered rings of atoms can be represented by planar " median hexagon " s made from the midpoints of the chemical bonds . This " median hexagon " representation made it easy to see that the cyclol fabric planes can be joined correctly if the dihedral angle between the planes equals the tetrahedral bond angle δ = <unk> ( -1 / 3 ) ≈ 109 @.@ 47 ° . 
 A large variety of closed polyhedra meeting this criterion can be constructed , of which the simplest are the truncated tetrahedron , the truncated octahedron , and the octahedron , which are Platonic solids or semiregular polyhedra . Considering the first series of " closed cyclols " ( those modeled on the truncated tetrahedron ) , Wrinch showed that their number of amino acids increased quadratically as <unk> , where n is the index of the closed cyclol Cn . Thus , the C1 cyclol has 72 residues , the C2 cyclol has 288 residues , etc . Preliminary experimental support for this prediction came from Max Bergmann and Carl Niemann , whose amino @-@ acid analyses suggested that proteins were composed of integer multiples of 288 amino @-@ acid residues ( n = 2 ) . More generally , the cyclol model of globular proteins accounted for the early analytical ultracentrifugation results of Theodor Svedberg , which suggested that the molecular weights of proteins fell into a few classes related by integers . 
 The cyclol model was consistent with the general properties then attributed to folded proteins . ( 1 ) <unk> studies had shown that folded proteins were significantly denser than water ( ~ 1 @.@ 4 g / mL ) and , thus , tightly packed ; Wrinch assumed that dense packing should imply regular packing . ( 2 ) Despite their large size , some proteins crystallize readily into symmetric crystals , consistent with the idea of symmetric faces that match up upon association . ( 3 ) Proteins bind metal ions ; since metal @-@ binding sites must have specific bond geometries ( e.g. , octahedral ) , it was plausible to assume that the entire protein also had similarly crystalline geometry . ( 4 ) As described above , the cyclol model provided a simple chemical explanation of denaturation and the difficulty of cleaving folded proteins with proteases . ( 5 ) Proteins were assumed to be responsible for the synthesis of all biological molecules , including other proteins . Wrinch noted that a fixed , uniform structure would be useful for proteins in templating their own synthesis , analogous to the Watson @-@ Francis Crick concept of DNA templating its own replication . Given that many biological molecules such as sugars and sterols have a hexagonal structure , it was plausible to assume that their synthesizing proteins likewise had a hexagonal structure . Wrinch summarized her model and the supporting molecular @-@ weight experimental data in three review articles . 
 = = Predicted protein structures = = 
 Having proposed a model of globular proteins , Wrinch investigated whether it was consistent with the available structural data . She hypothesized that bovine tuberculin protein ( 523 ) was a C1 closed cyclol consisting of 72 residues and that the digestive enzyme pepsin was a C2 closed cyclol of 288 residues . These residue @-@ number predictions were difficult to verify , since the methods then available to measure the mass of proteins were inaccurate , such as analytical ultracentrifugation and chemical methods . 
 Wrinch also predicted that insulin was a C2 closed cyclol consisting of 288 residues . Limited X @-@ ray crystallographic data were available for insulin which Wrinch interpreted as " confirming " her model . However , this interpretation drew rather severe criticism for being premature . Careful studies of the Patterson diagrams of insulin taken by Dorothy Crowfoot Hodgkin showed that they were roughly consistent with the cyclol model ; however , the agreement was not good enough to claim that the cyclol model was confirmed . 
 = = Downfall = = 
 The cyclol fabric was shown to be implausible for several reasons . Hans Neurath and Henry Bull showed that the dense packing of side chains in the cyclol fabric was inconsistent with the experimental density observed in protein films . Maurice Huggins calculated that several non @-@ bonded atoms of the cyclol fabric would approach more closely than allowed by their van der Waals radii ; for example , the inner Hα and <unk> atoms of the lacunae would be separated by only 1 @.@ 68 Å ( Figure 5 ) . <unk> showed chemically that the outside of proteins could not have a large number of hydroxyl groups , a key prediction of the cyclol model , whereas Meyer and <unk> showed that cyclol condensations of amino acids did not exist even in minute quantities as a transition state . More general chemical arguments against the cyclol model were given by Bergmann and Niemann and by Neuberger . Infrared spectroscopic data showed that the number of carbonyl groups in a protein did not change upon hydrolysis , and that intact , folded proteins have a full complement of amide carbonyl groups ; both observations contradict the cyclol hypothesis that such carbonyls are converted to hydroxyl groups in folded proteins . Finally , proteins were known to contain proline in significant quantities ( typically 5 % ) ; since proline lacks the amide hydrogen and its nitrogen already forms three covalent bonds , proline seems incapable of the cyclol reaction and of being incorporated into a cyclol fabric . An encyclopedic summary of the chemical and structural evidence against the cyclol model was given by Pauling and Niemann . Moreover , a supporting piece of evidence — the result that all proteins contain an integer multiple of 288 amino @-@ acid residues — was likewise shown to be incorrect in 1939 . 
 Wrinch replied to the steric @-@ clash , free @-@ energy , chemical and residue @-@ number criticisms of the cyclol model . On steric clashes , she noted that small deformations of the bond angles and bond lengths would allow these steric clashes to be relieved , or at least reduced to a reasonable level . She noted that distances between non @-@ bonded groups within a single molecule can be shorter than expected from their van der Waals radii , e.g. , the 2 @.@ 93 Å distance between methyl groups in <unk> . Regarding the free @-@ energy penalty for the cyclol reaction , Wrinch disagreed with Pauling 's calculations and stated that too little was known of intramolecular energies to rule out the cyclol model on that basis alone . In reply to the chemical criticisms , Wrinch suggested that the model compounds and simple bimolecular reactions studied need not pertain to the cyclol model , and that steric hindrance may have prevented the surface hydroxyl groups from reacting . On the residue @-@ number criticism , Wrinch extended her model to allow for other numbers of residues . In particular , she produced a " minimal " closed cyclol of only 48 residues , and , on that ( incorrect ) basis , may have been the first to suggest that the insulin monomer had a molecular weight of roughly 6000 Da . 
 Therefore , she maintained that the cyclol model of globular proteins was still potentially viable and even proposed the cyclol fabric as a component of the cytoskeleton . However , most protein scientists ceased to believe in it and Wrinch turned her scientific attention to mathematical problems in X @-@ ray crystallography , to which she contributed significantly . One exception was physicist Gladys Anslow , Wrinch 's colleague at Smith College , who studied the ultraviolet absorption spectra of proteins and peptides in the 1940s and allowed for the possibility of cyclols in interpreting her results . As the sequence of insulin began to be determined by Frederick Sanger , Anslow published a three @-@ dimensional cyclol model with sidechains , based on the backbone of Wrinch 's 1948 " minimal cyclol " model . 
 = = Partial redemption = = 
 The downfall of the overall cyclol model generally led to a rejection of its elements ; one notable exception was J. D. Bernal 's short @-@ lived acceptance of the Langmuir @-@ Wrinch hypothesis that protein folding is driven by hydrophobic association . Nevertheless , cyclol bonds were identified in small , naturally occurring cyclic peptides in the 1950s . 
 Clarification of the modern terminology is appropriate . The classic cyclol reaction is the addition of the NH amine of a peptide group to the C = O carbonyl group of another ; the resulting compound is now called an <unk> . By analogy , an oxacyclol is formed when an OH hydroxyl group is added to a peptidyl carbonyl group . Likewise , a <unk> is formed by adding an SH thiol moiety to a peptidyl carbonyl group . 
 The oxacyclol alkaloid ergotamine from the fungus Claviceps purpurea was the first identified cyclol . The cyclic <unk> <unk> is also formed by an oxacyclol reaction . Chemically analogous cyclic <unk> have also been obtained . Classic <unk> have been observed in small molecules and <unk> . Peptides are naturally produced from the reversion of <unk> , a key prediction of the cyclol model . Hundreds of cyclol molecules have now been identified , despite Linus Pauling 's calculation that such molecules should not exist because of their unfavorably high energy . 
 After a long hiatus during which she worked mainly on the mathematics of X @-@ ray crystallography , Wrinch responded to these discoveries with renewed enthusiasm for the cyclol model and its relevance in biochemistry . She also published two books describing the cyclol theory and small peptides in general . 
 = = Illustration of the scientific method = = 
 The cyclol model of protein structure is an example of empirical falsifiability acting as part of the scientific method . An original hypothesis is made that accounts for unexplained experimental observations ; the consequences of this hypothesis are worked out , leading to predictions that are tested by experiment . In this case , the key hypothesis was that the cyclol form of the peptide group could be favored over the amide form . This hypothesis led to the predictions of the cyclol @-@ 6 molecule and the cyclol fabric , which in turn suggested the model of semi @-@ regular polyhedra for globular proteins . A key testable prediction was that a folded protein 's carbonyl groups should be largely converted to hydroxyl groups ; however , spectroscopic and chemical experiments showed that this prediction was incorrect . The cyclol model also predicts a high lateral density of amino acids in folded proteins and in films that does not agree with experiment . Hence , the cyclol model could be rejected and the search begun for new hypotheses of protein structure , such as the models of the alpha helix proposed in the 1940s and 1950s . 
 It is sometimes argued that the cyclol hypothesis should never have been advanced , because of its a priori flaws , e.g. , its steric clashes , its inability to accommodate proline , and the high free energy <unk> the cyclol reaction itself . Although such flaws rendered the cyclol hypothesis implausible , they did not make it impossible . The cyclol model was the first well @-@ defined structure proposed for globular proteins , and too little was then known of intramolecular forces and protein structure to reject it immediately . It neatly explained several general properties of proteins and accounted for then @-@ anomalous experimental observations . Although generally incorrect , some elements of the cyclol theory were eventually verified , such as the cyclol reactions and the role of hydrophobic interactions in protein folding . A useful comparison is the Bohr model of the hydrogen atom , which was considered implausible from its inception , even by its creator , yet led the way to the ultimately correct theory of quantum mechanics . Similarly , Linus Pauling proposed a well @-@ defined model of DNA that was likewise implausible yet thought @-@ provoking to other investigators . 
 Conversely , the cyclol model is an example of an incorrect scientific theory of great symmetry and beauty , two qualities that can be regarded as signs of " obviously true " scientific theories . For example , the Watson @-@ Crick double helix model of DNA is sometimes said to be " obvious " because of its plausible hydrogen bonding and symmetry ; nevertheless , other , less symmetrical structures of DNA are favored under different conditions . Similarly , the beautiful theory of general relativity was considered by Albert Einstein as not needing experimental verification ; yet even this theory will require revision for consistency with quantum field theory . 
 = Royal Rumble ( 1993 ) = 
 Royal Rumble ( 1993 ) was the sixth annual Royal Rumble professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view event produced by the World Wrestling Federation ( WWF ) . It took place on January 24 , 1993 at the ARCO Arena in Sacramento , California . The main event was a Royal Rumble match , a battle royal in which two wrestlers started the match in the ring ; every two minutes , another wrestler joined . In total , thirty wrestlers competed to eliminate their competitors by throwing them over the top rope of the wrestling ring onto the arena floor . Yokozuna won the match and was awarded an opportunity to wrestle for the WWF World Heavyweight Championship at WrestleMania IX . Bret Hart also retained his WWF World Heavyweight Championship against Razor Ramon , and Shawn Michaels successfully defended his WWF Intercontinental Championship against Marty Jannetty . 
 = = Background = = 
 Royal Rumble 1993 consisted of six matches : four singles matches , one tag team match , and the Royal Rumble match . The buildup to the pay @-@ per @-@ view consisted of feuds scripted by the WWF 's writers . Some of the rivalries dated back several years , while others were created specifically to create excitement about the Royal Rumble . 
 The primary feud leading up to Royal Rumble 1993 was between WWF Champion Bret Hart and challenger Razor Ramon ( a replacement for The Ultimate Warrior , who had left the previous November ) . Ramon formed an alliance in late 1992 with Ric Flair , who Hart defeated to win the title belt . During an interview in which Hart was talking about the upcoming match , Ramon and Flair came to the ring and attacked Hart . Ramon later escalated the feud by attacking Owen Hart , Bret 's brother . 
 Another major feud featured at the event was between Shawn Michaels and Marty Jannetty , who had teamed for several years as The Rockers . The team split up in December 1991 , however , when Michaels attacked Jannetty during an episode of Brutus Beefcake 's interview segment , " The Barber Shop " . Michaels became a singles wrestler and won the WWF Intercontinental Championship on October 27 , 1992 from Davey Boy Smith . On the October 31 , 1992 episode of WWF Superstars of Wrestling , Jannetty returned to the WWF after a lengthy absence and confronted Michaels . He attempted to hit Michaels with a mirror , but Michaels pulled his valet , Sensational Sherri in front of him . Sherri was hit with the mirror , which caused friction between her and Michaels . Michaels and Jannetty were scheduled to face each other for the Intercontinental Championship at Royal Rumble 1993 . Leading up to the match , Sherri announced that she would be in the corner of one of the men , but she refused to say which one . 
 In an undercard match , The Steiner Brothers ( Rick and Scott ) , who made their WWF debut in late 1992 , were scheduled to face the Beverly Brothers ( Beau and Blake ) . There was little buildup for the match , but the Steiners and Beverlys had a rivalry over which was the best team of brothers in the WWF ( although the Beverly Brothers are not related in real life ) . 
 Several feuds also formed the background for the Royal Rumble match . Virgil had served as Ted DiBiase 's servant and bodyguard for several years . DiBiase treated Virgil poorly , which eventually led Virgil to turn against his employer . At Royal Rumble 1991 , he attacked DiBiase after a match by hitting him with the Million Dollar Championship , a title that DiBiase had awarded himself . Virgil defeated DiBiase for the belt at SummerSlam 1991 , although DiBiase later regained the title . The Undertaker was feuding with manager Harvey Wippleman . He had a series of matches against Kamala in 1992 that included a bout at SummerSlam . The rivalry culminated in a coffin match at Survivor Series 1992 . The Undertaker won the match , but Wippleman vowed revenge . Tito Santana and Rick Martel had formed a tag team known as Strike Force in 1987 , and they held the World Tag Team Championship together for five months . Martel walked away during a match against the Brain Busters at WrestleMania V , leaving Santana to face both opponents alone . The team split up as a result and the former partners had a lengthy feud . 
 Mr. Perfect served as " executive consultant " to Ric Flair in 1992 , but the relationship broke down toward the end of the year . The partnership split up when Perfect teamed with Randy Savage to face Flair and Razor Ramon at Survivor Series 1992 . Flair legitimately requested a release from his contract , as he felt he would be more successful if he returned to World Championship Wrestling ( WCW ) . WWF owner Vince McMahon agreed and set up a feud between Flair and Perfect to create a storyline for Flair 's departure from the company . Many wrestlers were scheduled to compete at the 1993 Royal Rumble but were either replaced or had left the company before the event . Those who were scheduled to compete were Doink the Clown , Crush , Hacksaw Jim Duggan , The Mountie , and Kamala . 
 The event also featured the WWF debut of Lex Luger . Luger had previously wrestled in WCW , where he held the WCW World Heavyweight Championship . He had left the wrestling industry to join Vince McMahon 's World Bodybuilding Federation ( <unk> ) . After the <unk> failed , Luger signed with McMahon 's WWF . 
 = = Event = = 
 Five matches with pre @-@ determined results were shown on the pay @-@ per @-@ view telecast . In addition , Doink the Clown defeated Jim Powers by submission in an untelevised dark match before the event . In the first match shown as part of the broadcast , the Steiner Brothers ( Rick and Scott ) faced the Beverly Brothers ( Beau and Blake ) . Scott gained the early advantage over Beau , both men quickly tagged in their partners . Rick performed a body slam on Blake and then tagged Scott back in , who threw Blake with a belly to belly suplex . The Beverlys regained the advantage and took turns attacking Scott 's back . Blake performed a Boston crab hold to put more pressure on Scott 's back and attempt to force him to submit . Scott escaped the hold and threw Blake to the mat by performing a Tiger driver . The Steiners capitalized on their advantage by keeping Blake in the ring and unable to tag his partner . Scott won the match for his team by pinning Blake after executing a Frankensteiner . 
 In the next match , Sensational Sherri stood at ringside as Shawn Michaels defended his Intercontinental Championship against Marty Jannetty . She did not reveal her allegiance to either man . Jannetty gained the early advantage , knocking Michaels out of the ring and diving onto him through the ropes . He then attacked Michaels by jumping off the top rope , but Michaels countering this move by hitting him on the way down . Michaels hit Jannetty 's shoulder against the ring post and focused on wearing down the shoulder once both men had re @-@ entered the ring . Michaels missed an attack from the top rope , which allowed Jannetty to punch him repeatedly . Michaels recovered and threw Jannetty out of the ring , but Jannetty then suplexed Michaels over the rope and onto the arena floor . Sherri turned on Michaels by slapping him in the face , and Jannetty threw Michaels back into the ring with a belly @-@ to @-@ back suplex . Jannetty performed a powerslam and a DDT on Michaels . Michaels attempted to punch Jannetty but knocked the referee unconscious instead . Sherri came into the ring and tried to hit Michaels with her shoe . Michaels moved out of the way , and Sherri hit Jannetty instead . When the referee recovered , Michaels performed a superkick on Jannetty and pinned him to retain the championship . 
 The third televised match featured the Big Boss Man facing Bam Bam Bigelow . Bigelow attacked Boss Man before the match and controlled the match 's beginning by using power moves to wear Boss Man down . Boss Man performed two clotheslines on Bigelow to gain the advantage . Bigelow responded by throwing Boss Man with a belly to back suplex , and then threw him out of the ring . He wore Boss Man down with a bear hug . Boss Man briefly regained the advantage by suplexing Bigelow but eventually tried to run at Bigelow to crush him in the corner of the ring . As Boss Man approached , Bigelow kicked him in the face and followed this up by performing a diving headbutt from the top rope to win the match by pinfall . 
 The next match was for the WWF Championship , as Bret Hart defended the title against Razor Ramon . Ramon got the early advantage by punching Hart repeatedly but accidentally hit his knee against a turnbuckle while running at Hart . Hart applied a figure @-@ four leglock to apply pressure to Ramon 's knee . Ramon escaped the hold and threw Hart against a ring post ; he capitalized on this advantage by attacking Hart 's back . Ramon threw Hart with a fallaway slam and applied a bear hug . Hart escaped the hold by biting Ramon . He threw Ramon out of the ring and performed several of his signature moves , including a Russian legsweep and an elbow drop from the second rope . Hart applied the Sharpshooter , his signature hold , but Ramon grabbed the ropes , which forced the referee to instruct Hart to break the hold . Hart threw Ramon with a belly @-@ to @-@ back suplex , but Ramon responded by attempting to perform the Razor 's Edge , his signature move . Hart reversed this into an unsuccessful pin attempt . With both men exhausted , Hart applied the Sharpshooter and won the match by forcing Ramon to submit . 
 Before the final match , Bobby Heenan , a manager and commentator , unveiled his newest wrestler , " The Narcissist " Lex Luger . Heenan pointed out Luger 's muscles and announced that Luger would carry on Heenan 's rivalry with Mr. Perfect . 
 The main event of the broadcast , the Royal Rumble match , came next . For the first time , a stipulation was added that the winner of the match would receive a match for the WWF Championship at that year 's WrestleMania ( a provision that has remained since ) . The match began with two former WWF Champions , as Ric Flair and Bob Backlund entered the ring first . Every two minutes , one of the remaining twenty @-@ eight contestants entered the match according to the number they drew prior to the event . Papa Shango was the third wrestler to enter but was thrown over the top rope and onto the arena floor by Ric Flair , causing Shango to be eliminated . Virgil entered sixth and immediately attacked Ted DiBiase because of their long @-@ standing grudge . When Mr. Perfect entered in the number ten spot , he and Flair fought each other until Perfect eliminated Flair by performing a clothesline to knock Flair onto the floor . Virgil was eliminated by The Berzerker , while Perfect was thrown out of the ring by Jerry Lawler , Koko B. Ware , and Ted DiBiase . 
 The Undertaker was the fifteenth wrestler to enter ; he eliminated four men before Harvey Wippleman appeared , accompanying a large man ( who was later revealed to be Giant González , billed at eight feet tall ) . González attacked The Undertaker and threw him out of the ring ; as a result , The Undertaker was eliminated from the match . Several referees tried to get González to return to the locker room ; he eventually left , and Paul Bearer , The Undertaker 's manager , came to the ring . He helped The Undertaker revive , and The Undertaker returned to the locker room to find González . Several minutes later , Typhoon entered the match , followed shortly by his tag team partner in The Natural Disasters , Earthquake . Earthquake immediately targeted Typhoon and eliminated him from the match . Earthquake tried to console his partner , who ignored him and left ringside . Later , Tito Santana and Rick Martel were in the ring at the same time ; they fought each other immediately as a result of their five @-@ year @-@ old feud . Yokozuna , weighing over 500 pounds ( 227 kilograms ) , entered in the number twenty @-@ seven spot ; at one point , almost every wrestler worked together in an attempt to eliminate him , but they were unable to lift him . 
 Former WWF Champion Randy Savage was the last wrestler to enter the match . The wrestlers fought and several men were eliminated in quick succession , leaving Backlund , Martel , Yokozuna , and Savage . Backlund eliminated Martel but was then eliminated by Yokozuna . Backlund was in the ring for one hour , one minute , and ten seconds , which set a new record for time spent in a Royal Rumble match . Savage gained the advantage over Yokozuna ; he knocked him down and performed a diving elbow drop from the top rope . He tried to pin Yokozuna , although pinfalls are not counted during a Royal Rumble . Yokozuna pushed Savage off of him so hard that Savage flew over the top rope and onto the arena floor . As a result , Yokozuna was named the winner of the 1993 Royal Rumble match . During the match , he eliminated seven wrestlers , which broke the previous record for most eliminations in a Royal Rumble match . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 At WrestleMania IX , Yokozuna defeated Bret Hart to win the WWF Championship . His title reign only lasted several minutes , however , as he dropped the belt to Hulk Hogan in an impromptu match . Yokozuna regained the title but dropped it to Hart the following year . 
 Shawn Michaels continued his feud with Sensational Sherri at WrestleMania IX . Sherri accompanied Tatanka , and Michaels countered this by introducing Luna Vachon , his new valet . After the match , Vachon attacked Sherri . The feud also continued between Michaels and Jannetty , as Jannetty defeated Michaels for the Intercontinental Championship on May 17 , 1993 . Michaels regained the belt in a rematch the following month to end the feud . 
 Razor Ramon continued to wrestle in high @-@ profile matches but achieved little success until changing his persona to a face after losing to the underdog 1 @-@ 2 @-@ 3 Kid in May 1993 . As a fan favorite , Ramon won his first of four Intercontinental Championships in September 1993 . 
 The day after Royal Rumble , Flair faced Perfect in a loser leaves town match , in which the loser would be forced to leave the WWF forever . Because Flair had an agreement with McMahon to lose to Mr. Perfect before leaving the promotion , Perfect won the match and Flair did not appear in the WWF again until 2001 . With Flair gone from the promotion , Luger continued Heenan 's feud and defeated Mr. Perfect at WrestleMania IX . 
 The Beverly Brothers were unable to win the World Tag Team Championship , but the Steiners won the belts on two occasions in 1993 . They feuded with Money Inc . ( DiBiase and Irwin R. Schyster ) , who had held the belts since the previous October , before winning their first championship on June 14 . 
 Earthquake and Typhoon stopped teaming after their confrontation during the Royal Rumble match . No feud ever materialized , however , as Earthquake was released by the WWF and left to compete in Japan . The rivalry between Virgil and DiBiase was not mentioned again until the following year , when Virgil had a brief feud with Nikolai Volkoff , who was managed by DiBiase . DiBiase was reunited with Virgil , who had been renamed Vincent , when both men were members of WCW 's New World Order in 1996 . 
 Luger 's status as a heel ( villain ) was short @-@ lived . Yokozuna issued a challenge for any American athlete to try to bodyslam him on the deck of the USS Intrepid on Independence Day that year . Several athletes made the attempt , but nobody was able to lift Yokozuna until Luger arrived in a helicopter and bodyslammed Yokozuna . Luger received a push and was given a match for Yokozuna 's WWF Championship at SummerSlam 1993 , but he was unable to win the belt . 
 The Undertaker 's feud with Harvey Wippleman escalated in the following months and was featured at two more pay @-@ per @-@ view events in 1993 . The Undertaker faced Giant González at WrestleMania IX ; González was disqualified after attacking The Undertaker with a chloroform @-@ soaked rag provided by Wippleman . Wippleman and González recruited Mr. Hughes , and the three men attacked The Undertaker and Paul Bearer . They stole The Undertaker 's urn , which was said to be the source of his power . The feud culminated in a Rest in Peace match at SummerSlam 1993 , which The Undertaker won to end the feud . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Writing for Online Onslaught , columnist Adam Gutschmidt stated that the first half of the event is worth watching . He enjoyed the tag team match and the bout between Jannetty and Michaels . He also found the WWF Championship match surprisingly good . He did not , however , feel that the match between Big Boss Man and Bam Bam Bigelow was interesting . He also disliked the Royal Rumble match because too many tag team wrestlers were included , there were few exciting moments , and Giant González did not help the match . Scott Keith reviewed the event for 411mania . He found the opening match between the Steiners and Beverlys to be boring . He enjoyed much of the match between Jannetty and Michaels but found the ending disappointing . He rated the match between Boss Man and Bigelow as a " dud " but enjoyed the WWF Championship bout . He called the Royal Rumble match one of the worst in history , as he found much of the match boring and did not enjoy the debut of González . Overall , he rated the event as " mildly recommended " . 
 The event drew 16 @,@ 000 spectators , who paid $ 187 @,@ 000 in admission fees . This was down from the previous year 's 17 @,@ 000 fans but higher than the attendance for any of the following three Royal Rumble events . The pay @-@ per @-@ view buyrate of 1 @.@ 25 was also lower than that of Royal Rumble 1992 , which had a 1 @.@ 8 buyrate . It was higher than the <unk> for all of the Royal Rumble events from 1994 to 1998 , however . 
 Royal Rumble 1993 was released on VHS by Coliseum Video on February 11 , 1993 in North America . It was released on DVD in North America as part of WWE 's Complete Royal Rumble Anthology on November 27 , 2007 . In the United Kingdom , it was released on VHS in 1993 . On June 6 , 2005 , it was packaged together with Royal Rumble 1994 as part of WWE 's Tagged Classics line for its United Kingdom DVD release . This was followed by the Complete Royal Rumble Anthology DVD set , which was released on October 15 , 2007 . 
 = = Results = = 
 ^ Sensational Sherri was in a neutral corner in the third match . 
 = = = Royal Rumble entrances and eliminations = = = 
 A new entrant came out approximately every two minutes . 
 ^ Giant González was not an entrant in the Rumble . This was his WWF debut . 
 Bob Backlund broke the longevity record by lasting 1 : 01 : 10 , previous records held by Ric Flair at 1 : 00 : 02 . 
 = I Not Stupid = 
 I Not Stupid ( Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> <unk> <unk> ; literally : " Children are not stupid " ) is a 2002 Singaporean comedy film about the lives , struggles , and adventures of three Primary 6 pupils who are placed in the academically inferior EM3 stream . Written and directed by Jack Neo , and produced by MediaCorp Raintree Pictures , the movie stars Xiang Yun , Richard Low , Selena Tan , Shawn Lee , Huang Po Ju and Joshua Ang . 
 Released in cinemas on 9 February 2002 , I Not Stupid earned over S $ 3 @.@ 8 million , becoming the second @-@ highest grossing Singaporean film . Its satirical criticism of the Singaporean education system and social attitudes in Singapore sparked public discussions and parliamentary debates that led to reforms in the education system . Its sequel , I Not Stupid Too , was released in 2006 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The film 's storyline revolves around the lives and families of three students in the EM3 academic stream , Terry Khoo ( Huang Po Ju ) , Liu Kok Pin ( <unk> <unk> <unk> ; Shawn Lee ) and Ang Boon Hock ( <unk> <unk> <unk> ; Joshua Ang ) . Terry , pampered and from a rich family , is a meek and obedient boy , with a domineering mother ( Selena Tan ) and a negligent businessman father ( Richard Low ) . Kok Pin is pushed to excel at school by his mother ( Xiang Yun ) , but he shows a talent for art , not academics — much to the consternation of his family . Boon Hock and his mother struggle to make ends meet by running a small wonton noodle stall ; to make up for the lack of a father figure , he places high value on loyalty and " manliness " in his friends . 
 The boys are often bullied for being in the " stupid " stream , which eventually leads to a fight during which one of the bullies is accidentally injured . In the principal 's office , Boon Hock and Kok Pin explain what happened , but Terry declines to testify on their behalf , following his mother 's instructions to " mind his own business " , which infuriates his friends and causes trouble between the boys . 
 Meanwhile , Terry 's father , Mr. Khoo gets in a fight with a man who turns out to be Kok Pin 's father , Mr. Liu ( Jack Neo ) , over a parking space . Mr. Khoo 's company is a client for Mr. Liu 's firm , an advertising agency , and their new @-@ found enmity causes Mr. Khoo to select the marketing campaign of John , an American expatriate , over that of Mr. Liu . As John 's ideas are totally incompatible with Chinese customs , Mr. Khoo 's business suffers as his customers are driven away . 
 As the boys deal with their problems , a new teacher at school helps by inspiring Boon Hock to excel in Mathematics , while reaching out to the other boys . Kok Pin continues to struggle , and enlists Boon Hock to help him cheat in the Preliminary examinations , but they are caught . Unable to face his mother , Kok Pin attempts suicide , but fails . When he finally tells her , she tries to punish him but collapses ; a doctor later diagnoses her with leukaemia , and tells Kok Pin that she will die without a bone marrow transplant . 
 As the end of the year approaches , Boon Hock excels in the <unk> Mathematics exam , while the other boys manage to scrape by — Kok Pin only marginally . Contrary to Kok Pin 's fears , his mother is satisfied because he has tried his best . When visiting Mrs. Liu at the hospital , the EM3 teacher announces that one of Kok Pin 's drawings won second prize in an international competition , but the moment is overshadowed by the rush to save Mrs. Liu 's life . Mr. Khoo passes the transplant test , but refuses to donate after discovering the intended recipient is his enemy 's wife . He eventually relents , but it is revealed that due to a mix @-@ up Terry , not Mr. Khoo , is the suitable donor . Despite protests from his parents , he insists on undergoing the operation , which is a success . A grateful Mr. Liu offers to help Mr. Khoo 's business with his proposal . As a result , Mr. Khoo 's business booms , and the two enemies become good friends . The film ends with Terry being bullied again , as in the beginning of the movie — but this time , he stands up for himself and fights back . 
 = = Political satire = = 
 I Not Stupid criticises many aspects of modern Singaporean culture , including streaming in the education system , deference to authority , and sociocultural stereotypes . The film can be read as an allegory for Singaporean society — the pampered protagonist and narrator , Terry , is an " everyman ; " deferent and coddled , with a domineering mother and affluent father . Terry 's intellectual failings lead him to be placed in the inferior EM3 stream , which becomes the driving force behind the storyline . The subsequent stigma placed upon the narrator illustrates how the Singaporean education system promotes academic elitism , with students in lower streams looked down upon as inferior , making it harder for them to catch up and realise their potential ( see golem effect ) , even if they are not necessarily stupid . This <unk> mentality puts mounting pressure upon the protagonists of the film , confounding them as they attempt to improve their standing and ameliorate their reputation in a society which judges them " worthless " . 
 Terry 's mother , Mrs. Khoo , is a " thinly veiled stand @-@ in for the [ Singapore ] government " , whose " mother @-@ knows @-@ best " mentality is well @-@ meaning , but strips her children of their freedom . She demands total obedience , and her repeated lines " Do you know how lucky you are to have a good and responsible mother ? " and " This is all for your own good " parody the Singapore government 's efforts to convince Singaporeans that government policies and actions is in the best interests of the nation . Mrs. Khoo also uses her position of power to buy off rebellion in her charges with gifts and bribes , in a pointed criticism of the government 's social policies . Other characters in the film comment on this relationship — for instance , in one scene , Mr. Liu states that " it is difficult to catch fish in Singapore , because fish in Singapore are like Singaporeans ; they 'll never open their mouths " , poking fun at the Singaporean trait of obedience and respect for authority . 
 The film also touches on other issues including Chinese self @-@ loathing ( wherein Singaporean companies regard Western expatriates as inherently superior to local workers ) , suicide , the use of Singlish , and the differences between English and Chinese . 
 = = Production = = 
 Jack Neo 's inspiration for the film was the Iranian movie Children of Heaven . Neo and his wife were moved to " holding hands and crying after seeing the love shared by the children " , which motivated him to make his own movie about youth . After speaking with parents in order to find topics to discuss in his film , Neo learned that due to problems with the Singaporean education system , specifically streaming , students face considerable academic and emotional stress . This problem formed the core of his film , which he called I Not Stupid in reference to the social stigma that streaming places on students . 
 Neo also drew on a dissatisfaction he felt with the way the school system promoted deference to authority over self @-@ reliance ; he wanted his film to tell youth " If you don 't want to change or make a difference , you won 't . It 's all up to you . " In exploring these ideas , Neo spent over two years researching and editing the script — checking scenes for accuracy , verifying facts , and drafting dialogue . Altogether , the work went through thirteen different revisions , and saw over 50 children audition for the lead roles , before Neo decided to send I Not Stupid into production . 
 This production was carried out by Raintree Pictures on a budget of S $ 900 @,@ 000 , sponsored by Bee Cheng Hiang , Yeo <unk> Seng and Sunshine Bakeries . The production crew included Daniel Yun as executive producer , David Leong and Chan Pui Yin as producers , <unk> Lam as cinematographer and Li Yi as music supervisor . In addition to writing and directing , Neo also composed the theme song , which was sung by Chen <unk> . The actual filming took place at <unk> Westlake Secondary School and Westlake Primary School over a period of 24 days , and the film found distribution through Raintree Pictures and United International Pictures . 
 = = Reception = = 
 I Not Stupid earned just S $ 46 @,@ 000 during a limited sneak preview run , prompting Raintree Pictures to embark on a massive publicity campaign , including invitations for teachers to discuss the film . After showing for four months on 30 screens the movie earned S $ 3 @.@ 8 million , becoming the second @-@ highest grossing Singaporean movie after Money No Enough . Following its success in Singapore , I Not Stupid was released in Malaysia , Hong Kong , Taiwan and mainland China . The movie also screened at the Pusan International Film Festival , Tokyo International Film Festival , the Jakarta International Film Festival and the 2005 Singapore Season cultural exhibition in London . Over 50 @,@ 000 VCDs of I Not Stupid were sold and its sole distributor , <unk> , declared it the " No. 1 selling VCD in Singapore " . This claim was disputed by Alliance Entertainment , which said that 70 @,@ 000 VCDs of Money No Enough were sold , but <unk> called the comparison inaccurate , as Money No Enough was a mature title , rather than a new release . 
 Awards that I Not Stupid won include Best Chinese Film at the Golden Bauhinia Awards and Best Chinese Humanitarian Film at the 2002 Taiwan Golden Torch Awards ; the movie was also nominated for Best Asian Film at the Hong Kong Film Awards , losing to My Sassy Girl . Critics praised the film for its humour and uniqueness , noting that it touched a raw nerve among Singaporeans . For example , <unk> of LoveHKFilm.com wrote , " I Not Stupid covers a variety of serious subjects , but all the while maintains a light comedic touch . Jack Neo [ makes this film ] a clever , well @-@ crafted social commentary and a damn good film to boot . " Other reviewers described I Not Stupid as " one of the greatest cinematic feats I ’ ve had the pleasure of experiencing " and displaying a " simple and yet excellent execution " . In contrast , <unk> reviewer Soh Yun @-@ Huei , found it " most shocking ... that the Singapore censors actually allowed this film through in the first place " . 
 Despite its political satire , the film received a positive response from the government of Singapore . Goh Chok Tong , then Prime Minister of Singapore , commended Jack Neo 's creative talent during his National Day Rally address on 18 August 2002 . In 2004 , Neo was the first local film @-@ maker to receive a National Day Award , and on 21 October 2005 , he and Dick Lee became the first pop culture artists to receive the Cultural Medallion , Singapore 's highest arts award . The movie sparked public discussion and parliamentary debate about the negative effects of streaming . In 2004 , the Ministry of Education decided to merge the <unk> and <unk> streams , and on 29 September 2006 , it announced that the EM3 stream will be scrapped by 2008 . 
 = English cannon = 
 The first usage of cannon in Great Britain was possibly in 1327 , when they were used in battle by the English against the Scots . Under the Tudors , the first forts featuring cannon batteries were built , while cannon were first used by the Tudor navy . Cannon were later used during the English Civil War for both siegework and extensively on the battlefield . 
 Cannon were first used abroad by the English during the Hundred Years War , when primitive artillery was used at the Battle of Crécy . With the Age of Discovery and the establishment of the Thirteen Colonies , cannon saw use in British armies in North America , first against the rival colony of New France , and later during the American Revolutionary War . From the 18th century to the present day , the Royal Regiment of Artillery has formed the artillery of the British Army . The Royal Navy developed the carronade in the 18th century , although they disappeared from use in the 1850s . As with other western cannon of the period , cannon used by the British Army and the Royal Navy became longer ranged and more destructive in the 19th and 20th centuries . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early development = = = 
 English cannon saw its first use during the Hundred Years War , being used in small numbers during the 1340s . " Ribaldis " were first mentioned in the English Privy Wardrobe accounts during preparations for the Battle of Crécy between 1345 and 1346 . These are believed to have shot large arrows and simplistic grapeshot , but they were so important they were directly controlled by the Royal Wardrobe . According to the contemporary poet Jean Froissart , the English cannon made " two or three discharges on the Genoese " , which is taken to mean individual shots by two or three guns because of the time taken to reload such primitive artillery . Similar cannon appeared at the Siege of Calais later the same year and by the 1380s , the " ribaudekin " had become mounted on wheels . 
 = = = Tudor navy and the rise of the fort = = = 
 Towards the end of the Middle Ages , the development of cannon made revolutionary changes to siege warfare throughout Europe , with many castles becoming susceptible to artillery fire . In England , significant changes were evident from the 16th century , when Henry VIII began building Device Forts between 1539 and 1540 as artillery fortresses to counter the threat of invasion from France and Spain . They were built by the state at strategic points to form the first powerful cannon batteries , but , though they had many of the same architectural facets as true castles , they served a purely military function ( rather than serving as residences ) . Deal Castle remains one of the most impressive such Device Forts , and was perfectly symmetrical , with a low , circular keep at its centre . Over 200 cannon and gun ports were set within the walls , and the fort formed a firing platform with a shape that allowed many lines of fire . In addition , its low curved bastions were designed to deflect cannonballs . Cannon were now an inexorable part of English warfare . 
 Cannon also saw use in the Tudor navy ( where a cannon was a " gun " , and a cannonball a " shot " ) . The French " culverin " was adapted for naval use by the English in the late 16th century , and had a significant advantage over the ballista that had previously been used in naval warfare . This cannon was of relatively long barrel and light construction , and fired solid round shot projectiles at long ranges along a flat trajectory . One of the first ships to be able to fire a full cannon broadside was the English carrack the Mary Rose , built in Portsmouth from 1510 – 1512 , and equipped with 78 guns ( 91 after an upgrade in the 1530s ) . It was one of the earliest purpose @-@ built warships to serve in the English Navy ( thought never to have served as a merchant ship ) , and her crew consisted of 200 sailors , 185 soldiers , and 30 gunners . 
 With the Age of Discovery , rivalry developed between European colonies and the importance of cannon in naval warfare increased . Many merchant vessels were armed with cannon and the aggressive activities of English privateers , who engaged the galleons of the Spanish treasure fleets , helped provoke the first Anglo @-@ Spanish War , though it was not one of the main factors . A fleet review on Elizabeth I 's accession in 1559 showed the navy to consist of 39 ships and in 1588 , Philip II of Spain launched the Spanish Armada against England . In a running battle lasting over a week , the Armada was scattered and defeated by the English navy . 
 = = = 17th century = = = 
 A description of the Gunner 's art is given during the English Civil War period ( mid @-@ 17th century ) by John Roberts , covering the modes of calculation and the ordnance pieces themselves , in his work The Compleat <unk> , printed London 1652 by W. Wilson and sold by George Hurlock ( Thames Street ) . The lower tier of English ships of the line at this time were usually equipped with demi @-@ cannon — a naval gun which fired a 32 @-@ pound solid shot . A full cannon fired a 42 @-@ pound shot ( and in fact there was a so @-@ called " royal cannon " that fired a 60 @-@ pound shot ) , but these were discontinued by the 18th century as they were seen as too unwieldy . 
 With the establishment of the Thirteen Colonies , cannon saw use in English armies in the North American mainland , first against the rival colony of New France . However , although the French were outnumbered , their fortifications and artillery were superior to English cannon . When 34 ships from the English colony of Massachusetts bombarded Quebec in 1690 , they were outmatched by the French batteries , which badly damaged the ships ' hulls and struck off the colours of the English flagship . The English brass field guns landed on the shore were entirely ineffective against the militiamen in the woods , and a spontaneous retreat left five cannon abandoned on the shore . French victory showed that to take Quebec , the cannon of " Old England would have to be brought in " . 
 = = = 18th century = = = 
 Before the 18th century , artillery " <unk> " were raised by Royal Warrant for specific campaigns and disbanded again when they were over . On 26 May 1716 , however , by Royal Warrant of George I , two regular companies of field artillery , each 100 men strong , were raised at Woolwich . On 1 April 1722 these companies were grouped with independent artillery companies at Gibraltar and Minorca to form the Royal Regiment of Artillery . The regiment expanded rapidly and by 1757 had 24 companies divided into two battalions , as well as a Cadet Company formed in 1741 . 
 When Quebec was finally captured during the French and Indian War , the British had more cannon installed in the fortifications , and built more embrasures into the walls to maximise their effectiveness against siege batteries . When the French returned in 1760 , the defenders had to leave all but two of their field guns in the retreat into the city . However , British cannon proved effective , as a heavy cannonade on the French batteries allowed them to hold out long enough for reinforcements . 
 By 1771 , there were 32 companies of the Royal Artillery in four battalions , as well as two Invalid Companies comprising older and unfit men employed in garrison duties . In January 1793 , two troops of Royal Horse Artillery ( RHA ) were raised to provide fire support for the cavalry , joined by two more in November 1793 . All RHA personnel were mounted . The Royal Irish Artillery was absorbed in 1801 . 
 Additionally , the carronade was adopted by the Royal Navy in 1779 , and the lower muzzle velocity of the round shot was intended to create many more of the deadly wooden splinters when hitting the structure of an enemy vessel ; these in fact were often the main cause of casualties . It was much shorter and a third to a quarter of the weight of an equivalent long gun : for example , a 32 pounder carronade weighed less than a ton , but a 32 pounder long gun weighed over 3 tons . Carronades were manufactured in the usual naval gun calibres , but they were not counted in a ship of the line 's rated number of guns . As a result , the classification of Royal Navy vessels in this period can mislead , since they would often be carrying more pieces of ordnance than they were described as carrying . 
 The carronade was initially very successful and widely adopted , although in the 1810s and 1820s , greater emphasis was placed on the accuracy of long @-@ range gunfire , and less on the weight of a broadside . The small powder charge of the carronade was only able to project a heavy cannonball over a relatively limited distance . The short barrel , low muzzle velocity and short range also increased the risk that a carronade would eject burning wadding onto nearby combustible materials , increasing the risk of fire . The carronade disappeared from the Royal Navy from the 1850s after the development of steel , jacketed cannon by William George Armstrong and Joseph Whitworth . 
 = = Operation = = 
 The 1771 Encyclopædia Britannica describes the operation of 18th @-@ century British cannon . Each cannon would be manned by two gunners , six soldiers , and four artillery officers . The right gunner was to prime the piece and load it with powder , while the left gunner would fetch the powder from the magazine and keep ready to fire the cannon at the officer 's command . Three soldiers stood on each side of the cannon , to ram and sponge the cannon , and hold the lantern and ladle . The second soldier on the left was charged with providing 50 bullets . 
 Prior to loading , the cannon would be well cleaned with a sponge to remove all sparks , filth , and dirt . The powder was added , followed by a wad of paper or hay , and the ball was thrown in . After ramming the cannon would be aimed with the elevation set using a quadrant and a plummet . At 45 degrees the ball had the utmost range – about ten times the gun 's level range . Any angle above the horizontal line was called random @-@ shot . The officer of artillery had to ensure the cannon was diligently served . Water was available to dip the sponges in and cool the pieces every ten or twelve rounds . 
 In the late 1770s it was said that a 24 @-@ pounder could fire 90 to 100 shots a day in summer , or 60 to 75 in winter . A 16 or 12 pounder would fire a little more , because they were easier served . The Encyclopædia Britannica mentions " some occasions where 200 shots have been fired from these pieces in the space of nine hours , and 138 in the space of five . " 
 The introduction of carronades at this time also resulted in guns that were easier to handle and required less than half the gunpowder of long guns , allowing fewer men to crew them than long guns mounted on naval garrison carriages . 
 During the Napoleonic Wars , a British gun team consisted of 5 numbered gunners - fewer crew than needed in the previous century . The No.1 was the gun commander , and a sergeant , who aimed the gun . The No.2 was the " <unk> " who cleaned the bore with the sponge dampened with water between shots ; the intention being to quench any remaining embers before a fresh charge was introduced . The No.3 , the loader , inserted the bag of powder and then the projectile . The No.2 then used a rammer , or the sponge reversed , to drive it in . At the same time , the No.4 ( " <unk> " ) pressed his thumb on the vent hole to prevent a draught that might fan a flame . The charge loaded , the No.4 pricked the bagged charge through the vent hole and filled the vent with powder . At the No.1 's command the No.5 would fire the piece with his <unk> . 
 = Maternal deprivation = 
 The term maternal deprivation is a catch @-@ phrase summarising the early work of psychiatrist and psychoanalyst , John Bowlby on the effects of separating infants and young children from their mother ( or mother substitute ) although the effect of loss of the mother on the developing child had been considered earlier by Freud and other theorists . Bowlby 's work on delinquent and affectionless children and the effects of hospital and institutional care lead to his being commissioned to write the World Health Organisation 's report on the mental health of homeless children in post @-@ war Europe whilst he was head of the Department for Children and Parents at the Tavistock Clinic in London after World War II . The result was the monograph Maternal Care and Mental Health published in 1951 , which sets out the maternal deprivation hypothesis . 
 Bowlby drew together such empirical evidence as existed at the time from across Europe and the USA , including Spitz ( 1946 ) and Goldfarb ( 1943 , 1945 ) . His main conclusions , that " the infant and young child should experience a warm , intimate , and continuous relationship with his mother ( or permanent mother substitute ) in which both find satisfaction and enjoyment " and that not to do so might have significant and irreversible mental health consequences , were both controversial and influential . The monograph was published in 14 different languages and sold over 400 @,@ 000 copies in the English version alone . Bowlby 's work went beyond the suggestions of Otto Rank and Ian Suttie that mothering care was essential for development , and focused on the potential outcomes for children deprived of such care . 
 The 1951 WHO publication was highly influential in causing widespread changes in the practices and prevalence of institutional care for infants and children , and in changing practices relating to the stays of small children in hospitals so that parents were allowed more frequent and longer visits . Although the monograph was primarily concerned with the removal of children from their homes it was also used for political purposes to discourage women from working and leaving their children in daycare by governments concerned about maximising employment for returned and returning servicemen . The publication was also highly controversial with , amongst others , psychoanalysts , psychologists and learning theorists , and sparked significant debate and research on the issue of children 's early relationships . 
 The limited empirical data and lack of comprehensive theory to account for the conclusions in Maternal Care and Mental Health led to the subsequent formulation of attachment theory by Bowlby . Following the publication of Maternal Care and Mental Health Bowlby sought new understanding from such fields as evolutionary biology , ethology , developmental psychology , cognitive science and control systems theory and drew upon them to formulate the innovative proposition that the mechanisms underlying an infant 's ties emerged as a result of evolutionary pressure . Bowlby claimed to have made good the " deficiencies of the data and the lack of theory to link alleged cause and effect " in Maternal Care and Mental Health in his later work Attachment and Loss published between 1969 and 1980 . 
 Although the central tenet of maternal deprivation theory — that children 's experiences of interpersonal relationships are crucial to their psychological development and that the formation of an ongoing relationship with the child is as important a part of parenting as the provision of experiences , discipline and child care — has become generally accepted , " maternal deprivation " as a discrete syndrome is not a concept that is much in current use other than in relation to severe deprivation as in " failure to thrive " . In the area of early relationships it has largely been superseded by attachment theory and other theories relating to even earlier infant – parent interactions . As a concept , parental deficiencies are seen as a vulnerability factor for , rather than a direct cause of , later difficulties . In relation to institutional care there has been a great deal of subsequent research on the individual elements of privation , deprivation , <unk> and deficiencies that may arise from institutional care . 
 = = History = = 
 Many traditions have stressed the grief of mothers over deprivation of their children but little has been said historically about young children 's loss of their mothers ; this may have been because loss of the mother in infancy frequently meant death for a breast @-@ fed infant . In the 19th century , French society <unk> a system in which infants were breast @-@ fed at the homes of foster mothers , returning to the biological family after weaning , and no concern was evinced at the possible effect of this double separation on the child . 
 Sigmund Freud may have been among the first to stress the potential effect of loss of the mother on the developing child , but his concern was less with the actual experience of maternal care than with the anxiety the child might feel about the loss of the nourishing breast . As little of Freud 's theory was based on actual observations of infants , little effort was made to consider the effects of real experiences of loss . 
 Following Freud 's early speculations about infant experience with the mother , Otto Rank suggested a powerful role in personality development for birth trauma . Rank stressed the traumatic experience of birth as a separation from the mother , rather than birth as an uncomfortable physical event . Not long after Rank 's introduction of this idea , Ian Suttie , a British physician whose early death limited his influence , suggested that the child 's basic need is for mother @-@ love , and his greatest anxiety is that such love will be lost . 
 In the 1930s , David Levy noted a phenomenon he called " primary affect hunger " in children removed very early from their mothers and brought up in institutions and multiple foster homes . These children , though often pleasant on the surface , seemed indifferent underneath . He questioned whether there could be a " deficiency disease of the emotional life , comparable to a deficiency of vital nutritional elements within the developing organism " . A few psychiatrists , psychologists and paediatricians were also concerned by the high mortality rate in hospitals and institutions obsessed with sterility to the detriment of any human or nurturing contact with babies . One rare paediatrician went so far as to replace a sign saying " Wash your hands twice before entering this ward " with one saying " Do not enter this nursery without picking up a baby " . 
 In a series of studies published in the 1930s , psychologist Bill Goldfarb noted not only deficits in the ability to form relationships , but also in the IQ of institutionalised children as compared to a matched group in foster care . In another study conducted in the 1930s , Harold Skeels , noting the decline in IQ in young orphanage children , removed toddlers from a sterile orphanage and gave them to " feeble @-@ minded " institutionalised older girls to care for . The toddlers ' IQ rose dramatically . Skeels study was attacked for lack of scientific rigour though he achieved belated recognition decades later . 
 René Spitz , a psychoanalyst , undertook research in the 1930s and ' 40s on the effects of maternal deprivation and <unk> . His investigation focused on infants who had experienced abrupt , long @-@ term separation from the familiar caregiver , as , for instance , when the mother was sent to prison . These studies and conclusions were thus different from the investigations of institutional rearing . Spitz adopted the term <unk> depression to describe the child 's reaction of grief , anger , and apathy to partial emotional deprivation ( the loss of a loved object ) and proposed that when the love object is returned to the child within three to five months , recovery is prompt but after five months , they will show the symptoms of increasingly serious deterioration . He called this reaction to total deprivation " <unk> " . He was also one of the first to undertake direct observation of infants . The conclusions were hotly disputed and there was no widespread acceptance . 
 During the years of World War II , evacuated and orphaned children were the subjects of studies that outlined their reactions to separation , including the ability to cope by forming relationships with other children . Some of this material remained unpublished until the post @-@ war period and only gradually contributed to understanding of young children 's reactions to loss . 
 Bowlby , who , unlike most psychoanalysts , had direct experience of working with deprived children through his work at the London Child Guidance Clinic , called for more investigation of children 's early lives in a paper published in 1940 . He proposed that two environmental factors were paramount in early childhood . The first was death of the mother , or prolonged separation from her . The second was the mother 's emotional attitude towards her child . This was followed by a study on forty – four juvenile thieves collected through the Clinic . There were many problematic parental behaviours in the samples but Bowlby was looking at one environmental factor that was easy to document , namely prolonged early separations of child and mother . Of the forty @-@ four thieves , fourteen fell into the category which Bowlby characterised as being of an " affectionless character " . Of these fourteen , twelve had suffered prolonged maternal separations as opposed to only two of the control group . 
 = = Maternal Care and Mental Health = = 
 Bowlby 's work on delinquent and affectionless children and the effects of hospital and institutional care lead to his being commissioned to write the World Health Organisation 's report on the mental health of homeless children in post @-@ war Europe whilst he was head of the Department for Children and Parents at the Tavistock Clinic in London after World War II . Bowlby travelled on the Continent and in America , communicating with social workers , paediatricians and child psychiatrists including those who had already published literature on the issue . These authors were mainly unaware of each other 's work , and Bowlby was able to draw together the findings and highlight the similarities described , despite the variety of methods used , ranging from direct observation to retrospective analysis to comparison groups . In addition , there was work from England undertaken by Dorothy Burlingham and Anna Freud on children separated from their families due to wartime disruption , and Bowlby 's own work . The result was the monograph Maternal Care and Mental Health published in 1951 , which sets out the maternal deprivation hypothesis . The WHO report was followed by the publication of an abridged version for public consumption called Child Care and the Growth of Love . This book sold over half a million copies worldwide . Bowlby tackled not only institutional and hospital care , but also policies of removing children from " unwed mothers " and untidy and physically neglected homes , and lack of support for families in difficulties . In a range of areas Bowlby cited the lack of adequate research and suggested the direction this could take . 
 = = Principal concepts of Bowlby 's theory = = 
 The quality of parental care was considered by Bowlby to be of vital importance to the child 's development and future mental health . It was believed to be essential that the infant and young child should experience a warm , intimate , and continuous relationship with his mother ( or permanent mother substitute ) in which both found satisfaction and enjoyment . Given this relationship , emotions of guilt and anxiety ( characteristics of mental illness when in excess ) would develop in an organised and moderate way . Naturally extreme emotions would be moderated and become amenable to the control of the child 's developing personality . He stated , " It is this complex rich and rewarding relationship with the mother in the early years , varied in countless ways by relations with the father and with siblings , that child psychiatrists and many others now believe to underlie the development of character and mental health . " 
 The state of affairs in which the child did not have this relationship he termed " maternal deprivation " . This term covered a range from almost complete deprivation , not uncommon in institutions , residential nurseries and hospitals , to partial deprivation where the mother , or mother substitute , was unable to give the loving care a small child needs , to mild deprivation where the child was removed from the mother 's care but was looked after by someone familiar whom he trusted . Complete or almost complete deprivation could " entirely cripple the capacity to make relationships " . Partial deprivation could result in acute anxiety , depression , neediness and powerful emotions which the child could not regulate . The end product of such psychic disturbance could be neurosis and instability of character . However , the main focus of the monograph was on the more extreme forms of deprivation . The focus was the child 's developing relationships with his mother and father and disturbed parent – child relationships in the context of almost complete deprivation rather than the earlier concept of the " broken home " as such . 
 In terms of social policy , Bowlby advised that parents should be supported by society as parents are dependent on a greater society for economic provision and " if a community values its children it must cherish its parents " . Also " <unk> " mothers of children under 3 should be supported to care for the child at home rather than the child be left in inadequate care whilst the mother sought work . ( It was assumed the mother of the illegitimate child would usually be left with the child ) . Fathers left with infants or small children on their hands without the mother should be provided with " housekeepers " so that the children could remain at home . Other proposals included the proper payment of foster homes and careful selection of foster carers , and frank , informative discussions with children about their parents and why they ended up in care and how they felt about it rather than the " least said , soonest mended " approach . The point that children were loyal to and loved even the worst of parents , and needed to have that fact understood non @-@ <unk> , was strongly made . 
 On the issue of removal of children from their homes , Bowlby emphasised the strength of the tie that children feel towards their parents and discussed the reason why , as he put it , " children thrive better in bad homes than in good institutions " . He was strongly in favour of support being provided to parents and extended families to improve the situation and provide care within the family rather than removal if possible . 
 = = " Maternal " = = 
 Bowlby used the phrase " mother ( or permanent mother substitute ) " . As it is commonly used , the term maternal deprivation is ambiguous as it is unclear whether the deprivation is that of the biological mother , of an adoptive or foster mother , a consistent caregiving adult of any gender or relationship to the child , of an emotional relationship , or of the experience of the type of care called " mothering " in many cultures . Questions about the exact meaning of this term are by no means new , as the following statement by Mary Ainsworth in 1962 indicates : " Although in the early months of life it is the mother who almost invariably interacts most with the child ... the role of other figures , especially the father , is acknowledged to be significant ... [ P ] <unk> deprivation ... has received scant attention ... [ In the case of ] institutionalization ... the term ' parental deprivation ' would have been more accurate , for the child has been ... deprived of interaction with a father @-@ figure as well as a mother @-@ figure ... [ It may be better to ] discourage the use of [ the term ' deprivation ' ] and encourage the substitution of the terms ' insufficiency ' , ' discontinuity ' , and ' distortion ' instead . " Ainsworth implies , neither the word " maternal " nor the word " deprivation " seems to be a literally correct definition of the phenomenon under consideration . 
 A contemporary of Ainsworth spoke of " the mother , a term by which we mean both the child 's actual mother and / or any other person of either sex who may take the place of the child 's physical mother during a significant period of time " . However , another contemporary referred to " the quasi @-@ mystical union of mother and child , of the dynamic union that mother and child represent " . 
 = = Influence on institutionalised care = = 
 The practical effects of the publication of Maternal Care and Mental Health were described in the preface to the WHO 1962 publication Deprivation of Maternal Care : A Reassessment of its Effects as " almost wholly beneficial " with reference to widespread changes in the institutional care of children . 
 The practice of allowing parents frequent visiting to hospitalised children became the norm and there was a move towards placing homeless children with foster carers , rather than in institutions , and a move towards the professionalisation of alternative carers . In hospitals , the change was given added impetus by the work of social worker and psychoanalyst James Robertson who filmed the distressing effects of separation on children in hospital and collaborated with Bowlby in making the 1952 documentary film A Two @-@ Year Old Goes to the Hospital . 
 According to Michael Rutter , the importance of Bowlby 's initial writings on " maternal deprivation " lay in his emphasis that children 's experiences of interpersonal relationships were crucial to their psychological development and that the formation of an ongoing relationship with the child was as important a part of parenting as the provision of experiences , discipline and child care . Although this view was rejected by many at the time , the argument focussed attention on the need to consider parenting in terms of consistency of caregivers over time and parental sensitivity to children 's individuality and it is now generally accepted . Bowlby 's theory sparked considerable interest and controversy in the nature of early relationships and gave a strong impetus to what Mary Ainsworth described as a " great body of research " in what was perceived as an extremely difficult and complex area . 
 = = Psychoanalysis = = 
 Bowlby departed from psychoanalytical theory which saw the gratification of sensory needs as the basis for the relationship between infant and mother . Food was seen as the primary drive and the relationship , or " dependency " was secondary . He had already found himself in conflict with dominant <unk> theories that children 's emotional problems are almost entirely due to fantasies generated from internal conflict between aggressive and libidinal drives , rather than to events in the external world . ( His breach with the psychoanalysts only became total and irreparable after his later development of attachment theory incorporating ethological and evolutionary principles , when he was effectively ostracised ) . Bowlby also broke with social learning theory 's view of dependency and reinforcement . Bowlby proposed instead that to thrive emotionally , children needed a close and continuous caregiving relationship . 
 Bowlby later stated that he had concluded that , contrary to the focus of psychoanalysts on the internal fantasy world of the child , the important area to study was how a child was actually treated by his parents in real life and in particular the interaction between them . He chose the actual removal of children from the home at this particular time because it was a specific event , the effects of which could be studied , and because he believed it could have serious effects on a child 's development and because it was preventable . In addition , views that he had already expressed about the importance of a child 's real life experiences and relationship with carers had been met by " sheer incredulity " by colleagues before World War II . This led him to see that far more systematic knowledge was required of the effects on a child of early experiences . Bowlby and his colleagues were pioneers of the view that studies involving direct observation of infants and children were not merely of interest but were essential to the advancement of science in this area . 
 = = Animal studies = = 
 Researchers have for years studied depression , alcoholism , aggression , maternal @-@ infant bonding and other conditions and phenomena in nonhuman primates and other laboratory animals using an experimental maternal deprivation paradigm . Most influentially , Harry Harlow would , in the mid @-@ 1950s , begin raising infant monkeys in his University of <unk> Madison laboratory in total or partial isolation and with inanimate surrogate mothers in an attempt to study maternal @-@ infant bonding as well as various states of mental illness . 
 In Harlow ’ s laboratory , infant rhesus monkeys were immediately removed from their mothers and placed with cloth or wire surrogate mothers , sometimes called “ iron maidens ” by the researchers . Harlow found that the infants would become attached to their inanimate mothers – both those made of wire and those covered with <unk> and when removed from them they would “ screech in terror ” . Harlow and his colleagues would later develop “ evil artificial mothers ” meant to “ impart fear and insecurity to infant monkeys ” -including one designed with brass <unk> but contrary to the researcher ’ s hypothesis , these animals too demonstrated an attachment to their surrogates . 
 Subsequent experiments would study the effects of total and partial isolation on the animals ’ mental health and interpersonal bonding using a stainless steel vertical chamber designed by Harlow , named the “ pit of despair ” , which was found to produce “ profound and prolonged depression ” in monkeys . Similarly , Harlow found that extended isolation in bare wire cages left monkeys with “ profound behavioral abnormalities ” including “ self @-@ clutching and rocking ” and later “ apathy and indifference to external stimulation ” . Harlow likened this behavior to catatonic schizophrenia . 
 Later experiments were devised to test the mother @-@ child bond with mothers who had themselves been reared in isolation as infants . This early deprivation was found to have retarded the mothers ’ emotional development and her ability to engage in intercourse and in turn become pregnant . In response , Harlow and his colleagues created an apparatus to impregnate these mothers they named a “ rape rack ” . Harlow found that once these monkeys gave birth , they cared little for their offspring writing , “ these monkey mothers that had never experienced love of any kind were devoid of love for their infants ” . While some mothers simply ignored their children , Harlow characterized others as “ evil ” and abusive and in some instances reported them “ crushing the infant 's face to the floor , chewing off the infant 's feet and fingers , and in one case … putting the infant 's head in her mouth and crushing it like an eggshell . ” 
 Harlow ’ s experiments have been heralded as revolutionary and also robustly criticized as scientifically invalid and sadistically cruel . Writing on the researcher ’ s legacy , John Gluck , a former student of Harlow ’ s opined , “ On the one hand , his work on monkey cognition and social development fostered a view of the animals as having rich subjective lives filled with intention and emotion . On the other , he has been criticized for the conduct of research that seemed to ignore the ethical <unk> of his own discoveries . " 
 Maternal deprivation experiments on nonhuman primates have continued into the 21st century and remain controversial . Stephen Suomi , an early collaborator of Harlow , has continued to conduct maternal deprivation experiments on rhesus monkeys in his NIH laboratory and has been vigorously criticized by PETA , Members of Congress and others . 
 = = Controversy , misinterpretation and criticism = = 
 Aside from his profound differences with psychoanalytic ideas , the theoretical basis of Bowlby 's monograph was controversial in a number of ways . Some profoundly disagreed with the necessity for maternal ( or equivalent ) love in order to function normally , or that the formation of an ongoing relationship with a child was an important part of parenting . The idea that early experiences have serious consequences for intellectual and psychosocial development was controversial in itself . Others questioned the extent to which his hypothesis was supported by the evidence . There was criticism of the confusion of the effects of privation ( no primary attachment figure ) and deprivation ( loss of the primary attachment figure ) and in particular , of the failure to distinguish between the effects of the lack of a primary attachment figure and the other forms of deprivation and <unk> that might affect children in institutions . 
 It was also pointed out that there was no explanation of how experiences subsumed under the broad heading of " maternal deprivation " could have effects on personality development of the kinds claimed . Bowlby explained in his 1988 work that the data were not at the time " accommodated by any theory then current and in the brief time of my employment by the World Health Organisation there was no possibility of developing a new one " . He then goes on to describe the subsequent development of attachment theory . 
 In addition to criticism , his ideas were often oversimplified , misrepresented , distorted or exaggerated for various purposes . This heightened the controversy . In 1962 , the WHO published Deprivation of Maternal Care : A Reassessment of its Effects to which Mary Ainsworth , Bowlby 's close colleague , contributed with his approval , to present the recent research and developments and to address misapprehensions . 
 Bowlby 's work was misinterpreted to mean that any separation from the natural mother , any experience of institutional care or a multiplicity of " mothers " necessarily resulted in severe emotional deprivation and sometimes , that all children undergoing such experiences would develop into " affectionless children " . As a consequence it was claimed that only 24 @-@ hour care by the same person ( the mother ) was good enough , day care and nurseries were not good enough and mothers should not go out to work . The WHO advised that day nurseries and <unk> could have a serious and permanent deleterious effect . Such strictures suited the policies of governments concerned about finding employment for returned and returning servicemen after World War II . In fact , although Bowlby was of the view that proper care could not be provided " by roster " , he was also of the view that babies should be accustomed to regular periods of care by another and that the key to alternative care for working mothers was that it should be regular and continuous . He addressed this point in a 1958 publication called Can I Leave My Baby ? . Ainsworth in the WHO 1962 publication also attempted to address this misapprehension by pointing out that the requirement for continuity of care did not imply an exclusive mother – child pair relationship . 
 Bowlby 's quotable remark , that children thrived better in bad homes than in good institutions , was often taken to extremes leading to reluctance on the part of Children 's Officers ( the equivalent of child care social workers ) to remove children from homes however neglectful and inadequate . In fact , although Bowlby mentioned briefly the issue of " partial deprivation " within the family , this was not fully investigated in his monograph as the main focus was on the risks of complete or almost complete deprivation . 
 Michael Rutter made a significant contribution to the controversial issue of Bowlby 's maternal deprivation hypothesis . His 1981 monograph and other papers ( Rutter 1972 ; Rutter 1979 ) comprise the definitive empirical evaluation and update of Bowlby 's early work on maternal deprivation . He amassed further evidence , addressed the many different underlying social and psychological mechanisms and showed that Bowlby was only partially right and often for the wrong reasons . Rutter highlighted the other forms of deprivation found in institutional care and the complexity of separation distress ; and suggested that anti @-@ social behaviour was not linked to maternal deprivation as such but to family discord . The importance of these refinements of the maternal deprivation hypothesis was to reposition it as a " vulnerability factor " rather than a causative agent , with a number of varied influences determining which path a child would take . 
 Rutter has more recently advised attention to the complexity of development and the roles of genetic as well as experiential factors , noting that separation is only one of many risk factors related to poor cognitive and emotional development . 
 = = = Fathers = = = 
 In accordance with the prevailing social realities of his time , namely the assumption that the daily care of infants and small children was undertaken by women and in particular , mothers , Bowlby referred primarily to mothers and " maternal " deprivation , although the words " parents " and " parental " are also used . Fathers are mentioned only in the context of the practical and emotional support they provide for the mother but the monograph contains no specific exploration of the father 's role . Nor is there any discussion as to whether the maternal role had , of necessity , to be filled by women as such . Bowlby 's work was misinterpreted by some to mean natural mothers only . 
 The 1962 WHO publication contains a chapter on the effect of " paternal deprivation " , there having by 1962 been some limited research on the issue which illustrated the importance of the father 's relationship with his children . The hope was expressed by Ainsworth that in the future there would be more such research and indeed her early research , which contributed significantly to attachment theory , covered infants relationships with all family members . It was also stated that in relation to institutional care , " parental deprivation " would have been more accurate , although Ainsworth preferred the terms " insufficiency " , " discontinuity " and " distortion " to either . 
 Michael Rutter in Maternal Deprivation <unk> ( 1972 ) , described by New Society as a " classic in the field of child care " , argued that research showed that it did not matter which parent the child got on well with as long as he got on well with one of them , that both parents influence their child 's development and that which parent is more important varies with age , sex and temperamental development . He concluded , " For some aspects of development the same @-@ sexed parent seems to have a special role , for some the person who plays and talks most with the child and for others the person who feeds the child . The father , the mother , brother and sisters , friends , school @-@ teachers and others all affect development , but their influences and importance differ for different aspects of development . A less exclusive focus on the mother is required . Children also have fathers ! " 
 Within attachment theory , Bowlby , in Attachment and Loss , volume one of Attachment ( 1969 ) , makes it quite clear that infants become attached to carers who are sensitive and responsive in their social interactions with them and that this does not have to be the mother or indeed a female . As a matter of social reality mothers are more often the primary carers of children and therefore are more likely to be the primary attachment figure , but the process of attachment applies to any carer and infants develop a number of attachments according to who relates to them and the intensity of the engagement . However , attachment theory relates to the development of attachment behaviours and relationships after about 7 months of age and there are other theories and research relating to earlier carer – infant interactions . 
 Schaffer in Social Development ( 1996 ) suggests that the father – child relationship is primarily a cultural construction shaped by the requirements of each society . In societies where the care of infants has been assigned to boys rather than girls , no difference in nurturing capacity was found . 
 = = = Feminist criticism = = = 
 There were three broad criticisms aimed at the idea of maternal deprivation from feminist critics . The first was that Bowlby overstated his case . The studies on which he based his conclusions involved almost complete lack of maternal care and it was unwarranted to generalise from this view that any separation in the first three years of life would be damaging . Subsequent research showed good quality care for part of the day to be harmless . The idea of exclusive care or exclusive attachment to a preferred figure , rather than a hierarchy ( subsequently thought to be the case within developments of attachment theory ) had not been borne out by research and this view placed too high an emotional burden on the mother . Secondly , they criticised Bowlby 's historical perspective and saw his views as part of the idealisation of motherhood and family life after World War II . Certainly his hypothesis was used by governments to close down much needed residential nurseries although governments did not seem so keen to pay mothers to care for their children at home as advocated by Bowlby . Thirdly , feminists objected to the idea of anatomy as destiny and concepts of " naturalness " derived from ethnocentric observations . They argued that anthropology showed that it is normal for childcare to be shared by a stable group of adults of which maternal care is an important but not exclusive part . 
 = = Maternal deprivation today = = 
 Whilst Bowlby 's early writings on maternal deprivation may be seen as part of the background to the later development of attachment theory , there are many significant differences between the two . At the time of the 1951 publication , there was little research in this area and no comprehensive theory on the development of early relationships . Aside from its central proposition of the importance of an early , continuous and sensitive relationship , the monograph concentrates mostly on social policy . For his subsequent development of attachment theory , Bowlby drew on concepts from ethology , cybernetics , information processing , developmental psychology and psychoanalysis . The first early formal statements of attachment theory were presented in three papers in 1958 , 1959 and 1960 . His major work Attachment was published in three volumes between 1969 and 1980 . Attachment theory revolutionised thinking on the nature of early attachments and extensive research continues to be undertaken . 
 According to Zeanah , " ethological attachment theory , as outlined by John Bowlby ... 1969 to 1980 ... has provided one of the most important frameworks for understanding crucial risk and protective factors in social and emotional development in the first 3 years of life . Bowlby 's ( 1951 ) monograph , Maternal Care and Mental Health , reviewed the world literature on maternal deprivation and suggested that emotionally available caregiving was crucial for infant development and mental health . " Beyond that broad statement , which is now generally accepted , little remains of the underlying detail of Bowlby 's theory of maternal deprivation that has not been either discredited or superseded by attachment theory and other child development theories and research , except in the area of extreme deprivation . 
 The opening of East European orphanages in the early 1990s following the end of the Cold War provided substantial opportunities for research on attachment and other aspects of institutional rearing , however such research rarely mentions " maternal deprivation " other than in a historical context . Maternal deprivation as a discrete syndrome is a concept that is rarely used other than in connection with extreme deprivation and failure to thrive . Rather there is consideration of a range of different lacks and deficiencies in different forms of care , or lack of care , of which attachment is only one aspect , as well as consideration of constitutional and genetic factors in determining developmental outcome . Subsequent studies have however confirmed Bowlby 's concept of " cycles of disadvantage " although not all children from unhappy homes reproduce the deficiencies in their own experience . Rather , it is now conceptualised as a series of pathways through childhood and a number of varied influences will determine which path a particular child takes . 
 = = The maternal deprivation concept outside mainstream psychology = = 
 The idea that separation from the female caregiver has profound effects is one with considerable resonance outside the conventional study of child development . In United States law , the " tender years " doctrine was long applied when custody of infants and toddlers was preferentially given to mothers . Over the last decade or so , some decisions appear to have been derived from the " tender years " concept , but others involve the contrary assumption that a 2 @-@ year @-@ old is too young to have developed a relationship with either parent . 
 Concern with the harm of separation from the mother is characteristic of the belief systems behind some complementary and alternative ( CAM ) psychotherapies . Such belief systems are concerned not only with the effect of the young child 's separation from the care of the mother , but with an emotional attachment between mother and child which advocates of these systems believe to develop <unk> . Such attachment is said to lead to emotional trauma if the child is separated from the birth mother and adopted , even if this occurs on the day of birth and even if the adoptive family provides all possible love and care . These beliefs were at one time in existence among some legitimate psychologists of psychoanalytic background . Today , however , beliefs in prenatal communication between mothers and infants are largely confined to unconventional thinkers such as William Emerson . 
 Belief in prenatal fetal awareness , mental communication between mother and unborn child , and emotional attachment of child to mother as a prenatal phenomenon , are concepts that connect easily to the unfounded assumption that all adopted children suffer emotional disorders . These beliefs are also congruent with CAM psychotherapies such as attachment therapy ( not based on attachment theory ) , which purport to bring about age regression and to recapitulate early development to produce a better outcome . 
 = Fijación Oral , Vol . 1 = 
 Fijación Oral , Vol . 1 ( English : Oral Fixation , Vol . 1 ) is the sixth studio album by Colombian recording artist Shakira . It was released on 3 June 2005 by Epic Records . After attaining international success in 2001 with her first English record , Laundry Service , Shakira wanted to release a fifth Spanish @-@ language project as its followup . In the vein of her earlier work , Fijación Oral , Vol . 1 is a Latin pop album . Shakira enlisted Rick Rubin as executive producer , also working with Gustavo Cerati , Lester Mendez , Luis F. Ochoa and Jose " <unk> " Torres . 
 At its release Fijación Oral , Vol . 1 received generally favorable reviews from music critics , who complimented Shakira 's evolution from her earlier work . The album debuted at number four on the US Billboard 200 , with first @-@ week sales of 157 @,@ 000 copies . It set a record as the highest debut for a full @-@ length Spanish @-@ language album in the country which still stands . Internationally , the album topped the charts in Argentina , Germany , Mexico and Spain . Fijación Oral , Vol . 1 was the Best Latin Rock / Alternative Album at the 2006 Grammy Awards , and the Album of the Year and the Best Female Pop Vocal Album at the Latin Grammy Awards . Fijación Oral , Vol . 1 became the highest selling Latin pop album of the decade in the United States and the second highest selling Latin album overall . As of May 2013 , over four million copies of the album were sold worldwide and it is one of the best @-@ selling Latin albums in the United States . 
 Four singles were released to promote the album . Although its lead single ( " La Tortura " ) was the only track to reach the US Billboard Hot 100 , the follow @-@ up singles " No " , " Día de Enero " and " Las de la Intuición " enjoyed moderate success on the Hot Latin Songs , Tropical Songs and Latin Pop Airplay charts . In November 2005 Shakira supplemented the album with her second English @-@ language record , Oral Fixation , Vol . 2 . The two were packaged together as a box set and released as Oral Fixation , Vol . 1 & 2 in January 2007 . The projects were promoted with the Oral Fixation Tour in 2006 and 2007 , which visited the Americas , Africa , Asia and Europe . A performance in Miami , Florida was filmed and released as a live album in November 2007 . 
 = = Background = = 
 After achieving international success in 2001 with her first English album , Laundry Service , Shakira released a Spanish @-@ language record as its followup ( her first since 1998 's Dónde Están los Ladrones ? ) . Having co @-@ written nearly sixty songs for the project , she decided to divide the release into two volumes and put herself " on the mission of selecting [ her ] favorite ones " to record . Fijación Oral , Vol . 1 contains all Spanish @-@ language songs and Oral Fixation , Vol . 2 features all English @-@ language tracks . Shakira initially said that the second volume would have a " completely new repertory of songs " , although the completed album included two English translations of songs from the first record . It was reissued in 2006 as an expanded version with an additional translated recording and her future international @-@ hit single , " Hips Don 't Lie " . When recording the albums , she worked with previous collaborators Lester Mendez and Luis Fernando Ochoa and new partners Gustavo Cerati and Jose " <unk> " Torres . 
 For the album , Shakira wrote all the lyrics , and the majority of the music . " To start seeing people 's first reactions , and how people start relating to these songs and appreciating every single piece of work I have done over the past two years , is the best reward an artist can have after so much hard work , " says Shakira . " I will not lie to you ; it was not a path of roses . It was painful at times to come up with two albums , to write more than 60 songs and to fight my own insecurities and doubts . " While speaking about the difference about expressing herself in Spanish and English , Shakira told , " When I express myself in Spanish , I find elements that help me express an idea in perhaps a different way than when I do it in English . There are different aesthetics , but there is a certain style to the way I write my own songs , a particular way of describing feelings and emotions that I have developed over all these years making songs . I have gotten in touch with my own gift - I am sure , 10 years ago , I was not half as good as I can say I am today , and I am still not good enough . There is a long way to go . " 
 = = Cover art and release = = 
 The artwork for both Oral Fixation albums was inspired by Eve , the first woman ; Shakira said she wanted " to attribute to Eve one more reason to bite the forbidden fruit , and that would be her oral fixation " and that " [ she always felt ] that [ she has ] been a very oral person . [ It is her ] biggest source of pleasure " . The first volume 's cover sees Shakira holding a baby girl in her arms ; the artwork for the second album shows a nude Shakira ( covered by tree branches ) , with the infant sitting in the tree . She stated that both covers alluded to psychoanalyst Sigmund Freud 's theory that infants begin discovering the world through their mouths during the oral stage of psychosexual development . 
 For Jon Pareles of The New York Times , " For obvious reasons , it 's eye @-@ catching , as was the cover of the Spanish @-@ language companion album , " Fijación Oral , Vol . 1 " . In the Middle East version of the album , Shakira was covered up with leaves . Complex magazine selected " Oral Fixation " album cover as the eleventh " sexiest album cover of all time " , writing that it is " the hottest portrayal of Eve in the Garden of Eden we can imagine . " Maxim also listed the album 's cover as one of the " sexiest album covers " , writing that , " A naked girl holding up an apple in a garden is played out , but not when the girl is hip @-@ shaking Shakira . Damn , it could happen all over again , couldn 't it ? . " 
 On January 23 , 2007 , Fijación Oral , Vol . 1 and Oral Fixation , Vol . 2 were released as a three @-@ disc box set , titled Oral Fixation , Vol . 1 & 2 . Each record was on a separate disc , and was packaged with a DVD featuring music videos and live recordings of album tracks . The compilation peaked at numbers 13 and 27 on the Billboard Latin Pop Albums and Top Latin Albums charts . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Fijación Oral , Vol . 1 is a Latin pop album . The introductory track , " En Tus <unk> " ( " In Your Pupils " ) , incorporates folk music styles and its opening verse includes French @-@ language lyrics . " La Pared " ( " The Wall " ) has been compared stylistically to the 1980s duo Eurythmics . " La Tortura " ( " The Torture " ) features Spanish singer @-@ songwriter Alejandro Sanz , with elements of Colombian cumbia music , dancehall and electronica . " <unk> un Sí " ( " <unk> a Yes " ) is a bossa nova song with cha @-@ cha elements against an orchestral background . " Día Especial " ( " Special Day " ) features Argentinean singer @-@ songwriter Gustavo Cerati on guitar . 
 The sixth track , " <unk> Inglés " , has a new wave feel . " No " also features Cerati on guitar , using a simple melody to emphasize Shakira 's vocals . " Las de la Intuición " ( " The Ones with the Intuition " ) has synthpop elements , while " Día de Enero " ( " January Day " ) has been compared to Mexican singer @-@ songwriter Natalia Lafourcade . " Lo <unk> " ( " Bare Essentials " ) has German @-@ language verses in which Shakira lyrically expresses " Come baby come . Don 't ever leave me " . The disc concludes with an acoustic version of " La Pared " and the <unk> remix of " La Tortura " . 
 = = Singles = = 
 " La Tortura " was released as the lead single from Fijación Oral , Vol . 1 on 12 April 2005 . It features Spanish singer @-@ songwriter Alejandro Sanz , and was praised for its production and reggaeton influence . " La Tortura " was the only single from the album to chart on the US Billboard Hot 100 ( peaking at number twenty @-@ three ) , and reached number one on the Billboard Hot Latin Songs , Tropical Songs , and Latin Pop Airplay charts . The song set a record for the most weeks at number one , and additionally became the best @-@ performing Latin single of the year . The track was eventually certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipments of 100 @,@ 000 copies . Internationally , " La Tortura " topped the Hungarian <unk> Top 40 and the Spanish and Venezuelan singles charts . Its music video was directed by Michael Haussman , depicting a fictionally @-@ romantic Shakira and Sanz . 
 The follow @-@ up singles were also successful . The second single , " No " , features Argentinian singer @-@ songwriter Gustavo Cerati and reached numbers two and eleven , respectively , on the Billboard Latin Pop Songs and Latin Songs charts . The video was filmed in a black @-@ and @-@ white effect , and was directed by Jaume de Laiguana . After the release of " Don 't Bother " as the lead single from Oral Fixation , Vol . 2 in late 2005 , " Día de Enero " was the third single from Fijación Oral , Vol . 1 . It peaked at numbers seven and twenty @-@ nine on the Billboard Latin Pop Songs and Latin Songs charts , respectively . Like " No " , its accompanying video was directed by de Laiguana . The clip refers to Shakira 's then @-@ boyfriend Antonio de la Rúa as she writes the letters " S y A " in a heart drawn in the sand . 
 Following the release of " Hips Don 't Lie " and " Illegal " as the second and third singles from Oral Fixation , Vol . 2 , the fourth and final single from Fijación Oral , Vol . 1 , " Las De La Intuición " , reached numbers eleven and thirty @-@ one , respectively , on the Billboard Latin Pop Songs and Latin Songs charts and number 1 in Spain . Its video shows Shakira in a purple wig . Shakira later recorded an English @-@ language version of the song , titled " Pure Intuition " . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 To promote Fijación Oral , Vol . 1 and Oral Fixation , Vol . 2 , Shakira began her Oral Fixation Tour on 14 June 2006 at the Feria De <unk> in Zaragoza , Spain . With assistance from the Creative Artists Agency , she visited twenty @-@ seven cities and performed forty @-@ one shows across five continents . The tour was additionally sponsored by Spanish automobile manufacturer SEAT , with whom Shakira also collaborated to support her Pies Descalzos Foundation . The tour concluded on 9 July 2007 at the <unk> <unk> Arena in Istanbul , Turkey . It grossed over $ 42 million in North and Latin America , and $ 100 million worldwide . The set list consisted primarily of Spanish @-@ language songs , and included singles from her earlier career . 
 In November 2007 Epic Records released the Oral Fixation Tour live album on Blu @-@ ray Disc , which was filmed during a December 2006 show in Miami , Florida . William Ruhlmann of AllMusic gave it a positive review , complimenting Shakira 's vocals and dancing talent . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 At Metacritic ( which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics ) Fijación Oral , Vol . 1 received an average score of 79 based on 13 reviews , indicating " generally favorable reviews " . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic said that " it 's hard to wait for Oral Fixation , Vol . 2 to arrive " , given the strength of the " commercial savvy and smart writing " displayed in the first volume . Matt Cibula of PopMatters shared a similar sentiment , adding that his excitement about Oral Fixation , Vol . 2 is a " massive understatement " . Entertainment Weekly 's Ernesto Lechner felt that Shakira " has found herself again " by " placing her operatic vocalizing at the service of Spanish poetry " , adding that this was her strongest album to date . 
 The Guardian 's Dave Simpson noted that " the songs are catchy , with melodies good enough to tempt non @-@ Spanish speakers to sing along " . Jon Pareles of The New York Times described the album as " blissfully pan @-@ American " , elaborating that " for Shakira it 's all pop , taut structures for volatile passion " . Barry Walters of Rolling Stone said that executive producer Rick Rubin helped " restore Shakira 's artistic integrity by keeping the industry at bay " . Yahoo ! Music 's Tom Townsend praised Shakira for being " wide awake and , as they used to say in Smash Hits , back , back , BACK ! " Paste 's Mark Kemp gave it a mixed review , saying that the record was " stronger overall than Laundry Service but not as warm as Dónde Están los Ladrones ? " 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 In North America , Fijación Oral , Vol . 1 debuted at number four on the US Billboard 200 , with first @-@ week sales of 157 @,@ 000 copies . It set a record for the highest debut of a full @-@ length Spanish @-@ language album in the country ( which it still holds ) , and topped the Billboard Top Latin Albums chart . According to Nielsen SoundScan , the album sold over 1 @,@ 012 @,@ 000 copies as of 2014 in the US . It was later certified platinum times eleven by Latin standards , with shipments of over 1 @,@ 100 @,@ 000 copies . In 2009 , Billboard named Fijación Oral , Vol . 1 as the best @-@ selling Latin pop album of the 2000s . In Mexico , the album debuted at number one , and was later certified triple platinum for shipments of 300 @,@ 000 copies . It was certified gold in Central America . 
 In South America , Fijación Oral , Vol . 1 peaked at number one in Argentina , and was eventually recognized with triple @-@ platinum certification . The album enjoyed similar success in Venezuela , selling over 34 @,@ 613 copies . Consequently , it was certified platinum in the country . Furthermore , the record sold over 100 @,@ 000 copies in Shakira 's native Colombia , and was later recognized with triple @-@ platinum certification . In Chile , it was certified platinum for shipping 15 @,@ 000 copies . 
 In Europe , Fijación Oral , Vol . 1 achieved similar success . It debuted at number two on the Austrian albums chart , where it was certified platinum for shipments of 30 @,@ 000 copies . The record peaked at numbers seven and fifteen , respectively , on the Belgian Walloon and Flanders album charts ; it was certified gold for shipments of 25 @,@ 000 copies . On the French albums chart the album reached number six , and was certified gold for shipments of 100 @,@ 000 copies . It topped the German Media Control Charts , receiving a platinum certification for shipments of 200 @,@ 000 copies . The record was certified gold in Greece for shipments of 10 @,@ 000 copies . On the Hungarian albums chart it reached number six , receiving a platinum certification for shipments of 20 @,@ 000 copies . The album peaked at number seven on the Dutch Top 40 . The record topped the Spanish albums chart , receiving triple @-@ platinum certification for shipments of 240 @,@ 000 copies . After peaking at number two on the Swiss Hitparade , the album was certified platinum for shipments of 40 @,@ 000 copies . As of May 2013 , the record has sold over four million copies worldwide . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic said that releasing the Spanish @-@ language Fijación Oral , Vol . 1 after the success of the English @-@ language Laundry Service was a " sharp move " , complimenting the album for demonstrating that Shakira " can not only return to her roots , but expand upon them " . He described " La Tortura " as a " natural for American radio " , and felt that the parent album generated anticipation for the upcoming Oral Fixation , Vol . 2 . Writing for PopMatters , Matt Cibula praised the album for its musical departure from Laundry Service , applauding the integration of subtle samples across several songs as " great nods to the sounds of the 1980s " . Dave Simpson of The Guardian compared Shakira to a " Latin American Madonna " , describing her vocals as reminiscent of " Cher and Hazel O 'Connor , produced by Julio Iglesias " . 
 Jon Pareles of The New York Times found Shakira 's " smart or ambitious " image to be uncharacteristic of a sex symbol . He praised the versatility of her multilingual lyrics and her experimentation in a number of genres , citing the " multiplicity " in " the arrangements , in the mixed emotions of the lyrics , [ and ] in Shakira 's mercurial voice " . Writing for Paste , Mark Kemp complimented Shakira for dispelling notions she is " the Latin Britney , the female Ricky Martin [ and ] the pretty pop tart who sings in Spanish and sounds like Alanis " ; he compared the mix of musical elements in Fijación Oral , Vol . 1 to a Pop @-@ Tart with a " rich and nutritious filling " . Tom Townsend of Yahoo ! Music called her " the greatest pop star we have " , comparing her " consuming artistry " to that of Madonna and Prince . He credited the album for inspiring a revival of pop music , saying that the release proved that the genre " wasn 't dead , just sleeping " . 
 Shakira 's international success was solidified with Fijación Oral , Vol . 1 's strong commercial performance . After it debuted at number 4 on the US Billboard 200 and became the highest @-@ debuting full @-@ length Spanish album in the country , her label Epic Records called her " the biggest female crossover artist in the world " . The album remains her second @-@ highest @-@ charting release in the nation , behind Laundry Service 's peak position at number 3 . According to Billboard , it was the second best @-@ selling Latin album of the decade in the US after Barrio Fino by Daddy Yankee . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 At the 2005 Billboard Music Awards , Fijación Oral , Vol . 1 was the Latin Pop Album of the Year . At the 2005 Mexican Oye ! Awards , the album was the Pop Album of the Year by a Female Artist . At the 2005 Premios Shock awards ceremony , it received an award for " Album of the Year " . The album was the Best Latin Rock or Alternative Album at the 2006 Grammy Awards , and was Album of the Year , Best Engineered Album and the Best Female Pop Vocal Album at the Latin Grammy Awards of 2006 . That year , at the 13th Billboard Latin Music Awards , the album was the best Latin Pop Album by a Female . It was the Pop Album of the Year at the 18th Lo Nuestro Awards . Fijación Oral , Vol . 1 received an ALMA Award as Spanish Album of the Year . At the 2006 <unk> Music Awards , it was named Best Latin Album . At the Colombian Nuestra Tierra award ceremony , it was nominated Best Album of the Year which went to Fonseca for Corazón . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Credits are adapted from the liner notes of Fijación Oral , Vol . 1 . 
 Notes 
 ^ a signifies a co @-@ producer 
 ^ b signifies an additional producer 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from Allmusic . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Italian cruiser Iride = 
 Iride was a torpedo cruiser of the Partenope class built for the Italian Regia Marina ( Royal Navy ) in the 1880s . Laid down in February 1889 at the Regio Cantiere di Castellammare di Stabia shipyard , she was launched in July 1890 and was commissioned in November 1892 . Her main armament were her six torpedo tubes , which were supported by a battery of ten small @-@ caliber guns . Iride spent most of her career in the main Italian fleet , where she was primarily occupied with training exercises . During the Italo @-@ Turkish War in September 1911 , she remained in Italian waters until late in the conflict ; she escorted a troop convoy to North Africa in April 1912 and bombarded Ottoman positions in June and July . Iride was eventually broken up for scrap in December 1920 . 
 = = Design = = 
 Iride was 73 @.@ 1 meters ( 239 ft 10 in ) long overall and had a beam of 8 @.@ 22 m ( 27 ft 0 in ) and an average draft of 3 @.@ 48 m ( 11 ft 5 in ) . She displaced 931 metric tons ( 916 long tons ; 1 @,@ 026 short tons ) normally . Her propulsion system consisted of a pair of horizontal triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each driving a single screw propeller , with steam supplied by four coal @-@ fired locomotive boilers . Specific figures for Iride 's engine performance have not survived , but the ships of her class had top speeds of 18 @.@ 1 to 20 @.@ 8 knots ( 33 @.@ 5 to 38 @.@ 5 km / h ; 20 @.@ 8 to 23 @.@ 9 mph ) at 3 @,@ 884 to 4 @,@ 422 indicated horsepower ( 2 @,@ 896 to 3 @,@ 297 kW ) . The ship had a cruising radius of about 1 @,@ 800 nautical miles ( 3 @,@ 300 km ; 2 @,@ 100 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . She had a crew of between 96 and 121 personnel . 
 Iride was armed with a main battery of one 120 mm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) / 40 gun and six 57 mm ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) / 43 guns mounted singly.α She was also equipped with three 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) / 20 guns in single mounts . Her primary offensive weapon was her six 450 mm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes . The ship was protected by an armored deck that was up to 1 @.@ 6 in ( 41 mm ) thick ; her conning tower was armored with the same thickness of steel plate . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Iride was laid down at the Regio Cantiere di Castellammare di Stabia ( Royal Dockyard in Castellammare di Stabia ) on 21 February 1889 , and was launched on 20 July 1890 . After fitting @-@ out work was completed , the ship was commissioned into the fleet on 1 November 1892 . Iride took part in the annual fleet exercises in 1893 in the " attacking squadron " , which also included six ironclads , her sister ship Euridice and the torpedo cruisers Goito and Monzambano . In 1895 , Iride was stationed in the 2nd Maritime Department , split between Taranto and Naples , along with most of the torpedo cruisers in the Italian fleet . These included her sister ships Partenope , Aretusa , Euridice , Urania , Minerva , and Caprera , the four Goito @-@ class cruisers , and Tripoli . 
 In 1904 – 05 , Iride was assigned to the Levant Station in the eastern Mediterranean . She took part in the 1907 fleet maneuvers that took place in September and October that year . At the start of the Italo @-@ Turkish War in September 1911 , Iride was stationed in Italy , alternating between the ports of La Spezia and Naples , along with her sister ships Urania and Caprera . By January 1912 , Iride had been stationed in Tripoli to support the garrison there against Ottoman forces . In early April , Iride , the torpedo cruiser Agordat , and six torpedo boats rendezvoused with a troop convoy carrying 10 @,@ 000 men to Zuwarah near the border with Tunisia . In June and July , Iride and the armored cruiser Carlo Alberto bombarded Turkish forces near Zuara . The Ottomans eventually agreed to surrender in October , ending the war . 
 Italy declared neutrality after the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , but by July 1915 , the Triple Entente had convinced the Italians to enter the war against the Central Powers with promises of territory acquisition in Italia irredenta . The Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy , which had been Italy 's primary rival for decades , was the primary opponent in the conflict . The Austro @-@ Hungarian battle fleet lay in its harbors directly across the narrow Adriatic Sea . Admiral Paolo Thaon di Revel , the Italian naval chief of staff , believed that the narrow waters and numerous islands of the Adriatic allowed Austro @-@ Hungarian submarines and minelayers to operate with a great degree of freedom . The threat from these underwater weapons to his capital ships was too serious for him to use the fleet in an active way . Instead , Revel decided to implement blockade at the relatively safer southern end of the Adriatic with the battle fleet , while smaller vessels , such as the MAS boats , conducted raids on Austro @-@ Hungarian ships and installations . As a result , Iride did not see action during the war . She was sold for scrap in December 1920 and was subsequently broken up for scrap . 
 = Walter Krueger = 
 Walter Krueger ( 26 January 1881 – 20 August 1967 ) was an American soldier and general officer in the first half of the 20th century . He is best known for his command of the Sixth United States Army in the South West Pacific Area during World War II . He rose from the rank of private to general in the United States Army . 
 Born in Flatow , West Prussia , Krueger migrated to the United States as a boy . He enlisted for service in the Spanish – American War and served in Cuba , and then re @-@ enlisted for service in the Philippine – American War . He was commissioned as a second lieutenant in 1901 . In 1914 he was posted to the Pennsylvania Army National Guard . His regiment was mobilized on 23 June 1916 and served along the Mexican border . After the United States commenced hostilities with Germany in April 1917 , Krueger was assigned to the 84th Infantry Division as its Assistant Chief of Staff G @-@ 3 ( Operations ) , and then its chief of staff . In February 1918 , he was sent to Langres to attend the American Expeditionary Force General Staff School , and in October 1918 , he became Chief of Staff of the Tank Corps . 
 Between the wars , Krueger served in a number of command and staff positions , and attended the Naval War College at his own request . In 1941 , he assumed command of the Third Army , which he led in the Louisiana Maneuvers . He expected , in view of his age , to spend the war at home training troops , but in 1943 he was sent to General Douglas MacArthur 's Southwest Pacific Area as commander of the Sixth Army and Alamo Force , which he led in a series of victorious campaigns against the Japanese . As an army commander , Krueger had to grapple with the problems imposed by vast distances , inhospitable terrain , unfavorable climate , and an indefatigable and dangerous enemy . He had to balance MacArthur 's need to speed up the tempo of operations in order to win campaigns with the more cautious approach of subordinates who often found themselves confronted by unexpectedly large numbers of Japanese troops . In the Battle of Luzon in 1945 , his largest , longest and last battle , he was finally able to maneuver his army as he had in 1941 against a Japanese army under Tomoyuki Yamashita . 
 Krueger retired to San Antonio , Texas , where he bought a house and wrote From Down Under to Nippon , an account of his campaigns in the Southwest Pacific . His retirement was marred by family tragedies . His son James was dismissed from the Army in 1947 for conduct unbecoming an officer and a gentleman . His wife 's health deteriorated , and she died of cancer in 1956 . His daughter Dorothy stabbed her husband to death in 1952 . She was sentenced to life imprisonment by a court @-@ martial , but was freed by the Supreme Court in 1957 . 
 = = Education and early life = = 
 Walter Krueger was born in Flatow , West Prussia , then part of the German Empire , but now part of Poland . He was the son of Julius Krüger , a Prussian landowner who had served as an officer in the Franco @-@ Prussian War , and his wife , Anna , formerly Hasse . Following Julius 's death , Anna and her three children emigrated to the United States to be near her uncle in St. Louis , Missouri . Walter was then eight years old . In St. Louis , Anna married Emil Carl Schmidt , a Lutheran minister . The family subsequently settled in Madison , Indiana . Krueger was educated at the Upper Seminary School in Madison , and the Cincinnati Technical High School in Cincinnati , Ohio . As a teenager , he wanted to become a naval officer , but when his mother objected he decided to become a blacksmith instead . 
 = = Early military service = = 
 On 17 June 1898 , Krueger , along with many of his fellow high @-@ school students , enlisted for service in the Spanish – American War with the 2nd Volunteer Infantry . He reached Santiago de Cuba a few weeks after the Battle of San Juan Hill , and spent eight months there on occupation duties , rising to the rank of sergeant . <unk> out of the volunteers in February 1899 , he returned home to Ohio , planning to become a civil engineer . 
 However , many of his comrades were re @-@ enlisting for service in the Philippine – American War and in June 1899 Krueger re @-@ enlisted as a private in M Company of the 12th Infantry . Soon he was on his way to fight Emilio Aguinaldo 's Insurrectos as part of Major General Arthur MacArthur , Jr . ' s 2nd Infantry Division . He took part in the advance from Angeles City to Tarlac City , Aguinaldo 's capital . But Aguinaldo had fled , and the 12th Infantry pursued him vainly all the way through Luzon 's central plain to Dagupan City . While serving in an infantry unit in the Philippines , he was promoted to sergeant . On 1 July 1901 , he was commissioned a second lieutenant and posted to the 30th Infantry on Marinduque . 
 Krueger returned to the United States with the 30th Infantry in December 1903 . The regiment moved to Fort Crook , Nebraska . In September 1904 , he married Grace Aileen Norvell , whom he had met in the Philippines . They had three children : James Norvell , born on 29 July 1905 ; Walter Jr . , born on 25 April 1910 ; and Dorothy Jane , who was born on 24 January 1913 . Both James and Walter Jr. attended the United States Military Academy , James graduating with the class of 1926 , and Walter Jr. with the class of 1931 . Dorothy married an Army officer , Aubrey D. Smith , of the class of 1930 . 
 In 1904 , Krueger attended and graduated from the Infantry @-@ Cavalry School at Fort Leavenworth , Kansas . This was followed by the Command and General Staff College in 1907 . He then joined the 23rd Infantry at Fort Ontario , New York . After a second tour in the Philippines , he returned to the United States in June 1909 , and was assigned to Department of Languages at Fort Leavenworth as an instructor in Spanish , French and German , which he could speak fluently . He also taught National Guard officers at Camp Benjamin Harrison , Indiana , and Pine Camp , New York . He published translations of several German military texts , most notably William Balck 's Tactics . The book attracted the attention of the Chief of Staff of the United States Army , Major General Leonard Wood , and was widely read . 
 = = World War I = = 
 With the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , Krueger was offered a post as an observer with the German Army but was forced to turn it down due to familial commitments . Instead , he was posted to the 10th Infantry of the Pennsylvania Army National Guard . The regiment was mobilized on 23 June 1916 and served along the Mexican border for five months as part of the Mexican Punitive Expedition under Major General John J. Pershing , although no National Guard units fought Mexican troops . The unit was mustered out in October 1916 . Afterwards , Krueger remained with the National Guard . He trained units , and helped establish a school for officers at the University of Pennsylvania . In an article in the Infantry Journal , he called for a large , national , conscript army similar to those of European countries , arguing that this would be in accord with America 's democratic values . 
 After the United States commenced hostilities against Germany in April 1917 , Krueger was assigned to the 84th Infantry Division at Camp Zachary Taylor as its Assistant Chief of Staff G @-@ 3 ( Operations ) . He became its chief of staff , with the rank of major as of 5 August 1917 . In February 1918 , he was sent to Langres , France , to attend the American Expeditionary Force General Staff School . All officers from divisions that were not under orders for France were ordered to return home in May 1918 , but Krueger stayed on as G @-@ 3 of the 26th Infantry Division . The French Army requested that Krueger be sent home due to his German origin , and Krueger was re @-@ posted to the 84th Division , but he soon returned to France , as the 84th Division embarked for France in August 1918 . In October , he became Chief of Staff of the Tank Corps . After the Armistice with Germany ended the fighting in November 1918 , he became assistant chief of staff of VI and IV Corps on occupation duty , advancing to the rank of temporary colonel . For his service in the war , he was awarded the Distinguished Service Medal in 1919 . 
 = = Interwar years = = 
 With the end of the war , Krueger returned to the United States on 22 June 1919 and was initially posted to the Infantry School at Fort Benning , Georgia . In 1920 , he assumed command of the 55th Infantry Regiment at Camp Funston , Kansas . He reverted to his permanent rank of captain on 30 June 1920 but was promoted to the permanent rank of major the next day . He attended the Army War College , graduating in 1921 , and remaining for a year as an instructor , where he taught such classes as the " Art of Command " . He paid a four @-@ month visit to Germany in 1922 as part of the War College 's Historical Section , during which he examined documents related to World War I in the German War Archives . These informed his lectures on the war , and he argued that much of the German Army 's effectiveness was attributable to its system of decentralized command . Krueger urged that American commanders in the field should be given wider latitude in carrying out their orders . 
 From 1922 to 1925 , Krueger served in the War Plans Division of the War Department General Staff in Washington , DC . Krueger worked on the United States color @-@ coded war plans , particularly War Plan Green , for another war with Mexico , and War Plan Blue , for another civil war in the United States . He traveled to the Panama Canal Zone in January 1923 to report on the state of the defenses there . After he returned , he was assigned to the Joint Army and Navy Planning Committee , an organ of the Joint Army and Navy Board responsible for coordinating war plans between the two services . While with the Joint Planning Committee , he worked on War Plan Orange , the plan for a war with Japan , and War Plan Tan , for a war with Cuba . Krueger considered the problems of inter @-@ service cooperation . At his own request , he attended the Naval War College at Newport , Rhode Island , in 1925 and 1926 . He continued to ruminate on the nature of command . " Doctrine " , he wrote , " knits all the parts of the military force together in intellectual bonds . " 
 Krueger came to feel that the prospects for promotion in the infantry were very poor , and in 1927 he tried to transfer to the United States Army Air Corps . He attended the Air Corps Primary Flying School at Brooks Field , Texas , but suffered an attack of neuritis in his right arm , and his flight instructor , Lieutenant Claire Lee Chennault , failed him . In December 1927 , he was offered a position as an instructor at the Naval War College , where he taught classes on World War I , and on joint operations . 
 In June 1932 , Krueger became commander of the 6th Infantry Regiment at Jefferson Barracks , Missouri , where he was promoted to colonel again on 1 August 1932 . Now aged 51 , he became resigned to retiring as a colonel , but in 1934 he returned to the War Plans Division , becoming chief of the division in May 1936 , and was promoted to temporary brigadier general in October 1936 . In September 1938 , Krueger went to Fort George G. Meade , Maryland , as commander of the 16th Infantry Brigade . He was promoted to temporary major general in February 1939 , when he became commander of the 2nd Infantry Division at Fort Sam Houston , Texas . The 2nd Infantry Division was at the time being used as a test of the US Army 's new triangular division concept . As a result , Krueger made a series of suggestions as to how the organization could be improved . He became interested in the possibilities of mechanization and fast @-@ paced modern warfare , which were tested in maneuvers with his division . His troops called themselves the " <unk> " . 
 = = World War II = = 
 = = = Training in the United States = = = 
 Krueger became commander of IX Corps on 31 January 1940 . This corps was created to control units of the Third Army engaged in large scale maneuvers in 1940 , in which Krueger 's IX Corps conducted a series of mock battles against Walter Short 's IV Corps . On 27 June , Krueger became commander of the VIII Corps . On 16 May 1941 , he was promoted to lieutenant general , in command of the Third Army . He also became commander of the Southern Defense Command on 16 July 1941 . Krueger asked for — and got — Colonel Dwight D. Eisenhower assigned to him as his chief of staff . 
 The Louisiana Maneuvers pitted Krueger 's Third Army against Lieutenant General Ben Lear 's Second Army . The maneuvers were a test ground for doctrine and equipment , and gave senior commanders experience in maneuvering their formations . In the first phase , Krueger quickly proved himself to be the more modern general . He responded adroitly to a changed battle situation by re @-@ orienting his front from northeast to northwest , and was able to inflict a series of reverses on Lear 's forces . In the second phase , Krueger had a superior force , and had to advance on Shreveport , Louisiana . Lear 's forces conducted a stubborn withdrawal , demolishing bridges in order to slow Krueger down . Krueger responded by sending Major General George S. Patton , Jr . ' s 2nd Armored Division on a wide flanking maneuver through Texas . Afterwards , Eisenhower became the head of the War Plans Division , and was replaced by Colonel Alfred M. Gruenther . After he too was transferred , Krueger replaced him with Colonel George B. Honnen . 
 Krueger wrote to a friend that 
 There 's nothing that I should like better than to have a command at the front . I should love to try to " <unk> " Rommel . However , I am sure that younger men will be selected for tasks of that nature , in fact for all combat commands . I shall be 62 this coming January [ 1943 ] , and though I am in perfect health , can stand a lot of hardship and people tell me I look and act ten years younger , I do not delude myself . 
 = = = Sixth Army = = = 
 It therefore came as a surprise when Krueger was informed that a theater commander had requested his services . General Douglas MacArthur , the Supreme Commander of the Southwest Pacific Area ( SWPA ) , said that he was " especially anxious to have Krueger due to my long and intimate association with him " . This too came as a surprise to Krueger ; while the two men had known each other for forty years , and Krueger had been chief of the War Plans Division when MacArthur was Chief of Staff , the two had never been close . 
 The War Department approved Krueger 's transfer to SWPA , but did not approve MacArthur 's request for Third Army headquarters . There were only three American divisions in SWPA : the 32nd Infantry Division at Rockhampton , Queensland , the 41st Infantry Division in the Buna area in Papua , and the 1st Marine Division in Melbourne , Victoria . The 1st Cavalry Division and the 24th Infantry Division were scheduled to arrive in 1943 , and other divisions would follow in 1944 , but for the time being there were much fewer troops than an army would normally control . The War Department therefore saw no need for a full strength army headquarters . Instead , Krueger had to make do with him a skeleton staff of a new Sixth Army , which was activated in January 1943 , with less than half the establishment strength of an army headquarters . 
 Krueger took with him several key members of the Third Army staff , including Brigadier General George Honnen as Chief of Staff , Colonel George H. Decker as Deputy Chief of Staff , Colonel George S. Price as Assistant Chief of Staff , G @-@ 1 ( Personnel ) , Colonel Horton V. White as Assistant Chief of Staff , G @-@ 2 ( Intelligence ) , Clyde Eddleman as Assistant Chief of Staff , G @-@ 3 ( Operations ) and Colonel Kenneth Pierce as Assistant Chief of Staff , G @-@ 4 ( Supply ) . Honnen had health problems , and spent much of April , May and June 1943 in hospital before being ordered home on 18 June . He was replaced by Brigadier General Edwin D. Patrick , who had served on the staff of Admiral William F. Halsey in the South Pacific Area . Patrick did not get along smoothly with Krueger or the rest of the Sixth Army staff , and in May 1944 Patrick was appointed to command the 158th Regimental Combat Team , and Decker became chief of staff . 
 Command in the Southwest Pacific Area was complicated . Instead of operations being conducted by the Sixth Army , its headquarters was used for what became Alamo Force . As a task force , Alamo Force came directly under MacArthur , rather than under the Allied Land Forces . Krueger noted that " the inherent difficulties faced by my dual headquarters in planning and administration were aggravated by the command setup , which was a novel one to say the least . " Because Alamo Force was a purely operational entity , administration was handled by the United States Army Forces in the Far East . Although there was only one army staff , Alamo Force was in New Guinea while the main body of Sixth Army headquarters was in Brisbane until February 1944 , when the two were finally brought together . They still had a dual role as Alamo Force and Sixth Army until September , when Alamo Force was discontinued and the Sixth Army became directly responsible for operations . 
 = = = Bismarck Archipelago = = = 
 The geographical , engineering and logistical difficulties of conducting operations in SWPA were driven home by Alamo Force 's first operation , Operation Chronicle , the occupation of Woodlark and Kiriwina Islands in June 1943 . Despite the fact that the operation was unopposed by the Japanese , it was subject to delays . Krueger visited Kiriwina , where road work and airbase development were held up by heavy rains , on 11 July . He was dissatisfied with the rate of progress and relieved the task force commander . The arrival of additional engineers sped up the base development effort , and No. 79 Squadron RAAF commenced operations from Kiriwina on 18 August . 
 He was also concerned by reports of the invasion of Kiska in the Aleutian Islands in August 1943 , in which a large Allied force invaded an island that had already been evacuated by the Japanese . If this could happen , it was also possible that a force might attack where the Japanese were unexpectedly strong . Different levels of command sometimes came up with widely varying estimates of Japanese strength because they used different methods to estimate it . 
 An attempt to obtain information for Operation Dexterity , the attack on New Britain , with a joint Army @-@ Navy reconnaissance team raised issues of inter @-@ service cooperation . The Navy was mainly interested in gathering hydrographic data rather than information on the state of the Japanese defenders . Because of a breakdown in communications , the PT boat that was supposed to collect the team was unable to rendezvous with it , and the team had to spend eleven more days on the island . Finally , the Navy tried to prevent the Army commander from briefing Alamo Force headquarters on what had occurred . 
 Krueger decided that he needed to have his own strategic reconnaissance capability . In November 1943 , he formed the Alamo Scouts as a special unit for reconnaissance and raiding . An Alamo Scout Training Center for volunteers was established on Fergusson Island , not far from Alamo Force 's headquarters on Goodenough Island , under the command of Colonel Frederick W. Bradshaw , whom Krueger had first encountered during the Louisiana maneuvers . The top graduates of the six @-@ week training course were assigned to the Alamo Scouts ; the other graduates were returned to their units where they could be used for similar work . By the end of the war , Alamo Scouts teams had conducted 106 missions . 
 In what became a standard procedure in SWPA , MacArthur 's General Headquarters ( GHQ ) nominated the objectives , set the target date , and allocated the troops to the operation , leaving Alamo Force to work out the details . MacArthur was not inflexible , however , and allowed Krueger to alter the staging areas , and postpone the operation by a month . Krueger 's concerns about the possibility of high casualties in securing the Gasmata area , and doubts as to whether the area was suitable for airbase development , led to it being dropped as a target . Arawe was substituted , and the size of the whole operation was scaled back . Krueger hoped to observe the 1st Marine Division 's landing at Cape Gloucester in December 1943 , but was unable to do so until the planning for the January 1944 landing at Saidor was complete . He crossed the Dampier Strait in a PT boat in stormy weather . PBY Catalinas sent to bring him back were unable to land , and he had to return on the destroyer USS Mullany . 
 Krueger accepted reports of a Japanese counterattack at Saidor , and sent reinforcements in response , but the attack did not eventuate . Because the 32nd Infantry Division was required for the upcoming Hansa Bay operation , he was initially reluctant to authorize it to block the trails behind the American beachhead . When he finally did so , it was too late . The retreating Japanese made good their escape , thereby defeating the whole purpose of the operation . The next operation , the Admiralty Islands campaign in February 1944 , played out differently . Based on Fifth Air Force reports that the islands were unoccupied , MacArthur accelerated his timetable and ordered an immediate reconnaissance in force of the islands . Krueger sent in the Alamo Scouts , who confirmed that the islands were still well @-@ defended . 
 Krueger did what he could to accelerate the movement of units of Major General Innis P. Swift 's 1st Cavalry Division to the Admiralty Islands in response to urgent pleas from Brigadier General William C. Chase , who managed to defeat the numerically superior Japanese forces . Krueger was unimpressed with Chase . " His task " , Krueger wrote to Swift , " was undoubtedly a difficult one , but did not , in my judgment , warrant the nervousness apparent in some of his despatches . This , and his failure to obey repeated positive orders to furnish detailed information of his situation and his losses , his closing his radio station during long periods , and his evident ignorance that reinforcements could not reach him by the times he demanded , were not calculated to inspire confidence . " 
 = = = New Guinea Campaign = = = 
 Over the next few months , the tempo of operations increased , forcing the Sixth Army to plan and execute multiple operations simultaneously . Operations Reckless and Persecution in April 1944 together comprised the largest operation yet in SWPA , with the 24th and 41st Infantry Divisions of Lieutenant General Robert L. Eichelberger 's I Corps landing at Tanahmerah and Humboldt bays near Hollandia , while the 163rd Regimental Combat Team landed at Aitape . Eichelberger was Krueger 's most senior subordinate , but when he did not meet Krueger 's expectation , Krueger let him know in no uncertain terms . " In my more than 40 years as an officer " , Krueger told one of his staff , " I have never raised my voice to an enlisted man , but a corps commander should know better . " 
 Krueger visited the beachhead with MacArthur and Eichelberger on the first day . After inspecting the beachhead , they went to the USS Nashville for ice cream sodas , whereupon MacArthur suggested , in view of the victory at Hollandia , they could accelerate the campaign timetable by moving on to Wakde @-@ Sarmi immediately . Krueger was willing to consider the idea , although he had already ordered the troops designated for Wakde @-@ Sarmi , the 32nd Infantry Division , to reinforce the position at Aitape , where he expected a major Japanese counterattack . Eichelberger was vehemently opposed , and the matter was dropped . 
 Krueger moved his headquarters to Hollandia in May 1944 . The swampy area with its restricted anchorages proved unsuitable for a major airbase complex , although fighter strips were constructed , and it was developed as a staging area . MacArthur was compelled to press on with the Wakde @-@ Sarmi project lest his troops become stranded without adequate air cover . A shortage of shipping meant that the operation had to be carried out by the troops in the Hollandia area , so Krueger nominated the 163rd Regimental Combat Team for Wakde , while the rest of the 41st Infantry Division captured Sarmi . However , with only days to go , doubts surfaced about the viability of construction in the Sarmi area , and Biak was substituted . In view of the difficulties involved in changing plans , and moving the troops around , MacArthur agreed to postpone both operations , Wakde until 17 May and Biak to 27 May . 
 As a result , Alamo Force became involved in desperate fighting on three different fronts simultaneously . The landing at Wakde was opposed by nearly twice as many Japanese troops than had been expected . When Krueger discovered that the Japanese were massing for an assault on the American position , he ordered a pre @-@ emptive attack . " Krueger " , wrote Edward Drea , " was too good a soldier to stand pat and wait for a Japanese attack . " Official historian Robert Ross Smith noted that " This decision , based upon the scanty , incomplete information concerning Japanese strength and dispositions available to General Krueger at the time , was destined to precipitate a protracted and bitter fight . " However , even if Krueger had known the true size of the Japanese force , he might still , under the circumstances , have taken the same approach . 
 The estimates of the number of Japanese troops on Biak were out by a similar margin , resulting in heavy casualties . In the Battle of Biak , stubborn Japanese resistance halted the 41st Infantry Division , and forced its commander , Major General Horace H. Fuller , to appeal to Krueger for reinforcements . In response , Krueger sent the 163rd Regimental Combat Team from Wakde . MacArthur soon grew impatient , as he needed the airstrips on Biak to support Admiral Chester Nimitz 's Invasion of Saipan . Nimitz 's operation ultimately drew Japanese attention away from Biak . MacArthur put pressure on Krueger for results , and Krueger in turn put pressure on Fuller . Krueger decided that Fuller had too many responsibilities as both task force commander and division commander , and decided to supersede him by sending Eichelberger to take over the task force . Fuller then submitted his resignation . Eichelberger 's chief of staff , Brigadier General Clovis Byers , offered to have Decker intercept and destroy the resignation before Krueger saw it , but Fuller decided against this . The battle raged for nearly a month . Afterwards , Krueger demanded an explanation from Eichelberger as to why he had allowed Fuller to quit . 
 Meanwhile , Japanese forces under Lieutenant General Hatazō Adachi attacked Alamo Force 's position at Aitape in the Battle of Driniumor River . Krueger called for an energetic defense , but the cautious commander of XI Corps , Major General Charles P. Hall , retained nine battalions around the airbase at Tadji . This left Brigadier General Clarence A. Martin without the resources to implement Krueger 's strategy , and he conducted a fighting withdrawal instead . Krueger travelled to Aitape where Hall presented him a counterattack plan , which he approved . By August , the fighting had ended and Adachi had been defeated . 
 = = = Philippines Campaign = = = 
 MacArthur accelerated his timetable yet again in September 1944 , and brought forward the planned invasion of Leyte to October 1944 . That this was the worst time of the year for campaigning on Leyte was not overlooked . Typhoons and heavy rains hampered the efforts to construct and rehabilitate airbases , and without them , large numbers of aircraft could not operate from Leyte . This meant not only that few air strikes could be flown in support of the Sixth Army , but that the Allied Air Forces could not prevent the Japanese from reinforcing Leyte . An additional five Japanese divisions and two mixed brigades were sent to Leyte , and the battle became one of grinding attrition . Able to view his troops in action more often than hitherto , Krueger found much to criticize . He noted that tanks were employed poorly , that the infantry were not aggressive enough , and saw poor sanitation and meals as a sign that officers were not taking adequate care of their men . Krueger 's generalship has also been questioned , with Ronald Spector criticizing " Krueger 's disastrous decision to delay the push into the mountains west of <unk> in favor of beach defense . " Krueger based his cautious appreciation of the situation on various intelligence sources rather than relying solely on Ultra . 
 In January 1945 , the Sixth Army embarked on its largest , longest and last campaign , the invasion of Luzon . Krueger intended to make " maximum utilization of America 's materiel and industrial superiority " . Once again , intelligence estimates of Japanese strength were questionable . MacArthur 's intelligence officer , Brigadier General Charles A. Willoughby , basing his estimates on Ultra , believed that there were about 172 @,@ 000 Japanese troops on Luzon . Krueger 's intelligence officer , Colonel Horton V. White , reckoned that there were 234 @,@ 000 . MacArthur did not believe there were anywhere near that number . In fact , General Tomoyuki Yamashita had 287 @,@ 000 troops on Luzon . For the first time since Louisiana in 1941 , Krueger was able to maneuver his army as a single body instead of having elements employed on multiple battles on scattered islands . He regarded Yamashita 's employment of armor as poor . Instead of using the 2nd Armored Division for a decisive counterattack against the vulnerable flank , Yamashita frittered away its strength in piecemeal efforts . 
 As the campaign unfolded , Krueger was pressured by MacArthur to capture Manila . He sent messages reporting what he saw was a lack of drive among the troops , and even moved his theater headquarters forward of Krueger 's . MacArthur tried to exploit Krueger 's rivalry with Eichelberger by allowing the latter 's Eighth Army to conduct its own drive on Manila from the south . Krueger eventually sent a flying column from the 1st Cavalry Division , but MacArthur 's expectation that the Japanese would not defend Manila was proven incorrect . Weeks of ferocious fighting were required to capture the city . 
 Krueger was promoted to general on 5 March 1945 . MacArthur recommended Krueger for the rank , even as he clashed with him over the drive on Manila , and rated Krueger 's generalship higher than that of Patton or Omar Bradley . Krueger 's campaign on Luzon continued until 30 June 1945 , when he handed over responsibility to Eichelberger in order to prepare for Operation Olympic , the invasion of Kyushu . 
 This proved unnecessary when Japan surrendered , and in September 1945 the Sixth Army took up occupation duty in Japan . Krueger established his headquarters in Kyoto , and assumed responsibility for Kyushu , Shikoku and southern Honshu . The Sixth Army remained in Japan until it handed over its occupation responsibilities to the Eighth Army on 31 December 1945 . It was deactivated on 25 January 1946 , and Krueger retired in July . For his service as commander of the Sixth Army in World War II , Krueger was awarded the Distinguished Service Cross , an oak leaf cluster to his Distinguished Service Medal , and the Navy Distinguished Service Medal . He was awarded a second oak leaf cluster to his Distinguished Service Medal for his part in the Occupation of Japan . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Krueger retired to San Antonio , Texas , where , in February 1946 , he bought a house for the first time . Because of a large income tax bill left over from the war , he was unable to buy it outright and so some of his friends established the Krueger Fund Committee , which paid for much of the house . In retirement , Krueger was involved in a number of charity and community organizations , including the United Service Organization , the Red Cross , and the National Foundation for Infantile Paralysis , and he served as director of civil defense for San Antonio and Bexar County . 
 Colonel Horton White , Krueger 's former intelligence officer , approached him with an offer from George Edward Brett of Macmillan to publish his memoirs . Krueger did not wish to write an autobiography , which he felt was " invariably apt to be an apologia " , but was willing to write up an account of the Sixth Army 's exploits . He commenced work in 1947 , but the project proceeded slowly . The result was From Down Under to Nippon : The Story of the 6th Army In World War II , which was published in 1953 . Historians were disappointed with the book , as it recounted what was known from the Sixth Army 's reports , but provided little insight into the reasons why operations were conducted the way they were . Krueger kept in contact with his wartime colleagues . He was proud of the subsequent accomplishments of members of his wartime staff , and traveled to New York each year to celebrate MacArthur 's birthday with MacArthur and other former senior commanders of the Southwest Pacific Area . He lectured at Army Schools and civic organizations , offering opinions on subjects such as the value of training , the benefit of universal military service , and the need for a unified defense establishment . 
 Krueger 's retirement was marred by family tragedies . His son James was dismissed from the Army in 1947 for conduct unbecoming an officer and a gentleman after a drunken incident . Grace 's health deteriorated , and she suffered from heart disease and high blood pressure . She was diagnosed with cancer in 1955 , and died on 13 May 1956 . Most dramatically , on 3 October 1952 , a lonely and depressed Dorothy fatally stabbed her husband , Colonel Aubrey D. Smith , with a hunting knife while he slept in their Army quarters in Japan . Dorothy , who felt that her husband now regarded her no more than " a clinging handicap to his professional career " , had turned to alcohol and drugs . 
 By six votes to three , a U.S. Army court @-@ martial found Dorothy Krueger guilty of first @-@ degree murder and sentenced her " to be confined at hard labor for the rest of her natural life " . A unanimous verdict of guilty would have made the death sentence mandatory . She was flown back to the United States in a Military Air Transport Service plane and was imprisoned at the Federal Prison Camp , Alderson , in West Virginia . The United States Court of Military Appeals rejected an appeal filed by Krueger 's lawyers that argued that Dorothy was not sane at the time of the incident , and that the testimony that the court @-@ martial had heard to the contrary was military rather than medical . 
 However , in 1955 , in a similar case involving another woman , Mrs. Clarice B. Covert , who had killed her husband in England with an axe , Federal District Court Judge Edward A. Tamm ruled that civilians who accompany military forces overseas could not be imprisoned by military courts . The two cases , Kinsella v. Krueger and Reid v. Covert , went to the US Supreme Court , which affirmed that military trials of civilians were indeed constitutional , only to reverse itself a year later in a review of the decisions . Dorothy was released , and went to live with Krueger in San Antonio . 
 When his old friend Fay Babson wrote a letter in 1960 complaining about not being promoted before retirement , Krueger replied that : 
 I wish you would compare your situation with mine for a moment . You are fortunate in having a loving wife by your side and three wonderful children . I , on the other hand , have lost my precious wife , my son Jimmie 's career ended in disgrace and my only daughter 's tragic action broke my heart . All the promotions and honors that have come to me cannot possibly outweigh these heartaches and disappointments . If true happiness is the aim of life — and I believe it is — then you are more fortunate than I and I would gladly trade with you . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
