 Krueger 's health began to decline in the late 1950s . He developed glaucoma in his right eye , and sciatica in his left hip . In 1960 , he had a hernia operation , followed by kidney surgery in 1963 . Nonetheless , he continued to attend MacArthur 's birthday in New York . He died from pneumonia at Valley Forge , Pennsylvania , on 20 August 1967 , and was buried in Section 30 of Arlington National Cemetery , among a number of family members . His papers are in the Cushing Memorial Library at Texas A & M University . 
 Although Krueger led a large force in operations over a large area for over two years , appearing on the cover of Time magazine on 20 January 1945 , and Krueger Middle School was named after him in San Antonio , Texas , in 1962 , he never became a well @-@ known figure like MacArthur . Krueger 's forte was what is today termed the operational level of war , transforming MacArthur 's strategic vision into reality . Krueger has usually been characterised as " an overly cautious commander who impeded MacArthur 's fast @-@ paced strategy . " William Manchester speculated that " the General knew his plodding subordinate was a useful counterweight to his own bravura " , and Edward Drea noted that at the Battle of the <unk> , Krueger 's actions were " entirely out of keeping with his otherwise methodical and plodding generalship " . MacArthur wrote : 
 History has not given him due credit for his greatness . I do not believe that the annals of American history have shown his superior as an Army commander . Swift and sure in the attack , tenacious and determined in defense , modest and restrained in victory — I do not know what he would have been in defeat , because he was never defeated . 
 = = Awards = = 
 = = Dates of promotion = = 
 = Masashi Hamauzu = 
 Masashi Hamauzu ( <unk> <unk> , Hamauzu Masashi , born September 20 , 1971 ) is a Japanese composer , arranger , pianist and lyricist . Hamauzu , who was employed at Square Enix from 1996 to 2010 , was best known during that time for his work on the Final Fantasy and SaGa video game series . Born into a musical family in Germany , Hamauzu was raised in Japan . He became interested in music while in kindergarten , and took piano lessons from his parents . 
 Hamauzu was hired by Square as a trainee , and his debut as a solo composer came the following year when he scored Chocobo no Fushigina Dungeon . He has collaborated with his friend and fellow composer Junya Nakano on several games , and has worked closely with synthesizer programmer Ryo Yamazaki on most titles since SaGa Frontier 2 . 
 After Nobuo Uematsu left Square Enix in 2004 , Hamauzu took over as the leading composer of the company 's music team . He was the sole composer for Final Fantasy XIII . He has also become a renowned piano arranger , and has arranged a number of albums , including Yasunori Mitsuda 's Sailing to the World piano score in 2006 . His music incorporates various styles , although he mostly uses classical and ambient music in his pieces . In 2010 , Hamauzu left Square Enix to start his own studio , <unk> . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Born in Munich , Germany , Hamauzu 's mother was a piano teacher and his father , Akimori Hamauzu , an opera singer . He developed an interest in music while in kindergarten . Growing up in Germany , Hamauzu received piano and singing lessons from his parents and created his first original compositions during high school . After his brother , Hiroshi , was born , the family moved to Osaka . He enrolled in the Tokyo National University of Fine Arts and Music , where he joined a student ensemble as a pianist . Hamauzu met his wife , <unk> Hamauzu ( née <unk> ) , at the university , and they have two children . <unk> worked alongside Hamauzu on the soundtrack to Final Fantasy VII as a soprano and Sigma Harmonics as a scat singer ; she was also a soprano for the score to Final Fantasy VIII & a lead vocalist in Final Fantasy XIII . After graduating from the university , he thought about becoming a classical musician , but he eventually found out that he wanted to work with game music instead . 
 = = = Career = = = 
 A fan of the Final Fantasy games , Hamauzu decided to apply for a job at Square . Nobuo Uematsu was impressed with his résumé , and employed Hamauzu as a trainee in 1996 . His debut came with the 1996 title Front Mission : Gun Hazard , with Uematsu , Yasunori Mitsuda , and Junya Nakano . Later the same year , he created four tracks for another multi @-@ composer game , Tobal No. 1 . Working with Nakano on these games , Hamauzu admired his musical style , and they became friends ; they have later collaborated on several titles . Hamauzu 's first solo project came in 1997 with Chocobo no Fushigina Dungeon . Shortly after the title 's release , Hamauzu and Yasuo <unk> created Chocobo no Fushigina Dungeon Coi Vanni Gialli , an arranged album containing orchestral tracks from the game 's music . Both the soundtrack and Coi Vanni Gialli were praised . For Final Fantasy VII , Hamauzu was the synthesizer programmer for the rendition of Joseph Haydn 's " The Creation " , and provided bass vocals in the eight @-@ person chorus for " One @-@ Winged Angel " . 
 In 1999 , Hamauzu was assigned with scoring SaGa Frontier 2 , replacing the SaGa series ' long @-@ time composer Kenji Ito . He spent some time conforming to the music Ito had established for the series , but eventually realized that he wanted to use his own unique style . The project introduced him to synthesizer programmer Ryo Yamazaki , whom he has worked with on most of his subsequent soundtracks . Hamauzu also released Piano Pieces " SF2 " ~ Rhapsody on a Theme of SaGa Frontier 2 , an arranged album featuring piano pieces of the game 's music . In 2001 , Hamauzu and Nakano were chosen to assist Uematsu in the production of the score for the critically acclaimed Final Fantasy X , based on their ability to create music that was different from Uematsu 's style . Hamauzu also contributed the Piano Collections arranged album of the game , which he described as his most challenging work , and the track named " feel " , an arrangement of " Hymn of the Fayth " , from the EP feel / Go dream : Yuna & Tidus . 
 In 2002 , Hamauzu composed the music for Unlimited Saga , a game that would be received negatively by critics due to a variety of gameplay issues . He became the leading composer of Square Enix 's music team in October 2004 , following Uematsu 's departure from the company . In 2005 , Hamauzu , Nakano , and the duo <unk> Zeal ( Takayuki and Yuki Iwai ) scored Musashi : Samurai Legend , the sequel to the 1998 title Brave Fencer Musashi . Hamauzu composed the highly anticipated but critically unsuccessful Final Fantasy VII follow @-@ up , Dirge of Cerberus : Final Fantasy VII , in 2006 . Later the same year , he arranged the Sailing to the World Piano Score at the request of Mitsuda ; the album was well received by pianists and confirmed Hamauzu 's position as the leading piano arranger of game music . 
 Hamauzu released a solo album , <unk> Dank , in 2007 after recording it in Munich , Germany . The album includes eleven piano pieces that he composed for personal pleasure after the creation of Piano Pieces " SF2 " ~ Rhapsody on a Theme of SaGa Frontier 2 as well as 14 arrangements of his game compositions . Two tracks from the album were performed at the 2007 Symphonic Game Music Concert in Leipzig . In 2008 , he composed the soundtrack to Sigma Harmonics , with synthesizer programming by Mitsuto Suzuki rather than Yamazaki . At the 2006 E3 event , a Square Enix press conference revealed that Hamauzu would be returning to the Final Fantasy series , scoring Final Fantasy XIII . He left Square Enix on January 19 , 2010 . He went on to form his own studio , <unk> , which he describes as a personal studio that does not include any other composers . He has since gone on to score Final Fantasy XIII @-@ 2 and Lightning Returns : Final Fantasy XIII , while also rearranging his old compositions for the high definition version of Final Fantasy X. 
 = = Musical style and influences = = 
 Hamauzu composes music in a wide variety of styles , often using multiple styles throughout the various pieces of a soundtrack . He mostly creates classical and ambient music , and uses the piano predominantly as an instrument . He frequently uses dissonance to provide an atmospheric effect . In Unlimited Saga , for example , the style of his compositions mix classical marches , tango music , electronic ambiance , instrumental solos , bossa nova , and jazz . 
 He cites animation composers Hiroshi Miyagawa and Ryuichi Sakamoto of Yellow Magic Orchestra , impressionist composers Maurice Ravel and Claude Debussy , and his father as major musical influences . During his adolescence , he enjoyed listening to the works of Miyagawa and Sakamoto . While attending university , he developed an appreciation for classical music , especially the compositions of Ravel and Debussy . 
 = = Works = = 
 = Draped Bust dollar = 
 The Draped Bust dollar is a United States dollar coin minted from 1795 to 1803 , and was reproduced , dated 1804 , into the 1850s . The design succeeded the Flowing Hair dollar , which began mintage in 1794 and was the first silver dollar struck by the United States Mint . The designer is unknown , though the distinction is usually credited to artist Gilbert Stuart . The model is also unknown , though Ann Willing Bingham has been suggested . 
 In October 1795 , newly appointed Mint Director Elias Boudinot ordered that the legal fineness of .892 ( 89 @.@ 2 % ) silver be used for the dollar rather than the unauthorized fineness of .900 ( 90 % ) silver that had been used since the denomination was first minted in 1794 . Due largely to a decrease in the amount of silver deposited at the Philadelphia Mint , coinage of silver dollars declined throughout the latter years of the 18th century . In 1804 , coinage of silver dollars was halted ; the last date used during regular mint production was 1803 . 
 In 1834 , silver dollar production was temporarily restarted to supply a diplomatic mission to Asia with a special set of proof coins . Officials mistakenly believed that dollars had last been minted with the date 1804 , prompting them to use that date rather than the date in which the coins were actually struck . A limited number of 1804 dollars were struck by the Mint in later years , and they remain rare and valuable . 
 = = Background = = 
 Coinage began on the first United States silver dollar , known as the Flowing Hair dollar , in 1794 following the construction and staffing of the Philadelphia Mint . The Coinage Act of 1792 called for the silver coinage to be struck in an alloy consisting of 89 @.@ 2 % silver and 10 @.@ 8 % copper . However , Mint officials were reluctant to strike coins with the unusual fineness , so it was decided to strike them in an unauthorized alloy of 90 % silver instead . This caused depositors of silver to lose money when their metal was coined . During the second year of production of the Flowing Hair dollar , it was decided that the denomination would be redesigned . It is unknown what prompted this change or who suggested it , though numismatic historian R.W. Julian speculates that Henry William de Saussure , who was named Director of the Mint on July 9 , 1795 , may have suggested it , as he had stated a redesign of the American coinage as one of his goals before taking office . It is also possible that the Flowing Hair design was discontinued owing to much public disapproval . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 Though the designer of the coin is unknown , artist Gilbert Stuart is widely acknowledged to have been its creator ; Mint Director James Ross Snowden began researching the early history of the United States Mint and its coinage in the 1850s , during which time he interviewed descendants of Stuart who claimed that their ancestor was the designer . It has been suggested that Philadelphia socialite Ann Willing Bingham posed as the model for the coin . Several sketches were approved by Mint engraver Robert Scot and de Saussure and sent to President George Washington and Secretary of State Thomas Jefferson to gain their approval . 
 After approval was received , the designs were sent to artist John Eckstein to be rendered into plaster models ; during that time , plaster models were used as a guide to cutting the dies , which was done by hand . Eckstein , who was dismissed by Walter Breen as a " local artistic hack " and described by a contemporary artist as a " thorough @-@ going drudge " due to his willingness to carry out most painting or sculptural tasks at the request of clients , was paid thirty dollars for his work preparing models for both the obverse Liberty and reverse eagle and wreath . After the plaster models were created , the engravers of the Philadelphia Mint ( including Scot ) began creating hubs that would be used to make dies for the new coins . 
 = = Production = = 
 It is unknown exactly when production of the new design began , as precise records relating to design were not kept at that time . R.W. Julian , however , places the beginning of production in either late September or early October 1795 , while Taxay asserts that the first new silver dollars were struck in October . In September 1795 , de Saussure wrote his resignation letter to President Washington . In his letter , de Saussure mentioned the unauthorized silver standard and suggested that Congress be urged to make the standard official , but this was not done . In response to de Saussure 's letter , Washington expressed his displeasure in the resignation , stating that he had viewed de Saussure 's tenure with " entire satisfaction " . As de Saussure 's resignation would not take effect until October , the president was given time to select a replacement . 
 The person chosen to fill the position was statesman and former congressman Elias Boudinot . Upon assuming his duties at the Mint on October 28 , Boudinot was informed of the silver standard that had been used since the first official silver coins were struck . He immediately ordered that this practice be ceased and that coinage would begin in the 89 @.@ 2 % fineness approved by the Coinage Act of 1792 . The total production of 1795 dollars ( including both the Flowing Hair and Draped Bust types ) totalled 203 @,@ 033 . It is estimated that approximately 42 @,@ 000 dollars were struck bearing the Draped Bust design . Boudinot soon ordered that production of minor denominations be increased . Later , assayer Albian Cox died suddenly from a stroke in his home on November 27 , 1795 , leaving the vital post of assayer vacant . This , together with Boudinot 's increased focus on smaller denominations , as well as a lull in private bullion deposits ( the fledgling Mint 's only source of bullion ) , caused a decrease in silver dollar production in 1796 . The total mintage for 1796 was 79 @,@ 920 , which amounts to an approximate 62 % reduction from the previous year 's total . 
 Bullion deposits continued to decline , and in 1797 , silver dollar production reached the lowest point since 1794 with a mintage of just 7 @,@ 776 pieces . During this time , silver deposits declined to such an extent that Thomas Jefferson personally deposited 300 Spanish dollars in June 1797 . In April 1797 , an agreement was reached between the Mint and the Bank of the United States . The Bank agreed to supply the Mint with foreign silver on the condition that the Bank would receive their deposits back in silver dollars . The Mint was closed between August and November 1797 due to the annual yellow fever epidemic in Philadelphia ; that year 's epidemic took the life of the Mint 's treasurer , Dr. Nicholas Way . In November 1797 , the Bank deposited approximately $ 30 @,@ 000 worth of French silver . In early 1798 , the reverse was changed from the small , perched eagle to a heraldic eagle similar to that depicted on the Great Seal of the United States . The agreement reached with the Bank of the United States along with other bullion depositors ( including Boudinot ) led to an increase in the number of silver dollars coined ; mintage for both the small and heraldic eagle types totalled 327 @,@ 536 . Mintage numbers for the dollar remained high through 1799 , with 423 @,@ 515 struck that year . 
 Toward the end of the 18th century , many of the silver dollars produced by the Mint were shipped to and circulated or melted in China in order to satisfy the great demand for silver bullion in that nation . In 1800 , silver deposits once again began to decline , and the total silver dollar output for that year was 220 @,@ 920 . In 1801 , following complaints from the public and members of Congress regarding the lack of small change in circulation , Boudinot began requesting that silver depositors receive smaller denominations rather than the routinely requested silver dollars , in an effort to supply the nation with more small change . Production dropped to 54 @,@ 454 silver dollars in 1801 and 41 @,@ 650 in 1802 , after Boudinot was able to convince many depositors to accept their silver in the form of small denominations . Although silver bullion deposits at the Mint had increased , Boudinot attempted to end silver dollar production in 1803 , favoring half dollars instead . Mintage of the 1803 dollar continued until March 1804 , when production of silver dollars ceased entirely . In total , 85 @,@ 634 dollars dated 1803 were struck . Following a formal request from the Bank of the United States , Secretary of State James Madison officially suspended silver dollar and gold eagle production in 1806 , although minting of both had ended two years earlier . 
 = = 1804 dollars = = 
 In 1831 , Mint Director Samuel Moore filed a request through the Treasury asking president Andrew Jackson to once again allow the coinage of silver dollars ; the request was approved on April 18 . In 1834 , Edmund Roberts was selected as an American commercial representative to Asia , including the kingdoms of Muscat and Siam . Roberts recommended that the dignitaries be given a set of proof coins . The State Department ordered two sets of " specimens of each kind [ of coins ] now in use , whether of gold , silver , or copper " . Though the minting of dollars had been approved in 1831 , none had been struck since 1804 . After consulting with Chief Coiner Adam Eckfeldt ( who had worked at the Mint since its opening in 1792 ) , Moore determined that the last silver dollars struck were dated 1804 . Unknown to either of them , the last production in March 1804 was actually dated 1803 . Since they believed that the last striking was dated 1804 , it was decided to strike the presentation pieces with that date as well . It is unknown why the current date was not used , but R.W. Julian suggests that this was done to prevent coin collectors from being angered over the fact that they would be unable to obtain the newly dated coins . 
 The first two 1804 dollars ( as well as the other coins for the sets ) were struck in November 1834 . Soon , Roberts ' trip was expanded to Indo @-@ China ( then known as Annam ) and Japan , so two additional sets were struck . The pieces struck under the auspices of the Mint are known as Class I 1804 dollars , and eight of that type are known to exist today . Roberts left for his trip in April 1835 , and he presented one set each to the Sultan of Muscat and the King of Siam . The gift to the Sultan of Muscat was part of an exchange of diplomatic gifts that resulted in the Sultan presenting the Washington Zoo with a full @-@ grown lion and lioness . Roberts fell ill in Bangkok and was taken to Macao , where he died in June 1835 . Following Roberts ' death , the remaining two sets were returned to the Mint without being presented to the dignitaries . 
 = = = Collecting = = = 
 Most coin collectors became aware of the 1804 dollar in 1842 , when Jacob R. Eckfeldt ( son of Adam Eckfeldt ) and William E. Du Bois published a book entitled A Manual of Gold and Silver Coins of All Nations , Struck Within the Past Century . In the volume , several coins from the Mint 's coin cabinet , including an 1804 dollar , were reproduced by tracing a pantograph stylus over an electrotype of the coins . In May 1843 , numismatist Matthew A. Stickney was able to obtain an 1804 dollar from the Mint 's coin cabinet by trading a rare pre @-@ federal United States gold coin . Due to an increase in the demand for rare coins , Mint officials , including Director Snowden , began minting an increasing number of coin restrikes in the 1850s . Several 1804 dollars were struck , and some were sold for personal profit on the part of Mint officials . When he discovered this , Snowden bought back several of the coins . One such coin , which Snowden later added to the Mint cabinet , was struck over an 1857 shooting thaler and became known as Class II , the only such piece of that type known to exist today . Six pieces with edge lettering applied after striking became known as Class III dollars . 
 By the end of the 19th century , the 1804 dollar had become the most famous and widely discussed of all American coins . In 1867 , one of the original 1804 dollars was sold at auction for $ 750 ( $ 12 @,@ 698 today ) . Seven years later , on November 27 , 1874 , a specimen sold for $ 700 ( $ 14 @,@ 640 today ) . In the early 20th century , coin dealer B. Max Mehl began marketing the 1804 dollar as the " King of American Coins " . The coins continued to gain popularity throughout the 20th century , and the price reached an all @-@ time high in 1999 , when an example graded Proof @-@ 68 was sold at auction for $ 4 @,@ 140 @,@ 000 . 
 = George Kelly ( baseball ) = 
 George Lange Kelly ( September 10 , 1895 – October 13 , 1984 ) , nicknamed " Long George " and " High Pockets " , was a Major League Baseball ( MLB ) first baseman . He played most of his MLB career for the New York Giants ( 1915 – 1917 , 1919 – 1926 ) , but also played for the Pittsburgh Pirates ( 1917 ) , Cincinnati Reds ( 1927 – 1930 ) , Chicago Cubs ( 1930 ) , and Brooklyn Dodgers ( 1932 ) . 
 Kelly is a two @-@ time World Series champion ( 1921 and 1922 ) . He led the National League in home runs once ( 1921 ) and runs batted in twice ( 1920 and 1924 ) , and was elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1973 . However , his selection is regarded as controversial , as many believe he is undeserving of the recognition and was only elected by the Veterans Committee because it consisted of his former teammates . 
 = = Career = = 
 Kelly began his professional career for the Victoria Bees of the Class @-@ B Northwestern League in 1914 and 1915 . During the 1915 season , he was purchased by the New York Giants from Victoria for $ 1 @,@ 200 ( equal to $ 28 @,@ 070 today ) . The Giants were rebuilding their team , and they saw Kelly as a possible replacement for Fred Merkle . However , he played sparingly for the Giants in his first MLB seasons , appearing in only 17 games in 1915 and 49 games in 1916 . He was selected off waivers by the Pittsburgh Pirates on July 25 , 1917 to back up Honus Wagner , but did not hit sufficiently . The Pirates waived Kelly , and he was reclaimed by the Giants from the Pirates on August 4 , 1917 . The Giants optioned Kelly to the Rochester Hustlers of the Class @-@ AA International League , where he played the rest of the 1917 season . Kelly did not play professionally in 1918 due to his military service . The Giants sold Kelly to Rochester before the 1919 season to acquire Earl Smith . 
 Finding success in Rochester , Kelly was purchased by the Giants in 1919 when Hal Chase was suspended . He became a regular in the Giants line @-@ up in 1920 , when he had a league @-@ leading 94 runs batted in ( RBIs ) . He led the league in assists and putouts in 1920 and 1921 ; his 1 @,@ 759 putouts in 1920 remains a league record . Kelly batted in 100 or more runs for four consecutive seasons and hit for a batting average of .300 or higher six consecutive seasons . He opened the 1921 season with at least one hit and one RBI in eight consecutive games , a record that stood until it was broken by Jorge Cantú in 2010 . The Giants appeared in the World Series in 1921 , 1922 , 1923 , and 1924 , winning in 1921 and 1922 . Kelly set a National League record with seven home runs in six consecutive games in 1924 , which has since been matched by Graig Nettles , Walker Cooper , and Willie Mays . 
 In the final series of the 1924 season , the Giants were playing the Philadelphia Phillies at the Polo Grounds and battling for the pennant with the Brooklyn Dodgers . Jimmy O 'Connell offered Phillies shortstop Heinie Sand $ 500 to intentionally lose the games . Sand rejected the bribe and reported it to Phillies manager Art Fletcher . It eventually led to the lifetime suspension of O 'Connell and Giants coach Crazy Dolan by Commissioner Kenesaw Mountain Landis . O 'Connell implicated Kelly , Frankie Frisch , and Ross Youngs as co @-@ conspirators . However , Commissioner Landis cleared Kelly , Frisch and Youngs of any wrongdoing . 
 That following offseason , Kelly , Sam Bohne and other Major League Baseball ( MLB ) players agreed to play professional basketball with O 'Connell . National League ( NL ) president John Heydler insisted that anyone who played with O 'Connell could be suspended . The Giants were also displeased with Kelly 's arrangement , as they were concerned about the chance he could injure himself in non @-@ baseball activity . However , Kelly had not played in any games at that point . He was removed from the roster and thus avoided suspension by MLB . 
 Kelly , naturally a first baseman , saw regular time as a second baseman in 1925 when Frisch injured his hand , while backup Bill Terry began playing first base . With the emergence of Terry , who requested a trade so that he could receive more playing time , and Giants manager John McGraw desiring an improvement in the outfield , Kelly was traded to the Cincinnati Reds prior to the 1927 season for Edd Roush . The Reds traded Roush due to a contract dispute . With Wally Pipp at first base for the Reds , Kelly was slated to play center field . The Reds released Pipp before the 1929 season , and Kelly returned to first base . 
 Kelly was released by the Reds on July 10 , 1930 , and signed by the minor @-@ league Minneapolis Millers of the Class @-@ AA American Association . The Millers traded Kelly to the Chicago Cubs for Mal Moss and a player to be named later ( Chick Tolson ) late in the 1930 season to fill in for the injured Charlie Grimm . Kelly he was released by the Cubs in February 1931 . He returned to the Millers for the 1931 season , and participated in a tour of Japan along with Frisch , Lou Gehrig , Mickey Cochrane , Al Simmons , Lefty Grove , and Rabbit Maranville , among others . 
 In April 1932 , the Millers traded Kelly to the Brooklyn Dodgers for Pea Ridge Day . With the Dodgers , he filled in for the injured Del Bissonette . Kelly played his final MLB game on July 27 , 1932 . He returned to the International League to finish the 1932 season with the Jersey City Skeeters , and played the 1933 season for the Oakland Oaks of the Pacific Coast League before retiring . 
 = = Player profile = = 
 Kelly was known as an excellent defensive first baseman . His positioning and footwork on hits to the outfield became the standard method for teaching future first basemen to handle relays . Frisch considered Kelly the finest first baseman he had seen . 
 Kelly also had a reputation as a clutch hitter . McGraw said there was no player he preferred to have bat in a big situation . Waite Hoyt considered him dangerous in clutch situations . 
 = = Hall of Fame induction = = 
 To be inducted in the National Baseball Hall of Fame , a player must receive at least 75 % of the vote from the Baseball Writers ' Association of America ( BBWAA ) or the Veterans Committee . Kelly was on the BBWAA ballot seven times , never coming close to being elected , and never garnering more than 1 @.@ 9 % of the vote . By year , voting results for Kelly were : 1947 ( one vote , 0 @.@ 6 % ) , 1948 ( two votes , 1 @.@ 7 % ) , 1949 ( one vote , 0 @.@ 7 % ) , 1956 ( two votes , 1 @.@ 0 % ) , 1958 ( two votes , 0 @.@ 8 % ) , 1960 ( five votes , 1 @.@ 9 % ) , and 1962 ( two votes , 0 @.@ 6 % ) . Despite the lack of support from the BBWAA , he was inducted into the Hall of Fame in 1973 by the Veterans Committee . At the time of Kelly 's election , the writers ' ballot was voted on by approximately 400 writers , while the Veterans Committee had a membership of twelve former players and executives . 
 The selection of Kelly was controversial , as many felt Kelly was not worthy of enshrinement in the Hall . According to the BBWAA , the Veterans Committee was not selective enough in choosing members . Charges of cronyism were levied against the Veterans Committee . When Kelly was elected , the Veterans Committee included two of his former teammates , Bill Terry and Frankie Frisch , who also shepherded the selections of Giants teammates Jesse Haines in 1970 , Dave Bancroft and Chick Hafey in 1971 , Ross Youngs in 1972 , Jim Bottomley in 1974 , and Freddie Lindstrom in 1976 . This led to the Veterans Committee having its powers reduced in subsequent years . Baseball historian Bill James , while ranking Kelly as the 65th greatest first baseman of all @-@ time , also cites Kelly as " the worst player in the Hall of Fame " . 
 = = Coaching career = = 
 Kelly served as a coach for the Cincinnati Reds , managed by former teammate Chuck Dressen , from 1935 to 1937 . Former teammate Casey Stengel hired Kelly to coach the Boston Braves from 1938 to 1943 . He returned to the Reds ' coaching staff in 1947 and 1948 . He coached the Oakland Oaks of the Pacific Coast League in 1949 . In 1954 , Kelly managed the independent Wenatchee Chiefs in the Western International League . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 A native San Franciscan , Kelly remained in the San Francisco Bay Area , living in Millbrae , California following his playing career . Kelly 's brother , Ren Kelly , uncle , Bill Lange , and cousin , Rich Chiles , also played in MLB . 
 Kelly suffered a stroke on October 5 , 1984 and died on October 13 at Peninsula Hospital in Burlingame , California . He is interred at the Holy Cross Cemetery in Colma , California . 
 = John T. Hayward = 
 John Tucker " Chick " Hayward ( 15 November 1908 – 23 May 1999 ) was a World War II naval aviator . He helped develop one of the two atomic bombs that was dropped on Japan in the closing days of the war . Later , he was a pioneer in the development of nuclear propulsion , nuclear weapons , guidance systems for ground- and air @-@ launched rockets , and underwater anti @-@ submarine weapons . A former batboy for the New York Yankees , Hayward dropped out of high school and lied about his age to enlist in the United States Navy at age 16 . He was subsequently admitted to the United States Naval Academy at Annapolis , from which he graduated 51st in his class of 1930 . He volunteered for naval aviation . 
 During World War II , he served at the Naval Aircraft Factory in Philadelphia , where he was involved in an effort to improve aircraft instrumentation , notably the compass and altimeter . He attended the University of Pennsylvania 's Moore School of Electrical Engineering , and studied nuclear physics . In June 1942 , he assumed command of a new patrol bomber squadron , VB @-@ 106 , equipped with <unk> @-@ 1 Liberators , which he led in a daring raid on Wake Island , in the Solomon Islands campaign , and in the Southwest Pacific Area . Returning to the United States in 1944 , he was posted was to the Naval Ordnance Test Station at Inyokern , California , where he joined the Manhattan Project , participating in Project Camel , the development of the non @-@ nuclear components of the Fat Man bomb , and in its drop testing . 
 After the war ended , he travelled to Hiroshima and Nagasaki as part of the team investigating the bomb damage , and during Operation Crossroads , he led the effort to photograph the nuclear explosion at the Bikini Atoll . In 1949 , he assumed command of VC @-@ 5 , the first naval nuclear bomber squadron . In March 1949 , he took off from the carrier USS Coral Sea in the Atlantic in a Lockheed P2V Neptune bomber carrying a dummy Little Boy pumpkin bomb , flew across the United States to make a simulated attack on a test site in California . , and flew back to Patuxent River , where he landed after a total of 23 hours flying . In August 1950 , he was at the controls of the first carrier landing and takeoff of an AJ @-@ 1 Savage heavy attack bomber . 
 From June 1951 to May 1953 , Hayward was head of the Military Applications Division of the Atomic Energy Commission , where he conducted atomic weapons laboratory work at Los Alamos National Laboratory . In June 1953 , he assumed command of the escort carrier USS Point Cruz , and was involved in the rescue of a baby who was found abandoned in the trash at a U.S. Army depot . In June 1954 , he became the first naval aviator to command the Naval Ordnance Laboratory , where he was involved with the development of the Mark 52 naval mine and the Mark 90 nuclear bomb , a nuclear depth charge . He was Assistant Chief of Naval Operations for Research and Development , and then Deputy Chief of Naval Operations for Development . In 1962 he assumed command of a carrier task force which included the nuclear @-@ powered aircraft carrier USS Enterprise . He commanded the Antisubmarine Warfare Force , Pacific Fleet , from 1963 to 1966 , and then was president of the Naval War College from 1966 until 1968 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Hayward was born in New York City on November 15 , 1908 one of eight children of Charles Brian and Rosa Hayward , née <unk> . As a youngster , he was a batboy for the New York Yankees . In May 1925 , he dropped out of high school at Loyola School and enlisted in the United States Navy by lying about his age , which at the time he believed to be only 15 , and forging his father 's signature on the papers . He soon acquired the nickname " Chick " from a bosun who asked " And how in did a little chick like you get in here amongst all these grown men ? " The nickname would remain with him for the rest of his naval career . 
 Hayward did his initial naval training at the Naval Station Newport at Newport , Rhode Island . He was encouraged by the Chaplain , Father John J. Brady , to try for admission to United States Naval Academy at Annapolis . Brady arranged for Hayward to be sent to the Naval Academy Preparatory School in Norfolk , Virginia , to study for the entrance exams . During World War I , some one @-@ hundred presidential appointments to Annapolis had been set aside for enlisted sailors , but few had applied , and fewer still had passed the entrance exams . Of the 119 sailors who sat the exams in 1926 , only 19 passed , one of whom was Hayward . He entered Annapolis in August 1926 , and was commissioned as an ensign on graduation in June 1930 , ranking 51st in his class of 406 . 
 After graduation , Hayward volunteered for naval aviation , and learned to fly in a Consolidated NY seaplane at Naval Air Station Hampton Roads . A tour of sea duty on the cruiser USS Richmond followed , after which he was posted to the Naval Air Station Pensacola to complete his flight training . He received his aviator 's wings in July 1932 . While there he met a local woman , Leila Marion ( Lili ) <unk> , and the two were married at St John 's Church in Warrington , Florida on 15 October 1932 . Their marriage would produce five children . 
 Hayward was posted to a scout bombing squadron , VS @-@ 1B , flying Vought SBU Corsairs , on the aircraft carrier USS Langley on the West Coast , and was soon promoted to the rank of lieutenant ( junior grade ) , but owing to government austerity measures , was not paid as such . In 1935 , the squadron was transferred to the USS Saratoga . Coming in for a landing , a fuel line on his aircraft broke , spraying him with fuel and damaging his left eye . After he recovered , and his flight status was restored , he was sent to VP @-@ 2 , which was stationed in the Panama Canal Zone , flying Martin PM patrol aircraft . Following a two @-@ year tour there , he was assigned to the <unk> Seagull detachment aboard the newly commissioned cruiser USS Philadelphia , where he was promoted to lieutenant on 30 June 1937 . He then repeated the procedure of commissioning the aircraft detachment of a new cruiser on another ship of the same class , the USS Phoenix in 1938 . 
 = = World War II = = 
 = = = Pacific Theater = = = 
 Hayward was posted to the Naval Aircraft Factory in Philadelphia in June 1940 , where he continued graduate studies at Temple University that he had begun in 1937 , and then attended the University of Pennsylvania 's Moore School of Electrical Engineering , where he studied nuclear physics . At the Naval Aircraft Factory , he was involved in an effort to improve aircraft instrumentation , notably the compass and altimeter . He was promoted to lieutenant commander in January 1942 . 
 In June 1942 , Hayward assumed command of a new patrol bomber squadron , VB @-@ 106 , equipped with <unk> @-@ 1 Liberators . He was promoted to commander in August 1942 . VB @-@ 106 trained in Hawaii , and flew its first combat mission against Wake Island in October 1943 . For this mission , he was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross . His citation read : 
 For extraordinary achievement while participating in aerial flight as Squadron Commander of a Heavy Bombing Squadron during the attack by U.S. Naval Forces against Wake Island on 5 October 1943 . He led the attack by his squadron and personally directed the operations against enemy objectives during which time he successfully and effectively bombed , strafed enemy installations , and obtained many valuable photographs of the island in the face of intense anti @-@ aircraft fire . His aggressive and skillful leadership and constant devotion to duty contributed directly to the success of this action against the enemy and were in keeping with the highest traditions of the United States Naval Service . 
 Hayward was awarded a second Distinguished Flying Cross on the recommendation of Captain Arleigh Burke for leading his squadron in the South Pacific Area . His citation read : 
 For extraordinary achievement while participating in aerial flight against the enemy as Commanding Officer of a Navy Bombing Squadron operating in the South Pacific area from 8 November 1943 to 24 February 1944 . During this period , Commander Hayward completed many combat and search missions over Japanese territory , frequently encountering heavy anti @-@ aircraft fire . Several of the missions were made , despite adverse weather conditions . On 8 November while on a routine search , he bombed <unk> Island , scoring four direct hits on an enemy bivouac area . On 20 and 31 December and 8 January he bombed , strafed and sank enemy supply barges on each occasion . On 24 February , his efficient spotting enabled our destroyers to destroy three Japanese cargo vessels in Kavieng Harbor . His superior airmanship and outstanding leadership contributed materially to the success of the squadron in inflicting severe damage on the Japanese forces in the area . His courageous conduct was in keeping with the highest traditions of the United States Naval Service . 
 In March 1944 , VB @-@ 106 was transferred to Nadzab in the Southwest Pacific Area , where it came under the command of the Fifth Air Force . It thus served in three different theaters in the Pacific . Hayward was awarded a third Distinguished Flying Cross : 
 For extraordinary achievement while participating in aerial flight from 13 April 1944 to 23 April 1944 . Captain Hayward completed twenty flights in a combat area where enemy anti @-@ aircraft fire was expected to be effective or where enemy aircraft patrols usually occurred . 
 He was also awarded the Legion of Merit with the valor device : 
 for exceptionally meritorious conduct in the performance of outstanding services to the Government of the United States as Commanding Officer of Bombing Squadron One Hundred Six ( VB @-@ 106 ) , in connection with operations against enemy Japanese forces in the Pacific Ocean Area from 25 March to 1 June 1944 . During this period , Captain Hayward successfully carried out three hundred and five long @-@ range search operations , armed reconnaissance and offensive strikes against the enemy . His competent leadership , professional skill and initiative were contributing factors in the success of his squadron in sinking twelve enemy cargo vessels and thirteen barges ; and in shooting down twelve aircraft and damaging three in aerial combat . Captain Hayward 's aggressiveness and unwavering devotion to duty were in keeping with the highest traditions of the United States Naval Service . 
 Somewhat depleted in both aircraft and aircrews , VB @-@ 106 handed over its three <unk> with the least hours on the clock to its relief , VB @-@ 115 , on 27 May 1944 , and returned to the United States . 
 = = = Manhattan Project = = = 
 Hayward 's next posting was to the Naval Ordnance Test Station at Inyokern , California . Initially he was involved with test firing rockets from various aircraft , including the Grumman F6F Hellcat and the twin engine Grumman F7F Tigercat . Once his security clearance was complete , he was assigned to the Manhattan Project . He participated in Project Camel , the development of the non @-@ nuclear components of the Fat Man bomb , and in its drop testing . This involved flying the four engine Boeing B @-@ 29 Superfortress . After the war ended , he travelled to Hiroshima and Nagasaki as part of the Manhattan Project team investigating the bomb damage . He was promoted to captain on 10 December 1945 . During Operation Crossroads , he led the effort to photograph the nuclear explosion at the Bikini Atoll . 
 = = Post war = = 
 = = = Nuclear weapons = = = 
 After a series of clashes with his superior at Inyokern , Captain James B. Sykes , Hayward left to become the Director for Plans and Operations for Armed Forces Special Weapons Project , Sandia National Laboratories on 1 August 1947 . On 1 January 1948 , he was reduced in rank to commander again . The Air Force offered a commission as a brigadier general , and Convair offered a job working on the SM @-@ 65 Atlas missile , but Hayward elected to stay in the navy . He participated in the Operation Sandstone nuclear tests in the Pacific in April 1948 . 
 After World War II , the US Navy sought to acquire a nuclear strike capability , and the Deputy Chief of Naval Operations for Air , Rear Admiral Arthur W. Radford wanted them to operate from aircraft carriers . There were practical problems with this . Nuclear weapons at that time were bulky and required a large aircraft to carry them . After Operation Crossroads , Radford asked Hayward if the Navy had such an aircraft , and Hayward suggested modifying the Lockheed P2V Neptune for carrier operations using jet @-@ assisted takeoff ( JATO ) rocket boosters . It was an interim solution , as it a could not carry a Fat Man , but only the smaller Little Boy bomb ; it could only be operated by the large Midway class aircraft carriers , which still had to be modified for the task ; and initially had no tailhook , so it was unable to land on a carrier , and a mission would have to end with it either landing at a land base or ditching at sea . 
 On 28 April 1948 , two P2Vs were launched from a carrier , the USS Coral Sea , for the first time . The intention was that each of the three Midway @-@ class carriers would have a nuclear attack squadron . The first of these , Composite ( Heavy Attack ) Squadron 5 ( VC @-@ 5 ) was formed at Moffett Field , California , on 9 September 1948 , with Commander Frederick L. " Dick " Ashworth , who had been weaponeer on the Nagasaki raid , as its acting commander . However , Rear Admiral Deak Parsons felt that Ashworth did not have sufficient flight time for the role , so it was decided that Hayward would command VC @-@ 5 . He assumed command on 3 January 1949 , with Ashworth as his executive officer . Hayward intended that Ashworth would take command of the next squadron , VC @-@ 6 , when it was formed . 
 Hayward was promoted to captain again on 19 February 1949 . On 7 March , he took off Coral Sea in the Atlantic in a P2V carrying a dummy Little Boy pumpkin bomb , and flew across the United States to make a simulated attack on the Salton Sea test site near El Centro , California . He then flew to Patuxent River , where he landed after a total of 23 hours flying . Hayward had tailhooks fitted to a pair of P2Vs , and made practice landings on a carrier deck painted on the ground at NAS Patuxent River , Maryland , He made some touch and go passes at the USS Franklin D. Roosevelt , but a carrier landing was considered too dangerous for regular crews to attempt . 
 The P2Vs would be first augmented , and then replaced , by the more capable North American AJ Savage as they became available . These could take off and land on a carrier , carrying a Fat Man . On 21 August 1950 , Hayward was at the controls of the first carrier landing and takeoff of an AJ @-@ 1 Savage heavy attack bomber , on the Coral Sea with the Commander of Naval Air Forces Atlantic Fleet ( <unk> ) , Vice Admiral Felix Stump , in the back seat . However by mid @-@ December VC @-@ 5 still only had six AJ @-@ 1s . 
 From June 1951 to May 1953 , Hayward was head of the Military Applications Division of the Atomic Energy Commission , where he conducted atomic weapons laboratory work at Los Alamos National Laboratory . He also worked on the foundation of the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory program in 1952 in close collaboration with Edward Teller . The culmination of this was working on the Ivy Mike nuclear test . 
 = = = Point Cruz = = = 
 In June 1953 , Hayward took command of the escort carrier USS Point Cruz . He confessed to the crew that he did not know what he was doing , and urged any crewman who felt he was doing something wrong to tell him so at once . At the end of the Korean War , the carrier was deployed at Inchon , where a baby was found abandoned in the trash at a U.S. Army depot . The baby was brought to an orphanage , and Hayward sent Point Cruz 's chaplain in response to a request for assistance . The nun running the orphanage felt the blue @-@ eyed baby would not be safe if he remained in Korea . Hayward is said to have told the chaplain : " You are not to return to this vessel until you have procured that baby . " 
 Hayward is credited with putting his naval career " on the line " by bringing the baby on the ship , which was against regulations , and he subsequently received orders to get the baby off the ship . However , having a baby on board boosted sailors ' morale , and Hayward later said that a leader must " know when to intelligently disregard regulations . " A visa was obtained by intervention of Richard Nixon 's staffers , and a passport was secured by winning a poker game against the South Korean who issued passports . The baby , adopted by Navy surgeon Hugh Keenan , who was also in port at Inchon , was later named Daniel , and was transferred to a civilian ship in Japan . Daniel Keenan was raised in Seattle and began attending reunions of the crew of the Point Cruz in 1993 . The story of Daniel Keenan was made into a television movie , A Thousand Men and a Baby , which aired on CBS in 1997 . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 Hayward assumed command of the Naval Ordnance Laboratory at White Oak , Maryland in June 1954 . He was the first naval aviator to do so , all the previous commanders having been naval ordnance officers . Under his guidance , the Naval Ordnance Laboratory developed the Mark 52 naval mine , an air @-@ delivered weapon with acoustic , magnetic and pressure sensors . Hayward encountered some resistance with this project , as mine warfare was a neglected field in the Navy . The Naval Ordnance Laboratory also developed the Mark 90 nuclear bomb , a nuclear depth charge , which was tested during Operation Wigwam in May 1955 . 
 From a naval career point of view , Hayward 's most notable drawback was his lack of time in command of a ship at sea . Admiral Arleigh Burke , now Chief of naval Operations , arranged for Hayward to be given command of the aircraft carrier Franklin D. Roosevelt in February 1956 . This would normally be the climax of naval aviator 's career , but that year he was selected for promotion to rear admiral . His record of 13 @,@ 200 flight hours was the highest ever achieved by a flag officer . On 7 January 1957 , he was assigned to the office of the Assistant Chief of Naval Operations for Plans and Operations . In October , he became Assistant Chief of Naval Operations for Research and Development . The very public failure of Project Vanguard resulted in Hayward being called to appear before a Congressional Committee , where he was grilled by its chairman , Senator Lyndon B. Johnson . The post was upgraded to Deputy Chief of Naval Operations for Development in 1959 , and he was promoted to vice admiral . He pushed the development of a number of new weapons systems , including the Lockheed P @-@ 3 Orion and the nuclear @-@ powered aircraft carrier USS Enterprise . Between 1959 and 1961 , Defense expenditure on research and development grew from $ 525 million ( roughly equivalent to $ 4 @.@ 26 billion in 2016 ) to $ 4 billion ( roughly equivalent to $ 31 @.@ 7 billion in 2016 ) . 
 In 1962 , President John F. Kennedy offered Hayward four stars and the job of Deputy Director of the Central Intelligence Agency . Hayward turned it down , accepting a demotion to rear admiral on 9 March 1962 to take command of Carrier Division 2 , which included the nuclear @-@ powered Enterprise Long Beach , Bainbridge and Truxtun . In October 1962 , his ships participated in the Cuban Missile Crisis . In June 1963 , he was restored to the rank of vice admiral , which was backdated to 25 April 1959 , the day he had first been promoted . He commanded the Antisubmarine Warfare Force , Pacific Fleet , from 13 June 1963 to 12 January 1966 , for which he was awarded the Navy Distinguished Service Medal for his " leadership , judgment and foresight in research and development associated with antisubmarine warfare and the training of Antisubmarine Warfare Groups during his tenure of command . 
 Hayward was president of the Naval War College in Newport , Rhode Island from 1966 until 1968 . He strove to transform the Naval War College into the Navy 's premier postgraduate school , one from which graduation would fit officers for , and mark them out as future flag officers . Heading a captain 's selection board in May 1967 , he disapproved of two officers with spotless records . " You mean they never argued , never had a difference of opinion ? " he remarked . " What kind of man is that ? " 
 Hayward was awarded a second Navy Distinguished Service Medal for his service as president of Naval War College . He retired in 1968 , but returned to serve to duty as a rear admiral from November 1970 to December 1971 as Commander , 14th Naval District , Commander Fleet Air Hawaii and Commander , Naval Base Pearl Harbor . His responsibilities included " the planning , training and execution of highly successful recoveries of Apollo spacecraft in the Mid @-@ Pacific " , for which he was awarded a third Legion of Merit . 
 = = Later life = = 
 After retiring from the Navy , Hayward worked for General Dynamics as a vice president for international programs until 1973 , and then as a consultant until 1979 . He then worked with the Draper Laboratory and the Hertz Foundation . He became an American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics Fellow in 1998 , and was inducted into the Naval Aviation Hall of Honor in 2004 . 
 Hayward died of cancer on 23 May 1999 in Atlantic Beach , Florida , and was buried in Arlington National Cemetery , along with his wife Leila , who had died the year before . He was survived by his son and four daughters . His papers are in the Naval History & Heritage Command at the Washington Navy Yard . 
 = David Bedell @-@ Sivright = 
 David Revell " Darkie " Bedell @-@ Sivright ( 8 December 1880 – 5 September 1915 ) was a Scottish international rugby union forward who captained both Scotland and the British Isles . Born in Edinburgh , and educated at Fettes College where he learned to play rugby , he studied at Cambridge University and earned four Blues playing for them in the Varsity Match . He was first selected for Scotland in 1900 in a match against Wales . After playing in all of Scotland 's Home Nations Championship matches in 1901 , 1902 and 1903 , Bedell @-@ Sivright toured with the British Isles – now known as the British and Irish Lions – side that toured South Africa in 1903 . After playing the first 12 matches of the tour , he was injured and so did not play in any of the Test matches against South Africa . 
 The next year Bedell @-@ Sivright was appointed captain for the British Isles team that toured Australia and New Zealand . Due to a broken leg he played only one Test match during the tour – against Australia – but was involved in a notable incident during a non @-@ Test match . Despite not playing , Bedell @-@ Sivright pulled the British team from the field for 20 minutes after disputing the decision by a local referee to send @-@ off one of their players . Bedell @-@ Sivright eventually allowed his side to resume play , but without their ejected teammate . 
 Following the tour Bedell @-@ Sivright briefly settled in Australia , before returning to Scotland to study medicine . He captained Scotland against the touring New Zealanders in 1905 , and in 1906 helped his country defeat the visiting South Africans 6 – 0 . After retiring from international rugby in 1908 he went on to become Scotland 's amateur boxing champion . A surgeon by profession , he joined the Royal Navy during the First World War , and died on active service during the Gallipoli Campaign . 
 Bedell @-@ Sivright had a reputation as an aggressive and hard rugby player , as well as a ferocious competitor . He was an inaugural inductee into the Scottish Rugby Hall of Fame , and in 2013 was inducted into the International Rugby Board ( IRB ) Hall of Fame . 
 = = Personal history = = 
 David Bedell @-@ Sivright was born in Edinburgh in 1880 to William Henry Revell Bedell @-@ Sivright of North Queensferry . Bedell @-@ Sivright was educated at Fettes <unk> before going to Trinity College , Cambridge in 1899 to read medicine . He later completed his medical training at the University of Edinburgh . His brother John played for Cambridge University RFC , and gained a single international cap in 1902 . 
 There are many tales surrounding Bedell @-@ Sivright , and it is difficult to separate fact from fiction . He had a reputation for aggression , and in 1909 became Scottish amateur boxing champion . After one international he rugby tackled a cart horse in Princes Street in Edinburgh after apparently laying down on a city tram track – this held up the traffic for an hour as no policeman would approach him . It is not clear exactly where Bedell @-@ Sivright picked up the nickname " Darkie " . One explanation is that it was due to " cynical " tactics he employed as captain , the other is that it was due to the dark rings around his eyes . 
 On 25 January 1915 Bedell @-@ Sivright was commissioned as a surgeon in the Royal Navy . He was posted to the Hawke Battalion of the Royal Naval Division stationed at Gallipoli during the Dardanelles Campaign in May 1915 . He was loaned to the Royal Scots Fusiliers from 8 to 20 June , and was then posted to the Portsmouth Battalion of Royal Marine Light Infantry . After a period onshore in the trenches while serving at an advanced dressing station , he was bitten by an unidentified insect . He complained of being fatigued and was taken offshore and transferred to the hospital ship HMHS <unk> Castle . Two days later , on 5 September , he died of septicaemia and was buried at sea off Cape Helles . He is commemorated on the Portsmouth Naval Memorial . 
 = = Rugby career = = 
 Bedell @-@ Sivright learned his rugby while a student at Fettes College , but first came to note as a player when he represented Cambridge University in the Varsity matches – contested against Oxford University – between 1899 and 1902 ; this won him four sporting Blues . He was first capped for Scotland in 1900 in a match against Wales at St Helen 's , Swansea . The match was a turning point for Welsh rugby , who won 12 – 3 , but the selectors stuck with Bedell @-@ Sivright who won another 21 caps for his country . He is the only Scottish player to have won three Triple Crowns – wins over Ireland , Wales and England within the same Home Nations Championship ( now the Six Nations ) – in 1901 , 1903 and 1907 . 
 In 1903 Bedell @-@ Sivright was selected for his first match with invitational touring side the Barbarians . He played a total of five games for the side between 1903 and 1907 , and captained them against Cardiff RFC in 1907 . 
 Bedell @-@ Sivright was later chosen to tour with two different British Isles teams . The first was the 1903 tour of South Africa under the captaincy of fellow Scottish international Mark Morrison . Although at the centre of the British Isles pack , <unk> @-@ Sivright did not play in any of the test matches . He played in the first 12 tour matches , where the team won six and lost six , but was injured thereafter . 
 In 1904 , at the request of the England Rugby Board ( known as the Rugby Football Union ) , Bedell @-@ Sivright was selected to lead a British Lions team on a tour of Australia and New Zealand . He only played in one Test , against Australia , because of a broken leg , but the team did go undefeated in Australia – winning all their matches there , and the three Test matches 17 – 0 , 17 – 3 and 16 – 0 . A notable incident on the Australian leg of the tour was a dispute between the British side and one of the Australian referees . The referee – Hugh Dolan – had ordered off British Isles player Denys Dobson after claiming Dobson had directed a personal insult at him . Bedell @-@ Sivright was not playing , but pulled his team from the field for 20 minutes while disputing the decision with Dolan and the other officials . Eventually the British side returned to play , but without Dobson . Following the match Bedell @-@ Sivright accused the referee of incompetence , and an inquiry eventually cleared Dobson of using indecent language , but he became the first British Isles player ever ordered off . 
 The five @-@ match New Zealand leg of the tour was far less successful for the British team . The tourists won their first two matches , but their third – the sole Test against New Zealand – was lost 9 – 3 . Bedell @-@ Sivright did not play in the Test after injuring himself in the teams ' first New Zealand tour match , but blamed that loss , and their subsequent draw and loss ( the final loss was 13 – 0 to Auckland ) on fatigue after their tour of Australia . According to a New Zealand newspaper , Bedell @-@ Sivright only ever claimed his side was " stale " after a loss , and never before . A New Zealand representative side was scheduled to tour the British Isles in 1905 , and Bedell @-@ Sivright did not report favourably on their chances of success . This may have contributed to the Home Nations underestimating the All Blacks – as the 1905 team become known – who ended up winning all but one of their 35 matches . 
 Bedell @-@ Sivright was so impressed with Australia that he decided to settle there . After a year he became bored of <unk> ( stock @-@ rearing ) , and decided to leave and head back to Scotland to study medicine . While studying in Edinburgh he joined the Edinburgh University RFC – captaining them for two seasons in 1906 – 07 and 1908 – 09 . He had returned to Scotland in time to face the touring New Zealanders , and so he captained his country against them at Inverleith . The All Blacks had not been troubled in any of their previous matches on tour , scoring 612 points , and conceding only 15 . Rugby writer Winston McCarthy described the Scottish forwards as " fast , vigorous and good dribblers " , and they led 7 – 6 at half @-@ time . However the New Zealanders were the better team , and scored six unanswered points in the second half to win 12 – 6 . 
 In 1906 the South Africans were touring the British Isles , and Bedell @-@ Sivright was selected for the Scotland side that defeated them 6 – 0 . This was the last Home Nations team to defeat South Africa in nearly 60 years . Hence he became the first Home Nations ' player to contest a Test match against each of Australia , New Zealand , and South Africa . 
 Bedell @-@ Sivright was one of the inaugural inductees into the Scottish Rugby Hall of Fame in 2010 , and in 2013 was inducted into the IRB Hall of Fame in a ceremony that honoured players from the British and Irish Lions ( as the British Isles team is now known ) and Australia during that year 's Lions tour of Australia . Edinburgh University RFC have a scholarship in Bedell @-@ Sivright 's honour ; the scholarships of between £ 500 and £ 2000 per year are intended " to attract the best young talent in the UK [ United Kingdom ] to play and study at The University of Edinburgh " . 
 Writing in 1919 , rugby journalist and author E. H. D. Sewell said of Bedell @-@ Sivright " If a plebiscite was taken on the question : " Who was the hardest forward who ever played International football ? " Sivright would get most votes if the voting was confined to players , and probably so in any event . " Bedell @-@ Sivright is described as one of the " hardest " men to ever play for Scotland , with author Nick Oswald – who wrote a book on the history of Scottish rugby – describing him as " a very aggressive forward . He didn 't excel in any one aspect of the game , but he was an absolutely ferocious competitor . " On hearing of his death , it was reported that : 
 = = International record = = 
 = Curtis Glencross = 
 Curtis Jack Glencross ( born December 28 , 1982 ) is a Canadian former professional ice hockey player . An undrafted player , he signed with the Anaheim Mighty Ducks as a free agent in 2004 and made his NHL debut with the team in 2007 . He has also played for the Columbus Blue Jackets , Edmonton Oilers , Calgary Flames and Washington Capitals . He was an effective goal scorer and active within the community during his time in Calgary , which led to the team naming him its recipient of the Ralph T. Scurfield Humanitarian Award in 2012 . After splitting the 2014 – 15 season between Calgary and Washington , Glencross was unable to reach a contract deal with any NHL team and opted to retire as a player . During his playing career , Glencross was a spokesman for the Special Olympics . He has also participated with Rae Croteau Jr . ' s chuckwagon racing team in the summer . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Glencross was born December 28 , 1982 , in Kindersley , Saskatchewan , but grew up in Provost , Alberta . He is the son of Mel and Robin Glencross , and has a younger brother , Matthew , and sister , Kari . His parents both played hockey and say he inherited an intense competitive nature from them . His family moved to Red Deer , Alberta when he was a teenager as his parents began a livestock auction business . Glencross was small for his age , standing less than five feet tall when he was 15 , and as a result was often left off the top teams in minor hockey despite having the talent to play ; he played Midget C hockey in Provost . He experienced a rapid growth spurt , growing a full foot in a period of 17 months , and was recruited to play Junior A hockey for the expansion Brooks Bandits of the Alberta Junior Hockey League ( AJHL ) in 2000 . He went on to become the first Bandit alumnus to play in the National Hockey League ( NHL ) , and his number 17 was retired by the team in 2011 . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = College and minor professional = = = 
 The Bandits were a last @-@ place team both years Glencross played , but he was among the AJHL 's leading goalscorers in 2001 – 02 with 42 goals . He went undrafted by an NHL team , but received interest from National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) schools and was considering returning to Brooks for a third season of junior . Jack Kowal , assistant coach of the University of Alaska @-@ Anchorage Seawolves , had scouted Glencross during the season . Impressed with his ability and intensity on the ice , offered Glencross a full scholarship to play for his school . Glencross played two seasons at Alaska @-@ Anchorage between 2002 and 2004 , scoring 32 goals and 57 points in 72 games . He was named the Western Collegiate Hockey Association offensive player of the week for December 15 , 2003 , after scoring a hat trick against the Colorado College Tigers in a 5 – 2 win . He led the Seawolves in goals ( 21 ) and points ( 34 ) in 2002 – 03 . 
 Glencross chose to forgo his final two years of college eligibility , signing a professional contract with the Anaheim Mighty Ducks on March 25 , 2004 . He was assigned to the team 's American Hockey League ( AHL ) affiliate , the Cincinnati Mighty Ducks , to complete the 2003 – 04 season . He scored two goals in seven regular season games , and one more in nine playoff games . He remained with Cincinnati in 2004 – 05 , appearing in 51 games and scoring nine points . He was moved to the Portland Pirates , also of the AHL , in 2005 – 06 and improved to 15 goals and 25 points in 41 games while also appearing in 19 post @-@ season games . 
 = = = Ducks , Blue Jackets and Oilers = = = 
 Glencross ' 2006 – 07 season was split between four teams . Glencross began with the Pirates , but at mid @-@ season earned his first call @-@ up and made his NHL debut on January 13 , 2007 . He scored his first goal on his first NHL shot that night , against Peter Budaj , in a 3 – 2 loss against the Colorado Avalanche . He played two games with Anaheim before he was traded , along with Zenon Konopka and a 7th round draft pick , to the Columbus Blue Jackets in exchange for Mark Hartigan , Joe <unk> and a 4th round pick on January 26 . Glencross appeared in seven games with the Blue Jackets but finished the season in the AHL with the Syracuse Crunch . 
 Glencross established himself as an NHL regular in 2007 – 08 . He appeared in 36 games for the Blue Jackets before being traded to the Edmonton Oilers in exchange for Dick <unk> on February 1 , 2008 . Glencross appeared in 26 games for the Oilers , scoring 15 goals and 25 points in 61 games combined between Columbus and Edmonton . Though he played well with Edmonton , the Oilers did not make a contract offer , making him an unrestricted free agent . Glencross hoped to remain in Edmonton as it was close to his Red Deer home . But after the Oilers made little effort to negotiate with him , he chose to sign a three @-@ year , $ 3 @.@ 6 million deal with Edmonton 's provincial rival , the Calgary Flames . 
 = = = Calgary Flames = = = 
 In his first year with the Flames , Glencross set new personal highs in games played ( 74 ) , goals ( 13 ) and points ( 40 ) . He missed six games in December 2008 with a knee injury , and three more early in the 2009 – 10 NHL season after he was suspended for a blind @-@ side hit on Chris Drury of the New York Rangers . He set a new personal best with 15 goals on the season that included his first NHL hat trick in a victory over the Carolina Hurricanes . His season was ended on March 17 after suffering a leg injury when he was struck by Matt Hendricks of the Colorado Avalanche in a knee @-@ on @-@ knee collision . 
 Playing in the final year of his contract , Glencross set personal highs of 24 goals and 43 points in 2010 – 11 . While the Flames received offers from other teams for Glencross at the trade deadline , the team chose to hold on to him though they risked losing him as an unrestricted free agent following the season . Glencross chose to remain in Calgary , agreeing to a four @-@ year , $ 10 @.@ 2 million contract with the Flames on May 17 , 2011 . Glencross felt that he could have earned a bigger contract on the open market , but chose to take less money to remain in Calgary . With 26 goals in 2011 – 12 , Glencross finished second on the team to Jarome Iginla 's 32 . He was the league 's most efficient scorer , scoring on 23 @.@ 6 percent of his shots on net . 
 Glencross reached several milestones in the lockout @-@ shortened 2012 – 13 season en route to leading the Flames with 15 goals . After scoring his 100th career goal , he recorded both his 100th assist and 200th point in a 5 – 4 victory over the Phoenix Coyotes on February 24 , 2013 . His season was ended prematurely by a knee injury after Anaheim 's Ben Lovejoy stuck his leg out to cause a knee @-@ on @-@ knee collision . The injury forced Glencross out of the team 's final four games of the season . 
 Injuries plagued Glencross throughout the 2013 – 14 season as he missed 15 games to a sprained knee , then suffered a high ankle sprain three weeks after his December 10 return . The injury forced him out of the lineup for nearly three months ; he missed an additional 29 games before returning to action . In just the sixth game after his return , he scored his third career hat @-@ trick in an 8 @-@ 1 victory against the Edmonton Oilers . 
 = = = Washington Capitals = = = 
 As Glencross ' contract was set to expire at the end of the 2014 – 15 season , his future in Calgary was placed in doubt ; the team asked him for a list of teams he would agree to waive his no trade clause to as the March 2 , 2015 , trade deadline approached . Though the team was in playoff contention at the deadline , it still opted to move Glencross . He was traded to the Washington Capitals on March 1 , in exchange for second and third round picks at the 2015 NHL Entry Draft . He made his debut with Washington two nights later . Combined between Calgary and Washington , Glencross scored 13 goals and 35 points in 71 games played . 
 Despite his reduced offensive output relative to previous seasons , Glencross expected to sign with a new team as a free agent . However , when no contract offers materialized , Glencross instead accepted a professional tryout offer with the Toronto Maple Leafs . Toronto opted against signing Glencross and , after releasing him from the try @-@ out , Glencross signed another tryout offer , with the Colorado Avalanche . After two scoreless pre @-@ season games he was released by the Avalanche on October 5 , 2015 . His first pre @-@ season game with the Avalanche was in Calgary ; the Flames recognized Glencross ' contributions with the team during the game , a gesture he appreciated . However , the Avalanche also released Glencross , leaving his career in limbo as the 2015 – 16 NHL season began . He opted against playing in Europe in favour of remaining in Canada with his young family and , on October 20 , 2015 , announced his retirement as a player . Glencross played 507 games , scored 134 goals and had 275 points . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 While Glencross grew up around the rodeo circuit , he did not enter into the sport until he met World Professional Chuckwagon Association driver Rae Croteau Jr. in 2005 . He became interested in chuckwagon racing at the time , and while he does not race , Glencross was a part of Croteau 's team in 2007 and 2008 , helping around the stables . 
 Glencross and his wife Tanya have two daughters and a son . An active member of the community during his playing career , Glencross served as a spokesman for the Special Olympics program , and hosted an annual charity golf tournament in support of Calgary Crime Stoppers . The first event , held in 2009 , raised C $ 100 @,@ 000 . Glencross is also involved with the Alberta Children 's Hospital . In recognition of his community efforts , the Flames named him the 2012 recipient of the Ralph T. Scurfield Humanitarian Award , given by the team in recognition of on @-@ ice leadership coupled with community service . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = SpongeBob SquarePants ( season 1 ) = 
 The first season of the American animated television series SpongeBob SquarePants , created by former marine biologist and animator Stephen Hillenburg , aired from May 1 , 1999 to April 8 , 2000 , and consisted of 20 episodes . The series chronicles the exploits and adventures of the title character and his various friends in the fictional underwater city of Bikini Bottom . The shows features the voices of Tom Kenny as SpongeBob SquarePants , Bill Fagerbakke as Patrick Star , Rodger Bumpass as Squidward Tentacles , Clancy Brown as Mr. Krabs , Carolyn Lawrence as Sandy Cheeks , and Mr. Lawrence as Plankton . Among the first guest stars in the show were Ernest Borgnine and Tim Conway voicing the superhero characters of Mermaid Man and Barnacle Boy , respectively . 
 Hillenburg initially conceived the show in 1984 and began to work on it shortly after the cancellation of Rocko 's Modern Life in 1996 . To voice the character of SpongeBob , Hillenburg approached Tom Kenny , who had worked with him on Rocko 's Modern Life . The show was originally to be called SpongeBoy Ahoy ! , but the name SpongeBoy was already in use for a mop product . Upon finding it out , Hillenburg decided to use the name " SpongeBob " . He chose " SquarePants " as a family name as it referred to the character 's square shape and it had a " nice ring to it " . 
 Several compilation DVDs that contained episodes from the season were released . The SpongeBob SquarePants : The Complete 1st Season DVD was released in Region 1 on October 28 , 2003 , Region 2 on November 7 , 2005 , and Region 4 on November 30 , 2006 . The pilot episode , " Help Wanted " , was not included on the DVD due to copyright issues with the song " Living in the Sunlight " by Tiny Tim , which appears in the episode , but was later released as a bonus feature on various series DVDs , including that of the third season . The season received positive reviews from media critics upon release . 
 = = Development = = 
 Creator Stephen Hillenburg initially conceived SpongeBob SquarePants in 1984 , while he was teaching and studying marine biology at what is now the Orange County Ocean Institute . During this period , Hillenburg became fascinated with animation , and wrote a comic book entitled The Intertidal Zone starring various anthropomorphic forms of sea life , many of which would evolve into SpongeBob SquarePants characters , including " Bob the Sponge " , who was the co @-@ host of the comic and resembled an actual sea sponge , as opposed to SpongeBob who resembles a kitchen sponge . In 1987 , Hillenburg left the institute to pursue his dream of becoming an animator , and began to envision the possible concept of a project involving anthropomorphic sea life , drawing several rough sketches . In 1992 , Hillenburg began to attend the California Institute of the Arts to study animation , having been accepted into the institute by Jules Engel , who was impressed with Hillenburg 's previous work . 
 While attending animation school , Hillenburg received a job on the children 's television series Mother Goose and Grimm , and worked on the series from 1991 to 1993 . When attending the California Institute of the Arts , he made his thesis film entitled Wormholes , which was funded by the Princess Grace Foundation and was later displayed at various animation festivals . In 1995 , Joe Murray , creator of Rocko 's Modern Life , met Hillenburg at an animation festival , and offered him a job as a director of the series . 
 Rocko 's Modern Life ended in 1996 . Shortly following this , Hillenburg began working on SpongeBob SquarePants , teaming up with several Nickelodeon veterans and Rocko crew members , including creative director Derek Drymon , writers and directors Sherm Cohen and Dan Povenmire , writer Tim Hill , actor and writer Martin Olson , animation director Alan Smart , and story editor Merriwether Williams . To voice the character of SpongeBob , Hillenburg approached Tom Kenny , who had worked with him on Rocko 's Modern Life . Originally the character was to be named SpongeBoy and the show would be called SpongeBoy Ahoy ! . However , the Nickelodeon legal department discovered that the name SpongeBoy was already in use for a mop product . This was discovered after voice acting for the original seven @-@ minute pilot was recorded in 1997 . Upon finding this out , Hillenburg decided that the character 's given name still had to contain " Sponge " so viewers would not mistake the character for a " Cheese Man " . Hillenburg decided to use the name " SpongeBob " . He chose " SquarePants " as a family name as it referred to the character 's square shape and it had a " nice ring to it " . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Cast = = = 
 The first season had a cast of six main actors . Tom Kenny provided the voice of the title character SpongeBob SquarePants and his pet snail Gary . SpongeBob 's best friend , a starfish named Patrick Star , was voiced by Bill Fagerbakke , while Rodger Bumpass played the voice of Squidward Tentacles , an arrogant and ill @-@ tempered octopus . Other members of the cast were Carolyn Lawrence as Sandy Cheeks , a squirrel from Texas ; Clancy Brown as Mr. Krabs , a miserly crab obsessed with money and SpongeBob 's boss at the Krusty Krab ; and Mr. Lawrence as Plankton , a small green copepod and Mr. Krabs ' business rival . 
 While Hillenburg , Derek Drymon , and Tim Hill were writing the pilot " Help Wanted " , Hillenburg was also conducting auditions to find voices for the show characters . He had created the character of SpongeBob with Tom Kenny , in which he utilised Kenny 's and other people 's personalities to help create SpongeBob 's personality . The voice of SpongeBob was originally used by Kenny for a very minor female alligator character named Al in Rocko 's Modern Life . Kenny forgot the voice initially as he created it only for that single use . Hillenburg , however , remembered it when he was coming up with SpongeBob and used a video clip of the episode to remind Kenny of the voice . Kenny says that SpongeBob 's high pitched laugh was specifically aimed at being unique , stating that they wanted an annoying laugh in the tradition of Popeye and Woody Woodpecker . Hillenburg originally had Mr. Lawrence for the role of voicing Squidward . Drymon said " We knew Doug from Rocko , where he was a storyboard director and where he also did the voice of <unk> . We were showing Doug the storyboard , and he started reading back to us in his Tony the Tiger / Gregory Peck voice . It was really funny , and we wound up having SpongeBob use a deep voice when he entered the Krusty Krab for the first time . " Hillenburg loved the voice and decided to give Lawrence the part of the series villain , Plankton . 
 The season had a number of secondary characters including Jill Talley as Plankton 's computer wife , Karen ; Mary Jo Catlett as Mrs. Puff , SpongeBob 's driving instructor ; Lori Alan as Pearl , Mr. Krabs ' daughter ; and Brian Doyle @-@ Murray as the Flying Dutchman . In addition to the regular cast members , episodes feature guest voices from many ranges of professions , including actors , musicians , and artists . Former McHale 's Navy actors Ernest Borgnine and Tim Conway reunited for their first joint TV project in 33 years as guest actors portraying SpongeBob 's favorite superheroes , Mermaid Man and Barnacle Boy , respectively . Borgnine said " We [ he and Conway ] played off each other . Tim 's such a performer - a little more caustic than I am . We were making all sorts of noise . People outside the room were <unk> . We 're supposed to be underwater , you know . " They would reprise their role in the episode " Mermaid Man and Barnacle Boy II " , which also guest starred Charles Nelson Reilly as their nemesis , the Dirty Bubble . In the episode " Scaredy Pants " , a Halloween special , American band the Ghastly Ones performed a special musical performance , while Brian Doyle @-@ Murray voiced the Flying Dutchman . American country guitarist and singer Junior Brown made a vocal cameo , performing the song " Texas " in the episode of the same name . In " Neptune 's Spatula " , John O 'Hurley appeared as King Neptune . John Lurie and Jim Jarmusch ( who collaborated to make the films Stranger Than Paradise and Down by Law ) made a cameo as themselves in the episode " Hooky " , through excerpts from the Bravo serial , Fishing with John . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Prior to start of production on the show , Hillenburg decided early that he wanted SpongeBob SquarePants to be a storyboard @-@ driven show , rather than script @-@ driven . Storyboard @-@ driven is an approach that required artists who could take a skeletal story outline and flesh it out with sight gags , dialogue and a structure that " would strike a balance between narrative and whimsy . " Hillenburg originally wanted " a team of young and hungry people " to work on the show . The group , who worked with Hillenburg on Rocko 's Modern Life before , consisted of Alan Smart , Nick Jennings , and Derek Drymon . Tim Hill was asked about if he want to work as story editor , but was unavailable at the time . The crew got Peter Burns to work as story editor who developed the idea for the episode " Ripped Pants " about SpongeBob ripping his pants . 
 During the first season , the writing staff used most of the story ideas that were in Hillenburg 's series bible and they had problems on how to generate new ideas . At one point , the writing staff went to the beach for inspiration for a possible episode . However , the day " was overcast and cold , so we [ the writers ] had to stay in the car . " Drymon said " We didn 't come up with too many ideas that day . " Story editor Peter Burns left , and the crew had Merriwether Williams to overtake . Hillenburg said to Williams that " it was her responsibility to get us [ the writers ] to come up with new ideas . " Drymon said " [ It ] is a tall order . " Williams gave Drymon a book called Zen in the Art of Writing , written by Ray Bradbury , that catalogs a collection of essays about writing processes . One of the ways in the book to inspire plots was " to write nouns that interested him [ Bradbury ] on a note card and hang them in his office . He felt just having the word in his eyesight would get his mind working . " Williams took this scheme and made it into " a writing exercise . " In writing meetings , the staff would all enumerate 10 nouns on strips of paper and place them in a hat . The hat would be passed throughout and a writer would have a limited time to spawn an idea based on the noun he wrote . Drymon said " It would almost always start a discussion , and we wound up getting a lot of episodes out of it . " Furthermore , Drymon said that Williams " really came up with a great addition to the process . " 
 One time , Hillenburg came to Williams and said , " Why don 't you go read a bunch of books about writing . " Hillenburg wanted to keep the enthusiasm in the writing room , because , according to Williams , " sometimes it can be a slog . " She went off , read more books about writing , and came up with two more exercises for writing meetings . 
 = = = Animation and design = = = 
 The animation was handled overseas in South Korea at Rough Draft Studios . Throughout the season 's run , from 1999 to 2000 , SpongeBob was animated using cel animation . The show shifted to digital ink and paint animation during its second season in 2000 . Executive producer Paul Tibbitt , in 2009 , said " [ ... ] The first season of SpongeBob was done the old @-@ fashioned way on cells , and every cell had to be part @-@ painted , left to dry , paint some other colors . It 's still a time @-@ consuming aspect of the process now , but the digital way of doing things means it doesn 't take long to correct . " The season was storyboarded and by Sherm Cohen , Derek Drymon , Steve Fonti , Stephen Hillenburg , Chuck Klein , Jay Lender , Chris Mitchell , Mark O 'Hare , Aaron Springer , Paul Tibbitt , Ennio Torresan , Vincent Waller , and Erik Wiese . 
 When the crew began production on the pilot , they were tasked to design the stock locations where " [ ... ] the show would return to again and again , and in which most of the action would take place , such as the Krusty Krab and SpongeBob 's pineapple house . " Hillenburg had a " clear vision " of what he wanted the show to look like . The idea was " to keep everything nautical " so the crew used lots of rope , wooden planks , ships ' wheels , netting , anchors , and boilerplate and rivets . 
 The season marked the introduction of the " sky flowers " as the main background . It first appeared in the pilot and has since become a common feature throughout the series . When series background designer Kenny Pittenger was asked " What are those things ? , " he answered " They function as clouds in a way , but since the show takes place underwater , they aren 't really clouds . " Since the show was influenced by tiki , the background painters have to use a lot of pattern . Pittenger said " So really , the sky flowers are mostly a whimsical design element that Steve [ Hillenburg ] came up with to evoke the look of a flower @-@ print Hawaiian shirt — or something like that . I don 't know what they are either . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 The season was critically acclaimed . Three of its episodes won Best Sound Editing in Television Animation at the 2000 Golden Reel Awards . It consisted of the episodes " Mermaid Man and Barnacle Boy " and " Pickles " for Music , while the " Karate Choppers " won for the Sound . In 2001 , " Rock Bottom " and " <unk> ! " also won the Golden Reel Awards for Best Sound Editing in Television Animation — Sound , while " Fools in April " and " Neptune 's Spatula " were nominated for Best Sound Editing in Television Animation — Music . 
 In his review for the Variety , Noel Holston said " [ The show ] is smarter and <unk> than most of the prime @-@ time animated series that have popped up in the past year . " Furthermore , most of the first season DVD reviews were positive towards the series as being one of the best American comedy shows . In a DVD review by Bill Treadway for DVD Verdict , he called the show " the best animated American comedy since The Simpsons , it is a claim I stand behind . " Treadway said the show is " accessible to all " that " adults will enjoy the witty satire and sly in @-@ jokes subtly inserted into every episode . " He also mentioned that " children will love the bright colors , spunky pace , and lively characters " and that " parents will not have to worry about violence or crude humor . " Jason Bovberg of DVD Talk called SpongeBob SquarePants " the coolest Saturday morning cartoon since the heyday of Warner Bros. " In a separate review for the season 's DVD release , Bovberg " highly recommended " the set and wrote " I love the show so much , I can 't see any way around giving this one a recommendation . " Bovberg was particular on the exclusion of the pilot episode " Help Wanted " , saying " But why is ' Help Wanted ' missing ? I suppose I 'll have to buy a " theme " disc down the road to secure that one . Sigh . " Furthermore , he described it as " the only disappointment of the set . " Ron J. Epstein , also from DVD Talk , said that the character of SpongeBob is " one of the strangest cartoon characters I have ever had the pleasure to watch . " He said that " Unlike most cartoons today , SpongeBob SquarePants caters to both a child and an adult audience . " 
 In his review for The Washington Post , Michael Cavna rewatched the pilot episode " Help Wanted " in 2009 and said " so much of the style and polish are already in place . " He ranked the episode at No. 3 at his The Top Five SpongeBob Episodes : We Pick ' Em list . Nancy Basile of the About.com said " [ The ] humor and optimistic essence of SpongeBob is evident even in this first episode . " 
 = = Episodes = = 
 Key 
 The following episodes listed in the chart are arranged according to their production order , rather than by their original air dates . 
 = = DVD release = = 
 The DVD boxset for season one was released by Paramount Home Entertainment and Nickelodeon in the United States and Canada in October 2003 , three years after it had completed broadcast on television . The DVD release features bonus materials including audio commentaries , featurettes , and music videos . The pilot episode " Help Wanted " was excluded in the DVD release due to copyright issues . According to Derek Drymon , the episode was not included because Nickelodeon did not want to pay Tiny Tim 's estate for the DVD rights . " Help Wanted " was later released on the SpongeBob SquarePants : The Complete 3rd Season DVD as a bonus feature on September 27 , 2005 . It was also released on the SpongeBob SquarePants : The First 100 Episodes DVD , alongside all the episodes of seasons one through five . The DVD included a featurette called " Help Wanted " the Seven Seas Edition that featured " Help Wanted " in numerous languages . The episode was also a bonus feature in the series DVD called SpongeBob SquarePants : 10 Happiest Moments that was released on September 14 , 2010 . Upon release , the DVD set was quickly sold out at Best Buy and was selling " briskly " at online retailers , including Amazon.com , Barnes & Noble and Walmart . In 2012 , the DVD was released in slim packaging . 
 = Einherjar = 
 In Norse mythology , the einherjar ( Old Norse " single ( or once ) fighters " ) are those who have died in battle and are brought to Valhalla by valkyries . In Valhalla , the einherjar eat their fill of the nightly @-@ resurrecting beast Sæhrímnir , and are brought their fill of mead ( from the udder of the goat Heiðrún ) by valkyries . The einherjar prepare daily for the events of Ragnarök , when they will advance for an immense battle at the field of Vígríðr ; the battle which the " ein " ( here meaning single @-@ time ) refers to . Heimdall occasionally returned the best of Einherjar to Midgard or Jotunheim with the purpose of killing giants , but they were forbidden to talk with the living . 
 The einherjar are attested in the Poetic Edda , compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional sources , the Prose Edda , written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson , the poem Hákonarmál ( by the 10th century skald Eyvindr skáldaspillir ) as collected in Heimskringla , and a stanza of an anonymous 10th century poem commemorating the death of Eric Bloodaxe known as Eiríksmál as compiled in Fagrskinna . 
 Scholarly theories have been proposed etymologically connecting the einherjar to the Harii ( a Germanic tribe attested in the 1st century AD ) , the eternal battle of Hjaðningavíg , and the Wild Hunt . The einherjar have been the subject of works of art and poetry . Valhalla is the place of Odin . It is told in Norse mythology that einherjar are those with golden auras only seen by Valkyries . The einherjar are the Warriors trained by Asgardians . 
 = = Attestations = = 
 = = = Poetic Edda = = = 
 In the poem Vafþrúðnismál , Odin engages the wise jötunn Vafþrúðnir in a game of wits . Disguised as Gagnráðr , Odin asks Vafþrúðnir " where men fight in courts every day . " Vafþrúðnir responds that ( here einherjar is translated as <unk> ) : 
 In the poem Grímnismál , Odin ( disguised as Grímnir ) tells the young Agnar that the cook <unk> boils the beast Sæhrímnir , which he refers to as " the best of pork " , in the container <unk> , yet adds that " but few know by what the <unk> are nourished . " Further into Grímnismál , Odin gives a list of valkyries ( <unk> , Skögul , Hildr , Þrúðr , Hlökk , Herfjötur , Göll , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and Reginleif ) , and states that they bear ale to the einherjar . Towards the end of the poem , another reference to the einherjar appears when Odin tells the king Geirröd ( unaware that the man he has been torturing is Odin ) that Geirröd is drunk , and that Geirröd loses much when he loses his favor and the favor of " all the Einherjar . " 
 In the poem Helgakviða Hundingsbana I , the hero Sinfjötli flyts with Guðmundr . Sinfjötli accuses Guðmundr of having once been a female , including that he was " a witch , horrible , unnatural , among Odin 's valkyries " and that all of the einherjar " had to fight , headstrong women , on your account " . 
 = = = Prose Edda = = = 
 In the Prose Edda book Gylfaginning , the einherjar are introduced in chapter 20 . In chapter 20 , Third tells Gangleri ( described as king Gylfi in disguise ) that Odin is called <unk> ( Old Norse " father of the slain " ) " since all those who fall in battle are his adopted sons , " and that Odin assigns them places in Valhalla and <unk> where they are known as einherjar . In chapter 35 , High quotes the Grímnismál valkyrie list , and says that these valkyries wait in Valhalla , and there serve drink , and look after tableware and drinking vessels in Valhalla . In addition , High says that Odin sends valkyries to every battle , that they allot death to men , and govern victory . 
 In chapter 38 , High provides more detail about the einherjar . Gangleri says that " you say that all those men that have fallen in battle since the beginning of the world have now come to Odin in Val @-@ hall . What has he got to offer them food ? I should have thought that there must be a pretty large number there . " High replies that it is true there are a pretty large number of men there , adding many more have yet to arrive , yet that " there will seem too few when the wolf comes . " However , High adds that food is not a problem because there will never be too many people in Valhalla that the meat of Sæhrímnir ( which he calls a boar ) cannot sufficiently feed . High says that Sæhrímnir is cooked every day by the cook <unk> in the pot <unk> , and is again whole every evening . High then quotes the stanza of Grímnismál mentioning the cook , meal , and container in reference . 
 Further into chapter 38 , Gangleri asks if Odin consumes the same meals as the einherjar . High responds that Odin gives the food on his table to his two wolves Geri and Freki , and that Odin himself needs no food , for Odin gains sustenance from wine as if it were drink and meat . High then quotes another stanza from Grímnismál in reference . In chapter 39 , Gangleri asks what the einherjar drink that is as plentiful as their food , and if they drink water . High responds that it is strange that Gangleri is asking if Odin , the All @-@ Father , would invite kings , earls , and other " men of rank " to his home and give them water to drink . High says that he " swears by his faith " that many who come to Valhalla would think that he paid a high price for a drink of water if there were no better beverages there , after having died of wounds and in agony . High continues that atop Valhalla stands the goat Heiðrún , and it feeds on the foliage of the tree called Læraðr . From Heiðrún 's udders flow mead that fills a vat a day . The vat is so large that all of the einherjar are able to drink to their fullness from it . 
 In chapter 40 , Gangleri says that Valhalla must be an immense building , yet it must often be crowded around the doorways . High responds that there are plenty of doors , and that crowding doesn 't occur around them . In support , High again quotes a stanza from Grímnismál . In chapter 41 , Gangleri notes that there are very many people in Valhalla , and that Odin is a " very great lord when he commands such a troop " . Gangleri then asks what entertainment the einherjar have when they 're not drinking . High responds that every day , the einherjar get dressed and " put on war @-@ gear and go out into the courtyard and fight each other and fall upon each other . This is their sport . " High says that when dinner time arrives , the einherjar ride back to Valhalla and sit down to drink . In reference , High quotes a stanza from Grímnismál . 
 In chapter 51 , High foretells the events of Ragnarök . After the god Heimdallr awakens all the gods by blowing his horn Gjallarhorn , they will assemble at a thing , Odin will ride to the well Mímisbrunnr and consult Mímir on behalf of himself and his people , the world tree Yggdrasil will shake , and then the Æsir and the einherjar will don their war gear . The Æsir and einherjar will ride to the field Vígríðr while Odin rides before them clad in a golden helmet , mail , and holding his spear Gungnir , and heading towards the wolf Fenrir . 
 In chapter 52 , Gangleri asks what will happen after the heavens , earth , and all of the world are burned and the gods , einherjar and all of mankind have died , noting that he had previously been told that " everyone will live in some world or other for ever and ever . " High replies with a list of locations , and then describes the re @-@ emerging of the world after Ragnarök . The einherjar receive a final mention in the Prose Edda in chapter 2 of the book Skáldskaparmál , where a quote from the anonymous 10th century poem Eiríksmál is provided ( see the Fagrskinna section below for more detail and another translation from another source ) : 
 = = = Heimskringla = = = 
 At the end of the Heimskringla saga Hákonar saga góða , the poem Hákonarmál ( by the 10th century skald Eyvindr skáldaspillir ) is presented . The saga relates that king Haakon I of Norway died in battle , and yet though he is Christian , he requests that since he has died " among heathens , then give me such burial place as seems most fitting to you . " The saga relates that , shortly after , Haakon died on the same slab of rock that he was born upon , that he was greatly mourned by friend and foe alike , and that his friends moved his body northward to <unk> in North Hordaland . Haakon was there buried in a large burial mound in full armor and his finest clothing , yet with no other valuables . Further , " words were spoken over his grave according to the custom of heathen men , and they put him on the way to Valhalla . " The poem Hákonarmál is then provided . 
 In Hákonarmál , Odin sends forth the two valkyries Göndul and Skögul to " choose among the kings ' kinsmen " and who in battle should dwell with Odin in Valhalla . A battle rages with great slaughter . Haakon and his men die in battle , and they see the valkyrie Göndul leaning on a spear shaft . Göndul comments that " <unk> now the gods ' following , since Hákon has been with host so goodly bidden home with holy godheads . " Haakon hears " what the valkyries said , " and the valkyries are described as sitting " high @-@ hearted on horseback , " wearing helmets , carrying shields and that the horses wisely bore them . A brief exchange follows between Haakon and the valkyrie Skögul : 
 Skögul says that they shall now ride forth to the " green homes of the godheads " to tell Odin the king will come to Valhalla . In Valhalla , Haakon is greeted by Hermóðr and Bragi . Haakon expresses concern that he shall receive Odin 's hate ( Lee Hollander theorizes this may be due to Haakon 's conversion to Christianity from his native heathenism ) , yet Bragi responds that he is welcome : 
 = = = Fagrskinna = = = 
 In chapter 8 of Fagrskinna , a prose narrative states that , after the death of her husband Eric Bloodaxe , Gunnhild Mother of Kings had a poem composed about him . The composition is by an anonymous author from the 10th century and is referred to as Eiríksmál , and describes Eric Bloodaxe and five other kings arriving in Valhalla after their death . The poem begins with comments by Odin ( as Old Norse Óðinn ) : 
 The god Bragi asks where a thundering sound is coming from , and says that the benches of Valhalla are creaking — as if the god Baldr had returned to Valhalla — and that it sounds like the movement of a thousand . Odin responds that Bragi knows well that the sounds are for Eric Bloodaxe , who will soon arrive in Valhalla . Odin tells the heroes Sigmund and Sinfjötli to rise to greet Eric and invite him into the hall , if it is indeed he . 
 Sigmund asks Odin why he would expect Eric more than any other king , to which Odin responds that Eric has reddened his gore @-@ drenched sword with many other lands . Eric arrives , and Sigmund greets him , tells him that he is welcome to come into the hall , and asks him what other lords he has brought with him to Valhalla . Eric says that with him are five kings , that he will tell them the name of them all , and that he , himself , is the sixth . 
 = = Theories and proposed etymological connections = = 
 According to John Lindow , Andy Orchard , and Rudolf Simek , scholars have commonly connected the einherjar to the Harii , a Germanic tribe attested by Tacitus in his 1st @-@ century AD work Germania . Tacitus writes : 
 As for the Harii , quite apart from their strength , which exceeds that of the other tribes I have just listed , they pander to their innate savagery by skill and timing : with black shields and painted bodies , they choose dark nights to fight , and by means of terror and shadow of a ghostly army they cause panic , since no enemy can bear a sight so unexpected and hellish ; in every battle the eyes are the first to be conquered . 
 Lindow says that " many scholars think there may be basis for the myth in an ancient Odin cult , which would be centered on young warriors who entered into an ecstatic relationship with Odin " and that the name Harii has been etymologically connected to the <unk> element of einherjar . Simek says that since the connection has become widespread , " one tends to interpret these obviously living armies of the dead as religiously motivated bands of warriors , who led to the formation of the concept of the einherjar as well as the Wild Hunt [ ... ] " . Simek continues that the notion of an eternal battle and daily resurrection appears in book I of Saxo Grammaticus ' Gesta Danorum and in reports of the eternal battle of Hjaðningavíg . 
 According to Guðbrandur Vigfússon , the concept of the einherjar links directly to the Old Norse name Einarr . Vigfússon comments that " the name Einarr is properly = <unk> " , and points to a relation to the term with the Old Norse common nouns <unk> ( meaning " bold " ) and <unk> ( meaning " valour " ) . 
 = Italian cruiser Etna = 
 Etna was a protected cruiser of the Italian Regia Marina ( Royal Navy ) built in the 1880s . She was the lead ship of the Etna class , which included three sister ships . Named for Mount Etna on the island of Sicily , the ship was laid down in January 1883 , was launched in September 1885 , and was completed in December 1887 . She was armed with a main battery of two 10 @-@ inch ( 254 mm ) and six 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) guns , and could steam at a speed of around 17 knots ( 31 km / h ; 20 mph ) . 
 Etna frequently cruised abroad throughout her career , including visits to the United States for the World 's Columbian Exposition and the Hudson @-@ Fulton Celebration in 1893 and 1909 , respectively . She served as a training ship for naval cadets from 1907 . She saw action during the Italo @-@ Turkish War of 1911 – 12 , primarily providing gunfire support to Italian troops ashore in Libya . By the outbreak of World War I in 1914 , Etna had been withdrawn from service and was employed as a headquarters ship for the commander of the Italian fleet at Taranto and later for the light forces based at Brindisi . The old cruiser was finally sold for scrap in May 1921 . 
 = = Description = = 
 Etna was 283 feet 6 inches ( 86 @.@ 4 m ) between perpendiculars , with a beam of 42 feet 6 inches ( 13 @.@ 0 m ) . She had a mean draft of 19 feet ( 5 @.@ 8 m ) and displaced between 3 @,@ 474 long tons ( 3 @,@ 530 t ) . Her crew numbered 12 officers and 296 men . The ship had two horizontal compound steam engines , each driving a single propeller , with steam provided by four double @-@ ended cylindrical boilers . Etna was credited with a top speed of 17 @.@ 8 knots ( 33 @.@ 0 km / h ; 20 @.@ 5 mph ) from 7 @,@ 480 indicated horsepower ( 5 @,@ 580 kW ) . She had a cruising radius of 5 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 9 @,@ 300 km ; 5 @,@ 800 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 The main armament of the ships consisted of two Armstrong 10 @-@ inch ( 254 mm ) , 30 @-@ caliber breech @-@ loading guns mounted in barbettes fore and aft . She was also equipped with six 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) , 32 @-@ caliber , breech @-@ loading guns that were carried in sponsons along the sides of the ship . For anti @-@ torpedo boat defense , Etna was fitted with five 57 @-@ millimeter ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) 6 @-@ pounder Hotchkiss guns and five 37 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) 1 @-@ pounder Hotchkiss guns . Etna was also armed with four 14 @-@ inch ( 356 mm ) torpedo tubes . One was mounted in the bow underwater and the other three were above water . She was protected with an armored deck below the waterline with a maximum thickness of 1 @.@ 5 inches ( 38 mm ) . The conning tower had .5 in ( 13 mm ) worth of armor plating . 
 From 1905 to 1907 the ship was rebuilt with forecastle and poop decks added and her armament was revised . The heavy 10 @-@ inch guns were replaced with two quick @-@ firing ( QF ) 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch ( 120 mm ) guns and the six breech @-@ loading 6 @-@ inch guns were replaced by four QF 6 @-@ inch guns , two on each side amidships . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Etna was built by the Castellammare shipyard ; her keel was laid down on 19 January 1883 and her completed hull was launched on 26 September 1885 . After fitting @-@ out work was finished , she was commissioned into the Italian fleet on 3 December 1887 . Etna served in the <unk> <unk> ( Permanent Squadron ) from her commissioning to 1893 and then served in North and South American waters until the end of 1895 . During this period , Etna and the protected cruisers Dogali and Giovanni Bausan represented Italy at the international naval review in New York , held at the start of the World 's Columbian Exposition in Chicago in 1893 . The Exposition marked the 400th anniversary of Christopher Columbus 's arrival in North America . Contingents from France , Germany , Britain , Spain , and several other nations also participated in the celebration . During the visit , she flew the flag of Rear Admiral G. B. <unk> , 
 During the First Italo @-@ Ethiopian War of 1895 – 6 she was stationed in the Red Sea . She thereafter supported Italian interests during the Cretan Revolt of 1898 . In 1897 , Etna was assigned to the cruiser squadron along with Lombardia and Dogali . The ship was then transferred to the Far East , during which time she made a visit to Sydney , Australia . She returned home in 1902 and was disarmed ; she was then commissioned as the flagship of the Superior Torpedo @-@ Boat Command in 1904 . In 1907 , Etna was converted into a training cruiser for naval cadets . Etna visited the United States in September 1909 for the Hudson @-@ Fulton Celebration in New York City , which also included ships from the German , British , and French fleets , among others , in addition to the hosting US Navy . On this occasion , she was joined by the cruiser Etruria . 
 Etna saw limited action during the Italo @-@ Turkish War in 1911 – 12 . At the outbreak of the war in September 1911 , she was stationed in eastern Africa , where Italy had colonies in Eritrea and Somaliland . She was joined there by the cruisers Elba , Liguria , Piemonte and Puglia . In December 1911 , she was stationed at Tobruk , where she , the battleship Vittorio Emanuele , the cruiser Etruria , and twelve torpedo boats provided gunfire support to the Italians defending the city . She remained there through January 1912 while the bulk of the Italian fleet returned to Italy for repairs . In April , Etna bombarded Ottoman positions outside Benghazi , and in August , she sent men ashore at Zuwarah to relieve the garrison there . On 13 September she shelled Ottoman troops near the ruins of ancient Tripoli . The following month , the Ottomans agreed to surrender , ending the war . 
 In September 1914 , Etna was withdrawn from service as a training ship and used instead as a floating headquarters . Italy entered World War I in May 1915 and the ship was thereafter used as a harbor defense ship before returning to her previous role as a headquarters ship for the commander in chief of the Italian fleet at Taranto . By May 1917 , she had been transferred to Brindisi , where she served as the headquarters ship for Rear Admiral Alfredo Acton during the Battle of the Strait of Otranto . The old cruiser was sold for scrapping on 15 May 1921 , and was the last surviving ship of her class . 
 = Hotarubi no Mori e = 
 Hotarubi no Mori e ( Japanese : 蛍火の杜へ , lit . " Into the Forest of Fireflies ' Light " ) is a one @-@ shot shōjo manga written by Yuki Midorikawa . It was published in the July 2002 issue of <unk> DX in Japan , and in July 2003 it was reprinted in a tankōbon short story collection of the same name , which included four romantic one @-@ shot stories written by Midorikawa . Hotarubi no Mori e tells the story of a young girl named Hotaru and her friendship with Gin , a strange young man wearing a mask , who she meets at the age of six in a mountain forest near her grandfather 's country home . Hotaru learns that her friend is supernatural and that touching Gin will cause him to disappear forever . Hotaru returns every summer to spend time with Gin , and their relationship matures as both struggle with its limitations . The inspiration to write the story came suddenly to Midorikawa , who immediately drew the manga — a process that went smoothly despite some initial conflicting elements . Hotarubi no Mori e is considered a starting point for Midorikawa 's best known work , Natsume 's Book of Friends . 
 A 44 @-@ minute anime film with the same title was produced in 2011 at the anime studio Brain 's Base and directed by Takahiro Omori . The film starred Japanese voice actors Ayane Sakura and Kōki Uchiyama , and its soundtrack included music by Makoto Yoshimori . The film maintained a strong following for months in Japan after its opening on September 17 , 2011 . The European premiere of Hotarubi no Mori e was on October 8 , 2011 at the Scotland Loves Animation festival , where it won the Jury Prize . It was screened at the Leeds International Film Festival , Anime Contents Expo and Anime Expo convention , and also won the Animation Film Award at the 66th Annual Mainichi Film Awards . 
 The anime was released on Blu @-@ ray Disc ( BD ) and DVD in Japan on February 22 , 2012 . An additional story related to the original manga and anime film , titled Hotarubi no Mori e Tokubetsuhen ( 蛍火の杜へ 特別編 ) , was released in a keepsake edition of the manga 12 days prior to the release of the anime . Both the keepsake edition manga and the limited edition BD ranked No. 13 on Japan 's Oricon sales chart shortly after their release . Sakura reported experiencing a strong emotional reaction to the story while recording the voice of Hotaru , and Midorikawa acknowledged that the story had a positive impact on her career . Reviewers universally praised the anime film for its beauty , simplicity , and tenderness , likening it to the works of Hayao Miyazaki of Studio Ghibli and Makoto Shinkai . There were few criticisms , most commonly focusing on its short length . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The original Hotarubi no Mori e shōjo manga and subsequent film tell the story of a six @-@ year @-@ old girl named Hotaru <unk> , who gets lost in a forest inhabited by a <unk> , or mountain spirit , as well as yōkai ( strange apparitions from Japanese folklore ) . She is found by a mask @-@ wearing , human @-@ like entity named Gin , who informs Hotaru that he will disappear forever if he is touched by a human . Gin then leads Hotaru out of the forest . Hotaru returns to visit Gin in the forest over the next few days and they become friends despite the limitations on their interactions . Although at summer 's end she must leave Gin to return to the city and her studies , Hotaru promises to return to visit him every summer holiday . As the years go by , Gin hardly ages while Hotaru physically matures and grows closer to his apparent age . Upon reaching adolescence Hotaru begins to struggle with their budding romance and their uncertain future together , while Gin wishes he could touch and hold the young woman that Hotaru has become . When Hotaru reaches high school , Gin takes her on a date to a festival in the forest hosted by the spirits . The night ends in tragedy when Gin mistakenly touches a young boy who sneaked into the spirit festival , though before he disappears , he and Hotaru embrace and confess their love for one another . The story ends with Hotaru accepting her pain and moving on with her life . The 2011 anime film adaptation of the story follows all of the events from the manga , adding only a few additional scenes . 
 Hotarubi no Mori e Tokubetsuhen ( 蛍火の杜へ 特別編 ) , published in 2011 , expands on the original story with a short episode told from Gin 's perspective . When Hotaru is a teenager , she shares some pudding with Gin before she leaves at the end of the summer . After Hotaru leaves , the yōkai attempt to cheer Gin up by bringing him a couple persimmons , one of the most prized treats on the mountain . Impressed with the taste , Gin thinks of sharing one of these persimmons with Hotaru next year . After discussing ways to preserve the persimmon with the yōkai and a spirit named Matsumino , Gin sets off to find ice on the highest mountain peak , but is disappointed to find none during the summer . When Gin returns scratched up from his fruitless search for ice , Matsumino feels sorry for him and offers to deliver the persimmon to Hotaru for him . However , not knowing where she lives , Matsumino gets lost and grows hungry . After he returns from his unsuccessful attempt to find Hotaru , Matsumino apologizes to Gin for eating the persimmon and Gin forgives him . The story concludes with Gin seeing Hotaru the following summer and wondering if he will be able to tell her about his feelings for her . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Manga = = = 
 The author , Yuki Midorikawa , explained in the postscript of the Aizoban Hotarubi no Mori e reprint that the idea for the story came to her more easily than for any other work up until that point . Although she had been planning to write a story as challenging as Hotarubi no Mori e once she had gained more experience writing manga , she decided to undertake the project sooner when the idea for the story suddenly came to her . Afraid that she might lose the idea , she promptly began to draw it , and Midorikawa 's writing progressed smoothly despite having numerous conflicting ideas for the development of the story . 
 The story came from Midorikawa 's desire to draw several scenes . She was interested in drawing a scene where a boy dodges a girl who is falling towards him . She also wanted to draw a shadowy summertime forest , which would allow her to expand the range of tones and blacks used in the manga . A third inspiration was the desire to depict a more tranquil summer festival than those she had drawn before . She was also eager to create the mask worn by Gin at the festival , which resembled the face of a fox whose typical <unk> eyes were replaced by oval ones to give the mask a " creepy " hybrid fox @-@ primate appearance . 
 The supernatural love story between Hotaru and Gin is considered a starting point for Midorikawa 's best known work , Natsume 's Book of Friends , which also depicts ill @-@ fated interactions between humans and yōkai ( sometimes referred to as <unk> ) . In both stories , differences in lifespan and other insurmountable barriers mar their relationships and attempts to understand each other . 
 Prior to the anime film 's theatrical release in 2011 , Midorikawa published an additional chapter to the story , Hotarubi no Mori e Tokubetsuhen . Since the original story was already complete and she initially felt uncomfortable about adding to it , she opted instead to expand on the story from Gin 's perspective . 
 = = = Anime = = = 
 According to the animation director , Yumi Satou , the anime project originated with his personal wish to animate original manga , which he enjoyed . The project was given approval in early 2011 , and according to the film 's producer , <unk> Yokoyama , the anime was originally planned as an OVA ( Original video animation ) , which would not have been released in theaters . However , the popularity of Natsume 's Book of Friends , which was also written by Midorikawa and developed by the same production staff , gave them the support they needed to create an anime film . The film was produced by the studio Brain 's Base and directed by Takahiro Omori , starring Japanese voice actors Ayane Sakura as Hotaru and Kōki Uchiyama as Gin . Satou had frequently worked together with Yokoyama on previous projects . Other staff included Akira <unk> ( character design ) , Yukihiro Shibuya ( art ) , Hiromi <unk> ( color design ) , Hitoshi Tamura ( photography ) , and Kazuhiko Seki ( editor ) . The anime film had a very small staff because it was a very short film and was produced domestically , unlike the TV series , Natsume 's Book of Friends , which was primarily outsourced to other countries — a common trend in anime production . 
 In March 2011 , midway through production , the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami struck Japan . Despite the national tragedy , the production crew continued its work , and according to Omori , the team hoped that their work would help soothe the nation after it had time to recover . Omori speculated that this was part of the reason for the strong positive reception and the awards the anime later received . 
 The setting in the manga was based on a shrine in the Kumamoto Prefecture of Japan , known as <unk> <unk> Shrine , which is dedicated to Izanagi @-@ no @-@ Mikoto and Izanami @-@ no @-@ Mikoto from Japanese mythology . The animation crew spent two hours searching the location for settings on which they could base their art . Because the story was set in the forest of a mountain god , Omori intended the art to represent a " different world " where the background scenery was obscure and the blue sky was slightly brighter than normal . Omori and his crew devoted extra attention to lighting and coloring , making the forest dim with light coming through the canopy and landing on the characters with the appropriate intensity . The contrast between light and dark was also used during the festival scene to emphasize its bizarre nature , reminding the audience that Hotaru should not be there . Because of the significance of the summer season to the story , Omori deliberately loaded the film with summer scenes , such as rustling leaves and <unk> of cicadas . 
 According to the Omori , the idea for the opening scene was suggested by Yokoyama ; following traditional cinematography , the images of scenes indirectly related to the main story were played while the opening credits appeared . Originally intended to show Gin 's life before meeting Hotaru , Omori allowed the viewer to decide its relationship in time with the main story . Omori also opted to start Hotaru 's narration from a time after the story 's main events ; showing Hotaru as an 18 @-@ year @-@ old who had just graduated high school and heading back to visit her relatives near the forest . By having Hotaru tell the story in retrospect , Omori thought it provided a more human feel and gave more meaning to the final scene , where Hotaru expresses her hopes for the future by saying , " Come on , let 's go . " 
 One of the difficulties in adapting the manga to anime , according to Omori , was that the developing relationship between Hotaru and Gin had to be shown visually , rather than through monologue . One way in which this was done used Hotaru 's yearly change in height — by subtly showing the convergence of the length of their strides when walking , the audience is led to perceive a change in their relationship . Omori also wanted to portray more depth to Hotaru 's character by expanding on her school life . Although the manga depicted a brief flash of her life in middle school , the anime depicted scenes from both aspects of her life . 
 Omori shared a draft of the film with composer Makoto Yoshimori so that he could write music to match the tempo . However , there was some disagreement over the ending theme , which Omori and Yoshimori discussed at length over email . Although neither would compromise on key points , the issue was eventually settled and the ending theme was finalized . 
 Hotaru 's voice actor in the anime film , Ayane Sakura , was a fan of Midorikawa and owned the original manga . In an interview , she mentioned that she was thrilled to get an audition and ultimately the role , and also admitted that she shed tears while recording . Kōki Uchiyama , who played Gin , read the manga for the audition , and confessed that he was concerned at first about how to portray his character , though his work made him feel good . The film was initially pre @-@ scored , where the voice acting was recorded prior to the creation of the animation , but later re @-@ recorded for the final version . According to Omori , this allowed the animation to emphasize natural pauses in the dialogue and let the cast set the rhythm and tempo . 
 = = Media = = 
 = = = Manga = = = 
 The manga was first published in the July 2002 issue of Hakusensha 's <unk> DX in Japan . It was first reprinted on July 10 , 2003 in the tankōbon entitled Hotarubi no Mori e , which included four previously published romantic one @-@ shot stories by Yuki Midorikawa . In addition to the titular short story , the book included " <unk> <unk> " ( April 2003 ) , " <unk> <unk> " ( November 2002 ) , and " <unk> <unk> " ( January 2003 ) . As part of the 2003 tankōbon short story collection , each of the four one @-@ shot stories were set in a different season : " <unk> <unk> " in spring , " Hotarubi no Mori e " in summer , " <unk> <unk> " in fall , and " <unk> <unk> " in winter . Within the tankōbon , the stories were arranged in order from spring to winter , although they were originally published in a different order . As of May 15 , 2012 , the tankōbon was on its 19th printing . 
 On September 5 , 2011 , 12 days prior to the anime movie 's premiere in Japan , a new story related to Hotarubi no Mori e was published as part of a keepsake edition of the original manga , Aizoban Hotarubi no Mori e ( <unk> 蛍火の杜へ ) . The 12 @-@ page story , titled " Hotarubi no Mori e Tokubetsuhen " ( 蛍火の杜へ 特別編 ) , is one of four short stories included in the keepsake edition , which also includes the original " Hotarubi no Mori e " and two other older works by Midorikawa : " <unk> no Kakera " ( <unk> ) ( 2003 ) and " Hoshi mo <unk> " ( <unk> ) ( 2005 ) . 
 = = = Anime = = = 
 The anime film , Hotarubi no Mori e , is categorized as a drama / romance , with a running time of 44 minutes . In March 2011 , the anime version was to be put on display at the Anime Contents Expo in Chiba , Japan , along with new work on Natsume 's Book of Friends , but the event was canceled following the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami . The opening date for the film was announced on June 4 on the film 's official website . On June 18 , special pre @-@ order tickets were sold along with the limited offer of a free poster . Around a week later , four television commercials focused on the anime 's main characters were streamed from the film 's official website . Sixteen days before the official release , a 96 @-@ second trailer was posted on Cinema Today , a Japanese movie website . 
 The film opened in Japan on September 17 , 2011 , playing at Theater <unk> in Osaka and Ikebukuro 's Cine Libre in Tokyo . The European premiere of Hotarubi no Mori e was on October 8 , 2011 at the Scotland Loves Animation festival in Glasgow , followed by interviews and a Q / A session with the animation director and the producer . It was screened again at the Scotland Loves Animation festival in Edinburgh on October 14 , along with two other short films produced by Brain 's Base studio . It was also a late addition to the 2011 Leeds International Film Festival and shown as a free presentation on November 18 in Leeds Town Hall . Hotarubi no Mori e was one of 60 titles screened at the first Anime Contents Expo held at Makuhari Messe in Chiba in late March 2012 . It was also shown on June 30 , 2012 at the Anime Expo convention at the Los Angeles Convention Center . 
 Limited edition copies of the Blu @-@ ray Disc and DVD were released in Japan on February 22 , 2012 . The limited edition sets included card set illustrations , stickers , a 40 @-@ page booklet , a strap with an attached mask ( like Gin 's ) , and other limited time specials . The DVD was also released at the same time without these extras . 
 = = = = Music = = = = 
 The original soundtrack ( catalog number : SVWC @-@ <unk> ) was released on August 24 , 2011 , less than a month prior to the release of the anime film . The music was recorded by Makoto Yoshimori , and the ending theme , " Natsu o <unk> " ( <unk> , lit . " I Was Watching Summer " ) , was sung by Shizuru <unk> . 
 All songs written and composed by Makoto Yoshimori . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The keepsake edition manga , Aizoban Hotarubi no Mori e by Midorikawa , ranked No. 13 on Japan 's Oricon comic sales chart during September 5 – 11 , 2011 , with 40 @,@ 641 copies sold during its first week . 
 In Japan , the anime was considered a hit , attracting many fans at each screening in Tokyo for several months . Following its European premiere at the Scotland Loves Animation festival in Glasgow , Hotarubi no Mori e was awarded the Jury Award . In January 2012 , it won the Animation Film Award at the 66th Annual Mainichi Film Awards and received at the awards ceremony held on February 13 , 2012 in Kawasaki , Japan . The limited edition Blu @-@ ray Disc also ranked No. 13 on Oricon 's weekly BD sales chart between February 20 – 26 , 2012 , with 7 @,@ 171 copies sold in the five days following its release . 
 The anime film of Hotarubi no Mori e was well received by its reviewers , and likened to the works of Hayao Miyazaki of Studio Ghibli and Makoto Shinkai . UK Anime Network 's Andy Hanley , who attended a screening at the Scotland Loves Animation festival , said it is " beautiful in its simplicity " , though noting that the climax seemed a bit rushed and sudden , leaving the audience to struggle with their emotions . 
 Nick Browne of T.H.E.M. Anime Reviews described it as a " vignette of bittersweet nostalgia " , praising the anime for being a " gorgeously detailed piece with beautiful animation . " Browne also wrote favorably of the story 's progression , noting that its dark undertones grew heavier as the main character matured , and that the consistent characterization of Hotaru from childhood to her early teens was impressive , especially given the film 's length . Browne 's criticisms were limited to noting the film 's short length , a clash between the cartoonish depictions of the forest spirits and the rest of the movie , and an issue with one element of plot development near the end of the film . He did note that sensitive viewers may interpret some aspects of the story as inappropriate , such as the initial age difference between the main characters and the way Gin punishes Hotaru as a child when she tries to touch him . In the case of the former , Browne noted that their romance developed only when Hotaru began to approach Gin 's physical age , and with the latter , he noted that no harm was intended . In both cases , he also mentioned that cultural differences must be considered . 
 Both Yokoyama and Satou noted the " Japanese @-@ ness " of the anime during the panel discussion following the main showing at the Scotland Loves Animation festival . Yokoyama had originally been concerned that foreign audiences would not fully understand and appreciate the work , but the reaction of the audience at the Glasgow showing alleviated his concerns . According to Yokoyama and Satou , elements of the story that exhibited strong elements of Japanese culture included the watermelon eating scene , the part where Gin hits young Hotaru over the head with a stick , and the scene where young Hotaru gets scared at night when she sees the face of a yōkai in the patterns of the wood panels on the ceiling . 
 Midorikawa attributed the success of Hotarubi no Mori e to the quality of the story , noting even those readers of the original manga who were critical of her artwork were drawn to read the story from start to finish . She speculated that hiding Gin 's face behind a mask had helped mitigate some of the artistic issues for which her earlier work had been criticized . The intense pressure experienced by Midorikawa early in her manga writing career was relieved as a result of the positive feedback she received upon her success with Hotarubi no Mori e . In 2011 , she expressed excitement for the new anime film and having the manga reprinted in a new short story collection , remarking that her attempts to write about her feelings and recent experiences in relation to Hotarubi no Mori e brought tears to her eyes . She described the story as a " precious work " that had help her build social connections . 
 = Nicola Zagame = 
 Nicola Maree " Ziggy " Zagame ( born 11 August 1990 in Sydney ) is an Australian water polo centre back / driver . She attended Kirrawee High School in New South Wales . One of her hobbies is art , and some of it was displayed as part of an exhibit at the <unk> Regional Gallery and Arts Centre in 2008 . She became a water polo player after being recruited from surf lifesaving when she was thirteen . She has had a water polo scholarship with the New South Wales Institute of Sport . She plays for the Cronulla Sharks in the National Water Polo League where she has twice set single season scoring records . She has represented her country as a member of Australia women 's national water polo team on both the junior and senior levels , and was part of the silver winning team at the 2010 FINA Women 's Water Polo World Cup . She represented Australia at the 2012 Summer Olympics . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Zagame , nicknamed Ziggy and Nicky , was born on 11 August 1990 in Sydney and grew up attending Kirrawee High School . Currently residing in Gymea Bay , New South Wales , the 174 cm ( 5 ft 9 in ) tall 73 kilograms ( 161 lb ) right handed Zagame disclosed her hobbies to be surfing , art , <unk> , and reading . Her art was displayed at the <unk> Regional Gallery and Arts Centre in 2008 as part of an exhibition of works of young local artists . She is " intrigued by the animal @-@ like qualities often found in people , both in physical appearance and personality " and integrated this theme into her works which were on display . She attended Sydney University where she was part of a course related to medical radiation science @-@ diagnostic radiography . She is a water polo coach and works at a shop making sandwiches . 
 = = Water polo = = 
 Zagame plays as a centre back / driver and prefers to wear cap number twelve . She keeps a rock that she considers lucky in her pool bag . She started playing water polo as a thirteen @-@ year @-@ old in Sutherland , New South Wales having been recruited from Cronulla <unk> where was involved with surf lifesaving . At the time of her transition to water polo , she was a better surf swimmer than a <unk> swimmer . She has held a scholarship for water polo at the New South Wales Institute of Sport . In 2008 , she competed in the Women 's International Series . 
 = = = Club team = = = 
 Zagame is a member of and plays club water polo for the Cronulla Sharks Water Polo Club in the National Water Polo League . During the 2009 season , she scored 76 goals . She played for the team in 2010 , including the finals tournament , during which she was named in the league final 's All Star team . She has twice set season goal @-@ scoring records while playing in the league , with the second time coming in a 2010 game when her team beat Adelaide at home in the Sutherland Leisure Centre . She challenges opposition players in such a way that it frequently results in her fouling out of games . She was the captain of the team during the 2011 season . In 2012 , she played briefly with the club before taking a break from the team following their 18 February 2012 game to attend the national team training camp . Her last game before the break was against the Balmain Tigers . As a member of the team , she helped win the first two games of the season 8 – 4 and 7 – 4 . 
 = = = Junior national team = = = 
 Zagame has represented Australia on the junior national level . In July 2006 , she was a member of the Youth Girls squad that competed in an international series in Auckland , New Zealand . 
 = = = Senior national team = = = 
 Zagame is a member of the Australia women 's national water polo team , nicknamed the Stingers . She made her senior team debut in May 2009 . In 2009 , she was part of the Australian side that finished third at the FINA World <unk> Super Finals in Kirishi , Russia . This was her first major international tournament as a member of the senior squad . In 2009 , she was part of the team that finished sixth at the FINA World Championships in Rome , Italy in 2009 . She was also part of the Australian side that won the 2009 Holiday Cup in the United States . 
 Zagame was a member of the 2010 Stingers squad that competed at the FINA World Cup in Christchurch , New Zealand where Australia finished second . In the team 's quarter finals 10 – 8 victory over the United States women 's national water polo team , she scored three goals . In May 2010 , she was a member of the team that competed at the FINA World League Asia @-@ Oceania zone held in Osaka , Japan and Tianjin , China . 
 Zagame was part of the Australian side that won a silver medal at the 2011 Kirishi Cup in June . In the game for the medal , they played Kazakhstan women 's national water polo team . In that match , she scored two goals . In July 2011 , she was a member of the Australian Stingers that competed in the 2011 FINA World Championships in Shanghai . In preparation for this tournament , she attended a team training camp in Perth , Western Australia . 
 In January 2012 , Zagame competed in the Pan Pacific Championships for the Stingers , and was a member of the squad that competed the three @-@ game test series against the United States . The Australian team won two of the three matches , with scores of 12 – 13 in an opening series loss , winning 11 – 6 in the second match and winning the third match 12 – 7 clash at Sutherland Leisure Centre . Zagame scored a goal in the second half of the final match in the series . This test series was the first time she had played an international match in her home swimming pool , Sutherland Leisure Centre . 
 In February 2012 , Zagame was named in the 17 @-@ member training squad for the 2012 Summer Olympics , and attended a training camp that started on 20 February 2012 at the Australian Institute of Sport . She was part of the Stingers squad that competed in a five @-@ game test against Great Britain at the AIS in late February 2012 . This was the team 's first matches against Great Britain 's national team in six years . The team will be cut to thirteen before the team departs for the Olympic games , with the announcement scheduled on 13 June . 
 Zagame is planning to stay in the sport and hopes to qualify for the 2016 Summer Olympics . 
 = 4 Walls = 
 4 Walls is the fourth studio album by South Korea @-@ based girl group f ( x ) , released by S.M. Entertainment on October 27 , 2015 . Lee Soo @-@ man , former president of S.M. Entertainment , served as the executive producer of the album . It marked the group 's first release as a four @-@ member group after former member Sulli left the group in August 2015 . 
 To promote the album , f ( x ) appeared and performed on several music programs including M Countdown , Music Bank and Show ! Music Core . The group further embarked on its first concert tour Dimension 4 – Docking Station ( 2016 ) , which visited South Korea and Japan in January and February 2016 . The title track " 4 Walls " was released as a single in conjunction with the release of the album . The record 's musical styles are diverse , incorporating the group 's signature electropop and synthpop sound with elements of various genres including house , EDM and UK garage . 
 The album received favorable reviews from music critics , who noted that the other members had the opportunity to showcase their vocal abilities more following the departure of Sulli . The release peaked atop South Korea 's Gaon Album Chart and has sold over 76 @,@ 000 physical copies in the country as of January 2016 ; in addition , 4 Walls topped the Billboard World Albums Chart and charted at number thirty @-@ nine on the Japanese Oricon Albums Chart . The single " 4 Walls " , meanwhile , peaked at numbers two on the Gaon Digital Chart and the Billboard World Digital Songs . 
 = = Background = = 
 South Korea @-@ based girl group f ( x ) had been known as a five @-@ member girl group , with its original lineup consisting of members Krystal , Amber , Victoria , Sulli , and Luna . The group 's last release as a five @-@ member group was Red Light , released in July 2014 . During the promotion of Red Light , member Sulli did not participate in live performances due to her " suffering from continual negative comments and false rumors , " according to the group 's parent company S.M. Entertainment 's official statement on July 25 , 2014 @.@ f ( x ) ' s promotional activities thereafter involved the four other members , while Sulli took a career hiatus . On August 7 , 2015 , it was announced that Sulli had officially withdrawn from the group to focus on her acting career , and f ( x ) would continue to promote as a four @-@ member group . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 f ( x ) was announced to be working on its then @-@ forthcoming studio album on September 11 , 2015 , when the group traveled to Jeju Island to film a music video . The album , titled 4 Walls , was released digitally worldwide on October 27 , 2015 by S.M. Entertainment . In South Korea , the album was distributed digitally and physically by S.M. Entertainment and KT Music . The music video for the title track " 4 Walls " was released simultaneously . The song impacted Korean Broadcasting System 's " K @-@ Pop Connection " radio on October 29 . 
 Following the release of the album , f ( x ) appeared and performed on several music programs . Its first televised appearance was on July 29 , 2014 on Mnet 's M Countdown , where the group performed " 4 Walls " and " Diamond " . The group subsequently appeared on KBS ' Music Bank and MBC 's Show ! Music Core on the two following days , respectively . To further promote the album , f ( x ) embarked on the concert tour Dimension 4 – Docking Station , which was its first concert tour since their debut in 2009 . The tour kicked off in Seoul , South Korea at Olympic Park from January 29 to 31 , 2016 , and further included six shows in four cities of Japan : Tokyo , Fukuoka , Osaka and Nagoya . The tour lasted from February 20 to 28 , 2016 . 
 = = Musical styles = = 
 The album , in the words of Pitchfork Media , keeps up with f ( x ) ' s signature electropop and synthpop styles that the group cultivated through its previous albums Pink Tape ( 2013 ) and Red Light ( 2014 ) . Jeff Benjamin of Billboard noted the emphasis on house and dance genres on the album . The opening track " 4 Walls " was described as a tropical house song with " slinky " synthesizers and " dreamy " hooks by The Star . It was characterized as an " update " of UK garage by Spin , while Billboard detailed it as having a deep house sound . The next song , " Glitter " , is an R & B and synthpop number . " Deja Vu " mixes industrial beats with glitch pop sounds , while " X " draws influences from the 1980s funk , 1990s disco and R & B. 
 " Rude Love " is described as a piano house song with dance fusion . " Diamond " is an electropop song , while " Traveler " features retro @-@ styled melodies and smooth rap verses . The track " Papi " , instrumented by synthesizers , infuses Latin music and EDM styles . " Cash Me Out " is an EDM song that incorporates elements of American electropop . The album closer " When I 'm Alone " is a synthpop track which was initially written by Canadian singer Carly Rae Jepsen during recording sessions for her third studio album Emotion ( 2015 ) , but its inclusion was withdrawn and its rights were later purchased by S.M. Entertainment . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 4 Walls was subject to favorable reviews from music critics . Jeff Benjamin from Billboard shared that despite the fact that the album was " arguably worse " than f ( x ) ' s previous albums Pink Tape ( 2013 ) and Red Light ( 2014 ) , it allowed the other members to showcase their vocal abilities more following the departure of Sulli . He praised it as a " rarity in K @-@ pop to do once " by " finding the right <unk> " and appreciated the " house and trendy dance " production . Benjamin subsequently named 4 Walls the second best K @-@ pop album of 2015 , writing : " Known for crafting some of the best full @-@ length K @-@ pop albums , f ( x ) did not disappoint with their long @-@ awaited 4 Walls comeback . " 
 Jakob Dorof on behalf of Pitchfork Media labeled the record a " superficial rebirth " following f ( x ) ' s lineup change and commented that the other members had the chance to express their talents more , particularly with Amber 's alto " harmonies " on " Rude Love " . He , upon reviewing the album for Spin , disliked the songs " Deja Vu " , " Papi " , " Cash Me Out " and " When I 'm Alone " . He nonetheless labeled them " minor misgivings " and complimented 4 Walls on featuring " sophisticated and innovative " musical styles that could " signal a surprise second life for the world 's greatest living pop group . " Echoing Dorof 's viewpoint , Chester Chin of The Star was not impressed by the inclusion of the " derivative " tracks " Glitter " and " Cash Me Out " , yet expressed his admiration for the " solid and edgy " album 's " more cohesive " sound as well as " more polished and sharper " beats . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 4 Walls was a commercial success in South Korea , and also charted in Japan and the United States . It debuted atop South Korea 's Gaon Album Chart on the chart issue dated October 25 – 31 , 2015 . It was the fourth best @-@ selling physical album of October 2015 in South Korea , with sales figures standing at 65 @,@ 933 copies . The album was additionally the eighteenth highest @-@ selling album of November with 7 @,@ 820 units sold . Overall , it ranked at number thirty @-@ three on the Gaon 's 2015 year @-@ end album chart , with accumulated sales of 75 @,@ 625 copies . 4 Walls debuted at number thirty @-@ nine on Japan 's Oricon Albums Chart on November 16 , 2015 . It peaked at number one on the U.S. Billboard World Albums Chart on November 14 , 2015 , becoming f ( x ) ' s second number one on the chart following 2013 's Pink Tape . 4 Walls was the group 's best @-@ charting album on the U.S. Heatseekers Albums Chart , where it charted at number seven . The single " 4 Walls " debuted at number two on South Korea 's Gaon Digital Chart for the week of October 25 , 2015 . It was the twenty @-@ sixth best @-@ selling single of October 2015 ( 199 @,@ 976 digital units sold ) , and the twelfth best @-@ selling single of November 2015 ( 247 @,@ 232 digital units sold ) in South Korea . The track debuted at number two on the U.S. Billboard World Digital Songs , becoming their highest @-@ charting song on the chart . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = 1st Croatian Guards Corps = 
 The 1st Croatian Guards Corps ( Croatian : 1 @.@ hrvatski gardijski <unk> ) was a special formation of the Croatian Army ( Hrvatska vojska – HV ) directly subordinated to the Ministry of Defence rather than the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Republic of Croatia and reporting directly to the President of Croatia . The corps was established in 1994 by the amalgamation of various HV special forces . The 2 @,@ 500 @-@ strong unit was organised into the 1st Croatian Guards Brigade ( 1 @.@ hrvatski gardijski zdrug – HGZ ) , a multi @-@ purpose special forces combat unit , and four battalions tasked with ensuring the security of the President of Croatia and carrying out ceremonial duties . The HGZ took part in a number of military operations during the Croatian War of Independence and the Bosnian War . It was disbanded in 2000 , when its components were amalgamated with other HV units to form the Special Operations Battalion , the 305th Military Intelligence Battalion , and the Honour Guard Battalion . 
 = = Establishment = = 
 On 25 February 1994 , the special forces of the Croatian Army ( Hrvatska vojska – HV ) were reorganised when all HV 's special forces units were combined to form the 1st Croatian Guards Corps ( 1 @.@ hrvatski gardijski <unk> ) . In April , personnel of the 8th Military Police Light Assault Brigade ( itself only established in September 1993 ) were also transferred to the corps , ultimately making the corps 2 @,@ 500 @-@ strong . In addition to special forces operations , the corps was also tasked with providing security for the President of Croatia . The corps was organised into four specialised battalions and the 1st Croatian Guards Brigade ( 1 @.@ hrvatski gardijski zdrug – HGZ ) , a multi @-@ purpose special forces combat unit . The HGZ was considered the elite unit of the HV . The entire corps was directly subordinated to the Ministry of Defence rather than the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Republic of Croatia , and reported directly to the president . It was commanded by Major General Mile <unk> . <unk> and his deputy were based in the Presidential Palace , while the bulk of the corps was based in nearby Tuškanac barracks . The HGZ was capable of fielding up to 300 troops in combat . It was commanded by Colonel ( later Major General ) Miljenko Filipović , who had previously commanded the Zrinski Battalion — one of the special forces units amalgamated into the corps . 
 = = Combat service = = 
 The HGZ took part in several battles of the Croatian War of Independence and the Bosnian War . In late November and December 1994 , it participated in Operation Winter ' 94 , the joint offensive of the HV and the Croatian Defence Council ( Hrvatsko vijeće obrane – HVO ) which pushed the Army of Republika Srpska ( Vojska Republike Srpske – VRS ) from the western parts of the Livanjsko field in Bosnia and Herzegovina . Elements of the HGZ also saw action along the Novska – Okučani axis of advance in the HV 's Operation Flash offensive that took place in western Slavonia in early May 1995 . By this time , the HGZ also commanded its own artillery and Mil Mi @-@ 24 helicopter gunships , in addition to Mil Mi @-@ 8 transport helicopters . The HGZ redeployed west of Livno once again in early June to take part in Operation Leap 2 , extending the salient that had been created in late 1994 west towards Bosansko Grahovo and Glamoč . The unit participated in the capture of those towns in late July 1995 during Operation Summer ' 95 . 
 In preparation for Operation Storm , the HV 4th Guards and 7th Guards Brigades were pulled back from positions facing the VRS that had been established during Operation Summer ' 95 , and were reoriented south towards the Army of the Republic of Serb Krajina ( ARSK ) . The ARSK was protecting the northern approaches to Knin − the capital of the unrecognised Republic of Serbian Krajina − which Croatia claimed as part of its own territory . As the two brigades turned over the positions north and west of Bosansko Grahovo to the HV 81st Guards Battalion , the HGZ was deployed to the rear of the battalion , tasked with intervening in case of any VRS attack towards Bosansko Grahovo . On the second day of the operation , 6 August , after Knin was captured by the HV , the HGZ was airlifted from the Livanjsko field to the village of <unk> north of Zadar . They then linked up with the 2nd Battalion of the 9th Guards Brigade and advanced east to capture the villages of <unk> and Kaštel <unk> . On 8 August , the HGZ participated in an operation against the last significant ARSK pocket in the area of Donji Lapac and Srb , alongside the three guards brigades and special police forces . 
 In September 1995 , the HGZ took part in Operation Mistral 2 , which extended HV and HVO control in western Bosnia and Herzegovina and captured the towns of Jajce , Šipovo and Drvar , moving the confrontation line north towards the Bosnian Serb capital of Banja Luka . In October , the HGZ also participated in Operation Southern Move , which captured the town of Mrkonjić Grad , and reached the southern slopes of Mount Manjača , 25 kilometres ( 16 miles ) south of Banja Luka . 
 = = Reorganisation = = 
 The corps was disbanded in 2000 and its constituents reorganised . A part of the HGZ was amalgamated with the Special Combat Skills Centre Šepurine to form the Special Operations Battalion . The remainder of the brigade was amalgamated with the Reconnaissance @-@ Sabotage Company based in Pula , the 350th Sabotage Detachment , the 280th Unmanned Aerial Vehicle Platoon , and the 275th Electronic Warfare Company to form the 305th Military Intelligence Battalion . The elements of the corps which were tasked with security of the President of Croatia and ceremonial duties were reformed and the Honour Guard Battalion was established in their place . 
 = 1993 – 94 South @-@ West Indian Ocean cyclone season = 
 The 1993 – 94 South @-@ West Indian Ocean cyclone season was the most active since the start of reliable satellite coverage in 1967 , with 15 named storms including one named tropical depression . Activity lasted from mid @-@ November , when Moderate Tropical Storm Alexina formed , until mid @-@ April , when Tropical Cyclone Odille became extratropical . Four tropical cyclones – Daisy , Geralda , Litanne , and Nadia – struck eastern Madagascar , of which Geralda was the costliest and deadliest . With gusts as strong as 350 km / h ( 220 mph ) accompanied by heavy rainfall , the cyclone destroyed more than 40 @,@ 000 homes and left 356 @,@ 000 people homeless . Geralda killed 231 people and left more than $ 10 million in damage . Cyclone Nadia was the second deadliest cyclone , having killed 12 people in northern Madagascar and later severely damaging portions of northeastern Mozambique , killing about 240 people and leaving $ 20 million in damage in the latter country . In February , Cyclone Hollanda struck Mauritius near peak intensity , causing $ 135 million in damage and two deaths . 
 Three storms – Alexina , Bettina , and Cecilia – formed in late 1993 , of which Cecilia affected land ; it produced heavy rainfall in Réunion while dissipating . Cyclone Daisy was the first storm in 1994 , which struck Madagascar twice and affected many areas that were later struck by Geralda . One cyclone – Farah – previously formed in the Australian basin as Tropical Cyclone Pearl before crossing into the south @-@ west Indian Ocean . Tropical Cyclone Ivy threatened Mauritius just days after Hollanda struck , and Intense Tropical Cyclone Litanne in March was the third of the season to hit northeastern Madagascar . The basin is defined as the area west of 90 ° E and south of the Equator in the Indian Ocean , which includes the waters around Madagascar westward to the east coast of Africa . Tropical cyclones in this basin are monitored by the Regional Specialised Meteorological Centre in Réunion ( MFR ) , as well as by the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) . 
 = = Seasonal summary = = 
 On July 1 , 1993 , the Météo @-@ France office in Réunion ( MFR ) became a Regional Specialized Meteorological Center , as designated by the World Meteorological Organization . In the year , MFR tracked tropical cyclones south of the equator from the coast of Africa to 90 ° E. Due to the high activity during the season , MFR issued twice the number of advisories as in the previous year . Every six hours in the season , the agency issued bulletins when there was a tropical system within the basin . Storms were named by advisory centers in Mauritius and Madagascar . 
 During the year , there were neutral El Niño Southern Oscillation conditions , and for several months there was a well @-@ established monsoon trough that extended into the Australian basin . The average storm duration was 9 days , although the final storm , Odille , lasted 16 days , a record at the time . The season was the most active on record since the start of reliable satellite coverage in 1967 . Due to the high number of storms , there were a record number of cyclone days – days in which a tropical cyclone is active – as well as intense tropical cyclone days , the latter with 27 . The next season approach either total was the 2001 – 02 season . MFR had an alphabetically prepared list of names for the season , the last seven of which went unused : <unk> , Ronna , <unk> , Telia , Valentina , <unk> , and <unk> . 
 In addition to the named storms , MFR tracked three other tropical systems that did not last for more than 24 hours . The first , designated Tropical Depression C1 , formed on December 5 near the eastern portion of the basin , and quickly dissipated . The other two , designated E1 and H1 , formed in January and February , respectively . In addition , Tropical Cyclone Willy crossed into the basin as a dissipating tropical depression , for which MFR did not issue advisories . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Moderate Tropical Storm Alexina = = = 
 The first storm of the season formed from a low pressure area with associated convection that persisted east of the Chagos Archipelago on November 7 . It formed in tandem with two tropical depressions in the North Indian ocean . The JTWC began tracking the system that day , although MFR did not follow suit until two days later . On November 10 , the depression intensified into Moderate Tropical Storm Alexina , having developed a central dense overcast . A narrow eastward @-@ moving trough caused the storm to move generally southward for its entire duration , the only such storm of the season to maintain a largely north @-@ south track . On November 11 , MFR estimated that Alexina attained peak winds of 85 km / h ( 55 mph ) , while JTWC estimated peak winds of 110 km / h ( 70 mph ) . Increased wind shear disrupted the convection , while a building ridge to the south caused its movement to slow . By late on November 12 , Alexina weakened to tropical depression status , which subsequently drifted to the west until dissipating on November 16 . 
 = = = Severe Tropical Storm Bettina = = = 
 On November 23 , the intertropical convergence zone spawned a low pressure area in the far northeastern portion of the basin , which the JTWC assessed as having formed in the western Australian basin . Located north of a large ridge , the system tracked southwestward initially before turning more to the west . Late on November 25 , MFR began classifying the system as a tropical disturbance , and within 12 hours the agency upgraded it to Moderate Tropical Storm Bettina . On November 26 , the storm turned to the southwest . The next day , Bettina developed an eye feature , and MFR upgraded it to a severe tropical storm , with winds of 110 km / h ( 70 mph ) . By comparison , the JTWC estimated winds of 100 km / h ( 65 mph ) . After wind shear increased sharply on November 28 , the storm quickly weakened and within 24 hours was devoid of convection . Bettina again turned to the west as a tropical depression , moving around the large ridge . It briefly re @-@ intensified on December 1 , but dissipated on December 3 south of the Mascarene Islands . 
 = = = Severe Tropical Storm Cecilia = = = 
 The intertropical convergence zone spawned a tropical disturbance in the northeast portion of the basin on December 9 . Initially the system did not develop , and MFR did not classify it until December 12 . The next day , the depression intensified into a moderate tropical storm , and was named Cecilia . The strengthening was short @-@ lived , and the storm quickly weakened to tropical depression status on December 14 . After initially tracking to the southwest , Cecilia turned to the west on December 15 due to a strengthening ridge to the south , by which time it had restrengthened and developed a central dense overcast . On December 17 , MFR upgraded the storm <unk> severe tropical storm , with winds of 100 km / h ( 65 mph ) according to MFR . The next day , JTWC estimated that Cecilia intensified to reach winds of 160 km / h ( 100 mph ) . While near peak intensity , the storm turned to the southwest and began weakening after wind shear increased . By December 19 , Cecilia had weakened to tropical depression status , and dissipated on December 21 after passing west of Réunion . An approaching trough had caused thunderstorms to reform in the eastern portion of the circulation , which resulted in heavy rainfall over Mauritius and later Réunion . In the latter island , the rainfall was heaviest in the northern portion , peaking at 475 mm ( 18 @.@ 7 in ) in Salazie in 24 hours ; the same station recorded 286 mm ( 11 @.@ 3 in ) in a 6 hour period , including 47 mm ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) in just 30 minutes . 
 = = = Tropical Cyclone Daisy = = = 
 In early January , the intertropical convergence zone persisted off the northeast coast of Madagascar , spawning a low pressure area on January 6 . The next day , the system developed into a tropical disturbance , which initially moved to the east due to high pressure to the south . On January 8 , the system developed a curved area of convection , which later developed into a central dense overcast . Initially located within a broader trough , the disturbance gradually became better defined as a distinct system . On January 10 , it intensified into Moderate Tropical Storm Daisy while passing near St. Brandon . A trough to the south weakened the ridge , causing the storm to turn to the southwest toward Madagascar . Daisy intensified into a severe tropical storm on January 11 , and later into a tropical cyclone the next day . At around 1200 UTC on January 13 , the cyclone made landfall near Brickaville in eastern Madagascar , with MFR estimating winds of about 155 km / h ( 100 mph ) ; at around the same time , the JTWC estimated peak winds of 175 km / h ( 110 mph ) . At landfall , Daisy had a symmetrical cloud pattern 400 km ( 250 mi ) in diameter . The high mountains of Madagascar caused the storm to quickly weaken , although it emerged into the Mozambique Channel as a tropical disturbance on January 15 . That day , a trough turned Daisy to the south , and it briefly re @-@ intensified into a tropical storm over warm waters . On January 16 , Daisy made a second landfall in southern Madagascar and dissipated the next day . 
 When Daisy struck Madagascar , it produced 200 km / h ( 120 mph ) wind gusts on Île Sainte @-@ Marie , along with heavy rainfall . The storm destroyed over 90 schools and government buildings and damaged the road network . Madagascar 's capital Antananarivo was flooded , forcing 6 @,@ 000 people to evacuate . Many of the same areas affected by Daisy were later affected by Geralda in February . 
 = = = Severe Tropical Storm Edmea = = = 
 The intertropical convergence zone spawned a low pressure area south of the Chagos archipelago on January 12 , and developed a large area of convection the next day . On January 13 , MFR began classifying the system as a tropical depression , and following further intensification , the agency upgraded the depression to Moderate Tropical Storm Edmea later that day . With a ridge to the southeast , the storm tracked generally to the southwest . Its initial strengthening rate slowed until Edmea reached peak winds of 95 km / h ( 60 mph ) on January 17 . An approaching trough turned the storm to the south away from any landmasses , and also increased shear which caused weakening . Turning to the southeast on January 18 , Edmea became extratropical the following day and was later absorbed by the trough . 
 = = = Tropical Cyclone Pearl – Farah = = = 
 On January 11 , a tropical low formed northwest of Broome , Western Australia . It was named Pearl a few hours later by the Bureau of Meteorology . The cyclone continued westward and reached a peak intensity of 155 km / h ( 100 mph ) . As the system moved west of 90 ° E , MFR took over warning responsibility on January 18 and renamed the cyclone Farah . At that time , MFR estimated winds of about 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) . After having moved westward due to a ridge to the south , Farah turned to the south upon entering the basin due to an approaching trough , which previously absorbed Edmea . High wind shear caused rapid weakening , and by January 19 , there was little remaining convection . The next day , Farah weakened to tropical depression status and turned to the southeast . The ridge built behind the trough , causing the depression to stall and drift northward , and by February 22 , Farah dissipated . 
 = = = Intense Tropical Cyclone Geralda = = = 
 Cyclone Geralda originated from an area of low pressure from the monsoon trough on January 25 . Over the following few days , the depression underwent gradual intensification , and MFR estimated peak winds of 200 km / h ( 125 mph ) on January 31 . Cyclone Geralda made landfall near Toamasina , Madagascar after weakening from its peak intensity . Within hours of moving onshore , the system had substantially weakened , and by February 5 , Geralda had degenerated into a land depression . After briefly emerging into the Mozambique Channel , Geralda crossed southern Madagascar , and it became extratropical on February 8 . Geralda was the strongest of the season and the strongest to hit Madagascar since a cyclone in March 1927 . 
 Geralda was the second cyclone in as many months to strike eastern Madagascar , after Daisy in January . Geralda produced wind gusts as strong as 350 km / h ( 220 mph ) , which were the highest worldwide for several decades . The cyclone also dropped heavy rainfall that caused flooding , particularly in valleys . About 80 % of the city of Toamasina was destroyed , including most schools , homes , and churches . The cyclone heavily damaged roads and rail lines , which later disrupted relief efforts . In the capital Antananarivo , Geralda killed 43 people after flooding many houses . Overall , more than 40 @,@ 000 homes were destroyed , leaving 356 @,@ 000 people homeless . Nationwide , the cyclone killed 231 people and caused over $ 10 million in damage . Relief work in the storm 's aftermath was hampered by lack of coordination , and the Malagasy military were deployed to help storm victims . Few stocks were pre @-@ positioned , causing food prices to rise greatly . Several countries and departments of the United Nations donated money or supplies to the country . 
 = = = Tropical Cyclone Hollanda = = = 
 The monsoon trough remained active , spawning a tropical depression on February 6 south of the Chagos archipelago . The system moved generally southwestward for much of its duration , steered by a ridge to the south . On February 8 , the depression intensified into Moderate Tropical Storm Hollanda , and the next day became a tropical cyclone , developing a small 20 km ( 12 mi ) eye . On February 10 , the cyclone attained peak winds of 155 km / h ( 100 mph ) , as assessed by MFR , and that day Hollanda struck the island of Mauritius at that intensity . Subsequently , the cyclone weakened while turning more to the south . A trough turned Hollanda to the east on February 13 , and the next day the storm became extratropical . 
 While moving across the island , Hollanda produced wind gusts of 216 km / h ( 134 mph ) in the capital city of Port Louis , while heavy rainfall reached 711 mm ( 28 @.@ 0 in ) in Mare aux Vacoas . The cyclone destroyed or severely damaged 450 houses , which left at least 1 @,@ 500 people homeless . High winds downed about 30 % of the island 's trees and left half of the island without power . Hollanda also caused severe crop damage ; nearly half of the island 's sugar crop was destroyed , which necessitated for the government to assist in replanting efforts . Hollanda killed two people and caused $ 135 million in damage on Mauritius . The highest rainfall from the cyclone fell on Réunion , with 741 mm ( 29 @.@ 2 in ) recorded at Grand Coude . On that island , there was also damage to crops and power lines . 
 = = = Tropical Cyclone Ivy = = = 
 The origins of Cyclone Ivy were from a disturbance that the JTWC began tracking on February 6 in the Australian basin . The next day , the disturbance crossed into the south @-@ west Indian Ocean , and on February 8 , MFR began tracking it . A ridge to the south imparted a general westward movement . With the convection gradually organizing , MFR upgraded the system to a tropical depression on February 9 and later to Moderate Tropical Storm Ivy the next day . A trough associated with the stronger Cyclone Hollanda turned the storm to the southwest . Although the JTWC upgraded Ivy to the equivalent of a minimal hurricane on February 12 , MFR estimated the storm weakened slightly , due to wind shear obscuring the center . By the following day , convection reorganized and the storm re @-@ strengthened , first to severe tropical storm status on February 15 and then to tropical cyclone status the next day . Around that time , Ivy approached within 100 km ( 62 mi ) of Rodrigues , where gusts reached 130 km / h ( 81 mph ) , and there was some damage . 
 After passing near Rodrigues , Ivy strengthened further , developing a well @-@ defined eye 50 km ( 31 mi ) in diameter , while turning more to the south due to a trough associated with the remnants of Hollanda . The JTWC estimated peak winds of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) on February 17 , around the same time MFR estimated peak winds of 140 km / h ( 85 mph ) . The strengthening ridge caused Ivy to slow its motion to the southwest while increased shear caused weakening . On February 18 , the cyclone weakened to tropical storm status , and by the next day was downgraded to tropical depression status . On February 20 , Ivy became extratropical , which dissipated the subsequent day . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Julita = = = 
 In the middle of February , the monsoon trough persisted over the Mozambique Channel and spawned a circulation on February 15 to the west of Juan de Nova Island . Thunderstorms increased around the circulation , and later that day , MFR began tracking the system as a tropical depression . Despite warm air temperatures , the system did not develop a warm core like most tropical cyclones as it moved to the southeast . On February 16 , the storm passed about 40 km ( 25 mi ) south of Juan de Nova Island , producing gusts of 75 km / h ( 47 mph ) . The next day , MFR estimated peak winds of about 55 km / h ( 35 mph ) ; despite that the system did not intensify into a moderate tropical storm , the Meteorological Service of Madagascar named the depression Julita on February 17 . It weakened as its structure deteriorated , and Julita moved ashore in western Madagascar near Morondava early on February 18 . It dissipated shortly thereafter . Julita affected areas impacted by earlier cyclones Daisy and Geralda , but caused minimal damage and no deaths . 
 = = = Moderate Tropical Storm Kelvina = = = 
 The intertropical convergence zone spawned an area of convection on March 5 off the northeast coast of Madagascar , which was classified by both JTWC and MFR that day . A large anticyclone to the east caused the system to track generally to the south , and initially wind shear prevented significant strengthening . On March 6 , the Meteorological Service of Madagascar named the system Kelvina , although the depression did not intensify into a moderate tropical storm until the next day . At around that time , the convection became better organized , extending away from the center to the east . On March 8 , MFR estimated peak winds of about 85 km / h ( 50 mph ) , although further strengthening was prevented by an increase in wind shear . On March 10 , Kelvina passed near Reunion , where it dropped heavy rainfall . The next day , the storm became extratropical , which continued south for several days , eventually degenerating into a trough that influenced the tracks of subsequent tropical cyclones . 
 = = = Intense Tropical Cyclone Litanne = = = 
 In late February , low pressure area developed near the Cocos Islands , associated with the monsoon trough . After initially moving eastward , a ridge turned it to the west , and on March 7 , the system crossed 90 ° E into the south @-@ west Indian Ocean as a developing tropical depression . The next day , MFR upgraded it to Tropical Storm Litanne . For much of its track , Litanne moved generally to the west @-@ southwest , to the north of a large ridge . The storm quickly intensified , developing an eye feature within its central dense overcast by late on March 8 . Late on March 9 , MFR upgraded Litanne to a tropical cyclone , after the storm developed a small , well @-@ defined eye 20 km ( 12 mi ) in diameter . With warm sea surface temperatures , Litanne intensified into an intense tropical cyclone by late on March 10 , although it subsequently weakened slightly . The cyclone turned to the southwest due to a trough from the remnants of Kelvina . Around 2000 UTC on March 12 , Litanne passed near St. Brandon , and the next day the cyclone passed about 300 km ( 190 mi ) north of Réunion island . At the time , the storm 's eye was 40 km ( 25 mi ) wide , and the wind radius was about 175 km ( 109 mi ) wide . The islands reported high surf but little effects . Subsequently , the storm turned more to the west , and Litanne restrengthened into an intense tropical cyclone while approaching the eastern coastline of Madagascar . MFR estimated peak winds of 195 km / h ( 120 mph ) on March 14 . 
 Weakening slightly after peaking in intensity , Cyclone Litanne continued to the west , making landfall near Brickaville in east @-@ central Madagascar at 1600 UTC on March 15 . This occurred months after cyclones Daisy and Geralda affected the same general area . Four hours before landfall , the storm had peak winds of 165 km / h ( 105 mph ) . A strengthening trough turned Litanne southward over the eastern portion of the country , and the storm dropped heavy rainfall . Flooding was limited , although high winds severely damaged the rice crop . Increasing wind shear removed the convection , causing quick weakening . On March 17 , Litanne emerged from southeastern Madagascar into the Indian Ocean as a tropical depression , and the next day transitioned into an extratropical cyclone after being absorbed by a nearby trough . Five days later after accelerating to the southeast , the storm dissipated about 2 @,@ 000 km ( 1 @,@ 200 mi ) south of where it first developed . 
 = = = Severe Tropical Storm Mariola = = = 
 The monsoon trough persisted east of the Cocos Islands in early March in the Australian basin , spawning the earlier Cyclone Litanne and the system that would eventually become Mariola . An area of convection developed on March 5 , and gradually organized with favorable upper @-@ level winds . The JTWC began tracking it on March 7 , and MFR followed suit the next day , when the system was located about 2 @,@ 000 km ( 1 @,@ 200 mi ) east of Litanne . On March 10 , the MFR estimated the system became a tropical depression once it developed a central dense overcast , and that night the system crossed into the basin as a moderate tropical storm , making it one of three concurrent storms , along with Kelvina and Litanne . With the ridge to the south , the storm tracked generally westward for much of its duration . After MFR named the storm Mariola early on March 11 , steady strengthening continued . On March 12 , a small eye feature developed , indicating the storm was near tropical cyclone intensity . MFR estimated peak winds of 115 km / h ( 70 mph ) , and JTWC estimated peak winds of 165 km / h ( 105 mph ) . 
 Due to Litanne crossing the same path three days earlier , Mariola was unable to intensify further . It began weakening shortly after peak intensity , and the structure gradually deteriorated . The storm turned slightly to the south @-@ west due to the remnants of Kelvina disrupting the ridge , although a west motion resumed after the ridge restrengthened . Cooler and drier air weakened the convection , and Mariola weakened below tropical storm status on March 18 . The next day , the depression dissipated north of Reunion . 
 = = = Intense Tropical Cyclone Nadia = = = 
 Cyclone Nadia formed on March 16 and moved westward for the first ten days of its duration , due to a ridge to the south . Warm waters and low wind shear allowed for the storm to gradually strengthen , first into a moderate tropical storm on March 19 and later into a tropical cyclone on March 21 . After developing a well @-@ defined eye , Nadia intensified to reach winds of 175 km / h ( 110 mph ) early on March 22 , according to MFR . The JTWC estimated winds of about 220 km / h ( 140 mph ) . On March 23 , the cyclone struck northern Madagascar , causing flooding and localized damage where it moved ashore . There were 12 deaths in the country . Nadia emerged into the Mozambique Channel as a weakened storm , although it reintensified slightly before making landfall in northeastern Mozambique on March 24 . The storm turned southward through the country , emerging over water on March 26 . It turned to the northeast and meandered over waters before dissipating on April 1 . 
 Damage was heaviest in Mozambique , estimated at about $ 20 million . Cyclone Nadia severely affected four provinces in the country , primarily Nampula Province where it moved ashore . There , 85 % of the houses were destroyed , and across its path , the cyclone left 1 @.@ 5 million people homeless . High winds caused widespread power outages , left areas without water , and significantly damaged crops , notably the cashew crop . The storm struck before the harvest , and lack of food caused 300 deaths in the months after the storm . Across Mozambique , Nadia directly caused 240 deaths and injured thousands . Effects spread as far inland as Malawi . 
 = = = Intense Tropical Cyclone Odille = = = 
 Around March 26 , an area of disturbed weather persisted just east of 90 ° E , associated with a low pressure area . That day , the JTWC began tracking the system . Located north of an anticyclone , the system tracked slowly to the south before curving to the west . On March 30 , it became a tropical depression , and that day crossed into the basin . The next day , the depression was named Odille after it intensified further . With low wind shear , the storm steadily intensified as it moved to the west , reaching severe tropical cyclone status on April 2 after an eye feature developed . The JTWC estimated winds of 150 km / h ( 90 mph ) on April 3 , equivalent to a minimal hurricane , although subsequently Odille weakened after turning to the northwest and experiencing increased wind shear . By April 6 , the system had weakened to a tropical disturbance with a poorly defined center , which was dislocated from the remainder of the convection . 
 On April 4 , Odille began redeveloping convection and re @-@ intensified into a moderate tropical storm , after entering an area of more favorable conditions . Around that time , it began moving to the southwest due to a break between the ridge . On April 10 , Odille intensified into a tropical cyclone while moving slowly around a ridge . The next day , it intensified into an intense tropical cyclone while passing near St. Brandon and turning to the southeast due to an approaching trough . Odille developed a well @-@ defined eye 45 km ( 28 mi ) in diameter , and MFR estimated peak winds of 175 km / h ( 110 mph ) , while the JTWC estimated winds of 195 km / h ( 120 mph ) . On April 12 , the cyclone passed about 150 km ( 95 mi ) west of Rodrigues , where wind gusts reached 125 km / h ( 78 mph ) at Port Mathurin . Steady weakening occurred as Odille accelerated and experienced increasing shear , weakening below tropical cyclone status on April 13 . The next day , the storm became extratropical , which lasted three more days until it was absorbed by the cold front . 
 = = Season effects = = 
 This table lists all the cyclones that developed in the Indian Ocean , during the 1993 – 94 South @-@ West Indian Ocean cyclone season . It includes their intensity , duration , name , landfalls , deaths , and damages . 
 = Lafayette College = 
 Lafayette College is a private liberal arts college located in Easton , Pennsylvania , United States . The school , founded in 1826 by James Madison Porter , son of General Andrew Porter of Norristown , and the citizens of Easton , first began holding classes in 1832 . The founders voted to name the school after General Lafayette , who famously toured the country in 1824 – 25 , as " a testimony of respect for [ his ] talents , virtues , and signal services ... in the great cause of freedom " . 
 Located on College Hill in Easton , the campus is situated in the Lehigh Valley , about 70 mi ( 110 km ) west of New York City and 60 mi ( 97 km ) north of Philadelphia . Lafayette College guarantees campus housing to all enrolled students . The school requires students to live in campus housing unless approved for residing in private off @-@ campus housing or home as a commuter . 
 Lafayette College is one of the most highly selective institutions in the United States . The student body , consisting entirely of undergraduates , comes from 46 U.S. states and Territories and 48 countries . Students at Lafayette are involved in over 250 clubs and organizations including athletics , fraternities and sororities , special interest groups , community service clubs and honor societies . Lafayette College 's athletic program is notable for The Rivalry with nearby Lehigh University . Since 1884 , the two football teams have met 151 times , making it the most played rivalry in the history of college football . 
 The College leads American liberal arts colleges with the most Goldwater Scholarship recipients in the past six years . 
 Notable people of Lafayette College include CEOs Ian Murray ( Vineyard Vines ) and Chip Bergh ( Levi Strauss & Co . ) , author Jay <unk> , coach Pete Carril , and politicians William E. Simon ( Secretary of the Treasury ) , John W. Griggs ( Attorney General ) , and Marcia <unk> ( U.S. Ambassador to Bangladesh ) . Additionally , Lafayette counts two Nobel Laureates as alumni , along with dozens of prominent bankers , judges , and scientists . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Founding = = = 
 A group of Easton citizens led by James Madison Porter met on December 27 , 1824 at White 's Tavern to explore the possibility of opening a college . The recent visit of General Lafayette to New York during his grand tour of the US in 1824 and 1825 prompted the founders to name the school after the French military officer . The group also established the 35 @-@ member Board of Trustees , a system of governance that has remained at the college to this day . In need of an education plan , the meeting gave the responsibility to Porter , lawyer Jacob Wagener , and Yale @-@ educated lawyer Joel Jones . The charter gained approval and on March 9 , 1826 , Pennsylvania Governor John Andrew Shulze 's signature made the college official . Along with establishing Lafayette as a Liberal Arts College , the charter called for religious equality amongst professors , students , and staff . 
 The Board of Trustees met on May 15 , 1826 for the election of officers , resulting with Thomas McKeen as Treasurer , Joel Jones as Secretary , and James Madison Porter as the first President of the College . Over the next few years , the Board met several times to discuss property and funding for the college 's start @-@ up . Six years after the first meeting , Lafayette began to enroll students . 
 The College opened on May 1 , 1829 , with four students under the guidance of Rev. John Monteith . At the start of the next year , the Rev. George Junkin , a Presbyterian minister , was elected President of the college and moved the all @-@ male Manual Labor Academy of Pennsylvania from Germantown to Easton . Classes began on May 9 , 1832 , with the instruction of 43 students on the south bank of the Lehigh River in a rented farmhouse . In order to earn money to support the program students had to labor in the fields and workshops . This manual labor infused College took the place of the original Military / Civil Engineering focus on which the school was founded , and would remain part of the curriculum until 1839 . Later that year , Lafayette purchased property on what is now known as " College Hill " – nine acres of elevated land across Bushkill Creek . The College 's first building was constructed two years later on the current site of South College . 
 A dispute between Porter and Rev. Junkin led to his resignation of the presidency in 1841 . Though still young , Lafayette was beginning to take shape , grappling with the possibility of religious affiliation for financial stability . In 1854 , Lafayette College became affiliated with the Presbyterian Church . By relinquishing their control , the College was able to collect $ 1000 a year from the Presbyterian Church Board of Education as regularly as the latter could pay it . In the time from 1855 to 1856 , Lafayette experienced a new peak enrollment of 112 students , leading to the " famous class " of 1857 . This close @-@ knit class of 27 men worked in secrecy to establish charters in national fraternities , thus instating the first Greek Fraternities at Lafayette College . These Fraternities remained secret and discouraged by the authorities until 1915 . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 In preparation for World War I , Lafayette announced that their current students would be awarded their degrees in absentia if they enlisted or went to work for farms to support the war effort . Professor Beverly Kunkel organized The Lafayette Ambulance United , Section 61 , United States Army Ambulance Corps . During the summer of 1917 , Dr. MacCracken arranged to turn the campus into a war camp for the War Department . Men trained to serve in mechanical trades . Lafayette remained a war camp until January 2 , 1919 when the regular course of study was re @-@ established at Lafayette . 
 = = = Lafayette in The Depression = = = 
 A drastic change in numbers of undergraduate and graduate students occurred between 1930 and 1934 during the Great Depression . The college made efforts to bolster enrollment including creation of new scholarship opportunities as well as scholarship loans . Lafayette College also founded an Engineering Guidance Conference for boys . The Conference was two weeks long and introduced twenty @-@ one high school students to the concepts of engineering . This program continued until the outbreak of World War II . Though the College faced its own deficits , it aided the larger community by offering a series of classes to unemployed men free of charge beginning in 1932 . They also made athletic facilities available to unemployed members of the community . Enrollment began to rise again for the 1935 – 1936 school year . 
 = = = Decade of Progress campaign = = = 
 As the college moved out of the great depression , the college 's new President , William Mather Lewis , began what it called the Decade of Progress campaign . It started as a celebration of the 70th anniversary of Lafayette 's engineering program . President Lewis regarded this 70 @-@ year period as a period , which " covers the great development in American engineering which has now seemed to reach its peak . " The goal of this campaign was to raise $ 500 @,@ 000 for payments on Gates hall , renovation of Van <unk> Memorial Library as well as equipment upgrades in other departments . By the time the campaign closed in 1944 , the total amount received was $ 280 @,@ 853 @.@ 34 . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 Initially , Lafayette College on the student and faculty level was committed to keeping peace in the Western Hemisphere . When President Roosevelt addressed the Pan @-@ American Congress stating that it was America 's duty to protect American 's science , culture , freedom and civilization , thirty @-@ seven Lafayette faculty members wired the President objecting to his sentiments . When the country was left with no other option in the wake of Pearl Harbor , The College Council of Defense was organized and overseen by the Northampton County Council of Defense . The college took official action as well . It bolstered its ROTC program and improved their facilities to prepare for air raid tests . The college continued to thrive until the draft age was lowered from 20 to 18 in November 1942 . Lafayette College was one of 36 academic institutions selected to train engineering and aviation cadets by the War Department . After the war The Serviceman 's <unk> Act of 1944 caused enrollment at Lafayette to jump dramatically peaking in 1949 with approximately 2000 students . 
 = = = <unk> institution = = = 
 In 1967 , faculty requested that a special committee be formed to discuss making Lafayette a co @-@ educational institution . That committee issued a formal recommendation the following year . In September 1970 Lafayette College welcomed its first official coeducational class with 146 women ( 123 freshmen , and 23 transfers ) . 
 = = = 21st century = = = 
 In 2004 , a report on religious life at Lafayette College was compiled . This report recommended a review of the college 's formal relationship with the Presbyterian church . To date , however , this affiliation remains in place , although the college is not a member of the Association of Presbyterian Colleges and Universities . 
 In 2007 , the college commemorated the 250th birthday of General Lafayette through a series of lectures and campus dedications . Major festivities were held on September 6 , 2007 , Lafayette 's birthday , and were kicked off the night before with a lecture by renowned historian David McCullough . Lafayette commemorated the recognition of the College Charter by the Pennsylvania Legislature on March 9 , with a campus wide and alumni toast around the world . 
 On January 16 , 2013 , Dr. Alison R. <unk> was announced as Lafayette 's 17th and first female President . She took office on July 1 , 2013 , replacing outgoing president Daniel Weiss . 
 = = Academics = = 
 Lafayette College offers a bachelor of arts ( B.A. ) degree in 37 fields . Lafayette also offers 14 bachelor of science ( B.S. ) degrees , 10 in areas of science and four in fields of engineering . The most popular majors are in the fields of Social Sciences , Engineering , Biology , English , and Psychology . Students may also create their own major by combining courses from different programs . 
 Lafayette College offers engineering programs within its liberal arts setting . The engineering programs offer five concentrations : Chemical , Civil , Electrical & Computer , Mechanical , and Engineering studies . In 2012 , 94 % of Lafayette 's candidates ( currently enrolled ) passed the Fundamentals of Engineering Examination . This is the first requirement toward getting a professional engineering license . The National average varies from 70 – 87 % depending on the type of engineering . 
 In the recent years , Lafayette College students earned numerous national and international scholarships , For the class of 2012 , Lafayette gave financial aid to 66 % of the students , with the average package amounting to $ 26 @,@ 850 for all students . The college also offers a merit @-@ based academic scholarship – the Marquis Scholarship , which provides $ 20 @,@ 000 per year . Lafayette 's endowment is more than $ 580 million , with total assets amounting to more than $ 1 billion . 
 Lafayette is also a Hidden Ivy 
 = = Rankings and reputation = = 
 = = = Admissions = = = 
 = = = Overlap Schools = = = 
 The most common overlap schools , as of 2015 , are Bucknell University , Cornell University , Lehigh University , Princeton University , and Villanova University 
 = = = Admission = = = 
 Admission to Lafayette has become increasingly competitive over the last few years ; in 2013 the acceptance rate was 34 % but it dropped to 28 % in 2016 . 
 = = Campus overview = = 
 = = = Campus = = = 
 Lafayette College is settled at the top of College Hill in Easton , Pennsylvania , located in the Lehigh Valley . The campus location is about 70 mi ( 110 km ) west of New York City and 60 mi ( 97 km ) north of Philadelphia . Its 340 @-@ acre campus houses 69 buildings , comprising approximately 1 @.@ 76 million square feet , which includes a 230 @-@ acre athletic campus . Lafayette 's campus buildings range in architectural style from Pardee Hall 's Second Empire design and Hogg Hall 's Collegiate Gothic , to the late modern architecture of the Williams Center for the Arts , the William E. and Carol G. Simon Wing of Skillman Library and the Farinon College Center . 
 = = = Academic facilities = = = 
 Williams Center for the Arts is the college 's performing arts center . Completed in 1983 , the building houses the Performance Series , the Williams Art Gallery and College Collections , the College Theater program , the departments of Art and Music , and the student @-@ led Arts Society . The centerpiece of the Williams Center is the 400 @-@ seat theater / concert hall and also contains a versatile art gallery , a 100 @-@ seat black box theater , and classrooms and studios for music and art . 
 Pardee Hall was completed in 1873 and remains one of the earliest buildings at Lafayette College . When initially constructed it was one of the largest academic buildings of its era . Pardee was first designed to hold all of the science programs ; currently it holds most of Lafayette 's humanities and social science departments . 
 The Kirby Hall of Civil Rights was constructed in the late 1920s between the First World War and the Great Depression . It was donated by the entrepreneur : Fred Morgan Kirby . In accordance to its time , the design " rumored to be per square foot the most expensive building of its day . " Lafayette selected the architectural firm Warren and Wetmore , known for their project designs with the New York Yacht Club , the Biltmore Hotel and Grand Central Station . The building 's exterior embraces styles of Republic Rome , the Renaissance , 17th English classicism , and Beaux @-@ Arts . The interior lobby area contains broad staircases and is constructed of travertine marble . The building currently houses the Government and Law department , giving students access to the Kirby library , with its twenty @-@ foot ceilings and oak @-@ paneled book cases . 
 Markle Hall , now the main administrative building , home of the Offices of Admissions and Financial Aid , originally was designated the Hall of Mining Engineering . An online historical survey of campus buildings is maintained by the College 's Special Collections . 
 The David Bishop Skillman library built in 1961 is the main library on campus with the addition of the Simon Wing in 1986 and $ 22 million renovation and expansion in 2004 . The library contains over 500 @,@ 000 volumes in its collections and is subscribed to thousands of magazines , journals , and newspapers in the electronic and paper format . In addition , the college 's Special Collections and College Archives are located inside for research and displays holdings related to the Marquis de Lafayette . Inside also contains reading and study areas and computer labs available to the students . 
 = = = Housing and student life facilities = = = 
 Lafayette College guarantees campus housing to all enrolled students . The school requires students to live in campus housing unless approved for residing in private off @-@ campus housing or home as a commuter . The College offers on @-@ campus housing options including traditional halls , Greek chapter houses , suite @-@ style halls , and group living units ; where some halls are single gender while others may be co @-@ ed by floor , wing , room , or suite . In addition , Lafayette College provides specialty housings that ties to specific academic departments , student organizations , or religious affiliations . Other residences include the McKelvy House , the Arts Houses , the French / German House , Hispanic Society of Lafayette , and the Hillel House . 
 Lafayette College offers a variety of dining options for the campus residents . Farinon College Center houses two of the main dining halls on campus . The top floor of Farinon is an " all @-@ you @-@ can @-@ eat " style buffet , while ground level is a food court . Marquis Hall , the second largest dining hall on campus , is the second dining hall with an " all @-@ you @-@ can @-@ eat " style buffet . Marquis also houses regularly themed events and contests . Gilbert 's Cafe , a coffeehouse located on the ground floor of Kirby House , was opened in 1999 to provide a late @-@ night hangout and food for students . Simon 's , a sandwich shop is located in the ground floor of <unk> , a residence hall . The Skillman Café located in the Skillman Library sells Starbucks coffee and fresh @-@ baked items made by the college . Lafayette also maintains an off @-@ campus organic farm , <unk> , which provides vegetables to the dining halls and employment for interested students . 
 = = Athletics = = 
 The Lafayette Leopards compete in the Patriot League under the guidance of current Athletic Director Bruce McCutcheon . Lafayette offers students the opportunity to participate in 23 NCAA Division I sports , 18 club sports , and over 30 intramural sports . The student @-@ athletes are considered students first , and athletes second . Lafayette currently ranks 3rd nationally in student @-@ athlete graduation success rate , according to the most recent NCAA study . 
 Among other firsts , Lafayette became the first non @-@ Ivy League school to win a national football championship in 1896 . Additionally , other American football innovations at Lafayette include the first use of the huddle and the invention of the head harness , precursor to the football helmet . The men 's basketball program also encompasses a decorated history , peaking in the late nineties under the leadership of Fran O 'Hanlon , who led the Leopards to back @-@ to @-@ back Patriot League championships and NCAA Tournament appearances in 1999 and 2000 . These seasons were documented by John Feinstein in his book , The Last Amateurs . 
 Affiliation : NCAA Division I , Football : Football Championship Subdivision 
 Conference : Patriot League 
 Team name : Leopards 
 Team colors : Maroon and white 
 Arch rival : Lehigh University 
 Other rivals : Bucknell University , Colgate University , Princeton University , University of Pennsylvania , Harvard University 
 Facilities : Fisher Field at Fisher Stadium ( Football ) , Kirby Sports Center ( Basketball ) , <unk> Fields Athletic Complex 
 = = = Varsity sports = = = 
 = = = The Rivalry ( Lafayette @-@ Lehigh ) = = = 
 Lafayette College 's athletic program is notable for " The Rivalry " with nearby Lehigh University . Since 1884 , the two football teams have met 150 times , making it the most played rivalry in the history of American college football , and also one of the oldest when including high school or secondary school contests . It is also the longest running rivalry in college football , with the teams playing at least once every year since 1897 . The Rivalry is considered one of the best in all of college athletics by ESPNU , which recently ranked it # 8 among the Top Ten College Football Rivalries . 
 Lafayette leads the all @-@ time series 78 – 67 – 5 . In the most recent contest , Lafayette won against Lehigh on Saturday , November 22 , 2014 by a score of 27 – 7 at Yankee Stadium ( storied home of the New York Yankees baseball team since 1923 , in The Bronx , New York ) . It was also the most well @-@ attended game in the series , with 48 @,@ 256 people . 
 = = Student life = = 
 Students at Lafayette are involved in over 250 clubs and organizations including athletics , fraternities and sororities , special interest groups , community service clubs and honor societies . The Lafayette College Student Government , consisting of fifteen elected students , is responsible for most of the student organizations on campus , and is responsible for the budget , emergency allocation , programming . These programs and activities are meant to promote student involvements around campus and to provide a space for interactions outside of the classroom . Further , Student Government actively collaborates with different bodies on campus to better the community , as well as maintains an influential relationship with the faculty , administration , and Board of Trustees in order to best meet the needs of the students . 
 = = = Greek life = = = 
 Lafayette College encompasses a lively Greek community . Though students are not eligible to join these organizations until sophomore year , approximately 40 @.@ 20 % of eligible students join the school 's four fraternities and six sororities . All but two of the Greek organizations at Lafayette are located on campus , making it a viable living option . Additionally , members of each house commit themselves to various philanthropic ventures throughout the academic year as these groups work together with the college , local , and national affiliates to help achieve the goals and ideals their organizations were founded upon . 
 = = = Fraternities = = = 
 = = = Sororities = = = 
 In addition to the 10 social fraternities and sororities , there are also a number of academic honor societies on campus . 
 = = = Academic honor societies = = = 
 = = = Newspaper = = = 
 The Lafayette , Lafayette 's weekly student newspaper , was founded in 1870 and is the oldest college newspaper in Pennsylvania . It is available in both print and online form . The newspaper has been published continuously since its creation , with the exception of during World War II , when operations were suspended between fall 1943 and March 1945 . Over 4 @,@ 200 digitized issues of The Lafayette are available online . 
 = = = Investment Club = = = 
 Founded in 1946 , it is the oldest student @-@ run investment club in the country . The club made national news in 2016 , when CNN profiled their investment skills that led to returns of over 175 times their initial investment over 70 years ( from $ 3 @,@ 000 in 1946 to $ 530 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) , thereby beating the S & P 500 Index . As of March 2016 , the portfolio contains 41 stocks . 
 = = = Engineers Without Borders = = = 
 The club was founded in 2003 and is a member of EWB @-@ USA . Members of the club represent many disciplines in engineering and the liberal arts . The club is linked with rural villages in the Yoro region of Honduras . EWB 's mission is to design and implement projects in these villages that help promote better life . The club has focused its efforts on water treatment systems . 
 El Convento , which is located in the Yoro district of central Honduras , will be the third sustainable water project EWB @-@ LC students have worked on in the country since 2003 when the club was founded . The group has implemented gravity @-@ fed water systems in neighboring Lagunitas and La Fortuna . In La Fortuna , the group utilized a slow sand filter in its system . The group 's previous work garnered national media exposure for being one of six national institutions to receive a $ 75 @,@ 000 grant from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency . 
 = = = Volunteer opportunities = = = 
 = = = = Landis Center = = = = 
 The Landis Center , Lafayette College 's community outreach program , provides students with service opportunities . Landis ' mission is to cultivate personal , civic and intellectual growth for students through meaningful and effective service experiences . The program also strives to foster college @-@ community partnerships that contribute to the well @-@ being of the community , both locally and globally . 
 = = = = Alternative School Break = = = = 
 Another volunteering alternative to the aforementioned Engineers Without Borders and Landis is Alternative School Break ( ASB ) . Students travel in teams during the January interim or spring break and help communities build homes , paint , and tutor . Recent destinations have included the Dominican Republic , Ecuador , New Orleans , Chicago , and New York City . Students raise money through various fundraising events to mitigate the cost of the trip . 
 = = = Lafayette Activities Forum = = = 
 The Lafayette Activities Forum is a student @-@ run organization that strives to promote campus interaction and student relations by incorporating programs and entertainment that reflect the interests of the general student body . <unk> is made up of three committees : Live Entertainment , Campus Culture , and Marketing & Public Relations . They are in charge of planning events such the Spring Concert , Fall Fest , the Spot Underground , Open Mic nights , and Live Comedy . 
 = = Notable alumni = = 
 Lafayette alumni include two Nobel Laureates and five Governors : Alexander Ramsey ( Class of 1836 ) , Henry M. Hoyt ( Class of 1849 ) , John W. Griggs ( Class of 1868 ) , Robert B. Meyner ( Class of 1930 ) , and Wayne Dumont ( Class of 1935 ) . Additionally , the College counts sixteen current and former members of the United States Congress as alumni . 
 Other notable alumni : 
 Philip S. Hench ( Class of 1916 ) – Winner of the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1950 for the discovery of the hormone cortisone 
 Joel Silver ( Class of 1974 ) – Head of Hollywood 's Silver Pictures and producer of films including the Die Hard , Lethal Weapon , and The Matrix series 
 Jed <unk> ( Class of 1992 ) – President of Franklin Templeton Investments 
 Michael F. Weinstein ( Class of 1970 ) – Former CEO of Snapple 
 Haldan K. Hartline ( Class of 1923 ) – Winner of the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1967 for his work in analyzing the neurophysiological mechanisms of vision 
 S. Donald Stookey ( Class of 1938 ) – Inventor of <unk> who earned his master 's degree in chemistry in the 1930s . 
 William E. Simon ( Class of 1952 ) – 63rd Secretary of the Treasury and president of the United States Olympic Committee 
 William F. Durand ( Class of 1888 ) – Mechanical engineer and first civilian chair of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics 
 Peyton C. March ( Class of 1886 ) – Former Army Chief of Staff 
 James McKeen Cattell ( Class of 1880 ) – First professor of psychology in the United States at the University of Pennsylvania . 
 Charles <unk> ( Class of 1881 ) – Founder of Dow Jones & Company . 
 Chip Bergh ( Class of 1979 ) – CEO of Levi Strauss & Co . 
 A. Mitchell Palmer ( Class of 1893 ) - 50th U.S. Attorney General and overseer of the " Palmer Raids " 
 Stephen Messer ( Class of 1993 ) – Founder of Rakuten <unk> and angel investor . 
 Pete Carril ( Class of 1952 ) – Head coach of Princeton University and creator of the " Princeton offense " 
 Jim Rosenhaus – Broadcaster for the Cleveland Indians 
 Richard Roberts ( Class of 1875 ) – Personal assistant to General George Armstrong Custer 
 Sarkis <unk> ( Class of 1951 ) – Inventor of the solar radio and philanthropist 
 Maynard Bixby ( Class of 1876 ) – Discoverer of <unk> and explorer 
 Jay Weiss ( Class of 1962 ) – Experimental psychologist and a 1984 MacArthur Fellow 
 Beth Mowins ( Class of 1989 ) – ESPN announcer and one of the first women color analysts on the network 
 Peter Simon ( Class of 1975 ) – Co @-@ owner of the NHL 's New Jersey Devils 
 D. Herbert Lipson ( Class of 1952 ) – Publisher and executive chairman of Philadelphia 
 Brent Glass ( Class of 1969 ) – Director of Smithsonian National Museum of American History 
 Joe Maddon ( Class of 1976 ) – Manager of the Chicago Cubs . 
 Al <unk> ( Class of 1923 ) – 1924 Summer Olympics gold medalist in the 4 × 100 metres relay , later featured on a U.S. postal stamp 
 William McMurtrie ( Class of 1871 ) – Chief Chemist for the United States Department of Agriculture and President of American Chemical Society 
 George Barclay ( Class of 1898 ) – Inventor of the football helmet 
 Walter E. Hanson ( Class of 1949 ) – Former chairman of KPMG 
 Michael S. Schmidt ( Class of 2005 ) Washington correspondent for The New York Times . 
 Frank Reed Horton ( Class of 1918 ) – Founder of Alpha Phi Omega . 
 = Neurolinguistics = 
 Neurolinguistics is the study of the neural mechanisms in the human brain that control the comprehension , production , and acquisition of language . As an interdisciplinary field , neurolinguistics draws methods and theories from fields such as neuroscience , linguistics , cognitive science , neurobiology , communication disorders , neuropsychology , and computer science . Researchers are drawn to the field from a variety of backgrounds , bringing along a variety of experimental techniques as well as widely varying theoretical perspectives . Much work in neurolinguistics is informed by models in psycholinguistics and theoretical linguistics , and is focused on investigating how the brain can implement the processes that theoretical and psycholinguistics propose are necessary in producing and comprehending language . Neurolinguists study the physiological mechanisms by which the brain processes information related to language , and evaluate linguistic and psycholinguistic theories , using aphasiology , brain imaging , electrophysiology , and computer modeling . 
 = = History = = 
 Neurolinguistics is historically rooted in the development in the 19th century of aphasiology , the study of linguistic deficits ( <unk> ) occurring as the result of brain damage . <unk> attempts to correlate structure to function by analyzing the effect of brain injuries on language processing . One of the first people to draw a connection between a particular brain area and language processing was Paul Broca , a French surgeon who conducted autopsies on numerous individuals who had speaking deficiencies , and found that most of them had brain damage ( or lesions ) on the left frontal lobe , in an area now known as Broca 's area . <unk> had made the claim in the early 19th century that different brain regions carried out different functions and that language was mostly controlled by the frontal regions of the brain , but Broca 's research was possibly the first to offer empirical evidence for such a relationship , and has been described as " epoch @-@ making " and " pivotal " to the fields of neurolinguistics and cognitive science . Later , Carl Wernicke , after whom Wernicke 's area is named , proposed that different areas of the brain were specialized for different linguistic tasks , with Broca 's area handling the motor production of speech , and Wernicke 's area handling auditory speech comprehension . The work of Broca and Wernicke established the field of aphasiology and the idea that language can be studied through examining physical characteristics of the brain . Early work in aphasiology also benefited from the early twentieth @-@ century work of Korbinian <unk> , who " mapped " the surface of the brain , dividing it up into numbered areas based on each area 's cytoarchitecture ( cell structure ) and function ; these areas , known as <unk> areas , are still widely used in neuroscience today . 
 The coining of the term " neurolinguistics " is attributed to Edith Crowell Trager , Henri <unk> and Alexandr Luria , in the late 1940s and 1950s ; Luria 's book " Problems in Neurolinguistics " is likely the first book with Neurolinguistics in the title . Harry Whitaker popularized neurolinguistics in the United States in the 1970s , founding the journal " Brain and Language " in 1974 . 
 Although aphasiology is the historical core of neurolinguistics , in recent years the field has broadened considerably , thanks in part to the emergence of new brain imaging technologies ( such as PET and fMRI ) and time @-@ sensitive electrophysiological techniques ( EEG and MEG ) , which can highlight patterns of brain activation as people engage in various language tasks ; electrophysiological techniques , in particular , emerged as a viable method for the study of language in 1980 with the discovery of the N400 , a brain response shown to be sensitive to semantic issues in language comprehension . The N400 was the first language @-@ relevant brain response to be identified , and since its discovery EEG and MEG have become increasingly widely used for conducting language research . 
 = = Neurolinguistics as a discipline = = 
 = = = Interaction with other fields = = = 
 Neurolinguistics is closely related to the field of psycholinguistics , which seeks to elucidate the cognitive mechanisms of language by employing the traditional techniques of experimental psychology ; today , psycholinguistic and neurolinguistic theories often inform one another , and there is much collaboration between the two fields . 
 Much work in neurolinguistics involves testing and evaluating theories put forth by psycholinguists and theoretical linguists . In general , theoretical linguists propose models to explain the structure of language and how language information is organized , psycholinguists propose models and algorithms to explain how language information is processed in the mind , and <unk> analyze brain activity to infer how biological structures ( populations and networks of neurons ) carry out those psycholinguistic processing algorithms . For example , experiments in sentence processing have used the ELAN , N400 , and P600 brain responses to examine how physiological brain responses reflect the different predictions of sentence processing models put forth by psycholinguists , such as Janet Fodor and Lyn Frazier 's " serial " model , and Theo <unk> and Gerard Kempen 's " unification model " . Neurolinguists can also make new predictions about the structure and organization of language based on insights about the physiology of the brain , by " generalizing from the knowledge of neurological structures to language structure " . 
 Neurolinguistics research is carried out in all the major areas of linguistics ; the main linguistic subfields , and how neurolinguistics addresses them , are given in the table below . 
 = = = Topics considered = = = 
 Neurolinguistics research investigates several topics , including where language information is processed , how language processing unfolds over time , how brain structures are related to language acquisition and learning , and how neurophysiology can contribute to speech and language pathology . 
 = = = = Localizations of language processes = = = = 
 Much work in neurolinguistics has , like Broca 's and Wernicke 's early studies , investigated the locations of specific language " modules " within the brain . Research questions include what course language information follows through the brain as it is processed , whether or not particular areas specialize in processing particular sorts of information , how different brain regions interact with one another in language processing , and how the locations of brain activation differs when a subject is producing or perceiving a language other than his or her first language . 
 = = = = Time course of language processes = = = = 
 Another area of neurolinguistics literature involves the use of electrophysiological techniques to analyze the rapid processing of language in time . The temporal ordering of specific patterns of in brain activity may reflect discrete computational processes that the brain undergoes during language processing ; for example , one neurolinguistic theory of sentence parsing proposes that three brain responses ( the ELAN , N400 , and P600 ) are products of three different steps in syntactic and semantic processing . 
 = = = = Language acquisition = = = = 
 Another topic is the relationship between brain structures and language acquisition . Research in first language acquisition has already established that infants from all linguistic environments go through similar and predictable stages ( such as babbling ) , and some neurolinguistics research attempts to find correlations between stages of language development and stages of brain development , while other research investigates the physical changes ( known as neuroplasticity ) that the brain undergoes during second language acquisition , when adults learn a new language . <unk> is observed when both Second Language acquisition and Language Learning experience are induced , the result of this language exposure concludes that an increase of gray and white matter could be found in children , young adults and the elderly . 
 Ping Li , Jennifer <unk> , Kaitlyn A. <unk> , May 2014 . <unk> as a function of second language learning : Anatomical changes in the human brain Cortex : A Journal Devoted to the Study of the Nervous System & Behavior , 410 @.@ 1016 / <unk> 
 = = = = Language pathology = = = = 
 <unk> techniques are also used to study disorders and breakdowns in language — such as aphasia and dyslexia — and how they relate to physical characteristics of the brain . 
 = = Technology used = = 
 Since one of the focuses of this field is the testing of linguistic and psycholinguistic models , the technology used for experiments is highly relevant to the study of neurolinguistics . Modern brain imaging techniques have contributed greatly to a growing understanding of the anatomical organization of linguistic functions . Brain imaging methods used in neurolinguistics may be classified into hemodynamic methods , electrophysiological methods , and methods that stimulate the cortex directly . 
 = = = Hemodynamic = = = 
 Hemodynamic techniques take advantage of the fact that when an area of the brain works at a task , blood is sent to supply that area with oxygen ( in what is known as the Blood Oxygen Level @-@ Dependent , or BOLD , response ) . Such techniques include PET and fMRI . These techniques provide high spatial resolution , allowing researchers to pinpoint the location of activity within the brain ; temporal resolution ( or information about the timing of brain activity ) , on the other hand , is poor , since the BOLD response happens much more slowly than language processing . In addition to demonstrating which parts of the brain may <unk> specific language tasks or computations , hemodynamic methods have also been used to demonstrate how the structure of the brain 's language architecture and the distribution of language @-@ related activation may change over time , as a function of linguistic exposure . 
 In addition to PET and fMRI , which show which areas of the brain are activated by certain tasks , researchers also use diffusion tensor imaging ( DTI ) , which shows the neural pathways that connect different brain areas , thus providing insight into how different areas interact . Functional near @-@ infrared spectroscopy ( <unk> ) is another hemodynamic method used in language tasks . 
 = = = Electrophysiological = = = 
 Electrophysiological techniques take advantage of the fact that when a group of neurons in the brain fire together , they create an electric dipole or current . The technique of EEG measures this electric current using sensors on the scalp , while MEG measures the magnetic fields that are generated by these currents . In addition to these non @-@ invasive methods , <unk> has also been used to study language processing . These techniques are able to measure brain activity from one millisecond to the next , providing excellent temporal resolution , which is important in studying processes that take place as quickly as language comprehension and production . On the other hand , the location of brain activity can be difficult to identify in EEG ; consequently , this technique is used primarily to how language processes are carried out , rather than where . Research using EEG and MEG generally focuses on event @-@ related potentials ( ERPs ) , which are distinct brain responses ( generally realized as negative or positive peaks on a graph of neural activity ) elicited in response to a particular stimulus . Studies using ERP may focus on each ERP 's latency ( how long after the stimulus the ERP begins or peaks ) , amplitude ( how high or low the peak is ) , or topography ( where on the scalp the ERP response is picked up by sensors ) . Some important and common ERP components include the N400 ( a negativity occurring at a latency of about 400 milliseconds ) , the mismatch negativity , the early left anterior negativity ( a negativity occurring at an early latency and a front @-@ left topography ) , the P600 , and the <unk> readiness potential . 
 = = Experimental design = = 
 = = = Experimental techniques = = = 
 Neurolinguists employ a variety of experimental techniques in order to use brain imaging to draw conclusions about how language is represented and processed in the brain . These techniques include the subtraction paradigm , mismatch design , violation @-@ based studies , various forms of priming , and direct stimulation of the brain . 
 = = = = Subtraction = = = = 
 Many language studies , particularly in fMRI , use the subtraction paradigm , in which brain activation in a task thought to involve some aspect of language processing is compared against activation in a baseline task thought to involve similar non @-@ linguistic processes but not to involve the linguistic process . For example , activations while participants read words may be compared to baseline activations while participants read strings of random letters ( in attempt to isolate activation related to lexical processing — the processing of real words ) , or activations while participants read syntactically complex sentences may be compared to baseline activations while participants read simpler sentences . 
 = = = = <unk> paradigm = = = = 
 The mismatch negativity ( MMN ) is a rigorously documented ERP component frequently used in neurolinguistic experiments . It is an electrophysiological response that occurs in the brain when a subject hears a " deviant " stimulus in a set of <unk> identical " standards " ( as in the sequence s s s s s s s d d s s s s s s d s s s s s d ) . Since the MMN is elicited only in response to a rare " oddball " stimulus in a set of other stimuli that are perceived to be the same , it has been used to test how speakers perceive sounds and organize stimuli categorically . For example , a landmark study by Colin Phillips and colleagues used the mismatch negativity as evidence that subjects , when presented with a series of speech sounds with acoustic parameters , perceived all the sounds as either / t / or / d / in spite of the acoustic variability , suggesting that the human brain has representations of abstract phonemes — in other words , the subjects were " hearing " not the specific acoustic features , but only the abstract phonemes . In addition , the mismatch negativity has been used to study syntactic processing and the recognition of word category . 
 = = = = Violation @-@ based = = = = 
 Many studies in neurolinguistics take advantage of anomalies or violations of syntactic or semantic rules in experimental stimuli , and analyzing the brain responses elicited when a subject encounters these violations . For example , sentences beginning with phrases such as * the garden was on the worked , which violates an English phrase structure rule , often elicit a brain response called the early left anterior negativity ( ELAN ) . Violation techniques have been in use since at least 1980 , when <unk> and Hillyard first reported ERP evidence that semantic violations elicited an N400 effect . Using similar methods , in 1992 , Lee <unk> first reported the P600 response to syntactic anomalies . Violation designs have also been used for hemodynamic studies ( fMRI and PET ) : Embick and colleagues , for example , used grammatical and spelling violations to investigate the location of syntactic processing in the brain using fMRI . Another common use of violation designs is to combine two kinds of violations in the same sentence and thus make predictions about how different language processes interact with one another ; this type of crossing @-@ violation study has been used extensively to investigate how syntactic and semantic processes interact while people read or hear sentences . 
 = = = = Priming = = = = 
 In psycholinguistics and neurolinguistics , priming refers to the phenomenon whereby a subject can recognize a word more quickly if he or she has recently been presented with a word that is similar in meaning or morphological makeup ( i.e. , composed of similar parts ) . If a subject is presented with a " prime " word such as doctor and then a " target " word such as nurse , if the subject has a faster @-@ than @-@ usual response time to nurse then the experimenter may assume that word nurse in the brain had already been accessed when the word doctor was accessed . Priming is used to investigate a wide variety of questions about how words are stored and retrieved in the brain and how structurally complex sentences are processed . 
 = = = = Stimulation = = = = 
 Transcranial magnetic stimulation ( TMS ) , a new noninvasive technique for studying brain activity , uses powerful magnetic fields that are applied to the brain from outside the head . It is a method of exciting or interrupting brain activity in a specific and controlled location , and thus is able to imitate <unk> symptoms while giving the researcher more control over exactly which parts of the brain will be examined . As such , it is a less invasive alternative to direct cortical stimulation , which can be used for similar types of research but requires that the subject 's scalp be removed , and is thus only used on individuals who are already undergoing a major brain operation ( such as individuals undergoing surgery for epilepsy ) . The logic behind TMS and direct cortical stimulation is similar to the logic behind aphasiology : if a particular language function is impaired when a specific region of the brain is knocked out , then that region must be somehow implicated in that language function . Few neurolinguistic studies to date have used TMS ; direct cortical stimulation and cortical recording ( recording brain activity using electrodes placed directly on the brain ) have been used with macaque monkeys to make predictions about the behavior of human brains . 
 = = = Subject tasks = = = 
 In many neurolinguistics experiments , subjects do not simply sit and listen to or watch stimuli , but also are instructed to perform some sort of task in response to the stimuli . Subjects perform these tasks while recordings ( electrophysiological or hemodynamic ) are being taken , usually in order to ensure that they are paying attention to the stimuli . At least one study has suggested that the task the subject does has an effect on the brain responses and the results of the experiment . 
 = = = = Lexical decision = = = = 
 The lexical decision task involves subjects seeing or hearing an isolated word and answering whether or not it is a real word . It is frequently used in priming studies , since subjects are known to make a lexical decision more quickly if a word has been primed by a related word ( as in " doctor " priming " nurse " ) . 
 = = = = <unk> judgment , acceptability judgment = = = = 
 Many studies , especially violation @-@ based studies , have subjects make a decision about the " acceptability " ( usually grammatical acceptability or semantic acceptability ) of stimuli . Such a task is often used to " ensure that subjects [ are ] reading the sentences attentively and that they [ distinguish ] acceptable from unacceptable sentences in the way the [ experimenter ] expect [ s ] them to do . " 
 Experimental evidence has shown that the instructions given to subjects in an acceptability judgment task can influence the subjects ' brain responses to stimuli . One experiment showed that when subjects were instructed to judge the " acceptability " of sentences they did not show an N400 brain response ( a response commonly associated with semantic processing ) , but that they did show that response when instructed to ignore grammatical acceptability and only judge whether or not the sentences " made sense " . 
 = = = = Probe verification = = = = 
 Some studies use a " probe verification " task rather than an overt acceptability judgment ; in this paradigm , each experimental sentence is followed by a " probe word " , and subjects must answer whether or not the probe word had appeared in the sentence . This task , like the acceptability judgment task , ensures that subjects are reading or listening attentively , but may avoid some of the additional processing demands of acceptability judgments , and may be used no matter what type of violation is being presented in the study . 
 = = = = Truth @-@ value judgment = = = = 
 Subjects may be instructed not to judge whether or not the sentence is grammatically acceptable or logical , but whether the proposition expressed by the sentence is true or false . This task is commonly used in psycholinguistic studies of child language . 
 = = = = Active distraction and double @-@ task = = = = 
 Some experiments give subjects a " distractor " task to ensure that subjects are not consciously paying attention to the experimental stimuli ; this may be done to test whether a certain computation in the brain is carried out automatically , regardless of whether the subject devotes attentional resources to it . For example , one study had subjects listen to non @-@ linguistic tones ( long beeps and buzzes ) in one ear and speech in the other ear , and instructed subjects to press a button when they perceived a change in the tone ; this supposedly caused subjects not to pay explicit attention to grammatical violations in the speech stimuli . The subjects showed a mismatch response ( MMN ) anyway , suggesting that the processing of the grammatical errors was happening automatically , regardless of attention — or at least that subjects were unable to consciously separate their attention from the speech stimuli . 
 Another related form of experiment is the double @-@ task experiment , in which a subject must perform an extra task ( such as sequential finger @-@ tapping or articulating nonsense syllables ) while responding to linguistic stimuli ; this kind of experiment has been used to investigate the use of working memory in language processing . 
 = York Community Stadium = 
 The York Community Stadium is a proposed multi @-@ purpose stadium in Huntington , York , England . It will be owned by City of York Council , and be shared by York City Football Club and York City Knights Rugby League Football Club . The projected capacity of the all @-@ seater stadium is 8 @,@ 005 . 
 The move to a new stadium was necessitated by the terms of the loan York City secured from the Football Stadia Improvement Fund to purchase their Bootham Crescent ground . Planning permission for the current design , put forward by Greenwich Leisure Ltd , was granted in March 2015 . Construction is expected to begin in the summer of 2016 , for completion in early 2018 . In addition to the stadium , the site will house a leisure complex and a community hub . 
 = = Background = = 
 York City F.C. ceased ownership of their Bootham Crescent ground in the summer of 1999 , after the club 's real property assets were transferred to a holding company called Bootham Crescent Holdings . The club secured a £ 2 million loan from the Football Stadia Improvement Fund ( FSIF ) to buy the ground in February 2004 . The terms of this loan required the club to identify a site for a new stadium by 2007 , and have detailed planning permission by 2009 , to avoid financial penalties . Once plans for a new stadium were in place , the loan would turn into a grant to assist in funding the relocation . 
 As part of the loan agreement , Persimmon have first refusal on purchasing Bootham Crescent once York City leave , for 10 % lower than its market value . Persimmon still intend to build 93 homes on the site , and the proceeds of the sale would go towards building the new stadium . In March 2008 , York City 's managing director Jason McGill cited " the annual cost of £ 60 @,@ 000 for the maintenance and upkeep of a 1932 stadium with few commercial and income @-@ generating opportunities " as the reason for the continued need to move to a new stadium . 
 = = Planning history = = 
 York City had identified a preferred site for a new stadium by April 2007 , but were unable to disclose the location due to confidentiality clauses . Despite the club failing to formally identify a site by the end of 2007 , financial penalties were not incurred , as the FSIF were satisfied with the progress made . However , McGill said plans with the preferred site had stalled by March 2008 . City of York Council announced its commitment to building a community stadium in May 2008 , which would be used by York City and the city 's rugby league club , York City Knights RLFC . 
 A project board was established in January 2009 , with the objective of ensuring the stadium be built by 2012 . City councillors approved the outline business case for the stadium in June 2009 , meaning officials could start searching for sites . Four sites were put forward to the council in June 2010 , and York City favoured the option of building a 6 @,@ 000 all @-@ seater stadium at Monks Cross in Huntington , to the north of York , on the site of Huntington Stadium , which would be ready by 2014 at the earliest . Mark Stead of The Press noted the advantages of this site , including the potential for land value to include , the opportunity to build health and fitness facilities and commercial interest , and the disadvantages , including a scheduled ancient monument being located on adjacent land and traffic concerns . In July 2010 , this location was chosen by the council executive as their preferred option . 
 Developers <unk> ( Monks Cross ) Ltd submitted a planning application for a community stadium , for use by York City and York City Knights , and a retail park in September 2011 . The council granted planning permission for the development in May 2012 , with the stadium expected to be ready during the 2014 – 15 season . Gavin Aitchison of The Press commented that " one of York ’ s biggest planning controversies in years finally came to a head " after the planning committee meeting that lasted over eight hours . Critics argued the development would damage the city centre economy , with a report by Deloitte saying the development would cost the city centre £ 50 million a year . In November 2012 , construction was delayed until June 2014 , for a completion date of July 2015 . A delay to the construction of the shopping park in June 2013 , caused by the discovery of protected great crested newts at the site , meant the stadium completion date was moved to January 2016 . 
 In August 2014 , Greenwich Leisure Ltd ( <unk> ) were named as the council 's preferred bidder to deliver an 8 @,@ 000 all @-@ seater stadium , to be shared by York City and York City Knights , and a leisure complex and a community hub . Construction was due to start during spring 2015 , for a completion date of July 2016 . York City were given responsibility for operating and managing the stadium on an initial 13 @-@ year contract . A planning application for the <unk> plan was submitted to the council in December 2014 , which was passed in March 2015 . The cost of the stadium and leisure complex , including a replacement athletics track at another site , stood at £ 37 million . 
 In July 2015 , construction was delayed as contracts were still being finalised , and the completion date was moved to during the 2016 – 17 season . Construction was delayed again a month later , with work to begin in February or March 2016 , for completion in April or May 2017 . With construction costs increasing due to more detailed design work , construction inflation and delays , the council pledged an additional £ 7 @.@ 2 million in March 2016 , raising the total cost of the project to £ 44 @.@ 2 million . Construction was delayed to the summer of 2016 , for completion in early 2018 . 
 = = Structure and facilities = = 
 The stadium is projected to have an all @-@ seated capacity of 8 @,@ 005 . It will comprise four stands ; the East Stand ( Main Stand ) , the West Stand , the North Stand and the South Stand . The three @-@ floored East Stand is to accommodate hospitality guests , players , officials and the media , and will be connected to the adjacent retail and community facilities . The stands will stretch the length of the playing field , and each corner will host stadium facilities , including matchday emergency services , stewarding , groundsman accommodation , plant space and a fan zone . The seats will be coloured red , white and blue , a combination of the colours of both teams . 
 The pitch will use reinforced natural grass , with provision to counter frost . The dimensions for football matches will be 105 by 68 metres ( 115 by 74 yd ) , with 3 @-@ metre @-@ wide run @-@ offs on the sides and <unk> metre @-@ wide run @-@ offs behind the goals , which will meet FIFA recommendations . The dimensions for rugby league matches will be 100 by 68 metres ( 109 by 74 yd ) , with 6 @-@ metre in @-@ goal areas , and 3 @-@ metre @-@ wide run @-@ offs on the sides and after the dead ball lines . 
 Adjoining the stadium will be the leisure complex , which will include a 25 @-@ metre , six @-@ lane swimming pool , a sports hall for netball , badminton and basketball , a gym with dance and spinning studios , an adventure sports zone and three 3G five @-@ a @-@ side pitches . A community hub will house health and well @-@ being services for York residents and visitors , including clinical services , an independent living assessment centre and a library . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Regular bus services will serve the stadium from the city centre , and additional services to other areas will be considered if there is sufficient demand . A review of the park and ride operating times will take place , with an extension to the service to be sought . On matchdays , 400 car parking places and 355 cycle parking places will be available at the stadium . A cycle route exists between the site and the city centre . 
 = Patrick Moore = 
 Sir Patrick Alfred Caldwell @-@ Moore CBE , FRS , <unk> ( 4 March 1923 – 9 December 2012 ) was an English amateur astronomer who attained prominent status in that field as a writer , researcher , radio commentator and television presenter . 
 Moore was president of the British Astronomical Association , co @-@ founder and president of the Society for Popular Astronomy ( SPA ) , author of over 70 books on astronomy , and presenter of the world 's longest @-@ running television series with the same original presenter , the BBC 's The Sky at Night . As an amateur astronomer , he became known as a specialist in Moon observation and for creating the Caldwell catalogue . <unk> such as his rapid diction and monocle made him a popular and instantly recognisable figure on British television . 
 Moore was also a self @-@ taught <unk> , glockenspiel player and pianist , as well as an accomplished composer . He was a former amateur cricketer , golfer and chess player . In addition to many popular science books , he wrote numerous works of fiction . Moore was an opponent of fox hunting , an outspoken critic of the European Union , supporter of the UK Independence Party and served as chairman of the short @-@ lived anti @-@ immigration United Country Party . He served in the Royal Air Force during World War II . He never married or had children . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Moore was born in Pinner , Middlesex on 4 March 1923 to Capt. Charles Trachsel Caldwell @-@ Moore MC ( died 1947 ) and Gertrude ( née White ) ( died 1981 ) . His family moved to Bognor Regis , and subsequently to East Grinstead where he spent his childhood . His youth was marked by heart problems , which left him in poor health and he was educated at home by private tutors . He developed an interest in astronomy at the age of six and joined the British Astronomical Association at the age of eleven . He was invited to run a small observatory in East Grinstead at the age of 14 , after his mentor – who ran the observatory – was killed in a road accident . At the age of 16 he began wearing a monocle after an oculist told him his right eye was weaker than his left . Three years later , he began wearing a full set of dentures . 
 During World War II , Moore joined the Home Guard in East Grinstead where his father had been elected platoon commander . Despite recounting in his autobiography that he had lied about his age to join the Royal Air Force in 1940 at age 16 , records show that he enlisted in the Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve in December 1941 at age 18 and was not called up for service until July 1942 as an Aircraftman , 2nd Class . After basic training at various RAF bases in England , he went to Canada under the British Commonwealth Air Training Plan and completed training at RAF Moncton in New Brunswick as a navigator and pilot . During his time in Canada , he met Albert Einstein and Orville Wright while on leave in New York . Returning to England in June 1944 , he was commissioned as a Pilot officer and was posted to RAF Millom in Cumbria , where he was a navigator in the crew of a Vickers Wellington bomber , engaged in maritime patrolling and bombing missions to mainland Europe . After the end of hostilities , Moore became an adjutant and then an Area Meteorological Officer , finally demobilized in October 1945 with the rank of Flying officer . The war had a significant influence on his life - he said his only romance ended when his fiancée Lorna , a nurse , was killed in London in 1943 by a bomb which struck her ambulance . Moore subsequently remarked that he never married because " there was no one else for me ... second best is no good for me ... I would have liked a wife and family , but it was not to be . " In his autobiography he said that after sixty years he still thought about her , and because of her death " if I saw the entire German nation sinking into the sea , I could be relied upon to help push it down . " In May 2012 he said to the " Radio Times " magazine , " We must take care . There may be another war . The Germans will try again , given another chance . A Kraut is a Kraut is a Kraut . And the only good Kraut is a dead Kraut . " 
 Moore said he was " exceptionally close " to his mother Gertrude , a talented artist who shared his Selsey home , which was decorated with her paintings of " <unk> " – little friendly aliens – which she produced and sent out annually as the Moores ' Christmas cards . Moore wrote the foreword for his mother 's 1974 book , Mrs Moore In Space . 
 = = Career in astronomy = = 
 After the war , Moore rejected a grant to study at the University of Cambridge , citing a wish to " stand on my own two feet " . He wrote his first book , Guide to the Moon ( later retitled Patrick Moore on the Moon ) in 1952 and it was published a year later . He wrote it on a 1908 Woodstock typewriter , which he used for every book he published . He was a teacher in Woking and at <unk> House School in Langton Green , from 1945 to 1953 . His second book was a translation of a work of French astronomer Gérard de Vaucouleurs ( Moore spoke fluent French ) . After his second original science book , Guide to the Planets , he penned his first work of fiction , The Master of the Moon , the first of numerous young @-@ adult fiction space adventure books ( including the late 1970s series the Scott Saunders Space Adventure ) ; he wrote a more adult novel and a farce titled Ancient Lights , though he did not wish either to be published . 
 While teaching at <unk> he set up a 12 ½ inch reflector telescope at his home , which he kept into his old age . He developed a particular interest in the far side of the Moon , a small part of which is visible from Earth as a result of the Moon 's libration ; the Moon was his specialist subject throughout his life . He claimed to have discovered and named the Mare Orientale ( Eastern Sea ) in 1946 , along with H P Wilkins , though he later conceded that German astronomer Julius Heinrich Franz should be credited with the discovery . The feature had been observed several times since telescopic observations began . Moore described the short @-@ lived glowing areas on the lunar surface , and gave them the name transient lunar phenomena in 1968 . 
 His first television appearance was in a debate about the existence of flying saucers following a spate of reported sightings in the 1950s ; Moore argued against Lord Dowding and other UFO proponents . He was invited to present a live astronomy programme and said the greatest difficulty was finding an appropriate theme tune ; the opening of Jean Sibelius 's Pelléas et Mélisande was chosen and used throughout the programme 's existence . The programme was originally named Star Map before The Sky at Night was chosen in the Radio Times . On 24 April 1957 , at 10 : 30 pm , Moore presented the first episode about the Comet Arend – Roland . The programme was pitched to casual viewers up to professional astronomers , in a format which remained consistent from its inception . Moore presented every monthly episode except for one in July 2004 when he suffered a near @-@ fatal bout of food poisoning caused by eating a contaminated goose egg and was replaced for that episode by Chris Lintott . Moore appears in the Guinness World Records book as the world 's longest @-@ serving TV presenter having presented the programme since 1957 . From 2004 to 2012 , the programme was broadcast from Moore 's home , when arthritis prevented him from travelling to the studios . Over the years he received many lucrative offers to take his programme onto other networks , but rejected them because he held a ' gentlemen 's agreement ' with the BBC . 
 A highlight of the series in 1959 was when the Russians allowed Moore to be the first Westerner to see the photographic results of the Luna 3 probe , and to show them live on air . Less successful was the transmission of the Luna 4 probe , which ran into technical difficulties and around this time Moore famously swallowed a large fly ; both episodes were live and Moore had to continue regardless . He was invited to visit the Soviet Union , where he met Yuri Gagarin , the first man to journey into outer space . For the fiftieth episode of The Sky at Night , in September 1961 , Moore 's attempt to be the first to broadcast a live direct telescopic view of a planet resulted in another unintended ' comedy episode ' , as cloud obscured the sky . 
 In 1965 , he was appointed director of the newly constructed Armagh Planetarium in Northern Ireland , a post he held until 1968 . His stay outside England was short partly because of the beginning of The Troubles , a dispute Moore wanted no involvement in . He was appointed Armagh County secretary of the Scout movement , but resigned after being informed that Catholics could not be admitted . In developing the Planetarium , Moore travelled to Japan to secure a Goto Mars projector . He helped with the redevelopment of the Birr Telescope in the Republic of Ireland . He was a key figure in the development of the Herschel Museum of Astronomy in Bath . 
 In June 1968 he returned to England , settling in Selsey after resigning his post in Armagh . During the NASA Apollo programme , presenting on the Apollo 8 mission , he said that " this is one of the great moments of human history " , only to have his broadcast interrupted by the children 's programme <unk> . He was a presenter for the Apollo 9 and Apollo 10 missions , and a commenter , with Cliff Michelmore and James Burke , for BBC television 's coverage of the Moon landing missions . Moore could not remember his words at the " Eagle has landed " moment , and the BBC has lost the tapes of the broadcast . A homemade recording reveals that the studio team was very quiet during the landing sequence , leaving the NASA commentary clear of interruptions . Some 14 seconds after " contact " Burke says " They 've touched " . At 36 seconds he says " Eagle has landed " . Between 53 and 62 seconds he explains the upcoming stay / no @-@ stay decision and NASA announces the T1 stay at 90 seconds after contact . At 100 seconds the recorded sequence ends . Thus any real @-@ time comment Moore made was not broadcast live and the recording ends before Burke polls the studio team for comment and reaction . Moore participated in TV coverage of Apollo missions 12 to 17 . 
 He was elected a member of the International Astronomical Union in 1966 ; having twice edited the Union 's General Assembly newsletters . He attempted to establish an International Union of Amateur Astronomers , which failed due to lack of interest . During the 1970s and 80s , he reported on the Voyager and Pioneer programs , often from NASA headquarters . At this time he became increasingly annoyed by conspiracy theorists and reporters who asked him questions such as " Why waste money on space research when there is so much to be done here ? " . He said that when asked these type of questions " I know that I 'm dealing with an idiot . " Another question that annoyed him was " what is the difference between astronomy and astrology ? " Despite this he made a point of responding to all letters delivered to his house , and sent a variety of standard replies to letters asking basic questions , as well as those from conspiracy theorists , proponents of hunting and ' cranks ' . Despite his fame , his telephone number was always listed in the telephone directory and he was happy to show members of the public his observatory . 
 He compiled the Caldwell catalogue of astronomical objects and in 1982 , asteroid 2602 Moore was named in his honour . In February 1986 he presented a special episode of The Sky at Night on the approach of Halley 's Comet , though he later said the BBC 's better @-@ funded Horizon team " made a complete hash of the programme . " In January 1998 , a tornado destroyed part of Moore 's garden observatory ; it was subsequently rebuilt . Moore campaigned unsuccessfully against the closure of the Royal Observatory , Greenwich in 1998 . Among Moore 's favourite episodes of The Sky at Night were those that dealt with eclipses , and he said " there is nothing in nature to match the glory of a total eclipse of the Sun . " 
 Moore was a BBC presenter for the total eclipse in England in 1999 , though the view he and his team had from Cornwall was obscured by cloud . Moore was the patron of the South Downs Planetarium & Science Centre , which opened in 2001 . 
 On 1 April 2007 , a 50th anniversary semi @-@ spoof edition of the programme was broadcast on BBC One , with Moore depicted as a Time Lord and featured special guests , amateur astronomers Jon Culshaw ( impersonating Moore presenting the first The Sky at Night ) and Brian May . On 6 May 2007 , a special edition of The Sky at Night was broadcast on BBC One , to commemorate the programme 's 50th anniversary , with a party in Moore 's garden at Selsey , attended by amateur and professional astronomers . Moore celebrated the record @-@ breaking 700th episode of The Sky at Night at his home in Sussex on 6 March 2011 . He presented with the help of special guests Professor Brian Cox , Jon Culshaw and Lord Rees , the Astronomer Royal . 
 It was reported in January 2012 that because of arthritis and the effects of an old spinal injury he was no longer able to operate a telescope . However , he was still able to present The Sky at Night from his home . 
 He died aged 89 at 12 : 25 p.m. on 9 December 2012 at his home in Selsey , West Sussex . 
 On 9 December 2014 it was reported that the Science Museum , London had acquired a large collection of Patrick Moore 's objects and manuscripts and memorabilia , including The Sky at Night scripts , and about 70 of his observation books , over more than 60 years , and manuscripts for astronomy and fiction books , and a 12 @.@ 5 inch reflecting telescope . 
 = = Activism and political beliefs = = 
 Moore was known for his conservative political views . In the 1970s , he was chairman of the anti @-@ immigration United Country Party , a position he held until the party was absorbed by the New Britain Party in 1980 . He campaigned for the politician Edmund Iremonger in the 1979 British general election , as they agreed the French and Germans were not to be trusted . Iremonger and Moore gave up political campaigning after deciding they were <unk> . Moore campaigned on behalf of Douglas Denny ( UKIP ) for the Chichester constituency in 2001 . A Tory voter for many years , he was a supporter and patron of the eurosceptic UK Independence Party until his death . He briefly supported the Liberal Party in the 1950s , though condemned the Liberal Democrats , saying he believed they could alter their position radically and that they " would happily join up with the BNP or the Socialist Workers Party ... if [ by doing so ] they could win a few extra votes . " He admired the Official Monster Raving Loony Party and was briefly their financial advisor . He wrote in his autobiography that Liechtenstein – a constitutional monarchy headed by a prince – had the best political system in the world . Moore was a critic of the Iraq War , and said " the world was a safer place when Ronald Reagan was in the White House " . He was a patron of the British Weights and Measures Association . 
 Proudly declaring himself to be English ( rather than British ) with " not the slightest wish to integrate with anybody " , he stated his admiration for controversial MP Enoch Powell . Moore devoted an entire chapter ( " The Weak Arm of the Law " ) of his autobiography to denouncing modern British society , particularly " motorist @-@ hunting " policemen , sentencing policy , the Race Relations Act , Sex Discrimination Act and the " Thought Police / Politically Correct Brigade " . He wrote that " homosexuals are mainly responsible for the spreading of AIDS ( the Garden of Eden is home of Adam and Eve , not Adam and Steve ) " . 
 In an interview with Radio Times , he asserted that the BBC was being " ruined by women " , commenting that : " The trouble is that the BBC now is run by women and it shows : soap operas , cooking , quizzes , kitchen @-@ sink plays . You wouldn 't have had that in the golden days . " In response , a BBC spokeswoman described Moore as being one of TV 's best @-@ loved figures and remarked that his " forthright " views were " what we all love about him " . In his June 2002 appearance on Room 101 he banished female news readers into Room 101 . 
 " I may be accused of being a dinosaur , but I would remind you that dinosaurs ruled the Earth for a very long time . " 
 Moore cited his opposition to fox hunting , blood sports and capital punishment to rebut claims that he had ultra right @-@ wing views . Though not a vegetarian , he held " a deep contempt for people who go out to kill merely to amuse themselves . " He was an animal lover , supporting many animal welfare charities ( particularly Cats Protection ) . He had a particular affinity for cats and stated that " a <unk> house is a soulless house " . 
 = = Other interests and popular culture = = 
 Because of his long @-@ running television career and eccentric demeanour , Moore was widely recognised and became a popular public figure . In 1976 it was used to good effect for an April Fools ' Day spoof on BBC Radio 2 , when Moore announced a once @-@ in @-@ a @-@ lifetime astronomical event that meant that if listeners could jump at that exact moment , 9 @.@ 47 a.m. they would experience a temporary sensation of weightlessness . The BBC received many telephone calls from listeners alleging they experienced the sensation . He was a key figure in the establishment of the International Birdman event in Bognor Regis , which was initially held in Selsey . 
 Moore appeared in other television and radio shows , including Just a Minute and , from 1992 until 1998 , playing the role of GamesMaster in the television show of the same name : a character who professed to know everything there is to know about video gaming . He would issue video game challenges and answered questions on cheats and tips . The show 's host , Dominik Diamond , claimed that Moore did not understand anything that he said on the show , yet managed to record his contributions in single takes . 
 Moore was a keen amateur actor , appearing in local plays . He appeared in self @-@ parodying roles , in several episodes of The Goodies and on the Morecambe and Wise show , and broadcast with Kenneth Horne only a few days before Horne 's death . He had a minor role in the fourth radio series of The Hitchhiker 's Guide to the Galaxy , and a lead role in the Radio 1 sci @-@ fi BBC / 20th Century Fox radio play , Independence Day UK in which amongst other things , Moore fills in as a navigator . He appeared in It 's a Celebrity Knockout , <unk> Blank and Face the Music . He appeared on television at least once in a film prop space suit . 
 He expressed appreciation for the science fiction television series Doctor Who and Star Trek , but stated that he had stopped watching when " they went PC - making women commanders , that kind of thing " . Despite this he subsequently made a cameo appearance in the Doctor Who episode " The Eleventh Hour " in 2010 , which was Matt Smith 's debut as the Eleventh Doctor . In the 1960s , Moore had been approached by the Doctor Who story editor Gerry Davis to act as a scientific advisor on the series to help with the accuracy of stories , a position ultimately taken by Kit Pedler . 
 A keen amateur chess player , Moore carried a pocket set and was vice president of Sussex Junior Chess Association . In 2003 , he presented Sussex Junior David Howell with the best young chess player award on Carlton Television 's Britain 's Brilliant <unk> show . Moore had represented Sussex in his youth . 
 Moore was an enthusiastic amateur cricketer , playing for the Selsey Cricket Club well into his seventies . He played for the Lord 's Taverners , a cricketing charity team , as a bowler with an unorthodox action . Though an accomplished leg spin bowler , he was a number 11 batsman and a poor fielder . The jacket notes to his book " Suns , Myths and Men " ( 1968 ) said his hobbies included " chess , which he plays with a peculiar leg @-@ spin , and cricket . " He played golf , and won a Pro @-@ Am competition in Southampton in 1975 . 
 Until forced to give up because of arthritis , Moore was a keen pianist and accomplished xylophone player , having first played the instrument at the age of 13 . He composed a substantial corpus of works , including two operettas . Moore had a ballet , Lyra 's Dream , written to his music . He performed at a Royal Command Performance , and performed a duet with Evelyn Glennie . 
 In 1998 , as a guest on Have I Got News for You , he accompanied the show 's closing theme tune on the xylophone and as a pianist , he once accompanied Albert Einstein playing The Swan by Camille Saint @-@ Saëns on the violin ( no recording was made ) . In 1981 he performed a solo xylophone rendition of the Sex Pistols ' " Anarchy in the U.K. " in a Royal Variety Performance . He did not enjoy most popular music : when played ten modern rock songs by such artists as Hawkwind , Muse and Pink Floyd , in a 2009 interview with journalist Joel McIver , he explained , " To my ear , all these songs are universally awful . " 
 Before encountering health problems he was an extensive traveller , and had visited all seven continents , including Antarctica ; he said his favourite two countries were Iceland and Norway . On 7 March 2006 he was hospitalised and fitted with a pacemaker because of a cardiac abnormality . He spoke in favour of Esperanto on the hundredth anniversary of the help @-@ language . 
 He was a friend of Queen guitarist and astrophysicist Brian May , who was an occasional guest on The Sky at Night . May bought Moore 's Selsey home in 2008 , leasing it back to him for a peppercorn rent the same day to provide financial security . May , Moore and Chris Lintott co @-@ wrote a book Bang ! The Complete History of the Universe . In February 2011 , Moore completed ( with Robin Rees and Iain Nicolson ) his comprehensive Patrick Moore 's Data Book of Astronomy for Cambridge University Press . In 1986 he was identified as the co @-@ author of a book published in 1954 called Flying Saucer from Mars , attributed to Cedric Allingham , which was intended as a money @-@ making venture and practical joke on UFO believers ; Moore never admitted his involvement . He once joined the Flat Earth Society as an ironic joke . 
 Moore believed himself to be the only person to have met the first aviator , Orville Wright , the first man in space , Yuri Gagarin , and the first man on the moon , Neil Armstrong . 
 In March 2015 , BBC Radio 4 broadcast a 45 @-@ minute play based on the life of Moore , The Far Side of the Moore by Sean Grundy , starring Tom Hollander as Moore and Patricia Hodge as his mother . 
 = = Honours and appointments = = 
 In 1945 , Moore was elected a fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society ; in 1977 he was awarded the society 's Jackson @-@ <unk> Medal . In 1968 , he was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire ( OBE ) and promoted to a Commander ( CBE ) of the order in 1988 . In 1999 he became the honorary president of the East Sussex Astronomical Society , a position he held until his death . In 2001 , he was knighted for " services to the popularisation of science and to broadcasting " . 
 In 2001 , he was appointed an Honorary Fellow of the Royal Society , the only amateur astronomer ever to achieve the distinction . In June 2002 , he was appointed as the honorary vice president of the Society for the History of Astronomy . Also in 2002 , Buzz Aldrin presented him with a British Academy of Film and Television Arts ( BAFTA ) award for services to television . He was patron of Torquay Boys ' Grammar School in south Devon . Moore had a long association with the University of Leicester and its Department of Physics and Astronomy , and was awarded an honorary Doctor of Science degree in 1996 and a Distinguished Honorary Fellowship in 2008 , the highest award that the university can bestow . 
 In 2009 , after saving Airdrie Public Observatory from closure in 2002 , Moore accepted the position of Honorary President of Airdrie Astronomical Association , a position which he held until his death . 
 = = Film and television appearances = = 
 = Typhoon Bolaven ( 2012 ) = 
 Typhoon Bolaven , known in the Philippines as Typhoon Julian , was regarded as the most powerful storm to strike the Korean Peninsula in nearly a decade , with wind gusts measured up to 186 km / h ( 116 mph ) . Forming as a tropical depression on August 19 , 2012 to the southwest of the Mariana Islands , Bolaven steadily intensified as it slowly moved west @-@ northwestward in a region favoring tropical development . The system was soon upgraded to a tropical storm less than a day after formation and further to a typhoon by August 21 . Strengthening became more gradual thereafter as Bolaven grew in size . On August 24 , the system attained its peak intensity with winds of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) and a barometric pressure of 910 mbar ( hPa ; 26 @.@ 87 inHg ) . Weakening only slightly , the storm passed directly over Okinawa on August 26 as it began accelerating toward the north . Steady weakening continued as Bolaven approached the Korean Peninsula and it eventually made landfall in North Korea late on August 28 before transitioning into an extratropical cyclone . The remnants rapidly tracked northeastward over the Russian Far East before turning eastward and were last noted on September 1 crossing the International Dateline . 
 Although Bolaven struck the Ryukyu Islands as a powerful typhoon , damage was less than expected . Relatively few buildings were damaged or destroyed across the region . The most significant effects stemmed from heavy rains , amounting to 551 @.@ 5 mm ( 21 @.@ 71 in ) , that caused flash flooding and landslides . One person drowned on Amami Ōshima after being swept away by a swollen river . In mainland Japan , two people drowned after being swept away by rough seas . In South Korea , 19 people were killed by the storm . Many buildings were damaged and approximately 1 @.@ 9 million homes were left without power . Losses in the country reached ₩ 420 billion ( US $ 374 @.@ 3 million ) , the majority of which was due to destroyed apple orchards . Significant damage also took place in North Korea where at least 59 people were killed and 50 others were reported missing . Additionally , 6 @,@ 700 homes were destroyed . Offshore , nine people drowned after two Chinese vessels sank . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On August 18 , an area of showers and thunderstorms associated with a trough formed about 520 km ( 320 mi ) west @-@ southwest of Guam . Over the following day , a low @-@ level circulation developed within the trough . Tracking slowly northeastward into a region of warm sea surface temperatures , low wind shear , and favorable divergence , continued development was anticipated . Later on August 19 , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) issued a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert as the system was anticipated to develop further . Hours later , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) classified the low as a tropical depression . The JTWC followed suit early on August 20 , designating the system as Tropical Depression 16W . Following the development of convective banding features along the southern side of the low , both the JMA and JTWC upgraded the depression to a tropical storm , with the former assigning it the name Bolaven . By this time , the storm began turning northwestward in response to a subtropical ridge south of Japan . Later on August 20 , microwave imagery from the Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission satellite depicted a weak eye @-@ like feature . 
 Early on August 21 , the JMA upgraded Bolaven to a severe tropical storm , with maximum estimated winds at 95 km / h ( 60 mph ) . Throughout the day , a large central dense overcast developed around the low @-@ level circulation and banding features became more prominent , especially over the southern half of the storm . However , the northwestern quadrant of Bolaven struggled to organize as quickly due to moderate wind shear produced by a nearby upper @-@ level anticyclone . Due to the improved structure , both the JMA and JTWC upgraded Bolaven to a typhoon during the latter half of August 21 . Gradual intensification ensued over the following days as the storm became increasingly organized . A second anticyclone developed over the center of Bolaven later that day and enhanced the cyclone 's poleward outflow . Although subsidence and wind shear increased along the northern edge of the storm on August 23 , the system 's outflow allowed it mitigate the negative effects ahead of it . 
 Due to the storm 's large size , it began turning towards the north @-@ northwest along the subtropical ridge on August 24 , earlier than anticipated . During this brief turn , the center of Bolaven crossed 135 ° E , entering the area of responsibility of the Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration ( PAGASA ) . As such , the administration assigned the typhoon with the local name Julian . Later that day , a well @-@ defined , 18 km ( 11 mi ) wide eye developed within the central dense overcast and several additional feeder bands formed along the south side of the circulation . Based on the improved structure , the JTWC estimated that the system attained one @-@ minute sustained winds of 215 km / h ( 135 mph ) , equivalent to a Category 4 on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale . By the morning of August 25 , Bolaven began to undergo an eyewall replacement cycle . Despite the slightly degrading structure , the JTWC estimated the storm to have intensified slightly , attaining one @-@ minute winds of 230 km / h ( 145 mph ) . 
 On August 25 , Bolaven began to interact with Typhoon Tembin , which was located over the South China Sea , causing Tembin to execute a slow counter @-@ clockwise loop . An outer eyewall became more apparent late on August 25 with a clear second ring of deep convection surrounding the original eye . Similar to the JTWC , the JMA continued to indicate that Bolaven was intensifying through early on August 26 . At that time , the JMA estimated the typhoon to have reached its peak intensity with winds of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) and a barometric pressure of 910 mbar ( hPa ; 26 @.@ 87 inHg ) . As the system approached Okinawa , radar imagery showed a 55 km ( 34 mi ) wide eyewall surrounding a small , but well @-@ organized 11 km ( 6 @.@ 8 mi ) wide inner eyewall . Shortly before 1500 UTC on August 26 , the center of Bolaven passed directly over Okinawa . At the time , the JTWC assessed the system to have had one @-@ minute sustained winds of 195 km / h ( 120 mph ) while the JMA estimated the winds to be 175 km / h ( 110 mph ) . Early on August 27 , the storm 's inner eyewall collapsed as the eyewall replacement cycle finished , with the new eye estimated to be about 220 km ( 140 mi ) in diameter . In addition to its unusually large eye , the storm itself was large , spanning approximately 890 to 1 @,@ 020 km ( 550 to 630 mi ) . However , microwave satellite imagery indicated an overall weakening of the western side of the storm . Accelerating northward , Bolaven maintained a well @-@ defined outflow due to a large tropical upper @-@ tropospheric trough to its southeast and a mid @-@ latitude trough to the northwest . 
 As the storm moved northward over the Yellow Sea , atmospheric conditions became increasingly hostile , with significantly lower sea surface temperatures and high wind shear . During the overnight of August 27 – 28 , the typhoon brushed South Korea as a weakening cyclone . Convection on the west side of the storm diminished and its feeder bands began to collapse . Increasing shear started taking its toll early on August 28 as convection became displaced from the center of circulation , leaving part of the southwestern quadrant exposed . This also indicated that Bolaven had begun to undergo an extratropical transition as it approached the Korean Peninsula . Following structural weakening , the JMA and JTWC downgraded Bolaven to a severe tropical storm and tropical storm , respectively . Hours before moving onshore in North Korea , the majority of the convection had moved over land while the circulation and the center itself had only stratocumulus clouds covering it . Around 1500 UTC on August 28 , Bolaven made landfall in North Korea with winds of 100 km / h ( 65 mph ) . Rapidly moving towards the northeast , the storm became fully embedded within a baroclinic zone near the China – North Korea border later that day . The JMA continued to monitor Bolaven as a tropical cyclone until early on August 29 , at which time the system was situated over the southern region of the Russian Far East . The extratropical remnants later turned eastward and were last noted on September 1 crossing the International Dateline . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 = = = Philippines = = = 
 On August 24 , fishing vessels and small craft off the northern and eastern coasts of Luzon , Philippines were advised to not venture out due to large swells produced by Typhoons Bolaven and Tembin . 
 = = = Ryukyu Islands = = = 
 On August 22 , hours before the JTWC classified Bolaven as a typhoon , Okinawa was placed under Tropical Cyclone Condition of Readiness ( TCCR ) four . The following day , media reports began calling Typhoon Bolaven " the bad one . " At this time , the then Category 4 @-@ equivalent typhoon was expected to pass directly over Okinawa and based on forecasts from the JTWC , it would be the most powerful storm to hit the island in 13 years . On August 24 , the TCCR was raised to level three . During the afternoon of August 25 , the TCCR was raised to the third @-@ highest level , one . Residents were urged to have all their preparations complete as soon as possible before the storm arrived . This was further raised to TCCR 1 @-@ C ( caution ) as tropical storm force winds began impacting the island . 
 Across Ishigaki Island , all public activities were canceled by August 24 and flights to mainland Japan were suspended . Ferry service to Kagoshima Prefecture was also canceled . Throughout Okinawa , 850 people , including 300 in Naha , evacuated to public shelters due to the threat of flooding . Transportation across the island was paralyzed due to the storm as ferry terminals , airports , and bus and rail services were shut down . During the evening of August 25 , All Nippon Airways and Japan Airlines canceled all flights to and from the Ryukyu Islands , south of Amami Ōshima for August 26 and the morning of August 27 . The slow motion of the storm led meteorologists at the JMA to warn residents of a potential record rainfall event , stating that localized areas could receive between 400 and 600 mm ( 16 and 24 in ) of rain . Rainfall rates were expected to reach nearly 150 mm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) per hour during the height of the storm . Due to the significant threat of flash flooding and mudslides , residents living in flood @-@ prone or mountainous areas were urged to evacuate . 
