 Due to strong digital downloads , " Liberty Walk " peaked at number three on the U.S. Billboard Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart . The song also reached number 79 on the Canadian Hot 100 . 
 = Braathens SAFE Flight 139 = 
 Braathen SAFE Flight 139 was an aircraft hijacking that occurred in Norway on 21 June 1985 . The incident took place on a Boeing 737 @-@ 205 belonging to Braathens SAFE that was on a scheduled flight from Trondheim Airport , Værnes to Oslo Airport , Fornebu . The hijacker was Stein Arvid Huseby , who was drunk during most of the incident . It was the first plane hijacking to take place in Norway ; there were no deaths and no injuries . Huseby was sentenced to three years prison and five years detention . 
 Armed with an air gun , Huseby threatened a cabin attendant and told the captain to proceed as planned to Fornebu . He claimed ( falsely ) to have placed explosives on board . His demands were to make a political statement and talk to Prime Minister Kåre Willoch and Minister of Justice Mona Røkke . The plane landed at 15 : 30 at Fornebu and was surrounded by the police . After one hour , Huseby released 70 hostages in exchange for having the aircraft being moved closer to the terminal building . Thirty minutes later , Huseby released the remaining passengers . He drank throughout the incident , and at 17 : 30 , after he consumed the plane 's beer supply , he surrendered his weapon in exchange for more beer . The plane was immediately stormed and Huseby arrested . 
 = = Hijacking = = 
 The hijacking occurred on board Braathens SAFE Flight 139 en route from Trondheim Airport , Værnes to Oslo Airport , Fornebu . The aircraft was a Boeing 737 – 205 , named Harald Gille ( after Harald IV of Norway ) with registration LN @-@ <unk> . The day before the hijacking , Huseby graduated from upper secondary school , where he studied health and social work . That evening , he purchased an air gun in Trondheim . The weapon was in his hand luggage when boarding the aircraft at Trondheim Airport , Værnes , where there was no security control . He selected a seat at the rear of the aircraft . While airborne , the hijacker showed a female flight attendant the air gun , and asked her to inform the captain that he wanted control over the aircraft , but that otherwise all was to proceed as planned . The flight attendant and later the hijacker used the intercom to communicate with the pilot . The police were informed about the incident via air controllers at 15 : 05 . 
 The plane landed at Fornebu at 15 : 30 , fifteen minutes after schedule . The aircraft parked at a location 700 metres ( 2 @,@ 300 ft ) from the terminal . It was immediately surrounded by police special forces , as well as officers from Asker and Bærum Police Department . Two special @-@ trained police officers were placed in the control tower , where they negotiated with Huseby . Fornebu was closed , and air traffic was rerouted to Oslo Airport , Gardermoen . The passengers were not informed about the incident until the aircraft was surrounded by the police . The hijacker informed the passengers and crew falsely that he had placed explosives in the toilet rooms , but that no one would be hurt if they cooperated . Huseby was dressed in a suit with sunglasses . The passengers on board described his actions as calm . During the whole incident , Huseby repeatedly asked for and drank beer . 
 Huseby 's demands were to talk to Prime Minister Kåre Willoch and Minister of Justice Mona Røkke , both from the Conservative Party . He also wanted to hold a press conference at Fornebu . Huseby was unsatisfied with his treatment after he left prison . He demanded to receive guarantees for a better treatment and economic security from the authorities . Assisted by a psychologist , the police negotiated with Huseby . One hour after the plane landed , 70 passengers were let out of the plane . The first group were those passengers who had or claimed they had transfers to other flights . In exchange , the aircraft was moved closer to the terminal building . The passengers were picked up by a bus and transported to the domestic terminal , where they were questioned by the police . The remaining passengers were let out thirty minutes later . Only the five crew members remained . 
 A friend of Huseby helped the police in the negotiations . At 18 : 30 , the aircraft was out of beer , so Huseby made an agreement that he would throw the gun out of the window in exchange for more beer . This was delivered by a civilian police officer . The aircraft was then immediately stormed by special forces and Huseby arrested . No @-@ one was injured in the hijacking . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Stein Arvid Huseby , originally from Karmøy , was at the time 24 years old . He had just finished studying at a Christian upper secondary school in Trondheim . He had previously been sentenced five times for violence offenses , including an armed robbery of a taxi and threatening a <unk> with a shotgun . He was beaten and abused by his father , and started drinking as a 13 @-@ year @-@ old . He lost his job as a seaman due to drunkenness , and was put into a psychiatric institution in 1980 , aged 19 . In 1983 , he was admitted to a Christian school , and had managed to stay away from alcohol for two years , but had started again just prior to the incident . He stated that he was afraid to lose his friends due to his misuse of alcohol . 
 During the court case , Huseby stated that he wanted help from society and attention drawn to his cause . However , he stated that he regretted doing this by hijacking . He stated that all he wanted was to send a message to the minister of justice and prime minister that he needed help , and that he did not intend that the other passengers be aware of his threats . Huseby stated that the hijacking was spontaneous and that he planned to make an armed robbery or take hostages at the Radisson SAS hotel in Oslo . His defense attorney argued that Huseby did not commit a hijacking in the letter of the law , but had instead taken hostages , which would result in a lesser sentence . The court psychologists stated that Huseby had a difficult childhood , and had been defined as an alcoholic at the age of 17 . They considered him to have very underdeveloped ability to make rational decisions and weak mental health . They also stated that he committed crimes to identify himself due to his low self @-@ esteem . On 29 May 1986 , Huseby was found guilty of hijacking in Eidsivating Court of Appeal . He was sentenced to three years prison and five years of preventive supervision . 
 = Bob Heffron = 
 Robert James " Bob " Heffron ( 10 September 1890 – 27 July 1978 ) , also known as R. J. Heffron , was a long @-@ serving New South Wales politician , union organiser and Australian Labor Party Premier of New South Wales from 1959 to 1964 . Born in New Zealand , Heffron became involved in various Socialist and Labor movements in New Zealand and later Australia before joining the Australian Labor Party . Being a prominent unionist organiser , having been gaoled at one stage for " conspiracy to strike action " , he was eventually elected to the Parliament of New South Wales for Botany in 1930 . However his disputes with party leader Jack Lang led to his expulsion from the ALP in 1936 and Heffron formed his own party from disgruntled Labor MPs known as the Industrial Labor Party . The success of his party enabled his readmission to the party and his prominence in a post @-@ Lang NSW Branch which won office in 1941 . 
 Heffron served as Minister of the Crown in the cabinets of William McKell , James McGirr and Joseph Cahill , most notably as Minister for Education from 1944 to 1960 and as Deputy Premier . In his significant tenure as minister for education Heffron oversaw massive expansion of the state 's public schools and the development of higher education services including the establishment of the New South Wales University of Technology ( now the University of New South Wales ) . Rising to become Premier in 1959 , he spearheaded a final attempt to abolish the New South Wales Legislative Council via referendum in 1961 , which ended in failure . Serving as Premier until 1964 , Heffron was a member of the New South Wales Legislative Assembly for 37 years until his retirement on 23 January 1968 . 
 = = Early years and background = = 
 " Bob " Heffron ( as he was widely known ) was born on 10 September 1890 in Thames , New Zealand , the fifth child of Irish @-@ born parents Michael Heffron , a blacksmith , and Ellen Heath . After spending his early education at nearby <unk> , Heffron left school at 15 to work in a gold @-@ treating plant while studying metallurgy at the Thames School of Mines . At 19 , he went to California to work and to the Yukon in Canada to look for gold ; when this proved unsuccessful he returned to New Zealand in 1912 . 
 Heffron joined the New Zealand Socialist Party in 1912 and , becoming a miners ' union organiser , was involved in the Waihi miners ' strike , an event significant to the development of the labour movement in New Zealand . Appointed an organiser for the Auckland General Labourers ' Union , Heffron studied law part @-@ time at Auckland University College , whilst residing at the Heffron family home at 24 Grosvenor Street Grey Lynn . Although having volunteered for military service in the First World War , Heffron was rejected on medical grounds , with the attending doctor citing heart troubles . However , the rejection on the grounds of health was done despite an allegation that Heffron , in an attempt to encourage such a finding , had smoked 12 packs of cigarettes prior to his medical , in order to avoid military service . His elder brother , William Thomas Heffron , enlisted as a Private on 3 October 1917 and was killed in action a few days before the armistice on 4 November 1918 , while serving with the 1st Battalion , Auckland Infantry Regiment . On 29 December 1917 he married Jessie <unk> , the daughter of a Norwegian engineer and they would have two daughters , <unk> Jessie and June . 
 In 1921 , the <unk> moved to Melbourne , Victoria . That same year in Victoria , Heffron was appointed an organiser for the Federated Clothing Trades of the Commonwealth of Australia and also joined the leftist Victorian Socialist Party . Later in 1921 he moved to Sydney , becoming the secretary of the New South Wales branch of the Federated Marine Stewards ' and <unk> 's Association of Australasia . As the union 's state secretary , a role he would hold for ten years , he took a prominent role in maritime trade unionism in Sydney . In February 1924 , when the Commonwealth and Dominion Line steamer Port Lyttelton was declared ' Black ' by the Labor Council of New South Wales owing to various worker 's disputes and the ship having been declared unseaworthy , Heffron and six other union representatives acted to advise members of the Seamen 's Union to refuse to work on the Port Lyttelton . For this , in April the government of Sir George Fuller had Heffron and the six other unionists arrested on the charge of conspiracy to strike action . Although controversially refused bail by the trial judge , Heffron and his fellow defendants , represented by Richard Windeyer KC and H. V. Evatt , were found not guilty and released in July 1924 by the court , a verdict that had been returned by the direction of the judge . Later joining the Australian Labor Party , at the time he showed himself to be a supporter of party leader Jack Lang , supporting Lang 's successful motion at the 1923 state conference to readmit James Dooley to the party . 
 = = Early political career = = 
 Having confirmed his Lang credentials , Heffron stood as the endorsed Labor party candidate for the seat of Botany at the 1927 election , which was held by Thomas Mutch , who had split from party after a <unk> with Lang and stood as an ' Independent Labor ' candidate after being denied preselection . A contest marked by clashes and accusations of <unk> , Heffron was ultimately unsuccessful , gaining only 45 % of the vote . He was eventually successful at the next election in 1930 , defeating Mutch , and would hold Botany until its abolition in 1950 . 
 While his support for Lang had enabled Heffron to accelerate his political career , he found himself increasingly unhappy with Lang 's autocratic and divisive political style , which had been amplified by the Great Depression , the expulsion of the NSW branch of the Labor Party from the federal branch and the ultimate dismissal of Lang 's government in 1932 by Governor Sir Philip Game . After Labor 's defeats at the hands of the United Australia Party ( UAP ) at the 1932 and 1935 state elections , Heffron became associated with a small group in caucus and in the NSW Labor Council who aimed to depose Lang as leader . However , while Heffron 's movement was based on his personal stronghold in his Botany – Maroubra ALP branches and the left @-@ wing trade unions , Lang maintained majority control of the caucus , party machine and the party newspaper , Labor Daily . 
 = = = Industrial Labor Party = = = 
 When Labor Council Secretary Robert King organised a conference of dissident left @-@ wing unions on 1 August 1936 , which was attended by Heffron and three other caucus members , Lang summoned a special party conference on 22 August which expelled Heffron , King and all the other leaders who attended the conference . As a result , Heffron , along with his colleague Carlo Lazzarini and others , formed the Industrial Labor Party ( ILP ) , which was also known as the ' Heffron Labor Party ' . Despite their expulsion , Heffron and the new ILP did increasingly well against Lang and the Labor Party , winning two subsequent by @-@ elections in the seats of Hurstville ( won by Clive Evatt ) and Waverley ( won by Clarrie Martin ) . In June 1939 , three other MPs , Frank Burke ( Newtown ) , Mat Davidson ( Cobar ) and Ted <unk> ( Sturt ) , unhappy with Lang 's leadership joined the ILP . As a result of its success , John Curtin and the federal executive of the ALP pressured the NSW ALP to readmit Heffron and his party at a unity conference at the Majestic Theatre in Newtown on 26 August 1939 . Heffron then combined forces with William McKell to depose Lang on 5 September 1939 , with McKell becoming the new leader of the party , although he declined to stand for the position of deputy leader . 
 = = Minister of the Crown = = 
 = = = National Emergency Services = = = 
 When the Labor Party eventually regained office under McKell , defeating Alexander Mair and the UAP at the May 1941 election , Heffron was elevated to the ministry as Minister for National Emergency Services , charged with the implementation of the National Emergency Services Act , and the administration of National Emergency Services , New South Wales . In this role he was responsible for the civil defence and air @-@ raid precautions of New South Wales , which became increasingly more important after the entry of Japan in the Second World War in December 1941 and subsequent attacks on Australia on Darwin and Sydney in 1942 . Serving until 8 June 1944 , Heffron advocated public vigilance whilst in this portfolio , declaring : " We are living in a fool 's paradise in Australia ... Many people have the idea that what is happening in other countries cannot happen here . " 
 Heffron also clashed with the Federal Government 's imposition of National Emergency Services procedures , most notably over the imposition of brownouts for the city of Sydney . In the Legislative Assembly in November 1942 , Heffron denounced the advisers of the Federal Government who continued to maintain the brown @-@ out as an essential defence measure : " The only conclusion I can come to , is that the brown @-@ out was born of a form of panic when Japan entered the war and it has continued because of a few brass hats will not look at the facts and the evidence of the fighting men , but persist in sticking to their first conclusion . The position , therefore , is ludicrous . " Heffron later affirmed that the brown @-@ out was completely unnecessary as a black @-@ out , with short notice given , was a more effective and safer defensive measure . 
 = = = Minister for Education = = = 
 Appointed by McKell as Minister for Education in June 1944 , Heffron authored in 1946 a comprehensive policy for the New South Wales education system entitled : Tomorrow is Theirs : The Present and Future of Education in New South Wales . As minister during the important post @-@ war era of economic growth and infrastructure development , Heffron presided over the expansion in the number and facilities of the public schools in NSW , with enrollments in all areas doubling in size . 
 In November 1952 he appointed Harold Wyndham as the Director @-@ General of Education , and commissioned him to chair a committee tasked to completely review the Secondary education system in New South Wales and make recommendations for improvements . The committee 's report , popularly referred to as " The Wyndham Report " , was presented to Heffron in October 1957 and gave rise to the Public Education Act of 1961 , being brought into effect in 1962 , during Heffron 's term as Premier . Key amongst the changes was the objective of presenting all students with the opportunity to experience a wide range of subjects , including visual arts , industrial arts , music and drama , and a wide range of languages . The five @-@ year secondary school system was abandoned in favour of adding another year to the course , with major statewide external examinations at the end of the tenth ( School Certificate ) and the twelfth ( Higher School Certificate ) years of schooling . 
 Heffron 's reformist attitude in education also extended to the tertiary level , in which he intended to significantly expand NSW 's capacity for higher @-@ level learning . On 9 July 1946 he presented a proposal to the cabinet outlining the creation of a technological @-@ based university in NSW , as a separate institution to the existing Sydney Technical College and a year later cabinet authorised the appointment of a Developmental Council , chaired by Heffron , to bring the new tertiary institution into existence . First meeting in August 1947 , the council established all the guidelines and regulations that would set @-@ up the future institution and by March 1948 , 46 students had already enrolled to study . 
 This institution , now named the " New South Wales University of Technology " , gained its statutory status through the enactment of ' New South Wales University of Technology Act 1949 ' , which was carried by Heffron 's firm support of its cause : " the Government ... is fully alive to the need in a democratic country to extend facilities to students who , for financial reasons , cannot attend present full @-@ time university courses " . This was the first time that a second university was to be established in any Australian state . With the establishment of this institution receiving opposition by some areas in the media and conservatives , Heffron came to its defence in an article published in the Sydney Morning Herald on 4 May 1949 , noting : " I feel that this new institution should be given time to prove its worth through the quality and work of its graduates " . In September 1958 Heffron moved the bill to change the name of the New South Wales University of Technology to the University of New South Wales following the recommendations of the Murray Report that had proposed the expansion of its focus from technology into such fields as medicine and arts . When several opposition MPs objected during debate on the basis of it posing a threat to the status of the University of Sydney , with one joking that it could be called " Heffron University " , Heffron came to the defence of the university and dismissed the objections as " absurd " . In 1950 Heffron 's seat of Botany was abolished and largely replaced by Maroubra , which he was subsequently elected to and would hold until his retirement in 1968 . 
 Meanwhile , Heffron , who supported a general policy of decentralising tertiary education across the state , directed his Department to begin the establishment of various Teachers ' Colleges in New South Wales , to provide sufficient tertiary training to the expanding numbers of teachers filling the new schools and colleges across the state . Among them was the Newcastle Teachers ' College , established in 1949 and opened in 1950 , which facilitated growing calls from the city of Newcastle for a more permanent University in the city . In May 1951 , Heffron indicated his support for the establishment of a satellite college of Sydney University in Newcastle as an initial step towards the establishment of a full university . By July Heffron sought to approach Sydney University officials to facilitate efforts " to have a university established in Newcastle as soon as possible " , and noted that his moves to purchase land in the city as the site of this college was an indication of the government 's intentions : " I didn 't buy that site in Newcastle just for fun . I want to provide a university in Newcastle and I want that to be only the first step in providing universities all over the state " . However , by the time Heffron opened the Newcastle University College ( <unk> ) on 3 December 1951 , no affiliation had been finalised . By May 1952 , a University Establishment Group had gained much momentum but Heffron had been notified by Premier Joseph Cahill that there were insufficient funds available for the establishment of another full university . Nevertheless , in early 1954 this college had become a college of the New South Wales University of Technology . As premier , in late 1961 Heffron moved with his Minister for Education , Ernest <unk> , that the Newcastle University College would become a full university " come what may " . This was achieved when on 12 March 1962 , the University of Technology Vice @-@ Chancellor Philip Baxter notified the <unk> Warden , Professor James Auchmuty , that it would be allowed to take on full autonomy to become the University of Newcastle from 1 January 1965 . 
 In 1951 Heffron also played a role in the establishment of the University of New England ( <unk> ) when he discussed with the University of Sydney on its thoughts about training and certifying schoolteachers by external studies and / or correspondence courses . The university rejected the idea , stating that external degree or certification programs would be significantly inferior to residence education . Undeterred , Heffron asked New England about its willingness to conduct external studies . The Warden of the New England University College ( and later first Vice Chancellor of <unk> ) Robert Madgwick enthusiastically supported the idea and instructed his college 's staff to begin preparing an external studies program . Heffron asked the University of Sydney if it had any objection to New England being granted independence to operate the state 's external education program . The university replied that it had no objection . As a result , Heffron introduced the ' University of New England Act ' to parliament in early December 1953 , it received assent on 16 December 1953 and the college became the independent University of New England on 1 February 1954 . 
 = = = Deputy premier and leadership = = = 
 Throughout his period in the cabinet , Heffron was seen as a prominent and well @-@ performing member of the government , and as such a potential contender for the premiership . The first opportunity for Heffron came in February 1946 , when McKell announced to the Labor caucus of his intention to resign before the 1947 election . McKell , with the intention of ensuring Heffron as his successor , remained as an MP even after Prime Minister Joseph Chifley had announced his appointment as Governor @-@ General in order to vote for Heffron . At the ballot on 5 February 1947 , Heffron lost by two votes to the Minister for Housing , James McGirr , who was favoured by the more Catholic and conservative caucus members . When McGirr announced his resignation on the grounds of ill health on 1 April 1952 , Heffron put himself forward as a candidate to succeed him against , among others , Deputy Premier Joseph Cahill . However , the day before the ballot on 3 April , Heffron had been made aware that he would not have the numbers in caucus to win against Cahill and consequently made arrangements with Cahill to give the votes of his bloc to Cahill , in exchange for his support to become Deputy Premier . As a result , on 3 April Cahill defeated Attorney General Clarrie Martin 32 votes to 14 to become Premier and Heffron defeated Mines Secretary Joshua Arthur 32 votes to 14 to become Deputy Premier . 
 When Heffron 's former opponent Arthur resigned from the ministry on 23 February 1953 when a Royal Commission was set up to investigate his involvement in corrupt business activity , Heffron was commissioned to replace him as Secretary for Mines , serving from February to September 1953 . As Deputy Premier , Heffron acted in Cahill 's absence and in times of infirmity , which included receiving the Japanese Prime Minister <unk> Kishi , on his arrival at Sydney Airport on 31 October 1957 , the first visit of a Prime Minister of Japan to Australia . Heffron 's role as deputy became of prime importance when Cahill died suddenly in October 1959 , and the 68 @-@ year @-@ old Heffron was elected to succeed him unopposed . 
 = = Premier of New South Wales = = 
 Heffron became Premier , being sworn in with his cabinet on 23 October 1959 at Government House , Sydney by Governor Sir Eric Woodward . However , his time as Premier was marked by significant tensions within the Labor Party in NSW and nationally , where although a split involving the Democratic Labor Party had been avoided during Cahill 's term , the sectarian and factional undercurrent in the party was very much present in what was increasingly perceived as a tired and divided government . Indeed , the 68 @-@ year @-@ old Heffron 's government consisted mostly of MPs and Ministers who had come in with McKell after the 1941 election . In parliament , Heffron tended to reflect this by leaving most of the speaking roles to his deputy Jack Renshaw and local government and highways minister Pat Hills . It was clear to many that the aged Heffron 's best days as a politician were behind him , as future Labor political advisor Richard Hall noted in The Bulletin : " In the House he tends to ramble on , recalling past glories as Minister for Education or Minister for Emergency Services in answer to questions . In an age where clichés cloak most politicians , Heffron throws them out as though they were devastating retorts , although occasionally the old radical has shown his teeth , flashed into anger , and for a few minutes reminded us that this was the great mob @-@ orator who led many bitter strikes . " His old nemesis Jack Lang also took the opportunity to take a last swipe at him , ridiculing Heffron in his newspaper , Century , as " Mr Magoo " . On 14 October 1960 , Heffron presided over the official opening of <unk> Dam , the completion of which meant that it became the primary reservoir and the first reliable water supply for the whole Sydney catchment . At the opening , Heffron declared : " We have come along way from the Tank Stream , Sydney 's first water supply " . 
 = = = Evatt as chief justice = = = 
 In January 1960 Heffron provided his old friend H. V. Evatt a dignified exit from federal politics by nominating him to succeed Sir Kenneth Street as Chief Justice of New South Wales . His Attorney General Reg Downing , however , was horrified , having favoured the senior puisne justice Sir William Owen as the most suitable candidate while also realising that Evatt 's worsening health would render him less than equal to the task of chief justice . Therefore , while Downing , as attorney general , would normally be the person to move the nomination of chief justice in cabinet , he refused to do so , leaving Heffron to do it himself . Heffron 's motion to nominate Evatt was passed narrowly by 8 votes to 6 . Downing 's concerns would come to pass as Evatt indeed proved highly ineffective , often wracked by mental and physical ill @-@ health , was reduced to having most of his judgements written or co @-@ written for him , and resigning in 1962 after only two years as chief justice . 
 = = = Legislative Council abolition = = = 
 Upon his elevation as premier Heffron , following an approved motion from the 1958 state conference , reanimated the longstanding Labor policy to abolish the Legislative Council of New South Wales by announcing a statewide referendum on this question . Heffron had long supported this policy from his <unk> days , seeing the council as an outdated bastion of conservative privilege , a position that was echoed by trade union official and member of the Legislative Council , Tom Dougherty , who had pushed through a rule at the 1952 state conference that banned <unk> from becoming members of the state party executive . However , Heffron 's efforts found themselves up against significant opposition , not only from the Liberal and Country parties but also within the Labor party itself . Indeed , when the ' Constitution Amendment ( Legislative Council Abolition ) Bill ' came before the Legislative Council on 2 December 1959 , the council resolved 33 votes to 25 to send it back to the Legislative Assembly on the grounds that such a bill should have originated in the council . This was passed with the support of seven Labor councillors crossing the floor ( including Cyril Cahill , Anne Press and Donald Cochrane ) , who were all subsequently expelled from the party and formed the Independent Labor Group . 
 On 6 April 1960 , Heffron attempted to send the bill back to the council , which returned it to the assembly on the same grounds as before . As a result of the deadlock , Heffron requested the Governor to order a joint session of parliament on 20 April , a session which lasted two hours and was boycotted by the opposition . On 12 May the Assembly resolved that the bill be submitted for a referendum . However , later that day the leader of the opposition in the Legislative Council , Hector Clayton , started legal action against the government on the grounds that under section 5B of the NSW Constitution , the council had neither voted nor deliberated on the bill and thus the bill could not be submitted for a referendum . In the case of Clayton v. Heffron ( 1960 ) a majority of the full bench of the Supreme Court of New South Wales ( headed by Chief Justice Evatt ) found in favour of the government four to one on the grounds that they had complied fully with the intention of section 5B , while also denying the plaintiff leave to appeal to the High Court . The subsequent appeal to the New South Wales Court of Appeal was rejected by Chief Judge in Equity McLelland on 10 October . In a subsequent case to the High Court , Clayton argued that section 15 of the Commonwealth Constitution , which dealt with the process by which state parliaments filled senate vacancies , entrenched the requirement for such parliaments to be bicameral on account of its exclusive mention of both houses . This was rejected by the court that affirmed that the mention did not exclude the right of state parliaments to do as they saw fit regarding abolition or reform . 
 In January 1961 , Heffron announced the date of the referendum for 29 April 1961 and affirmed that it would be a simple yes / no question and would not include " alternative proposals such as retaining the Upper House on an elective basis " . However , despite the lack of time allocated for a campaign , the Liberal / Country opposition led by Robert Askin and Charles Cutler , despite rallying around a moderate slogan of " retain and reform " , spearheaded a strong campaign centered on warnings of a Labor @-@ dominated single house subject to " Communist and Trades Hall influence " . Askin promised to fight abolition " from one end of the state to the other " while Cutler also promised an " all @-@ out campaign " alongside the Liberals . By contrast Heffron and Labor 's campaign was described as extremely " tame " and " lacklustre " , having been weakened against the fact that any criticism of the Legislative Council also included its Labor members , with some Labor backbench MLAs terming the council " the union officials club " . 
 As a result , the referendum on 29 April was categorically rejected with 802 @,@ 512 votes ( 42 @.@ 4 % ) for abolition and 1 @,@ 089 @,@ 193 votes ( 57 @.@ 5 % ) against . This would be the last attempt to abolish the council and , as the first time the NSW Labor party had lost a state poll in many years , was widely seen as the beginning of the end for the Labor government , which had been in power since 1941 . Heffron 's supporter Dougherty resigned from the council a month later in protest of the result . 
 = = = Second term = = = 
 At the 1962 election Heffron , despite the damage to prestige represented by the failed referendum , put forward new policies including the establishment of a Department of Industrial Development to reduce unemployment , free school travel , aid to home buyers and commencing the construction of the Sydney – Newcastle Freeway as a toll @-@ road . At the election the Labor Party increased its margin by 5 seats , leaving a comfortable majority in the new parliament , although its success was attributed to the unpopularity at the time of Sir Robert Menzies ' federal Liberal government following the 1961 credit squeeze . 
 Another one of Heffron 's election promises , namely a Royal Commission into the legalisation of off @-@ course betting , caused considerable tension with his own cabinet . His Attorney General Reg Downing favoured its legalisation through a government @-@ supervised <unk> Agency Board ( TAB ) while his Chief Secretary Gus Kelly favoured legalising the activities of existing SP bookmakers . Downing however , went over Heffron 's head and procured an ALP State Executive order requiring the establishment of a TAB . When the Final Report of Commission was handed down on 29 March 1963 , echoing the position of Downing , Heffron was obliged to carry out the establishment of the TAB . 
 Another issue arose when Cardinal Norman Gilroy presented Heffron in September 1962 with a plan for State aid to Catholic Church schools , including assistance for teacher salaries and capital grants for buildings , an issue that was highly explosive in the sectarian politics of New South Wales at the time . Heffron , alive to the need for a limited form of state support to placate sectarian conflict that could destroy the government , permitted Treasurer Jack Renshaw to include state support for school laboratories and a means @-@ tested allowance to school students in the 1963 budget . Heffron later dropped the school laboratory provision but his permitting of the means @-@ tested allowance provoked condemnation from the Federal Party Executive in Adelaide on 30 September 1962 , who were less interested in placating the traditional Catholic hierarchy and more informed by the bitterness of the earlier ALP / DLP split in the party in 1955 . Heffron and Renshaw backed down on this last provision , leaving no state aid for Catholic schools , and affirming the dominance of the Federal party in such matters . 
 Heffron , humiliated and tired after several decades in ministerial office , resigned as Premier six months later on 30 April 1964 at the age of 73 . His announcement came as a surprise to many members of his own party , although there had been existing hints in the previous months that the Labor caucus had been discussing a departure plan for Heffron , to be replaced by the Deputy Premier Renshaw . Heffron insisted that he had made the decision to himself a year prior , declaring : " It was purely my own decision , so I cannot complain about anyone throwing me out or advising me to get out . Sometimes we are advised to get out - there are hints , but we don 't take any notice when they come from outside , but it is not the same , of course , as coming from your own party . " Renshaw succeeded him as Premier . On 24 June 1964 , Heffron was granted by Queen Elizabeth II retention of the title " The Honourable " for having served for more than three years as a Member of the Executive Council of New South Wales . 
 = = Later life = = 
 After resigning as Premier , Heffron remained in Parliament as Member for Maroubra , retaining his seat at the 1965 election , thereby witnessing his Labor Party enter opposition for the first time in twenty @-@ five years . He stayed for one more term until his retirement in January 1968 , marking thirty @-@ seven years in Parliament . In his valedictory speech , Heffron remarked : 
 " In looking back on my life , I express happiness that I did go into politics . If anybody had then said to me that I would become a Minister of the Crown , I should have thought that I would be the last card in the pack . When I see these young fellows in the Ministry , it reminds me of when I was beating about back in the dark days of the depression . Had anybody then suggested that I would become a Premier of New South Wales , I should have considered that man a suitable candidate for Callan Park . However , with the passage of time , these things happen , and it then becomes a matter of doing one 's best . That is what I have tried to do over the years . " 
 In youth a Roman Catholic , he spent most of his adulthood – unusually for a New South Wales Labor politician at the time – outside the Roman Church , describing himself as a " proselytising rationalist " . In his later years he became more attached to the beliefs of his youth , and became the first Australian statesman to be received by Pope Paul VI during an official visit to the Vatican in July 1963 . In retirement , Heffron lived in the North Shore suburb of Kirribilli . His wife Jessie died aged 84 on 7 July 1977 at Kirribilli Private Hospital while <unk> was also admitted there as a patient . He died aged 87 at the same hospital on 27 July 1978 , survived by his two daughters . Heffron was granted a State funeral with a service at St Stephen 's Uniting Church , Sydney that was attended by over 200 people including Governor Roden Cutler , Premier Neville Wran and former Premiers McKell , Renshaw , Askin , Lewis and Willis , before being sent for cremation at Eastern Suburbs Crematorium in <unk> . In Heffron 's condolence motion in the Legislative Assembly on 15 August 1978 , Wran reflected on Heffron 's achievements : 
 " The importance of his term as Minister for Education lies not merely in its record length of sixteen years ; it lies in the unprecedented challenges of those years and the way he met them . Because of the seminal importance of those years , Mr Heffron could well lay claim to be father of the modern education system in New South Wales . [ ... ] These were years not only of vast expansion in the number of schools and pupils ; they were also years of great experimentation and innovation reflecting deep changes in community attitudes to the purposes of education . The Heffron years established for the first time that equality of opportunity in education was the right of all , not just of the privileged few . " 
 = = Honours and legacy = = 
 In 1947 Heffron was honoured by the Royal Australian Historical Society by being made an Honorary Fellow . Heffron was made an honorary Doctor of Letters by the University of Sydney on 29 August 1952 , with his citation reading : 
 " Robert James Heffron 's whole political career has shown him to be a man of deep sincerity of purpose and with the courage of his convictions , ' One who never turned his back , but marched <unk> . ' It is , in consequence , not surprising that under his ministerial aegis we see the results of his educational zeal and enthusiasm in the rapid growth of the Child Welfare Department , which he has raised to a level equal to the best overseas , in the expansion of library and other cultural facilities , in the planning and creation of new schools , colleges and institutes of higher learning , and last , but not least , in the unfailing sympathy he has always shown with our own University and in his ready understanding of its more pressing problems . " 
 Heffron was also awarded an Honorary Doctor of Science at the New South Wales University of Technology 's first graduation ceremony to be held on the Kensington campus on 16 April 1955 . The citation noted that Heffron " has played a vital role in the founding and early development of this university and remains a sympathetic and wise counsellor to our cause ... His name is written indelibly into the history of the New South Wales University of Technology " . In 1956 his portrait , depicting him in the Scarlet and Old Gold robes of his honorary D.Sc. , was painted by Henry Hanke , entered into that year 's Archibald Prize , and was purchased by the university for its collection in 1957 . In 1962 , the now University of New South Wales , in honour of his role in its establishment and his continuing support , named its newest building after him as the " Robert Heffron Building " , it is now the Australian School of Business . 
 He was also made an honorary Doctor of Letters by the University of New England in 1956 . In 1961 Prince Henry Hospital named the A Ward building of its 1935 extension as " Heffron House " in his honour . In 1962 , in honour of Heffron 's role in establishing the school in 1950 , South Sydney Boys ' High School named its library after him as the " R. J. Heffron Library " . The nearby Randwick Boys High School had done the same to its new library when Heffron opened the school on 11 March 1959 . On 14 June 1966 , the Sydney City Council resolved to name the newly built community hall on Burton Street , Darlinghurst , after him as " Heffron Hall " . In 1973 , the New South Wales Electoral Commission named the new state electorate of Heffron after him and it covers much of his former electorate of Botany . The Charles Sturt University Faculty of Education building in its Bathurst Campus was also named after Heffron in honour of his role in the establishment of the preceding Bathurst and Wagga Wagga Teacher 's Colleges ( now the CSU Bathurst and Wagga Wagga campuses ) . Heffron Park and Heffron Road in Maroubra are named after him , as is Heffron Road in Lalor Park . His first daughter , <unk> , married Dutch sailor Pieter Cordia in 1945 , was a trained nurse and was awarded the Medal of the Order of Australia in 2005 for her efforts to save the heritage of Prince Henry Hospital , which included the building named after her father forty years previously . 
 = Great Southern Group = 
 Great Southern Group was a group of Australian companies that was notable as the country 's largest agribusiness managed investment scheme ( MIS ) business . Great Southern Limited ( GSL ) , the parent company was listed on the Australian Securities Exchange . Through its wholly owned subsidiary , Great Southern Managers Australia Ltd ( GSMAL ) , it established , sold and managed approximately 43 agricultural managed investment schemes . Finance for the MIS was offered to investors via another wholly owned subsidiary , Great Southern Finance ( <unk> ) . 
 The company was founded in 1987 and became a public company in 1999 . It expanded its MIS business rapidly in the 2000s , supported by favourable tax regulations for these types of investments . Most of the Group 's business was in plantation forestry to supply woodchips for the pulp and paper industry , but in the 2000s it diversified into high @-@ value timbers , beef cattle , olives , viticulture , and almond production . The company 's after @-@ tax profit peaked at A $ 132 million in 2006 , but by 2008 had deteriorated to a A $ 63 million loss . 
 The Great Southern companies attracted debate and criticism associated with the operation of managed investment schemes generally , and the environmental performance of their Tiwi Islands operation in particular . On 16 May 2009 , as a result of worsening economic conditions and regulatory issues , the GSL , GSMAL , <unk> and other subsidiaries of GSL entered into voluntary administration . Ferrier Hodgson was appointed as the Administrator . On 18 May 2009 secured creditors appointed McGrath Nicol as the Receiver and Manager to GSL and GSMAL ( as well as other subsidiaries ) . On 19 November 2009 GSL , GSMAL and other subsidiaries of GSL were placed into liquidation . Ferrier Hodgson was appointed as liquidator . 
 According to Ferrier Hodgson , the Great Southern Group had about 52 @,@ 000 investors who contributed about $ 2 @.@ 2 billion . Further , the group raised over $ 260 million in equity from shareholders , obtained over $ 200 million in unsecured convertible notes and raised over $ 600 million in secured funding . 
 Subsequent to the liquidation of the Great Southern Group , aggrieved MIS investors commenced various class actions . 
 Ferrier Hodgson is currently completing the liquidation of the Great Southern Group . 
 The collapse of Great Southern Group , in conjunction with the failure of another high @-@ profile agribusiness company , Timbercorp , led to three separate Australian parliamentary committee inquiries into the MIS industry . 
 = = Business activities = = 
 The Great Southern Group in 2008 formed Australia 's largest managed agribusiness investment scheme operation . The company comprised a parent entity , Great Southern Plantations Limited ( from 2007 renamed Great Southern Limited ) , and over forty subsidiaries , almost all wholly owned . Those subsidiaries held or operated Great Southern 's businesses , including providing management services . 
 At the centre of Great Southern 's operations were management investment schemes ( referred to as MIS schemes ) . MIS schemes are a mechanism by which investors ' funds are pooled to invest in a common business enterprise . A " responsible entity " ( such as Great Southern ) controls the routine administration of the investments . In primary production schemes such as those managed by Great Southern , investors are the growers of products ( such as forestry plantations ) , with an agreement with the company to manage the investment " to plant , establish and maintain the trees until they are harvested at maturity " . Investors in Great Southern generally purchased lots ( typically of 1 hectare ) on land owned or leased by Great Southern . Thus investors owned the plantations , but the land assets belonged to the company . While investors owned individual woodlots , risks and returns were distributed across all investors in individual projects , with growers sharing " the average yield at harvest for the entire Project ... rather than the return from their individual woodlot " . These were not high rates of return for the length of investment involved . Some of the schemes relied upon the rationale that investors would retire and therefore receive income from the scheme when their marginal tax rate was lower than at the time of initial investment . Based on this premise some schemes were claiming a rate of return after tax of eight to nine percent . Others suggested the schemes were a poor investment likely to achieve only six percent return . 
 Returns to investors comprised a tax deduction in the year in which they bought the products , and returns from the sale of produce over the life of the project , which was typically at the point of harvest 10 – 12 years later for plantations , " and up to 23 years for horticultural projects such as almonds " . Great Southern would deduct management fees from the final sale value . A typical forestry investment in the early 2000s involved an initial payment of $ 3000 for one @-@ third of a hectare woodlot , yielding a $ 2900 tax deduction at that time . Returns on harvesting depended on many variables ; Great Southern forecast that investors would recoup their original investment and a further return of between $ 1923 and $ <unk> per woodlot , however early schemes did not achieve these figures on the basis of the timber sales , with some resulting in woodchip sales of only around A $ 1500 , half the value of what was originally invested . Investors received their returns when the product ( usually woodchip ) was harvested and sold . 
 While the majority of Great Southern 's activity was in the sale of managed investment schemes , in 2007 it diversified into funds management through the purchase of Rural Funds Management Ltd , retaining its diversified agricultural assets fund and offering a new share fund and a blended property fund . In addition to retailing MIS products to investors , Great Southern also provided loans to investors wanting to borrow to invest . By 2009 its loan book comprised 14 @,@ 500 loans with an average value of approximately A $ 50 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Rise = = 
 The Great Southern Group began as the company Great Southern , co @-@ founded in 1987 by accountant John Carlton Young , and microbiologist Helen Sewell . It began by managing South @-@ east Australian plantations of Pinus radiata , but in 1992 shifted to <unk> plantations for woodchip production , dealing in blue gum woodlot investments . Through the 1990s it developed its plantation business in south western Western Australia including the Great Southern region ( after which the company is named ) , leasing woodlots to investors on land owned by Great Southern . A related entity , <unk> Finance Pty Ltd , would also lend finance to investors . 
 Young was Great Southern 's Executive Chairman when it listed on the Australian Stock Exchange in 1999 , and co @-@ founder Sewell remained in a full @-@ time role until her retirement in February 2001 . When the ASX200 , a new stock exchange index comprising the top 200 Australian companies by market capitalisation and liquidity , was instituted in March 2000 , Great Southern was one of the stocks included . 
 By 2001 , the Group had 66 000 hectares of forestry plantations in New South Wales , Queensland , Victoria and Western Australia . Its performance on the share market was strong enough that it was Shares magazine 's number one ranked stock in its table of top 50 stocks by yield in January 2002 . However the business faced some turbulent times , with profits in 2001 and 2002 down on the levels of 2000 . The company was delisted from the ASX200 for a period ( from October 2002 to August 2003 ) , although it was relisted and remained in the index until December 2008 . 
 In 2004 , the Group diversified into viticulture , planting vines in Western Australia . The company reported that it had been the ASX200 's fourth @-@ best performer in 2004 , and second @-@ best performer over the preceding two years . In November 2004 , Young indicated to the company 's annual meeting that harvesting of the first plantations had now commenced , and forecast further MIS sales growth . The shares in Great Southern peaked at A $ 4 @.@ 76 at this time , and Young sold a significant proportion of his shareholding , netting him A $ 32 @.@ 6 million . 
 In 2005 Great Southern expanded into organic olives , acquired some existing beef cattle MIS businesses , and bought forest products company Sylvatech , including its A $ 700 million of assets . The purchase of Sylvatech meant the company now also had forestry plantations in the Northern Territory , on the Tiwi Islands . 
 Great Southern 's cattle properties included the 660 @,@ 000 @-@ hectare <unk> Bulla property in WA 's East Kimberley region , the similar sized Wrotham Park , 300 kilometres west of Cairns , and the 196 @,@ 000 @-@ hectare blue @-@ ribbon station of Chudleigh Park near Townsville " , as well as a further 2 @.@ 4 million hectares of pastoral leasehold . In 2007 , the company also diversified its MIS offerings to high value timbers , such as mahogany , the uses for which included furniture and flooring . The following table outlines the expansion of the Great Southern Group 's operations . 
 = = Fall = = 
 In the mid @-@ 2000s , Great Southern 's business was growing rapidly , with sales and market capitalisation increasing at more than 100 per cent per annum . However , in its 2005 Annual Report , the company disclosed that it was subsidising the returns to its 1994 forestry scheme by approximately A $ 3 million , and that it expected to have to similarly subsidise the 1995 and 1996 schemes by up to A $ 12 million in future years . Board Chairman Peter <unk> and non @-@ executive director Jeffry Mews both expressed concern about the way in which Great Southern was funding shortfalls on the sales of timber products , with the issue leading directly to Mews ' resignation . Although the company continued to sell over A $ 800 million of MIS products in the two financial years after incurring losses on its early offerings , it was not meeting sales targets , and its share price was falling . 
 Underpinning Great Southern 's decision to subsidise returns to its early investors was a looming problem : its forestry plantations were not performing to expectations . Timber yields were poorer than had been projected . Great Southern 's baseline projection had been 250 tonnes of woodchips per hectare , but an assessment in 2003 suggested that in most plantations yield would be reduced : in some cases to less than half the planned figure . The company itself considered that yields were proving to be " disappointing " , with actual yields for the woodlots planted in the period between 1994 and 1997 ( and thus harvested by 2008 ) being between 120 and 200 tonnes per hectare . Plantation growth had been limited by drought conditions and issues with the site and seedling quality of early plantings . 
 The company 's sales of MIS schemes , and its profits , both peaked in 2006 , with over A $ 450 million in sales , and a net profit after tax of A $ 133 million . However , the 2006 harvest ( of 1996 plantations ) yielded a return of only A $ 1500 and $ 1750 for the woodlots that investors had bought for A $ 3000 . These plantations had not been productive enough to yield a profit for investors , so Great Southern inflated the returns to A $ 4100 using its own funds . 
 In December 2007 Young announced he would step down as managing director , remaining as both non @-@ executive director and major shareholder . Saying that he wanted someone younger to implement the company 's five @-@ year business plans , he handed over to Cameron Rhodes , one of Great Southern 's existing senior management team . 
 In 2008 , Great Southern had over 430 employees managing investment schemes on behalf of over 47 000 investors . Industry sectors in which investment occurred included beef cattle , forestry , wine grapes , almonds , and poultry production . Its plantation estate had grown to 179 000 hectares , the vast majority of which was for wood pulp production . 
 As MIS sales declined from their 2006 peak , the Group 's debt levels rose . By October 2008 , business analysts <unk> Securities were describing the company as " excessively geared " . The Group developed a proposal , known as Project Transform , to restructure the business , in particular through seeking the agreement of investors to swap their MIS investments for shares in Great Southern Limited . The intention was to free up capital to reduce debt , and make the business more attractive to investors . Analysts such as <unk> Securities and Macquarie Research Equities supported the strategy . 
 The company reported a A $ 64 million loss in its 2008 financial year . By 2009 , the global economic downturn , and regulatory uncertainty associated with MIS schemes , was putting the company under financial pressure , and it was seeking to improve its situation both through asset sales and refinancing of debt . Its debt levels had risen significantly : it had extended its debt financing with its banks from A $ 245 million to A $ 350 million in 2007 . By September 2008 its total debt had ballooned to A $ 820 million , of which A $ 376 million was owed to its lead bankers , ANZ , Commonwealth Bank , BankWest and Mizuho . Great Southern had also been hoping to see a rise in the price obtained for its woodchips , but was unsuccessful in its 2009 negotiations with Japanese customers . 
 By early 2009 , business analysts <unk> Agribusiness Research considered Great Southern to be financially stressed , and that it was " hard to envisage a rapid turnaround in the outlook " for the company . They gave Great Southern as managers the second @-@ lowest rating on their assessment scale , just short of stating that the investment would be " detrimental to an investor 's ... portfolio " . Great Southern 's banks refused a request in 2009 for a further $ 35 million loan . Great Southern 's attempts to extract itself from financial trouble were unsuccessful and by May 2009 , when a trading halt was called , the company 's shares were worth just 12 cents . On 16 May 2009 administrators were appointed under the Corporations Act 2001 , with the companies ' assets passing into control of receivers <unk> on 18 May 2009 . The assets of the group were primarily its land holdings . By the time it went into administration , they were valued at A $ 1 @.@ 8 billion , however , despite company expansion plans , its net assets had not grown for four years . 
 In July 2009 the receivers determined that the company was insolvent . With a complex business structure to unravel , some commentators expect it may take years for the company 's collapse to be fully resolved . By April 2010 , timber company Gunns had taken over as the responsible entity running most of Great Southern 's pulpwood schemes , but the land on which they were being grown was yet to be sold . 
 Following its collapse , there was some speculation about whether Great Southern had disclosed to the market issues with the rate of return it was going to achieve on some of its timber investments . During parliamentary committee inquiries , these allegations were extended to the possibility that the auditors had been misled . It was also noted that , at the time that difficulties were emerging for Great Southern , its CEO sold some of his shares at the top of the companies ' fortunes for $ 32 @.@ 6 million . 
 One of Australia 's other leading managed investment scheme companies , Timbercorp , had also gone into administration the previous month . The two corporate collapses prompted examination by three separate Parliamentary committee inquiries : the first by the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Corporations and Financial Services , into Agribusiness Managed Investment Schemes , which reported in September 2009 ; the second by the Senate Select Committee on Agricultural and Related Industries ; and the third by the Senate Economics References Committee , " Agribusiness managed investment schemes - Bitter harvest " ; published in 11 March 2016 . 
 In 2012 , over 22 @,@ 000 of Great Southern 's investors commenced civil action suing for damages , claiming they had been misled by the company . 
 = = Great Southern and the regulation of managed investment schemes ( MIS ) = = 
 Great Southern and its nearest industry rival Timbercorp were estimated as having 43 per cent of all managed investment schemes ( MIS ) business in Australia . In contrast to other MIS industry participants , for which MIS activity is only a small part of their operations , managed investment schemes were 100 per cent of Great Southern Group and Timbercorp 's business . 
 Agribusiness <unk> offer certain advantages to investors , dispersing investment risks across a large pool of investors and , through tax concessions , sharing those risks between the private investor and the taxpayer . The schemes were intended to overcome failures in the market for risk , and in the area of forestry reflect the fact that Australia has always subsidised plantation development . 
 MIS schemes however have a long history of criticism . Reports from the Rural Industries Research and Development Corporation ( <unk> ) in 2000 and 2004 were reported to have found the schemes performed relatively poorly , in one case relating an analysis " of schemes offered to the public in 2002 – 03 [ that ] found that less than 10 per cent were sufficiently sound investments to warrant their recommendation " . In 2006 , another <unk> report in 2006 observed : 
 Along with other studies , our analysis suggests that the MIS sector ( but not all MIS ) continues to 
 perform poorly with respect to realistic or actual rates of return versus marketed rates . There are limited rights for investors . Issues arising from the large number and small economic size of the retail 
 investor population and those arising from asymmetric information dominate the economics of MIS . 
 The Australian Securities and Investments Commission ( ASIC ) was also reported to have identified issues with inadequate disclosure of information to potential investors , poor performance of the investments , and high management fees for agricultural MIS schemes . In 2003 , the commission commented that it " has deployed a disproportionate percentage of its resources to the regulation of this sector , which represents only a minority of funds under management " . In 2010 it commenced revision of disclosure rules , prompted by " recent turmoil in the agribusiness scheme sector " . 
 The Great Southern Group relied significantly on financial planners and accountants recommending their MIS products to investors . The company was paying commissions of ten percent – high by industry standards , and similar to those paid by other failed investment businesses including <unk> Corporation and Storm Financial . It was also spending a lot of money on recruiting financial advisers to sell its products . One report indicated that A $ 137 million was spent on " commissions , marketing and promotion in two years to 2008 " . Some accountants , with Great Southern 's support , were recommending the agribusiness investment schemes , though they did not have a financial services licence ; one report suggested over half of Great Southern 's MIS sales were coming through accountants , often tax specialists from small practices . These practices had been questioned for several years by the corporate regulator ASIC and some market analysts , and were widely criticised following Great Southern 's collapse . Some experts were critical of the lack of knowledge and expertise of the investment advisers recommending agroforestry MIS schemes . 
 = = = Taxation treatment of MIS schemes = = = 
 Crucial to the attractiveness to investors of all MIS schemes is their taxation treatment . The Australian government had for many years been encouraging agricultural and forestry investment schemes by allowing investors to claim up @-@ front tax deductions of the costs of investment . Investors paid Great Southern a fee to lease plantation woodlots . Great Southern managed the woodlot , and the investor could deduct the cost of the lease from the income they declared that year for tax assessment purposes . The tax deductible status of the investment was widely regarded as the main attraction of MIS schemes to investors . 
 The tax @-@ driven nature of investment in the sector made it vulnerable to policy changes and court rulings interpreting tax law . Tax law reforms in the late 1990s resulting from a major review of tax policy ( called the Ralph review ) altered the way in which deductions could be claimed . These changes , together with company profit warnings , caused a decline in Great Southern 's share price and its business prospects in 2000 and 2001 . Although Great Southern survived the reforms , another company , Australian Plantation Timber , was driven into administration . In June 2001 a Senate committee report was critical of Australian Taxation Office ( ATO ) advice on forestry investments , and the ATO released a statement reassuring forest product investors that they had investment certainty . MIS schemes recovered in 2002 , despite a further Senate Committee report critical of mass @-@ marketed investment schemes , that recommended " that the government seek advice from both ASIC and the ACCC on the question of the adequacy of the current measures for monitoring the schemes market , with particular reference to agribusiness and franchise schemes " . 
 Throughout the mid @-@ 2000s , MIS schemes , including those of Great Southern , attracted increasing investment , driven by tax advantages . Tax benefits for investors that had been due to expire in June 2006 were extended in the Howard government 's 2005 budget to June 2008 , and Great Southern was one of the beneficiaries of the decision . Nevertheless , although Great Southern 's business had continued to grow , the sector was unhappy about taxation uncertainty . The government moved to address this in 2007 , through the Tax Laws Amendment ( 2007 Measures No.3 ) Bill 2007 . Forest industry peak bodies , the National Association of Forest Industries , Tree Plantations Australia , <unk> Investment Managers Australia and the Australian Plantation Products and Paper Industry Council jointly supported the legislation , saying it would end " ten years of instability and uncertainty about the future ongoing taxation arrangements for retail forestry projects " . Nevertheless , the bill attracted heated debate in the Parliament , and did not end taxation issues in the sector . 
 In 2007 , the ATO moved to end the up @-@ front tax deductions for non @-@ forestry MIS investments . This announcement was a disappointment to Great Southern , although only 30 per cent of its business at that stage was non @-@ forestry MIS that would be affected by the ATO ruling . The ATO 's ruling was overturned in 2008 , however it had created significant investor and lender uncertainty . 
 = = Great Southern and Australian politics = = 
 Because Great Southern was involved in a controversial industry , it figured in policy debates throughout its life as a publicly listed company . At the centre of Great Southern 's business was the development of new forest estates for commercial harvest . Australia 's state and federal governments had agreed in 1992 to a National Forest Policy Statement , which included the goal of expanding Australia 's plantation forests . On this foundation , in July 1996 , the federal forests minister and his state and territory counterparts met and " endorsed the plantation industry 's target of <unk> the plantation estate from 1 @.@ 1 million hectares to 3 million hectares by the year 2020 " . In October 1997 governments , the Australian Plantation Products and Paper Industry Council , the Australian Forest Growers , and the National Association of Forest Industries , jointly released Plantations for Australia : The 2020 Vision , known as " Plantations 2020 " . 
 The federal minister for forests from 1998 to 2001 , Wilson Tuckey , was a strong advocate of Plantations 2020 . He also held the federal seat of O 'Connor in Western Australia , which included much of the Great Southern region and significant areas of plantation forests . Tuckey and the forest industry had a close relationship , to the extent that the industry paid for newspaper advertisements that reproduced a letter from Tuckey , following critical coverage of forestry MIS schemes in the media . Great Southern also reproduced Tuckey 's letter in their 2000 Annual Report . 
 During the 2004 election year , Great Southern gave A $ 20 @,@ 000 to each of the governing Liberal and National Parties , as well as to the Labor opposition . In the lead up to the 2007 federal election , Great Southern made A $ 40 @,@ 000 of donations to the Labor opposition , including A $ 10 @,@ 000 two days after the release of the party 's primary industries policy . After Labor won the election , Great Southern 's managing director John Young spoke positively of the change in government and of Labor 's willingness to review policy toward managed investment schemes . 
 = = Environmental and land use issues = = 
 In acquiring the Acacia <unk> plantations of Sylvatech on the Tiwi Islands , Great Southern Group had taken on responsibility for an investment that , while supported by the local Tiwi Land Council , was opposed by environmental non @-@ government organisations ( NGOs ) and some individuals on the Tiwi Islands . The concerns expressed by NGOs related to loss of biodiversity and to greenhouse gas emissions . 
 Complaints were made that Great Southern Group 's 2005 acquisition , Sylvatech , was conducting clearing and plantation activities in breach of environmental conditions set by the Commonwealth Department of the Environment , Water , Heritage and the Arts . These complaints led to a departmental investigation and an agreement between the company and the government that recognised there had been inadvertent breaches of environmental conditions by the company , where forestry operations had intruded into zones designed to protect sensitive rainforests and wetland areas . The company was required to " fix all incursions into the rainforest and wetland buffers " , post a $ 1 million bond to ensure the works were completed , and provide $ 1 @.@ 35 million over three years toward the Tiwi Land Council 's Indigenous Rangers Program , a group of Indigenous land management staff funded by the Tiwi Land Council and Great Southern to conduct environmental works , including weed management and monitoring threatened species . 
 There had been criticism of MIS companies generally , and Great Southern Group ( as the largest company in the sector ) in particular , suggesting that their appetite for land for plantations and agribusiness was driving up land prices in some regions , and distorting some commodity markets . In 2004 , Great Southern 's leading competitor Timbercorp reported a rise in plantation land prices from around A $ 3 @,@ 000 to around A $ 6 @,@ 000 per hectare in just five years . The high demand for forestry MIS schemes led to plantations being expanded on to less suitable land , with timber growth and yield then falling below projections that were based on better quality plantations . Some farmers claimed that MIS were driving up prices in agricultural water markets . Opinion was also divided about whether the expansion of MIS properties in a region was causing shrinkage of towns or was , conversely , stimulating employment . 
 = = Analysing the Group 's failure = = 
 Analysis of the MIS failures of Great Southern Group and Timbercorp focused on several factors . First , critics argued that some MIS investments resembled Ponzi schemes , where securing financial returns for existing investors relied on attracting new investors rather than on successful economic activity . Second , Great Southern Group 's rapid expansion had been underpinned by high levels of debt , and in difficult economic circumstances in which new investment was diminishing and new borrowings were hard to obtain , that debt could not successfully be serviced . Third , some experts and Great Southern Group itself expressed concern that investor uncertainty caused by ATO rulings , and fueled by reporting of taxation policy issues , had scared investors away from their MIS . This was a view that the Australian Taxation Office rejected , arguing that the administrators of both Timbercorp and Great Southern had not identified taxation uncertainty as an issue . Finally , a range of commentators considered that the MIS tax concessions were encouraging unsustainable business models , with companies focusing on selling the tax benefits of investments rather than focussing on profitable commodity production . This , it was argued , led them to underestimate business risks , <unk> land prices , and sell products at lower @-@ than @-@ optimal prices . The failure of MIS schemes for these reasons was predicted in 2008 by <unk> , who argued that " we know that investment driven by the demand for tax minimisation , and not market realities , is associated with collapse " . 
 The Australian Financial Review ( AFR ) had for years carried stories critical of managed investment schemes . An AFR story had prompted the letter , supporting the forest industries , from federal government minister Wilson Tuckey in 2000 . When Great Southern collapsed , Tuckey was asked for comment by the Sydney Morning Herald . He said " Everyone thought [ a plantation strategy ] was a good idea at the time " . He argued investors would probably not lose their money , but " shareholders and lenders could be in a bit of trouble " . With both Great Southern Group and Timbercorp under administration , the AFR continued its editorial attack on government MIS policy . An AFR journalist wrote , " as a general rule , MIS industries are inherently doomed to fail both from an investment and a social good perspective ... Taxpayers should ... not be surprised that they continue to fall over " . 
 = = Great Southern Class Action = = 
 In May , 2011 more than 2 @,@ 000 of the estimated 8 @,@ 000 investors who lost money in the collapse of GSL took legal action seeking damages from Great Southern . They said the company did not disclose the risks associated with managed investment schemes and the company 's poor financial performance . The action also sort to question Bendigo and Adelaide Bank , Javelin Asset Management and Great Southern Finance as to why they issued loans to investors in Great Southern . 
 The trial of the Great Southern Group proceedings began in late October 2012 and concluded in late October 2013 before his Honour Justice Croft . The plaintiffs ' principal claim was that the responsible entity , Great Southern Managers Australia Limited , issued product disclosure statements which were ' defective ' under Part 7 @.@ 9 of the Corporations Act 2001 ( <unk> ) . No allegations of wrongdoing were made against the BEN Parties or Javelin . However , the plaintiffs sought consequential declarations that the loans were void and unenforceable . 
 In July 2014 , shortly before judgment was due to be handed down , the parties settled the Great Southern Group proceedings . A term of the settlement for those group members with loans with the BEN Parties or Javelin was an acknowledgment and admission that their loans were valid and enforceable . 
 The $ 23 million settlement , flagged in July , resolves a class action by 2000 investors led by Macpherson and Kelley Lawyers and targeting Bendigo and Adelaide Bank 's involvement in Great Southern 's schemes . 
 The class action had sought to void more than $ 300 million of loans taken out with Bendigo and Javelin Asset Management to fund the schemes on the basis that investors were misled by Great Southern , which collapsed five years ago . 
 The deed of settlement , however , confirms the loans are valid and enforceable , while waiving accrued penalty interest on overdue borrowings . 
 About $ 20 million of the $ 23 million will be paid to Macpherson and Kelley Lawyers to cover its costs , with just $ 3 million to be distributed among tens of thousands of investors who sunk nearly $ 2 billion into Great Southern . 
 = Ian Smith = 
 Ian Douglas Smith , <unk> , ID ( 8 April 1919 – 20 November 2007 ) was a politician , farmer and fighter pilot who served as Prime Minister of Rhodesia ( or Southern Rhodesia ) from 1964 to 1979 . His country 's first native @-@ born premier , he led the predominantly white government that unilaterally declared independence from the United Kingdom in 1965 , following prolonged dispute over the terms . He remained Prime Minister for almost all of the 14 years of international isolation that followed , and oversaw Rhodesia 's security forces during most of the Bush War , which pitted the unrecognised administration against communist @-@ backed black nationalist guerrilla groups . Smith , who has been described as personifying white Rhodesia , remains a highly controversial figure — supporters venerate him as a man of integrity and vision " who understood the uncomfortable truths of Africa " , while critics describe an unrepentant racist whose policies and actions caused the deaths of thousands and contributed to Zimbabwe 's later crises . 
 Smith was born to British immigrants in Selukwe , a small town in the Southern Rhodesian Midlands , four years before the colony became self @-@ governing in 1923 . Serving as a Royal Air Force fighter pilot in the Middle East and Europe during the Second World War , he spent months behind German lines in Italy and suffered debilitating facial and bodily wounds that remained conspicuous for the rest of his life . He set up a farm in his home town in 1948 and , the same year , became Member of Parliament for Selukwe — at 29 years old , the country 's youngest ever MP . Originally a Liberal , he moved to the United Federal Party in 1953 , and served as Chief Whip from 1958 . He left in 1961 in protest at the territory 's new constitution , and the following year helped Winston Field to form the all @-@ white , firmly conservative Rhodesian Front ( RF ) , which called for independence without an immediate shift to black majority rule . 
 Smith became Deputy Prime Minister following the RF 's December 1962 election victory , and stepped up to the premiership after Field resigned in April 1964 . With the UK government refusing to grant independence while Rhodesia did not devise a set timetable for the introduction of majority rule , talks with the British Prime Minister Harold Wilson repeatedly broke down , leading Smith and his Cabinet to declare independence on 11 November 1965 . His government endured in the face of United Nations economic sanctions with the assistance of South Africa and , until 1974 , Portugal . Talks with Britain in 1966 , 1968 and 1971 came to nothing . Smith declared Rhodesia a republic in 1970 and led the RF to three more decisive election victories over the next seven years . After the Bush War began in earnest in 1972 , he negotiated with the non @-@ militant nationalist leader Bishop Abel Muzorewa and the rival guerrilla movements headed by Joshua Nkomo and Robert Mugabe . 
 In 1978 , Smith and non @-@ militant nationalists including Muzorewa signed the Internal Settlement , under which the country became Zimbabwe Rhodesia in 1979 . Mugabe and Nkomo continued fighting ; no country recognised the settlement . Smith was part of Muzorewa 's delegation that settled with Britain and the revolutionary guerrillas at Lancaster House , and following Zimbabwe 's recognised independence in 1980 , he was Leader of the Opposition during Mugabe 's first seven years in power . Smith was a stridently vocal critic of the Mugabe government both before and after his retirement from front @-@ line politics in 1987 ; he dedicated much of his 1997 memoirs , The Great Betrayal , to condemning Mugabe and UK politicians . As Mugabe 's reputation thereafter plummeted amid Zimbabwe 's economic ruin , reckoning of Smith and his legacy improved . Zimbabwean opposition supporters lauded the elderly Smith as an immovable symbol of resistance . He remained in Zimbabwe until 2005 , when he moved to Cape Town , South Africa for medical reasons . After his death two years later at the age of 88 , his ashes were repatriated and scattered at his farm . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Family , childhood and adolescence = = = 
 Ian Douglas Smith was born on 8 April 1919 in Selukwe , a small mining and farming town about 310 km ( 190 mi ) southwest of the Southern Rhodesian capital Salisbury . He had two elder sisters , Phyllis and Joan . His father , John Douglas " Jock " Smith , was originally from Hamilton , Scotland ; the son of a cattle breeder and butcher , he had emigrated to Rhodesia as an 18 @-@ year @-@ old in 1898 , and become a prominent rancher , butcher , miner and garage owner in Selukwe . Jock and his English wife Agnes ( née Hodgson ) had met in 1907 , when she was 16 , a year after her family 's emigration to Selukwe from <unk> , Cumberland . After Mr Hodgson sent his wife and children back to England in 1908 , Jock Smith astonished them in 1911 by arriving unannounced in Cumberland to ask for Agnes 's hand ; they had not seen each other for three years . They married in <unk> , then returned together to Rhodesia , where Jock , an accomplished horseman , won the 1911 Coronation Derby at Salisbury . 
 The Smiths involved themselves heavily in local life . Jock chaired the village management board and commanded the Selukwe Company of the Southern Rhodesia Volunteers ; he was also a founder member of the Selukwe Freemasons ' Lodge and president of the town football and rugby clubs . Agnes , who became informally known as " Mrs Jock " , established and ran the Selukwe Women 's Institute . Both won the MBE ( at different times ) for their services to the community . " My parents strove to instil principles and moral virtues , the sense of right and wrong , of integrity , in their children , " Smith wrote in his memoirs . " They set wonderful examples to live up to . " He considered his father " a man of extremely strong principles " — " one of the fairest men I have ever met and that is the way he brought me up . He always told me that we 're entitled to our half of the country and the blacks are entitled to theirs . " Raised on the frontier of the British Empire in the UK 's youngest settler colony , Smith and his generation of white Rhodesians grew up with a reputation for being " more British than the British " , something in which they took great pride . 
 Ian Smith showed sporting promise from an early age . After attending the Selukwe primary school , he boarded at Chaplin School in Gwelo , about 30 km ( 19 mi ) away . In his final year at Chaplin , he was head prefect , captain of the school teams in cricket , rugby and tennis , recipient of the Victor Ludorum in athletics , and the school 's outstanding rifle marksman . " I was an absolute lunatic about sport , " he later said ; " I concede , looking back , that I should have devoted much more time to my school work and less to sport . " All the same , his grades were good enough to win a place at Rhodes University College , in Grahamstown , South Africa , which was often attended by Rhodesian students , partly because Rhodesia then had no university of its own , and partly because of the common eponymous association with Cecil Rhodes . Smith enrolled at the start of 1938 , reading for a Bachelor of Commerce degree . After injuring his knee playing rugby , he took up rowing and became stroke for the university crew . 
 = = = Second World War ; Royal Air Force pilot = = = 
 When the Second World War broke out in September 1939 , Southern Rhodesia had been self @-@ governing for 16 years , having gained responsible government from Britain in 1923 . It was unique in the British Empire and Commonwealth in that it held extensive autonomous powers ( including defence , but not foreign affairs ) while lacking dominion status . Coming under the British flag diplomatically , it entered the conflict automatically when the UK declared war , but issued a symbolic declaration of war anyway . Smith , who was about halfway through his university course , later described feeling patriotically compelled to put his studies aside to " fight for Britain and all that it represented " . Excited by the idea of flying a Spitfire , he wanted to join the air force , but was prevented from immediately doing so by a policy adopted in Rhodesia not to recruit university students until after they graduated . Smith engineered his recruitment into the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) in spite of this rule during 1940 , suppressing mention of his studies , and formally joined in September 1941 . 
 After a year 's training at Gwelo under the Empire Air Training Scheme , Smith passed out with the rank of pilot officer in September 1942 . He hoped to be stationed in Britain , but was posted to the Middle East instead ; there he joined No. 237 ( Rhodesia ) Squadron RAF , flying Hurricanes . In October 1943 , in Egypt , Smith crashed his Hurricane after his throttle malfunctioned during a dawn takeoff . Suffering serious facial disfigurements , he also broke his jaw , leg and shoulder . Doctors and surgeons in Cairo rebuilt Smith 's face through skin grafts and plastic surgery , and he was passed fit to fly again in March 1944 . Turning down an offer to return to Rhodesia as an instructor , he rejoined No. 237 Squadron , which had switched to flying Spitfire Mk IXs , in Corsica in May 1944 . 
 During a strafing raid over northern Italy on 22 June 1944 , Smith was hit by enemy flak and forced to bail out behind German lines . He was briefly hidden by a peasant family named Zunino , then recruited into a group of pro @-@ Allied Italian partisans with whom he took part in sabotage operations against the German garrison for about three months . When the Germans pulled out of the area in October 1944 , Smith left to try to link up with the Allied forces who had just invaded southern France . Accompanied by three other servicemen , each from a different European country , and a local guide , Smith hiked across the Maritime Alps , finishing the journey walking barefoot on the ice and snow . He was recovered by American troops in November 1944 . Smith again turned down the offer of a billet in Rhodesia , and returned to active service in April 1945 with No. 130 ( Punjab ) Squadron , by then based in western Germany . He flew combat missions there , " [ having ] a little bit of fun shooting up odd things " , he recalled , until the war in Europe ended on 7 May 1945 with Germany 's surrender . Smith remained with No. 130 Squadron for the rest of his service , flying with the unit to Denmark and Norway , and was discharged at the end of 1945 with the rank of flight lieutenant . He retained reasonable proficiency in Italian for the rest of his life , albeit reportedly with an " atrocious " accent . 
 = = = Graduation , marriage and entrance to politics = = = 
 With Jock in increasingly poor health after the war , the Smith family briefly considered sending Ian to start a life in the United States with the help of Jock 's brother Elijah , who had become a prosperous New York businessman . Smith showed little interest in leaving Rhodesia , however , and decided that he would finish at university , then come home and buy his own farm . He returned to Rhodes in early 1946 to find the campus swamped with veterans like himself — there were 400 of them out of barely 1 @,@ 000 students . Smith became spokesman for the university 's ex @-@ servicemen , senior student of his hall and chairman of the students ' representative council . He turned down the presidency of the rowing club , saying it would be one administrative commitment too many , but agreed to coach the crew . Training the rowers under strict military @-@ style discipline , he led them to victory in the 1946 South African Inter @-@ Varsity Boat Race at the Vaal Dam south of Johannesburg , upstaging the well @-@ fancied Wits crew , and subsequently received national @-@ standard varsity honours for rowing , the first Rhodes student ever to do so . At the end of the year , having passed the exams to gain his commerce degree ( " by some miracle " , he recalled ) , he returned to Southern Rhodesia to study farming at <unk> Agricultural College , near Salisbury . 
 Smith attended dedicated courses for ex @-@ servicemen at <unk> during 1947 and 1948 , learning skills such as ploughing , herding and milking ; he gained practical experience at Taylor 's dairy farm near Selukwe and on a tobacco ranch at Marandellas . In 1947 he met Janet <unk> ( née Watt ) , a schoolteacher from the Cape in South Africa who had come to Selukwe to stay with family after the death of her husband Pieter on the rugby field . What Janet had planned as a short holiday for herself and her two infant children , Jean and Robert , turned into a permanent move when she accepted a job offer from the Selukwe junior school . Smith later wrote that the qualities that had attracted him most to Janet were her intelligence , courage and " <unk> [ <unk> ] on principle to side @-@ stepping or evading an issue ... her tendency was to opt for a decision requiring courage , as opposed to taking the easy way out " . They were engaged in 1948 . Meanwhile , Smith negotiated the purchase of a piece of rough land near Selukwe , bounded by the Lundi and <unk> Rivers and bisected by a clear stream . He and Janet gave the previously nameless 3 @,@ 600 @-@ acre ( 15 km2 ) plot the name that the local Karanga people used to refer to the stream , " Gwenoro " , and set up a ranch where they ran cattle and grew tobacco and maize . 
 A general election was called in Southern Rhodesia in July 1948 after the United Party government , headed by the Prime Minister Sir Godfrey Huggins , unexpectedly lost a vote in the Legislative Assembly . In August , about a month before election day , Smith was approached by members of the opposition Liberal Party and asked to stand for them in Selukwe . Jacob Smit 's Liberals , despite their name , were decidedly illiberal , chiefly representing commercial farming , mining and industrial interests . Smith was initially reluctant , saying he was too busy organising his life to stand , but agreed after one of the Liberal officials suggested that a political career might allow him to defend the values he had fought for in the Second World War . With their wedding barely a fortnight away , Janet was astonished to learn of Smith 's decision to run for parliament , having never before heard him discuss politics . " I can 't say that I am really interested in party politics , " Smith explained to her , " but I 've always been most interested in sound government . " Smith duly became a Liberal Party politician , finalised his purchase of Gwenoro , and married Janet , adopting her two children as his own , all in a few weeks in August 1948 . They enjoyed a few days ' honeymoon at Victoria Falls , then went straight into the election campaign . 
 The Southern Rhodesian electoral system allowed only those who met certain financial and educational qualifications to vote . The criteria were applied equally to all regardless of race , but since most black citizens did not meet the set standards , the electoral roll and the colonial parliament were overwhelmingly white . Smith canvassed around the geographically very large Selukwe constituency and quickly won considerable popularity . Many white families were receptive to him because of their respect for his father , or because they had had children at school with him . His RAF service also helped , particularly as the local United Party candidate , Petrus Cilliers , had been interned during the hostilities for opposing the war effort . On 15 September 1948 , Smith defeated Cilliers and the Labour candidate Egon <unk> with 361 votes out of 747 , and thereby became Member of Parliament for Selukwe . At 29 years old , he was the youngest MP in Southern Rhodesian history . The Liberals , however , were roundly defeated , going from 12 seats before the election to only five afterwards . Smit , who had lost his seat in Salisbury City , retired and was replaced as Leader of the Opposition by Raymond <unk> , who renamed the Liberals the Rhodesia Party . Having grown up in an area of Cape Town so pro @-@ Smuts that she had never had to vote , Janet did not think her husband 's entry to parliament would alter their lives at all . " First of all I was marrying a farmer , " she later said , " now he was going to be a politician as well . So I said , ' Well , if you are really interested in it , carry on . ' ... It never dawned on me — being so naive about politicians — that our lives would be affected in the slightest degree . " 
 = = Parliament = = 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Because of Southern Rhodesia 's small size and lack of major controversies , its unicameral parliament then sat only twice a year , for about three months in total , holding discussions in the afternoons either side of a half @-@ hour break for tea on the lawn . Smith 's early parliamentary commitments in Salisbury therefore did not detract greatly from his ranching . His maiden speech to the Legislative Assembly , in November 1948 , concerned the Union of South Africa Trade Agreement Bill , then at its second reading . He was slow to make an impact in parliament — most of his early contributions related to farming and mining — but his exertions within the party won him <unk> 's respect and confidence . Janet ran Gwenoro during Smith 's absences , and gave birth to his only biological child , Alec , in Gwelo on 20 May 1949 . 
 The pursuit of full dominion status was then regarded as something of a non @-@ issue by most Southern Rhodesian politicians . They viewed themselves as virtually independent already ; they lacked only the foreign affairs portfolio and taking this on would mean having to shoulder the expense for high commissions and embassies overseas . Huggins and the United Party instead pursued an initially semi @-@ independent Federation with Northern Rhodesia and Nyasaland , two protectorates directly administered from London , with the hope of ultimately creating a single , united dominion in south @-@ central Africa . 
 Smith was one of the few to raise the independence issue at this time , according to his memoirs because his " instinct and training told me to be prepared for every contingency " . During the Federation debate in the House of Assembly , he posited that since Southern Rhodesia was effectively choosing Federation over independence , a clause should be inserted into the bill guaranteeing Southern Rhodesia dominion status in the event of a Federal break @-@ up . The United Party rejected this on the grounds that the Federation had to be declared indissoluble so it could raise loans . Smith was uncertain about the Federal project , but publicly supported it after the mostly white electorate approved it in a referendum in April 1953 . He told the Rhodesia Herald that now it had been decided to pursue Federation , it was in Southern Rhodesia 's best interests for everybody to try to make it succeed . He and other Rhodesia Party politicians joined the new Federal Party , headed by Huggins and Northern Rhodesia 's Sir Roy Welensky , on 29 April 1953 . 
 = = = Federation ; Chief Whip = = = 
 The Federation was overtly led by Southern Rhodesia , the most developed of the three territories — Salisbury was its capital and Huggins its first Prime Minister . Garfield Todd replaced Huggins as Prime Minister of Southern Rhodesia . Resigning his Selukwe seat , Smith contested and won the Federal Assembly 's Midlands constituency in the inaugural Federal election on 15 December 1953 , and thereafter continued as a backbench member of little distinction . In the recollection of Welensky , who took over as Federal Prime Minister on Huggins 's retirement in 1956 , Smith " didn 't spend much time in Salisbury " during the early Federal period , and had " three major interests ... one was daylight saving , one was European education and he always showed an interest in farming " . 
 Smith received his first political office in November 1958 , following that month 's Federal election ( in which he was returned as MP for <unk> ) , after one of Welensky 's Federal Cabinet ministers requested Smith 's appointment as a Parliamentary Secretary in the new United Federal Party ( UFP ) government . Welensky turned this down , saying that while he appreciated Smith 's relative seniority on the back benches after 10 years in parliament , he did not think he had " shown the particular drive that I would have expected " for such a role . He decided to instead give Smith " a run as Chief Whip , which is generally the step to a ministerial appointment , and ... see how he works out " . 
 According to his biographer Phillippa Berlyn , Smith remained a somewhat pedestrian figure as Chief Whip , though he was acknowledged by his peers as someone who " did his homework well " whenever he contributed . Clifford Dupont , then Smith 's counterpart as Chief Whip of the Dominion Party , later commented that the UFP 's huge majority in the Federal Assembly gave Smith little opportunity to distinguish himself as few votes were ever in serious doubt . 
 = = = Leaving the UFP = = = 
 Amid decolonisation and the Wind of Change , the idea of " no independence before majority rule " ( " NIBMAR " ) gained considerable ground in British political circles during the late 1950s and early 1960s . The Federation , which had faced black opposition from the start , particularly in Northern Rhodesia and Nyasaland , grew ever more tenuous . Despite Todd 's lowering of Southern Rhodesia 's educational and financial voting qualifications in 1957 to enlarge the black electorate , very few of the newly enfranchised blacks registered to vote , partly because the black nationalist movement targeted those who did with arson attacks and petrol bombings . Attempting to advance the case for Southern Rhodesian independence , particularly in the event of Federal dissolution , Sir Edgar Whitehead , who replaced Todd in 1958 , agreed a new constitution with Britain in 1961 . The 1961 constitution contained no explicit independence guarantees , but Whitehead , Welensky and other proponents nevertheless presented it to the Southern Rhodesian electorate as the " independence constitution " under which Southern Rhodesia would become a Commonwealth realm on a par with Australia , Canada and New Zealand if the Federation broke up . 
 Smith was one of the loudest voices of white dissent against the new constitution . He opposed its splitting of the heretofore non @-@ racial , qualified electorate into graduated " A " and " B " rolls , saying the proposed system had " racialist " connotations , and objected to the idea that the first black MPs would be elected on what he said would be a " debased franchise " . " Our policy in the past has always been that we would have a government , in Rhodesia , based on merit and that people wouldn 't worry whether you were black or whether you were white , " he said . He also pointed out that the document did not actually guarantee Southern Rhodesian independence in the event of Federal dissolution . At the UFP vote on the constitution on 22 February 1961 , Smith was the only member out of 280 to vote against it . Deeply disillusioned by these developments , he resigned from the UFP soon after to sit in the Federal Assembly as an independent . He lent his support to the " United Group " , an awkward coalition wherein Winston Field 's conservative Dominion Party closed ranks with Sir Robert Tredgold and other liberals against the constitutional proposals , despite opposing them for totally contradictory reasons . The black nationalist leaders initially endorsed the constitution , signing the draft document , but almost immediately repudiated it and called for blacks to boycott elections held under it . A referendum of the mostly white electorate approved the new constitution by a majority of 65 % on 26 July 1961 . 
 = = = Forming the Rhodesian Front = = = 
 As the UK government granted majority rule in Nyasaland and made moves towards the same in Northern Rhodesia , Smith decided that the Federation was a lost cause and resolved to found a new party that would push for Southern Rhodesian independence without an immediate transfer of power . With the support of the millionaire rancher , miner and industrialist D C " Boss " Lilford , he formed the Rhodesian Reform Party ( RRP ) , based around defectors from the UFP , in December 1961 . Meanwhile , Whitehead attempted to counter the black nationalists and persuade newly eligible blacks to register as voters . He banned the main nationalist group , the National Democratic Party , for being violent and intimidatory — it reformed overnight as the Zimbabwe African People 's Union ( ZAPU ) — and announced that the UFP would repeal the Land Apportionment Act , which segregated the ownership and occupation of certain areas on a racial basis , if it won the next Southern Rhodesian election . Commitments such as these won the UFP few black votes and prompted many scandalised whites to defect to the RRP or Field 's Dominion Party . 
 Smith , Field and others met in Salisbury on 13 March 1962 and agreed to unite against Whitehead as the Rhodesian Front ( RF ) . The Front ranged from former UFP men , including Smith , who advocated gradual transition and a government based on merit and electoral qualifications , to the Dominion Party 's more right @-@ wing members , some of whom held segregationist views not dissimilar to those of South Africa 's National Party . Amid these differences , the nascent RF coalition was shaky at best . Its members were brought together by their common opposition to Whitehead 's promises of fast @-@ track reform , which they agreed would lead to a Congo @-@ style national crisis , the flight of the white community and ultimately the country 's destruction . In the wider Cold War context , the ardently anti @-@ communist RF aspired to represent a pro @-@ Western bulwark in Africa , alongside South Africa and Portugal , in the face of what they saw as Soviet and Chinese expansionism . Smith asserted that the RF worked to thwart " this mad idea of a hand @-@ over , of a sell @-@ out of the European and his civilisation , indeed of everything he had put into his country " . " The white man is the master of Rhodesia , " he said ; " [ he ] has built it and intends to keep it " . 
 The RF ignored the April 1962 Federal elections , deeming them irrelevant , and instead concentrated on the Southern Rhodesian elections that were due at the end of the year . Whitehead attempted to curb the continuing black nationalist violence through new legislation and in September 1962 banned ZAPU , arresting 1 @,@ 094 of its members and describing it as a " terrorist organisation " , but he was still seen by much of the electorate as too liberal . He set a general election for 14 December 1962 . A number of corporations that had previously funded UFP campaigning this time backed the RF . The RF campaign exploited the chaos in the Congo and the uncertainty regarding Southern Rhodesia 's future to create a theme of urgency — it pledged to keep power " in responsible hands " , to defend the Land Apportionment Act , to oppose compulsory integration , and to win Southern Rhodesian independence . 
 The electoral race was close @-@ run until the night before election day , when Whitehead made what proved a fatal political gaffe by telling a public meeting at Marandellas that he would appoint a black Cabinet minister immediately if he won the election , and might soon have as many as six . This statement appeared on the radio news just before the polling booths opened the next morning , and stunned white voters . Many abandoned Whitehead at the last minute . The results , announced on 15 December 1962 , put the RF into government with 35 " A " -roll seats to the UFP 's 15 " A " -roll and 14 " B " -roll seats . Few had expected this ; even the RF was somewhat taken aback by its victory , though Smith later described feeling " quietly confident " on election day . Contesting the <unk> constituency in the rural south @-@ west , he bested the UFP 's Reginald Segar by 803 votes to 546 . 
 = = = Deputy Prime Minister under Field = = = 
 Announcing his Cabinet on 17 December 1962 , Field named Smith his Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of the Treasury . Two days later , R A Butler , the British Deputy Prime Minister and First Secretary of State , announced that the UK government would allow Nyasaland to leave the Federation . With Northern Rhodesia now also under a secessionist black nationalist government — Kenneth Kaunda and Harry <unk> had formed a coalition to keep the UFP out — and Southern Rhodesia under the RF , the Federation was effectively over . The Field Cabinet made Southern Rhodesian independence on Federal dissolution its first priority , but the Conservative government in the UK was reluctant to grant this under the 1961 constitution as it knew doing so would lead to censure and loss of prestige in the United Nations ( UN ) and the Commonwealth . Indeed , Southern Rhodesia 's minority government had already become something of an embarrassment to the UK and it hurt Britain 's reputation to even maintain the status quo there . Granting independence without major constitutional reform would furthermore provoke outcry from the Conservatives ' main parliamentary opposition , the Labour Party , which was strongly anti @-@ colonial and supportive of black nationalist ambitions . 
 Butler announced on 6 March 1963 that he was going to convene a conference to decide the Federation 's future . It would be impossible ( or at least very difficult ) for Britain to dissolve the union without Southern Rhodesia 's co @-@ operation as the latter , being self @-@ governing , had been co @-@ signatory to the Federal agreement in 1953 . According to Smith , Field , Dupont and other RF politicians , Butler made several oral independence guarantees to ensure Southern Rhodesia 's attendance and support at the conference , but repeatedly refused to give anything on paper . Field and Smith claimed that Butler justified this to them the day before the conference began by saying that binding Whitehall to a document rather than his word would be against the Commonwealth 's " spirit of trust " — an argument that Field eventually accepted . " Let 's remember the trust you emphasised , " Smith warned , according to Field 's account wagging his finger at Butler ; " if you break that you will live to regret it . " No minutes were made of this meeting . Butler denied afterwards that he had ever made such a promise . Southern Rhodesia attended the conference , held at the Victoria Falls Hotel over a week starting from 28 June 1963 , and among other things it was agreed to formally liquidate the Federation at the end of 1963 . 
 The Federation dissolved on 31 December 1963 with Nyasaland and Northern Rhodesia both on track for full statehood by the end of 1964 , while Southern Rhodesia continued to drift in uncertainty . Under huge pressure from the RF to rectify this matter and win independence , Field 's perceived vacillation and <unk> in his dealings with the UK government caused sections of his party to lose confidence in him during early 1964 . On 2 April 1964 , with Smith in the chair , the RF caucus passed a near @-@ unanimous vote of no confidence in Field , leading to the Prime Minister 's resignation 11 days later . Smith accepted the Cabinet 's nomination to take his place . He was the first Southern Rhodesian Prime Minister to have been born in the country , something that he thought profoundly altered the character of the dispute with Britain . " For the first time in its history the country now had a Rhodesian @-@ born PM , someone whose roots were not in Britain , but in southern Africa , " he later reflected — " in other words , a white African . " 
 = = Prime Minister = = 
 = = = First days ; banning of PCC / ZAPU and ZANU = = = 
 Most of the Southern Rhodesian press predicted that Smith would not last long ; one column called him " a momentary man " , thrust into the spotlight by the RF 's dearth of proven leaders . His only real rival to replace Field had been William Harper , an ardent segregationist who had headed the Dominion Party 's Southern Rhodesian branch during the Federal years . Some reporters predicted Welensky 's imminent introduction to Southern Rhodesian politics at the head of an RF – UFP coalition government , but Welensky showed little interest in this idea , saying he would be unable to manoeuvre in an RF @-@ dominated House . The RF 's replacement of Field with Smith drew criticism from the British Labour leader Harold Wilson , who called it " brutal " , while J B Johnston , the British High Commissioner in Salisbury , indicated his disapproval by refusing to meet Smith for two weeks after he took office . The ZAPU leader Joshua Nkomo branded the new Smith Cabinet " a suicide squad ... interested not in the welfare of all the people but only in their own " , and predicted that the RF would " eventually destroy themselves " . Asserting that a lasting " place for the white man " in Southern Rhodesia would benefit all of the country 's people , the new Prime Minister said the government should be based " on merit , not on colour or nationalism " , and insisted that there would be " no African nationalist government here in my lifetime " . 
 Smith announced his Cabinet on his first day in office , 14 April 1964 . He increased the number of ministers from 10 to 11 , redistributed portfolios , and made three new appointments . Smith 's fellow former UFP men made up most of the new RF Cabinet , with Harper and the Minister of Agriculture , the Duke of Montrose ( also called Lord Graham ) , heading a minority of hardline Dominion Party veterans . Ken Flower , whom Field had appointed Director of the Central Intelligence Organisation ( CIO ) on its creation the previous year , was surprised to be retained by Smith . Smith announced his policies to the nation through full @-@ page advertisements in the newspapers : " No forced integration . No lowering of standards . No abdication of responsible government . No repeal of the Land Apportionment Act . No appeasement to suit the Afro @-@ Asian bloc . " " An honest Rhodesian , " a 1964 political poster declared — " Trust Mr Smith . He will never hand over Rhodesia . " 
 One of the Smith government 's first actions was to crack down hard on the black nationalist political violence that had erupted following the establishment of a second black nationalist organisation , the Zimbabwe African National Union ( ZANU ) , by disgruntled ZAPU members in Tanzania in August 1963 . The rival movements were split tribally , ZAPU being mostly Ndebele and ZANU predominantly Shona , and politically — ZAPU , which had relabelled itself the People 's Caretaker Council ( PCC ) within Southern Rhodesia to circumvent its ban , was Marxist – Leninist and backed by the Warsaw Pact and its allies , while ZANU had aligned itself with Maoism and the bloc headed by communist China . Their respective supporters in the black townships clashed constantly , also targeting non @-@ aligned blacks whom they hoped to recruit , and sporadically attacked whites , businesses and police stations . 
 Amid PCC / ZAPU 's calls for various strikes and protests , including an appeal for black children to boycott state schools , Smith 's Justice Minister Clifford Dupont had Nkomo and other PCC / ZAPU leaders restricted at <unk> in the remote south @-@ east two days after Smith took office . The politically motivated killing of a white man , Petrus <unk> , near <unk> by ZANU insurgents on 4 July 1964 marked the start of intensified black nationalist violence and police counteraction that culminated in the banning of ZANU and PCC / ZAPU on 26 August , with most of the two movements ' respective leaders concurrently jailed or restricted . ZANU , ZAPU and their respective guerrilla armies — the Zimbabwe African National Liberation Army ( ZANLA ) and the Zimbabwe People 's Revolutionary Army ( ZIPRA ) — thereafter operated from abroad . 
 = = = Unilateral Declaration of Independence ( UDI ) = = = 
 Smith , who had been to the UK only four times before 1964 and never more than briefly , was soon labelled a " raw colonial " by Whitehall . He was almost immediately at loggerheads with the UK government , which he claimed had forsaken British ideals , and the Commonwealth , which he said had abandoned its own founding principles amid the Wind of Change . He accused both of isolating Southern Rhodesia because it still respected these values . When he learned in June that Salisbury would not be represented at the Commonwealth Prime Ministers ' Conference for the first time since 1932 , he was deeply insulted and alleged British betrayal , double standards and appeasement . Three months later , Smith accepted the British condition that the independence terms had to be acceptable to majority opinion , but impasse immediately developed regarding the mechanism by which black views would be gauged . Labour 's narrow victory in the October 1964 UK general election meant that Smith would be negotiating not with Sir Alec Douglas @-@ Home but with Harold Wilson , who was far less accommodating towards the RF stand . Smith declared acceptability to majority opinion to have been demonstrated after a largely white referendum and an indaba of tribal chiefs and headmen both decisively backed independence under the 1961 constitution in October and November 1964 , but black nationalists and the UK government dismissed the indaba as insufficiently representative of the black community . 
 Following Northern Rhodesia 's independence as Zambia in October 1964 — Nyasaland had been independent Malawi since July — Southern Rhodesia began referring to itself simply as Rhodesia , but Whitehall rejected this change . Perceiving Smith to be on the verge of a unilateral declaration of independence ( UDI ) , Wilson issued a statement in October 1964 warning of dire economic and political consequences , and wrote to Smith demanding " a categorical assurance forthwith " that no UDI would be attempted . Smith ignored this , expressing confusion as to what he had done to provoke it . The UK and Rhodesian governments exchanged often confrontational correspondence over the next year or so , each accusing the other of being unreasonable and intransigent . Little progress was made when two Prime Ministers met in person in January 1965 , when Smith travelled to London for Sir Winston Churchill 's funeral . The RF called a fresh election for May 1965 and , campaigning on an election promise of independence , won all 50 " A " -roll seats ( elected mostly by whites ) . Wilson 's ministers deliberately stonewalled Smith during mid @-@ 1965 , hoping to eventually break him down , but this only caused the Rhodesian hierarchy to feel yet more alienated . From June , a peripheral dispute concerned Rhodesia 's unilateral and ultimately successful attempt to open an independent mission in Lisbon ; Portugal 's acceptance of this in September 1965 prompted British outrage and Rhodesian delight . 
 Amid rumours that UDI was imminent , Smith arrived in London with the declared intent of settling the independence issue on 4 October 1965 , but flew home eight days later with the matter unresolved . When Wilson travelled to Salisbury on 26 October , Smith offered to enfranchise about half a million black Rhodesians immediately along the lines of " one taxpayer , one vote " in return for independence , but Wilson said this was unacceptable as most blacks would still be excluded . He proposed a Royal Commission to test public opinion in Rhodesia regarding independence under the 1961 constitution , and suggested that the UK might safeguard black representation in the Rhodesian parliament by withdrawing relevant devolved powers . This latter prospect horrified Smith 's team as it seemed to them to have ruled out the failsafe option of keeping the status quo . After Wilson returned to Britain on 30 October 1965 , he presented terms for the Royal Commission that the Rhodesians found unacceptable — among other things , Britain would not commit itself to accepting the results . Smith rejected these conditions on 5 November , saying they made the whole exercise pointless . After waiting a few days for new terms from Wilson , Smith made a consensus decision with his Cabinet to break ties unilaterally on 11 November 1965 , and signed the Unilateral Declaration of Independence at 11 : 00 local time . 
 = = = Fallout from UDI = = = 
 UDI , while received calmly by most Rhodesians , prompted political outrage in Britain and overseas . It astonished Wilson , who called on the people of Rhodesia to ignore the post @-@ UDI government , which he described as " hell @-@ bent on illegal self @-@ destroying " . Following orders from Whitehall , the colonial Governor Sir Humphrey Gibbs formally sacked Smith and his Cabinet , accusing them of treason . Smith and his ministers ignored this , considering Gibbs 's office obsolete under the 1965 constitution enacted as part of UDI . After Gibbs made clear that he would not resign , Smith 's government effectively replaced him with Dupont , who was appointed to the post of " Officer Administering the Government " ( created by the 1965 constitution ) . No attempt was made to remove Gibbs from his official residence at Government House , however ; he remained there , ignored by the Smith administration , until the declaration of a republic in 1970 . 
 The UN General Assembly and Security Council quickly joined Britain in condemning UDI as illegal and racist . Security Council Resolutions 216 and 217 , adopted in the days following Smith 's declaration , denounced UDI as an illegitimate " usurpation of power by a racist settler minority " , and called on nations not to entertain diplomatic or economic relations . No country recognised Rhodesia as independent . Black nationalists in Rhodesia and their overseas backers , prominently the Organisation of African Unity ( OAU ) , clamoured for the UK to remove Smith 's government with a military invasion , but Britain dismissed this option , citing logistical issues , the risk of provoking a pre @-@ emptive Rhodesian strike on Zambia , and the psychological issues likely to accompany any confrontation between British and Rhodesian troops . Wilson instead resolved to end UDI through economic sanctions , banning the supply of oil to Rhodesia and the import of most Rhodesian goods to Britain . When Smith continued to receive oil through South Africa and Portuguese Mozambique , Wilson posted a Royal Navy squadron to the Mozambique Channel in March 1966 . This blockade , the Beira Patrol , was endorsed by UN Security Council Resolution 221 the following month . 
 Wilson predicted in January 1966 that the various boycotts would force Smith to give in " within a matter of weeks rather than months " , but the British ( and later UN ) sanctions had little effect on Rhodesia , largely because South Africa and Portugal went on trading with it , providing it with oil and other key resources . Clandestine trade with other nations also continued , initially at a reduced level , and the diminished presence of foreign competitors helped domestic industries to slowly mature and expand . Even many OAU states , while bombarding Rhodesia with opprobrium , continued importing Rhodesian food and other products . Rhodesia thus avoided the economic cataclysm predicted by Wilson and gradually became more self @-@ sufficient . " Rhodesia can not only take it , but she can also make it , " Smith said on 29 April 1966 , while opening the annual Central African Trade Fair in Bulawayo . " When I say take it , I use it in two ways . Firstly , when it comes to sanctions we have proved we can take it . Secondly , when it comes to independence , we have also proved we can take it . " 
 = = = Tiger and Fearless talks with Wilson = = = 
 Wilson told the British House of Commons in January 1966 that he would not enter any kind of dialogue with Smith 's post @-@ UDI government ( which he called " the illegal regime " ) until it gave up its claim of independence , but by mid @-@ 1966 British and Rhodesian civil servants were holding " talks about talks " in London and Salisbury . By November that year , Wilson had agreed to negotiate personally with Smith . Smith and Wilson subsequently held two rounds of direct negotiations , both of which were held aboard Royal Navy ships off Gibraltar . The first took place aboard HMS Tiger between 2 and 4 December 1966 , while the second , aboard HMS Fearless , was held between 8 and 13 October 1968 . 
 The British Prime Minister went to HMS Tiger in a belligerent mindset . Wilson 's political secretary Marcia <unk> later wrote of " apartheid ... on that ship " , with the British and Rhodesian delegations separated in all activities outside the conference room at Wilson 's orders . Despite the uneasy atmosphere — accounts from both sides describe Wilson dealing with the Rhodesians extremely tersely — talks progressed relatively smoothly until the subject turned to the manner of the transition . Wilson insisted on the abandonment of the 1965 constitution , the dissolution of the post @-@ UDI government in favour of a " broad @-@ based " multiracial interim administration and a period under a British Governor , conditions that Smith saw as tantamount to surrender , particularly as the British proposed to draft and introduce the new constitution only after a fresh test of opinion under UK control . When Smith asserted on 3 December that he could not settle without first consulting his Cabinet in Salisbury , Wilson was enraged , declaring that a central condition of the summit had been that he and Smith would have plenipotentiary powers to make a deal . According to J R T Wood , Wilson and his Attorney General Sir Elwyn Jones then " bullied Smith for two long days " to try to get him to settle , without success . 
 A working document was ultimately produced and signed by Smith , Wilson and Gibbs , to be accepted or rejected in its entirety by each Cabinet after the Prime Ministers returned home . Whitehall accepted the proposals , but Salisbury turned them down ; Smith announced on 5 December 1966 that while he and his ministers were largely satisfied with the terms , the Cabinet did not feel it could responsibly abandon the 1965 constitution while so much uncertainty surrounded the transition and the new " mythical constitution yet to be evolved " . Gondo , Rhodesia 's Leader of the Opposition , promptly demanded Smith 's resignation , reasoning that the Cabinet 's rejection of the working document he had helped to draft amounted to a vote of no confidence . The RF ignored him . Warning that " grave actions must follow " , Wilson took the Rhodesia problem to the United Nations , which proceeded to institute the first mandatory trade sanctions in its history with Security Council Resolutions 232 ( December 1966 ) and 253 ( April 1968 ) . These measures required UN member states to prevent all trade and economic links with Rhodesia . 
 State press censorship , introduced by the Smith administration on UDI , was lifted in early April 1968 , though according to the Glasgow Herald the government retained " considerable powers to control information . It may reflect no more than Mr Smith 's growing confidence that nothing — short of a sell @-@ out to Britain — can undermine his position in Rhodesia " . The series of Rhodesian High Court cases debating the legality of UDI came to a close five months later on 13 September . A panel of judges headed by Sir Hugh Beadle ruled UDI , the 1965 constitution and Smith 's government to be de jure , prompting the UK Commonwealth Secretary George Thomson to accuse them of breaching " the fundamental laws of the land " . 
 On HMS Fearless , the British reversed their confrontational approach of the Tiger talks and made a marked effort to appear genial and welcoming , mixing socially with the Rhodesians and accommodating Smith in the Admiral 's cabin on HMS Kent , which was moored alongside . Marked progress towards agreement was made — for example , Wilson dropped altogether the transition period under a colonial Governor — but the Rhodesian delegation now demurred on a new British proposal , the " double safeguard " . This would involve elected black Rhodesians controlling a blocking quarter in the Rhodesian parliament , and thereafter having the right to appeal passed legislation to the Privy Council in London . Smith 's team accepted the principle of the blocking quarter but agreement could not be reached on the technicalities of it ; the involvement of the UK Privy Council was rejected by Smith as a " ridiculous " provision that would prejudice Rhodesia 's sovereignty . The Fearless summit ended with a joint Anglo @-@ Rhodesian statement asserting that " both sides recognise that a very wide gulf still remains " , but were prepared to continue negotiations in Salisbury . This never occurred . 
 = = = A republic ; failed accord with Douglas @-@ Home = = = 
 With their hopes of Commonwealth realm status through a settlement with Britain dimming , Smith and the RF began to seriously consider the alternative of a republic as early as December 1966 , after the Tiger talks . Republicanism was presented as a means to clarify Rhodesia 's claimed constitutional status , end ambiguity regarding ties with Britain and elicit official foreign recognition and acceptance . Smith 's government began exploring a republican constitution in March 1967 . The Union Jack and Rhodesia 's Commonwealth @-@ style national flag — a defaced Sky Blue Ensign with the Union Jack in the canton — were formally superseded on 11 November 1968 , the third anniversary of UDI , by a new national flag : a green @-@ white @-@ green vertical triband , charged centrally with the Rhodesian coat of arms . After the electorate voted " yes " in a June 1969 referendum both to a new constitution and to the abandoning of symbolic ties to the Crown , Smith declared Rhodesia a republic on 2 March 1970 . The 1969 constitution introduced a President as head of state , a multiracial senate , separate black and white electoral rolls ( each with qualifications ) and a mechanism whereby the number of black MPs would increase in line with the proportion of income tax revenues paid by black citizens . This process would stop once blacks had the same number of seats as whites ; the declared goal was not majority rule , but rather " parity between the races " . 
 No country recognised the Rhodesian republic . The RF was decisively returned to power in the first election held as a republic , on 10 April 1970 , winning all 50 white seats . Hopes for an Anglo @-@ Rhodesian rapprochement were boosted two months later when the Conservatives won a surprise election victory in the UK . Edward Heath took over as Prime Minister while Douglas @-@ Home became Foreign Secretary . Talks between Douglas @-@ Home and Smith began with a lengthy meeting in Salisbury in April 1971 and continued until a tentative understanding was reached in early November . A UK delegation headed by Douglas @-@ Home and the Attorney General Sir Peter Rawlinson flew to Salisbury on 15 November for negotiations over a new constitution , and after six days of discussion an accord was signed on 21 November 1971 . 
 The constitution agreed upon was based largely on the one Rhodesia had just adopted , but would eventually bring about a black majority in parliament . Black representation in the House would be immediately increased , and a majority of both black and white MPs would have to approve retrogressive legislation ; blacks would thus wield an effective veto " as long as they voted solidly together " , Robert Blake comments . " The principle of majority rule was enshrined with safeguards ensuring that there could be no legislation which could impede this , " Smith wrote in his memoirs . " On the other hand , there would be no mad rush into one man , one vote with all the resultant corruption , nepotism , chaos and economic disaster which we had witnessed in all the countries around us . " 
 The UK announced a test of opinion in Rhodesia to be undertaken by a four @-@ man commission headed by the veteran judge Lord Pearce . All four population groups — black , white , coloured ( mixed ) and Asian — would have to approve the terms for Britain to proceed . ZANU and ZAPU supporters quickly formed the African National Council ( later the United African National Council , or UANC ) to organise and co @-@ ordinate black opposition to the deal . Bishop Abel Muzorewa , the first black man to have been ordained as such in Rhodesia , was installed as the movement 's leader . The Pearce Commission finished its work on 12 March 1972 and published its report two months later — it described white , coloured and Asian Rhodesians as in favour of the terms by 98 % , 97 % and 96 % respectively , and black citizens as against them by an unspecified large majority . This came as a great shock to the white community " and a deep disappointment to those in Britain who hoped to get rid of this tiresome albatross " , Blake records . Smith condemned the Pearce Commissioners as " naive and inept " . The UK withdrew from negotiations , but neither government abandoned the accord entirely . " I would ask them [ the black people of Rhodesia ] to look again very carefully at what they rejected , " Douglas @-@ Home told the House of Commons ; " the proposals are still available because Mr Smith has not withdrawn or modified them . " 
 = = = Bush War = = = 
 The Rhodesian Bush War ( or Second Chimurenga ) , which had been underway at a low level since before UDI , began in earnest in December 1972 when ZANLA attacked farms in north @-@ eastern Rhodesia . The Rhodesian Security Forces mounted a strong counter @-@ campaign over the next two years . Muzorewa re @-@ engaged with Smith in August 1973 , accepting the 1971 – 72 Douglas @-@ Home terms , and the two signed a statement to that effect on 17 August . The UANC executive repudiated this in May 1974 , but talks between Smith and Muzorewa continued sporadically . The RF again won a clean sweep of the 50 white seats in the July 1974 general election . 
 Rhodesia 's early counter @-@ insurgency successes were undone by political shifts in the guerrillas ' favour overseas . The April 1974 Carnation Revolution in Lisbon led to Mozambique 's transformation over the next year from a Portuguese territory friendly to Smith 's government into a communist state openly allied with ZANU . Wilson and Labour returned to power in Britain in March 1974 . Portugal 's withdrawal made Rhodesia hugely dependent on South Africa , but Smith still insisted that he held a strong position . " If it takes one year , five years , ten years , we 're prepared to ride it out , " he told the RF congress on 20 September 1974 . " Our stand is clear and unambiguous . Settlement is desirable , but only on our terms . " 
 The geopolitical situation tilted further against Smith in December 1974 when the South African Prime Minister B J Vorster pressured him into accepting a détente initiative involving the Frontline States of Zambia , Tanzania and Botswana ( Mozambique and Angola would join the following year ) . Vorster had concluded that Rhodesia 's position was untenable and that South African interests would be better served by collaborating with black African governments over a Rhodesian settlement ; he hoped that success in this might win South Africa some international legitimacy and allow it to retain apartheid . Détente forced a ceasefire , giving the guerrillas time to regroup , and required the Rhodesians to release the ZANU and ZAPU leaders so they could attend a conference in Rhodesia , united under the UANC banner and led by Muzorewa . When Rhodesia stopped releasing black nationalist prisoners on the grounds that ZANLA and ZIPRA were not observing the ceasefire , Vorster harried Smith further by withdrawing the South African Police , which had been helping the Rhodesians patrol the countryside . Smith remained stubborn , saying in the run @-@ up to the conference that " We have no policy in Rhodesia to hand over to a black majority government " and that his government instead favoured " a qualified franchise for all Rhodesians ... [ to ] ensure that government will be retained in responsible hands for all times " . 
 Nkomo remained unchallenged at the head of ZAPU , but the ZANU leadership had become contested between its founding president , the Reverend Ndabaningi Sithole , and Robert Mugabe , a former teacher from Mashonaland who had recently won an internal election in prison . When they were released in December 1974 under the détente terms , Mugabe went to Mozambique to consolidate his leadership of the guerrillas , while Sithole joined Muzorewa 's delegation . It had been agreed that the talks would take place within Rhodesia , but the black nationalists refused to meet on ground they perceived as not neutral . The Rhodesians insisted on abiding by the accord and negotiating inside the country . To please both camps the conference was held on a train halfway across the Victoria Falls Bridge on the border between Rhodesia and Zambia ; the delegations sat on opposite sides of the frontier . The conference , which took place on 26 August 1975 with Kaunda and Vorster as mediators , failed to produce a settlement ; each side accused the other of being unreasonable . Smith afterwards held direct talks with Nkomo and ZAPU in Salisbury , but these also led nowhere ; Nkomo proposed an immediate transition to an interim government headed by himself , which Smith rejected . Guerrilla incursions picked up strongly in the first months of 1976 . 
 On 20 March 1976 , Smith gave a televised speech including what became his most quoted utterance . " I don 't believe in majority rule ever in Rhodesia — not in 1 @,@ 000 years , " he said . " I repeat that I believe in blacks and whites working together . If one day it is white and the next day it is black , I believe we have failed and it will be a disaster for Rhodesia . " The first sentence of this statement became commonly quoted as evidence that Smith was a crude racist who would never compromise with the black nationalists , even though the speech was one in which Smith had said that power @-@ sharing with black Rhodesians was inevitable and that " we have got to accept that in the future Rhodesia is a country for black and white , not white as opposed to black and vice versa " . The " not in 1 @,@ 000 years " comment was , according to Peter Godwin , an attempt to reassure the RF 's right wing , which opposed any transition whatsoever , that white Rhodesians would not be sold out . In her 1978 biography of Smith , Berlyn comments that regardless of whether the statement was " taken out of context , or whether his actual intent was misinterpreted " , this was one of his greatest blunders as Prime Minister as it gave obvious ammunition to his detractors . 
 Henry Kissinger , the US Secretary of State , announced a formal interest in the Rhodesian situation in February 1976 , and over the next half @-@ year held discussions with Britain , South Africa and the Frontline States in what became the " Anglo @-@ American initiative " . Meeting Smith in Pretoria on 18 September 1976 , Kissinger proposed majority rule after a transition period of two years . According to Smith , Kissinger told him he considered his participation in the " demise of Rhodesia " to be " one of the great tragedies of my life " . He strongly encouraged Smith to accept his deal , though he knew it was unpalatable to him , as any future offer could only be worse from Smith 's standpoint — especially if , as expected , US President Gerald Ford lost the upcoming election to Jimmy Carter . Smith expressed great reluctance , but agreed on 24 September after Vorster intimated that South Africa might cut off financial and military aid if he refused . It was the first time Smith had publicly accepted the principles of unconditional majority rule and one man , one vote . However , the Frontline States then abruptly revised their stance and turned the Kissinger terms down , saying that any transition period was unacceptable . Britain quickly arranged an all @-@ party conference in Geneva , Switzerland to try to salvage a solution . ZANU and ZAPU announced that they would attend this and any summit thereafter as a joint " Patriotic Front " ( PF ) , including members of both parties under a combined leadership . The Geneva Conference , held between October and December 1976 under British mediation , also failed . 
 = = = Internal Settlement and Lancaster House ; becoming Zimbabwe = = = 
 Smith 's moves towards a settlement with black nationalist groups prompted outrage in sections of Rhodesian Front 's right wing , but he remained unassailable within the party as a whole , which had in late 1975 granted him a mandate to negotiate for the best possible settlement however he saw fit . The split in the party ultimately led to the defection in July 1977 of 12 RF MPs after Smith introduced legislation to remove racial criteria from the Land Tenure Act . The loss of these seats to the breakaway Rhodesian Action Party , which opposed any conciliation with black nationalists , meant that Smith now only barely had the two @-@ thirds majority in parliament he would need to change the constitution , as he would have to in the event of a settlement . He therefore called an early election , and on 31 August 1977 roundly defeated the defectors — " the dirty dozen " , the RF called them — as well as all other opposition ; for the third time in seven years , the RF had won all 50 white seats . The party revolt turned out to be a blessing in disguise for Smith , Berlyn comments , as it allowed him to " shed the dead wood of the right wing " , giving him more freedom in negotiations with the nationalists . The need for a settlement was becoming urgent — the war was escalating sharply , white emigration was climbing and the economy was starting to struggle as the UN sanctions finally began to have a serious effect . 
 In March 1978 , Smith and non @-@ militant nationalist groups headed by Muzorewa , Sithole and Chief Jeremiah <unk> agreed what became the " Internal Settlement " , under which the country would be reconstituted as Zimbabwe Rhodesia in June 1979 after multiracial elections . ZANU and ZAPU were invited to participate , but refused ; Nkomo sardonically dubbed Smith 's black colleagues " the blacksmiths " . The deal was badly received abroad , partly because it kept the police , the military , the judiciary and the civil service in white hands . There would be a senate of 20 blacks and 10 whites , and whites would be reserved 28 out of 100 seats in the new House of Assembly . Smith and Nkomo re @-@ entered negotiations in August 1978 , but these ended after ZIPRA shot down an Air Rhodesia passenger flight on 3 September and massacred survivors at the crash site . Smith cut off talks , introduced martial law across most of the country and ordered reprisal attacks on guerrilla positions . Smith , Muzorewa and Sithole toured the US in October 1978 to promote their settlement , and met Kissinger , Ford and others including the future President Ronald Reagan . On 11 December , ZANLA attacked Salisbury 's oil storage depot , causing a fire that lasted six days and destroyed a quarter of Rhodesia 's fuel . Two months later ZIPRA downed another civilian flight , this time killing all on board . 
 After whites endorsed the Internal Settlement by 85 % in a referendum on 30 January 1979 , Smith dissolved the Rhodesian parliament for the last time on 28 February . The RF won all the white seats in the April 1979 elections while Muzorewa and the UANC won a majority in the common roll seats with 67 % of the popular vote ; the PF rejected this , however , as did the UN , which passed a resolution branding it a " sham " . Sithole , astounded that his party had won only 12 seats to the UANC 's 51 , suddenly turned against the settlement and alleged that the polls had been stage @-@ managed in Muzorewa 's favour . Mugabe dismissed the bishop as a " neocolonial puppet " and pledged to continue ZANLA 's campaign " to the last man " ; Nkomo similarly committed ZIPRA . On 1 June 1979 , the day of the country 's official reconstitution as Zimbabwe Rhodesia , Muzorewa replaced Smith as Prime Minister , at the head of a UANC – RF coalition Cabinet made up of 12 blacks and five whites . Smith was included as Minister without portfolio ; Nkomo promptly dubbed him the " Minister with all the portfolios " . 
 An observer group from the UK Conservative Party did regard the April 1979 elections as fair , and Margaret Thatcher , the Conservative leader , was personally disposed to recognise Muzorewa 's government and lift sanctions . The potential significance of the Conservative victory in the May 1979 British general election was not lost on Smith , who wrote to Thatcher : " All Rhodesians thank God for your magnificent victory . " The US Senate passed a resolution urging President Carter to remove sanctions and declare Zimbabwe Rhodesia legitimate , but Carter and his Cabinet remained strongly opposed . Carter and Thatcher ultimately decided against accepting Zimbabwe Rhodesia , noting the continued international support for the guerrillas . After the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Lusaka in August 1979 , the UK Foreign Secretary Lord Carrington invited the Zimbabwe Rhodesian government and the Patriotic Front to attend an all @-@ party constitutional conference at Lancaster House in London , starting on 10 September . 
 Smith was part of Muzorewa 's delegation at Lancaster House . Several aspects of the Internal Settlement constitution , such as a declaration of human rights and a guarantee that land redistributed by the government would be paid for , were retained ; it was also agreed to have 20 reserved white seats out of 100 for at least seven years . Fresh elections would be held during a brief period under a British Governor invested with full executive and legislative powers . The new constitution was agreed on 18 October , and on 12 December 1979 the House of Assembly voted to dissolve itself , ending UDI . Lord Soames arrived in Salisbury later the same day to become Southern Rhodesia 's last Governor ; among other things he announced that Smith would be granted amnesty for declaring independence . The final Lancaster House Agreement was signed on 21 December . Smith was the only member of any delegation to openly oppose the accords ; he refused to attend the signing ceremony and boycotted the post @-@ agreement party , instead having dinner with former RAF comrades and Group Captain Sir Douglas Bader . 
 The UK government and the international community ultimately declared the February 1980 general election free and fair , though many observers attested to widespread political violence and intimidation of voters , particularly by ZANU ( which added Patriotic Front to its name to become " ZANU – PF " ) . British monitors in the ZANU – PF @-@ dominated eastern provinces were strongly critical , reporting " brutal ' disciplinary murders ' as examples of the fate awaiting those who failed to conform " , name @-@ taking and " claims to the possession of machines which would reveal how individuals had voted " . The Commonwealth Observer Group acknowledged that irregularities were occurring but ruled that accounts were exaggerated . After the RF won all 20 white seats , Soames announced late on 4 March 1980 that Mugabe and ZANU – PF had won 57 of the 80 common roll seats , giving them a majority in the new House of Assembly . Mugabe invited Smith to his house that evening and according to Smith treated him " most courteously " ; Mugabe expressed joy at inheriting a " wonderful country " with modern infrastructure and a viable economy , outlined plans for gradual reform that Smith found reasonable , and said that he hoped to stay in regular contact . This meeting had a profound effect on the former Prime Minister . Having denounced Mugabe as an " apostle of Satan " before the election , Smith now publicly endorsed him as " sober and responsible " . " If this were a true picture , then there could be hope instead of despair , " he recalled in his autobiography . " When I got home I said to Janet that I hoped it was not an hallucination . " 
 = = Opposition = = 
 = = = First years under Mugabe = = = 
 The new Zimbabwean parliament opened on 15 May 1980 , a month after formal independence from Britain , with Smith as the reconstituted country 's first Leader of the Opposition . Continuing a long @-@ standing tradition from the Rhodesian era , the government and opposition entered the House in pairs — Mugabe and Smith walked in side by side with their respective MPs following , " aptly <unk> [ ing ] the mood of reconciliation " , Martin Meredith comments . With around 1 @,@ 000 whites leaving Zimbabwe each month , Smith took to the radio to urge them to stay and give Mugabe 's new order a chance , but over half of the country 's whites left within three years . As Meredith records , the 100 @,@ 000 or so who remained " retreated into their own world of clubs , sporting activities , and comfortable living " . Mugabe made great efforts when he first took power to endear himself to the white farming community , which accounted for at least 75 % of Zimbabwe 's agricultural output . Amid booming Zimbabwean commodity prices in the years immediately following 1980 , many white commercial farmers came to support Mugabe . The new Prime Minister continued cordially meeting Smith until the RF leader took him to task in 1981 for openly calling for a one @-@ party state ; Smith said this was putting off foreign investors . Mugabe was not impressed and , according to Smith , refused to ever meet him again . 
 As Mugabe 's main opponent in Parliament at the head of the Republican Front ( as the RF renamed itself in 1981 ) , Smith presented himself as the guardian of what he called Zimbabwe 's " white tribe " . He spoke gloomily about Zimbabwe 's future prospects , repeatedly accused the Mugabe administration of corruption , malevolence and general incompetence , and criticised Mugabe 's support for a one @-@ party system . The RF took an increasingly confrontational line in the House after Mugabe and other government ministers began regularly pouring scorn on the white community in national broadcasts and other media . Amid rising tensions with South Africa , various white Zimbabweans were arrested , accused of being South African agents , and tortured . When Smith complained about whites being imprisoned without trial under emergency powers , a number of ZANU – PF MPs pointed out that they themselves had been detained under that same legislation , and for far longer , by Smith 's government . Mugabe openly admitted torturing suspected spies , had some who were found not guilty by the High Court immediately rearrested on the street outside , and accused Western critics of caring only because the people in question were white . 
 Smith visited Britain and the United States in November 1982 , and spoke scathingly about Zimbabwe to reporters , claiming that Mugabe was turning the country into a totalitarian Marxist – Leninist dictatorship . Government retribution was immediate . On Smith 's return home , police raided an art exhibition hosting him as guest of honour in Harare ( as Salisbury had been renamed in April 1982 ) and took all the attendees in for questioning , ostensibly because of suspicions it might be an illegal political meeting . A week later , police seized his passport , according to a government statement because his criticism of Zimbabwe while abroad constituted " political bad manners and hooliganism " . Police meticulously searched his Harare house and Gwenoro over the next week , confiscating firearms , personal papers and a diary . Smith told reporters all this was " part of the game to intimidate me and so demoralise the whites " . Some RF MPs left the party to sit with ZANU – PF or as independents , feeling that constantly confronting Mugabe was ill @-@ advised and unnecessary . Smith , however , remained convinced that nobody would stand up for white Zimbabweans if they did not stick together and defend their interests in parliament . 
 Smith <unk> later wrote that the former Prime Minister had resolved to " go down ... with all rhetorical guns blazing " . This was in spite of increasingly unstable health ; in June 1982 he collapsed in the House of Assembly , clutching at his side and shaking . Half a year later he had to arrange treatment in South Africa for a condition stemming from hardening of the arteries . The government 's confiscation of his passport and two refusals of its return prevented him from going , so in April 1983 Smith successfully applied for a British passport . " I 'll still try to get my Zimbabwean passport back , " he said . " I was born here and that is the passport I should travel on . " Smith regained his Zimbabwean papers after about a year . In 1984 he declared his intention to renounce his British nationality to abide by a new Zimbabwean law outlawing multiple citizenship . Britain did not recognise this legislation ; according to Smith , British officials refused to take his UK passport when he tried to return it . 
 = = = Gukurahundi ; last years in politics = = = 
 After the already tense relations between ZANU – PF and ZAPU disintegrated amid Mugabe 's wish to adopt a one @-@ party system in Zimbabwe , Mugabe expelled Nkomo from the government in February 1982 , accusing him and ZAPU of plotting a coup . About a year later , Mugabe deployed the North Korean @-@ trained 5 Brigade to Matabeleland , ZAPU 's heartland , where it massacred thousands of civilians accused of supporting " dissidents " in what became called Gukurahundi . Meredith asserts that this far exceeded anything that had occurred during the Bush War , an opinion shared by Geoff Hill . Some white farmers were also killed . Estimates for the number of deaths during the five @-@ year Gukurahundi campaign range from 10 @,@ 000 to 30 @,@ 000 . Mugabe concurrently took steps to marginalise the other main black nationalist leaders from the Chimurenga . Nkomo fled to the UK in March 1983 , fearing for his life ; Sithole similarly exiled himself in the United States . Muzorewa stayed in Zimbabwe and was detained in late 1983 for alleged " subversive links " with South Africa . On arriving in England , Nkomo accused Mugabe of genocide and asserted that " Things are worse now than they ever were under Ian Smith " . Mugabe denied that anything improper was happening and put reports to the contrary down to " reactionary foreign journalists " . 
 The Zimbabwean government publicly threatened Smith on a regular basis , but in practice left him and his property largely untouched — Mugabe frequently pointed to Smith 's freedom as evidence of Zimbabwe 's reconciliation policy . Smith renamed the RF the Conservative Alliance of Zimbabwe ( CAZ ) on 21 July 1984 , concurrently removing racial criteria for membership and inviting black Zimbabweans to join . The CAZ was very successful in the 1985 parliamentary election , winning 15 of the 20 white seats ; Smith won decisively in Bulawayo Central . Mugabe interpreted this as " the racists of this country " defying his government and rejecting reconciliation , and immediately pledged to abolish the white seats , which he said compromised " the sovereignty of our people " . After Smith described Mugabe 's government as " illiterate " on BBC television in November 1985 , Mugabe told the House of Assembly Smith was " an incorrigible racist " who " should long ago have been hanged and hanged publicly " . Later that month , Smith 's close friend and long @-@ standing political associate " Boss " Lilford , who had provided much of the finance to form the RF , was found beaten and shot to death on his ranch . Smith described Lilford afterwards as a man " who was prepared to die for [ his ] principles " , but refused to openly discuss any possible political motive , saying simply that " it would be premature to come to conclusions " . 
 Smith was by now in the twilight of his career , but his outspoken , confrontational stance continued to irritate the ZANU – PF government . He was declared a " fifth columnist " by the Information Minister Nathan <unk> in February 1987 after he advised a group of South African businessmen that they could survive economic sanctions if white South Africans stood together . Three months later , after he was suspended from the Zimbabwean parliament for a year over his comments in South Africa and criticism of ZANU – PF , he resigned as leader of the CAZ . His four decades as an MP formally ended in September 1987 when , as allowed under the Lancaster House terms , ZANU – PF scrapped the white seats amid sweeping constitutional reforms . The office of Prime Minister was abolished in October ; Mugabe became the country 's first executive President two months later . Mugabe and Nkomo signed a unity accord at the same time merging ZAPU into ZANU – PF with the stated goal of a Marxist – Leninist one @-@ party state . 
 This marked the end of Smith 's front @-@ line political career — Gerald Smith ( no relation ) replaced him as leader of the CAZ — but he remained active in opposition at a reduced level . In July 1992 he chaired a meeting where the CAZ , Muzorewa 's UANC , Sithole 's ZANU – <unk> party and Edgar <unk> 's Zimbabwe Unity Movement formed a coalition to challenge Mugabe and ZANU – PF in the next parliamentary election . The result was the short @-@ lived United Front , which Smith agreed to chair , saying he had no more political ambitions and could therefore be regarded as a neutral figurehead . The United Front quickly failed , largely due to the lack of common ground between the constituent parties , and never contested an election . Another brief collaboration between Smith , Muzorewa and Sithole in March 2000 also led to nothing . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 The elderly Ian Smith lived in an unassuming house in Harare where , according to David Blair , " the front gate always stood open and virtually anyone who walked up the drive would be invited in for tea " . He still owned Gwenoro , but employed a manager to run it after Janet 's death in 1994 . He insisted that he would never leave Zimbabwe . " Don 't get fazed by the riots , hold your head high , do not be afraid , " a friend reported him saying . " Show you are not budging and the government will leave you alone . " He dedicated much of his 1997 autobiography , The Great Betrayal , to criticising the Mugabe administration and a long succession of British figures he considered to have let him and Rhodesia down ; he also defended and attempted to justify his actions as Prime Minister , and praised Nelson Mandela , calling him Africa 's " first black statesman " . Smith 's enduring popularity among white Zimbabweans was evidenced by the long queues they formed to have him sign copies of the book on its release in Harare in December 1997 . " They were captured , hiding their faces and turning to the wall , as television cameras recorded their ' betrayal ' for the evening news , " Josephine Fisher records . Not all of the country 's whites admired Smith , however ; some felt that his obstinate refusal to acknowledge what they saw as past errors caused the whole white community to be resented and viewed with suspicion . 
 = = = Land reform programme ; Smith gains new popularity = = = 
 According to Meredith , governmental mismanagement and widespread corruption within the ZANU – PF order led to Mugabe and others enriching themselves considerably at the expense of the country as a whole . In Meredith 's view , the average Zimbabwean was worse off in 2000 than he had been in 1980 : " average wages were lower , unemployment had trebled , public services were crumbling , and life expectancy was falling " . Opposition to ZANU – PF grew , particularly in the towns and cities . In 2000 , hoping to win support from rural blacks , Mugabe introduced a fast @-@ track land reform programme under which groups of ZANU – PF activists , officially referred to as " war veterans " , were sent to take over white @-@ owned farms so the land could be split up , without compensation , and redistributed to black peasant farmers . White farmers and their black employees were violently forced out , food production plummeted , and the economy collapsed to half the size it had been in 1980 . 
 When a group of about 50 ZANU – PF activists briefly invaded Gwenoro in May 2000 , Smith played down the incident , saying the intruders were just bored and out of work . " There 's no politics on the farm , " he said . Five months later , in England to address the Oxford Union , Smith described Mugabe as " mentally deranged " . The President announced in response that Smith would be arrested and tried for genocide if he ever came back to Zimbabwe , a threat that Smith mocked . " I would love that . Let him try it , " he said — " It would give me the chance to tell the world the truth about this gangster ... I will give him the date and time of arrival of my plane so he can meet me at the airport . " A mass of reporters descended on Harare International Airport on 7 November 2000 to witness Smith 's arrest , but far from being detained , the former Prime Minister was greeted cheerily by immigration officers and allowed through without any obstruction . Telling the waiting pressmen that he was disappointed not to have met any confrontation , he commented : " We have a president here who is mentally unstable and makes statements that have no bearing on reality " , and went home unmolested . 
 In early September 2001 , ZANU – PF militants again attempted to force Smith off his farm . The former Prime Minister telephoned the provincial Governor , who promptly sent police to remove the invaders . According to Smith , the trespassers were shocked to hear the authorities were taking his side , and left before the police even arrived . Half a year later , Smith lost his Zimbabwean passport as a result of further tightening of the law regarding multiple citizenship . New legislation passed in 2001 required Zimbabwean citizens to disavow any claim to other nationalities , even if they did not hold foreign passports . Insisting that Mugabe 's government had no right to strip him of Zimbabwean citizenship , Smith refused to renounce his right to British nationality , though he had not held a UK passport for years . Zimbabwean authorities duly refused to renew Smith 's passport in March 2002 . State press reported that he had " automatically ceased to be a citizen of Zimbabwe " on the passport 's expiry , having failed to renounce British citizenship before a deadline on 8 January that year . Smith claimed that his Zimbabwean citizenship had been illegally revoked and that he was now stateless , an assertion disputed by the Minister of Home Affairs John Nkomo , who said that Smith could stay in the country , but would not receive a new Zimbabwean passport until he renounced his right to British nationality . 
 By 2002 , the white community in Zimbabwe had shrunk to no more than 50 @,@ 000 people , of whom many , like Smith , were elderly . Smith had by this time lost most of his former international prominence — his visit to the UK in 2004 to meet Conservative politicians was largely ignored by the British press — but he achieved new domestic popularity and eminence among Zimbabwean opposition supporters , who came to see him as an unbreakable , defiant symbol of resistance to the Mugabe government . According to R W Johnson , a speech he gave to students at the University of Zimbabwe condemning Mugabe and ZANU – PF as incompetent and corrupt " gangsters " earned him a standing ovation . In 2002 , Smith challenged Mugabe to come with him to a township to see who got the best welcome . " Only one of us will come out alive , " Smith said ; " I 'm ready to put that to the test right now . He 's not . " 
 = = = Final years and death = = = 
 Smith travelled to South Africa for medical treatment in 2005 , and moved into a retirement home overlooking the sea in St James , a southern suburb of Cape Town . He was reportedly devastated by the death of his son Alec from a heart attack at London Heathrow Airport in January 2006 . Despite some marked differences — Alec had used illegal drugs in his youth , and openly opposed his father 's policies while he was Prime Minister — they had been very close . The elder Smith had referred to his son as " my rock " . Smith 's stepdaughter Jean , who had married the prominent Rhodesian singer @-@ songwriter Clem <unk> in 1967 , was by this time also widowed . She and Robert Smith cared for their stepfather in his final years . 
 After some weeks of illness , Ian Smith died in Cape Town on 20 November 2007 at the age of 88 , having suffered a stroke . Jean was with him . His ashes were returned to Zimbabwe and scattered by his family at Gwenoro . The farm continued to operate under the ownership of Smith 's stepchildren until December 2012 , when it was expropriated by the Mugabe administration as part of the land reform programme and given to a technical college . 
 Investigations into alleged electoral fraud during the 2008 presidential and parliamentary elections in Zimbabwe , when ZANU – PF was accused of using dead " ghost voters " to counter Morgan Tsvangirai and the Movement for Democratic Change ( MDC ) , revealed that Smith and hundreds of thousands of other dead people were still on the electoral roll . According to the Zimbabwe Election Support Network 's audit report , published in 2011 , deceased " voters " made up 27 % of the registered electorate . Mugabe had insisted during his ultimately victorious campaign in 2008 that he would not allow the MDC to take power even if it won , asserting that " only God " could remove him from office . Smith was finally struck off the voters ' roll in April 2013 , along with 345 @,@ 000 other dead people . 
 = = Character , reputation and legacy = = 
 " Smith was a simple man , " Graham Boynton wrote soon after his death , " and it was his rather humourless , one @-@ dimensional Rhodesian @-@ ness that at once made him a hero among his own people and a figure of derision among his enemies " . As leader of the Rhodesian Front and its successors , he was the foremost figure of his country 's white community — a " symbol and father figure " , in Mordechai Tamarkin 's phrase , who as Prime Minister " personified white Rhodesia " . Supporters hailed him as " a political visionary ... who understood the uncomfortable truths of Africa " ; detractors , meanwhile , denounced him as " an unrepentant racist " . His determination to preserve the white minority 's position in Rhodesia caused many black Africans and others to perceive him as a symbol of iniquitous white rule and racism . Smith always denied being driven by racial prejudice — in a 1987 interview he asserted that he had been defending Western principles and that " it was Marxism I fought , not blacks " . Above all , he never expressed regret regarding his actions as Prime Minister ; he insisted to the end that the political and economic ruination of Zimbabwe under ZANU – PF had borne out his predictions and proven him right . 
 " The key to understanding Smith , " Johnson wrote , " was that , like other white Rhodesians , he clung to an almost Victorian view of the world both in moral values and in the easy assumptions of British primacy that characterised the empire . " Bill Schwarz took a similar line , writing that Smith and his supporters reacted to the British Empire 's demise by imagining white Rhodesians to be " the final survivors of a lost civilisation " , charged with " tak [ ing ] on the mantle of historic Britain " in the imperial power 's absence . " He spoke endlessly about how Rhodesians had been more British than the British , " Boynton reflected , " and how this small community of decent , fair @-@ minded whites had been betrayed by , well , just about everybody he could think of ... It was easy to mock Ian Smith , but he was right — both about the betrayals and about the quality of most African politicians " . Smith 's " not in 1 @,@ 000 years " quote dominated his obituaries , a development that Peter Godwin , despite his critical stance regarding Smith and his policies , considered " unfair and inaccurate " . " Over the years it has become shorn of all context and compressed into a free @-@ floating clip that has now become his epitaph , " Godwin wrote . " But there is more than enough for which to quite legitimately criticise Smith , without resorting to fabrication . " 
 Memories of his travails on Britain 's behalf during the Second World War — " undoubtedly the central experience of his life " , according to Johnson — were fundamental to the sense of profound betrayal Smith felt when the UK government proved one of his main adversaries as Prime Minister . The wartime plastic surgery that corrected the wounds to his face left its right side paralysed , giving him a crooked smile and a somewhat blank expression , while his bodily injuries gave him a stoop and a slight limp ; he also could not sit for long periods without pain . The post @-@ colonial UK Smith encountered as Prime Minister seemed to him " foreign and somewhat effete " , to quote Kenneth Young , while Smith was " a foreigner in all but language to most British politicians — a man of convictions so outdated , of tastes so naive , as to make mutual understanding almost impossible . " Smith held most of the British politicians he dealt with in extremely low esteem , considering them to have pushed him and his country into an impossible position where , he asserted in 1970 , the decision to take unilateral action was " forced upon us " . 
 In his prime , Smith was widely recognised by both contemporaries and rivals as a formidable negotiator . <unk> considered him " a man too principled ( or short @-@ sighted ) to compromise with what he regards as wrong " , while Welensky compared dealing with him to " trying to nail jelly to a wall " . He had an " iron nerve " , to quote his RF colleague P K van der Byl , and a reputation for " icy calm " ; he almost never got angry or raised his voice . He spoke with " a nasal monologue " as Peter Younghusband described it — " uninspiring even by Rhodesian oratorical standards " . His open , informal association with the general public fostered the impression among white Rhodesians that their Prime Minister was still an " ordinary , decent fellow " , which Berlyn cites as a major factor in his enduring popularity . Welensky described him in 1978 as wielding an " almost hypnotic influence " over the Rhodesian electorate , which helped him to win " election after election ... hands down " . He also had the grudging respect of at least some of his black nationalist opponents during the Bush War ; one , quoted anonymously by People magazine in 1976 , asserted that " If we had a leader like Mr Smith , we would have won long ago . " Sithole , the long @-@ time ZANU leader , said : " Smith is a fighter . He put up a great fight for his people . We were like two bulls in there , the way we fought . He is a man . I respect him . " 
 Patrick <unk> , an MDC politician and member of the Zimbabwean Senate , said after Smith 's death that Zimbabweans had much to thank him for . " The roads that we are using today were all built by Smith , " he said . " All the infrastructure is Smith 's . We never suffered the way we are suffering now because Smith took care of the economy that supported all people and they had enough to eat . When he left power the [ British ] pound was on a par with the Zimbabwean dollar , but President Mugabe has killed all that . " David Coltart , another MDC politician , issued a statement after Smith 's death praising him as a man of modesty and integrity , but criticising what Coltart felt to be " disastrous political decisions as Prime Minister " ; Coltart considered Smith 's policies to have radicalised black nationalists , fomented Mugabe 's rise to power and thereby " directly contributed to the trauma that Zimbabwe is suffering from today " . Godwin took a similar line , describing the emergency powers Smith used to combat black nationalists as " draconian " ; he also pointed out that these " levers of repression " had formed the base for much of what Mugabe later did . Lord Carrington spoke scathingly about Smith in a 2005 interview with Heidi Holland , saying he disliked both Smith and Mugabe but would choose the latter if he " absolutely had to choose " ; Smith was , in his opinion , " a bigoted , stupid man " responsible for all of Zimbabwe 's problems . 
 While acknowledging the privileged position whites had under Smith , several commentators have latterly agreed with his claims that many black Zimbabweans preferred him to Mugabe with hindsight . " Smith 's image improved inversely as Mugabe 's plummeted , " Johnson wrote . " When he walked the streets of Harare , Africans would almost queue up to grasp his hand and wish him well . " " If you were to go to Harare today [ in 2007 ] and ask ordinary black Zimbabweans who they would rather have as their leader — Smith or Mugabe — the answer would be almost unanimous , " Boynton asserted ; " And it would not be Mugabe . " Smith 's death prompted strongly condemnatory reports in Zimbabwe 's state media . The Deputy Minister of Information Bright <unk> accused Smith of being a racist , blamed him for the deaths of thousands and asserted that he would " not be mourned or missed here by any decent person " . Reactions from Zimbabweans on the street were mixed , however ; according to Western journalists , many expressed sadness . 
 = Chinese Nü Yr = 
 Chinese Nü Yr is an extended play ( EP ) by Irish producer Seamus Malliagh , known by his stage name Iglooghost , released on the Brainfeeder label on 30 October 2015 . Containing elements of footwork , bass , grime and 2 @-@ step garage , the EP 's sound is represented by a worm who goes through several nonsensical lands . To make Chinese Nü Yr , Malliagh first designed the cover art and then developed songs with structures and sound to fit the artwork . Upon release , the EP garnered generally favorable reviews from critics , a common praise being its unique style . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Chinese Nü Yr is a Footwork album using elements of bass , grime and 2 @-@ step garage . Malliagh explained that Chinese Nü Yr is a story about Xiāngjiāo , a gelatinous worm who wears a witch hat and is voiced by pitch @-@ shifted recordings of his dad and little sister . Xiāngjiāo blasts through many colorful , nonsensical lands , having to dodge things such as peanuts , floating fruit , pink @-@ colored fog , and mountains growing out of the ground . Forced to visit uncountably many alien worlds , Xiāngjiāo fears both the unfamiliarity of future lands and the extreme speed at which he / she travels . In a December 2015 interview , Malliagh stated the fate of the worm will occur in a full @-@ length album . 
 A wobbly , stretchy synth sound representing the worm moving through worlds is used on all of the tracks . Pitch @-@ shifted recordings of Malliagh 's dad screaming signifies the worm porting through a hole to the next world , which , according to Malliagh , he was used to given that he was a member of a punk group . He described writing his story as if he was scoring a film , first making the cover art for the EP , and then coming up with the structures and sounds of the songs to fit it . He said in an interview with LA Weekly that " Marrying music and pictures is the funnest thing ever . There 's so many subconscious elements at play . Looking at a ' mega @-@ sick ' picture can make even the most crappy , uncool song sound awesome . Art has this incredible way of subconsciously enhancing music . " 
 = = Tracks = = 
 Chinese Nü Yr 's first two tracks , " <unk> " and " <unk> / <unk> " , were compared by Resident Advisor journalist Andrew Ryce to the works of labels PC Music and <unk> Loom ; the reason of the comparison for the former song is due to its " mush @-@ mouthed vocals " and sounds commonly found in trance music , the hip hop and uptempo " speedy chop @-@ up " of the latter for its vocals reminiscent of the song " Hard " by English producer Sophie . " Hard " ends with a rap verse from Japanese singer and producer Mr. <unk> , whom Iglooghost said had " amazing taste in melodies " and that her work " sounds wide @-@ eyed and childlike but is also introspective , like a genius baby . " " Gold Coat " is the least frantic of all of the EP 's four tracks , and Ryce also called it his least favorite of the songs : " Mal 's strength comes from deftly juggling ideas , so " Gold Coat " ' s dubstep @-@ tempo diversion feels like a regression . " " Peach Rift " , the heaviest @-@ sounding and longest cut on the EP at over five minutes , was described by Ryce as a " Rubik 's Cube of heavy basslines , chirpy synths , and chattering vocals that never quite line up , which can be numbing by the end . " 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 " Gold Coat " was Chinese Nü Yr 's lead single , released on 7 October 2015 . Six days later , the label Brainfeeder announced they would release the EP on 30 October 2015 . Two days before the release of the EP , the music blog Pigeons & Planes premiered " <unk> " . Iglooghost said the name of the record came from looking at the sky while flying back home from his gig in Rome : " The sky looked really weird and for some reason the word Chinese New Year came into my head . I was really happy , because everything seemed super cool , life just seemed really warm and nice . I think the word Chinese New Year sounds warm and cool . I imagine fireworks , red colours and Chinese lanterns . ” Upon its distribution , Chinese Nü Yr garnered positive reviews . Gary Suarez , reviewing for The Quietus , spotlighted the EP 's " <unk> manic synthesis of garage , hip hop , footwork , and as @-@ yet undefined ( sub ) genres " that " makes him a <unk> to watch . " Both Ryce and Exclaim ! critic Ashley Hampson praised Malliagh for making such a unique record while still fitting with the works of other acts on the Brainfeeder label . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = IndiGo = 
 IndiGo is a low @-@ cost airline headquartered at Gurgaon , India . It is the largest airline in India in terms of passengers carried with a 36 @.@ 8 % market share as of February 2016 . The airline operates 679 daily flights to 40 destinations and is the second largest low @-@ cost carrier in Asia . It has its primary hub at Indira Gandhi International Airport , Delhi . 
 The airline was founded as a private company by Rahul Bhatia of InterGlobe Enterprises and Rakesh Gangwal , a United States @-@ based NRI in 2006 . It took delivery of its first aircraft in July 2006 and commenced operations a month later in August 2006 . The airline became the largest Indian carrier in terms of passenger market share in 2012 . The company went public in November 2015 . The airline operates a single aircraft type of Airbus A320 with an all economy configuration . 
 = = History = = 
 IndiGo was founded in 2006 as a private company by Rahul Bhatia of InterGlobe Enterprises and Rakesh Gangwal , a United States @-@ based NRI . InterGlobe had a 51 @.@ 12 % stake in IndiGo and 47 @.@ 88 % was held by Gangwal 's Virginia The new owner of Indigo share as an 20 @.@ 2 % in Indigo She daughter of <unk> and Meena Devi <unk> . She is from Manipur State City Imphal . <unk> <unk> Bhatia . She from <unk> <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> Street @-@ based company Caelum Investments . IndiGo placed a firm order for 100 Airbus A320 @-@ 200 aircraft in June 2005 with plans to commence operations in mid @-@ 2006 . IndiGo took delivery of its first Airbus aircraft on 28 July 2006 , nearly one year after placing the order . It commenced operations on 4 August 2006 with a service from New Delhi to Imphal via Guwahati . By the end of 2006 , the airline had six aircraft and nine more aircraft were acquired in 2007 . In December 2010 , IndiGo replaced state @-@ run carrier Air India as the third largest airline in India , behind Kingfisher Airlines and Jet Airways with a passenger market share of 17 @.@ 3 % . 
 In 2011 , IndiGo placed an order for 180 Airbus A320 aircraft in a deal worth US $ 15 billion . In January 2011 , after completing five years of operations , the airline got permission to launch international flights . The airline launched international services in September 2011 . In December 2011 , the DGCA expressed reservations that the rapid expansion could impact passenger safety . 
 In February 2012 , IndiGo took delivery of its 50th aircraft , less than six years after it began operations in 2006 . For the quarter ending March 2012 , IndiGo was the most profitable airline in India and became the second largest airline in India in terms of passenger market share . On 17 August 2012 , IndiGo became the largest airline in India in terms of market share surpassing Jet Airways , six years after commencing operations . 
 In January 2013 , IndiGo was the second fastest growing low @-@ cost carrier in Asia behind Indonesian airline Lion Air . In February 2013 , following the announcement of civil aviation ministry that it would be allow IndiGo to take delivery of only five aircraft that year , the airline planned to introduce low @-@ cost regional flights by setting up a subsidiary . Later , IndiGo announced that it plans to seek permission from the ministry to acquire four more aircraft , therefore taking delivery of nine aircraft in 2013 . As of March 2014 , IndiGo is the second largest low @-@ cost carrier in Asia in terms of seats flown . 
 In August 2015 , IndiGo placed an order of 250 Airbus A320neo aircraft worth $ 27 billion , making it the largest single order ever in Airbus history . IndiGo announced a ₹ 3 @,@ 200 crore ( US $ 480 million ) initial public offering on 19 October 2015 which opened on 27 October 2015 . As of February 2016 , it is the largest airline in India in terms of passengers carried with a 36 @.@ 8 % market share . 
 = = Corporate affairs and identity = = 
 IndiGo is headquartered in Gurgaon , India . 
 = = = Logo and livery = = = 
 Twenty round dots arranged in the shape of an aircraft serves as the logo of the airline . The airline uses a two tone blue livery on a white background with the belly of the aircraft painted in Indigo with the logo in white . The flight attendants wear a single @-@ piece navy @-@ blue tunic with a cap and a thin indigo belt designed by fashion designer Rajesh Pratap Singh and make @-@ up artist Ambika Pillai . The airline has the tagline on @-@ time focusing on punctuality . 
 = = Operations = = 
 IndiGo became one of the fastest growing low cost carriers in the world and was the largest profitable airline in India . The success of IndiGo has been attributed to its unique business model which reduces costs . The airline operates a single type of aircraft ( Airbus A320 ) in similar seating configuration which simplifies crew training and maintenance . The airline strikes bulk deals with Airbus reducing unit costs . The airline targets a quick turn @-@ around time of 20 minutes to get the aircraft ready for the next flight , ensuring planes fly about 12 hours every day . Employees share multiple roles with a check @-@ in staff doubling as a baggage handler . 
 = = Destinations = = 
 As of July 2016 , IndiGo operates 818 daily flights to 40 destinations , 35 in India and 5 abroad . Its main base is located at Delhi , with additional bases at Bangalore , Chennai , Hyderabad , Kolkata , Mumbai and Nagpur . In January 2011 , IndiGo received a license to operate international flights after completing five years of operations . IndiGo 's first international service was launched between New Delhi and Dubai on 1 September 2011 . International services were later expanded to serve Bangkok , Singapore , Muscat and Kathmandu . The airline is considering launch of flights to Kunming , China . 
 = = Fleet = = 
 In order to reduce operational overhead , IndiGo operates only the Airbus A320 family of aircraft in its fleet . As of April 2016 , IndiGo operates the following aircraft : 
 = = = Fleet Information = = = 
 IndiGo received its first A320 in July 2006 and planned to induct 100 aircraft by 2015 – 2016 . In 2012 , the airline took delivery of its 50th aircraft and the 100th aircraft was delivered on 4 November 2014 , completing its initial order ahead of schedule . The Airbus A320neo family aircraft ordered in 2011 were to be delivered starting 2015 . However , due to a delay in the production and delivery of these aircraft , IndiGo dry @-@ leased a total of 22 used aircraft to cope up with the demand . The first A320neo aircraft was delivered to IndiGo on 11 March 2016 . 
 = = = New aircraft orders = = = 
 IndiGo placed an order for 100 Airbus A320 @-@ 200 aircraft worth US $ 6 billion in June 2005 during the Paris Air Show with plans to commence operations in mid @-@ 2006 . IndiGo signed a memorandum of understanding for an additional 180 Airbus A320 aircraft including 150 with the New Engine Option ( NEO ) worth US $ 15 billion on 11 January 2011 and IndiGo will be one of the launch customers of the A320neo aircraft . 
 On 15 October 2014 , IndiGo expressed its intention to order a further 250 A320neo aircraft worth US $ 25 @.@ 7 billion at list prices . On 15 August 2015 , IndiGo confirmed the order for 250 A320neo aircraft for $ 26 @.@ 5 billion . The order also provides IndiGo the flexibility to convert some A320s to <unk> which can seat more passengers and fly on longer routes . The order of 250 jets is Airbus 's single largest order by number of aircraft . 
 = = Services = = 
 Being a low @-@ cost carrier , IndiGo offers only economy class seating accommodating 180 passengers per aircraft . To keep fares low , IndiGo does not provide complimentary meals in any of its flights , though it does have a buy @-@ on board in @-@ flight meal programme . No in @-@ flight entertainment is available and Hello 6E is the in @-@ flight magazine published by IndiGo . IndiGo offers premium services , where the passengers can avail additional benefits like a pre @-@ assigned seat , multiple cancellations and priority check @-@ in at a higher fare . 
 = = Awards and achievements = = 
 IndiGo has won the following awards : 
 Best low @-@ cost carrier by the Airline Passengers Association of India ( 2007 ) 
 Best low @-@ cost carrier at the Galileo Express Travel Awards ( 2008 ) 
 Best low cost airline by CNBC Awaaz ( 2009 , 2013 ) 
 Best LCC Aviation award for excellence by Centre for Asia Pacific Aviation ( 2015 ) 
 = Kreutz sungrazer = 
 The Kreutz sungrazers ( / <unk> / , pronounced <unk> ) are a family of sungrazing comets , characterized by orbits taking them extremely close to the Sun at perihelion . They are believed to be fragments of one large comet that broke up several centuries ago and are named for German astronomer Heinrich Kreutz , who first demonstrated that they were related . A Kreutz sungrazers 's aphelion is about 170 AU from the Sun ; these sungrazers make their way from the distant outer Solar System from a patch in the sky in Canis Major , to the inner Solar System , to their perihelion point near the Sun , and then leave the inner Solar System in their return trip to their aphelion . 
 Several members of the Kreutz family have become great comets , occasionally visible near the Sun in the daytime sky . The most recent of these was Comet Ikeya – Seki in 1965 , which may have been one of the brightest comets in the last millennium . It has been suggested that another cluster of bright Kreutz system comets may begin to arrive in the inner Solar System in the next few years to decades . 
 Many hundreds of smaller members of the family , some only a few meters across , have been discovered since the launch of the SOHO satellite in 1995 . None of these smaller comets have survived its perihelion passage . Larger sungrazers such as the Great Comet of 1843 and C / 2011 W3 ( Lovejoy ) have survived their perihelion passage . Amateur astronomers have been successful at discovering Kreutz comets in the data available in real time via the Internet . 
 = = Discovery and historical observations = = 
 The first comet whose orbit had been found to take it extremely close to the Sun was the Great Comet of 1680 . This comet was found to have passed just 200 @,@ 000 km ( 0 @.@ 0013 AU ) above the Sun 's surface , equivalent to about half the distance between the Earth and the Moon . It thus became the first known sungrazing comet . Its perihelion distance was just 1 @.@ 3 solar radii . 
 Astronomers at the time , including Edmond Halley , speculated that this comet was a return of a bright comet seen close to the Sun in the sky in 1106 . 163 years later , the Great Comet of 1843 appeared and also passed extremely close to the Sun . Despite orbital calculations showing that it had a period of several centuries , some astronomers wondered if it was a return of the 1680 comet . A bright comet seen in 1880 was found to be travelling on an almost identical orbit to that of 1843 , as was the subsequent Great Comet of 1882 . Some astronomers suggested that perhaps they were all one comet , whose orbital period was somehow being drastically shortened at each perihelion passage , perhaps by retardation by some dense material surrounding the Sun . 
 An alternative suggestion was that the comets were all fragments of an earlier Sun @-@ grazing comet . This idea was first proposed in 1880 , and its plausibility was amply demonstrated when the Great Comet of 1882 broke up into several fragments after its perihelion passage . In 1888 , Heinrich Kreutz published a paper showing that the comets of 1843 ( C / 1843 D1 , the Great March Comet ) , 1880 ( C / 1880 C1 , the Great Southern Comet ) , and 1882 ( C / 1882 R1 , Great September Comet ) were probably fragments of a giant comet that had broken up several orbits before . The comet of 1680 proved to be unrelated to this family of comets . 
 After another Kreutz sungrazer was seen in 1887 ( C / 1887 B1 , the Great Southern Comet of 1887 ) , the next one did not appear until 1945 . Two further sungrazers appeared in the 1960s , Comet Pereyra in 1963 and Comet Ikeya – Seki , which became extremely bright in 1965 , and broke into three pieces after its perihelion . The appearance of two Kreutz Sungrazers in quick succession inspired further study of the dynamics of the group . 
 The group generally has an Inclination of roughly 140 degrees , a perihelion distance of around 0 @.@ 01 AU , and a Longitude of ascending node of 340 – 10 ° . 
 = = Notable members = = 
 The brightest members of the Kreutz sungrazers have been spectacular , easily visible in the daytime sky . The three most impressive have been the Great Comet of 1843 , the Great Comet of 1882 and Comet Ikeya – Seki . Another notable Kreutz sungrazer was the Eclipse Comet of 1882 ( see further below ) . 
 = = = Great Comet of 1843 = = = 
 The Great Comet of 1843 was first noticed in early February of that year , just over three weeks before its perihelion passage . By February 27 it was easily visible in the daytime sky , and observers described seeing a tail 2 – 3 ° long stretching away from the Sun before being lost in the glare of the sky . After its perihelion passage , it reappeared in the morning sky , and developed an extremely long tail . It extended about 45 ° across the sky on March 11 and was more than 2 ° wide ; the tail was calculated to be more than 300 million kilometers ( 2 AU ) long . This held the record for the longest measured cometary tail until 2000 , when Comet Hyakutake 's tail was found to stretch to some 550 million kilometers in length . ( The Earth – Sun distance — 1 AU — is only 150 million kilometers . ) 
 The comet was very prominent throughout early March , before fading away to almost below naked eye visibility by the beginning of April . It was last detected on April 20 . This comet apparently made a substantial impression on the public , inspiring in some a fear that judgement day was imminent . 
 = = = Eclipse Comet of 1882 = = = 
 A party of observers gathered in Egypt to watch a solar eclipse in May 1882 were greatly surprised when they observed a bright streak near to the Sun once totality began . By a remarkable coincidence , the eclipse had coincided with the perihelion passage of a Kreutz comet . The comet would otherwise have gone unnoticed — its sighting during the eclipse was the only observation of it . Photographs of the eclipse revealed that the comet had moved noticeably during the <unk> eclipse , as would be expected for a comet racing past the Sun at almost 500 km / s . The comet is sometimes referred to as Tewfik , after Tewfik Pasha , the Khedive of Egypt at the time . 
 = = = Great Comet of 1882 = = = 
 The Great Comet of 1882 was discovered independently by many observers , as it was already easily visible to the naked eye when it appeared in early September 1882 , just a few days before perihelion . It grew rapidly brighter and was eventually so bright it was visible in the daytime for two days ( 16 – 17 September ) , even through light cloud . 
 After its perihelion passage , the comet remained bright for several weeks . During October , its nucleus was seen to fragment into first two and then four pieces . Some observers also reported seeing diffuse patches of light several degrees away from the nucleus . The rate of separation of the fragments of the nucleus was such that they will return about a century apart , between 670 and 960 years after the break @-@ up . 
 = = = Comet Ikeya – Seki = = = 
 Comet Ikeya – Seki is the most recent very bright Kreutz sungrazer . It was discovered independently by two Japanese amateur astronomers on September 18 , 1965 , within 15 minutes of each other , and quickly recognised as a Kreutz sungrazer . It brightened rapidly over the following four weeks as it approached the Sun , and reached apparent magnitude 2 by October 15 . Its perihelion passage occurred on October 21 , and observers across the world easily saw it in the daytime sky . A few hours before perihelion passage on October 21 it had a visible magnitude from − 10 to − 11 , comparable to the first quarter of the Moon and brighter than any other comet seen since 1106 . A day after perihelion its magnitude decreased to just − 4 . 
 Japanese astronomers using a coronagraph saw the comet break into three pieces 30 minutes before perihelion . When the comet reappeared in the morning sky in early November , two of these nuclei were definitely detected with the third suspected . The comet developed a very prominent tail , about 25 ° in length , before fading throughout November . It was last detected in January 1966 . 
 = = Dynamical history and evolution = = 
 A study by Brian G. Marsden in 1967 was the first attempt to trace back the orbital history of the group to identify the progenitor comet . All known members of the group up until 1965 had almost identical orbital inclinations at about 144 ° , as well as very similar values for the longitude of perihelion at 280 – 282 ° , with a couple of outlying points probably due to uncertain orbital calculations . A greater range of values existed for the argument of perihelion and longitude of the ascending node . 
 Marsden found that the Kreutz sungrazers could be split into two groups , with slightly different orbital elements , implying that the family resulted from fragmentations at more than one perihelion . Tracing back the orbits of Ikeya – Seki and the Great Comet of 1882 , Marsden found that at their previous perihelion passage , the difference between their orbital elements was of the same order of magnitude as the difference between the elements of the fragments of Ikeya – Seki after it broke up . This meant it was realistic to presume that they were two parts of the same comet which had broken up one orbit ago . By far the best candidate for the progenitor comet was that seen in 1106 ( Great Comet of 1106 ) : Ikeya – Seki 's derived orbital period gave a previous perihelion almost exactly at the right time , and while the Great Comet of 1882 's derived orbit implied a previous perihelion a few decades later , it would only require a small error in the orbital elements to bring it into agreement . 
 The Sun @-@ grazing comets of 1668 , 1689 , 1702 and 1945 seem to be closely related to those of 1882 and 1965 , although their orbits are not well enough determined to establish whether they broke off from the parent comet in 1106 , or the previous perihelion passage before that , some time in the 3 – 5th centuries AD . This subgroup of comets is known as Subgroup II . Comet White – Ortiz – Bolelli , which was seen in 1970 , is more closely related to this group than Subgroup I , but appears to have broken off during the previous orbit to the other fragments . 
 The Sun @-@ grazing comets observed in 1843 ( Great Comet of 1843 ) and 1963 ( Comet Pereyra ) seem to be closely related and belong to the subgroup I , although when their orbits are traced back to one previous perihelion , the differences between the orbital elements are still rather large , probably implying that they broke apart from each other one revolution before that . They may not be related to the comet of 1106 , but rather a comet that returned about 50 years before that . Subgroup I also includes comets seen in 1695 , 1880 ( Great Southern Comet of 1880 ) and in 1887 ( Great Southern Comet of 1887 ) , as well as the vast majority of comets detected by SOHO mission ( see below ) . 
 The distinction between the two sub @-@ groups is thought to imply that they result from two separate parent comets , which themselves were once part of a ' grandparent ' comet which fragmented several orbits previously . One possible candidate for the grandparent is a comet observed by Aristotle and Ephorus in 371 BC . Ephorus claimed to have seen this comet break into two . However modern astronomers are skeptical of the claims of Ephorus , because they were not confirmed by other sources . Instead comets that arrived between 3rd and 5th centuries AD ( comets of 214 , 426 and 467 ) are considered as possible progenitors of the Kreutz family . The original comet must certainly have been very large indeed , perhaps as large as 100 km across ( for comparison , the nucleus of Comet Hale – Bopp was about 40 km across ) . 
 Although its orbit is rather different from those of the main two groups , it is possible that the comet of 1680 is also related to the Kreutz sungrazers via a fragmentation many orbits ago . 
 The Kreutz sungrazers are probably not a unique phenomenon . Studies have shown that for comets with high orbital inclinations and perihelion distances of less than about 2 AU , the cumulative effect of gravitational perturbations tends to result in sungrazing orbits . One study has estimated that Comet Hale – Bopp has about a 15 % chance of eventually becoming a Sun @-@ grazing comet . 
 = = Recent observations = = 
 Until recently , it would have been possible for even a very bright member of the Kreutz sungrazers to pass through the inner Solar System unnoticed , if its perihelion had occurred between about May and August . At this time of year , as seen from Earth , the comet would approach and recede almost directly behind the Sun , and could only become visible extremely close to the Sun if it became very bright . Only a remarkable coincidence between the perihelion passage of the Eclipse Comet of 1882 and a total solar eclipse allowed its discovery . 
 However , during the 1980s , two Sun @-@ observing satellites serendipitously discovered several new members of the Kreutz family , and since the launch of the SOHO Sun @-@ observing satellite in 1995 , it has been possible to observe comets very close to the Sun at any time of year . The satellite provides a constant view of the immediate solar vicinity , and SOHO has now discovered hundreds of new Sun @-@ grazing comets , some just a few metres across . About 83 % of the sungrazers found by SOHO are members of the Kreutz group , with the other being referred to as ' non @-@ Kreutz ' or ' sporadic ' sungrazers ( Meyer , Marsden , and <unk> & 2 families ) . On average , a new member of the Kreutz family is discovered every three days . Apart from Comet Lovejoy , none of the sungrazers seen by SOHO has survived its perihelion passage ; some may have plunged into the Sun itself , but most are likely to have simply evaporated away completely . 
 More than 75 % of the SOHO sungrazers have been discovered by amateur astronomers analysing SOHO 's observations via the Internet . Some amateurs have managed remarkable numbers of discoveries , with Rainer Kracht of Germany having chalked up 211 , Michael Oates of the United Kingdom making 144 , and Zhou Bo of China spotting 97 . As of December 2011 , over 2 @,@ 000 Kreutz sungrazers have been identified using SOHO data . 
 SOHO observations have shown that Sungrazers frequently arrive in pairs separated by a few hours . These pairs are too frequent to occur by chance , and cannot be due to break @-@ ups on the previous orbit , because the fragments would have separated by a much greater distance . Instead , it is thought that the pairs result from fragmentations far away from the perihelion . Many comets have been observed to fragment far from perihelion , and it seems that in the case of the Kreutz sungrazers , an initial fragmentation near perihelion can be followed by an ongoing ' cascade ' of break @-@ ups throughout the rest of the orbit . 
 The number of Subgroup I Kreutz comets discovered is about four times the number of Subgroup II members . This suggests that the ' grandparent ' comet split into parent comets of unequal size . 
 = = Future = = 
 <unk> , the Kreutz sungrazers might continue to be recognised as a distinct family for many thousands of years yet . Eventually their orbits will be dispersed by gravitational perturbations , although depending on the rate of fragmentation of the constituent parts , the group might be completely destroyed before it is gravitationally dispersed . The continuing discovery of large numbers of the smaller members of the family by SOHO will undoubtedly lead to a greater understanding of how comets break up to form families . 
 It is not possible to estimate the chances of another very bright Kreutz comet arriving in the near future , but given that at least 10 have reached naked eye visibility over the last 200 years , another great comet from the Kreutz family seems almost certain to arrive at some point . Comet White – Ortiz – Bolelli in 1970 reached an apparent magnitude of 1 . In December 2011 , Kreutz sungrazer C / 2011 W3 ( Lovejoy ) survived its perihelion passage and had an apparent magnitude of − 3 . 
 = Pipe organ = 
 The pipe organ is a musical instrument that produces sound by driving pressurized air ( called wind ) through organ pipes selected via a keyboard . Because each pipe produces a single pitch , the pipes are provided in sets called ranks , each of which has a common timbre and volume throughout the keyboard compass . Most organs have multiple ranks of pipes of differing timbre , pitch , and volume that the player can employ singly or in combination through the use of controls called stops . 
 A pipe organ has one or more keyboards played by the hands ( called manuals ) , and a pedalboard played by the feet ; each keyboard has its own group of stops . The keyboard ( s ) , pedalboard , and stops are housed in the organ 's console . The organ 's continuous supply of wind allows it to sustain notes for as long as the corresponding keys are depressed , unlike the piano and harpsichord whose sound begins to dissipate immediately after it is played . The smallest portable pipe organs may have only one or two dozen pipes and one manual ; the largest may have over 20 @,@ 000 pipes and seven manuals . A list of some of the most notable and largest pipe organs in the world can be viewed at List of pipe organs . 
 The origins of the pipe organ can be traced back to the water organ in Ancient Greece , in the 3rd century BC , in which the wind supply was created with water pressure . By the 6th or 7th century AD , bellows were used to supply organs with wind . Beginning in the 12th century , the organ began to evolve into a complex instrument capable of producing different timbres . A pipe organ with " great leaden pipes " was sent to the West by the Byzantine emperor Constantine V as a gift to Pepin the Short , King of the Franks , in 757 . Pepin 's son Charlemagne requested a similar organ for his chapel in Aachen in 812 , beginning the pipe organ 's establishment in Western church music . By the 17th century , most of the sounds available on the modern classical organ had been developed . From that time , the pipe organ was the most complex man @-@ made device - a distinction it retained until it was displaced by the telephone exchange in the late 19th century . 
 Pipe organs are installed in churches , synagogues , concert halls , schools , and other public buildings . They are used in the performance of classical music , sacred music , secular music , and popular music . In the early 20th century , pipe organs were installed in theaters to accompany the screening of films during the silent movie era ; in municipal auditoria , where orchestral transcriptions were popular ; and in the homes of the wealthy . The beginning of the 21st century has seen a resurgence in installations in concert halls . The organ boasts a substantial repertoire , which spans over 500 years . 
 = = Construction = = 
 A pipe organ contains one or more sets of pipes , a wind system , and one or more keyboards . The pipes produce sound when pressurized air produced by the wind system passes through them . An action connects the keyboards to the pipes . Stops allow the organist to control which ranks of pipes sound at a given time . The organist operates the stops and the keyboards from the console . 
 = = = Pipes = = = 
 Organ pipes are made from either wood or metal and produce sound ( " speak " ) when air under pressure ( " wind " ) is directed through them . As one pipe produces a single pitch , multiple pipes are necessary to accommodate the musical scale . The greater the length of the pipe , the lower its resulting pitch will be . The timbre and volume of the sound produced by a pipe depends on the volume of air delivered to the pipe and the manner in which it is constructed and voiced , the latter adjusted by the builder to produce the desired tone and volume . Hence a pipe 's volume cannot be readily changed while playing . 
 Organ pipes are divided into flue pipes and reed pipes according to their design and timbre . Flue pipes produce sound by forcing air through a <unk> , like that of a recorder , whereas reed pipes produce sound via a beating reed , like that of a clarinet or saxophone . 
 Pipes are arranged by timbre and pitch into ranks . A rank is a row of pipes mounted vertically onto a windchest . The stop mechanism admits air to each rank . For a given pipe to sound , the stop governing the pipe 's rank must be engaged , and the key corresponding to its pitch must be depressed . Ranks of pipes are organized into groups called divisions . Each division generally is played from its own keyboard and conceptually comprises an individual instrument within the organ . 
 = = = Action = = = 
 An organ contains two actions , or systems of moving parts . When a key is depressed , the key action admits wind into a pipe . The stop action allows the organist to control which ranks are engaged . An action may be mechanical , pneumatic , or electrical ( or some combination of these , such as electro @-@ pneumatic action ) . The key action is independent of the stop action , allowing an organ to combine a mechanical key action along with an electric stop action . 
 A key action which physically connects the keys and the windchests is a mechanical or tracker action . Connection is achieved through a series of rods called trackers . When the organist depresses a key , the corresponding tracker pulls open its pallet , allowing wind to enter the pipe . 
 In a mechanical stop action , each stop control operates a valve for a whole rank of pipes . When the organist selects a stop , the valve allows wind to reach the selected rank . This control was at first a draw stop knob , which the organist selects by pulling ( or drawing ) toward himself / herself . This is the origin of the idiom " to pull out all the stops " . More modern stop selectors , used for electric actions , are tilting tablets or rocker tabs . 
 Tracker action has been used from antiquity to modern times . Despite the extra effort needed in playing , many organists prefer tracker action because of a feel and a control of the pipe valve operation . Before the pallet opens , wind pressure augments tension of the pallet spring , but once the pallet opens , only the spring tension is felt at the key . This provides a " breakaway " feel . 
 A later development was the tubular @-@ pneumatic action , which uses changes of pressure within lead tubing to operate pneumatic valves throughout the instrument . This allowed a lighter touch , and more flexibility in the location of the console , within a 50 @-@ foot ( 15 @-@ m ) limit . This type of construction was used in the late 19th century to early 20th century , and has had only rare application since the 1920s . 
 A more recent development is the electric action which uses low voltage DC to control the key and / or stop mechanisms . Electricity may control the action indirectly through air pressure valves ( pneumatics ) , in which case the action is electro @-@ pneumatic . In such actions , an electromagnet attracts a small pilot valve which lets wind go to a bellows ( " pneumatic " ) which opens the pallet . When electricity operates the action directly without the assistance of pneumatics , it is commonly referred to as direct electric action . In this type , the electromagnet 's armature carries a disc pallet . 
 When electrical wiring alone is used to connect the console to the windchest , electric actions allow the console to be separated at any practical distance from the rest of the organ , and to be movable . Electric stop actions can be controlled at the console by stop knobs , by pivoted tilting tablets , or rocker tabs . These are simple switches , like wall switches for room lights . Some may include electromagnets for setting or resetting when combinations are selected . 
 The most modern actions are primarily electronic , which connect the console and windchests via narrow data cables instead of the larger <unk> cables of electric actions . Boxes containing small embedded computers in the console and near the windchests translate console commands into fast serial data for the cable , and back into electrical commands at the windchest [ s ] . 
 = = = Wind system = = = 
 The wind system consists of the parts that produce , store , and deliver wind to the pipes . Pipe organ wind pressures are on the order of 0 @.@ 10 psi ( 0 @.@ 69 kPa ) . Organ builders often measure organ wind using a U @-@ tube manometer containing water , so commonly give its magnitude as the difference in water levels in the two legs of the manometer , rather than in units of pressure . The difference in water level is proportional to the difference in pressure between the wind being measured and the atmosphere . The 0 @.@ 10 psi above would register as 2 @.@ 75 inches of water ( 70 <unk> ) . An Italian organ from the Renaissance period may be on only 2 @.@ 2 inches ( 56 mm ) , while ( in the extreme ) solo stops in some large 20th @-@ century organs may require up to 50 inches ( 1 @,@ 300 mm ) . In isolated , extreme cases , some stops have been voiced on 100 inches ( 2 @,@ 500 mm ) . 
 Playing the organ before electricity required at least one person to operate the bellows . When signaled by the organist , a <unk> would operate a set of bellows , supplying the organ with air . Because <unk> were expensive , organists would usually practise on other instruments such as the clavichord or harpsichord . By the mid @-@ 19th @-@ century bellows were also being operated by water engines , steam engines or gasoline engines . Starting in the 1860s bellows were gradually replaced by wind turbines which were later directly connected to electrical motors . This made it possible for organists to practice regularly on the organ . Most organs , both new and historic , have electric blowers , although others can still be operated manually . The wind supplied is stored in one or more regulators to maintain a constant pressure in the windchests until the action allows it to flow into the pipes . 
 = = = Stops = = = 
 Each stop usually controls one rank of pipes , although mixtures and undulating stops ( such as the Voix céleste ) control multiple ranks . The name of the stop reflects not only the stop 's timbre and construction , but also the style of the organ in which it resides . For example , the names on an organ built in the north German Baroque style generally will be derived from the German language , while the names of similar stops on an organ in the French Romantic style will usually be French . Most countries tend to use only their own languages for stop nomenclature . English @-@ speaking nations as well as Japan are more receptive to foreign nomenclature . Stop names are not standardized : two otherwise identical stops from different organs may have different names . 
 To facilitate a large range of timbres , organ stops exist at different pitch levels . A stop that sounds at unison pitch when a key is depressed is referred to as being at 8 ′ ( pronounced " eight @-@ foot " ) pitch . This refers to the length of the lowest @-@ sounding pipe in that rank , which is approximately eight feet . For the same reason , a stop that sounds an octave higher is at 4 ′ pitch , and one that sounds two octaves higher is at 2 ′ pitch . Likewise , a stop that sounds an octave lower than unison pitch is at 16 ′ pitch , and one that sounds two octaves lower is at 32 ′ pitch . Stops of different pitch levels are designed to be played simultaneously . 
 The label on a stop knob or rocker tab indicates the stop ’ s name and its pitch in feet . Stops that control multiple ranks display a Roman numeral indicating the number of ranks present , instead of its pitch . Thus , a stop labelled " Open Diapason 8 ′ " is a single @-@ rank diapason stop sounding at 8 ′ pitch . A stop labelled " Mixture V " is a five @-@ rank mixture . 
 Sometimes , a single rank of pipes may be able to be controlled by several stops , allowing the rank to be played at multiple pitches or on multiple manuals . Such a rank is said to be unified or borrowed . For example , an 8 ′ Diapason rank may also be made available as a 4 ′ Octave . When both of these stops are selected and a key ( for example , c ′ ) is pressed , two pipes of the same rank will sound : the pipe normally corresponding to the key played ( c ′ ) , and the pipe one octave above that ( c ′ ′ ) . Because the 8 ′ rank does not have enough pipes to sound the top octave of the keyboard at 4 ′ pitch , it is common for an extra octave of pipes used only for the borrowed 4 ′ stop to be added . In this case , the full rank of pipes ( now an extended rank ) is one octave longer than the keyboard . 
 Special unpitched stops also appear in some organs . Among these are the <unk> ( a wheel of rotating bells ) , the nightingale ( a pipe submerged in a small pool of water , creating the sound of a bird warbling when wind is admitted ) , and the effet d <unk> ( " thunder effect " , a device that sounds the lowest bass pipes simultaneously ) . Standard orchestral percussion instruments such as the drum , chimes , celesta , and harp have also been imitated in organ building . 
 = = = Console = = = 
 The controls available to the organist , including the keyboards , couplers , expression pedals , stops , and registration aids are accessed from the console . The console is either built into the organ case or detached from it . 
 = = = = Keyboards = = = = 
 Keyboards played by the hands are known as manuals ( from the Latin manus , meaning " hand " ) . The keyboard played by the feet is a pedalboard . Every organ has at least one manual ( most have two or more ) , and most have a pedalboard . Each keyboard is named for a particular division of the organ ( a group of ranks ) and generally controls only the stops from that division . The range of the keyboards has varied widely across time and between countries . Most current specifications call for two or more manuals with sixty @-@ one notes ( five octaves , from C to c ″ ″ ) and a pedalboard with thirty or thirty @-@ two notes ( two and a half octaves , from C to f ′ or g ′ ) . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 A coupler allows the stops of one division to be played from the keyboard of another division . For example , a coupler labelled " Swell to Great " allows the stops drawn in the Swell division to be played on the Great manual . This coupler is a unison coupler , because it causes the pipes of the Swell division to sound at the same pitch as the keys played on the Great manual . Coupling allows stops from different divisions to be combined to create various tonal effects . It also allows every stop of the organ to be played simultaneously from one manual . 
 Octave couplers , which add the pipes an octave above ( super @-@ octave ) or below ( sub @-@ octave ) each note that is played , may operate on one division only ( for example , the Swell super octave , which adds the octave above what is being played on the Swell to itself ) , or act as a coupler to another keyboard ( for example , the Swell super @-@ octave to Great , which adds to the Great manual the ranks of the Swell division an octave above what is being played ) . 
 In addition , larger organs may use unison off couplers , which prevent the stops pulled in a particular division from sounding at their normal pitch . These can be used in combination with octave couplers to create innovative aural effects , and can also be used to rearrange the order of the manuals to make specific pieces easier to play . 
 = = = = Enclosure and expression pedals = = = = 
 Enclosure refers to a system that allows for the control of volume without requiring the addition or subtraction of stops . In a two @-@ manual organ with Great and Swell divisions , the Swell will be enclosed . In larger organs , parts or all of the Choir and Solo divisions may also be enclosed . The pipes of an enclosed division are placed in a chamber generally called the swell box . At least one side of the box is constructed from horizontal or vertical palettes known as swell shades , which operate in a similar way to Venetian blinds ; their position can be adjusted from the console . When the swell shades are open , more sound is heard than when they are closed . Sometimes the shades are exposed , but they are often concealed behind a row of facade @-@ pipes or a grill . 
 The most common method of controlling the louvers is the balanced swell pedal . This device is usually placed above the centre of the pedalboard and is configured to rotate away from the organist from a near @-@ vertical position ( in which the shades are closed ) to a near @-@ horizontal position ( in which the shades are open ) . An organ may also have a similar @-@ looking crescendo pedal , found alongside any expression pedals . Pressing the crescendo pedal forward cumulatively activates the stops of the organ , starting with the softest and ending with the loudest ; pressing it backwards reverses this process . 
 = = = = Combination action = = = = 
 Organ stops can be combined in countless permutations , resulting in a great variety of sounds . A combination action can be used to switch instantly from one combination of stops ( called a registration ) to another . Combination actions feature small buttons called pistons that can be pressed by the organist , generally located beneath the keys of each manual ( thumb pistons ) or above the pedalboard ( toe pistons ) . The pistons may be divisional ( affecting only a single division ) or general ( affecting all the divisions ) , and are either preset by the organ builder or can be altered by the organist . Modern combination actions operate via computer memory , and can store several channels of registrations . 
 = = = Casing = = = 
 The pipes , action , and wind system are almost always contained in a case , the design of which also may incorporate the console . The case blends the organ 's sound and aids in projecting it into the room . The case often is designed to complement the building 's architectural style and it may contain ornamental carvings and other decorations . The visible portion of the case , called the façade , will most often contain pipes , which may be either sounding pipes or dummy pipes solely for decoration . The façade pipes may be plain , burnished , gilded , or painted and are usually referred to as ( en ) <unk> within the context of the French organ school . 
 Organ cases occasionally feature a few ranks of pipes protruding horizontally from the case in the manner of a row of trumpets . These are referred to as pipes en <unk> and are particularly common in organs of the Iberian peninsula and large 20th @-@ century instruments . 
 Many organs , particularly those built in the early 20th century , are contained in one or more rooms called organ chambers . Because sound does not project from a chamber into the room as clearly as from a freestanding organ case , <unk> organs may sound muffled and distant . For this reason , some modern builders , particularly those building instruments specializing in polyphony rather than Romantic compositions , avoid this unless the architecture of the room makes it necessary . 
 = = = Tuning and regulation = = = 
 The goal of tuning a pipe organ is to adjust the pitch of each pipe so that they all sound in tune with each other . How the pitch of each pipe is adjusted depends on the type and construction of that pipe . 
 Regulation adjusts the action so that all pipes sound correctly . If the regulation is wrongly set , the keys may be at different heights , some pipes may sound when the keys are not pressed , or pipes may not sound when a key is pressed . Tracker action , for example in the organ of Cradley Heath Baptist Church , includes adjustment nuts on the wire ends of the wooden trackers , which have the effect of changing the effective length of each tracker . 
 = = History and development = = 
 = = = Antiquity and Medieval = = = 
 The organ is one of the oldest instruments still used in European classical music that has commonly been credited as having derived from Greece . Its earliest predecessors were built in Ancient Greece in the 3rd century BC . The word organ is derived from the Latin <unk> , an instrument similar to a portative organ used in ancient Roman circus games . Organum is derived in turn from the Greek <unk> ( <unk> ) , a generic term for an instrument or a tool . 
 The Greek engineer <unk> of Alexandria is credited with inventing the organ in the 3rd century BC . He devised an instrument called the hydraulis , which delivered a wind supply maintained through water pressure to a set of pipes . The hydraulis was played in the arenas of the Roman Empire . The pumps and water regulators of the hydraulis were replaced by an inflated leather bag in the 2nd century AD , and true bellows began to appear in the 6th or 7th century AD . 
 The 9th century Persian geographer Ibn <unk> ( d . 911 ) ; in his lexicographical discussion of instruments cited the urghun ( organ ) as one of the typical instruments of the Byzantine Empire . It was often used in the Hippodrome . The first Western pipe organ with " great leaden pipes " was sent to the West by the Byzantine emperor Constantine V as a gift to Pepin the Short King of the Franks in 757 . Pepin 's son Charlemagne requested a similar organ for his chapel in Aachen in 812 , beginning its establishment in Western church music . 
 Portable organs ( the portative and the positive organ ) were invented in the Middle Ages . Towards the middle of the 13th century , the <unk> represented in the miniatures of illuminated manuscripts appear to have real keyboards with balanced keys , as in the Cantigas de Santa Maria . Its portability made the portative useful for the accompaniment of both sacred and secular music in a variety of settings . 
 Large organs such as the one installed in 1361 in Halberstadt , Germany , the first documented permanent organ installation , likely prompted Guillaume de <unk> to describe the organ as " the king of instruments " , a characterization still frequently applied . The Halberstadt organ was the first instrument to use a chromatic key layout across its three manuals and pedalboard , although the keys were wider than on modern instruments . It had twenty bellows operated by ten men , and the wind pressure was so high that the player had to use the full strength of his arm to hold down a key . 
 Until the mid @-@ 15th century , organs had no stop controls . Each manual controlled ranks at multiple pitches , known as the Blockwerk . Around 1450 , controls were designed that allowed the ranks of the Blockwerk to be played individually . These devices were the forerunners of modern stop actions . The higher @-@ pitched ranks of the Blockwerk remained grouped together under a single stop control ; these stops developed into mixtures . 
 = = = Renaissance and Baroque periods = = = 
 During the Renaissance and Baroque periods , the organ 's tonal colors became more varied . Organ builders fashioned stops that imitated various instruments , such as the <unk> and the viola da gamba . The Baroque period is often thought of as organ building 's " golden age , " as virtually every important refinement was brought to a culminating art . Builders such as Arp Schnitger , Jasper Johannsen , Zacharias Hildebrandt and Gottfried <unk> constructed instruments that were in themselves artistic masterpieces , displaying both exquisite craftsmanship and beautiful sound . These organs featured well @-@ balanced mechanical key actions , giving the organist precise control over the pipe speech . Schnitger 's organs featured particularly distinctive reed timbres and large Pedal and <unk> divisions . 
 Different national styles of organ building began to develop , often due to changing political climates . In the Netherlands , the organ became a large instrument with several divisions , doubled ranks , and mounted cornets . The organs of northern Germany also had more divisions , and independent pedal divisions became increasingly common . The divisions of the organ became visibly discernible from the case design . 20th @-@ century musicologists labelled this the <unk> . 
 In France , as in Italy , Spain and Portugal , organs were primarily designed to play <unk> verses rather than accompany congregational singing . The French Classical Organ , became remarkably consistent throughout France over the course of the Baroque era , more so than any other style of organ building in history , and standardized registrations developed . It was elaborately described by Dom <unk> de <unk> in his treatise L 'art du facteur d <unk> ( The Art of Organ Building ) . For example , in France , the organ at Notre @-@ Dame 's ( St. Etienne , Loire ) was built by Joseph and Claude @-@ Ignace <unk> in 1837 , at a time when their career was at its apex . 
 In England , many pipe organs were taken out of churches during the English Reformation of the 16th century and the Commonwealth period . Often these were relocated to private homes . At the Restoration , organ builders such as <unk> Harris and " Father " Bernard Smith brought new organ @-@ building ideas from continental Europe . English organs evolved from small one- or two @-@ manual instruments into three or more divisions disposed in the French manner with grander reeds and mixtures . The Echo division began to be enclosed in the early 18th century , and in 1712 Abraham Jordan claimed his " swelling organ " at St Magnus @-@ the @-@ Martyr to be a new invention . The swell box and the independent pedal division appeared in English organs beginning in the 18th century . 
 = = = Romantic period = = = 
 During the Romantic period , the organ became more symphonic , capable of creating a gradual crescendo . New technologies and the work of organ builders such as Eberhard Friedrich <unk> , Aristide Cavaillé @-@ Coll , and Henry Willis made it possible to build larger organs with more stops , more variation in sound and timbre , and more divisions . Enclosed divisions became common , and registration aids were developed to make it easier for the organist to manage the great number of stops . The desire for louder , grander organs required that the stops be voiced on a higher wind pressure than before . As a result , a greater force was required to overcome the wind pressure and depress the keys . To solve this problem , Cavaillé @-@ Coll configured the English " Barker lever " to assist in operating the key action . 
 Organ builders began to lean towards specifications with fewer mixtures and high @-@ pitched stops . They preferred to use more 8 ′ and 16 ′ stops in their specifications and wider pipe scales . These practices created a warmer , richer sound than was common in the 18th century . Organs began to be built in concert halls ( such as the organ at the Palais du <unk> in Paris ) , and composers such as Camille Saint @-@ Saëns and Gustav Mahler used the organ in their orchestral works . 
 = = = Modern development = = = 
 The development of pneumatic and electro @-@ pneumatic key actions in the late 19th century made it possible to locate the console independently of the pipes , greatly expanding the possibilities in organ design . Electric stop actions were also developed , which allowed sophisticated combination actions to be created . 
 In the mid @-@ 20th century , organ builders began to build historically inspired instruments modelled on Baroque organs . They returned to building mechanical key actions , voicing with lower wind pressures and thinner pipe scales , and designing specifications with more mixture stops . This became known as the Organ reform movement . 
 In the late 20th century , organ builders began to incorporate digital components into their key , stop , and combination actions . Besides making these mechanisms simpler and more reliable , this also makes it possible to record and play back an organist ’ s performance via the MIDI protocol . In addition , some organ builders have incorporated digital stops into their pipe organs . 
 The electronic organ developed throughout the 20th century . Some pipe organs were replaced by digital organs because of their lower purchase price , smaller physical size , and minimal maintenance requirements . In the early 1970s , Rodgers Instruments pioneered the hybrid organ , an electronic instrument that incorporates real pipes ; other builders such as Allen Organs and <unk> <unk> have since built hybrid organs . It should be noted that electronic " organs " may have a lower purchase price but have demonstrated a higher cost of ownership as components fail and parts become obsolete . Pipe organs , made of metal , wood , leather , and felt can be maintained for centuries . 
 = = Repertoire = = 
 The main development of organ repertoire has progressed along with that of the organ itself , leading to distinctive national styles of composition . Because organs are commonly found in churches and synagogues , the organ repertoire includes a large amount of sacred music , which is accompanimental ( choral anthems , congregational hymns , liturgical elements , etc . ) as well as solo in nature ( chorale preludes , hymn <unk> designed for <unk> use , etc . ) . The organ 's secular repertoire includes preludes , fugues , sonatas , organ symphonies , suites , and transcriptions of orchestral works . 
 Although most countries whose music falls into the Western tradition have contributed to the organ repertoire , France and Germany in particular have produced exceptionally large amounts of organ music . There is also an extensive repertoire from the Netherlands , England , and the United States . 
 Before the Baroque era , keyboard music generally was not written for one instrument or another , but rather was written to be played on any keyboard instrument . For this reason , much of the organ 's repertoire through the Renaissance period is the same as that of the harpsichord . Pre @-@ Renaissance keyboard music is found in compiled manuscripts that may include compositions from a variety of regions . The oldest of these sources is the Robertsbridge Codex , dating from about 1360 . The <unk> <unk> , which dates from about 1470 and was compiled in Germany , includes <unk> of vocal music by the English composer John <unk> . The earliest Italian organ music is found in the Faenza Codex , dating from 1420 . 
 In the Renaissance period , Dutch composers such as Jan <unk> <unk> composed both fantasias and psalm settings . <unk> in particular developed a rich collection of keyboard figuration that influenced subsequent composers . The Italian composer Claudio <unk> wrote in the typical Italian genres of the toccata , the <unk> , and the <unk> . In Spain , the works of Antonio de <unk> began the most prolific period of Spanish organ composition , which culminated with Juan <unk> . 
 Early Baroque organ music in Germany was highly contrapuntal . Sacred organ music was based on chorales : composers such as Samuel Scheidt and Heinrich <unk> wrote chorale preludes , chorale fantasias , and chorale motets . Towards the end of the Baroque era , the chorale prelude and the <unk> became mixed , forming the chorale <unk> . This genre was developed by Georg Böhm , Johann Pachelbel , and Dieterich Buxtehude . The primary type of free @-@ form piece in this period was the <unk> , as exemplified in the works of Matthias <unk> , Nicolaus <unk> , Böhm , and Buxtehude . The organ music of Johann Sebastian Bach fused characteristics of every national tradition and historical style in his large @-@ scale preludes and fugues and chorale @-@ based works . Towards the end of the Baroque era , George Frideric Handel composed the first organ concertos . 
 In France , organ music developed during the Baroque era through the music of Jean <unk> , François Couperin , and Nicolas de <unk> . Because the French organ of the 17th and early 18th centuries was very standardized , a conventional set of registrations developed for its repertoire . The music of French composers ( and Italian composers such as Girolamo Frescobaldi ) was written for use during the Mass . Very little secular organ music was composed in France and Italy during the Baroque period ; the written repertoire is almost exclusively intended for liturgical use . In England , composers such as John Blow and John Stanley wrote multi @-@ sectional free works for liturgical use called voluntaries through the 19th century . 
 Organ music was seldom written in the Classical era , as composers preferred the piano with its ability to create dynamics . In Germany , the six sonatas op . 65 of Felix Mendelssohn ( published 1845 ) marked the beginning of a renewed interest in composing for the organ . Inspired by the newly built Cavaillé @-@ Coll organs , the French organist @-@ composers César Franck , Alexandre <unk> and Charles @-@ Marie Widor led organ music into the symphonic realm . The development of symphonic organ music continued with Louis Vierne and Charles <unk> . Widor and Vierne wrote large @-@ scale , multi @-@ movement works called organ symphonies that exploited the full possibilities of the symphonic organ . Max Reger and Sigfrid <unk> @-@ Elert 's symphonic works made use of the abilities of the large Romantic organs being built in Germany at the time . 
 In the 19th and 20th centuries , organ builders began to build instruments in concert halls and other large secular venues , allowing the organ to be used as part of an orchestra , as in Saint @-@ Saëns ' Symphony No. 3 . Frequently the organ is given a <unk> part , such as in Joseph <unk> 's Symphonie Concertante for Organ & Orchestra , Francis Poulenc 's Concerto for Organ , Strings and <unk> , and Frigyes <unk> ' Organ Concerto . 
 Other composers who have used the organ prominently in orchestral music include Gustav Holst , Richard Strauss , Ottorino Respighi , Gustav Mahler , Anton Bruckner , and Ralph Vaughan Williams . Because these concert hall instruments could approximate the sounds of symphony orchestras , transcriptions of orchestral works found a place in the organ repertoire . As silent films became popular , theatre organs were installed in theatres to provide accompaniment for the films . 
 In the 20th @-@ century symphonic repertoire , both sacred and secular , continued to progress through the music of Marcel Dupré , Maurice <unk> , and Herbert Howells . Other composers , such as Olivier Messiaen , György Ligeti , Jehan Alain , Jean Langlais , Gerd Zacher , and Petr Eben , wrote post @-@ tonal organ music . Messiaen 's music in particular redefined many of the traditional notions of organ registration and technique . 
 = = = Online radio stations = = = 
 <unk> An online station of classical organ music . 
 Positively Baroque An online station dedicated to organ music of the Baroque period . 
 At the Organ An online station providing weekly programming about the classical organ . 
 <unk> A weekly 2 @-@ hour public radio program of organ music . 
 Sacred Classics , a radio program of organ and choral music 
 = = = Databases = = = 
 International Organ Foundation , an online pipe organ database with specifications of more than 8000 organs in over 80 countries 
 Organ Historical Society Pipe Organ Database 
 The Top 20 - The World 's Largest Pipe Organs 
 National Pipe Organ Register , featuring history and specifications of 28 @,@ 000 pipe organs in the United Kingdom 
 Die <unk> , photos and specifications of some of the world 's most interesting organs ( subscription required for some content ) 
 Organ Database , <unk> , pictures and information about some 33 @,@ 500 pipe organs around the world 
 The New York City Organ Project documents organs present and past in the five boroughs of New York City 
 = = = Resources for pipe organ video recordings = = = 
 " <unk> to the King of Instruments " – video series with Carol Williams ( organist ) about the large & small , famous & unique pipe organs of the world . American Video & Audio Production Company 
 " The Joy of Music " – television series with Diane Bish about large pipe organs in USA and in Europe . 
 = Barend Joseph Stokvis = 
 Barend Joseph Stokvis ( Dutch pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> <unk> ] ; 16 August 1834 – 28 September 1902 ) was a physician and professor of physiology and pharmacology at the University of Amsterdam . He is mainly remembered for his description of acute porphyria in 1889 . As a researcher in chemical pathology he made contributions to the understanding of a number of diseases , such as diabetes . He was also considered an expert in tropical medicine and a celebrated medical educator . He authored an influential pharmacology textbook . Stokvis was one of a number of prominent 19th century Jewish physicians in the Netherlands . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Stokvis was born to Rachel Wittering and Joseph Barend Stokvis , Jr . , a Jewish physician and obstetrician in Amsterdam . He studied medicine in Amsterdam and at the University of Utrecht under Franciscus <unk> and Jacobus Schroeder van der <unk> , obtaining a doctorate on a dissertation on hepatic glucose production in diabetes in 1856 . His thesis appeared shortly after the publication of related work by the French physiologist Claude Bernard . Stokvis may also have been influenced by the chemist Gerardus Mulder in Amsterdam . Subsequently he travelled to Paris and Vienna ( and possibly Prague ) , before establishing himself in medical practice in Amsterdam . He continued his medical research under the physiologists Adriaan <unk> , Wilhelm Kühne and Thomas Place . In 1867 , the Brussels Academy awarded a gold medal to Stokvis for an essay on the development of albuminuria , a kidney disorder in which the protein albumin can be detected in the urine . 
 = = Scientific career = = 
 In 1874 he was appointed as lecturer in medicine at the Athenaeum Illustre in medicine , pathology and pharmacodynamics , and became a professor when the Athenaeum received university status and became the Municipal University of Amsterdam . He served as rector magnificus ( dean ) of the university in the 1880s . 
 His prolific output , mainly in chemical pathology , included research into the metabolism of glycogen , uric acid , and urea ; studies into an epidemic of cholera in Amsterdam ; the toxicity of Atropa belladonna ( deadly nightshade ) ; various pigmented substances in the blood ( including porphyrins ) ; the nature of the heart sounds ; and several contributions in tropical medicine , in which he was considered an expert . He also described the blood disorder <unk> . 
 In 1889 , he reported on a case of acute illness provoked by the newly introduced hypnotic drug <unk> , also known as <unk> . Stokvis observed the unusual dark red urine , discovered that it contained porphyrins , and coined the name " porphyria " for the condition . The patient 's underlying condition was probably acute intermittent porphyria , which can be provoked by medicines . Similar reports by others followed shortly after , and it was soon found that other drugs could also induce porphyria attacks . The Swedish chemist Olof <unk> further analysed red compound found in the urine of the patients with <unk> @-@ related porphyria attacks , labeling it " <unk> " . <unk> were first identified by the German chemist Felix Hoppe @-@ Seyler in 1871 , and derive their named from the Greek for purple — <unk> — after to their purple color . 
 Stokvis ' most important work was judged by his contemporaries to be his three @-@ volume " <unk> over <unk> " ( " Speeches on Pharmacology " , soon translated into the French " <unk> de <unk> " ) , which appeared shortly before his death . 
 = = Other activities = = 
 Stokvis was close to the influential German pathologist Rudolf Virchow . In 1879 Stokvis was elected a member of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences , and he served as vice @-@ president of the Academy in 1896 . He was awarded received an honorary Doctorate of Laws by the University of Edinburgh in 1884 . Stokvis also chaired the 1883 International Colonial Medicine Congress in Amsterdam . He was one of the founders ( in 1896 ) of Janus , an international journal for the history of medicine . He is regarded as an illustrious member of Holland 's medical dynasty , and as a pioneer in the fields of chemical physiology and chemotherapy . Together with Samuel Siegmund Rosenstein , professor of medicine in Leiden , he was a supporter of Aletta Jacobs , the first woman to qualify as a doctor in the Netherlands . 
 In addition to his medical work , Stokvis also succeeded his father as president of the charitable Jewish Poor Board ( Nederlandsch <unk> <unk> ) , was a member @-@ founder of the Dutch Jewish Institute for the Insane , and a board member of the Jewish Institute for the Aged and the Amsterdam Jewish Hospital ( Centraal <unk> <unk> ) . He was also a patron of the arts . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In 1865 he married Julia Elisabeth , the sister of his close friend , the banker and philanthropist A.C. Wertheim . They had two children . He was an ardent swimmer , and wrote poetry under several pseudonyms . He spoke several languages . He died in Amsterdam shortly after returning from a holiday in Ireland , from what was thought to be myocarditis . 
 = Abe Mickal = 
 Ibrahim Khalil " Abe " Mickal ( c . 1912 / 1913 – September 20 , 2001 ) was a Lebanese American college football player and a doctor . Mickal played as a running back for the LSU Tigers of Louisiana State University , where he was notable for his passing skills and play @-@ making ability . He was also the team 's primary punter and placekicker . A three @-@ time All @-@ Southeastern Conference selection , Mickal led LSU to an undefeated season in 1933 , and a conference championship and Sugar Bowl in 1935 . In 1936 , Mickal played quarterback for a college all @-@ star team that became the first team of college players to defeat a National Football League ( NFL ) team . Although selected in the 1936 NFL Draft , he did not play professionally . Mickal was a charter member of the LSU Athletic Hall of Fame in 1937 and was inducted into the College Football Hall of Fame in 1967 . 
 In addition to football , Mickal was a cadet in LSU 's Reserve Officers ' Training Corps ( ROTC ) , was a member of the pre @-@ med club and debate team , and as a senior was president of the university 's student body . While a student at LSU , Mickal declined a seat in the Louisiana State Senate offered to him by U.S. Senator and noted LSU supporter , Huey P. Long . He earned his medical degree in 1940 , and after serving in World War II he began a lifelong career in obstetrics and gynecology . He served as head professor of the LSU Medical School OB / GYN department for over twenty years . Actively involved in various university affairs during and after his time as a student , Mickal was named LSU 's " Alumnus of the Year " in 1980 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Ibrahim Khalil Mickal was born in Syria , in an area that is today part of Lebanon , and immigrated with his family to the United States in 1920 and arrived on Ellis Island . He settled in McComb , Mississippi and attended McComb High School , where he played football , baseball , and basketball and ran track . His father Kalil , who ran a local general store , was initially against his son playing sports . " It was an old Lebanese custom , " Mickal later explained , " that the eldest son take over the business . My father wasn 't aware that I was playing . " His father was eventually persuaded by the townspeople to let his son play . During his senior year he was recruited by LSU and Notre Dame to play football , and ultimately chose the Tigers after the death of Notre Dame head coach Knute Rockne . 
 = = College = = 
 Mickal was an all @-@ around player ; a triple @-@ threat running back who also played on defense . He was regarded as an excellent deep @-@ ball passer ; in the words of LSU coach Lawrence " Biff " Jones : " Mickal is a greater passer than Red Cagle — he 's the greatest I ever saw . " Jones was Cagle 's coach while at Army . One sportswriter referred to Mickal as " the Dizzy Dean of the nation 's forward passers . " He was also known for his play @-@ making ability during crucial moments of games , and LSU compiled a win – loss record of 23 – 4 – 5 in the three seasons Mickal played for the team . 
 = = = 1933 = = = 
 Mickal showed his versatility in the first game of the 1933 season against Rice , tossing a 40 @-@ yard pass on the first play from scrimmage to end Pete Burge and booting punts of 76 and 61 yards . In week four against Arkansas Mickal completed touchdown passes of 48 and 57 yards and ran for a 15 @-@ yard touchdown , as he was responsible for every score in the 20 – 0 win over the eventual Southwest Conference champion Razorbacks . He scored the only touchdown of LSU 's final game of the season , against Tennessee , with a goal line dive into the end zone . He also kicked the extra point for the 7 – 0 victory , and completed the season having successfully made every extra point he attempted . The Tigers finished undefeated with three ties in their first season as members of the Southeastern Conference ( SEC ) . After the season , Mickal was named to the United Press ( UP ) All @-@ SEC second team as a halfback . 
 = = = 1934 = = = 
 One of Mickal 's most notable games came in 1934 against the Mustangs of Southern Methodist . He threw two touchdown passes , the first one a 32 @-@ yarder to tie the game at 7 – 7 in the second quarter . Late in the fourth quarter and down by a touchdown , Mickal dropped back at his own 35 @-@ yard line and hurled a pass down the middle of the field . It was caught in stride at the Mustang 20 @-@ yard line by <unk> Tinsley , who ran it into the end zone to tie the game at 14 – 14 , which was the final score . In week four against 13th @-@ ranked Arkansas , Mickal completed five of seven passes for 117 yards , which included a 52 @-@ yard bomb in the third quarter for the first score of the 16 – 0 win . He also averaged over 50 yards per punt on nine punts . The next week he threw a touchdown pass , kicked a field goal , and averaged over 40 yards per punt in a 29 – 0 win over previously undefeated Vanderbilt . Mickal was named a first @-@ team All @-@ SEC selection as a fullback by the Associated Press ( AP ) and as a halfback by the UP . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 During the season , Mickal was acclaimed an honorary Louisiana State Senator by U.S. Senator Huey P. Long , whom he had befriended , at a burlesque campus meeting . Long was a noted LSU supporter and was highly involved in operations of the football program . When it came time for his ceremonial " seating " Mickal refused to appear for the ceremony , despite the urging of Long . After Long reasoned with the senate and spectators that Mickal " had to study , " Mickal was granted a five @-@ day leave of absence by senator Harvey <unk> to " do his work at school and go forward with his preparation for his football duties . " Mickal remained silent on the matter , however ; he did not give a reason for his refusal of the honor . The day he was to be inducted , Mickal said in a telegram to Long that if he accepted the senatorship he would introduce a joint resolution that made it " unlawful " for any Tulane player to cross the LSU goal line in 1934 . 
 = = = 1935 = = = 
 Mickal had a slow start to 1935 while he recovered from a broken ankle he suffered over the summer . In week three , he threw two touchdown passes against Manhattan College , and a game @-@ winning touchdown pass against Vanderbilt two weeks later . In the regular season finale , Mickal was responsible for three touchdowns in a 41 – 0 win over rival Tulane . LSU played TCU at the end of the season in the Sugar Bowl , in a game that was a highly anticipated match @-@ up between Mickal and the Horned Frogs ' Sammy Baugh . The offenses were unable to do much , however , as rain throughout the day had muddied the field . TCU won the game , 3 – 2 . LSU finished the season undefeated in conference play for its first SEC championship . Mickal was named to the AP All @-@ SEC second @-@ team as a fullback after the season , and earned second @-@ team All @-@ America honors from Liberty magazine . 
 = = = 1936 All @-@ Stars vs. Bears = = = 
 In September 1936 , Mickal played quarterback for the Centennial College All @-@ Stars , a team composed of college players from southern schools to play against the National Football League 's Chicago Bears at Cotton Bowl stadium . He scored the All @-@ Stars ' only touchdown with a dive into the end zone from the one @-@ foot line in the third quarter . The Bears scored their only touchdown later that quarter on a 5 @-@ yard run by Bronko Nagurski . Mickal had a chance to tackle Nagurski before the goal line . " A lot of things flashed through my mind , " explained Mickal . " There was nothing between him and the goal line but me . I thought about making the perfect tackle and reading about being the All @-@ Stars ' hero . Then I thought about Nagurski 's size . I thought about the Nagurski legend . I thought about going to med school . I thought about possible brain damage . " He decided to step aside and let Nagurski score . The extra point , however , was blocked by Bob Reynolds , and the game ended 7 – 6 in favor of the All @-@ Stars . It was the first time a team of college players defeated a professional American football team . 
 = = = Extracurricular = = = 
 Mickal was actively involved in the university 's Reserve Officers ' Training Corps . He received the Outstanding Cadet Award as a freshman and was regimental sergeant major as a junior . As a senior he attained the rank of Cadet Colonel and earned the Kemper Williams Sabre as the school 's outstanding cadet . Additionally , he was a member of the pre @-@ med club and debate team , and in 1936 was president of the school 's Interfraternity Council , college of arts and sciences , and student body . Mickal was a member of the Theta Kappa Nu fraternity . 
 = = Later life = = 
 = = = Medical career = = = 
 Mickal was selected in the sixth round of the 1936 NFL Draft by the Detroit Lions . However , he did not play in the NFL . He instead chose to complete his medical degree at the Louisiana State University School of Medicine , where he graduated from in 1940 . He served as a major in the U.S. Army Medical Corps during World War II . After the war , he worked in obstetrics and gynecology at New Orleans Charity Hospital from 1946 to 1949 , shortly after which he was named to the LSU medical faculty . In 1959 he became the head professor of the LSU Medical School , a position he served in until his retirement in 1980 . He helped found the Society of <unk> Oncology and the Infectious Disease Society for Obstetrics and Gynecology , and served as president of the Society of <unk> Surgeons from 1981 to 1982 . From 1985 until his death in 2001 he was vice president for medical affairs at Kenner Regional Medical Center . 
 = = = Honors = = = 
 Mickal was a charter member of the LSU Athletic Hall of Fame in 1937 . In 1967 , the National Football Foundation named Mickal to the College Football Hall of Fame . He was inducted into the Louisiana Sports Hall of Fame in 1969 and the Mississippi Sports Hall of Fame in 1985 . Mickal was named LSU 's " Alumnus of the Year " in 1980 and its " Medical Alumnus of the Year " in 1985 . " It 's been a beautiful marriage — and I 've had all the better of it , " said Mickal of his involvement with the university . The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists gave Mickal its Distinguished Service Award in 1991 . 
 = Ernest Hemingway = 
 Ernest Miller Hemingway ( July 21 , 1899 – July 2 , 1961 ) was an American novelist , short story writer , and journalist . His economical and understated style had a strong influence on 20th @-@ century fiction , while his life of adventure and his public image influenced later generations . Hemingway produced most of his work between the mid @-@ 1920s and the mid @-@ 1950s , and won the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1954 . He published seven novels , six short story collections , and two non @-@ fiction works . Additional works , including three novels , four short story collections , and three non @-@ fiction works , were published posthumously . Many of his works are considered classics of American literature . 
 Hemingway was raised in Oak Park , Illinois . After high school , he reported for a few months for The Kansas City Star , before leaving for the Italian front to enlist with the World War I ambulance drivers . In 1918 , he was seriously wounded and returned home . His wartime experiences formed the basis for his novel A Farewell to Arms ( 1929 ) . 
 In 1921 , he married Hadley Richardson , the first of his four wives . The couple moved to Paris , where he worked as a foreign correspondent and fell under the influence of the modernist writers and artists of the 1920s " Lost Generation " expatriate community . He published his first novel , The Sun Also Rises , in 1926 . After his 1927 divorce from Hadley Richardson , Hemingway married Pauline Pfeiffer ; they divorced after he returned from the Spanish Civil War where he had been a journalist , and after which he wrote For Whom the Bell Tolls ( 1940 ) . Martha Gellhorn became his third wife in 1940 ; they separated when he met Mary Welsh in London during World War II . He was present at the Normandy landings and the liberation of Paris . 
 Shortly after the publication of The Old Man and the Sea ( 1952 ) , Hemingway went on safari to Africa , where he was almost killed in two successive plane crashes that left him in pain or ill health for much of his remaining life . Hemingway maintained permanent residences in Key West , Florida ( 1930s ) and Cuba ( 1940s and 1950s ) , and in 1959 , he bought a house in Ketchum , Idaho , where he committed suicide in the summer of 1961 . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Ernest Miller Hemingway was born on July 21 , 1899 , in Oak Park , Illinois , a suburb of Chicago . His father , Clarence Edmonds Hemingway , was a physician , and his mother , Grace Hall @-@ Hemingway , was a musician . Both were well @-@ educated and well @-@ respected in the conservative community of Oak Park , a community about which resident Frank Lloyd Wright said , " So many churches for so many good people to go to " . For a short period after their marriage , Clarence and Grace Hemingway lived with Grace 's father , Ernest Hall , who eventually became their first son 's namesake . Later Ernest Hemingway would say that he disliked his name , which he " associated with the naive , even foolish hero of Oscar Wilde 's play The Importance of Being Earnest " . The family eventually moved into a seven @-@ bedroom home in a respectable neighborhood with a music studio for Grace and a medical office for Clarence . 
 Hemingway 's mother frequently performed in concerts around the village . As an adult , Hemingway professed to hate his mother , although biographer Michael S. Reynolds points out that Hemingway mirrored her energy and enthusiasm . Her insistence that he learn to play the cello became a " source of conflict " , but he later admitted the music lessons were useful to his writing , as is evident in the " contrapuntal structure " of For Whom the Bell Tolls . The family owned a summer home called Windemere on Walloon Lake , near Petoskey , Michigan , where as a four @-@ year @-@ old he learned from his father to hunt , fish , and camp in the woods and lakes of Northern Michigan . His early experiences in nature instilled a passion for outdoor adventure and living in remote or isolated areas . 
 From 1913 until 1917 , Hemingway attended Oak Park and River Forest High School where he took part in a number of sports , namely boxing , track and field , water polo , and football . He excelled in English classes and performed in the school orchestra with his sister Marcelline for two years . In his junior year , he took a journalism class , taught by Fannie Biggs , which was structured " as though the classroom were a newspaper office " . The better writers in class submitted pieces to The Trapeze , the school newspaper . Hemingway and Marcelline both had pieces submitted to The Trapeze ; Hemingway 's first piece , published in January 1916 , was about a local performance by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra . He continued to contribute to and to edit the Trapeze and the Tabula ( the school 's newspaper and yearbook ) , for which he imitated the language of sportswriters , and used the pen name Ring Lardner , Jr . — a nod to Ring Lardner of the Chicago Tribune whose byline was " Line O <unk> " . Like Mark Twain , Stephen Crane , Theodore Dreiser and Sinclair Lewis , Hemingway was a journalist before becoming a novelist ; after leaving high school he went to work for The Kansas City Star as a cub reporter . Although he stayed there for only six months , he relied on the Star 's style guide as a foundation for his writing : " Use short sentences . Use short first paragraphs . Use vigorous English . Be positive , not negative . " 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 Early in 1918 , Hemingway responded to a Red Cross recruitment effort in Kansas City and signed on to become an ambulance driver in Italy . He left New York in May and arrived in Paris as the city was under bombardment from German artillery . By June , he was at the Italian Front . It was probably around this time that he first met John Dos Passos , with whom he had a rocky relationship for decades . On his first day in Milan , he was sent to the scene of a munitions factory explosion , where rescuers retrieved the shredded remains of female workers . He described the incident in his non @-@ fiction book Death in the Afternoon : " I remember that after we searched quite thoroughly for the complete dead we collected fragments " . A few days later , he was stationed at Fossalta di Piave . 
 On July 8 , he was seriously wounded by mortar fire , having just returned from the canteen bringing chocolate and cigarettes for the men at the front line . Despite his wounds , Hemingway assisted Italian soldiers to safety , for which he received the Italian Silver Medal of Bravery . Still only 18 , Hemingway said of the incident : " When you go to war as a boy you have a great illusion of immortality . Other people get killed ; not you ... Then when you are badly wounded the first time you lose that illusion and you know it can happen to you . " He sustained severe shrapnel wounds to both legs , underwent an immediate operation at a distribution center , and spent five days at a field hospital before he was transferred for recuperation to the Red Cross hospital in Milan . He spent six months at the hospital , where he met and formed a strong friendship with " Chink " Dorman @-@ Smith that lasted for decades and shared a room with future American foreign service officer , ambassador , and author Henry Serrano Villard . 
 While recuperating , he fell in love , for the first time , with Agnes von Kurowsky , a Red Cross nurse seven years his senior . By the time of his release and return to the United States in January 1919 , Agnes and Hemingway had decided to marry within a few months in America . However , in March , she wrote that she had become engaged to an Italian officer . Biographer Jeffrey Meyers states in his book Hemingway : A Biography that Hemingway was devastated by Agnes ' rejection , and in future relationships , he followed a pattern of abandoning a wife before she abandoned him . 
 = = = Toronto and Chicago = = = 
 Hemingway returned home early in 1919 to a time of readjustment . Not yet 20 years old , he had gained from the war a maturity that was at odds with living at home without a job and with the need for recuperation . As Reynolds explains , " Hemingway could not really tell his parents what he thought when he saw his bloody knee . He could not say how scared he was in another country with surgeons who could not tell him in English if his leg was coming off or not . " In September , he took a fishing and camping trip with high school friends to the back @-@ country of Michigan 's Upper Peninsula . The trip became the inspiration for his short story " Big Two @-@ Hearted River " , in which the semi @-@ autobiographical character Nick Adams takes to the country to find solitude after returning from war . A family friend offered him a job in Toronto , and with nothing else to do , he accepted . Late that year he began as a freelancer , staff writer , and foreign correspondent for the Toronto Star Weekly . He returned to Michigan the following June and then moved to Chicago in September 1920 to live with friends , while still filing stories for the Toronto Star . 
 In Chicago , he worked as an associate editor of the monthly journal Cooperative Commonwealth , where he met novelist Sherwood Anderson . When St. Louis native Hadley Richardson came to Chicago to visit the sister of Hemingway 's roommate , he became infatuated and later claimed , " I knew she was the girl I was going to marry " . Hadley was red @-@ haired , with a " nurturing instinct " , and eight years older than Hemingway . Despite being older than Hemingway , Hadley , who had grown up with an overprotective mother , seemed less mature than usual for a young woman her age . Bernice <unk> , author of The Hemingway Women , claims Hadley was " evocative " of Agnes , but that Hadley had a childishness that Agnes lacked . The two corresponded for a few months and then decided to marry and travel to Europe . They wanted to visit Rome , but Sherwood Anderson convinced them to visit Paris instead , writing letters of introduction for the young couple . They were married on September 3 , 1921 ; two months later , Hemingway was hired as foreign correspondent for the Toronto Star , and the couple left for Paris . Of Hemingway 's marriage to Hadley , Meyers claims : " With Hadley , Hemingway achieved everything he had hoped for with Agnes : the love of a beautiful woman , a comfortable income , a life in Europe . " 
 = = = Paris = = = 
 Carlos Baker , Hemingway 's first biographer , believes that while Anderson suggested Paris because " the monetary exchange rate " made it an inexpensive place to live , more importantly it was where " the most interesting people in the world " lived . In Paris , Hemingway met writers such as Gertrude Stein , James Joyce , and Ezra Pound who " could help a young writer up the rungs of a career " . The Hemingway of the early Paris years was a " tall , handsome , muscular , broad @-@ shouldered , brown @-@ eyed , rosy @-@ cheeked , square @-@ jawed , soft @-@ voiced young man . " He and Hadley lived in a small walk @-@ up at 74 rue du Cardinal Lemoine in the Latin Quarter , and he worked in a rented room in a nearby building . Stein , who was the bastion of modernism in Paris , became Hemingway 's mentor and godmother to his son Jack ; she introduced him to the expatriate artists and writers of the Montparnasse Quarter , whom she referred to as the " Lost Generation " — a term Hemingway popularized with the publication of The Sun Also Rises . A regular at Stein 's salon , Hemingway met influential painters such as Pablo Picasso , Joan Miró , and Juan Gris . He eventually withdrew from Stein 's influence and their relationship deteriorated into a literary quarrel that spanned decades . The American poet Ezra Pound met Hemingway by chance at Sylvia Beach 's bookshop Shakespeare and Company in 1922 . The two toured Italy in 1923 and lived on the same street in 1924 . They forged a strong friendship , and in Hemingway , Pound recognized and fostered a young talent . Pound introduced Hemingway to the Irish writer James Joyce , with whom Hemingway frequently embarked on " alcoholic sprees " . 
 During his first 20 months in Paris , Hemingway filed 88 stories for the Toronto Star newspaper . He covered the Greco @-@ Turkish War , where he witnessed the burning of Smyrna , and wrote travel pieces such as " Tuna Fishing in Spain " and " Trout Fishing All Across Europe : Spain Has the Best , Then Germany " . Hemingway was devastated on learning that Hadley had lost a suitcase filled with his manuscripts at the Gare de Lyon as she was traveling to Geneva to meet him in December 1922 . The following September , the couple returned to Toronto , where their son John Hadley Nicanor was born on October 10 , 1923 . During their absence , Hemingway 's first book , Three Stories and Ten Poems , was published . Two of the stories it contained were all that remained after the loss of the suitcase , and the third had been written the previous spring in Italy . Within months a second volume , in our time ( without capitals ) , was published . The small volume included six vignettes and a dozen stories Hemingway had written the previous summer during his first visit to Spain , where he discovered the thrill of the corrida . He missed Paris , considered Toronto boring , and wanted to return to the life of a writer , rather than live the life of a journalist . 
 Hemingway , Hadley and their son ( nicknamed Bumby ) returned to Paris in January 1924 and moved into a new apartment on the rue Notre @-@ Dame des Champs . Hemingway helped Ford Madox Ford edit the The Transatlantic Review , which published works by Pound , John Dos Passos , Baroness Elsa von Freytag @-@ Loringhoven , and Stein , as well as some of Hemingway 's own early stories such as " Indian Camp " . When In Our Time ( with capital letters ) was published in 1925 , the dust jacket bore comments from Ford . " Indian Camp " received considerable praise ; Ford saw it as an important early story by a young writer , and critics in the United States praised Hemingway for reinvigorating the short story genre with his crisp style and use of declarative sentences . Six months earlier , Hemingway had met F. Scott Fitzgerald , and the pair formed a friendship of " admiration and hostility " . Fitzgerald had published The Great Gatsby the same year : Hemingway read it , liked it , and decided his next work had to be a novel . 
 With his wife Hadley , Hemingway first visited the Festival of San Fermín in Pamplona , Spain , in 1923 , where he became fascinated by bullfighting . It is at this time that he began to be referred to as " Papa . " The Hemingways returned to Pamplona in 1924 and a third time in June 1925 ; that year they brought with them a group of American and British expatriates : Hemingway 's Michigan boyhood friend Bill Smith , Donald Ogden Stewart , Lady Duff Twysden ( recently divorced ) , her lover Pat Guthrie , and Harold Loeb . A few days after the fiesta ended , on his birthday ( July 21 ) , he began to write the draft of what would become The Sun Also Rises , finishing eight weeks later . A few months later , in December 1925 , the Hemingways left to spend the winter in Schruns , Austria , where Hemingway began revising the manuscript extensively . Pauline Pfeiffer joined them in January and against Hadley 's advice , urged Hemingway to sign a contract with Scribner 's . He left Austria for a quick trip to New York to meet with the publishers , and on his return , during a stop in Paris , began an affair with Pfeiffer , before returning to Schruns to finish the revisions in March . The manuscript arrived in New York in April ; he corrected the final proof in Paris in August 1926 , and Scribner 's published the novel in October . 
 The Sun Also Rises epitomized the post @-@ war expatriate generation , received good reviews , and is " recognized as Hemingway 's greatest work " . Hemingway himself later wrote to his editor Max Perkins that the " point of the book " was not so much about a generation being lost , but that " the earth abideth forever " ; he believed the characters in The Sun Also Rises may have been " battered " but were not lost . 
 Hemingway 's marriage to Hadley deteriorated as he was working on The Sun Also Rises . In the spring of 1926 , Hadley became aware of his affair with Pfeiffer , who came to Pamplona with them that July . On their return to Paris , Hadley asked for a separation ; in November she formally requested a divorce . They split their possessions while Hadley accepted Hemingway 's offer of the proceeds from The Sun Also Rises . The couple were divorced in January 1927 , and Hemingway married Pfeiffer in May . 
 Pfeiffer , who was from a wealthy Catholic Arkansas family , had moved to Paris to work for Vogue magazine . Before their marriage , Hemingway converted to Catholicism . They honeymooned in Le Grau @-@ du @-@ Roi , where he contracted anthrax , and he planned his next collection of short stories , Men Without Women , which was published in October 1927 , and included his boxing story " Fifty Grand " . Cosmopolitan magazine editor @-@ in @-@ chief Ray Long praised " Fifty Grand " , calling it , " one of the best short stories that ever came to my hands ... the best prize @-@ fight story I ever read ... a remarkable piece of realism . " 
 By the end of the year Pauline , who was pregnant , wanted to move back to America . John Dos Passos recommended Key West , and they left Paris in March 1928 . That spring , Hemingway suffered a severe injury in their Paris bathroom , when he pulled a skylight down on his head thinking he was pulling on a toilet chain . This left him with a prominent forehead scar , which he carried for the rest of his life . When Hemingway was asked about the scar , he was reluctant to answer . After his departure from Paris , Hemingway " never again lived in a big city " . 
 = = = Key West and the Caribbean = = = 
 In the late spring , Hemingway and Pauline traveled to Kansas City , where their son Patrick was born on June 28 , 1928 . Pauline had a difficult delivery , which Hemingway fictionalized in A Farewell to Arms . After Patrick 's birth , Pauline and Hemingway traveled to Wyoming , Massachusetts , and New York . In the winter , he was in New York with Bumby , about to board a train to Florida , when he received a cable telling him that his father had committed suicide . Hemingway was devastated , having earlier written his father telling him not to worry about financial difficulties ; the letter arrived minutes after the suicide . He realized how Hadley must have felt after her own father 's suicide in 1903 , and he commented , " I 'll probably go the same way . " 
 Upon his return to Key West in December , Hemingway worked on the draft of A Farewell to Arms before leaving for France in January . He had finished it in August but delayed the revision . The serialization in Scribner 's Magazine was scheduled to begin in May , but as late as April , Hemingway was still working on the ending , which he may have rewritten as many as seventeen times . The completed novel was published on September 27 . Biographer James Mellow believes A Farewell to Arms established Hemingway 's stature as a major American writer and displayed a level of complexity not apparent in The Sun Also Rises . In Spain during the summer of 1929 , Hemingway researched his next work , Death in the Afternoon . He wanted to write a comprehensive treatise on bullfighting , explaining the <unk> and <unk> complete with glossaries and appendices , because he believed bullfighting was " of great tragic interest , being literally of life and death . " 
 During the early 1930s , Hemingway spent his winters in Key West and summers in Wyoming , where he found " the most beautiful country he had seen in the American West " and hunted deer , elk , and grizzly bear . He was joined there by Dos Passos and in November 1930 , after bringing Dos Passos to the train station in Billings , Montana , Hemingway broke his arm in a car accident . The surgeon tended the compound spiral fracture and bound the bone with kangaroo tendon . Hemingway was hospitalized for seven weeks , with Pauline tending to him ; the nerves in his writing hand took as long as a year to heal , during which time he suffered intense pain . 
 His third son , Gregory Hancock Hemingway , was born a year later on November 12 , 1931 , in Kansas City . Pauline 's uncle bought the couple a house in Key West with a carriage house , the second floor of which was converted into a writing studio . Its location across the street from the lighthouse made it easy for Hemingway to find after a long night of drinking . While in Key West , Hemingway frequented the local bar Sloppy Joe 's . He invited friends — including Waldo Peirce , Dos Passos , and Max Perkins — to join him on fishing trips and on an all @-@ male expedition to the Dry Tortugas . Meanwhile , he continued to travel to Europe and to Cuba , and — although in 1933 he wrote of Key West , " We have a fine house here , and kids are all well " — Mellow believes he " was plainly restless " . 
 In 1933 , Hemingway and Pauline went on safari to East Africa . The 10 @-@ week trip provided material for Green Hills of Africa , as well as for the short stories " The Snows of Kilimanjaro " and " The Short Happy Life of Francis Macomber " . The couple visited Mombasa , Nairobi , and Machakos in Kenya ; then moved on to Tanganyika Territory , where they hunted in the Serengeti , around Lake <unk> , and west and southeast of present @-@ day Tarangire National Park . Their guide was the noted " white hunter " Philip Hope Percival who had guided Theodore Roosevelt on his 1909 safari . During these travels , Hemingway contracted amoebic dysentery that caused a prolapsed intestine , and he was evacuated by plane to Nairobi , an experience reflected in " The Snows of Kilimanjaro " . On Hemingway 's return to Key West in early 1934 , he began work on Green Hills of Africa , which he published in 1935 to mixed reviews . 
 Hemingway bought a boat in 1934 , named it the Pilar , and began sailing the Caribbean . In 1935 he first arrived at Bimini , where he spent a considerable amount of time . During this period he also worked on To Have and Have Not , published in 1937 while he was in Spain , the only novel he wrote during the 1930s . 
 = = = Spanish Civil War = = = 
 In 1937 , Hemingway agreed to report on the Spanish Civil War for the North American Newspaper Alliance ( <unk> ) , arriving in Spain in March with Dutch filmmaker Joris Ivens . Ivens , who was filming The Spanish Earth , wanted Hemingway to replace John Dos Passos as screenwriter , since Dos Passos had left the project when his friend José Robles was arrested and later executed . The incident changed Dos Passos ' opinion of the leftist republicans , creating a rift between him and Hemingway , who later spread a rumor that Dos Passos left Spain out of cowardice . 
 Journalist and writer Martha Gellhorn , whom Hemingway had met in Key West the previous Christmas ( 1936 ) , joined him in Spain . Like Hadley , Martha was a St. Louis native , and like Pauline , she had worked for Vogue in Paris . Of Martha , <unk> explains , " she never catered to him the way other women did " . Late in 1937 , while in Madrid with Martha , Hemingway wrote his only play , The Fifth Column , as the city was being bombarded . He returned to Key West for a few months , then back to Spain twice in 1938 , where he was present at the Battle of the Ebro , the last republican stand , and he was among the British and American journalists who were some of the last to leave the battle as they crossed the river . 
 = = = Cuba = = = 
 In the spring of 1939 , Hemingway crossed to Cuba in his boat to live in the Hotel <unk> <unk> in Havana . This was the separation phase of a slow and painful split from Pauline , which had begun when Hemingway met Martha Gellhorn . Martha soon joined him in Cuba , and they almost immediately rented " Finca Vigia " ( " Lookout Farm " ) , a 15 @-@ acre ( 61 @,@ 000 m2 ) property 15 miles ( 24 km ) from Havana . Pauline and the children left Hemingway that summer , after the family was reunited during a visit to Wyoming , and when Hemingway 's divorce from Pauline was finalized , he and Martha were married November 20 , 1940 , in Cheyenne , Wyoming . 
 As he had after his divorce from Hadley , he changed locations , moving his primary summer residence to Ketchum , Idaho , just outside the newly built resort of Sun Valley , and his winter residence to Cuba . Hemingway , who had been disgusted when a Parisian friend allowed his cats to eat from the table , became enamored of cats in Cuba , keeping dozens of them on the property . 
 Gellhorn inspired him to write his most famous novel , For Whom the Bell Tolls , which he started in March 1939 and finished in July 1940 . It was published in October 1940 . Consistent with his pattern of moving around while working on a manuscript , he wrote For Whom the Bell Tolls in Cuba , Wyoming , and Sun Valley . For Whom the Bell Tolls became a Book @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Month Club choice , sold half a million copies within months , was nominated for a Pulitzer Prize , and as Meyers describes it , " triumphantly re @-@ established Hemingway 's literary reputation " . 
 In January 1941 , Martha was sent to China on assignment for Collier 's magazine . Hemingway went with her , sending in dispatches for the newspaper PM , but in general he disliked China . A 2009 book suggests during that period he may have been recruited to work for Soviet intelligence agents under the name " Agent Argo " . They returned to Cuba before the declaration of war by the United States that December , when he convinced the Cuban government to help him refit the Pilar , which he intended to use to ambush German submarines off the coast of Cuba . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 From May 1944 to March 1945 , Hemingway was in London and Europe . When Hemingway first arrived in London , he met TIME magazine correspondent Mary Welsh , with whom he became infatuated . Martha had been forced to cross the Atlantic in a ship filled with explosives because Hemingway refused to help her get a press pass on a plane , and she arrived in London to find Hemingway hospitalized with a concussion from a car accident . <unk> to his plight , she accused him of being a bully and told him that she was " through , absolutely finished " . The last time that Hemingway saw Martha was in March 1945 as he was preparing to return to Cuba , and their divorce was finalized later that same year . Meanwhile , he had asked Mary Welsh to marry him on their third meeting . 
 Hemingway was present at the Normandy Landings wearing a large head bandage but , according to Meyers , he was considered " precious cargo " and not allowed ashore . The landing craft came within sight of Omaha Beach before coming under enemy fire and turning back . Hemingway later wrote in Collier 's that he could see " the first , second , third , fourth and fifth waves of [ landing troops ] lay where they had fallen , looking like so many heavily laden bundles on the flat pebbly stretch between the sea and first cover . " Mellow explains that , on that first day , none of the correspondents were allowed to land and Hemingway was returned to the Dorothea Dix . 
 Late in July , he attached himself to " the 22nd Infantry Regiment commanded by Col. Charles ' Buck ' Lanham , as it drove toward Paris " , and Hemingway became de facto leader to a small band of village militia in Rambouillet outside of Paris . Of Hemingway 's exploits , World War II historian Paul Fussell remarks : " Hemingway got into considerable trouble playing infantry captain to a group of Resistance people that he gathered because a correspondent is not supposed to lead troops , even if he does it well " . This was in fact in contravention of the Geneva Convention , and Hemingway was brought up on formal charges ; he said that he " beat the rap " by claiming that he only offered advice . 
 On August 25 , he was present at the liberation of Paris although , contrary to the Hemingway legend , he was not the first into the city , nor did he liberate the Ritz . In Paris , he visited Sylvia Beach and Pablo Picasso with Mary Welsh , who joined him there , ; in a spirit of happiness , he forgave Gertrude Stein . Later that year , he was present at heavy fighting in the Battle of Hürtgen Forest . On December 17 , 1944 , a feverish and ill Hemingway had himself driven to Luxembourg to cover what was later called The Battle of the Bulge . As soon as he arrived , however , Lanham handed him to the doctors , who hospitalized him with pneumonia ; by the time that he recovered a week later , most of the fighting in this battle was over . 
 In 1947 , Hemingway was awarded a Bronze Star for his bravery during World War II . He was recognized for his valor , having been " under fire in combat areas in order to obtain an accurate picture of conditions " , with the commendation that " through his talent of expression , Mr. Hemingway enabled readers to obtain a vivid picture of the difficulties and triumphs of the front @-@ line soldier and his organization in combat " . 
 = = = Cuba and the Nobel Prize = = = 
 Hemingway said he " was out of business as a writer " from 1942 to 1945 during his residence in Cuba . In 1946 he married Mary , who had an ectopic pregnancy five months later . The Hemingway family suffered a series of accidents and health problems in the years following the war : in a 1945 car accident , he " smashed his knee " and sustained another " deep wound on his forehead " ; Mary broke first her right ankle and then her left in successive skiing accidents . A 1947 car accident left Patrick with a head wound and severely ill . Hemingway sank into depression as his literary friends began to die : in 1939 William Butler Yeats and Ford Madox Ford ; in 1940 Scott Fitzgerald ; in 1941 Sherwood Anderson and James Joyce ; in 1946 Gertrude Stein ; and the following year in 1947 , Max Perkins , Hemingway 's long @-@ time Scribner 's editor and friend . During this period , he suffered from severe headaches , high blood pressure , weight problems , and eventually diabetes — much of which was the result of previous accidents and many years of heavy drinking . Nonetheless , in January 1946 , he began work on The Garden of Eden , finishing 800 pages by June . During the post – war years , he also began work on a trilogy tentatively titled " The Land " , " The Sea " and " The Air " , which he wanted to combine in one novel titled The Sea Book . However , both projects stalled , and Mellow says that Hemingway 's inability to continue was " a symptom of his troubles " during these years . 
 In 1948 , Hemingway and Mary traveled to Europe , staying in Venice for several months . While there , Hemingway fell in love with the then 19 @-@ year @-@ old Adriana <unk> . The platonic love affair inspired the novel Across the River and into the Trees , written in Cuba during a time of strife with Mary , and published in 1950 to negative reviews . The following year , furious at the critical reception of Across the River and Into the Trees , he wrote the draft of The Old Man and the Sea in eight weeks , saying that it was " the best I can write ever for all of my life " . The Old Man and the Sea became a book @-@ of @-@ the @-@ month selection , made Hemingway an international celebrity , and won the Pulitzer Prize in May 1952 , a month before he left for his second trip to Africa . 
 In 1954 , while in Africa , Hemingway was almost fatally injured in two successive plane crashes . He chartered a sightseeing flight over the Belgian Congo as a Christmas present to Mary . On their way to photograph Murchison Falls from the air , the plane struck an abandoned utility pole and " crash landed in heavy brush " . Hemingway 's injuries included a head wound , while Mary broke two ribs . The next day , attempting to reach medical care in Entebbe , they boarded a second plane that exploded at take @-@ off , with Hemingway suffering burns and another concussion , this one serious enough to cause leaking of cerebral fluid . They eventually arrived in Entebbe to find reporters covering the story of Hemingway 's death . He briefed the reporters and spent the next few weeks recuperating and reading his erroneous obituaries . Despite his injuries , Hemingway accompanied Patrick and his wife on a planned fishing expedition in February , but pain caused him to be irascible and difficult to get along with . When a bushfire broke out , he was again injured , sustaining second degree burns on his legs , front torso , lips , left hand and right forearm . Months later in Venice , Mary reported to friends the full extent of Hemingway 's injuries : two cracked discs , a kidney and liver rupture , a dislocated shoulder and a broken skull . The accidents may have precipitated the physical deterioration that was to follow . After the plane crashes , Hemingway , who had been " a thinly controlled alcoholic throughout much of his life , drank more heavily than usual to combat the pain of his injuries . " 
 In October 1954 , Hemingway received the Nobel Prize in Literature . He modestly told the press that Carl Sandburg , Isak Dinesen and Bernard Berenson deserved the prize , but he gladly accepted the prize money . Mellow claims Hemingway " had coveted the Nobel Prize " , but when he won it , months after his plane accidents and the ensuing world @-@ wide press coverage , " there must have been a lingering suspicion in Hemingway 's mind that his obituary notices had played a part in the academy 's decision . " Because he was suffering pain from the African accidents , he decided against traveling to Stockholm . Instead he sent a speech to be read , defining the writer 's life : 
 Writing , at its best , is a lonely life . Organizations for writers palliate the writer 's loneliness but I doubt if they improve his writing . He grows in public stature as he sheds his loneliness and often his work deteriorates . For he does his work alone and if he is a good enough writer he must face eternity , or the lack of it , each day . 
 From the end of the year in 1955 to early 1956 , Hemingway was bedridden . He was told to stop drinking to mitigate liver damage , advice he initially followed but then disregarded . In October 1956 , he returned to Europe and met Basque writer Pio <unk> , who was seriously ill and died weeks later . During the trip , Hemingway became sick again and was treated for " high blood pressure , liver disease , and arteriosclerosis " . 
 In November 1956 , while staying in Paris , he was reminded of trunks he had stored in the Ritz Hotel in 1928 and never retrieved . Upon re @-@ claiming and opening the trunks , Hemingway discovered that the trunks were filled with notebooks and writing from his Paris years . Excited about the discovery , when he returned to Cuba in 1957 , he began to shape the recovered work into his memoir A Moveable Feast . By 1959 he ended a period of intense activity : he finished A Moveable Feast ( scheduled to be released the following year ) ; brought True at First Light to 200 @,@ 000 words ; added chapters to The Garden of Eden ; and worked on Islands in the Stream . The last three were stored in a safe deposit box in Havana , as he focused on the finishing touches for A Moveable Feast . Author Michael Reynolds claims it was during this period that Hemingway slid into depression , from which he was unable to recover . 
 The Finca Vigia became crowded with guests and tourists , as Hemingway , beginning to become unhappy with life there , considered a permanent move to Idaho . In 1959 he bought a home overlooking the Big Wood River , outside Ketchum , and left Cuba — although he apparently remained on easy terms with the Castro government , telling The New York Times he was " delighted " with Castro 's overthrow of Batista . He was in Cuba in November 1959 , between returning from Pamplona and traveling west to Idaho , and the following year for his 60th birthday ; however , that year he and Mary decided to leave after hearing the news that Castro wanted to nationalize property owned by Americans and other foreign nationals . In July 1960 , the Hemingways left Cuba for the last time , leaving art and manuscripts in a bank vault in Havana . After the 1961 Bay of Pigs Invasion , the Finca Vigia was expropriated by the Cuban government , complete with Hemingway 's collection of " four to six thousand books " . 
 = = = Idaho and suicide = = = 
 Through the end of the 1950s , Hemingway continued to rework the material that would be published as A Moveable Feast . In the summer of 1959 , he visited Spain to research a series of bullfighting articles commissioned by Life magazine , returning to Cuba in January 1960 to work on the manuscript . Life wanted only 10 @,@ 000 words , but the manuscript grew out of control . For the first time in his life unable to organize his writing , he asked A. E. Hotchner to travel to Cuba to help . Hotchner helped him trim the Life piece to 40 @,@ 000 words , and Scribner 's agreed to a full @-@ length book version ( The Dangerous Summer ) of almost 130 @,@ 000 words . Hotchner found Hemingway to be " unusually hesitant , disorganized , and confused " , and suffering badly from failing eyesight . 
 On July 25 , 1960 , Hemingway and Mary left Cuba , never to return . Hemingway then traveled alone to Spain to be photographed for the front cover for the Life magazine piece . A few days later , he was reported in the news to be seriously ill and on the verge of dying , which panicked Mary until she received a cable from him telling her , " Reports false . <unk> Madrid . Love Papa . " However , he was seriously ill , and believed himself to be on the verge of a breakdown . He was lonely and took to his bed for days , retreating into silence , despite having had the first installments of The Dangerous Summer published in Life in September 1960 to good reviews . In October , he left Spain for New York , where he refused to leave Mary 's apartment on the pretext that he was being watched . She quickly took him to Idaho , where George Saviers ( a Sun Valley physician ) met them at the train . 
 At this time , Hemingway was constantly worried about money and his safety . He worried about his taxes , and that he would never return to Cuba to retrieve the manuscripts he had left there in a bank vault . He became paranoid , thinking the FBI was actively monitoring his movements in Ketchum . The FBI had , in fact , opened a file on him during World War II , when he used the Pilar to patrol the waters off Cuba , and J. Edgar Hoover had an agent in Havana watch Hemingway during the 1950s . By the end of November , Mary was at wits ' end , and Saviers suggested Hemingway go to the Mayo Clinic in Minnesota , where he may have believed he was to be treated for hypertension . The FBI knew Hemingway was at the Mayo Clinic , as an agent later documented in a letter written in January 1961 . In an attempt at anonymity , Hemingway was checked in at the Mayo Clinic under Saviers ' name . Meyers writes that " an aura of secrecy surrounds Hemingway 's treatment at the Mayo " , but confirms he was treated with electroconvulsive therapy as many as 15 times in December 1960 , and in January 1961 was " released in ruins " . Reynolds was able to access Hemingway 's records at the Mayo , which indicated that the combination of medications given Hemingway may have created the depressive state for which he was treated . 
 Three months later back in Ketchum , in April 1961 , one morning in the kitchen Mary " found Hemingway holding a shotgun " . She called Saviers who sedated him and admitted him to the Sun Valley hospital ; from there he was returned to the Mayo Clinic for more electro shock treatments . He was released in late June , and arrived home in Ketchum on June 30 . Two days later , in the early morning hours of July 2 , 1961 , Hemingway " quite deliberately " shot himself with his favorite shotgun . He had unlocked the basement storeroom where his guns were kept , gone upstairs to the front entrance foyer of their Ketchum home , and according to Mellow , with the " double @-@ barreled shotgun that he had used so often it might have been a friend " , he shot himself . Mary called the Sun Valley Hospital , and a doctor quickly arrived at the house . Despite his finding that Hemingway " had died of a self @-@ inflicted wound to the head " , the initial story told to the press was that the death had been " accidental " . 
 During his final years , Hemingway 's behavior had been similar to his father 's before he committed suicide ; his father may have had the genetic disease hemochromatosis , in which the inability to metabolize iron culminates in mental and physical deterioration . Medical records made available in 1991 confirm that Hemingway had also been diagnosed with hemochromatosis in early 1961 . Both his sister Ursula , and his brother Leicester also committed suicide . Added to Hemingway 's physical ailments was the additional problem that he had been a heavy drinker for most of his life . 
 Family and friends flew to Ketchum for the funeral , officiated by the local Catholic priest who believed Hemingway 's death accidental . Of the funeral ( during which an altar boy fainted at the head of the casket ) , Hemingway 's brother Leicester wrote : " It seemed to me Ernest would have approved of it all . " 
 In a press interview five years later , Mary Hemingway admitted that her husband had committed suicide . 
 = = Writing style = = 
 The New York Times wrote in 1926 of Hemingway 's first novel , " No amount of analysis can convey the quality of The Sun Also Rises . It is a truly gripping story , told in a lean , hard , athletic narrative prose that puts more literary English to shame . " The Sun Also Rises is written in the spare , tight prose that made Hemingway famous , and , according to James Nagel , " changed the nature of American writing . " In 1954 , when Hemingway was awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature , it was for " his mastery of the art of narrative , most recently demonstrated in The Old Man and the Sea , and for the influence that he has exerted on contemporary style . " Paul Smith writes that Hemingway 's first stories , collected as In Our Time , showed he was still experimenting with his writing style . He avoided complicated syntax . About 70 percent of the sentences are simple sentences — a childlike syntax without subordination . 
 Henry Louis Gates believes Hemingway 's style was fundamentally shaped " in reaction to [ his ] experience of world war " . After World War I , he and other modernists " lost faith in the central institutions of Western civilization " by reacting against the elaborate style of 19th @-@ century writers and by creating a style " in which meaning is established through dialogue , through action , and silences — a fiction in which nothing crucial — or at least very little — is stated explicitly . " 
 Developing this connection between Hemingway and other modernist writers , Irene Gammel believes his style was carefully cultivated and honed with an eye toward the avant @-@ garde of the era . Hungry for " vanguard experimentation " and rebelling against Ford Madox Ford 's " staid modernism " , Hemingway published the work of Gertrude Stein and Elsa von Freytag @-@ Loringhoven in The Transatlantic Review . As Gammel notes , Hemingway was " introduced to the Baroness 's experimental style during a time when he was actively trimming the verbal ' fat ' off his own style , as well as flexing his writer 's muscles in assaulting conventional taste . " 
 Because he began as a writer of short stories , Baker believes Hemingway learned to " get the most from the least , how to prune language , how to multiply intensities and how to tell nothing but the truth in a way that allowed for telling more than the truth . " Hemingway called his style the Iceberg Theory : the facts float above water ; the supporting structure and symbolism operate out of sight . The concept of the iceberg theory is sometimes referred to as the " theory of omission " . Hemingway believed the writer could describe one thing ( such as Nick Adams fishing in " The Big Two @-@ Hearted River " ) though an entirely different thing occurs below the surface ( Nick Adams concentrating on fishing to the extent that he does not have to think about anything else ) . 
 Jackson Benson believes Hemingway used autobiographical details as framing devices about life in general — not only about his life . For example , Benson postulates that Hemingway used his experiences and drew them out with " what if " scenarios : " what if I were wounded in such a way that I could not sleep at night ? What if I were wounded and made crazy , what would happen if I were sent back to the front ? " Writing in " The Art of the Short Story " , Hemingway explains : " A few things I have found to be true . If you leave out important things or events that you know about , the story is strengthened . If you leave or skip something because you do not know it , the story will be worthless . The test of any story is how very good the stuff that you , not your editors , omit . " 
 The simplicity of the prose is deceptive . Zoe Trodd believes Hemingway crafted skeletal sentences in response to Henry James 's observation that World War I had " used up words " . Hemingway offers a " multi @-@ focal " photographic reality . His iceberg theory of omission is the foundation on which he builds . The syntax , which lacks subordinating conjunctions , creates static sentences . The photographic " snapshot " style creates a collage of images . Many types of internal punctuation ( colons , semicolons , dashes , parentheses ) are omitted in favor of short declarative sentences . The sentences build on each other , as events build to create a sense of the whole . Multiple strands exist in one story ; an " embedded text " bridges to a different angle . He also uses other cinematic techniques of " cutting " quickly from one scene to the next ; or of " splicing " a scene into another . Intentional omissions allow the reader to fill the gap , as though responding to instructions from the author , and create three @-@ dimensional prose . 
 In his literature , and in his personal writing , Hemingway habitually used the word " and " in place of commas . This use of <unk> may serve to convey immediacy . Hemingway 's <unk> sentence — or in later works his use of subordinate clauses — uses conjunctions to juxtapose startling visions and images ; Jackson Benson compares them to haikus . Many of Hemingway 's followers misinterpreted his lead and frowned upon all expression of emotion ; Saul Bellow satirized this style as " Do you have emotions ? Strangle them . " However , Hemingway 's intent was not to eliminate emotion , but to portray it more scientifically . Hemingway thought it would be easy , and pointless , to describe emotions ; he sculpted collages of images in order to grasp " the real thing , the sequence of motion and fact which made the emotion and which would be as valid in a year or in ten years or , with luck and if you stated it purely enough , always " . This use of an image as an objective correlative is characteristic of Ezra Pound , T. S. Eliot , James Joyce , and Proust . Hemingway 's letters refer to Proust 's Remembrance of Things Past several times over the years , and indicate he read the book at least twice . 
 = = Themes = = 
 The popularity of Hemingway 's work to a great extent is based on the themes , which according to scholar Frederic Svoboda are love , war , wilderness and loss , all of which are strongly evident in the body of work . These are recurring themes of American literature , which are clearly evident in Hemingway 's work . Critic Leslie Fiedler sees the theme he defines as " The Sacred Land " — the American West — extended in Hemingway 's work to include mountains in Spain , Switzerland and Africa , and to the streams of Michigan . The American West is given a symbolic nod with the naming of the " Hotel Montana " in The Sun Also Rises and For Whom the Bell Tolls . According to Stoltzfus and Fiedler , Hemingway 's nature is a place for rebirth , for therapy , and the hunter or fisherman has a moment of transcendence when the prey is killed . Nature is where men are without women : men fish ; men hunt ; men find redemption in nature . Although Hemingway writes about sports , Carlos Baker believes the emphasis is more on the athlete than the sport , while Beegel sees the essence of Hemingway as an American naturalist , as reflected in such detailed descriptions as can be found in " Big Two @-@ Hearted River " . 
 Fiedler believes Hemingway inverts the American literary theme of the evil " Dark Woman " versus the good " Light Woman " . The dark woman — Brett Ashley of The Sun Also Rises — is a goddess ; the light woman — Margot Macomber of " The Short Happy Life of Francis Macomber " — is a murderess . Robert Scholes admits that early Hemingway stories , such as " A Very Short Story " , present " a male character favorably and a female unfavorably " . According to Rena Sanderson , early Hemingway critics lauded his male @-@ centric world of masculine pursuits , and the fiction divided women into " <unk> or love @-@ slaves " . Feminist critics attacked Hemingway as " public enemy number one " , although more recent re @-@ evaluations of his work " have given new visibility to Hemingway 's female characters ( and their strengths ) and have revealed his own sensitivity to gender issues , thus casting doubts on the old assumption that his writings were one @-@ <unk> masculine . " Nina <unk> believes that Brett Ashley and Margot Macomber " are the two outstanding examples of Hemingway 's ' bitch women . ' " 
 The theme of women and death is evident in stories as early as " Indian Camp " . The theme of death permeates Hemingway 's work . Young believes the emphasis in " Indian Camp " was not so much on the woman who gives birth or the father who commits suicide , but on Nick Adams who witnesses these events as a child , and becomes a " badly scarred and nervous young man " . Hemingway sets the events in " Indian Camp " that shape the Adams persona . Young believes " Indian Camp " holds the " master key " to " what its author was up to for some thirty @-@ five years of his writing career " . Stoltzfus considers Hemingway 's work to be more complex with a representation of the truth inherent in existentialism : if " nothingness " is embraced , then redemption is achieved at the moment of death . Those who face death with dignity and courage live an authentic life . Francis Macomber dies happy because the last hours of his life are authentic ; the bullfighter in the corrida represents the pinnacle of a life lived with authenticity . In his paper The Uses of Authenticity : Hemingway and the Literary Field , Timo Müller writes that Hemingway 's fiction is successful because the characters live an " authentic life " , and the " soldiers , fishers , boxers and backwoodsmen are among the archetypes of authenticity in modern literature " . 
 The theme of emasculation is prevalent in Hemingway 's work , most notably in The Sun Also Rises . <unk> , according to Fiedler , is a result of a generation of wounded soldiers ; and of a generation in which women such as Brett gained emancipation . This also applies to the minor character , Frances Clyne , Cohn 's girlfriend in the beginning in the book . Her character supports the theme not only because the idea was presented early on in the novel but also the impact she had on Cohn in the start of the book while only appearing a small number of times . Baker believes Hemingway 's work emphasizes the " natural " versus the " unnatural " . In " Alpine Idyll " the " <unk> " of skiing in the high country late spring snow is juxtaposed against the " <unk> " of the peasant who allowed his wife 's dead body to linger too long in the shed during the winter . The skiers and peasant retreat to the valley to the " natural " spring for redemption . 
 Susan Beegel has written that some more recent critics — writing through the lens of a more modern social and cultural context several decades after Hemingway 's death , and more than half a century after his novels were first published — have characterized the social era portrayed in his fiction as misogynistic and homophobic . In her 1996 essay , " Critical Reception " , Beegel analyzed four decades of Hemingway criticism and found that " critics interested in multiculturalism " , particularly in the 1980s , simply ignored Hemingway , although some " apologetics " have been written . Typical , according to Beegel , is an analysis of Hemingway 's 1926 novel , The Sun Also Rises , in which a critic contended : " Hemingway never lets the reader forget that Cohn is a Jew , not an unattractive character who happens to be a Jew but a character who is unattractive because he is a Jew . " Also during the 1980s , according to Beegel , criticism was published that focused on investigating the " horror of homosexuality " and the " racism " typical of the social era portrayed in Hemingway 's fiction . In an overall assessment of Hemingway 's work Beegel has written : " Throughout his remarkable body of fiction , he tells the truth about human fear , guilt , betrayal , violence , cruelty , drunkenness , hunger , greed , apathy , ecstasy , tenderness , love and lust . " 
 = = Influence and legacy = = 
 Hemingway 's legacy to American literature is his style : writers who came after him emulated it or avoided it . After his reputation was established with the publication of The Sun Also Rises , he became the spokesperson for the post – World War I generation , having established a style to follow . His books were burned in Berlin in 1933 , " as being a monument of modern decadence " , and disavowed by his parents as " filth " . Reynolds asserts the legacy is that " [ Hemingway ] left stories and novels so starkly moving that some have become part of our cultural heritage . " 
 Benson believes the details of Hemingway 's life have become a " prime vehicle for exploitation " , resulting in a Hemingway industry . Hemingway scholar Hallengren believes the " hard boiled style " and the machismo must be separated from the author himself . Benson agrees , describing him as introverted and private as J. D. Salinger , although Hemingway masked his nature with braggadocio . In fact , during World War II , Salinger met and corresponded with Hemingway , whom he acknowledged as an influence . In a letter to Hemingway , Salinger claimed their talks " had given him his only hopeful minutes of the entire war " and jokingly " named himself national chairman of the Hemingway Fan Clubs . " 
 The extent of Hemingway 's influence is seen in the tributes and echoes of his fiction in popular culture . A minor planet , discovered in 1978 by Soviet astronomer Nikolai Chernykh , was named for him ( <unk> Hemingway ) ; Ray Bradbury wrote The Kilimanjaro Device , with Hemingway transported to the top of Mount Kilimanjaro ; the 1993 motion picture Wrestling Ernest Hemingway , about the friendship of two retired men , Irish and Cuban , in a seaside town in Florida , starred Robert Duvall , Richard Harris , Shirley MacLaine , Sandra Bullock , and Piper Laurie . The influence is evident with the many restaurants named " Hemingway " ; and the proliferation of bars called " Harry 's " ( a nod to the bar in Across the River and Into the Trees ) . A line of Hemingway furniture , promoted by Hemingway 's son Jack ( Bumby ) , has pieces such as the " Kilimanjaro " bedside table , and a " Catherine " slip @-@ covered sofa . Montblanc offers a Hemingway fountain pen , and a line of Hemingway safari clothes has been created . The International Imitation Hemingway Competition was created in 1977 to publicly acknowledge his influence and the comically misplaced efforts of lesser authors to imitate his style . Entrants are encouraged to submit one " really good page of really bad Hemingway " and winners are flown to Italy to Harry 's Bar . 
 In 1965 , Mary Hemingway established the Hemingway Foundation and in the 1970s she donated her husband 's papers to the John F. Kennedy Library . In 1980 , a group of Hemingway scholars gathered to assess the donated papers , subsequently forming the Hemingway Society , " committed to supporting and fostering Hemingway scholarship . " 
 Almost exactly 35 years after Hemingway 's death , on July 1 , 1996 , his granddaughter Margaux Hemingway died in Santa Monica , California . Margaux was a supermodel and actress , co @-@ starring with her younger sister Mariel in the 1976 movie Lipstick . Her death was later ruled a suicide , making her " the fifth person in four generations of her family to commit suicide . " 
 = = Selected list of works = = 
 " Indian Camp " ( 1924 ) 
 The Sun Also Rises ( 1926 ) 
 A Farewell to Arms ( 1929 ) 
 Death in the Afternoon ( 1932 ) 
 Green Hills of Africa ( 1935 ) 
 For Whom the Bell Tolls ( 1940 ) 
 The Old Man and the Sea ( 1951 ) 
 = Great Stink = 
 The Great Stink was an event in central London in July and August 1858 during which the hot weather exacerbated the smell of untreated human waste and industrial effluent that was present on the banks of the River Thames . The problem had been mounting for some years , with an ageing and inadequate sewer system that emptied directly into the Thames . The miasma from the effluent was thought to transmit contagious diseases , and three outbreaks of cholera prior to the Great Stink were blamed on the ongoing problems with the river . 
 The smell , and people 's fears of its possible effects , prompted action from the local and national administrators who had been considering possible solutions for the problem . The authorities accepted a proposal from the civil engineer Joseph Bazalgette to move the effluent eastwards along a series of interconnecting sewers that sloped towards outfalls beyond the metropolitan area . Work on high- , mid- and low @-@ level systems for the new Northern and Southern Outfall Sewers started at the beginning of 1859 and lasted until 1875 . To aid the drainage , pumping stations were placed to lift the sewage from lower levels into higher pipes . Two of the more ornate stations , Abbey Mills in Stratford and Crossness on the Erith Marshes , are listed for protection by English Heritage . Bazalgette 's plan introduced the three embankments to London in which the sewers ran — the Victoria , Chelsea and Albert <unk> . 
 Bazalgette 's work ensured that sewage was no longer dumped onto the shores of the Thames and brought an end to the cholera outbreaks ; his actions probably saved more lives than any other Victorian official . His sewer system operates into the 21st century , servicing a city that has grown to over eight million . The historian Peter Ackroyd argues that Bazalgette should be considered a hero of London . 
 = = Background = = 
 Brick sewers had been built in London from the 17th century when sections of the Fleet and Walbrook rivers were covered for that purpose . In the century preceding 1856 , over a hundred sewers were constructed in London , and at that date the city had around 200 @,@ 000 cesspits and 360 sewers . Some cesspits leaked methane and other gases , which often caught fire and exploded , leading to loss of life , while many of the sewers were in a poor state of repair . During the early 19th century improvements had been undertaken in the supply of water to Londoners , and by 1858 many of the city 's medieval wooden water pipes were being replaced with iron ones . This , combined with the introduction of flushing toilets and the rising of the city 's population from just under one million to three million , led to more water being flushed into the sewers , along with the associated effluent . The outfalls from factories , slaughterhouses and other industrial activities put further strain on the already failing system . Much of this outflow either overflowed , or was discharged directly , into the Thames . 
 The scientist Michael Faraday described the situation in a letter to The Times in July 1855 : shocked at the state of the Thames , he dropped pieces of white paper into the river to " test the degree of opacity " . His conclusion was that " Near the bridges the <unk> rolled up in clouds so dense that they were visible at the surface , even in water of this kind . ... The smell was very bad , and common to the whole of the water ; it was the same as that which now comes up from the gully @-@ holes in the streets ; the whole river was for the time a real sewer . " The smell from the river was so bad that in 1857 the government poured chalk lime , chloride of lime and carbolic acid into the waterway to ease the stench . 
 The prevailing thought in Victorian healthcare concerning the transmission of contagious diseases was the miasma theory , which held that most communicable diseases were caused by the inhalation of contaminated air . This contamination could take the form of the odour of rotting corpses or sewage , but also rotting vegetation , or the exhaled breath of someone already diseased . <unk> was believed by most to be the vector of transmission of cholera , which was on the rise in 19th @-@ century Europe . The disease was deeply feared by all , because of the speed with which it could spread , and its high fatality rates . 
 London 's first major cholera epidemic struck in 1831 , when the disease claimed 6 @,@ 536 victims . In 1848 – 49 there was a second outbreak in which 14 @,@ 137 London residents died , and this was followed by a further outbreak in 1853 – 54 in which 10 @,@ 738 died . During the second outbreak , John Snow , a London @-@ based physician , noticed that the rates of death were higher in those areas supplied by the Lambeth and the Southwark and Vauxhall water companies . In 1849 he published a paper , On the Mode of Communication of Cholera , which posited the theory of the water @-@ borne transmission of disease , rather than the miasma theory ; little attention was paid to the paper . Following the third cholera outbreak in 1854 , Snow published an update to his treatise , after he focused on the effects in Broad Street , Soho . Snow had removed the handle from the local water pump , thus preventing access to the contaminated water , with a resulting fall in deaths . It was later established that the well from which the water was drawn had a leaking sewer running nearby . 
 = = Local government = = 
 The civic infrastructure overseeing the management of London 's sewers had gone through several changes in the 19th century . In 1848 the Metropolitan Commission of Sewers ( MCS ) was established at the urging of the social reformer Edwin Chadwick and a Royal Commission . The Commission superseded seven of the eight authorities that had managed London 's sewers since the time of Henry VIII ; it was the first time that a unitary power had full control over the capital 's sanitation facilities . The Building Act 1844 had ensured that all new buildings had to be connected to a sewer , not a cesspool , and the commission set about connecting cesspools to sewers , or removing them altogether . Because of the fear that the miasma from the sewers would cause the spread of disease , Chadwick and his successor , the pathologist John Simon , ensured that the sewers were regularly flushed through , a policy that resulted in more sewage being discharged into the Thames . 
 In August 1849 the MCS appointed Joseph Bazalgette to the position of assistant surveyor . He had been working as a consultant engineer in the railway industry until overwork had brought about a serious breakdown in his health ; his appointment to the commission was his first position on his return to employment . Working under the Chief Engineer , Frank Foster , he began to develop a more systematic plan for the city 's sewers . The stress of his position was too much for Foster , and he died in 1852 ; Bazalgette was promoted into his position , and continued refining and developing the plans for the development of the sewerage system . The Metropolis Management Act 1855 replaced the commission with the Metropolitan Board of Works ( MBW ) , which took control of the sewers . 
 By June 1856 Bazalgette completed his definitive plans , which provided for small , local sewers about 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 9 m ) in diameter to feed into a series of larger sewers until they drained into main outflow pipes 11 feet ( 3 @.@ 4 m ) high . A Northern and Southern Outfall Sewer were planned to manage the waste for each side of the river . London was mapped into high- , middle- and low @-@ level areas , with a main sewer servicing each ; a series of pumping stations was planned to remove the waste towards the east of the city . Bazalgette 's plan was based on that of Foster , but was larger in scale , and allowed for more of a rise in population than Foster 's – from 3 to 4 @.@ 5 million . Bazalgette submitted his plans to Sir Benjamin Hall , the First Commissioner of Works . Hall had reservations about the outfalls — the discharge points of waste outlets into other bodies of water — from the sewers , which he said were still within the bounds of the capital , and were therefore unacceptable . During the ongoing discussions Bazalgette refined and modified his plans , in line with Hall 's demands . In December 1856 Hall submitted the plans to a group of three consultant engineers , Captain Douglas Strutt Galton of the Royal Engineers , James Simpson , an engineer with two water companies , and Thomas Blackwood , the chief engineer on the Kennet and Avon Canal . The trio reported back to Hall in July 1857 with proposed changes to the positions of the outfall , which he passed on to the MBW in October . The new proposed discharge points were to be open sewers , running 15 miles ( 24 km ) beyond the positions proposed by the Board ; the cost of their plans was to be over £ 5 @.@ 4 million , considerably more than the maximum estimate of Bazalgette 's plan , which was £ 2 @.@ 4 million . In February 1858 a general election saw the fall of Lord Palmerston 's first government , which was replaced by Lord Derby 's second ministry ; Lord John Manners replaced Hall , and Benjamin Disraeli was appointed Leader of the House of Commons and Chancellor of the Exchequer . 
 = = June to August 1858 = = 
 By mid @-@ 1858 the problems with the Thames had been building for several years . In his novel Little Dorrit — published as a serial between 1855 and 1857 — Charles Dickens wrote that the Thames was " a deadly sewer ... in the place of a fine , fresh river " . In a letter to a friend , Dickens said : " I can certify that the offensive smells , even in that short whiff , have been of a most head @-@ and @-@ stomach @-@ <unk> nature " , while the social scientist and journalist George Godwin wrote that " in parts the deposit is more than six feet deep " on the Thames foreshore , and that " the whole of this is thickly impregnated with impure matter " . In June 1858 the temperatures in the shade in London averaged in the mid @-@ 30s ° C ( 93 – 97 ° F ) — rising to 48 ° C ( 118 ° F ) in the sun . Combined with an extended spell of dry weather , the level of the Thames dropped and raw effluent from the sewers remained on the banks of the river . Queen Victoria and Prince Albert attempted to take a pleasure cruise on the Thames , but returned to shore within a few minutes because the smell was so terrible . The press soon began calling the event " The Great Stink " ; the leading article in the City Press observed that " <unk> of speech is at an end — it stinks , and <unk> once inhales the stink can never forget it and can count himself lucky if he lives to remember it " . A writer for The Standard concurred with the opinion . One of its reporters described the river as a " pestiferous and typhus breeding abomination " , while a second wrote that " the amount of poisonous gases which is thrown off is proportionate to the increase of the sewage which is passed into the stream " . The leading article in The Illustrated London News commented that : 
 We can colonise the remotest ends of the earth ; we can conquer India ; we can pay the interest of the most enormous debt ever contracted ; we can spread our name , and our fame , and our <unk> wealth to every part of the world ; but we cannot clean the River Thames . 
 By June the stench from the river had become so bad that business in Parliament was affected , and the curtains on the river side of the building were soaked in lime chloride to overcome the smell . The measure was not successful , and discussions were held about possibly moving the business of government to Oxford or St Albans . The Examiner reported that Disraeli , on attending one of the committee rooms , left shortly afterwards with the other members of the committee , " with a mass of papers in one hand , and with his pocket handkerchief applied to his nose " because the smell was so bad . The disruption to its legislative work led to questions being raised in the House of Commons . According to Hansard , the Member of Parliament ( MP ) John Brady informed Manners that members were unable to use either the Committee Rooms or the Library because of the stench , and asked the minister " if the noble Lord has taken any measures for mitigating the <unk> and discontinuing the nuisance " . Manners replied that the Thames was not under his jurisdiction . Four days later a second MP said to Manners that " By a perverse ingenuity , one of the noblest of rivers has been changed into a cesspool , and I wish to ask whether Her Majesty 's Government intend to take any steps to remedy the evil ? " Manners pointed out " that Her Majesty 's Government have nothing whatever to do with the state of the Thames " . The satirical magazine Punch commented that " The one absorbing topic in both Houses of Parliament ... was the Conspiracy to Poison question . Of the guilt of that old offender , Father Thames , there was the most ample evidence " . 
 At the height of the stink , between 200 and 250 tons of lime were being used near the mouths of the sewers that discharged into the Thames , and men were employed spreading lime onto the Thames foreshore at low tide ; the cost was £ 1 @,@ 500 per week . On 15 June Disraeli tabled the Metropolis Local Management Amendment Bill , a proposed amendment to the 1855 Act ; in the opening debate he called the Thames " a Stygian pool , reeking with ineffable and intolerable horrors " . The Bill put the responsibility to clear up the Thames on the MBW , and stated that " as far as may be possible " the sewerage outlets should not be within the boundaries of London ; it also allowed the Board to borrow £ 3 million , which was to be repaid from a 3 pence levy on all London households for the next forty years . The terms favoured Bazalgette 's original 1856 plan , and overcame Hall 's objection to it . The leading article in The Times observed that " Parliament was all but compelled to legislate upon the great London nuisance by the force of sheer stench " . The bill was debated in late July and was passed into law on 2 August . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Bazalgette 's plans for the 1 @,@ 100 miles ( 1 @,@ 800 km ) of additional street sewers ( collecting both effluent and rainwater ) , which would feed into 82 miles ( 132 km ) of main interconnecting sewers , were put out to tender between 1859 and 1865 . Four hundred draftsmen worked on the detailed plans and sectional views for the first phase of the building process . There were several engineering challenges to be overcome , particularly the fact that parts of London — including the area around Lambeth and Pimlico — lie below the high @-@ water mark . Bazalgette 's plan for the low @-@ level areas was to lift the sewage from low @-@ lying sewers at key points into the mid- and high @-@ level sewers , which would then drain with the aid of gravity , out towards the eastern outfalls at a gradient of 2 feet per mile ( 38 cm / km ) . 
 Bazalgette was a proponent of the use of Portland cement , a material stronger than standard cement , but with a weakness when over @-@ heated . To overcome the problem he instituted a quality control system to test batches of cement , that is described by the historian Stephen Halliday as both " elaborate " and " draconian " . The results were fed back to the manufacturers , who altered their production processes to further improve the product . One of the cement manufacturers commented that the MBW were the first public body to use such testing processes . The progress of Bazalgette 's works was reported favourably in the press . Paul <unk> , the architectural historian , describes the coverage as presenting many of the workers " in a positive , even heroic , light " , and in 1861 The Observer described the progress on the sewers as " the most expensive and wonderful work of modern times " . Construction costs were so high that in July 1863 an additional £ 1 @.@ 2 million was loaned to the MBW to cover the cost of the work . 
 = = = Southern drainage system = = = 
 The southern system , across the less @-@ populated suburbs of London , was the smaller and easier part of the system to build . Three main sewers ran from Putney , Wandsworth and Norwood until they linked together in Deptford . At that point a pumping station lifted the effluent 21 feet ( 6 @.@ 4 m ) into the main outflow sewer , which ran to the Crossness Pumping Station on the Erith Marshes , where it was discharged into the Thames at high tide . The newly @-@ built station at Crossness was designed by Bazalgette and Charles Henry Driver , a consultant engineer and a proponent of the use of cast iron as a building material . The building was in a Romanesque style and the interior contains architectural cast @-@ ironwork which English Heritage describe as important . The power for pumping the large amounts of sewage was provided by four massive beam engines , named Victoria , Prince Consort , Albert Edward and Alexandra , which were manufactured by James Watt and Co . 
 The station was opened in April 1865 by the Prince of Wales — the future King Edward VII — who officially started the engines . The ceremony , which was attended by other members of royalty , MPs , the Lord Mayor of London and the Archbishops of Canterbury and York , was followed by a dinner for 500 within the building . The ceremony marked the completion of construction of the Southern Outfall Sewers , and the beginning of their operation . 
 With the successful completion of the southern outflow , one of the board members of the MBW , an MP named Miller , proposed a bonus for Bazalgette . The board agreed , and were prepared to pay the engineer £ 6 @,@ 000 — three times his annual salary — with an additional £ 4 @,@ 000 to be shared among his three assistants . Although the idea was subsequently dropped following criticism , Halliday observes that the large amounts discussed " at a time when parsimony was the dominant characteristic of public expenditure is a firm indication of the depth of public interest and approval that appears to have characterised the work . " 
 = = = Northern drainage system = = = 
 The northern side of the Thames was the more populous , housing two @-@ thirds of London 's population , and the works had to proceed through congested streets and overcome such urban hurdles as canals , bridges and railway lines . Work began on the system on 31 January 1859 , but the builders encountered numerous problems in construction , including a labourers ' strike in 1859 – 60 , hard frosts in winter , and heavier than normal rainfall . The rain was so heavy in June 1862 that an accident occurred at the works re @-@ building the Fleet sewer . The deep excavations were running parallel to the excavation of a cutting at Clerkenwell for the Metropolitan Railway ( now the Metropolitan line ) , and the 8 1 ⁄ 2 ft ( 2 @.@ 6 m ) wall dividing the two trenches collapsed , spilling the waters of the Fleet onto Victoria Street , damaging the gas and water mains . 
 The high @-@ level sewer — the most northern of the works — ran from Hampstead Heath to Stoke Newington and across Victoria Park , where it joined with the eastern end of the mid @-@ level sewer . The mid @-@ level sewer began in the west at Bayswater and ran along Oxford Street , through Clerkenwell and Bethnal Green , before the connection . This combined main sewer ran to the Abbey Mills Pumping Station in Stratford , where it was joined by the eastern end of the low @-@ level sewer . The pumps at Abbey Mills lifted the effluent from the low @-@ level sewer 36 feet ( 11 m ) into the main sewer . This main sewer ran 5 miles ( 8 km ) — along what is now known as the Greenway — to the outfall at Beckton . 
 Like the Crossness Pumping Station , Abbey Mills was a joint design by Bazalgette and Driver . Above the centre of the engine @-@ house was an ornate dome that , <unk> considers , gives the building a " superficial resemblance ... to a Byzantine church " . The architectural historian Nikolaus Pevsner , in his Buildings of England , thought the building showed " exciting architecture applied to the most foul purposes " ; he went on to describe it as " an unorthodox mix , vaguely Italian Gothic in style but with tiers of Byzantine windows and a central octagonal lantern that adds a gracious Russian flavour " . 
 To provide the drainage for the low @-@ level sewers , in February 1864 Bazalgette began building three embankments along the shores of the Thames . On the northern side he built the Victoria Embankment , which runs from Westminster to Blackfriars Bridge , and the Chelsea Embankment , running from Millbank to the Cadogan Pier at Chelsea . The southern side contains the Albert Embankment , from the Lambeth end of Westminster Bridge to Vauxhall . He ran the sewers along the banks of the Thames , building up walls on the foreshore , running the sewer pipes inside and infilling around them . The works claimed over 52 acres ( 21 ha ) of land from the Thames ; the Victoria Embankment had the added benefit of relieving the congestion on the pre @-@ existing roads between Westminster and the City of London . The cost of building the embankments was estimated at £ 1 @.@ 71 million , of which £ 450 @,@ 000 was used for purchasing the necessary river @-@ front properties , which had tended to be in light @-@ industrial use . The Embankment project was seen as being nationally important and , with the Queen unable to attend because of illness , the Victoria Embankment was opened by the Prince of Wales in July 1870 . The Albert Embankment had been completed in November 1869 , while the Chelsea Embankment was opened in July 1874 . 
 Bazalgette considered the Embankment project " one of the most difficult and intricate things the ... [ MBW ] have had to do " , and shortly after the Chelsea Embankment was opened , he was knighted . In 1875 the work on the western drainage was completed , and the system became operational . The building work had required 318 million bricks and 880 @,@ 000 cubic yards ( 670 @,@ 000 m3 ) of concrete and mortar ; the final cost was approximately £ 6 @.@ 5 million . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In 1866 there was a further cholera outbreak in London that claimed 5 @,@ 596 lives , although it was confined to an area of the East End between Aldgate and Bow . At the time that was a part of London which had not been connected to Bazalgette 's system , and 93 per cent of the fatalities occurred within the region . The fault lay with the East London Water Company , who discharged their sewage half a mile ( 805 m ) downstream from their reservoir : the sewage was being carried upstream into the reservoir on the incoming tide , contaminating the area 's drinking water . The outbreak , and the diagnosis of its causes , led to the acceptance that cholera was water @-@ borne , not transmitted by miasma . The Lancet , relating details of the investigation into the incident by Dr William Farr , stated that his report " will render irresistible the conclusions at which he has arrived in regard to the influence of the water @-@ supply in causation of the epidemic . " It was the last outbreak of the disease in the capital . 
 In 1878 a Thames pleasure @-@ steamer , the SS Princess Alice , collided with the collier Bywell Castle and sank , causing over 650 deaths . The accident took place close to the outfalls and questions were raised in the British press over whether the sewage was responsible for some of the deaths . In the 1880s further fears over possible health concerns because of the outfalls led to the MBW purifying sewage at Crossness and Beckton , rather than dumping the untreated waste into the river , and a series of six sludge boats were ordered to ship effluent into the North Sea for dumping . The first boat commissioned was named the SS Bazalgette , which remained in service until December 1998 , when the dumping stopped , and an incinerator was used to dispose of the waste . The sewers were expanded in the late 19th century and again in the early 20th century . The drainage network is , as of 2015 , managed by Thames Water , and is used by up to eight million people a day . The company states that " the system is struggling to cope with the demands of 21st @-@ century London " . 
 Crossness Pumping Station remained in use until the mid @-@ 1950s when it was replaced . The engines were too large to remove and were left in situ , although they fell into a state of disrepair . The station itself became a grade I listed building with the Ministry of Public Building and Works in June 1970 ( since replaced by English Heritage ) . The building and its engines are , as of 2015 , under restoration by the Crossness Engines Trust . The president of the trust is the British television producer Peter Bazalgette , the great @-@ great @-@ grandson of Joseph . As of 2015 part of the Abbey Mill facility continues to operate as a sewage pumping station . The building 's large double chimneys were removed during the Second World War following fears that they could be used by the Luftwaffe as landmarks for navigation , and the building became a grade II * listed building with the Ministry of Works in November 1974 . 
 The provision of an integrated and fully functioning sewer system for the capital , together with the associated drop in cholera cases , led the historian John <unk> to state that Bazalgette " probably did more good , and saved more lives , than any single Victorian official " . Bazalgette continued to work at the MBW until 1889 , during which time he replaced three of London 's bridges : Putney in 1886 , Hammersmith in 1887 and Battersea in 1890 . He was appointed president of the Institution of Civil Engineers ( ICE ) in 1884 , and in 1901 a monument commemorating his life was opened on the Victoria Embankment . When he died in March 1891 , his obituarist in The Illustrated London News wrote that Bazalgette 's " two great titles to fame are that he beautified London and drained it " , while Sir John Coode , the president of ICE at the time , said that Bazalgette 's work " will ever remain as monuments to his skill and professional ability " . The obituarist for The Times opined that " when the New Zealander comes to London a thousand years hence ... the magnificent solidity and the faultless symmetry of the great granite blocks which form the wall of the Thames @-@ embankment will still remain . " He continued , " the great sewer that runs beneath Londoners ... has added some 20 years to their chance of life " . The historian Peter Ackroyd , in his history of subterranean London , considers that " with [ John ] Nash and [ Christopher ] Wren , Bazalgette enters the pantheon of London heroes " because of his work , particularly the building of the Victoria and Albert <unk> . 
 = Hurricane Elida ( 2008 ) = 
 Hurricane Elida was the sixth tropical cyclone , fifth named storm , and second hurricane of the 2008 Pacific hurricane season . Elida formed out of a weak tropical wave which formed off the western coast of Central America on July 8 . The wave remained poorly organized over the next two days before developing a surface low . The low was declared Tropical Depression Six @-@ E on July 11 while located to the south of Guatemala . The depression intensified into Tropical Storm Elida the next morning . It intensified steadily over the next two days before being upgraded to a hurricane . The storm fluctuated in intensity over the next several days before reaching its peak intensity on July 16 with winds of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) . Elida slowly weakened as it passed over cooling waters and was downgraded to a tropical storm on July 18 and further downgraded to a tropical depression on July 19 . The cyclone degenerated into a remnant low shortly after , and completely dissipated on July 21 over open waters . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Hurricane Elida developed out of a weak tropical wave which formed off the western coast of Central America on July 8 . It is possible that the wave formed in the Atlantic Ocean , but there is little evidence to support this theory . The system remained poorly organized for two days before gaining enough convection to be classified using the Dvorak technique on July 10 , while located 290 mi ( 465 km ) south of Guatemala . Later that day , a surface low developed but convection remained minimal . During the night and through the morning of July 11 , convection increased sufficiently and a tropical cyclone formation alert was issued . By the end of the day , the storm had become Tropical Depression Six @-@ E , six hours earlier than the operational data . At the time of the upgrade , the depression was located 360 mi ( 580 km ) south @-@ southeast of Puerto Angel , Mexico . The depression was moving towards the west @-@ northwest at 16 mph ( 26 km / h ) due to a low to mid @-@ level ridge located to the north of the storm . 
 The depression was upgraded to Tropical Storm Elida early on July 12 while located 200 mi ( 370 km ) south of Puerto Angel , Mexico . Elida 's forward motion slowed somewhat as it neared the southwestern edge of the mid @-@ level ridge . Deep convection developed around the center of circulation and a strong banding feature formed along the western side of the storm . Slow strengthening took place throughout the morning as the center remained underneath the deep convection . Outflow to the north of the storm was slightly restricted , indicating that there was some easterly wind shear . During the afternoon , a well defined banding feature appeared , but the outflow to the north remained highly constricted . Elida began to move slightly faster , still being influenced by the mid @-@ level ridge . The foreword motion was forecast to slow down in the two- to three @-@ day range as it moved away from the ridge . Overnight , wind shear began to weaken and outflow to the north of Elida was established . By the morning of July 13 , banding features and outflow were present all around the storm , but wind shear managed to keep the center of Elida slightly displaced from the deepest convection . The movement of a weakening mid to upper @-@ level trough would allow Elida to make a westerly turn . Later in the morning , the wind shear lessened and in the early afternoon , a burst of convection near the center of Elida had formed , but subsequently weakened . 
 Although Elida initially failed to develop an <unk> in the early afternoon hours , satellite indicated the formation of an eye . Based on this , Elida was upgraded into a hurricane . In the late morning hours , Elida intensified <unk> and a ragged eye appeared in the afternoon as the structure of the storm improved . At this point , forecasters thought the Elida had peaked in intensity or was near its peak . Elida 's direction shifted from a west @-@ northwest to west as the ridge located to the north of the storm began influencing the trajectory . The eye disappeared shortly <unk> as easterly wind shear began to increase . Elida slowly weakened and by the afternoon , Elida was barely holding onto hurricane status . Despite this , Elida became better organized overnight as convection wrapped around the eye . 
 On the morning of July 16 , the eye appeared on infrared satellite and cirrus outflow improved all around the system ; however , Elida was nearing cooler waters . The mid @-@ level ridge to the north of Elida was now forecast to move with the storm , ensuring westward motion and slightly increasing the foreword speed to 12 mph ( 19 km / h ) . Elida accelerated slightly and maintained a westerly motion . The eye quickly disappeared from infrared satellite later in the morning , but deep convection persisted on the eastern side of the center of circulation . In the afternoon , an eye appeared embedded in the deep convection and Elida intensified into a category two hurricane with winds of 105 mph ( 165 km / ) while located 630 mi ( 1015 km ) southwest of Cabo San Lucas , Mexico . By the nighttime hours , thunderstorm activity in the northern semicircle of Elida waned and cold waters began to take their toll on Elida as the eye became cloud filled and less distinct . In the late morning , Elida weakened to a category one hurricane as determined in the tropical cyclone report . Despite continuing deep convection near the center of Elida and even an embedded eye , the center was lagging behind , making the storm slightly tilted . Elida produced a large amount of deep convection overnight , but the winds continued to lessen . The storm continued to move over colder waters , but wind shear was forecast to lessen , leading to slow , steady weakening . 
 By the morning of July 18 , thunderstorm activity associated with Elida diminished further and the storm was downgraded to a tropical storm . Despite being over very cool waters , Elida managed to maintain a small area of deep convection as it slowly weakened . By the afternoon , most of the convection had dissipated and all that remained . The small area of convection shifted to the east side of the center overnight , allowing Elida to remain a tropical storm with winds barely at 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) . By the morning of July 19 , Elida was traversing waters of 23 ° C ( 73 ° F ) and all the deep convection had dissipated . Due to the lack of convection , Elida was downgraded to a tropical depression . Cold waters prevented any convection from redeveloping in the late morning , and it was unlikely that any convection would form . Elida was later declared a remnant low that afternoon as the system had been devoid of convection for hours . The remnant low continued moving towards the west @-@ southwest before dissipating into an open trough on July 21 while located 690 mi ( 1 @,@ 110 km ) east @-@ southeast of the Hawaiian Islands . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Due to the proximity of Elida to Mexico , the Government of Mexico warned residents about the possibility of heavy rains from the outer edges of the storm . Thunderstorms related to Elida developed over Oaxaca , Guerrero , Michoacán , Colima and Jalisco . In Nayarit , Elida produced storms that dropped torrential rainfall and hail that injured at least one person . The rainfall resulted in the formation of a lake roughly 45 cm ( 18 in ) deep . Several trees feel , blocking streets for several hours . Street flooding reached a depth of 20 cm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) , inundating shops and some homes . Indirect effects , such as large swells , were felt along the Mexican coastline as the storm produced waves up to 4 m ( 13 ft ) . However , as trade winds increased during the middle of July , the remnants of Elida brought rainfall to east @-@ facing slopes of the Island of Hawaii and Maui . Frequent rain showers produced 2 to 6 inches ( 51 to 152 mm ) of precipitation in those regions , but no significant flooding occurred . 
 = Operation Slapstick = 
 Operation Slapstick was the code name for a British landing from the sea at the Italian port of Taranto during the Second World War . The operation , one of three landings during the Allied invasion of Italy in September 1943 , was undertaken by airborne troops of the British 1st Airborne Division , commanded by Major @-@ General George Hopkinson . 
 Planned at short notice , the mission followed an offer by the Italian government to open the ports of Taranto and Brindisi on the heel of Italy to the Allies . The airborne division was selected to undertake the mission , but at the time they were located in North Africa . A shortage of transport aircraft meant the division could not land in their traditional way by parachute and glider , and all the landing craft in the area were already allocated to the other landings : Operation Avalanche at Salerno on the western coast , and Operation Baytown at Calabria . Instead , the division had to be transported across the Mediterranean by ships of the Royal Navy . The landing was unopposed and the airborne division successfully captured the ports of Taranto , and later Brindisi on the Adriatic coast in working order . 
 The only German forces in the area were elements of the 1st Parachute Division ( 1 . Fallschirmjäger Division ) , which engaged the advancing British in ambushes and at roadblocks during a fighting withdrawal north . Eventually , by the end of September , the British 1st Airborne Division advanced 125 miles ( 201 km ) to Foggia . Reinforcements from two infantry divisions had by then been landed behind them , which allowed the airborne troops to be withdrawn to Taranto . Soon after , the division , minus the 2nd Parachute Brigade , sailed for England in preparation for Operation Overlord , the invasion of Normandy . 
 = = Background = = 
 In May 1943 , the Axis powers of Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy were defeated in the North African Campaign . Two months later , the Allied powers of Great Britain and the United States , successfully launched their invasion of Sicily , codenamed Operation Husky . The island being completely occupied by the end of August , the Allies next turned their attention to the invasion of Italy . 
 On 3 September 1943 , the British Eighth Army , under the command of General Bernard Montgomery , crossed the Straits of Messina from Sicily and landed in Calabria during Operation Baytown to seize the ports of Reggio and San Giovanni . The main invasion was planned for 9 September , with the U.S. Fifth Army , commanded by Lieutenant General Mark Clark , landing at Salerno on the western coast in Operation Avalanche , with Naples as their immediate objective . The Allies hoped that the invasion would persuade the Italian forces to surrender . If they did , the five Italian divisions in France and the twenty @-@ nine in the Balkans would have to be replaced by German formations . Also , if the Germans then decided to continue the fight in Italy , they would have to redeploy some of their divisions engaged on the Eastern Front or on occupation duties in France . 
 During secret surrender negotiations with the Allies in early September , the Italian government offered to open the ports of Taranto and Brindisi on the eastern coast . German forces in that area were very weak and would be expected to withdraw rather than fight if the Allies landed there . General Dwight D. Eisenhower , the Supreme Allied Commander in the Mediterranean , quickly planned a third landing , codenamed Slapstick , to take advantage of the offer . 
 Slapstick was in part an operation of deception , to divert German forces away from the main Allied landings at Salerno on the same day , while also attempting to capture Taranto and Brindisi intact . The main value of Taranto was its large port . Its seizure would , with the expected capture of Naples in the west by the Americans , give the Allies supply points on both Italian coasts . 
 The military operation played a major political role , since the King Vittorio Emanuele III of Italy , the queen Elena , the crown prince and future king Umberto , the Prime Minister , Generale Badoglio , and other high ranking Italian officers hastily escaped from Rome to Ortona , where they embarked aboard the corvette <unk> early in the morning of 9 September . Later on the same day they arrived at the port of Brindisi . The town of Brindisi was at the time controlled only by the Italian Army , but it was soon to be protected by the British forces , supporting the diplomatic , political and military contacts between the Italian government and the Allied forces , leading to the declaration of war by Italy against Germany . 
 = = = Taranto = = = 
 First founded by the Spartans almost 3 @,@ 000 years before , Taranto had been fought over numerous times . Combatants had ranged from the Arab and Byzantine empires to the Normans in the Middle Ages . It later became part of the Kingdom of Sicily and the Kingdom of Naples . After the unification of Italy , Taranto became the home of the Italian Navy . 
 Taranto is also the capital city of the Province of Taranto in the region of Apulia and has a large dock area . It includes the two islets of St. Peter and St. Paul , which protect the bay , called the Mar Grande ( Big Sea ) , where the commercial port is located . The military port was located in another bay , the Mar Piccolo . 
 As it was the base of the Italian Navy , in November 1940 Taranto was attacked by the British Royal Navy in what became known as the Battle of Taranto . During the attack by carrier @-@ borne aircraft , in one night , the Italian fleet lost around half its strength ; the next day , their undamaged ships were transferred from Taranto to Naples to try to protect them from similar attacks . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 = = = German forces = = = 
 The German High Command fully expected Italy to surrender and , in preparation , had secretly established a new Army group headquarters commanded by Generalfeldmarschall Erwin Rommel at Munich . Rommel would have six divisions transferred from the Eastern Front , two divisions from France that had just been reformed , and two parachute divisions based in Germany in his new command . However , a Russian offensive in the east prevented the release of all the units promised . Adolf Hitler came to the conclusion that , without the backing of the Italian Army , it would be impossible for the Germans to defend the whole of Italy . 
 In Italy , German Generalfeldmarschall Albert Kesselring , unaware of what was happening in Germany , had been building up the strength of his forces . He was aided in this by the escape from Sicily of three divisions , which managed to cross the Straits of Messina without serious loss of men or equipment . In August , five infantry and two panzer divisions moved into northern Italy . After the loss of Sicily , Hitler amended the German plans , deciding to hold the Salerno @-@ Naples area with five infantry divisions , while the 1st Parachute Division was ordered to the Apulia region . 
 Commanded by Generalmajor Richard Heidrich , the 1st Parachute Division consisted of the 1st , 3rd and 4th Parachute Regiments , with an artillery regiment , tank @-@ destroyer , anti @-@ aircraft , and engineer battalions , and other support units . The division was the successor of the original German airborne force , the 7th Air Division , and was highly experienced . It had spearheaded the German invasion in the west in 1940 , and fought in the battles of Greece and Crete , and in the Soviet Union . Withdrawn from the Soviet Union in 1943 , the division had already fought against British paratroops during operations in Sicily . However , on 9 September only three combat battalions and the headquarters were in Apulia . 
 = = = British forces = = = 
 Plans were formulated on 6 September to transport the British 1st Airborne Division to Taranto from their base in North Africa . They would take advantage of the Italian surrender to capture the port and establish anti @-@ aircraft defences . What was left of the Italian fleet still using the harbour was expected to have left beforehand . The Allies believed that the division would face only minimal opposition and would be able to overcome any resistance with the limited naval support available , as Taranto was outside the range of Allied fighter aircraft based in Sicily . 
 Although it had been formed in October 1941 , the British 1st Airborne Division , commanded by Major @-@ General George Hopkinson , had never before fought as a complete division . The only units with any combat experience were the 1st Parachute Brigade , which had fought with distinction as an independent brigade in North Africa and in Operation Fustian during the Allied invasion of Sicily , and the 1st Airlanding Brigade , understrength with only two battalions , which had also fought in Sicily during Operation Ladbroke . Both brigades had suffered heavy casualties in Sicily and were in no condition to undertake any further assault landings . Of the division 's other brigades , the 2nd and 4th Para Brigades , were untried in battle . Also , the 2nd Parachute Brigade was the only full strength unit , as the 4th Parachute Brigade had only two battalions , with its third battalion still forming in Palestine . 
 There was only sufficient troop transport aircraft to support one division @-@ sized operation , and that was allocated to the U.S. 82nd Airborne Division , under Major General Matthew Ridgway , as part of the Salerno landings . As a result , the 1st Airborne Division had to be carried to Italy by sea . With no landing craft available on such short notice , the division was carried across the Mediterranean by four cruisers , HMS Aurora , HMS Penelope , HMS Dido and HMS Sirius of the Royal Navy 's 12th Cruiser Squadron , accompanied by the minelayer HMS Abdiel and the American cruiser USS Boise , all commanded by Commodore W.G. Agnew . If the landing was successful , the British 78th Infantry Division in Sicily and the 8th Indian Infantry Division in the Middle East , would be sent to reinforce the airborne division , under the command of V Corps . 
 = = Landing = = 
 Before leaving Tunisia , the 1st Airborne Division was divided into two halves . The first half , consisting of the divisional headquarters , the 1st and 4th Parachute Brigade groups and the 9th Field Company , Royal Engineers , boarded the Royal Navy ships at Bizerta . The ships departed at 17 : 00 on 8 September , their decks loaded with the division 's vehicles and stores . Admiral of the Fleet Sir Andrew Cunningham was concerned that the Italian battle fleet based at Taranto might sortie and attack the cruisers which would be unable to defend themselves adequately , overloaded as they were with troops and equipment . He therefore ordered the battleships HMS Howe and HMS King George V and their six escorting destroyers , commanded by Vice Admiral Arthur Power , to leave their base in Malta and join the flotilla . At 18 : 30 8 September , while the convoy was at sea , General Eisenhower broadcast the details of the Italian surrender . 
 To support the British landings early on 9 September , <unk> was attacked by American B @-@ 26 Marauders from the 17th and 310th Bombardment Groups . Then , just as the Allied flotilla approached Taranto , the Italian battleships Andrea Doria and Caio Duilio and three cruisers were observed leaving the harbour . The flotilla went to action stations , but the Italian ships just sailed past them en route to Malta to surrender in accordance with the agreement between the Allies and the Italian government . At 15 : 00 , the flotilla reached the minefield guarding the entrance to Taranto . The destroyer HMS Javelin negotiated the minefield and entered the harbour . Two hours later , Javelin returned with an Italian harbour pilot on board . HMS Penelope and USS Boise were guided safely into the harbour and alongside the jetty , where they disembarked the troops they were carrying , while the other ships in the flotilla remained outside the port and used small ship 's boats to take their soldiers ashore . The port 's facilities were all in working order and were soon unloading the ships . 
 The first units ashore were the headquarters of the 4th Parachute Brigade and the 10th Parachute Battalion , which were directed to move inland to guard against a German attack . When the airborne division troops entered the city , they were welcomed by the Italian defenders and informed that the German forces had already departed . When the two brigades were offloaded , they passed through the city and set up defensive positions to the north . At the same time , Major @-@ General George F. Hopkinson , established his divisional headquarters in the <unk> Europa Hotel and accepted the Italian surrender from the military governor . 
 After safely landing the first half of the division , the 12th Cruiser Squadron returned to Bizerta to collect the remaining troops , consisting of the 2nd Parachute Brigade , the 1st Airlanding Brigade and the Glider Pilot Regiment . The only casualties in the landing occurred on 10 September when HMS Abdiel , while manoeuvring alongside the dock , struck a mine and sank . Casualties totaled 58 killed and 154 wounded from the 6th ( Royal Welch ) Parachute Battalion , and 48 dead among Abdiel 's crew . Abdiel was also carrying twelve 6 pounder anti @-@ tank guns of the 2nd Anti @-@ tank Battery , and the division 's reserve ammunition supply . 
 Overnight , the 4th Parachute Brigade led the advance inland . By daybreak on 10 September , they had reached <unk> , where they were welcomed by the population . The next town they reached was Mottola , which was still occupied by the Germans . The Germans put up some resistance to the 156th Parachute Battalion 's assault , but withdrew soon after . The division 's first combat casualties resulted from this action . The wounded were evacuated to Taranto , where the 133rd ( Parachute ) Field Ambulance had established an 80 @-@ bed main dressing station at the <unk> hospital . 
 The German paratroop rearguard tried to delay the British advance with several ambushes and roadblocks . At a roadblock beside the town of Castellaneta , Major @-@ General Hopkinton , the GOC , was hit by a burst of German machine gun fire while observing the 10th Parachute Battalion 's attack . He died of his wounds the following day . Hopkinson was replaced as the divisional commander by Brigadier Ernest Down , previously the commander of the 2nd Parachute Brigade . 
 Within 48 hours of landing at Taranto , the airborne division reached and occupied the port of Brindisi and Bari on the Adriatic coast without opposition from the Italian defenders . On 11 September on the division 's left , contact was made with the 1st Canadian Infantry Division , the leading unit of the British Eighth Army which had arrived in the area from Calabria . By the evening of 12 September , the 1st Airborne Division had advanced 20 miles ( 32 km ) inland on foot . 
 The airborne division 's next objective was now the airfield at Gioia del Colle . The Royal Air Force needed the airfield to bring in fighter aircraft from Sicily and support the landings at Salerno , which had not gone as expected . The Germans continued their withdrawal , and Gioia was reached over the night of the 16 / 17 September , by the 10th and 156th Parachute battalions . The Royal Air Force took over the airfield and 48 hours later , six squadrons were flying from the base in support of Allied operations . Between 20 and 24 September , the 1st Airborne Division was ordered to halt and construct defences on the approaches to Taranto , due to concerns that the Germans might launch a counterattack against the overextended unit . 
 The V Corps headquarters landed at Taranto on 18 September and prepared for the arrival of its two divisions . The first was the British 78th Infantry Division , which started arriving at Bari on 22 September , followed by the 8th Indian Infantry Division at Taranto the next day . On 24 September , the 1st Parachute and 1st Airlanding brigades took over the advance for the airborne division . By 27 September , they and the 78th Division reached Foggia , 125 miles ( 201 km ) from Taranto . From there , the airborne division was withdrawn to Taranto . By November , most of the 1st Airborne Division had left for England . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Operation Slapstick did not provide the diversion General Eisenhower had hoped for . The decision by Heidrich not to oppose the landings was made without reference to Kesselring 's headquarters . Heidrich had expected to be confronted by an overwhelming Allied force and had withdrawn his units north , although he endeavoured to delay the Allied advance where possible by ambushes and roadblocks . The German division went on to frustrate the Allied attempt to advance on Rome during the Battle of Monte Cassino in 1944 . 
 The British 1st Airborne Division only fought in one other battle during the war . Almost a year to the day , on 17 September 1944 , they took part in Operation Market Garden , the airborne assault crossing of the River Rhine in the Netherlands . Trapped behind German lines with their backs to the river and surrounded by parts of two panzer divisions , the division was virtually destroyed in the Battle of Arnhem ; only 2 @,@ 100 men of the 10 @,@ 000 that had started the mission were evacuated south of the Rhine . The 1st Airborne Division was also flown into Norway towards the end of the war in May 1945 to accept the surrender of German forces and occupy formerly German held positions in Operation Doomsday . 
 = Tropical Storm Agatha ( 1992 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Agatha was the deadliest tropical cyclone to form during the 1992 Pacific hurricane season . Developing as a tropical depression off the Pacific coast of Mexico on June 1 , the storm gradually organized over the next several hours . As it moved northward , the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Agatha later that day . After reaching its peak winds as a strong tropical storm , Agatha steadily weakened while turning to the west . The system was downgraded to a tropical depression on June 5 , and subsequently lost its tropical characteristics the next day . Although Agatha never made landfall , the storm 's outer rainbands triggered widespread flooding that killed ten people . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On May 26 , a tropical wave — or a quasi @-@ equatorward area of low pressure — moved off the Central American coast into the east Pacific . Over the subsequent days the system produced a broad area of convection , which began to show signs of organization on May 29 . Early on June 1 , the disturbance became better defined , and shortly thereafter the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) classified it as a tropical depression while located 460 mi ( 740 km ) southwest of Acapulco . At the time , the depression maintained good outflow aloft ; it was forecast to strengthen into a minimal hurricane after three days . Based on a combination of ship data and Dvorak intensity estimates , the system was upgraded into Tropical Storm Agatha on June 2 . 
 For the first two days of its duration , Agatha steered toward the north while embedded within a deep southerly flow . Steady intensification continued , and the storm reached winds of 50 mph ( 90 km / h ) six hours after being upgraded as it neared the coast of Mexico . By the afternoon of June 2 , the center exhibited an elongated appearance within its associated central dense overcast , a large area of organized mid @-@ tropospheric convection . Around 1800 UTC that same day , the storm peaked in intensity with winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) and a minimum pressure of 990 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 23 inHg ) . 
 Maintaining its peak intensity for 30 hours , Agatha gradually decelerated as it passed within 100 mi ( 160 km ) southwest of the Mexican coast . Although specialists at the NHC had anticipated a Category 1 @-@ hurricane landfall on the territory , the storm defied predictions and stayed at sea . The center of the storm promptly became ill @-@ defined on infrared satellite imagery , simultaneously recurving to the west . Agatha continued to degenerate quickly into the morning of June 4 , with a ragged appearance observed on satellite imagery . By 0600 UTC June 5 , the storm was downgraded back into tropical depression status prior to dissipating the next day . 
 = = Preparations and Impact = = 
 On June 2 , forecasters at the National Hurricane Center anticipated Agatha to make landfall in Mexico near hurricane strength . In light of this , a tropical storm warning and hurricane watch were issued for the Pacific coast of Mexico between <unk> to Cabo <unk> around 2100 UTC that day . Additionally , heavy rains from the system prompted concerns over mudslides and flash floods . Following Agatha 's turn towards the west early on June 3 , the watches and warnings were discontinued . Roughly 1 @,@ 500 people evacuated from coastal areas of Michoacán due to the threat of damaging winds and flooding . 
 Although the center of Agatha remained offshore , heavy rains within the system 's outer rainbands impacted southwestern and central Mexico . Widespread flooding and mudslides killed ten people and left thousands homeless . Along the coast , waves reportedly reached heights of 16 ft ( 4 @.@ 9 m ) . 
 = New York State Route 391 = 
 New York State Route 391 ( NY 391 ) is a short state highway in Erie County , New York , in the United States . The route is signed as north – south ; however , it follows more of a southeast – northwest alignment between NY 277 in the hamlet of North Boston and U.S. Route 62 ( US 62 ) in the village of Hamburg . NY 391 meets the Southern Expressway ( US 219 ) just north of North Boston . Both ends of NY 391 are located in residential areas ; however , the middle section of the route passes through more rural areas of the towns of Boston and Hamburg . 
 The routing of NY 391 has been part of several routes over the years , beginning with NY 62 in 1930 . NY 62 was mostly renumbered to NY 75 c . 1932 , and all of NY 75 south of Hamburg became concurrent to US 219 when it was extended into New York c . 1935 . NY 75 was cut back to Hamburg by 1940 , leaving just US 219 on modern NY 391 . US 219 was realigned north of North Boston in the early 1970s to follow other routes north to meet the first completed piece of the Southern Expressway near Orchard Park . NY 391 was assigned to US 219 's former routing into Hamburg at this time . The route originally ended two blocks to the west at the junction of NY 75 and US 62 ; however , this extension was eliminated c . 2004 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 391 begins at an intersection with NY 277 ( Herman Hill Road ) in North Boston , a hamlet within the town of Boston . It heads to the northwest as Boston State Road , passing by suburban homes as it approaches the Southern Expressway ( US 219 ) . The two highways meet by way of a diamond interchange . West of the exit , NY 391 's surroundings become more rural as it enters the town of Hamburg , where it passes by open fields and a handful of houses . 
 The route follows Eighteen Mile Creek northwest and west toward the village of Hamburg , where the amount of development along the highway increases significantly . At McKinley Parkway ( County Route 204 ) , NY 391 becomes East Main Street and begins to pass through the outskirts of the village . It officially enters Hamburg upon intersecting Sunnyside Drive two blocks to the west . The route continues into the village center , passing by commercial and residential buildings on its way to a roundabout at Buffalo Street , where it meets US 62 . At this point , NY 391 comes to an end while US 62 turns west onto Main Street from Buffalo Street . 
 = = History = = 
 What is now NY 391 was originally designated as part of NY 62 , a highway extending from Great Valley north to Buffalo , in the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York . US 62 was extended into New York c . 1932 ; as a result , all of NY 62 south of Athol Springs was redesignated as NY 75 to eliminate numerical duplication with the U.S. Highway . US 219 was extended into New York c . 1935 , overlapping NY 75 between Great Valley and Hamburg . The overlap was eliminated by 1940 following the truncation of NY 75 to what had been the west end of its overlap with US 62 through Hamburg . 
 In the early 1970s , construction began on the Southern Expressway , a limited @-@ access highway connecting Buffalo to Springville . The first segment of the expressway — between the New York State Thruway east of Lackawanna and US 20A west of Orchard Park — opened to traffic by 1973 as a realignment of US 219 . In between the end of the expressway and North Boston , US 219 temporarily overlapped US 20A and NY 277 . The former routing of US 219 from North Boston to Hamburg was redesignated as NY 391 . 
 An extension of the freeway south to NY 391 near North Boston opened in the mid @-@ 1970s , resulting in a slight , temporary truncation of NY 391 to the end of the freeway . Another extension of the expressway south to Springville was completed in the early 1980s . It became part of US 219 upon opening ; at the same time , NY 391 was reextended to NY 277 in North Boston . The remainder of US 219 's former routing south to Springville was transferred to Erie County upon the completion of the Springville – Buffalo segment of the Southern Expressway . Originally , NY 391 terminated at NY 75 in Hamburg , resulting in an extraneous overlap with US 62 for two blocks along Main Street . NY 391 was truncated to the eastern end of the concurrency c . 2004 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Erie County . 
 = The Hitchhiker 's Guide to the Galaxy ( radio series ) = 
 The Hitchhiker 's Guide to the Galaxy is a science fiction comedy radio series written by Douglas Adams ( with some material in the first series provided by John Lloyd ) . It was originally broadcast in the United Kingdom by BBC Radio 4 in 1978 , and afterwards the BBC World Service , National Public Radio in the U.S. and CBC Radio in Canada . The series was the first radio comedy programme to be produced in stereo , and was innovative in its use of music and sound effects , winning a number of awards . 
 The series follows the adventures of hapless Englishman Arthur Dent and his friend Ford Prefect , an alien who writes for The Hitchhiker 's Guide to the Galaxy , a pan @-@ galactic encyclopedia and travel guide . After Earth is destroyed in the first episode , Arthur and Ford find themselves aboard a stolen spaceship piloted by a motley crew including Zaphod Beeblebrox ( Ford 's semi @-@ cousin and Galactic President ) , the depressed robot Marvin and Trillian , the only other human survivor of Earth 's destruction . 
 A pilot programme was commissioned in March 1977 , and was recorded by the end of the following June . A second series was commissioned in 1979 , transmitted in 1980 . Episodes of the first series were specially re @-@ recorded for release on LP records and audio cassettes and Adams adapted the first series into a best @-@ selling novel in 1979 . After the 1980 transmissions of the second radio series , a second novel was published and the first series was adapted for television . This was followed in turn by three further novels , a computer game , and various other media formats . 
 Adams had considered writing a third radio series to be based on his novel Life , the Universe and Everything in 1993 , but the project did not begin for another ten years . Adams had died in May 2001 . Dirk Maggs , with whom Adams had discussed the new series , eventually directed and co @-@ produced radio series adaptations of that novel , as well as So Long , and Thanks for All the Fish and Mostly Harmless . These became the third , fourth and fifth radio series transmitted in 2004 and 2005 . 
 A sixth series will be aired in 2017 . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Early development = = = 
 Douglas Adams had contributed comedy sketches for BBC radio programmes produced by Simon Brett ( including The <unk> Way and Week Ending ) , and was asked to pitch a radio sitcom in February 1977 . Adams initially pitched a " bedsit comedy " because that " seemed to be what most situation comedies tended to be about . " Adams said in an interview that when Simon Brett proposed a radio science fiction comedy series , he " fell off his chair ... because it was what I 'd been fighting for all these years " . Adams wrote his first outlines in February 1977 . 
