 Originally to be called The Ends of the Earth , each episode would have ended with the planet Earth meeting its demise in a different way . While writing the first episode , Adams realised that he needed a character who knew what was going to happen to Earth before the other characters . He decided to make this character an alien and , remembering an idea he supposedly had had while lying drunk in a field in Innsbruck , Austria in 1971 , decided that this character would be a " roving reporter " for The Hitchhiker 's Guide to the Galaxy . Later recollections by his friends at the time indicate that Adams first spoke openly of the idea of " hitch @-@ hiking around the galaxy " while on holiday in Greece in 1973 . 
 As the first radio episode 's writing progressed , the Guide became the central focus of his story , and he decided to base the whole series around it , with the initial destruction of Earth being the only hold @-@ over from the " Ends of the Earth " proposal . In Adams ' February 1977 outline , the character of Arthur Dent was initially called " <unk> B " , the joke being that the audience initially assume the character is also an alien rather than a human . Adams later renamed the character for the pilot to " Arthur Dent " . It has been proposed by Adams ' biographer M. J. Simpson that the character was almost certainly named after the 17th century puritan writer Arthur Dent , author of The Plain Man 's Pathway to Heaven first published in 1601 , although Adams himself claimed no recollection of consciously choosing the name . 
 = = = Pilot and commissioning = = = 
 A pilot episode was commissioned on 1 March 1977 and the recording was completed on 28 June 1977 . Brett and Adams both later recounted different parts of the pilot episode 's genesis , including convincing the BBC that such a programme could not be recorded with a studio audience , and insisting that the programme be recorded in stereo sound . To win this latter argument , Hitchhiker 's was briefly classified internally as a drama instead of a comedy , as in 1977 BBC Radio Drama programmes were allowed to be recorded in stereo , and BBC Radio Comedy programmes were not . 
 A full series of six episodes ( five new episodes , plus the pilot ) was commissioned on 31 August 1977 . However , Adams had in the meantime sent a copy of the Hitchhiker 's pilot episode to the BBC 's Doctor Who production office , and was thus commissioned to write a four @-@ part Doctor Who serial ( " The Pirate Planet " ) a few weeks later . In addition , Simon Brett had left the BBC , and the final five episodes in the first series were produced by Geoffrey Perkins . 
 With conflicting writing commitments , Adams engaged his friend and flat @-@ mate John Lloyd to assist in writing what became known as " Fit the Fifth " and " Fit the Sixth " . The second episode was produced in November 1977 . The script of the last episode of the first series ( which was later retitled " The Primary Phase " ) was completed in February 1978 , and production ( including sound mixing and effects ) was completed on 3 March 1978 . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Adams wrote both of the main parts of Arthur Dent and Ford Prefect with actors Simon Jones and Geoffrey McGivern in mind . According to Jones , Adams telephoned him when he was writing the pilot to ask whether he would essentially play himself ; Adams later stated that although Arthur Dent was not a portrayal of Simon Jones , he wrote the part to play to Jones 's strengths as an actor . 
 The radio series ( and the LP and TV versions ) featured a narration by comedy actor Peter Jones as " The Book " . He was cast after it was decided that a " Peter @-@ Jonesy " sort of voice was required . This led to a three @-@ month search for an actor with sonorous , avuncular tones who sounded exactly like Peter Jones , after which the producers eventually hired Peter Jones himself . Following another actor dropping out of the production , Bill Wallis was called in at short notice to play two parts ; Mr Prosser and Vogon Jeltz . One character appearing in the pilot who was dropped from subsequent incarnations of the story was Lady Cynthia , an aristocrat who helps demolish Dent 's house , who was played by another ex @-@ Cambridge Footlights actress , Jo Kendall . 
 The pilot featured only a small cast of characters , and following its commission into a series there was a need for additional characters . Many were picked for their roles in previous series , for example according to Adams , Mark Wing @-@ Davey had played a character in The Glittering Prizes " who took advantage of people and was very trendy " making him suitable for the role of Zaphod . Meanwhile , Richard Vernon , who was noted for his portrayal of " grandfatherly types " , was chosen to be Slartibartfast . Other main characters included Susan Sheridan as Trillian and Stephen Moore as Marvin . 
 = = First and second radio series = = 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 In the first series , Earthman Arthur Dent is going to have his house demolished to make way for a new road , but before work can start his friend Ford Prefect informs him that the world is going to be demolished by a Vogon constructor fleet " to make way for a hyperspace bypass " and that he is in fact an alien writer for " The Hitchhiker 's Guide to the Galaxy " . <unk> a ride aboard the Vogon ship which has just destroyed Earth , the pair eventually find themselves aboard a stolen spaceship called The Heart of Gold . On board is Ford 's semi @-@ cousin and President of the Galaxy , Zaphod Beeblebrox , a woman Dent once met at a party called Trisha MacMillan ( who has styled herself " Trillian " ) and a depressed robot called Marvin . Beeblebrox is searching for the mythical planet of <unk> and the answer to the " Ultimate Question of Life , the Universe and Everything " , which it turns out is " 42 " . Dent and the others later find themselves at The Restaurant at the End of the Universe and ultimately held captive aboard a <unk> ship which is just about to crash @-@ land on Prehistoric Earth . 
 In series two , Zaphod , wanted for stealing the Heart of Gold amongst other misdemeanors , is attempting to contact the editor of The Guide while escaping mercenaries from <unk> , " the most totally evil place in the Galaxy " . Arthur and Ford are eventually rescued after being stranded on prehistoric Earth for years and eventually reunited aboard the Heart of Gold , where they are pursued by <unk> . Finding themselves on the planet of <unk> , populated by a race of bird @-@ people , they hear about the rudest word in the universe and the Shoe Event Horizon . Escaping from this planet using a 900 @-@ year @-@ old spaceship , the three eventually find themselves in the offices of the Guide editor , Zarniwoop , and we discover that it was Zaphod who accidentally signed off the Earth for destruction . 
 = = = Production = = = 
 One of Adams 's stated goals was to be experimental in the use of sound . Being a fan of Pink Floyd and The Beatles ( and especially the experimental concept albums both bands produced in the late 1960s and early 1970s ) , Adams wanted the programme to have the feel of a " rock album ... to convey the idea that you actually were on a spaceship or an alien planet — that sense of a huge aural landscape " . 
 The first series was therefore the first BBC radio comedy to use stereophonic techniques . Adams later said that before Hitchhiker 's , stereo was deemed impossible for radio comedy and after it was made compulsory . Producer Geoffrey Perkins recalled that the technology available in 1978 for mixing sound effects at the BBC 's Paris Theatre radio studio was limited . The production had one eight track tape recorder at their disposal and so many of the effects in the programme were mixed " live " with tape loops of background sound effects strung around the recording studio . Actors whose speech needed to be modified in post @-@ production by Radiophonic technicians , such as Stephen Moore 's performance as Marvin the Android , were recorded in isolation from the main " humanoid " characters . Allegedly , Moore recorded most of his performance in a cupboard and met the other actors only after the first session was complete . 
 Sound and effects were created by Paddy Kingsland , Dick Mills and Harry Parker of the BBC Radiophonic Workshop . Several of the sound effects recorded by Dick Mills for the first series were released on the album BBC Sound Effects No. 26 - Sci @-@ Fi Sound Effects . Other BBC staff members who worked on the first two radio series included Alick Hale @-@ Munro ( chief sound engineer ) and Anne Ling ( production secretary ) and the " Technical Team " is given as : Paul <unk> , Lisa Braun ( studio manager ) , Colin Duff ( studio manager ) , Eric Young , Martha Knight , Max Alcock and John Whitehall . 
 The first radio series ( first six episodes ) was broadcast on BBC Radio 4 in March and April , 1978 . A seventh episode was broadcast on 24 December 1978 . This seventh episode was commonly known as the Christmas Episode . This had nothing to do with Christmas except in an early draft ( which would have had Marvin the Paranoid Android as the " star " that was followed by the Three Wise Men ) ; it was called the Christmas Episode because it was first broadcast on Christmas Eve . 
 Production on the second series was delayed several times . While Adams was meant to be working on scripts for a stage adaptation of Hitchhiker 's in April 1979 , he was also employed as the Script Editor for Doctor Who and turned down an offer from John Lloyd to submit material for Not the Nine O 'Clock News . The recording on the first day scheduled for the second radio series , 19 May 1979 , was left incomplete because Adams had not yet finished the script . Further scheduled recordings on 11 July and 1 August of that year were also cancelled , this time due in part to Adams trying to work on the LP re @-@ recordings of the first series , as well as its novelisation . 
 Further recording attempts were made on 23 October and 3 December . The recording of the final episode in the second series was completed on 13 January 1980 : the audio mixing of the episode was not finished until 25 January , the day it was transmitted . The tape " arrived just a few minutes before transmission " . The final five episodes , completing the second radio series , were broadcast in January 1980 . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The theme tune used for the radio series ( and all subsequent adaptations ) is " Journey of the Sorcerer " , an instrumental piece composed by Bernie Leadon and recorded by The Eagles on their album One of These Nights . Adams chose this song for its futuristic @-@ sounding nature , but also for the fact that it had a banjo in it , which , as Geoffrey Perkins recalls , Adams said would give it an " on the road , hitch @-@ hiking feel " . 
 Adams also wanted to incorporate music from a variety of pop , rock and classical artists . Series one ( " The Primary Phase " ) included an eclectic range of modern classical , experimental rock and electronic music . The Hitchhiker 's Guide to the Galaxy : The Original Radio Scripts lists works including A Modern Mass for the Dead ( Requiem ) by György Ligeti , A Rainbow in Curved Air by Terry Riley , Volumina by György Ligeti , Wind on Water by Robert Fripp and Brian Eno , Poppy <unk> and the Phantom Band by Terry Riley , <unk> by Patrick Moraz , Shine On You Crazy Diamond ( intro ) by Pink Floyd , Rock and Roll Music by The Beatles , Also sprach Zarathustra ( intro ) by Richard Strauss , <unk> by Gruppe Between , Space Theme by <unk> <unk> , Oxygène by Jean Michel Jarre , That 's Entertainment by Howard Dietz and Arthur Schwartz , Over Fire Island by Eno ( with Fripp ) , Miracles of the Gods by Absolute Elsewhere , <unk> by Karlheinz Stockhausen , <unk> by György Ligeti , The <unk> Cathedral by Isao Tomita , <unk> by Gruppe Between and What a Wonderful World by Louis Armstrong . 
 This diverse range of music was only featured during the first series due to the difficulty in obtaining rights for commercial releases ( leading to episodes of the first series being remade as an LP album without the proprietary background music in 1979 ) . For series two Paddy Kingsland was commissioned to provide background music and for the third to fifth series Paul ' Wix ' Wickens was chosen . 
 = = = International broadcasts and repeats = = = 
 The series was first broadcast on BBC Radio 4 at 10.30pm on Wednesday 8 March 1978 . Simon Jones recalled that Adams was initially disappointed at the scheduling as the timeslot was allegedly guaranteed to turn a programme into a " cult " ( i.e. a small but dedicated listenership ) . As it happened , the programme gained listeners through the lack of any competition elsewhere on television or radio , but primarily through word of mouth ; several Sunday newspapers included reviews and it was mentioned in Radio 4 's Pick of the Week . As a result of its exposure through these reviews , the BBC received numerous requests for a repeat from people who had missed the initial episodes . A repeat of the series was broadcast on 23 April , only two weeks after the last episode had aired . 
 In the end , the complete first series was rebroadcast twice by the BBC in 1978 and once in 1979 , as well as on the BBC World Service . The complete second series was rebroadcast once in 1980 , and the complete original run of 12 episodes was broadcast twice over a twelve @-@ week period , once from April to June 1981 and the second time from the end of March to the start of June , 1983 . 
 Broadcasting by National Public Radio in the United States followed in March 1981 with a repeat broadcast in September . This was one of their first transmissions in stereo . The following year , 1982 , the series was carried by CBC Radio ( Canadian Broadcasting Corporation ) . A German radio version of the first six radio episodes , Per Anhalter ins All was transmitted in 1981 and the twelve original radio episodes have been translated and transmitted in Finland , France , The Netherlands and Sweden . 
 All of the episodes , including those completed after Adams 's death , are referred to as " Fits " after Lewis Carroll 's " The Hunting of the Snark : an Agony in Eight Fits " . In 1981 , upon a rebroadcast of the twelve episodes of the first two series , it was decided that the Christmas episode , which previously had no episode number , would be called " Fit the Seventh " and the episodes in the second series , which had first been billed as Fit the First to Fit the Fifth ( representing five parts of the second series ) would become Fit the Eighth to Fit the Twelfth . 
 = = Reception and awards = = 
 The first series was noted for its unusual concept , out @-@ of @-@ context parodies , " semantic and philosophical jokes " , compressed prose and " groundbreaking deployment of sound effects and voice techniques " . 
 The programme was a hit with listeners , although a BBC World Service listener in India allegedly " strongly objected to ' Robots taking part in a comedy show ' " and another in Sierra Leone thought that " as a source of information it is misleading " . One listener complained to the Radio Times that " In just about 50 years of radio and latterly TV listening and watching , this strikes me as the most fatuous , inane , childish , pointless , <unk> drivel ... It is not even remotely funny " . 
 BBC Radio 3 's Critics Forum thought the show had " the sort of effect that a Monty Python programme actually has , of making everything that appears immediately after it on radio or television or whatever , seem absolutely ludicrous " . By the time the sixth episode was broadcast , the show had become a cult hit . 
 The success of the series encouraged Adams to adapt it into a novel , which was based on the first four Fits and released in the second week of October 1979 . While the second radio series was being recorded in 1979 , Adams was commissioned to deliver a pilot script for a television adaptation , which , after a number of delays , was delivered by 1981 . The storyline set out by the initial radio series has since appeared in numerous formats including a 1984 video game and a 2005 feature film . 
 The original series was the recipient of a number of awards including the Imperial Tobacco Award ( 1978 ) , The Sony Award ( 1979 ) , The Society of Authors / Pye Awards ' Best Programme for Young People ' ( 1980 ) and the Mark Time Awards ' Grand Master Award ' ( Adams ) and ' Hall of Fame ' ( 1998 ) . It was the only radio show ever to be nominated for the Hugo science fiction awards , in 1979 , in the ' Best Dramatic Presentation ' category . As a result of the series , Douglas Adams was inducted into the Radio Academy 's Hall of Fame . 
 = = Third , fourth and fifth radio series = = 
 = = = Announcement = = = 
 In November 2003 , two years after Adams 's death and 23 years after the production on the Secondary Phase had ceased , a new radio adaptation of Adams ' <unk> novel Life , the Universe and Everything was announced . This would become the third series of the Hitchhiker 's Guide to the Galaxy on radio . Dirk Maggs , a friend of Adams , was chosen to create , direct and co @-@ produce the adaptations . Maggs had previously consulted with Adams on potential radio adaptations for the final three books in 1993 and 1997 . The project was restarted in September 2001 by Maggs , Helen <unk> and Bruce Hyman , with help from Jane Belson and Ed Victor . 
 At the time of the announcement , it was stated that the original goal was to transmit the six part adaptation of the third novel starting in February 2004 , with the remaining eight episodes comprising the final two novels . A fourth and fifth series based on So Long , and Thanks For All the Fish and Mostly Harmless were to have been transmitted in September 2004 . 
 However , soon after the six episodes comprising the third series had been recorded by Above the Title Productions , a minor legal dispute over the online availability of episodes arose between the production company and The Walt Disney Company , which had started production on the Hitchhiker 's movie , also in 2003 . This led to a delay in transmitting the third series and an immediate cessation in the production of series four and five . Eventually a deal was worked out , and the Tertiary Phase was first broadcast on BBC Radio 4 on 21 September 2004 . 
 = = = Adaptation = = = 
 Maggs stated in the series ' script book that he felt bound by his promise to Douglas Adams to allow the scripts of the Tertiary Phase to closely follow the plot of the third book ; " I myself was willing to give the Tertiary Phase 7 out of 10 on the grounds that I was a little too reverential to the text and the pace suffered as a result . " But in adapting the final two novels , the only instructions Maggs got from Adams was " They don 't need more than four episodes each . " Thus Maggs was able to use many of the major plot elements of the final two books ( though not necessarily in the same order ) , and attempt to reconnect plot threads from all five radio series . 
 The new episodes reunited most of the living original cast . The parts of The Book , Eddie the Computer and Slartibartfast were recast to replace actors now deceased , with William Franklyn , Roger Gregg and Richard Griffiths taking over these three roles , respectively . Peter Jones , the original narrator , had died in 2000 ; Richard Vernon , the original Slartibartfast , had died in 1997 ; and David Tate , who had voiced Eddie the Computer ( among many other roles ) , had died in 1996 . 
 Bill Wallis , who played Mr. Prosser and <unk> Vogon Jeltz in the original series , was unavailable , and Toby Longworth took the role of Jeltz in the new series . John Marsh , who had been the continuity announcer for Fits Two to Twelve , was rehired to reprise this role . There was also a posthumous cameo role by Adams as <unk> , edited from his BBC audiobook recording of the novel . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 In series 3 , after the events of series 2 are revealed to be a hallucination , Arthur Dent and Ford Prefect find themselves again stuck on prehistoric Earth . After being rescued , they find themselves transported to Lord 's Cricket Ground just before it is destroyed by 11 white robots . Slartibartfast teaches Dent how cricket is based on the history of the worst wars in the galaxy , and the pair travel to Krikkit in order to prevent another war . In the final part , Dent and Trillian meet the computer behind the Supernova Bomb and there is another attempt to find the Ultimate Question to Life , the Universe and Everything . 
 In the fourth series , Dent discovers that Earth has been recreated again and meets Fenchurch , the woman of his dreams . Meanwhile , a spaceship lands in Knightsbridge , God 's Last Message to his Creation is discovered , and Marvin makes his last appearance . In the fifth series , a tenth planet in the solar system is discovered and Ford discovers that The Guide has become a much more sinister place to work . Arthur Dent discovers that he is a father and his new daughter , Random , flies to Earth to meet him . There are three potential endings to the series . 
 = = = Broadcast = = = 
 The third series ran on BBC Radio 4 from Tuesday 21 September to 26 October 2004 , with repeats on the following Thursdays . The series was also streamed in <unk> and Windows Media formats ( including versions in a 5 @.@ 1 surround mix ) were made available on Radio 4 's website until the following Thursday . In another continuity nod , the term " Fit " is still used in place of " episode " ; episodes of the third series were subtitled Fits the Thirteenth to Eighteenth . 
 The six @-@ part " Tertiary Phase " was broadcast in September and October 2004 . The four @-@ part " Quandary Phase " was broadcast in May 2005 , and the four @-@ part " Quintessential Phase " was broadcast immediately following , in May and June 2005 . The names for these series were chosen because they sound " less daunting , more memorable and are a bit easier to spell " than the standard terms quaternary and <unk> . 
 = = Media releases = = 
 The first two series were first released on audio cassette and CD in 1988 , marking the tenth anniversary of the first broadcast of the first episode . These were the first programmes of any kind released on CD by the BBC Radio Collection . The two radio series were known simply as " the first series " and " the second series " until 1992 when the BBC made its first re @-@ release in separate boxes as " The Primary Phase " and " The Secondary Phase " . The episodes were released with those titles in 1993 , and again in 1998 , for the series ' twentieth anniversary . In 2001 , they became the first programmes of any kind re @-@ released by the BBC Radio Collection in an MP3 @-@ CD format . 
 A 3 @-@ CD set of the Tertiary Phase was released in mid @-@ October 2004 , before the final episodes were broadcast . These CDs contain extended material , previously cut to make 27 @-@ minute episodes for radio . A 2 @-@ CD set of the Quandary Phase was released at the end of May 2005 , and a 2 @-@ CD set of the Quintessential Phase was released at the end of June 2005 . Both sets again include material that was originally cut for reasons of timing . 
 A script book for the final fourteen episodes was released in July 2005 . The book is entitled The Hitchhiker 's Guide to the Galaxy Radio Scripts : The Tertiary , Quandary and Quintessential Phases . Dirk Maggs writes in his introduction that the " book is a companion volume to The Original Radio Scripts .... " 
 A box set entitled The Hitchhiker 's Guide to the Galaxy : The Complete Radio Series was released on 3 October 2005 . It contains fifteen CDs , subdivided per radio series , and bonus material exclusive to the box set . BBC Audio released a DVD version of the Tertiary Phase , featuring that series in 5 @.@ 1 surround sound , in October 2006 . Contrary to previous announcements , this was merely a DVD @-@ Video disc with Dolby Digital sound and other features , rather than a DVD @-@ Audio disc . While it had been stated that BBC Audio plans on also releasing the fourth and fifth radio series on DVD , no dates have been set . 
 = = = Special editions = = = 
 Special editions of the Primary and Secondary Phases were released in November 2008 . These have , according to the BBC , been given " a thorough clean @-@ up and remaster " by Dirk Maggs . This includes using the new Philip Pope signature tune , so the material can be released worldwide , which has required John Marsh to re @-@ record his announcements so they could be mixed in . Cleaning up the recordings aims to reduce the hiss produced by the overdubbing in the original and also re @-@ levelling the episodes to produce a greater clarity in the sound . 
 According to the inlay which comes with the Special Edition , all previous CD editions of the Primary & Secondary Phases played back slightly fast due to capstan wear on the mastering tape machine , with the result that the audio was pitch @-@ shifted up by half a semitone . That was corrected for the special editions and has the effect of making the episodes nearly a minute longer . 
 = = = Commercial rights issues = = = 
 A number of scenes from Fit the Third were cut from commercially released recordings of the radio series because they featured copyrighted music . For example , in one scene Marvin " hums " like Pink Floyd , using the opening to " Shine On You Crazy Diamond " , then " sings " " Rock and Roll Music " by The Beatles , and finally the theme music from 2001 : A Space Odyssey , the opening " Sunrise " movement from Richard Strauss 's Also sprach Zarathustra . It would have been very cost prohibitive in the 1980s to get clearances to release a recording of Fit the Third with this music , though agreements were reached on most of the rest of the copyrighted music used during the first series . As a result , all commercial recordings of Fit the Third are about two minutes shorter than other episodes . Recordings of the original radio broadcasts still contain it . 
 For the CD and cassette releases of the Tertiary Phase in the United States , and all CD and cassette releases of the Quandary and Quintessential Phases , the instrumental title theme , " Journey of the Sorcerer , " composed by Bernie Leadon and originally recorded by US rock band the Eagles , was re @-@ interpreted by The Illegal Eagles , a tribute band , using an arrangement by Philip Pope . This was done for licensing reasons ( though the original track was used for the original radio transmissions and the on @-@ demand downloads ) . In a 2005 interview with Simon Jones , the use of this song was mentioned as a major cause for the delay in releasing recordings of the new series in the United States . 
 = = Live tours = = 
 In June and July 2012 The Hitchhiker 's Guide To The Galaxy Radio Show embarked on a live tour of the UK , directed by Dirk Maggs and starring the original radio cast recreating their roles : Simon Jones as Arthur Dent , Geoffrey McGivern as Ford Prefect , Susan Sheridan as Trillian , Mark Wing @-@ Davey as Zaphod Beeblebrox , the voice of Stephen Moore as Marvin The Paranoid Android ( Moore being unavailable to perform in person , as he was touring with Cameron Mackintosh 's production of Oliver ! ) 
 Actors from the Tertiary to Quintessential Phases who appeared were Toby Longworth ( <unk> Vogon Jeltz ) , Samantha Béart ( Random Dent ) , Andy Secombe ( Colin the Security Robot ) , Philip Pope ( Krikkit song ) and a recording of the voice of Douglas Adams as <unk> . 
 The production featured a series of " VIP guests " as the voice of The Book including Billy Boyd , Phill Jupitus , Rory McGrath , Roger McGough , Jon Culshaw , Christopher Timothy , Andrew Sachs , John Challis , Hugh Dennis , John Lloyd , Terry Jones and Neil Gaiman . 
 This production was based on the first four Fits in the first act , with the second act covering material from the rest of the series . The show also featured a band , who performed the songs Share and Enjoy , the Krikkit song Under the Ink Black Sky , Marvin 's song How I Hate The Night , and Marvin , which was a minor hit in 1981 . 
 Each performance was recorded and was available for download for seven days after each show . 
 The tour started on 8 June 2012 at the Theatre Royal , Glasgow and continued through the summer until 21 July when the final performance was at Playhouse Theatre , Edinburgh . 
 The production started touring again in September 2013 , and had been due to visit 49 towns and cities across England , Scotland , Wales and Northern Ireland . The main cast was the same as the 2012 tour , with the exception of Zaphod , who was played by Mitch Benn . In October the remaining dates of the tour were cancelled due to poor ticket sales . 
 = Solar eclipse = 
 As seen from the Earth , a solar eclipse is a type of eclipse that occurs when the Moon passes between the Sun and Earth , and the Moon fully or partially blocks ( " occults " ) the Sun . This can happen only at new moon , when the Sun and the Moon are in conjunction as seen from Earth in an alignment referred to as syzygy . In a total eclipse , the disk of the Sun is fully obscured by the Moon . In partial and annular eclipses , only part of the Sun is obscured . 
 If the Moon were in a perfectly circular orbit , a little closer to the Earth , and in the same orbital plane , there would be total solar eclipses every month . However , the Moon 's orbit is inclined ( tilted ) at more than 5 degrees to the Earth 's orbit around the Sun ( see ecliptic ) , so its shadow at new moon usually misses Earth . Earth 's orbit is called the ecliptic plane as the Moon 's orbit must cross this plane in order for an eclipse ( both solar as well as lunar ) to occur . In addition , the Moon 's actual orbit is elliptical , often taking it far enough away from Earth that its apparent size is not large enough to block the Sun totally . The orbital planes cross each other at a line of nodes resulting in at least two , and up to five , solar eclipses occurring each year ; no more than two of which can be total eclipses . However , total solar eclipses are rare at any particular location because totality exists only along a narrow path on the Earth 's surface traced by the Moon 's shadow or umbra . 
 An eclipse is a natural phenomenon . Nevertheless , in some ancient and modern cultures , solar eclipses have been attributed to supernatural causes or regarded as bad omens . A total solar eclipse can be frightening to people who are unaware of its astronomical explanation , as the Sun seems to disappear during the day and the sky darkens in a matter of minutes . 
 Since looking directly at the Sun can lead to permanent eye damage or blindness , special eye protection or indirect viewing techniques are used when viewing a solar eclipse . It is technically safe to view only the total phase of a total solar eclipse with the unaided eye and without protection ; however , this is a dangerous practice , as most people are not trained to recognize the phases of an eclipse , which can span over two hours while the total phase can only last up to 7 @.@ 5 minutes for any one location . People referred to as eclipse chasers or <unk> will travel to remote locations to observe or witness predicted central solar eclipses . 
 For the date of the next eclipse see the section Recent and forthcoming solar eclipses . 
 = = Types = = 
 There are four types of solar eclipses : 
 A total eclipse occurs when the dark silhouette of the Moon completely obscures the intensely bright light of the Sun , allowing the much fainter solar corona to be visible . During any one eclipse , totality occurs at best only in a narrow track on the surface of Earth . 
 An annular eclipse occurs when the Sun and Moon are exactly in line , but the apparent size of the Moon is smaller than that of the Sun . Hence the Sun appears as a very bright ring , or annulus , surrounding the dark disk of the Moon . 
 A hybrid eclipse ( also called annular / total eclipse ) shifts between a total and annular eclipse . At certain points on the surface of Earth it appears as a total eclipse , whereas at other points it appears as annular . Hybrid eclipses are comparatively rare . 
 A partial eclipse occurs when the Sun and Moon are not exactly in line and the Moon only partially obscures the Sun . This phenomenon can usually be seen from a large part of the Earth outside of the track of an annular or total eclipse . However , some eclipses can only be seen as a partial eclipse , because the umbra passes above the Earth 's polar regions and never intersects the Earth 's surface . Partial eclipses are virtually unnoticeable , as it takes well over 90 % coverage to notice any darkening at all . Even at 99 % it would be no darker than civil twilight . 
 The Sun 's distance from Earth is about 400 times the Moon 's distance , and the Sun 's diameter is about 400 times the Moon 's diameter . Because these ratios are approximately the same , the Sun and the Moon as seen from Earth appear to be approximately the same size : about 0 @.@ 5 degree of arc in angular measure . 
 A separate category of solar eclipses is that of the Sun being occluded by a body other than the Earth 's moon , as can be observed at points in space away from the Earth 's surface . Two examples are when the crew of Apollo 12 observed the Earth eclipse the Sun in 1969 and when the Cassini probe observed Saturn eclipsing the Sun in 2006 . 
 The Moon 's orbit around the Earth is an ellipse , as is the Earth 's orbit around the Sun . The apparent sizes of the Sun and Moon therefore vary . The magnitude of an eclipse is the ratio of the apparent size of the Moon to the apparent size of the Sun during an eclipse . An eclipse that occurs when the Moon is near its closest distance to Earth ( i.e. , near its perigee ) can be a total eclipse because the Moon will appear to be large enough to completely cover the Sun 's bright disk , or photosphere ; a total eclipse has a magnitude greater than 1 . Conversely , an eclipse that occurs when the Moon is near its farthest distance from Earth ( i.e. , near its apogee ) can only be an annular eclipse because the Moon will appear to be slightly smaller than the Sun ; the magnitude of an annular eclipse is less than 1 . Slightly more solar eclipses are annular than total because , on average , the Moon lies too far from Earth to cover the Sun completely . A hybrid eclipse occurs when the magnitude of an eclipse changes during the event from less to greater than one , so the eclipse appears to be total at some locations on Earth and annular at other locations . 
 Because the Earth 's orbit around the Sun is also elliptical , the Earth 's distance from the Sun similarly varies throughout the year . This affects the apparent size of the Sun in the same way , but not as much as does the Moon 's varying distance from Earth . When Earth approaches its farthest distance from the Sun in July , a total eclipse is somewhat more likely , whereas conditions favour an annular eclipse when Earth approaches its closest distance to the Sun in January . 
 = = = Terminology for central eclipse = = = 
 Central eclipse is often used as a generic term for a total , annular , or hybrid eclipse . This is , however , not completely correct : the definition of a central eclipse is an eclipse during which the central line of the umbra touches the Earth 's surface . It is possible , though extremely rare , that part of the umbra intersects with the Earth ( thus creating an annular or total eclipse ) , but not its central line . This is then called a non @-@ central total or annular eclipse . The last non @-@ central solar eclipse was on April 29 , 2014 . This was an annular eclipse . The next non @-@ central total solar eclipse will be on April 9 , <unk> . 
 The phases observed during a total eclipse are called : 
 First contact — when the Moon 's limb ( edge ) is exactly tangential to the Sun 's limb . 
 Second contact — starting with Baily 's Beads ( caused by light shining through valleys on the Moon 's surface ) and the diamond ring effect . Almost the entire disk is covered . 
 Totality — the Moon obscures the entire disk of the Sun and only the solar corona is visible . 
 Third contact — when the first bright light becomes visible and the Moon 's shadow is moving away from the observer . Again a diamond ring may be observed . 
 Fourth contact — when the trailing edge of the Moon ceases to overlap with the solar disk and the eclipse ends . 
 = = Predictions = = 
 = = = Geometry = = = 
 The diagrams to the right show the alignment of the Sun , Moon and Earth during a solar eclipse . The dark gray region between the Moon and Earth is the umbra , where the Sun is completely obscured by the Moon . The small area where the umbra touches Earth 's surface is where a total eclipse can be seen . The larger light gray area is the penumbra , in which a partial eclipse can be seen . An observer in the <unk> , the area of shadow beyond the umbra , will see an annular eclipse . 
 The Moon 's orbit around the Earth is inclined at an angle of just over 5 degrees to the plane of the Earth 's orbit around the Sun ( the ecliptic ) . Because of this , at the time of a new moon , the Moon will usually pass to the north or south of the Sun . A solar eclipse can occur only when new moon occurs close to one of the points ( known as nodes ) where the Moon 's orbit crosses the ecliptic . 
 As noted above , the Moon 's orbit is also elliptical . The Moon 's distance from the Earth can vary by about 6 % from its average value . Therefore , the Moon 's apparent size varies with its distance from the Earth , and it is this effect that leads to the difference between total and annular eclipses . The distance of the Earth from the Sun also varies during the year , but this is a smaller effect . On average , the Moon appears to be slightly smaller than the Sun as seen from the Earth , so the majority ( about 60 % ) of central eclipses are annular . It is only when the Moon is closer to the Earth than average ( near its perigee ) that a total eclipse occurs . 
 The Moon orbits the Earth in approximately 27 @.@ 3 days , relative to a fixed frame of reference . This is known as the sidereal month . However , during one sidereal month , Earth has revolved part way around the Sun , making the average time between one new moon and the next longer than the sidereal month : it is approximately 29 @.@ 5 days . This is known as the synodic month , and corresponds to what is commonly called the lunar month . 
 The Moon crosses from south to north of the ecliptic at its ascending node , and vice versa at its descending node . However , the nodes of the Moon 's orbit are gradually moving in a retrograde motion , due to the action of the Sun 's gravity on the Moon 's motion , and they make a complete circuit every 18 @.@ 6 years . This regression means that the time between each passage of the Moon through the ascending node is slightly shorter than the sidereal month . This period is called the <unk> or draconic month . 
 Finally , the Moon 's perigee is moving forwards or precessing in its orbit , and makes a complete circuit in 8 @.@ 85 years . The time between one perigee and the next is slightly longer than the sidereal month and known as the anomalistic month . 
 The Moon 's orbit intersects with the ecliptic at the two nodes that are 180 degrees apart . Therefore , the new moon occurs close to the nodes at two periods of the year approximately six months ( 173 @.@ 3 days ) apart , known as eclipse seasons , and there will always be at least one solar eclipse during these periods . Sometimes the new moon occurs close enough to a node during two consecutive months to eclipse the Sun on both occasions in two partial eclipses . This means that , in any given year , there will always be at least two solar eclipses , and there can be as many as five . 
 Eclipses can occur only when the Sun is within about 15 to 18 degrees of a node , ( 10 to 12 degrees for central eclipses ) . This is referred to as an eclipse limit . In the time it takes for the Moon to return to a node ( draconic month ) , the apparent position of the Sun has moved about 29 degrees , relative to the nodes . Since the eclipse limit creates a window of opportunity of up to 36 degrees ( 24 degrees for central eclipses ) , it is possible for partial eclipses ( or rarely a partial and a central eclipse ) to occur in consecutive months . 
 = = = Path = = = 
 During a central eclipse , the Moon 's umbra ( or <unk> , in the case of an annular eclipse ) moves rapidly from west to east across the Earth . The Earth is also rotating from west to east , at about 28 km / min at the Equator , but as the Moon is moving in the same direction as the Earth 's spin at about 61 km / min , the umbra almost always appears to move in a roughly west @-@ east direction across a map of the Earth at the speed of the Moon 's orbital velocity minus the Earth 's rotational velocity . 
 The width of the track of a central eclipse varies according to the relative apparent diameters of the Sun and Moon . In the most favourable circumstances , when a total eclipse occurs very close to perigee , the track can be up to 267 km ( 166 mi ) wide and the duration of totality may be over 7 minutes . Outside of the central track , a partial eclipse is seen over a much larger area of the Earth . Typically , the umbra is 100 – 160 km wide , while the penumbral diameter is in excess of 6400 km . 
 = = = Duration = = = 
 The following factors determine the duration of a total solar eclipse ( in order of decreasing importance ) : 
 The moon being almost exactly at perigee ( making its angular diameter as large as possible ) . 
 The earth being very near aphelion ( furthest away from the sun in its elliptical orbit , making its angular diameter nearly as small as possible ) . 
 The midpoint of the eclipse being very close to the earth 's equator , where the orbital velocity is greatest . 
 The vector of the eclipse path at the midpoint of the eclipse aligning with the vector of the earth 's rotation ( i.e. not diagonal but due east ) . 
 The midpoint of the eclipse being near the subsolar point ( the part of the earth closest to the sun ) . 
 The longest eclipse that has been calculated thus far is the eclipse of July 16 , <unk> ( with a maximum duration of 7 minutes 4 seconds over northern Guyana ) . 
 = = Occurrence and cycles = = 
 Total solar eclipses are rare events . Although they occur somewhere on Earth every 18 months on average , it is estimated that they recur at any given place only once every 360 to 410 years , on average . The total eclipse lasts for only a maximum of a few minutes at any location , because the Moon 's umbra moves eastward at over 1700 km / h . Totality currently can never last more than 7 min 32 s . This value changes over the millennia and is currently decreasing . By the 8th millennium , the longest theoretically possible total eclipse will be less than 7 min 2 s . The last time an eclipse longer than 7 minutes occurred was June 30 , 1973 ( 7 min 3 sec ) . Observers aboard a Concorde supersonic aircraft were able to stretch totality for this eclipse to about 74 minutes by flying along the path of the Moon 's umbra . The next total eclipse exceeding seven minutes in duration will not occur until June 25 , 2150 . The longest total solar eclipse during the 11 @,@ 000 year period from 3000 BC to at least 8000 AD will occur on July 16 , <unk> , when totality will last 7 min 29 s . For comparison , the longest total eclipse of the 20th century at 7 min 8 s occurred on June 20 , 1955 and there are no total solar eclipses over 7 min in duration in the 21st century . 
 If the date and time of any solar eclipse are known , it is possible to predict other eclipses using eclipse cycles . The saros is probably the best known and one of the most accurate . A saros lasts 6 @,@ 585 @.@ 3 days ( a little over 18 years ) , which means that , after this period , a practically identical eclipse will occur . The most notable difference will be a westward shift of about 120 ° in longitude ( due to the 0 @.@ 3 days ) and a little in latitude ( north @-@ south for odd @-@ numbered cycles , the reverse for even @-@ numbered ones ) . A saros series always starts with a partial eclipse near one of Earth 's polar regions , then shifts over the globe through a series of annular or total eclipses , and ends with a partial eclipse at the opposite polar region . A saros series lasts 1226 to 1550 years and 69 to 87 eclipses , with about 40 to 60 of them being central . 
 = = = Frequency per year = = = 
 Between two and five solar eclipses occur every year , with at least one per eclipse season . Since the Gregorian calendar was instituted in 1582 , years that have had five solar eclipses were 1693 , 1758 , 1805 , 1823 , 1870 , and 1935 . The next occurrence will be <unk> . On average , there are about 240 solar eclipses each century . 
 = = = Final totality = = = 
 Total solar eclipses are seen on Earth because of a fortuitous combination of circumstances . Even on Earth , eclipses of the type familiar to people today are a temporary ( on a geological time scale ) phenomenon . Hundreds of millions of years in the past , the Moon was too close to the Earth to precisely occlude the Sun as it does during eclipses today ; and over a billion years in the future , it will be too far away to do so . 
 Due to tidal acceleration , the orbit of the Moon around the Earth becomes about 2 @.@ 2 cm more distant each year . It is estimated that , in slightly less than 1 @.@ 4 billion years , the distance from the Earth to the Moon will have increased by 30 @,@ 400 km . During that period , the apparent angular diameter of the Moon will decrease in size , meaning that it will no longer be able to completely cover the Sun 's disk as seen from the Earth . This will be true even when the Moon is at perigee , and the Earth at aphelion . Moreover , the Sun is increasing in diameter by about 5 % per billion years . Therefore , the last total solar eclipse on Earth will occur about six hundred million years from now . 
 = = Historical eclipses = = 
 Historical eclipses are a very valuable resource for historians , in that they allow a few historical events to be dated precisely , from which other dates and ancient calendars may be deduced . A solar eclipse of June 15 , 763 BC mentioned in an Assyrian text is important for the Chronology of the Ancient Orient . There have been other claims to date earlier eclipses . The King Zhong Kang supposedly beheaded two astronomers , Hsi and Ho , who failed to predict an eclipse 4 @,@ 000 years ago . Perhaps the earliest still @-@ unproven claim is that of archaeologist Bruce Masse , who putatively links an eclipse that occurred on May 10 , <unk> BC with a possible meteor impact in the Indian Ocean on the basis of several ancient flood myths that mention a total solar eclipse . 
 Eclipses have been interpreted as omens , or portents . The ancient Greek historian Herodotus wrote that Thales of Miletus predicted an eclipse that occurred during a battle between the Medes and the Lydians . Both sides put down their weapons and declared peace as a result of the eclipse . The exact eclipse involved remains uncertain , although the issue has been studied by hundreds of ancient and modern authorities . One likely candidate took place on May 28 , 585 BC , probably near the Halys river in Asia Minor . An eclipse recorded by Herodotus before Xerxes departed for his expedition against Greece , which is traditionally dated to 480 BC , was matched by John Russell Hind to an annular eclipse of the Sun at Sardis on February 17 , 478 BC . Alternatively , a partial eclipse was visible from Persia on October 2 , 480 BC . Herodotus also reports a solar eclipse at Sparta during the Second Persian invasion of Greece . The date of the eclipse ( August 1 , 477 BC ) does not match exactly the conventional dates for the invasion accepted by historians . 
 Chinese records of eclipses begin at around 720 BC . The 4th century BC astronomer Shi Shen described the prediction of eclipses by using the relative positions of the Moon and Sun . The " radiating influence " theory ( i.e. , the Moon 's light was reflection from the Sun ) was existent in Chinese thought from about the sixth century BC ( in the Zhi Ran of Zhi Ni Zi ) , though it was opposed by the 1st century AD philosopher Wang Chong , who made clear in his writing that this theory was nothing new . Ancient Greeks , such as Parmenides and Aristotle , also supported the theory of the Moon shining because of reflected light . 
 Attempts have been made to establish the exact date of Good Friday by assuming that the darkness described at Jesus 's crucifixion was a solar eclipse . This research has not yielded conclusive results , and Good Friday is recorded as being at Passover , which is held at the time of a full moon . Further , the darkness lasted from the sixth hour to the ninth , or three hours , which is much , much longer than the eight @-@ minute upper limit for any solar eclipse 's totality . In the Western hemisphere , there are few reliable records of eclipses before 800 AD , until the advent of Arab and monastic observations in the early medieval period . The first recorded observation of the corona was made in Constantinople in 968 AD . 
 The first known telescopic observation of a total solar eclipse was made in France in 1706 . Nine years later , English astronomer Edmund Halley observed the solar eclipse of May 3 , 1715 . By the mid @-@ 19th century , scientific understanding of the Sun was improving through observations of the Sun 's corona during solar eclipses . The corona was identified as part of the Sun 's atmosphere in 1842 , and the first photograph ( or daguerreotype ) of a total eclipse was taken of the solar eclipse of July 28 , 1851 . <unk> observations were made of the solar eclipse of August 18 , 1868 , which helped to determine the chemical composition of the Sun . 
 = = Viewing = = 
 Looking directly at the photosphere of the Sun ( the bright disk of the Sun itself ) , even for just a few seconds , can cause permanent damage to the retina of the eye , because of the intense visible and invisible radiation that the photosphere emits . This damage can result in impairment of vision , up to and including blindness . The retina has no sensitivity to pain , and the effects of retinal damage may not appear for hours , so there is no warning that injury is occurring . 
 Under normal conditions , the Sun is so bright that it is difficult to stare at it directly . However , during an eclipse , with so much of the Sun covered , it is easier and more tempting to stare at it . Looking at the Sun during an eclipse is as dangerous as looking at it outside an eclipse , except during the brief period of totality , when the Sun 's disk is completely covered ( totality occurs only during a total eclipse and only very briefly ; it does not occur during a partial or annular eclipse ) . Viewing the Sun 's disk through any kind of optical aid ( binoculars , a telescope , or even an optical camera viewfinder ) is extremely hazardous and can cause irreversible eye damage within a fraction of a second . 
 = = = Partial and annular eclipses = = = 
 Viewing the Sun during partial and annular eclipses ( and during total eclipses outside the brief period of totality ) requires special eye protection , or indirect viewing methods , if eye damage is to be avoided . The Sun 's disk can be viewed using appropriate filtration to block the harmful part of the Sun 's radiation . <unk> do not make viewing the Sun safe . Only properly designed and certified solar filters should be used for direct viewing of the Sun 's disk . Especially , self @-@ made filters using common objects such as a floppy disk removed from its case , a Compact Disc , a black colour slide film , smoked glass , etc. must be avoided . 
 The safest way to view the Sun 's disk is by indirect projection . This can be done by projecting an image of the disk onto a white piece of paper or card using a pair of binoculars ( with one of the lenses covered ) , a telescope , or another piece of cardboard with a small hole in it ( about 1 mm diameter ) , often called a pinhole camera . The projected image of the Sun can then be safely viewed ; this technique can be used to observe sunspots , as well as eclipses . Care must be taken , however , to ensure that no one looks through the projector ( telescope , pinhole , etc . ) directly . Viewing the Sun 's disk on a video display screen ( provided by a video camera or digital camera ) is safe , although the camera itself may be damaged by direct exposure to the Sun . The optical <unk> provided with some video and digital cameras are not safe . Securely mounting # 14 welder 's glass in front of the lens and viewfinder protects the equipment and makes viewing possible . Professional workmanship is essential because of the dire consequences any gaps or detaching mountings will have . In the partial eclipse path , one will not be able to see the corona or nearly complete darkening of the sky , however , depending on how much of the Sun 's disk is obscured , some darkening may be noticeable . If three @-@ quarters or more of the sun is obscured , then an effect can be observed by which the daylight appears to be dim , as if the sky were overcast , yet objects still cast sharp shadows . 
 = = = Totality = = = 
 When the shrinking visible part of the photosphere becomes very small , Baily 's beads will occur . These are caused by the sunlight still being able to reach the Earth through lunar valleys . Totality then begins with the diamond ring effect , the last bright flash of sunlight . 
 It is safe to observe the total phase of a solar eclipse directly only when the Sun 's photosphere is completely covered by the Moon , and not before or after totality . During this period , the Sun is too dim to be seen through filters . The Sun 's faint corona will be visible , and the chromosphere , solar prominences , and possibly even a solar flare may be seen . At the end of totality , the same effects will occur in reverse order , and on the opposite side of the Moon . 
 = = = Photography = = = 
 Photographing an eclipse is possible with fairly common camera equipment . In order for the disk of the Sun / Moon to be easily visible , a fairly high magnification long focus lens is needed ( at least 200 mm for a 35 mm camera ) , and for the disk to fill most of the frame , a longer lens is needed ( over 500 mm ) . As with viewing the Sun directly , looking at it through the viewfinder of a camera can produce damage to the retina , so care is recommended . 
 = = Other observations = = 
 A total solar eclipse provides a rare opportunity to observe the corona ( the outer layer of the Sun 's atmosphere ) . Normally this is not visible because the photosphere is much brighter than the corona . According to the point reached in the solar cycle , the corona may appear small and symmetric , or large and fuzzy . It is very hard to predict this in advance . 
 Phenomena associated with eclipses include shadow bands ( also known as flying shadows ) , which are similar to shadows on the bottom of a swimming pool . They only occur just prior to and after totality , when a narrow solar crescent acts as an anisotropic light source . 
 = = = 1919 observations = = = 
 The observation of a total solar eclipse of May 29 , 1919 helped to confirm Einstein 's theory of general relativity . By comparing the apparent distance between stars in the constellation Taurus , with and without the Sun between them , Arthur Eddington stated that the theoretical predictions about gravitational lenses were confirmed . The observation with the Sun between the stars was only possible during totality , since the stars are then visible . Though Eddington 's observations were near the experimental limits of accuracy at the time , work in the later half of the 20th century confirmed his results . 
 = = = Gravity anomalies = = = 
 There is a long history of observations of gravity @-@ related phenomena during solar eclipses , especially around totality . In 1954 , and again in 1959 , Maurice Allais reported observations of strange and unexplained movement during solar eclipses . This phenomenon is now called the Allais effect . Similarly , in 1970 , <unk> and Allen observed the sudden change in motion of a torsion pendulum ; this phenomenon is called the <unk> effect . 
 A recent published observation during the 1997 solar eclipse by Wang et al. suggested a possible gravitational shielding effect , which generated debate . Later in 2002 , Yang and Wang published detailed data analysis , which suggested that the phenomenon still remains unexplained . 
 = = = Eclipses and transits = = = 
 In principle , the simultaneous occurrence of a Solar eclipse and a transit of a planet is possible . But these events are extremely rare because of their short durations . The next anticipated simultaneous occurrence of a Solar eclipse and a transit of Mercury will be on July 5 , <unk> , and a Solar eclipse and a transit of Venus is expected on April 5 , <unk> . 
 More common , but still infrequent , is a conjunction of a planet ( especially , but not only , Mercury or Venus ) at the time of a total solar eclipse , in which event the planet will be visible very near the eclipsed Sun , when without the eclipse it would have been lost in the Sun 's glare . At one time , some scientists hypothesized that there may be a planet ( often given the name Vulcan ) even closer to the Sun than Mercury ; the only way to confirm its existence would have been to observe it in transit or during a total solar eclipse . No such planet was ever found , and general relativity has since explained the observations that led astronomers to suggest that Vulcan might exist . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 During a total solar eclipse , the Moon 's shadow covers only a small fraction of the Earth . The Earth continues to receive at least 92 percent of the amount of sunlight it receives without an eclipse – more if the penumbra of the Moon 's shadow partly misses the Earth . Seen from the Moon , the Earth during a total solar eclipse is mostly brilliantly illuminated , with only a small dark patch showing the Moon 's shadow . The brilliantly @-@ lit Earth reflects a lot of light to the Moon . If the corona of the eclipsed Sun were not present , the Moon , illuminated by <unk> , would be easily visible from Earth . This would be essentially the same as the earthshine which can frequently be seen when the Moon 's phase is a narrow crescent . In reality , the corona , though much less brilliant than the Sun 's photosphere , is much brighter than the Moon illuminated by <unk> . Therefore , by contrast , the Moon during a total solar eclipse appears to be black , with the corona surrounding it . 
 = = = Artificial satellites = = = 
 Artificial satellites can also pass in front of the Sun as seen from the Earth , but none is large enough to cause an eclipse . At the altitude of the International Space Station , for example , an object would need to be about 3 @.@ 35 km ( 2 @.@ 08 mi ) across to blot the Sun out entirely . These transits are difficult to watch , because the zone of visibility is very small . The satellite passes over the face of the Sun in about a second , typically . As with a transit of a planet , it will not get dark . 
 Observations of eclipses from spacecraft or artificial satellites orbiting above the Earth 's atmosphere are not subject to weather conditions . The crew of Gemini 12 observed a total solar eclipse from space in 1966 . The partial phase of the 1999 total eclipse was visible from Mir . 
 During the Apollo – Soyuz Test Project conducted in July 1975 , the Apollo spacecraft was positioned to create an artificial solar eclipse giving the Soyuz crew an opportunity to photograph the solar corona . 
 = = = Impact = = = 
 The Solar eclipse of March 20 , 2015 , was the first occurrence of an eclipse estimated to potentially have a significant impact on the power system , with the electricity sector taking measures to mitigate any impact . The continental Europe and Great Britain synchronous areas were estimated to have about 90 <unk> of solar power and it was estimated that production would temporarily decrease by up to 34 GW compared to a clear sky day . The temperature may decrease by 3 ° C , and wind power potentially decrease as winds are reduced by 0 @.@ 7 m / s . 
 = = Recent and forthcoming solar eclipses = = 
 Eclipses only occur in the eclipse season , when the Sun is close to either the ascending or descending node of the Moon . Each eclipse is separated by one , five or six <unk> ( synodic months ) , and the midpoint of each season is separated by 173 @.@ 3 days , which is the mean time for the Sun to travel from one node to the next . The period is a little less than half a calendar year because the lunar nodes slowly regress . Because 223 synodic months is roughly equal to 239 anomalistic months and 242 draconic months , eclipses with similar geometry recur 223 synodic months ( about 6 @,@ 585 @.@ 3 days ) apart . This period ( 18 years 11 @.@ 3 days ) is a saros . Because 223 synodic months is not identical to 239 anomalistic months or 242 draconic months , saros cycles do not endlessly repeat . Each cycle begins with the Moon 's shadow crossing the earth near the north or south pole , and subsequent events progress toward the other pole until the Moon 's shadow misses the earth and the series ends . Saros cycles are numbered ; currently , cycles 117 to 156 are active . 
 = Ach wie flüchtig , ach wie nichtig , BWV 26 = 
 Ach wie flüchtig , ach wie nichtig ( Ah , how fleeting , ah how insignificant ) , BWV 26 , is a church cantata by Johann Sebastian Bach . He composed the chorale cantata in Leipzig for the 24th Sunday after Trinity and first performed it on 19 November 1724 . 
 The cantata is based upon Michael Franck 's hymn " <unk> dich , o liebe Seele " , with a melody by Johann Crüger ( 1652 ) . It is the only time that Bach used this hymn . Its theme , the transience of human life , is the only connection to the prescribed gospel reading . The first and last stanza are used unchanged in both text and tune : the former is treated as a chorale fantasia , the latter as a four @-@ part closing chorale . An unknown librettist paraphrased the inner stanzas as arias and recitatives . Bach scored the cantata for four vocal soloists , a four @-@ part choir , and a Baroque instrumental ensemble of horn , flute , three oboes , strings and continuo . 
 = = History and words = = 
 Bach wrote the cantata in 1724 in his second year in Leipzig for the 24th Sunday after Trinity . That year , Bach composed a cycle of chorale cantatas , begun on the first Sunday after Trinity . The prescribed readings for the Sunday were from the Epistle to the Colossians , a prayer for the Colossians ( Colossians 1 : 9 – 14 ) , and from the Gospel of Matthew , the story of the Raising of Jairus ' daughter ( Matthew 9 : 18 – 26 ) . The cantata is based on the hymn in 13 stanzas by Michael Franck ( 1652 ) , to a melody by Johann Crüger ( 1661 ) , " a meditation on the transience of human life and of all earthly goods " . This aspect is the only connection to the gospel . An unknown poet retained the first and the last stanza unchanged as movements 1 and 6 of the cantata . He derived the inner movements as a sequence of alternating arias and recitatives from the inner stanzas . John Eliot Gardiner points out that " several of Bach 's late Trinity season cantatas " concentrate on " the brevity of human life and the futility of earthly hopes " . 
 Bach first performed the cantata on 19 November 1724 . It is the only time that he used this hymn . 
 = = Scoring and structure = = 
 Bach structured the cantata in six movements . The text and tune of the hymn appear unchanged in the outer choral movements , a chorale fantasia and a four @-@ part closing chorale , which frame a sequence of alternating arias and recitatives . Bach scored the work for four vocal soloists ( soprano , alto , tenor , bass ) , a four @-@ part choir and a Baroque instrumental ensemble of a horn ( Co ) doubling the soprano in the chorale , flauto traverso ( Ft ) , three oboes ( Ob ) , two violins ( Vl ) , viola ( Va ) , organ ( Org ) and basso continuo . 
 In the following table of the movements , the scoring follows the Neue Bach @-@ Ausgabe . The keys and time signatures are taken from Alfred Dürr , using the symbol for common time ( 4 / 4 ) . 
 = = Music = = 
 = = = 1 = = = 
 The opening chorus , " Ach wie flüchtig , ach wie nichtig " ( Ah , how fleeting , ah how insignificant ) , is a chorale fantasia . The instruments play concertante music , to which the soprano sings the cantus firmus line by line . The lower voices act as a " self @-@ contained group " , mostly in homophony , and " declaim the individual lines of text in unison at the end of each choral passage , using a melodic formula derived from the beginning of the hymn . " Bach illustrates the imagery of the text , " fleetingness and <unk> " in motifs such as " abrupt chords separated by pauses and ... hurrying scale figures " . Gardiner comments : 
 Long before the first statement of Franck 's hymn ( sopranos doubled by cornetto ) Bach establishes the simile of man 's life to a rising mist which will soon disperse . Fleet @-@ footed scales , crossing and recrossing , joining and dividing , create a mood of <unk> vapour . 
 The Musicologist Julian Mincham compares the instrumental music to " mist and fog , images which imply movements of wind and air " and hears the lower voices as " evincing a feeling of primeval power and solidarity " . 
 = = = 2 = = = 
 In the first aria , the text " So schnell ein <unk> Wasser <unk> " ( As quickly as rushing water ) is illustrated in the flute , the violin and the tenor voice by " fast @-@ flowing " music , " each musician required to keep changing functions – to respond , imitate , echo or double one another – while variously contributing to the insistent <unk> of the tumbling torrent " . 
 = = = 3 = = = 
 In a recitative for alto , " Die Freude wird zur <unk> " ( Joy becomes sadness ) , images such as flowers speak of transience until the grave . The Bach scholar Klaus Hofmann describes it as a " far @-@ reaching coloratura [ which ] culminates in an uneasy dissonance " . 
 = = = 4 = = = 
 In the last aria , an " unusual oboe trio " accompanies the bass <unk> in " An <unk> <unk> das Herze zu <unk> " ( To hang one 's heart on earthly treasures ) . Gardiner comments : " He scores this <unk> ( Dance of the dead ) for three oboes and continuo supporting his bass soloist in a mock bourrée " , the oboes undermining in " throbbing accompaniment ... those earthly pleasures by which men are seduced " , then representing " through jagged figures ... the tongues of flame which will soon reduce them to ashes , and finally in hurtling semiquaver scales of 6 / 4 chords ... surging waves which will tear all worldly things apart " . Mincham sees a connection of the runs to those of movement 1 , but points out how different their function is here : 
 now depicting thunder flames , stormy seas and the destruction of the world . The descending scales played in unison by the three oboes have great force . The vocalist has several prominent images , notably the long melisma on the word " <unk> " ( shatter ) and the weird , descending chromatic phrase towards the end , suggestive of a world of chaos and foolishness . 
 = = = 5 = = = 
 A recitative for soprano , " Die <unk> Herrlichkeit und <unk> " ( The highest glory and magnificence ) , expresses that even highest power will not escape death . 
 = = = 6 = = = 
 The closing chorale , " Ach wie flüchtig , ach wie nichtig " ( Ah , how fleeting , ah how insignificant ) , is a four @-@ part setting . 
 = = Selected recordings = = 
 The listing is taken from the selection on the Bach @-@ Cantatas website . Choirs and orchestras are roughly marked as large by red background ; instrumental groups playing period instruments in historically informed performances are highlighted green under the header Instr .. 
 = Egmont Prinz zur Lippe @-@ Weißenfeld = 
 Egmont Prinz zur Lippe @-@ Weißenfeld ( 14 July 1918 – 12 March 1944 ) was a Luftwaffe night fighter flying ace of royal descent during World War II . A flying ace or fighter ace is a military aviator credited with shooting down five or more enemy aircraft during aerial combat . Prinz zur Lippe @-@ Weißenfeld was credited with 51 aerial victories , all of them claimed in nocturnal combat missions . 
 Prinz zur Lippe @-@ Weißenfeld was born on 14 July 1918 in Salzburg , Austria and joined the infantry of the Austrian Bundesheer in 1936 . He transferred to the emerging Luftwaffe , initially serving as a reconnaissance pilot in the Zerstörergeschwader 76 ( ZG 76 ) , before he transferred to the night fighter force . He claimed his first aerial victory on the night of 16 to 17 November 1940 . By the end of March , he had accumulated 21 aerial victories for which he was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross ( Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes ) on 16 April 1942 . He received the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves ( Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes mit Eichenlaub ) on 2 August 1943 , for 45 aerial victories . He was promoted to Major and tasked with leading Nachtjagdgeschwader 5 ( NJG 5 ) in January 1944 , before he and his crew were killed in a flight accident on 12 March 1944 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Egmont Prinz zur Lippe @-@ Weißenfeld was born on 14 July 1918 in Salzburg , Austria as a member of a cadet branch of the ruling House of Lippe . His father was Prince Alfred of Lippe @-@ Weißenfeld and his mother was born Countess Anna von <unk> . Egmont was the only son of four children . His sisters Carola , Sophie and Dora were all younger than Egmont . The family lived in an old castle in Upper Austria called Alt <unk> . At birth he had a remote chance of succeeding to the throne of the Principality of Lippe , a small state within the German Empire . However , only months after his birth , Germany became a republic and all the German royal houses were forced to abdicate . 
 Prinz zur Lippe @-@ Weißenfeld in his younger years was very enthusiastic about the mountains and wildlife . From his fourteenth year he participated in hunting . At the same time he was also very much interested in music and sports and discovered his love for flying at the Gaisberg near Salzburg . Here he attended the glider flying school of the Austrian <unk> Club . He attended a basic flying course with the second air regiment in Graz and Wiener Neustadt even before he joined the military service . 
 Prinz zur Lippe @-@ Weißenfeld never married or had children . In January 1941 he became acquainted with Hannelore Ide , nicknamed <unk> . She was a secretary for a <unk> . The two shared a close relationship and spent as much time together as the war permitted , listening to music and sailing on the IJsselmeer until his death in 1944 . 
 = = Military service = = 
 Prinz zur Lippe @-@ Weißenfeld joined the Austrian Bundesheer in 1936 at the age of 18 , initially serving in the infantry . In the aftermaths of the 1938 Anschluss , the incorporation of Austria into Greater Germany by Nazi Germany , he transferred to the German Luftwaffe and was promoted to Leutnant in 1939 . He had earned his Luftwaffe Pilots Badge on 5 October 1938 and underwent further training at Fürstenfeldbruck , Schleißheim and Vienna @-@ Aspern . His Luftwaffe career started with the II . Gruppe ( 2nd group ) of the Zerstörergeschwader 76 ( ZG 76 ) before he was transferred to the night fighter wing Nachtjagdgeschwader 1 ( NJG 1 ) on 4 August 1940 . The unit was based at Gütersloh where he familiarised himself with the methods of the night fighters . 
 By the summer of 1940 , the first night fighters were transferred to Leeuwarden in the Netherlands . Prinz zur Lippe @-@ Weißenfeld was one of the pilots included in this small detachment . As early as 20 October 1940 , he had taken over command of an independent night fighter commando at Schiphol and later at Bergen . On his first encounter with the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) bomber , in the night of 16 to 17 November 1940 , he claimed a Vickers Wellington bomber from No. 115 Squadron RAF shot down at <unk> hours . His second victory was claimed on the night of 15 January 1941 , when he shot down an Armstrong Whitworth Whitley <unk> of the Linton @-@ on @-@ Ouse based No. 58 Squadron RAF over the northern Netherlands , near the Dutch coast in the <unk> at a nature reserve at <unk> . He was wounded in action on 13 March 1941 , while flying Bf 110 D @-@ 2 ( W.Nr. <unk> – factory number ) of the 4 . / <unk> with his radio operator Josef <unk> when he made an emergency landing at Bergen after their aircraft was hit by the defence fire , wounding them both . Shortly after midnight on 10 April 1941 , Prinz zur Lippe @-@ Weißenfeld claimed a No. 12 Squadron RAF Wellington over the IJsselmeer , raising NJG 1 's victory score to 100 . This achievement was celebrated at the Amstel Hotel in Amsterdam with General Josef Kammhuber , Wolfgang Falck , Werner Streib , Helmut Lent and others attending . On 30 June 1941 while flying Bf 110 C @-@ 4 ( W.Nr. <unk> ) on a practice intercept mission over Noord Holland , he collided with Bf 110 C @-@ 7 ( W.Nr. 2075 ) piloted by Leutnant Rudolf Schoenert of the 4 . / NJG 1 and crashed near Bergen aan Zee . On 19 June 1941 he earned his first of four references in the daily Wehrmachtbericht , a daily radio report made by the Oberkommando der Wehrmacht ( High Command of the Armed Forces ) regarding the military situation on all fronts . By July 1941 his number of aerial victory claims stood at 10 . Promoted to Oberleutnant he became Staffelkapitän of the 5th Staffel of Nachtjagdgeschwader 2 ( NJG 2 ) on 15 November 1941 . By the end of 1941 he had claimed a total of 15 aerial victories . 
 He was awarded the German Cross in Gold ( Deutsches Kreuz in Gold ) on 25 January 1942 and the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross ( Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes ) on 16 April 1942 after he had shot down 4 RAF bombers in the night of 26 to 27 March 1942 , his score standing at 21 aerial victories . This feat earned him his third reference in the Wehrmachtbericht on 27 March 1942 . In July 1942 he was one of the leading German night fighter aces with 37 aerial victories . 
 Promoted to Hauptmann , Prinz zur Lippe @-@ Weißenfeld was made Gruppenkommandeur of the I. Gruppe ( 1st group ) of Nachtjagdgeschwader 3 on 1 October 1942 , where he claimed 3 further aerial victories . He was transferred again , taking command of the III . Gruppe ( 3rd group ) of NJG 1 on 31 May 1943 . One month later he claimed his 45th aerial victory for which he was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves ( Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes mit Eichenlaub ) on 2 August 1943 . 
 After a one @-@ month hospital stay , Prinz zur Lippe @-@ Weißenfeld was promoted to Major and made Geschwaderkommodore of Nachtjagdgeschwader 5 ( NJG 5 ) on 20 February 1944 . He and his crew , Oberfeldwebel Josef <unk> and Unteroffizier Kurt <unk> , were killed in a flying accident on 12 March 1944 on a routine flight from Parchim to <unk> @-@ sous @-@ Laon . Above Belgium , they seem to have encountered a bad weather zone with low clouds and a dense snowstorm and it was assumed that the aircraft hit the high Ardennes ground after being forced to fly lower because of ice forming on the wings . The exact circumstances of this flight may never be known , the Bf 110 G @-@ 4 C9 + CD ( Werknummer 720 010 — factory number ) crashed into the Ardennes mountains near St. Hubert where the completely burned @-@ out wreck was found the following day . The funeral service was held in the city church of Linz on 15 March 1944 . Prinz Egmont zur Lippe @-@ Weißenfeld and Prinz Heinrich zu Sayn @-@ Wittgenstein are buried side by side at Ysselsteyn in the Netherlands . 
 = = Awards = = 
 Front Flying Clasp of the Luftwaffe in Gold 
 Iron Cross ( 1939 ) 
 2nd Class ( 17 December 1940 ) 
 1st Class ( 17 January 1941 ) 
 Wound Badge in Black 
 German Cross in Gold on 25 January 1942 as Oberleutnant in the 5 . / NJG 2 
 Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves 
 Knight 's Cross on 16 April 1942 as Oberleutnant and Staffelkapitän of the 5 . / NJG 2 
 263rd Oak Leaves on 2 August 1943 as Hauptmann and Gruppenkommandeur of the III . / NJG 1 
 Mentioned four times in the Wehrmachtbericht 
 = = = Wehrmachtbericht references = = = 
 = Tropical Storm Chantal ( 2001 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Chantal was a North Atlantic tropical cyclone that moved across the Caribbean Sea in August 2001 . Chantal developed from a tropical wave on August 14 in the tropical Atlantic Ocean . It tracked rapidly westward for much of its duration , and after degenerating into a tropical wave it passed through the Windward Islands . Chantal reached a peak intensity of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) twice in the Caribbean Sea , and each time it was anticipated to attain hurricane status ; however , wind shear and later land interaction prevented strengthening to hurricane status . On August 21 Chantal moved ashore near the border of Mexico and Belize , and the next day it dissipated . 
 In the Windward Islands , lightning caused two indirect deaths in Trinidad . Chantal dropped light to moderate rainfall across its path , most significantly in Quintana Roo in Mexico where it caused widespread mudslides . Damage in Belize totaled $ 4 million ( 2001 USD ; $ 5 @.@ 35 million 2016 USD ) , due to the combined impact of high waves , moderate winds , and rainfall . Overall damage was minor . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave moved off the coast of Africa on August 11 . Associated deep convection quickly decreased after tracking westward through the tropical Atlantic Ocean , although by August 13 a broad low pressure area and closed circulation developed along the wave . Environmental conditions favored tropical development , and the system gradually became better organized , although convection was initially limited near the center . On August 14 , convection increased northwest of the center and became sufficiently well @-@ organized for the system to be considered a tropical depression ; at the time , it was located about 1500 miles ( 2400 km ) east of the southern Windward Islands . 
 Situated to the south of a strong subtropical ridge , the depression tracked rapidly westward . With easterly wind shear , the structure was initially disorganized , although the system was forecast to attain tropical storm status within 48 hours of developing , due to anticipated favorable conditions . One computer model predicted the depression would reach winds of around 115 miles per hour ( 185 km / h ) by four days after development . Banding features increased while the satellite presentation continued to improve , and at 1200 UTC on August 16 the depression was upgraded to Tropical Storm Chantal about 370 miles ( 595 km ) east of Barbados . At the same time however , a QuikSCAT pass suggested the system did not contain a low @-@ level circulation , and in post @-@ season analysis , the National Hurricane Center estimated the system degenerated into a tropical wave rather than attain tropical storm status . This was confirmed by a Hurricane Hunters flight into the system . 
 Despite lacking a closed circulation , the overall structure remained well @-@ organized , and with a favorable upper @-@ level environment the possibility of regeneration into a tropical cyclone was noted . Early on August 17 , the remnants of Chantal passed over the Windward Islands with winds of tropical storm force . After entering the Caribbean Sea , the system slowed while its convective pattern expanded and became more symmetric . Hurricane Hunters confirmed that a small circulation developed about 290 miles ( 265 km ) south of Saint Croix , and accordingly the system developed into a tropical storm . Forecasters described the upper @-@ level environment as " ideal for [ a ] tropical cyclone to intensify " , with winds of 80 miles per hour ( 130 km / h ) forecast within a few days . The cyclone was predicted to maintain a west @-@ northwestward track toward the northwestern Caribbean and Gulf of Mexico . On August 18 , the winds increased to 65 miles per hour ( 105 km / h ) , although an increase in forward motion caused the low @-@ level circulation to become separated from the deep convection . The storm again decelerated on August 19 , allowing re @-@ organization and for Chantal to attain peak sustained winds of 70 miles per hour ( 110 km / h ) about 185 miles ( 295 km ) south of Kingston , Jamaica . 
 After reaching peak winds , Tropical Storm Chantal became disorganized while the center became ill @-@ defined and situated to the west @-@ southwest of the main area of convection ; this was due to unfavorable upper @-@ level winds , although computer models continued to forecast a more favorable upper @-@ level environment . By early on August 20 , Hurricane Hunters reported several low @-@ level circulations embedded within a large low pressure area . Later that day , wind shear decreased when the storm moved into the Gulf of Honduras . Chantal became much better organized , again reaching peak winds of 70 miles per hour ( 110 km / h ) before making landfall early on August 21 near the border of Mexico and Belize . Initially , the storm was forecast to cross the Yucatán Peninsula and Bay of Campeche and make a second landfall in the state of Veracruz . Chantal slowly weakened over land while moving slowly across northern Belize . Convection decreased markedly late on August 21 , and early the next day Chantal weakened to tropical depression status . The upper- and middle @-@ level circulations turned to the northeast while the low @-@ level circulation turned to the west @-@ southwest further inland . Weakening continued , and late on August 22 Chantal dissipated over the Mexican state of Tabasco . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 The National Hurricane Center issued a tropical storm watch for Barbados , St. Vincent , and Saint Lucia on August 15 . The following day the watches were changed to warnings , since forecasters predicted that the system would reach tropical storm status . Additional watches and warnings were also issued for the rest of Windward Islands . 
 Late on August 17 , the government of Jamaica issued a hurricane watch for the island , due to anticipated strengthening . The next day , it was upgraded to a hurricane warning briefly before being amended to a tropical storm warning , due to the storm 's weakening in the central Caribbean . In the country , officials advised fishermen to return to harbor , while some flights into Norman Manley International Airport were canceled . A tropical storm warning was also issued for the Cayman Islands , where an emergency shelter was opened . There , tourists were recommended to temporarily leave the islands . 
 About 50 hours before landfall , a tropical storm watch was issued for Belize and the eastern Yucatán Peninsula , and about 12 hours later it was upgraded to a hurricane watch . When the lack of significant intensification became apparent , a tropical storm warning was added for much of the Yucatán Peninsula and later for a portion of the Mexican coast along the Bay of Campeche . As the storm approached , nearly 2 @,@ 500 people in vulnerable areas of eastern Mexico evacuated to safer areas . About 8 @,@ 000 people evacuated in Belize , primarily on offshore islands . The government of Belize opened its emergency operation center and evacuated several hospitals . About 250 airline flights were canceled , and some cruise ship paths were diverted to safer locations . 
 = = Impact = = 
 As a strong tropical wave , Chantal passed through the Windward Islands . The island of Martinique reported sustained winds of 39 miles per hour ( 63 km / h ) with gusts to 56 miles per hour ( 91 km / h ) . On August 16 , lightning from the system killed two brothers in southern Trinidad . Also on the island , heavy rainfall caused flooding and road washouts . 
 While tracking across the eastern Caribbean Sea , the outer rainbands of Chantal produced light to moderate rainfall across Puerto Rico and the United States Virgin Islands . In Puerto Rico , the highest rainfall total was 2 @.@ 4 inches ( 61 mm ) in Rio Piedras . Passing to the south of Jamaica , the storm produced light rainfall and gusty winds . The outer rainbands also affected the Cayman Islands . 
 In Belize , the tropical storm produced a wind gust of 71 miles per hour ( 115 km / h ) in Caye Caulker , although stronger winds were possible in a convective band to the north . Moderate rainfall was reported across the country , peaking at 9 @.@ 81 inches ( 249 mm ) at <unk> station . Along the coast , high waves damaged seawalls and piers . Further inland , the combination of winds and flooding caused agriculture and infrastructure damage ; overall damage in the country totaled $ 4 million ( 2001 USD ; $ 5 @.@ 35 million 2016 USD ) . 
 Tropical Storm Chantal also produced gusty winds in the Yucatán Peninsula , peaking at 62 miles per hour ( 100 km / h ) in Chetumal , Quintana Roo . Dropping moderate to heavy rainfall along its path , a station near Chetumal reported a peak total of 20 @.@ 03 inches ( 509 mm ) . The remnants of Chantal also produced rainfall along the Bay of Campeche coast . The storm resulted in downed trees and power lines , as well as damaged buildings . Heavy rainfall led to mudslides across Quintana Roo , leaving some areas isolated . Initially , there were reports of two missing fishermen off the southeastern coast , although it was not later confirmed . Overall damage was minor . 
 = New Jersey Route 20 = 
 Route 20 , known locally as McLean Boulevard , is a state highway that runs 4 @.@ 15 miles ( 6 @.@ 68 km ) in New Jersey , United States . It runs along the east side of Paterson , Passaic County , following the west bank of the Passaic River between U.S. Route 46 and River Street ( County Route 504 ) , at which point County Route 504 begins . It is a four- to six @-@ lane divided highway most of its length that runs through residential and commercial areas of Paterson , intersecting with Interstate 80 and Route 4 at interchanges . The northernmost part of the route is a county @-@ maintained one @-@ way pair that follows 1st and 2nd Avenues . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Route 20 begins at an interchange with U.S. Route 46 and County Route 630 ( Crooks Avenue ) just north of the Garden State Parkway on the border of Clifton and Paterson . The road follows the bend of the Passaic River directly north of Dundee Lake , heading to the north into Paterson as McLean Boulevard , a four @-@ lane divided highway with a 45 mph ( 72 km / h ) speed limit . The route runs in between the Passaic River to the east and two large cemeteries to the west before coming to an interchange with Interstate 80 and Market Street . Past Interstate 80 , Route 20 becomes a six @-@ lane divided highway that heads through a mix of residential and commercial areas . 
 The next interchange along the route is for Route 4 ( Broadway ) , with access to both eastbound Route 4 and westbound Broadway from both directions . The road continues further north as a four @-@ lane divided highway with a speed limit of 35 mph ( 56 km / h ) , heading through more urbanized areas of Paterson . It crosses County Route 651 ( East 33rd Street / Morlot Avenue ) , which crosses the Passaic River to become County Route 78 ( Morlot Avenue ) in Bergen County . 
 Route 20 continues to follow the Passaic River as a 45 mph ( 72 km / h ) road through commercial areas , featuring an intersection with County Route 652 ( 5th Avenue ) . Past this intersection , the route proceeds through urban areas , turning west and splitting into a one @-@ way pair . Here , the route becomes county maintained , with the northbound direction following 1st Avenue and the southbound direction following 2nd Avenue before coming to an end at County Route 504 ( River Street ) . 
 = = History = = 
 The present @-@ day routing of Route 20 north of Market Street was legislated in 1927 as part of Route 3 , which was to run from the New York border at Greenwood Lake to Secaucus . In addition , the present day routing south of Route 4 was also legislated as part of that route , which was to run from the George Washington Bridge to Cape May . In 1929 , the western terminus of Route 3 was moved to Paterson as Route S4B ( now Route 208 ) was planned to replace the alignment of Route 3 from Paterson to the New York border . McLean Boulevard through Paterson was built by the 1930s . In the 1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering , Route 20 was legislated to follow the former alignment of Route 3 between Paterson and East Rutherford as Route 3 was moved to the Route S3 freeway that was built between East Rutherford and Clifton . 
 Another freeway routing of Route 20 was planned in 1959 . This road , which was to be a six @-@ lane freeway called the Paterson Peripheral , was to run from Clifton north to the existing Route 20 in downtown Paterson . This road was completed between the Garden State Parkway and Valley Road by 1969 and north to Interstate 80 in 1975 . Upon completion , this road received the Route 20 designation . In 1972 , the state took over maintenance of the Paterson Plank Road from Route 3 to Route 17 in East Rutherford and made it a part of the route . As these three sections of Route 20 were not connected , they received three different route designations by the 1990s . The freeway section of Route 20 from the Garden State Parkway to Interstate 80 was designated Route 19 , the section between Route 3 and Route 17 was designated Route 120 , and the Route 20 designation was retained along McLean Boulevard through Paterson . The unfinished section of Route 20 that was to connect McLean Boulevard to Paterson Plank Road was built as a northern extension of the Route 21 freeway in 2000 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Passaic County . 
 = Shukri al @-@ Quwatli = 
 Shukri al @-@ Quwatli ( 1891 – 30 June 1967 ; Arabic : <unk> <unk> ) was the first president of post @-@ independence Syria . He began his career as a dissident working towards the independence and unity of the Ottoman Empire 's Arab territories and was consequently imprisoned and tortured for his activism . When the Kingdom of Syria was established , Quwatli became a government official , though he was disillusioned with monarchism and co @-@ founded the republican Independence Party . Quwatli was immediately sentenced to death by the French who took control over Syria in 1920 . Afterward , he based himself in Cairo where he served as the chief ambassador of the Syrian @-@ Palestinian Congress , cultivating particularly strong ties with Saudi Arabia . He used these connections to help finance the Great Syrian Revolt ( 1925 – 1927 ) . In 1930 , the French authorities pardoned Quwatli and thereafter , he returned to Syria , where he gradually became a principal leader of the National Bloc . He was elected president of Syria in 1943 and oversaw the country 's independence three years later . 
 Quwatli was reelected in 1948 , but was toppled in a military coup in 1949 . He subsequently went into exile in Egypt , returning to Syria in 1955 to participate in the presidential election , which he won . A conservative presiding over an increasingly leftist @-@ dominated government , Quwatli officially adopted neutralism amid the Cold War . After his request for aid from the United States was denied , he drew closer to the Eastern bloc . He also entered Syria into a defense arrangement with Egypt and Saudi Arabia to confront the influence of the Baghdad Pact . In 1957 , Quwatli , who the US and the Pact countries attempted but failed to oust , sought to stem the leftist tide in Syria , but to no avail . By then , his political authority had receded as the military increasingly bypassed Quwatli 's jurisdiction by separately coordinating with Quwatli 's erstwhile backer , Egyptian president Gamal Abdel Nasser . 
 In 1958 , after months of unity talks , Quwatli merged Syria with Egypt to form the United Arab Republic and stepped down for Nasser to serve as president . In gratitude , Nasser awarded Quwatli the honorary title of " First Arab Citizen " . Quwatli grew disenchanted with the union , believing it had reduced Syria to a police state subordinate to Egypt . He supported Syria 's secession in 1961 , but plans for him to finish his presidential term afterward did not materialize . Quwatli left Syria following the 1963 Ba 'athist coup , an he died of a heart attack in Lebanon weeks after Syria 's defeat in the 1967 Six Day War . He was buried in Damascus on 1 July . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Family = = = 
 The Quwatli 's were a family of merchants , who became wealthy from trading with Arabia , and moved to Damascus from Baghdad in the 18th @-@ century . The family established itself in the district of al @-@ Shaghour in Damascus , and by 1860 , some of the family 's wealth was invested in buying large tracts of land in the Ghouta farms surrounding Damascus . The family 's notable status was owed to their wealth , rather than an aristocratic or religious lineage , and their traditional spheres of activity were commerce and the Ottoman civil service . 
 Shukri 's grandfather , Abd al @-@ Ghani was involved in finance , as well as his great @-@ uncle , Ahmad , who was the president of the Agricultural Bank of Damascus . His other great @-@ uncle , Murad , was a member of the Administrative Council for the city . His father 's wealth rested on the highly @-@ fertile lands he owned , and later bequeathed to Shukri and his siblings , in the Ghouta . His older brother , Hasan , was elected President of the Damascus Chamber of Commerce and Agriculture . 
 In 1928 , Shukri al @-@ Quwatli married Bahira al @-@ Dalati , the 19 @-@ year @-@ old daughter of nationalist Said al @-@ Dalati , whom Quwatli met while in jail in 1916 . Shukri and Bahira had five children ; Hassan ( the oldest , born in 1935 ) , Mahmud , Huda , Hana and Hala . Bahira al @-@ Dalati died in 1989 . 
 = = = Childhood and education = = = 
 Shukri Quwatli was born in Damascus in 1891 . He received his elementary education at a Jesuit school in the city , then studied at the preparatory high school of Maktab Anbar in the Jewish quarter of Damascus . He obtained his baccalauréat in 1908 . He then moved to Istanbul where he studied political science and public administration . Quwatli graduated from the <unk> @-@ i <unk> in 1913 . He returned to Damascus in 1913 after receiving his diploma , and started working for the Ottoman civil service . 
 = = = = Early influences = = = = 
 Quwatli was initially brought up in a pro @-@ Ottoman environment , owing to his family 's connections in Istanbul . The restrictions of the Abdul Hamid II era , however , started to be felt around the Ottoman Empire , and discontent was brewing even among the empire 's elite . Following the Young Turk Revolution against Abdul Hamid II in 1908 , parliamentary elections were called in all provinces , and liberal Arab intellectuals like Shukri al @-@ Asali , Shafiq <unk> al @-@ Azm , and Rushdi al @-@ Shama 'a secured seats as deputies ( members of the legislature ) representing Damascus . The liberal current that established itself through these figures , and the political dailies they established including al @-@ <unk> ( " The Firebrand " ) and al @-@ <unk> ' al @-@ Arabi ( " Arab Brotherhood " ) , greatly influenced Quwatli and other Arab youths . 
 During the Ottoman countercoup of 1909 , Quwatli strongly supported the Committee of Union and Progress ( CUP ) against Abdul Hamid II . Nevertheless , after the failed countercoup , the CUP accused Arab provinces of supporting Abdul Hamid II and initiated a policy of Turkification , whereby all local officials were substituted by Turkish ones . Soon after , the parliament was dissolved , and the liberal Arab politicians were forced out in the following elections . 
 = = Early nationalist activities = = 
 Quwatli 's early involvement in the Arab nationalist movement came through the Arab Congress of 1913 . Shortly after starting his career at the Ottoman civil service in Damascus , he received an invitation to attend the conference in Paris . However , the conference was strongly condemned by the Ottoman authorities , and Arab notables were forbidden from attending . Nevertheless , the congress had succeeded in rousing nationalist feelings in Arab provinces . Quwatli 's first confrontation with the Ottoman authorities came in February 1914 during a visit by Jamal Pasha , the governor of Syria at the time , to the offices of the Governorate of Damascus , where Quwatli worked . During the visit , Quwatli refused to follow the normal protocol — bending over and kissing Jamal Pasha 's right hand — and was promptly thrown in prison at the Citadel of Damascus . He was bailed out of prison a few days later through his family 's connections , but he lost his job at the civil service . 
 = = = Al @-@ Fatat = = = 
 The growing hardships in the country during the early years of World War I pushed Quwatli to join the secret society of al @-@ Fatat , which was facilitated by his childhood friend and co @-@ founder , Nasib al @-@ Bakri . Al @-@ Fatat was an underground organization established in Paris in 1911 by Arab nationalists with the aim of gaining independence and unity of the various Arab territories in the Ottoman Empire . In 1913 , the society established its main branch in Damascus , and was successful in attracting the Syrian elite into its ranks . 
 In 1915 , Sharif Hussein , trying to garner support for his planned uprising against the Ottomans , sent his son Faisal to Damascus to lobby the Syrian notables on his behalf . Faisal , a member of al @-@ Fatat himself , met secretly with other members of the society , including Quwatli , in the house of Nasib al @-@ Bakri . When the Ottoman authorities learned of the meeting , they ordered the arrest of al @-@ Bakri and his two brothers , Fawzi and Sami , accusing them of treason . Quwatli was charged by the al @-@ Fatat leadership with the task of facilitating their escape , in which he succeeded . In retaliation , Ottoman authorities placed him under arrest , in which he was subjected to torture and humiliation . Nevertheless , Quwatli refused to confess to anything , and his captors failed to implicate him in the operation so they released him a month later . The tremendous pressure of that experience , however , took its toll on the young Quwatli , and upon his release he retired to his country house in <unk> and stopped all contacts with members of al @-@ Fatat and the opposition . 
 In late 1916 he was approached by <unk> al @-@ Ayyubi in hope that Quwatli could help him secure an escape route for his ailing father , Shukri al @-@ Ayyubi , who was arrested by the Ottomans , like he did for Nasib al @-@ Bakri . However , despite Quwatli 's refusal to help , Ottoman authorities tracked down the contact and arrested both men . Quwatli was subjected to further torture to coerce him to reveal the names of his al @-@ Fatat colleagues . In an attempt to prevent himself from surrendering the names , Quwatli tried to commit suicide . After cutting his wrists , Quwatli 's life was saved at the last minute by fellow inmate , al @-@ Fatat member and practicing doctor , Ahmad Qadri . He spent four more months in jail , before being released on bail by his relative , Shafiq al @-@ Quwatli , who served as a deputy at the Ottoman Parliament , on 28 January 1917 . His experience in jail and the story about his attempted suicide turned Quwatli into a nationalist hero in Syria . 
 = = Kingdom of Syria = = 
 On 1 October 1918 , an Arab army under the leadership of Emir Faisal and British general T. E. Lawrence entered Damascus , and by the end of October the rest of Ottoman Syria fell to the Allied Forces . Emir Faisal became in charge of administering the liberated territory . He appointed Rida al @-@ <unk> as prime minister , and Quwatli 's friend , Nasib al @-@ Bakri became a personal adviser to the Emir . Quwatli , at the age of twenty @-@ six , was appointed assistant to the governor of Damascus , Alaa al @-@ Din al @-@ Durubi . 
 However , many of Quwatli 's generation were unimpressed with Faisal 's leadership skills , and were drawn to a republican , rather than monarchist , view of governance . Furthermore , they were suspicious of Faisal , and his brother Abdullah 's ties with the British . On 15 April 1919 they founded a loose coalition under the name of al @-@ Istiqlal Party ( " Independence Party " ) . The party had a pan @-@ Arab , secular , anti @-@ British and anti @-@ Hashemite outlook and attracted mostly youth activists from the elite classes . Well @-@ known members , other than Quwatli , included Adil Arslan , <unk> al @-@ <unk> , Riad al @-@ <unk> , <unk> al @-@ Jabiri , Ahmad Qadri , Izzat Darwaza and Awni Abd al @-@ Hadi . Although ostensibly working for the government , Quwatli devoted his efforts to nationalist activities outside the government 's auspices . In addition to al @-@ Istiqlal , he was also a member of the Palestinian @-@ led Arab Club 's Damascus branch . 
 In a meeting with the 1919 King – Crane Commission , sent by the United States ( US ) to gauge national sentiment in greater Syria , Quwatli rejected the notion of an American military presence in Syria , telling Crane that " Reduction of sovereignty is non @-@ negotiable " and instead suggesting that the US help Syrians to " build their state and live in peace on their land . " Nevertheless , French forces had already started landing on the Syrian coast in 1919 to enforce the Sykes – Picot Agreement whereby France and the UK would divide up the former Arab territories of the Ottoman Empire between themselves . In March 1920 , the League of Nations granted France a mandate over Syria and Lebanon , and in response Emir Faisal declared himself king of Syria on 8 March 1920 . When King Faisal refused to accept the mandate , the French marched on Damascus . Yusuf al- ' Azma , minister of defense at the time , led a small force and met the French at the Battle of Maysalun on 23 July 1920 . The battle ended in a decisive victory for the French , and the next day French forces occupied Damascus . King Faisal was deported to Europe , and the French Mandate for Syria and the Lebanon was officially declared . 
 = = Leader in Syrian independence movement = = 
 = = = Emissary of the Syrian @-@ Palestinian Congress = = = 
 The French started their rule by sentencing 21 nationalist leaders , including Quwatli , to death on 1 August 1920 . Quwatli managed to flee only hours before a warrant for his arrest was issued . From Damascus he fled by car to Haifa in British @-@ mandated Palestine , and soon after to Cairo in Egypt . From there , Quwatli spent the bulk of his time traveling throughout the Arab world and Europe serving as the virtual ambassador of the Syrian @-@ Palestinian Congress . He became the chief link between Arab nationalist activists in Europe and in the Arab world . 
 In Europe , he particularly frequented Berlin where he worked with the prominent Arab nationalist intellectual Shakib Arslan to proliferate anti @-@ French sentiment , leading the French Mandatory authorities to label Quwatli one of the " most dangerous " Syrian exiles . He developed close ties with Ibn Saud , who by 1925 ruled much of Arabia , having overrun the Hashemites in the Hejaz . Quwatli had a prior relationship with the House of Saud , stemming from his own family 's commercial links with the Saudis and Quwatli 's friendship with Sheikh Yusuf Yasin , a Syrian adviser to Ibn Saud , who Quwatli had dispatched to Arabia during Faisal 's rule . Quwatli , strongly distrustful of the Hashemites , was impressed by Ibn Saud 's relatively quick conquest over much of Arabia and saw in the Saudis a strong potential ally against British and French imperialism in the Middle East . By 1925 , Quwatli had solidified his position as the intermediary between Ibn Saud and the Syrian @-@ Palestinian Congress . His acquisition of Saudi funding put him at odds with the Congress 's chief financier Michel <unk> , however . 
 = = = Financing the Great Syrian Revolt = = = 
 In the summer of 1925 tensions between the Druze chiefs of the Hauran led by Sultan Pasha al @-@ Atrash and the French authorities culminated with the Great Syrian Revolt , which spread throughout Syria within months . While Quwatli 's Istiqlal Party lobbied the Grand Mufti of Jerusalem , Amin al @-@ Husseini to set up a financial support network for the rebellion , Quwatli had already secured the funneling of funds and arms from the Hejaz and also diverted some of the military aid to the Jerusalem @-@ based committee . As the revolt 's initial momentum began to recede in mid @-@ 1926 , bickering between opposition leaders , inside and outside of Syria , increased significantly . Quwatli was accused by his rivals in Cairo of pocketing some money he raised and paying off rebels to prevent rebel raids against his family 's extensive apricot orchards in the Ghouta . Tensions between <unk> like Quwatli and Arslan and other Syrian nationalist leaders like al @-@ Bakri and Shahbandar , were particularly sharp , with the latter accusing Quwatli of being out of touch from the realities of the revolt , and Quwatli accusing Shahbandar of treason for attempting to stop the insurrection . 
 = = = Role in the National Bloc = = = 
 In late 1927 , Quwatli headed the Istiqlal @-@ dominated Executive Committee of the Syrian @-@ Palestinian Congress , although <unk> headed a separate rival committee that also called itself the Congress 's Executive Committee . Both were based in Cairo . In 1930 , Quwatli was allowed to return to Syria under a general amnesty . Thereafter , he joined the National Bloc , the preeminent opposition movement in Syria — though tolerated by the French . Although he opposed the moderate stances of the Bloc 's Damascene leaders , he determined he could only remain a major political player by joining the group . He sought to steer it towards a more determined nationalist course and worked to expand his support base , relying on his relationships with residents in some of Damascus ' traditionally nationalist neighborhoods ( al @-@ Midan and al @-@ Shaghour ) and among the city 's merchant and emerging industrialist classes . He also worked to draw support from the staunch pan @-@ <unk> of the League of National Action ( LNA ) beginning in 1933 . He managed to co @-@ opt much of the LNA 's members by 1935 – 36 by financing its land development company ( which aimed to prevent land sales to Zionist organizations in Palestine ) and assigning some of its leaders to the director boards of companies affiliated with the Bloc . 
 In 1936 , as a general strike was underway in the country to demand a renegotiation of the French role in Syria , Quwatli was appointed the Bloc 's vice president of internal affairs , but was not part of the treaty negotiation committee which led talks with the French in Paris in March . A new treaty was established by the end of the month , although the French did not ratify it . Between then and fall , Quwatli spearheaded efforts to unify nationalists ranks in Syria , convincing LNA leader Sabri al @-@ Asali to join the Bloc 's highest governing body . By enlisting the support of many prominent pan @-@ <unk> like himself , Quwatli strengthened his position within the Bloc , particularly in regards to his chief nationalist rival Jamil Mardam Bey . 
 On 20 March 1941 , during World War II , when the Vichy French were in control of Syria , Quwatli called for immediate Syrian independence amid a period of food shortages , high unemployment and widespread nationalist rioting in the country . Vichy troops in the country were defeated by the Allied forces in July and Quwatli left Syria during the campaign . He returned in 1942 . France officially recognized Syria 's independence on 27 September . However , French troops were not withdrawn and national elections were postponed by the French Mandatory authorities . 
 = = First presidential term = = 
 = = = Election of 1943 = = = 
 Prior to the 1943 national elections in French Mandatory Syria , the French authorities attempted to negotiate with Quwatli as head of the National Bloc to issue a treaty that guaranteed an independent Syria 's alignment and close military cooperation with France , in return for French help in securing Quwatli 's election to the presidency . Quwatli refused , believing the Syrian people would view such negotiations negatively . He was also confident that the National Bloc would win the elections regardless of French support . Quwatli did win the vote , becoming Syria 's president on 17 August 1943 . 
 = = = Syrian independence = = = 
 As president , Quwatli continued to press for Syrian independence from France . In a bid to garner American and British support for his government , he declared war against the Axis Powers , aligning Syria with the Allies . Growing countrywide unrest in response to French Mandatory rule led to military assaults against Damascus and other Syrian cities in May 1945 . More French troops were scheduled to land in Syria to aid the authorities , but at Quwatli 's request for intervention , British troops invaded Syria from Transjordan , entering Damascus on 1 June . The French military campaign came to an immediate halt as a consequence . The UK and the US had viewed the French military action in Syria as a potential catalyst for further unrest throughout the Middle East and a detriment to British and American lines of communication in the region . 
 As French troops began a partial withdrawal from the country , Quwatli instructed Fares al @-@ Khoury , his envoy to the US and head of the Syrian mission to the United Nations , to bring the issue of Syria 's independence to the United Nations Security Council ( UNSC ) , cabling Khoury to " Go to [ US President Harry ] Truman and tell him the French have ploughed the land in Syria , over our heads ! " Khoury proceeded to petition the UNSC to force France 's withdrawal from Syria . The US and UK backed Syria 's request and informed Quwatli that British troops were in control of Syria , requesting Quwatli 's cooperation in enforcing an evening curfew in the country . Quwatli complied and expressed his gratitude to the British government . At a summit between France , the UK , the US , Russia and China , France agreed to withdraw from both Syria and Lebanon in return for British promises to withdraw its military from the Levant region as well . Quwatli was angered that Syria was left out of the conference and requested a summit with Truman and Winston Churchill , which was rebuffed . 
 The transfer of administrative powers to the Syrian government began on 1 August , the day in which Quwatli announced the establishment of the Syrian Army and his position as the commander in chief . Quwatli also asked Khoury to form a cabinet , which was established on 24 August . The French finished their withdrawal from Syria on 15 April 1946 and Quwatli declared Syria 's independence day on 17 April . 
 = = = Post @-@ independence politics = = = 
 Following Syria 's independence , the National Bloc was dissolved and replaced by the National Party . Quwatli 's leadership , while supported by older politicians like Asali , Jabiri and Haffar , became increasingly challenged by emerging leaders such as Nazim al @-@ Qudsi of the People 's Party and Akram al @-@ Hawrani of the Arab Socialist Party as well as the Baath Party , the Syrian Socialist Nationalist Party ( <unk> ) , the Muslim Brotherhood and the Syrian Communist Party ( SCP ) . Antagonistic relations between Quwatli and the Hashemite kings of Iraq and Jordan , Abdullah I and Faisal II , respectively , increased with the latter two seeking to unite Syria , Iraq and Jordan under Hashemite monarchical rule , and Quwatli countering that Iraq and Jordan join a republican Syria under his leadership instead . The Hashemites found support in the People 's Party , which became an influential force in Aleppo , a major city and economic hub of Syria , particularly after the 1947 death of Jabiri , Quwatli 's Aleppo @-@ based ally . 
 In early 1947 , Quwatli and the National Party , the largest party in parliament , made an amendment to the constitution to enable Quwatli to seek re @-@ election . The move was met by strong disapproval from rival Syrian parties and opposition politicians , and a campaign to unseat Quwatli in the next presidential election was commenced . Quwatli 's allies won 24 out of 127 seats during the 1947 parliamentary election , the first in post @-@ independence Syria , while the opposition won 53 seats and independents unaffiliated with any political party won 50 . A number of Quwatli 's allies defected from the National Party and former president Atassi retired from politics because of his frustration at Quwatli 's handling of Syrian internal affairs . Quwatli tasked Jamil Mardam Bey to form a new cabinet in October , which included mostly pro @-@ Western politicians . 
 Despite the heavy presence of pro @-@ American figures in the cabinet and Quwatli 's initially warm ties with the US , relations between the two countries began to unravel amid the nascent Cold War and the view that Quwatli was becoming a detriment to US interests in the region . Quwatli developed close relations with the SCP and its head Khalid <unk> , which was a contributing factor to the US Congress 's rejection of Quwatli 's arms request for the Syrian Army in late 1947 . Quwatli also rejected the construction of the Trans @-@ Arabian Pipeline in Syria ( to connect the oilfields of Saudi Arabia to Lebanon ) . Quwatli feared construction of the pipeline would threaten the mostly British @-@ owned Iraq Petroleum Company and upset the UK , as well as the Syrian public , who he believed would view the project " as a new form of indirect foreign economic control " , according to Moubayed . US support for Israel , particularly under Truman , and Quwatli 's adamant opposition to Zionism was a further source of tension . 
 = = Second presidential term = = 
 = = = Election of 1948 = = = 
 With the constitution amended to allow for a president to seek more than one term , Quwatli ran against Khalid al @-@ Azm for another five @-@ year term and won by a slim majority on 18 April 1948 . 
 = = = 1948 Arab @-@ Israeli War = = = 
 Quwatli opposed the proposed partition of the British Mandate of Palestine into separate Jewish and Arab states , arguing that the plan , which would allocate 56 % of Palestine to the Jewish state , violated the rights of the Palestinian Arab majority . The proposal passed the UN vote and Syria made war preparations soon afterward , including co @-@ founding the Arab Liberation Army ( ALA ) . Quwatli had proposed the creation of the ALA as a volunteer force to attract fighters from throughout the Arab world and to take the place of Arab regular armies . The ALA 's establishment was sponsored by the Arab League following the UN partition vote and Fawzi al @-@ Qawuqji , a Syrian commander who played leading roles in the Great Syrian Revolt and the 1936 revolt in Palestine , was appointed its commander . Quwatli did not believe the armies of Syria and the Arab world were ready to successfully confront Jewish forces and as war drew near in early 1948 , he petitioned Abdel Rahman Azzam , head of the Arab League , to not enter Arab armies into Palestine . Instead , Quwatli offered to provide local Palestinian Arab fighters arms and funding . Azzam was not swayed and continued his effort of rallying Arab governments to dispatch their armies . On 15 May , after the establishment of Israel was announced , Quwatli ordered the Syrian Army to enter Palestine immediately . 
 The Syrian Army , which consisted of 4 @,@ 500 soldiers , had been mostly repelled in their offensive during the first few days of the war , gaining control over a small area along the Syrian border . As a result of the army 's poor showing , Quwatli pressed defense minister Ahmad al @-@ Sharabati to resign his post , which Sharabati did on 24 May . He then replaced chief of staff Abdullah <unk> with Husni al @-@ Zaim during that same period of the war . Following the war , Quwatli accused Zaim of military incompetence and his officers of profiteering . In turn , Zaim accused Quwatli of mismanagement during the conflict . The Syrian public did not spare Quwatli blame for the army 's poor performance , causing his popularity , built on his nationalist reputation , to erode further . The Syrian press was also sharply critical of Quwatli and Prime Minister Mardam Bey , urging them to leave their positions . Mardam Bey resigned on 22 August 1948 and was replaced by Khalid al @-@ Azm . 
 Mass demonstrations took place in Syria condemning US President Harry Truman for recognizing Israel . Synagogues were attacked in Damascus as were the offices of General Motors . US officials were frustrated at Quwatli for not attempting to stop the demonstrations . When Egypt , Jordan and Lebanon signed armistice agreements with Israel between February and April 1949 , Syria under Quwatli did not do so and refused to send a delegation to attend truce negotiations in Rhodes in March . 
 = = = Coup d 'état of 1949 = = = 
 On 29 March 1949 , Zaim launched a coup d 'état , overthrowing Quwatli . Zaim 's troops entered Damascus and raided Quwatli 's home . They disarmed his guard and confronted Quwatli in his night clothes before army officer Ibrahim al @-@ Husseini arrested him . After being allowed to change his clothes , Quwatli was taken by the authorities to the city 's Mezzeh Prison . Prime Minister al @-@ Azm was also arrested . The coup had been backed and allegedly co @-@ planned with the US Central Intelligence Agency . The US was the first country to recognize Zaim 's government , followed by the UK , France , and the Hashemite kingdoms of Iraq and Jordan . 
 = = Exile in Egypt = = 
 As a result of pressure from the Egyptian and Saudi governments to spare the life of their ally Quwatli , al @-@ Zaim agreed to release Quwatli from prison in mid @-@ April 1949 . After officially resigning as President , Quwatli was exiled to Alexandria , Egypt . In Egypt he was respected as a guest of honor by King Farouk and after the July 1952 revolution , by the Free Officers who gained power . Despite his positive relationship with the ousted King Farouk , Quwatli developed a close friendship with the founder of the Free Officers , Gamal Abdel Nasser , who became Egypt 's leader in 1954 . 
 = = Third presidential term = = 
 = = = Elections of 1955 = = = 
 Quwatli returned to Syria in 1955 , following the ouster of President Adib al @-@ Shishakli and during the presidency of Hashim al @-@ Atassi . Quwatli entered his candidacy in the August 1955 presidential elections , at the age of 63 . Required to secure a two @-@ thirds majority in the 142 @-@ member Syrian Parliament in order to win , Quwatli defeated his main opponent Khalid al @-@ Azm 89 to 42 ( a further six votes were cast as invalid ) in the first round . This prompted a second round of voting , in which Quwatli won the presidency with 91 votes against Azm 's 41 ( a further five votes were blank and two invalid . ) Quwatli 's bid for the presidency was supported by the governments of Egypt and Saudi Arabia , both of which were allied in their opposition to the Baghdad Pact as was Quwatli . 
 Prime Minister Sabri al @-@ Asali resigned from his post on 6 September following the Ba 'ath Party 's withdrawal from the cabinet . As a result , Quwatli attempted to nominate Lutfi al @-@ Haffar as Prime Minister , but reneged after opposition from the Ba 'athists . Afterward , Quwatli asked Rushdi al @-@ <unk> to form a cabinet , but the latter refused , citing that influence from the Syrian Army would deprive his government of real power . President Nasser of Egypt recommended the reappointment of Asali , but Quwatli refused , instead opting for Said al @-@ Ghazzi , an independent . Ghazzi agreed and subsequently presided over a national unity government . 
 = = = Adoption of neutralism = = = 
 Under Quwatli 's leadership , Syria increasingly moved towards neutralism , despite the conservative views held by Quwatli . However , on 10 September , Quwatli first opted to make an official request for arms from the United States , but was eventually rebuffed despite support from US Secretary of State John Foster Dulles . Starting in 1956 , Quwatli began to look towards the Eastern bloc for economic and military assistance . During the tenure of his administration , Quwatli furthered Syria 's relations with other neutralist countries such as Yugoslavia , India and Egypt , but also with the Soviet Union ( USSR ) and the Eastern bloc . The pursuit of this policy was partially due to the support afforded to the leftist movements in Syria by the Saudi and Egyptian governments who viewed them as strong opponents of the Baghdad Pact , and the highly influential leftist factions of the Syrian Army . Quwatli and Nasser initiated the Egyptian @-@ Syrian Agreement , a defense arrangement that would serve as a counterweight to the Baghdad Pact , in March 1955 . The agreement stipulated that each country would assist the other in case of an attack , the establishment of numerous committees to coordinate joint military activities and the creation of a joint military command headed by Egyptian officer Abdel Hakim Amer . The agreement was concluded 20 October . 
 Increasingly concerned at the growing leftist trend in the country , Quwatli called for a national unity government that would include parties from across the political spectrum on 15 February 1956 . Despite opposition from the Ba 'athists , Quwatli managed to preside over a " national covenant " which entailed a foreign policy of opposition to Zionism and imperialism as well as the adoption of neutralism amid the Cold War . Nonetheless , and against Quwatli 's advice , Ghazzi resigned from his post in June 1956 as a result of pressure from the Ba 'athists and the communists who had been leading protests against Ghazzi 's decision to lift the ban on wheat sales to Western Europe . Faced with few options , Quwatli reappointed Asali as Prime Minister . Asali moved to further strengthen ties with Egypt , including a pledge to start unity talks , and appointed Ba 'athists to the ministerial positions of economy and foreign affairs . 
 Following the tripartite invasion of the Sinai Peninsula and the Suez Canal by British , French and Israeli forces in October 1956 , Quwatli severed ties with Britain . Quwatli sent hundreds of army recruits to aid the Egyptian defense and made an emergency visit to Moscow to request Soviet backing for Nasser from Premier Nikita Khrushchev , telling the latter that the tripartite forces " want to destroy Egypt ! " In response to public pressure , in late December Prime Minister Asali reshuffled his cabinet , removing several fellow conservatives and strengthening leftist influence in the government . 
 = = = Confronting leftist influence = = = 
 In July 1957 , relations between Quwatli 's ally Saudi Arabia and the governments of Iraq and Jordan , rivals of Syria , warmed considerably to the protestations of the leftist current in Syria , which viewed the growing ties between the region 's conservative monarchies with distress . After a series of public criticisms of King Saud by an array of Syrian political figures , including al @-@ Azm , Michel Aflaq and Akram al @-@ Hawrani , Saud froze Syrian assets in Saudi Arabia and withdrew his ambassador from Syria in protest . In response to the crisis between the two countries , an alarmed Quwatli ordered Asali to publicly distance his government from the anti @-@ Saudi views of some in the Syrian Parliament and press , and to publicly apologize to Saud . In addition , Quwatli personally issued a government order to shut down the communist newspaper Al <unk> . 
 On 6 August , Quwatli established a long @-@ term agreement with the USSR , entailing a long @-@ term Soviet loan to fund development works in Syria and the Soviet purchase of a large portion of Syrian agricultural and textile surpluses . US fears that Syria was approaching a communist takeover had prompted an attempted CIA @-@ sponsored coup to replace the Quwatli government with former president Shishakli . However , the coup plot was foiled by the head of Syrian intelligence , Abdel Hamid al @-@ Sarraj , on 12 August and Syria consequently expelled the US military attaché from Damascus . The US , which denied the coup plot , responded by expelling the Syrian ambassador from Washington and recalling its ambassador from Syria . 
 Leftist influence in Syria grew further in the immediate wake of the crisis ; on 15 August , a high @-@ ranking officer from Sidon , Lebanon with Marxist leanings , Afif Bizri , was appointed army chief of staff , and several mid @-@ level officers were replaced with communist officers . Quwatli flew to Egypt amid apparent plans to resign from the presidency in favor of the Soviet @-@ leaning Azm . However , he returned to Syria on 26 August . Tensions had been rising as rumors swept the region regarding a US @-@ backed Turkish or joint Iraqi @-@ Jordanian invasion of Syria to prevent a potential communist takeover . Quwatli 's earlier success in repairing ties between Syria and Saudi Arabia proved particularly useful during this period . Saud immediately lent his full support to Quwatli , whom he viewed as a significant counterweight to the leftist movement , by rebuffing President Dwight D. Eisenhower 's appeal to endorse the Eisenhower Doctrine , a policy aimed at containing communist and Arab nationalist influence in the Middle East . He also accepted an invitation to Damascus by Quwatli on 25 August , publicly stating that Saudi Arabia would support Syria in any aggression against it . Iraqi Prime Minister Ali Jawdat also proclaimed support for Syria when he visited on 26 August , in spite of support for an attack by the Iraqi monarchy . Both Saud and Jawdat privately criticized Syria 's leadership for increasing dependence on the Eastern bloc . 
 Nonetheless , the US and its allies in the Baghdad Pact genuinely feared that Syria was becoming a satellite of the Soviets and decided in a September meeting that Quwatli 's government had to be removed . That same month Turkish troops massed along the border with Syria . On 13 October , Nasser , who had launched a radio campaign denouncing the Baghdad Pact countries , dispatched 1 @,@ 500 Egyptian troops , a mostly symbolic force , to the port of Latakia in northern Syria in a show of Arab strength against Turkey , to the acclaim of the Syrian and pan @-@ Arab public . The leaders of Jordan and Iraq promptly reassured Quwatli that they had no intention to interfere in Syria 's internal affairs . Nasser had apparently bypassed his ally Quwatli , coordinating the deployment with officers Sarraj and Bizri instead . Quwatli related this fact to Saud , who had complained of not being consulted of the Egyptian move beforehand , an " admission ... of Quwatli 's political irrelevance , " according to contemporary historian Salim Yaqub . 
 Sarraj and Bizri wielded substantial influence in Syrian politics , checking the power of the political factions and purging Nasser 's opponents from the officer corps . This was a source of concern for Quwatli , but he kept both men in their posts , partially due to pressure from Nasser . Quwatli further solidified his ties with the latter by appointing Akram al @-@ Hawrani , the prominent Arab socialist leader , as speaker of parliament , and Salah al @-@ Din Bitar , the co @-@ founder of the pan @-@ Arabist Ba 'ath Party , as foreign affairs minister . 
 = = = Unity with Egypt = = = 
 Amid the euphoria generated by Egypt 's military intervention , serious unity discussions commenced between Syria and Egypt . Towards the end of October , Anwar al @-@ Sadat , the Egyptian speaker of parliament , visited the Syrian parliament in Damascus in a gesture of solidarity , only for the visit to end with the Syrian parliament voting unanimously to enter into a union with Egypt without delay . A Syrian delegation then headed for Cairo to persuade Nasser to accept unity with Syria , but Nasser expressed his reservations regarding unity to the delegates and Quwatli , who was in Damascus . Nasser was wary of the Syrian military 's habitual interference in the country 's political affairs and the stark difference in the countries ' economies and political systems . The Syrian political and military leadership continued to press Nasser out of both sincere commitment to Arab nationalism and a realization that only unification with Egypt could prevent impending strife in the country due to increasing communist influence . 
 In December , the Ba 'ath Party composed a proposal entailing federal unity with Egypt , prompting their communist rivals to propose a total union . While the communists were less eager to merge with Egypt , they sought to appear before the Syrian public as the group most dedicated to unity , privately believing Nasser would reject the offer as he had the first time . According to historian <unk> Dawisha , " the communists ended up outmaneuvering themselves ... unprepared for the unfolding events spearheaded by a public driven to frenzy by all talk and promises of union . " On 11 January 1958 , the communist chief @-@ of @-@ staff , Bizri , led an officers delegation to press for unity with Cairo without consulting Quwatli beforehand . Instead , the Egyptian ambassador , Mahmud Riad , met and notified Quwatli of Bizri 's move . Quwatli was angered at the military 's move , telling Riad that it amounted to a coup and Egypt was complicit . 
 To his assert his influence over the unity talks , Quwatli sent Foreign Minister al @-@ Bitar to Cairo on 16 January to join the discussions . Nasser , while still hesitant at the Syrian proposal and discouraged by members of his inner circle , became increasingly concerned with the communists ' power in Syria as testified by Bizri 's leadership and autonomy from Quwatli . He was further pressured by the Arab nationalist members of the delegation , including al @-@ Bitar , who alluded to an impending communist takeover and urgently appealed to him not to " abandon " Syria . 
 Nasser ultimately agreed to the union , but insisted that it be formed strictly on his terms , stipulating a one @-@ party system , a merged economy , and Syria 's adoption of Egyptian social institutions ; in effect a full @-@ blown union . Syria 's political leaders , particularly the communists , the Ba 'athists and the conservatives , viewed Nasser 's terms unfavorably , but nonetheless accepted them in response to mounting popular pressure . Quwatli left for Cairo in mid @-@ February to conclude the agreement with Nasser and on 22 February the United Arab Republic ( UAR ) was established . Quwatli resigned from the presidency and Nasser became the president of the new union . To honor Quwatli for his gesture and his longtime struggle in the Arab nationalist cause , Nasser accorded him the title of " First Arab Citizen . " 
 The announcement of the UAR was met with widespread jubilation and celebration throughout the Arab world , most prominently in Syria . Nasser arrived in Damascus on an unannounced visit on 24 February and went directly to Quwatli 's home . According to al @-@ Hawrani , as Nasser met with Quwatli , " a sea of colliding humanity gathered with astonishing speed " as residents left their workplaces and homes to meet the leaders at Quwatli 's house . When the two decided to leave for the official guesthouse in an open @-@ top automobile , it took them two hours to reach the destination , where it normally would have taken about five minutes . The commotion of the growing crowds surrounding the car caused Quwatli to nearly faint . Following the union 's establishment , Quwatli retired from politics . 
 = = Later life = = 
 By 1960 , Quwatli had quarreled with Nasser and criticized his policies in Syria . In particular , he condemned the institution of land distribution and industrial nationalization in July 1961 , stating it would harm the economy severely . He was also personally affronted that his son @-@ in @-@ law Fayez al @-@ <unk> had much of his property seized by the government as part of the socialist measures . Resentment towards the union across the spectrum of Syria 's political class , social elite and officer corps was on the rise , with these key groups chafing at the centralization of authority into Nasser 's hands , domination by a vastly larger Egypt at the political , social and economic levels and the sidelining of these groups in the governance of Syria . The Syrian public also grew wary of the virtual police state set up in the country by Sarraj . A coup by secessionist officers was undertaken in Syria on 28 September , effectively breaking up the UAR . Quwatli lent his support toward the coup , aligning himself with the secessionist officers . 
 On 23 October , he made a televised speech condemning the UAR and expressing his disappointment with Nasser , saying " unity does not mean annexation and the presidential system does not mean the separation of the ruler from the ruled . " He also accused the Egyptian authorities of establishing a system of rule dependent on " 1 @,@ 001 spies " and responsible for sowing division in the republic . Quwatli told the Syrian people they controlled their own destiny , saying " Ranks and titles come and go , but you the people are immortal ! " He concluded his speech with self @-@ criticism , stating " I was able to serve your struggle as an ordinary citizen more than I was able to serve you when I was president . " 
 The secessionist officers , pleased at Quwatli 's statements , discussed whether or not to have Quwatli serve another term as president or to finish the term he began in 1955 , which was cut about one year short as a result of the UAR 's establishment . The proposal did not manifest , largely due to Quwatli 's relatively old age at the time . On 8 March 1963 a coalition of unionist officers consisting of Ba 'athists , Nasserists and independent Arab nationalists overthrew the secessionist government of President Nazim al @-@ Qudsi and Prime Minister Khalid al @-@ Azm . Quwatli left Syria shortly after and moved to Beirut , Lebanon . 
 = = Death = = 
 Quwatli had a heart attack shortly after the Six Day War ( 5 – 10 June 1967 ) . Feeling a pain in his chest he was taken to a hospital on 29 June . He died in Beirut on 30 June . According to Syrian historian Sami Moubayed , Quwatli died after learning of the defeat of the Syrian and Arab armies . The Ba 'athist @-@ dominated government refused to allow Quwatli 's body to be buried in Damascus and only relented after diplomatic pressure from King Faisal of Saudi Arabia . An honorary funeral organized by the state was held for him on 1 July . 
 On the day of his funeral , Radio Damascus called Quwatli " one of the sons of this homeland who has sacrificed and struggled for the advancement , liberation and unity of the Arab nation . " He was proclaimed a founding father of the Syrian Arab Republic . Historians and the Syrian population generally consider Quwatli to be one of the most " renowned Syrian leaders of the twentieth century , " according to Moubayed . 
 = Sunol Water Temple = 
 The Sunol Water Temple is located at 505 Paloma Way in Sunol , California . Designed by Willis Polk , the 59 foot high classical pavilion is made up of twelve concrete Corinthian columns and a concrete ring girder that supports the conical wood and tile roof . Inside the temple , water originally from the Pleasanton well fields and Arroyo de la Laguna flowed into a white tiled cistern before plunging into a deeper water channel carrying water from the filter galleries to the Niles Aqueduct in Niles Canyon and across San Francisco Bay near the Dumbarton Bridge . The roof covering the cistern has paintings depicting Indian maidens carrying water vessels . The temple is open to the public Monday to Friday , 9 a.m. to 3 p.m. 
 = = History = = 
 Since the mid @-@ 19th century a private company , the Spring Valley Water Company ( SVWC ) , owned much of the Alameda Creek Watershed and had held a monopoly on water service to San Francisco . In 1906 , William Bowers Bourn II , a major stockholder in the SVWC , and owner of the giant Empire gold mine , hired Willis Polk to design a " water temple " atop the spot where three subterranean water sources converge ( a pipe from the Arroyo de la Laguna , Alameda Creek , through the Sunol infiltration galleries , and a 30 @-@ inch pipeline from the artesian well field of Pleasanton ) Some sources claim Bourn wanted to sell the water company to the City of San Francisco and saw the temple as a way to appeal to San Francisco voters , who would have to approve the purchase ( municipal efforts to buy out the SVWC had been a source of constant controversy from as early as 1873 , when the first attempt to purchase it was turned down by the voters because the price was too high ) . Other sources claim that as one born into wealth and classically educated , Bourn was partially motivated by a sense of civic responsibility . 
 Polk 's design , modeled after the ancient Temple of Vesta in Tivoli , Italy , was constructed in 1910 ( Tivoli is where many of the waters that fed Rome converged in the foothills of the Apennines ) . Prior to the construction of the Hetch Hetchy Aqueduct , half of San Francisco 's water supply ( 6 million gallons a day ) passed through the Sunol temple . The SVWC , including the temple , was purchased by San Francisco in 1930 for $ 40 million . 
 For decades the Water Temple received many visitors and was a popular location for picnickers . By the 1980s the water temple had badly deteriorated , and was severely damaged in 1989 's Loma Prieta earthquake , leading some community leaders to call for its demolition . The site was closed to the public because of safety concerns . A community effort led to the temple 's restoration from 1997 to 2001 , at a cost of $ 1 @.@ 2 million , including seismic and accessibility upgrades . Following its restoration the temple opened again to the public . Today any water that flows through the temple is not part of the potable water supply . 
 Fields adjacent to the temple belong to the city of San Francisco which has authorized the digging of a gravel quarry on the site . Local residents concerned about the temple 's future brought a lawsuit to attempt block the quarry project , but eventually ran out of funds and dropped the suit . 
 In June 2006 , a new facility named the Sunol Agricultural Park was opened on a site adjacent to the temple . The park provides space for small businesses and nonprofit groups to grow produce and is a project of a non @-@ profit called Sustainable Agriculture Education ( SAGE ) . The park serves a platform for service and educational programs related to sustainable agriculture and environmental conservation . 
 = = Inscription = = 
 " I will make the wilderness a pool of water and the dry lands springs of water . [ Isaiah 41 : 18b ] The streams whereof shall make glad the city . [ Psalms 46 : 4 ] <unk> <unk> [ Spring Valley Water Company 1910 ] " 
 = Machine Head ( band ) = 
 Machine Head is an American heavy metal band from Oakland , California . Formed on October 12 , 1991 , the group was founded by vocalist and guitarist Robb Flynn and bassist Adam Duce . The current lineup of the band comprises Flynn , drummer Dave McClain , guitarist Phil Demmel , and bassist Jared MacEachern . Machine Head is one of the pioneering bands in the New Wave of American Heavy Metal . 
 Machine Head was formed by member Robb Flynn , previously part of the bands Forbidden and Vio @-@ lence . Flynn felt musically unfulfilled with Vio @-@ lence and requested to start a side project . When his request was denied , he left the band and formed Machine Head in 1991 with Adam Duce , Logan Mader and Tony Constanza . The band 's first album Burn My Eyes , was a big success in Europe where it garnered attention on MTV 's Headbangers Ball . In America ( with <unk> taken off the air during the grunge movement ) Machine Head would not have success until later albums . 
 The band nearly disbanded in 2002 after negotiating off its label Roadrunner Records , when controversy surrounding Machine Head 's fourth album Supercharger ( released 3 weeks after September 11 , 2001 ) resulted in their songs and music video for the song " Crashing Around You " ( which featured burning buildings ) being pulled from all media outlets . The band re @-@ signed with Roadrunner soon after and has released four albums since , 2003 's Through the Ashes of Empires , 2007 's The Blackening ( which earned Machine Head its first Grammy Award nomination ) and 2011 's Unto the Locust . Their most recent album , Bloodstone & Diamonds , was released in 2014 . Machine Head have sold over 3 million records worldwide . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation and Burn My Eyes ( 1991 – 96 ) = = = 
 Machine Head were formed on October 12 , 1991 , in Oakland , California by vocalist / guitarist Robb Flynn and bassist Adam Duce . Flynn had recently parted ways with Vio @-@ lence after a physical fight between the band members and a local gang . He still had a desire to write music and along with Duce recruited guitarist Logan Mader and drummer Tony Costanza to form Machine Head . The band 's name was thought of by Flynn because it " sounded cool " , despite the popular belief that it came from the Deep Purple album of the same name . The band started jamming in a local warehouse shared with four punk rock bands . Machine Head recorded a demo in a friend 's bedroom , funded with US $ 800 . A record executive representing Roadrunner Records listened to the demo and signed the band . 
 Machine Head entered Fantasy Studios in Berkeley , California to record its debut album Burn My Eyes . Not long into production , Constanza left the band and was replaced by Chris Kontos . Most of the songs on the album were songs written by Flynn and Duce during the time Flynn was not in a band , about " being pissed off " from his previous struggles in Vio @-@ lence , as well as both of their battles with illegal drugs . Produced by Colin Richardson , the album was released on August 9 , 1994 . The album shipped nearly 400 @,@ 000 copies worldwide , becoming Roadrunner Records ' best selling debut album . Allmusic reviewer John Franck stated " Burn My Eyes is a bone @-@ shattering exercise in brutality " . 
 Not long after Burn My Eyes 's release Machine Head started touring heavily in support of the album , opening for Slayer in Europe in the latter half of 1994 , a tour which ended with their own headline show at the London Astoria . Following the success of the support tour the band returned to Europe for a headline tour in early 1995 , performing in the same venues they opened for Slayer . The band would return to Europe for the summer festival season but Kontos refused to tour and the band drafted Walter Ryan for the festival dates . On the band 's return to the US Kontos was fired because he was not keeping to touring commitments . Kontos went on to play drums with Testament , and was replaced by Dave McClain . 
 = = = The More Things Change ... and The Burning Red ( 1997 – 2000 ) = = = 
 After touring for Burn My Eyes , Machine Head entered the studio to record its second studio album , The More Things Change ... , with Richardson producing and mixing for a second time . The album was released on March 25 , 1997 , and debuted at number 138 on the Billboard 200 albums chart . Machine Head toured in Europe with Napalm Death , Coal Chamber and <unk> , then went on the first Ozzfest for the first tours in support of the album . Mader showed up to a practice session late , high on methamphetamine , cursing at and insulting the band members ; and quit the band later that day . Ahrue Luster replaced him and finished touring , while Mader toured with Soulfly in support of their self @-@ titled debut album . 
 After three years of touring and working with producer Ross Robinson , Machine Head released its third studio album , The Burning Red , on August 10 , 1999 . The band added new elements to its music , including rapping vocals , a move which some believe to have been influenced by Ahrue Luster himself . This album and the band 's change in image / musical direction ( nu metal / alternative metal ) was highly criticized , with critics and fans alike accusing the band of " selling out " . Nevertheless , McClain stated they weren 't trying to sound like popular bands but " wanted to sound different " . Rick Anderson of Allmusic stated Machine Head was " sounding a bit looser and less constricted musically than they have in the past " . The Burning Red became Machine Head 's top selling album for a number of years , and debuted at number 88 on the Billboard 200 . 
 = = = Supercharger and Through the Ashes of Empires ( 2001 – 05 ) = = = 
 Machine Head finished touring for The Burning Red , and entered a studio with producer Johnny K to record Supercharger . Debuting at number 115 on the Billboard 200 , the album was released on October 2 , 2001 . The album met the same criticism as The Burning Red , especially for the ever @-@ present rapping vocals . Blabbermouth.net reviewer Borivoj Krgin stated Supercharger " is likely to disappoint everyone who is expecting the Bay Area quartet to return to the ultra @-@ testosterone @-@ charged sounds of their first two albums " . 
 Machine Head released a single for " Crashing Around You " as well as a music video . The video was released several weeks after the September 11 , 2001 attacks , and was banned from MTV for the depictions of falling buildings . Roadrunner Records , expecting to make a fair profit from album promotions , dropped the band 's funding , causing Machine Head to leave the label . At the same time the band was leaving Roadrunner , Luster departed from the band for musical differences . 
 By 2002 , Machine Head had sold over 1 @.@ 3 million albums worldwide , and overall Supercharger ( mixed by Colin Richardson ) would go on to sell 250 @,@ 000 copies worldwide , which was their lowest selling album to date . Once the tour for the album had been completed , Machine Head and Roadrunner Records mutually decided to sever ties with regards to distribution in North America and around the world , however to fill the ties , the band released <unk> ( also mixed by Colin Richardson ) which was a recording of a Brixton Academy , London set . 
 In 2002 Ahrue Luster left the band and was temporarily replaced by Phil Demmel , who played in thrash band Vio @-@ lence alongside Flynn . Demmel played some festival shows with Machine Head ( including a headlining slot at the With Full Force festival in Germany ) . Then with Phil not being able to commit to the band , he and Machine Head parted ways . The remainder of the band starting writing songs for the next album ( eventually Through the Ashes ... ) , and hoping to get signed to a record label . They recorded a short demo , including a radio @-@ style song called " Pins and Needles " , and an Electronic Press Kit for the companies , also hoping they can get signed on the strength of their previous efforts . Nearly every record label in the music industry rejected the four track demo . 
 After Machine Head 's European tour , Ahrue Luster returned to his family business and the band started writing together as a three @-@ piece , while leaving a position open for Demmel . In March 2003 , Demmel joined Machine Head as a full @-@ time guitarist and started writing with the band . By June 2003 , Machine Head entered a studio with Flynn producing . On October 27 , 2003 , Machine Head released Through the Ashes of Empires in Europe . 
 The band was turned down by multiple record labels in the United States , until Roadrunner USA , interested in the new album , offered Machine Head another record contract . Machine Head accepted the offer on the grounds that the band owns 100 % of the music . On April 20 , 2004 , Through the Ashes of Empires was released in the United States with a bonus track for the Americans ' long wait for the album 's release . The album debuted at number 88 on the Billboard 200 . The band released a single for " Imperium " , the video for which received heavy rotation on MTV . Eduardo Rivadavia of AllMusic stated Through the Ashes of Empires " marked a return to form in no uncertain terms " . 
 Machine Head headlined the True Metal stage at the 2005 Wacken Open Air festival to 40 @,@ 000 fans — the band 's largest headlining crowd at the time . The band released a DVD containing a full sold @-@ out concert held at the Brixton Academy in December 2004 , a documentary , and music videos . The DVD debuted at number 13 on the U.S. music video charts . They also played in Dubai for the annual Dubai Desert Rock Festival in 2005 . This was their first show in the Middle East . The band also played at the farewell concert of <unk> <unk> on the Euro Speedway <unk> . 
 = = = The Blackening ( 2006 – 09 ) = = = 
 Machine Head 's sixth studio album , titled The Blackening , was released in North America on March 27 , 2007 . It entered the Billboard 200 at number 53 , the highest charting position for the band at that time , with first @-@ week sales of 15 @,@ 000 . It also made the top 20 in several European countries . Robb Flynn stated during an interview that the band are fans of Rush and received a great deal of influence from their album A Farewell to Kings while creating The Blackening . 
 The album received positive reviews from music critics , with some labeling it the best metal album of 2007 . Blabbermouth.net reviewer Don Kaye awarded the album a 9 @.@ 5 out of 10 , saying The Blackening is " one of the purest , finest , most powerful expressions of modern heavy metal released " and compared it to the 1986 Metallica album Master of Puppets , while Allmusic editor Thom Jurek described the album as " an over the top rage and <unk> with all the qualities that earned the group its enormous fan base by touring and recording " , praising the songs " Beautiful Mourning " , " Halo " , and " Now I Lay Thee Down " . Rolling Stone reviewer Andy Greene , however , responded negatively as he was displeased with the songs running over ten minutes . 
 Machine Head toured North America with Lamb of God , Trivium and Gojira in early 2007 to promote The Blackening , and opened for Megadeth and Heaven & Hell in April 2007 . A European tour saw the band make an appearance at the Download Festival in Donington Park . Shortly after , the band announced a co @-@ headlining tour of Japan , Europe , and Australia titled The Black Crusade from October to December . Other bands on the bill included Trivium , Arch Enemy , DragonForce ( Europe only ) and Shadows Fall ( Europe only ) . On June 12 , 2007 , at the Metal Hammer Golden Gods Awards , the band won the award for " Best Album " , and Flynn won the " Golden God " award . Machine Head also won Best Album at the Kerrang ! Awards 2007 . The band replaced Bullet For My Valentine supporting Metallica 's Wembley Stadium show on Sunday July 8 , 2007 , as Bullet For My Valentine 's vocalist Matt Tuck required a tonsillectomy . Machine Head also toured North America with Hellyeah , Nonpoint and Bury Your Dead in early 2008 . Machine Head recently completed a world tour where they played Bengaluru , India , Israel and Dubai , <unk> in March 2008 . 
 In October 2008 the band toured in Australia with Slipknot . The band then toured Europe with Slipknot and Children of Bodom in November and December . The band recorded a version of Iron Maiden 's classic , " Hallowed Be Thy Name " for a Kerrang ! tribute compilation album , entitled Maiden Heaven : A Tribute to Iron Maiden ; this song was played live multiple times since its release and has become a permanent in their current touring setlists . Amongst other bands who appeared on the album were label mates , Dream Theater and Trivium . 
 It was announced on August 10 , 2008 that Machine Head and Austin , Texas based band The Sword would be opening for Metallica at ten shows in January 2009 . In a recent interview conducted with Phil Demmel , he revealed that with Machine Head 's upcoming touring commitments , the band would not have chance to write a follow up album until at least 2010 , for an expected 2011 release date . Machine Head toured with The Sword in Metallica 's World Magnetic Tour for the Death Magnetic album from 2008 to 2009 . Machine Head also opened for Megadeth , Slayer and Suicide Silence on the Canadian Carnage tour in late June . Machine Head reportedly cancelled their appearance at Sonisphere Festival in the UK because they had disagreements with the staff over their slot . They thought they should play after Limp Bizkit . However , a week before the Sonisphere festival took place on August 1 and 2 , Machine Head agreed to take back their slot below Limp Bizkit . Their appearance was kept secret until the day they played . In August 2009 , they won the Inspiration Award at the 2009 Kerrang ! Awards . It was announced on the August 31 that Machine Head would tour through Europe and UK in 2010 with Hatebreed , Bleeding Through , and All Shall Perish in what will be known as " The Black Procession " , as well as adding dates for an Australian and New Zealand tour cycle in March . This will be the last time the band tour in support of The Blackening before writing the next album , as Dave McClain described in an interview , before their Belfast show in Northern Ireland . 
 = = = Unto the Locust ( 2010 – 12 ) = = = 
 In November 2010 , Machine Head began writing and demoing new material for their seventh studio album , Unto the Locust . With Robb Flynn acting as producer , Machine Head officially began recording the album on April 16 , 2011 at Green Day 's Jingletown Studios in Oakland , California . 
 In the summer of 2011 , Machine Head toured as a part of the Rockstar Mayhem Festival . During the tour , the band debuted a new song off of Unto the Locust , entitled " Locust " . The song was later released on Amazon and iTunes on June 14 , 2011 . Unto the Locust was released on September 27 , 2011 , to critical acclaim . The album charted in several countries , including number 22 in the US ( the first time the band had ever cracked the top 25 in US ) and at number 5 in Germany . 
 After the release of Unto the Locust , Machine Head began its Eight Plague Tour and during the first European leg , the band was supported by Bring Me the Horizon , DevilDriver and Darkest Hour . On the North American leg , Machine Head was supported by Suicide Silence , Darkest Hour , and Rise to Remain ( although Rise to Remain was later forced to drop out ) . 
 In 2012 , Machine Head headlined the Soundwave Festival in Australia . The band also played at the 2012 Download Festival , <unk> , Graspop festivals , as well as headlined both Bloodstock Open Air and the Wacken Festival . Machine Head were also scheduled to be part of the first @-@ ever Mayhem Festival cruise , until it was cancelled . 
 On September 10 , Machine Head announced a North American tour with Dethklok , All That Remains and Black Dahlia Murder , beginning with a " Warm Up " show on October 24 , the tour starts on October 30 and ends on December 8 . On September 14 , Machine Head won the " Best International Band " award at the 2012 Metal Hammer awards in Berlin , Germany . On October 1 , Machine Head announced the release of " Machine Fucking Head Live " , the band 's first live album since 2003 's <unk> . The album will feature 15 live recordings from the band 's various 2011 @-@ 2012 tours and is to be released on November 13 on a two disc set or download with 4 bonus tracks , with pre @-@ orders of the album having a six track rarities & B @-@ sides EP . 
 On November 13 , Machine Head announced cancellation of their North American tour dates from the 13th to the 23rd due to Robb Flynn requiring emergency surgery to treat an inguinal hernia . 
 In a November 2012 interview , Machine Head guitarist Phil Demmel revealed that the band planned to begin writing new material for their eighth studio album in 2013 and hopes that they will begin recording it before the end of that year . 
 = = = Bloodstone & Diamonds ( 2013 – present ) = = = 
 On February 22 , 2013 , the band announced that bassist / founding member Adam Duce left the band , albeit on friendly terms . 4 days later , Robb Flynn revealed in his online blog that he fired Adam Duce because of ongoing differences . His departure makes Flynn the only remaining original member . As of March 2013 , Unto the Locust has sold 100 @,@ 000 copies in the United States , making it their third quickest @-@ selling album behind The Blackening and Supercharger which have sold 260 @,@ 000 in two weeks and 250 @,@ 000 copies in 4 months in the United States respectively . The band began the process of searching for a temporary bassist for the 2013 Rockstar Energy Drink Mayhem Festival in the U.S. For a limited time , the band accepted and reviewed YouTube submissions . On June 24 , 2013 the band announced that former Sanctity rhythm guitarist and vocalist Jared MacEachern has joined the band as their new bassist . Robb Flynn said of MacEachern : " Monte Conner recommended Jared since he was already on the tour , and that ended up being a great call . Jared flew out a few days before the tour and rehearsed with us and did great . " Phil Demmel continued : — " There were dozens of amazing players , and it was interesting to watch each one take on our tunes . One of our biggest criteria for this gig was to be able to sing the high harmonies . That was our litmus test . And Jared passed with flying colors . " . 
 On October 2 , 2013 the band announced that it signed to Nuclear Blast . In February 2014 , the band entered the studio to record their new album , Bloodstone & Diamonds , for a late summer release . 
 In early 2014 , Duce filed a lawsuit against his former band and manager in federal court " for trademark infringement , breach of fiduciary duty , breach of partnership agreement , intentional and negligent interference with prospective economic relations , negligence , defamation and unfair competition , and he wants the band enjoined from using the Machine Head marks . " The lawsuit was settled out of court on July 2 with undisclosed terms . In August 2014 , Robb Flynn announced the track listing for Bloodstone & Diamonds , consisting of 12 tracks along with its artwork . 
 Bloodstone & Diamonds was released in November 2014 to positive reviews from fans and critics alike , with many saying how the addition of MacEachern brought a sense of rejuvenation to the band . The band embarked on a lengthy world tour in support of the album , including a leg of European shows , two American legs and various others in Japan , Australia and New Zealand . 
 On June 1 , 2016 , a stand @-@ alone single titled " Is There Anybody Out There ? " premiered on Sirius XM Octane , and on June 3 the single was available for digital download . 
 = = Musical style , Influences and Legacy = = 
 Machine Head 's music crosses multiple genres such as thrash metal , groove metal , and heavy metal . The band is influenced by Californian thrash metal bands such as Vio @-@ lence , Metallica , Exodus , Slayer and Testament , crossover thrash bands Suicidal Tendencies and Cro @-@ Mags , groove metal bands Pantera and <unk> , and grunge bands Nirvana , Soundgarden and Alice in Chains , but they also have influences from 70 's / early 80 's metal acts such as Judas Priest , Iron Maiden , Rush and Black Sabbath . 
 Their early albums Burn My Eyes and The More Things Change ... show a groove metal and thrash metal approach , similar to bands like Pantera and <unk> . The albums also featured brutal and technical drumming by Chris Kontos and Dave McClain . The band changed their musical direction for the albums The Burning Red ( 1999 ) and Supercharger ( 2001 ) , which have been described as displaying a nu metal sound . These albums featured rapping by Robb Flynn and simpler guitar riffs , but retaining part of their aggressive sound . This change in direction resulted in criticism from many fans because of the popularity of nu metal at the time . 
 Machine Head returned to the groove metal and thrash metal sound of the first two albums with the album Through the Ashes of Empires , which proved a success . 
 Machine Head increased the complexity and technicality in their sound for the next album , The Blackening , which partially changes the sound of their first 5 albums in favor of a more classic heavy metal and thrash metal oriented sound , with fully complex song structures and guitar riffs . Unto the Locust features heavier , faster and more complex riffs by both Robb Flynn and Phil Demmel , influenced by classical music , and supported by fast and complex drum patterns by Dave McClain . This is also the first Machine Head 's record to include blast beats . 
 Robb Flynn makes use of different vocal styles including clean vocals , screams and death growls . 
 Machine Head is one of the bands that support the New Wave of American Heavy Metal and influenced bands such as Slipknot , Hatebreed , Lamb of God , Shadows Fall , Bullet for My Valentine , DevilDriver , Gojira , Trivium , Avenged Sevenfold , <unk> , Killswitch Engage , Chimaira , The Black Dahlia Murder , Throwdown , Suicide Silence . 
 = = Band members = = 
 = = = Timeline = = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 Burn My Eyes ( 1994 ) 
 The More Things Change ... ( 1997 ) 
 The Burning Red ( 1999 ) 
 Supercharger ( 2001 ) 
 Through the Ashes of Empires ( 2003 ) 
 The Blackening ( 2007 ) 
 Unto the Locust ( 2011 ) 
 Bloodstone & Diamonds ( 2014 ) 
 = Jonathan Belcher = 
 Jonathan Belcher ( 8 January 1681 / 2 – 31 August 1757 ) was a merchant , businessman , and politician from the Province of Massachusetts Bay during the American colonial period . Belcher served simultaneously for over a decade as colonial governor of the British colonies of New Hampshire ( 1729 – 1741 ) and Massachusetts ( 1730 – 1741 ) and later for ten years as governor of New Jersey ( 1747 – 1757 ) . 
 Born into a wealthy Massachusetts merchant family , Belcher attended Harvard College and then entered into the family business and local politics . He was instrumental in promoting Samuel Shute as governor of Massachusetts in 1715 , and sat on the colony 's council , but became disenchanted with Shute over time and eventually joined the populist faction of Elisha Cooke , Jr . After the sudden death of Governor William Burnet in 1729 Belcher successfully acquired the governorships of Massachusetts and New Hampshire . During his tenure , Belcher politically marginalized those who he perceived as opposition and made many powerful enemies in both provinces . In a long @-@ running border dispute between Massachusetts and New Hampshire , Belcher sided with Massachusetts interests despite openly proclaiming neutrality in the matter . It was later discovered that he allowed illegal logging on Crown lands by political allies . His opponents , led by William Shirley and Samuel Waldo , eventually convinced the Board of Trade to replace Belcher ( with Shirley in Massachusetts and Benning Wentworth in New Hampshire ) , and the border dispute was resolved in New Hampshire 's favor . 
 Belcher was appointed governor of New Jersey in 1747 with support from its Quaker community . He unsuccessfully attempted to mediate the partisan conflicts between New Jersey 's Quakers and large landowners , and promoted the establishment of the College of New Jersey , now Princeton University . Through most of his tenure as royal governor , Belcher was ill with a progressive nervous disorder , and died in office in 1757 . Belchertown , Massachusetts is named for him . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Youth and education = = = 
 Jonathan Belcher was born in Cambridge , Province of Massachusetts Bay , on 8 January 1681 / 2 . The fifth of seven children , his father Andrew was an adventurer and businessman , and his mother , Sarah Gilbert Belcher , was the daughter of a politically well connected Connecticut merchant and Indian trader . His mother died when he was seven , and his father sent him to live with relatives in the country while he expanded his trading business . Andrew Belcher was highly successful in trade , although some of it was in violation of the Navigation Acts , and some was supposedly conducted with pirates . However he made his money , he became one of the wealthiest men in Massachusetts in the 1680s and 1690s . To promote the family 's status , he sent his son to the Boston Latin School in 1691 , and then Harvard College in 1695 , where Belcher was listed second ( the order of listing being a rough indication of a family 's importance ) behind Jeremiah Dummer . Belcher and Dummer both went on to political careers in the province , sometimes as allies , but also as opponents . Belcher 's five sisters all married into politically or economically prominent families , forging important connections that would further his career . 
 In January 1705 / 6 Belcher married Mary Partridge , the daughter of former New Hampshire Lieutenant Governor William Partridge , an occasional business partner of his father 's . The couple had three children ( Andrew , Sarah , and Jonathan ) before she died in 1736 . His brother @-@ in @-@ law through this marriage was the painter Nehemiah Partridge . 
 = = = Agent for his father 's commercial empire = = = 
 Belcher graduated from Harvard at the age of 17 , and then entered into his father 's business . The trading empire his father built encompassed trade from the West Indies to Europe , and included shares or outright ownership of more than 15 ships . In the spring of 1704 Belcher 's father sent him to London to cultivate business contacts of his own , and to secure military supply contracts . After forging relations based on his father 's letters of introduction in London , Belcher traveled to the Netherlands to do the same with Dutch merchants , and to begin a tour of western Europe . After seeing the sights of Rotterdam and Amsterdam he traveled to Hanover , where he was received by Electress Sophia and met the future King of Great Britain , George , Duke of Brunswick @-@ Lüneburg . After calling on the Prussian court in Berlin , he returned to New England . During these travels he was exposed to a variety of religious practices , but found regular comfort in Christian services most similar to the Calvinist @-@ leaning New England Congregational Church . He eventually came to see himself as a defender of that faith practice , which permeated his political life . 
 During the years of the War of the Spanish Succession ( whose North American theater is also known as Queen Anne 's War , 1702 – 13 ) , Belcher 's father was retained as a major supplier to the provincial militia and served as the province 's commissary general . Belcher was involved in the management of the family 's trading activities . In 1708 he traveled again to London , where he secured a major contract with The Admiralty . Before returning to Massachusetts he once again traveled to Hanover , where he was well received at court . The war effort caused economic upheavals in Massachusetts , and the <unk> , who stockpiled grain and other supplies for military use , became a focus for popular discontent when food shortages arose late in the war . The family 's warehouses were the targets of mob action , and Belcher was beaten by a mob on one occasion . 
 = = = His own investments = = = 
 Belcher 's merchant interests included the occasional trafficking in slaves . He is known to have owned slaves , ordering them from his friend , Isaac Royall , Sr. He presented an enslaved Indian to Electress Sophia on his second visit to Hanover in 1708 . Despite this , he expressed a distaste for slavery , writing in 1739 , " We have but few in these parts , and I wish there were less . " 
 In addition to the mercantile trade , the Belcher family also had extensive land holdings in New England . Due to errors in early surveys of the line between Massachusetts and neighboring Connecticut , Massachusetts in the early 1700s gave lands in the central portion of the province to Connecticut as compensation for the survey errors , which were in its favor . When Connecticut auctioned off these " Equivalent Lands " in 1716 , Belcher was one of the buyers . The lands he was allocated were eventually incorporated as Belchertown . 
 Belcher also inherited property from his father that was located in what is now Wallingford and Meriden , Connecticut . He spent a significant amount of money in an unsuccessful attempt to profitably mine the property for metal ores , particularly copper . In 1714 Belcher expanded his mining interests , acquiring a stake in a mine in Simsbury ( now East Granby , Connecticut ) . In 1735 he reported having invested £ 15 @,@ 000 in these ventures , which failed in part because under British law at the time it was illegal to smelt copper in the colonies , necessitating the costly shipment of ores to England . He eventually established a technically illegal smelting operation . ( The Simsbury site , later used by the state as a prison , is now a National Historic Landmark . ) 
 Upon the accession of King George I in 1714 , Andrew Belcher sent Jonathan to London , seeking to capitalize on the existing connection to the new king . During this trip Belcher engaged in recruiting for his properties in Connecticut . In addition to hiring an experienced metal refiner in England , he also recruited German miners ; the area near the Simsbury mine became known as " Hanover " as a consequence of their presence . ( Belcher had previously toured mines in the Harz mountains on his first visit to the Hanover . ) 
 = = Agent and councilor = = 
 Colonel Elizeus Burges was commissioned as governor of Massachusetts and New Hampshire by the new king . Belcher , along with compatriot Jeremiah Dummer , representing opponents of a land bank proposal that Burges had promised to support , bribed him £ 1 @,@ 000 to resign before he left England . Dummer and Belcher were then instrumental in promoting Samuel Shute as an alternative to Burges , believing among other things that he was likely to be well received in New England because he was from a prominent Dissenting family . They also coached Shute on the political situation in the province after he won the appointment . Shute arrived in Boston on 4 October 1716 , where he began a difficult and contentious tenure in office . He signaled his partisanship by first taking up residence with Paul Dudley , son of the last @-@ appointed governor Joseph Dudley and a land bank opponent , rather than Acting Governor William Tailer . 
 Belcher was elected to the Massachusetts Governor 's Council in 1718 . During Shute 's tenure Belcher was seen as part of a political faction that generally supported the governor . He was consequently on and off the council several times , blocked by the efforts of populist leader Elisha Cooke , Jr . This struggle continued after Shute left the province at the end of 1722 to prosecute his differences with the assembly with the Privy Council in London . Belcher , however , became increasingly unhappy that Paul Dudley wielded more influence than he did during the administration of William Dummer ( who was Dudley 's brother @-@ in @-@ law ) that followed . 
 When William Burnet arrived in 1728 as governor Belcher was unexpectedly elected moderator of Boston 's town meeting in an election apparently engineered by Cooke . In Burnet 's dispute with the assembly over his salary ( which exceeded that of Shute in its acrimony and occupied most of Burnet 's brief tenure ) , Cooke and Belcher made common cause over the issue . Belcher was elected by the assembly as an agent to London to explain the colonial position on the governor 's salary , and Cooke helped raise the funds needed for the trip . 
 = = Governor of Massachusetts and New Hampshire = = 
 In 1729 , while Belcher was in London , news arrived that Governor Burnet had died quite suddenly . Belcher lobbied for and was awarded the job of governor of both Massachusetts and New Hampshire . This was accomplished in part by bypassing the Board of Trade and appealing directly to higher level ministers in the government , earning him the enmity of the powerful board secretary , Martin Bladen , who opposed his nomination . In accepting the appointment he was effectively promising to argue in the colony in favor of the position he had been sent to London to argue against . During Belcher 's long tenure ( he served from 1730 to 1741 , one of the longer tenures of a Massachusetts provincial governor ) he would argue with the colonial politicians that he was acting in their interest , while also working to convince London colonial administrators he was implementing their policies . Historian William <unk> writes that as a consequence , " By trying to keep on good terms with the province and the administration he lost the respect of both . " 
 = = = Massachusetts = = = 
 While he was in London Belcher arranged for Lieutenant Governor Dummer to be replaced by William Tailer ( whose appointment to that post in 1715 he had ironically managed to supersede by lobbying for Dummer 's appointment ) , and recommended that Jeremiah Dummer ( with whom his relations had become seriously strained ) be dismissed as colonial agent . He was well received in Massachusetts upon his arrival in 1731 , but immediately began to purge opponents and their supporters from positions over which he had control . This immediately put all on notice that he would freely use patronage power as a political weapon . 
 One early issue Belcher took on was that of defending the established church . As an ardent Congregationalist ( which was the establishment in Massachusetts ) he perceived as dangerous the attempts of adherents of the Church of England in particular to gain exemptions from church taxes . He was willing to countenance such an exemption for the relatively modest number of Quakers , but refused to support one for the more numerous and politically connected Anglicans until it was apparent in 1735 that he would be instructed to do so . His support of the Quaker exemption brought him a potent support base in that community in London . In 1735 Belcher presided over a meeting in Deerfield at which the Stockbridge Indians agreed to accept Congregationalist missionaries and authorized the erection of a mission house . ( The Mission House , built c . 1742 pursuant to this agreement , still stands , and is a National Historic Landmark . ) 
 Belcher also sought to improve business conditions in Boston . While on his tours of Europe he had opportunity to witness the comparatively orderly markets in Dutch cities ; he used what he learned from those experiences to significantly reform the previously chaotic markets of Boston . ( His positive feelings towards the <unk> prompted him to name Boston 's Hanover Street in their honor . ) 
 = = = New Hampshire = = = 
 Belcher 's administration of New Hampshire started out friendly but rapidly turned sour . He learned that Lieutenant Governor John Wentworth had offered his support to Samuel Shute when the governorship became available , and consequently turned on the entire Wentworth clan in retaliation . He took on as an ally and confidant Richard Waldron , a bitter opponent of the Wentworths and a relative by marriage . Because John Wentworth had , during his long tenure as lieutenant governor , established a large power base with both the province 's land owners and merchants , this made him many powerful enemies . Biographer Michael <unk> theorizes that it was Waldron 's influence that drove Belcher to strip many Wentworths and their allies from patronage positions . The Wentworth power base was also generally unhappy that New Hampshire was tied to Massachusetts with the shared governorship , and many resented the fact that a Massachusetts man occupied the post . Because of their influence , New Hampshire 's assembly was hostile to Belcher , and his opponents were able to convince the Board of Trade to appoint some of their number to the provincial council over his objections . Belcher made repeated unsuccessful attempts to get sympathetic assemblies , calling for elections ten times during his tenure . The intransigent legislatures refused to enact his legislative proposals . 
 Belcher was disheartened when David Dunbar was appointed lieutenant governor of New Hampshire after John Wentworth died in December 1730 . Dunbar , who was friendly with the Wentworths , was also the king 's surveyor , responsible for identifying trees suitable for use as ship masts and ensuring no illegal logging was taking place on ungranted lands in all of northern New England . This work was in opposition to a significant number of Belcher 's supporters , who engaged in illegal logging on those lands , behavior explicitly countenanced by the governor . Belcher took all steps possible to ensure Dunbar could not exercise any significant powers , refusing to seat him on the council , and making frequent trips from Boston to Portsmouth to exercise his authority personally . The two men disliked one another , and Dunbar began moving supporters in London to lobby for Belcher 's replacement not long after his appointment in 1731 . The illegal logging activity by Belcher 's allies eventually came to the attention of William Shirley , the crown advocate of the provincial admiralty court whose patron was the powerful Duke of Newcastle . 
 = = = Boundary dispute = = = 
 Belcher was unwilling to resolve longstanding boundary disputes between New Hampshire and Massachusetts . The disputed territory included areas west of the Merrimack River from its great bend near present @-@ day Chelmsford , Massachusetts to present @-@ day Concord , New Hampshire . Competing grantees from the two provinces were by the 1730s engaging in increasingly tense legal action and petty violence against each other . Despite claims that he was neutral on the matter , Belcher orchestrated affairs to prefer the settlement of lands north and west of the Merrimack River by Massachusetts residents . The dispute eventually reached the highest levels of government and court in England . New Hampshire 's advocates for separation from Massachusetts found an able spokesman in John Thomlinson , a London merchant with logging interests , who in 1737 convinced the Board of Trade to establish a commission on the boundary issue . Despite Belcher 's attempts to orchestrate legislative proceedings to the advantage of Massachusetts ( for example , allowing the New Hampshire assembly only one day to prepare a case on the dispute while that of Massachusetts had several months ) , the final ruling on the boundary , issued in 1739 , went significantly in New Hampshire 's favor . 
 = = = United opposition = = = 
 By 1736 representatives of Belcher 's many political enemies began to coalesce into a unified opposition in London . William Shirley , who sought a more lucrative position , sent his wife to London to lobby on his behalf , making common cause with Samuel Waldo , a wealthy lumber baron whose supply contracts with the Royal Navy were harmed by Belcher 's support of illegal logging . David Dunbar resigned as lieutenant governor in 1737 and went to London , where he provided documentation of the logging practices . These forces united with Thomlinson in an effort to orchestrate the replacement of Belcher , preferably with Shirley in Massachusetts and Benning Wentworth in New Hampshire . 
 Matters became more complicated in 1739 due to London politics and a currency crisis in Massachusetts . Belcher had been ordered to effect the retirement of a large amount of Massachusetts paper currency by 1741 , and the legislation to accomplish this was rejected by the Board of Trade , leading to the introduction of competing banking proposals in the province . One faction dominated by landowners proposed a land bank , while merchants proposed a bank that would issue silver @-@ backed paper . The proposals polarized the Massachusetts political establishment , and Belcher was unable to take sides for fear of alienating supporters on either side . He instead sought without success to browbeat the assembly into passing a currency retirement scheme acceptable to London . In 1740 elections land bank supporters swept into office , and the bank began issuing notes . Merchant interests opposed to the land bank began widespread lobbying in London for Parliamentary relief ( which came in 1741 , when it passed legislation extending the 1720 Bubble Act , which disallowed <unk> companies , to the colonies ) likely abetted by John Thomlinson . 
 While this crisis brewed in Massachusetts , the ascendant Duke of Newcastle successfully pressured Prime Minister Robert Walpole to declare war on Spain in 1739 . Part of the war strategy involved the raising of provincial forces to assist in operations against Spanish holdings in the West Indies . Belcher , who was expected to raise about 400 men , promised to raise 1 @,@ 000 , but was only able to raise about 500 in Massachusetts , and not even the 100 he had promised from New Hampshire . This was due in part on the reluctance of the extra companies to travel to the Caribbean without assurances of pay and supply . Belcher also , in pursuit of the financial agenda , vetoed bills to issue currency with which to fund the militia that were raised . 
 The exact reasons for Belcher 's dismissal have been a recurring subject of scholarly interest , due to the many colonial , imperial , and political factors at play . Two principal themes within these analyses are Belcher 's acquisition of many local enemies , and the idea that good imperial governance in London eventually required his replacement . Before the issues of 1739 most of the efforts to unseat Belcher had failed : Belcher himself noted that year that " the <unk> I am <unk> 'd in is carrying on in much the same manner as for 9 years past . " Historian Stephen Foster further notes that someone as powerful as Newcastle was at the time generally had much weightier issues to deal with than arbitrating colonial politics . In this instance , however , imperial and colonial considerations coincided over the need for Massachusetts to provide a significant number of troops for Newcastle 's proposed West Indies expedition . In April 1740 Newcastle in effect offered Shirley the opportunity to prove , in the light of Belcher 's political difficulties , that he could more effectively raise troops than the governor could . Shirley consequently engaged in recruiting , principally outside Massachusetts ( where Belcher had refused his offers of assistance , understanding what was going on ) , and deluged Newcastle with documentation of his successes while Belcher was preoccupied with the banking crisis . Newcastle handed the issue off to Martin Bladen , secretary to the Board of Trade and a known Belcher opponent . The Board of Trade then apparently decided , based on the weight of the evidence , that Belcher needed to be replaced . In April 1741 the Privy Council approved William Shirley 's commission as governor of Massachusetts , and Benning Wentworth 's commission as governor of New Hampshire was issued the following June . 
 = = Governor of New Jersey = = 
 The fact that he had been supplanted by Shirley came as a surprise to Belcher . He had expected to lose the New Hampshire governorship , but was shocked when news of Shirley 's commissioning arrived . Following Shirley 's inauguration Belcher retired to his Milton estate . Seemingly restless and in some financial need , he expressed weak interest in the possibility of holding another colonial appointment , and in 1743 traveled to England , stopping in Dublin to visit his son Jonathan Jr . When he arrived in London he joined the social circles of the Congregationalist and Quaker communities ( the latter including among its influential members his brother @-@ in @-@ law Richard Partridge ) , and called on colonial administrators in the hopes of acquiring a new posting . There he remained for three years , until in 1746 word arrived that the governor of New Jersey , Lewis Morris , had died . Since New Jersey had a strong Quaker political establishment , Belcher immediately began mobilizing supporters in the London Quaker community to assist in securing the post . Due to this alacrity he was able to get the posting before agents for Morris ' son Robert Hunter Morris had time to organize their effort . 
 He served as governor of New Jersey from 1747 until his death in 1757 . About a year after his arrival in Burlington ( then the provincial capital ) , he married ( for the second time ) Louise Teale , a widow he met in London , in September 1748 . The political situation he arrive in was highly acrimonious , and there had been riots in the previous year over widespread disagreements on land titles between land owners , who controlled the provincial council , and farmers and tenants , who controlled the assembly . Most legislation had been stalled since 1744 due to the inability of assembly , council , and governor to resolve differences on these issues . Governor Morris ' high @-@ handed actions in support of the proprietors had united previously divided populist factions against him and the council . The province was also a rural patchwork quilt of different cultures and religions , unlike predominantly English and Congregationalist New England . Elizabethtown , near New York , was heavily populated by evangelical Christians , among them Reverend Aaron Burr , and Belcher found himself welcome there . He regularly attended services there , and was particularly influenced by preachers including George Whitefield and Jonathan Edwards , leaders of the Great Awakening with whom he corresponded . 
 Although Belcher 's arrival prompted some goodwill , resulting in the passage of bills to fund the government and deal with ongoing counterfeiting of the colonial paper currency , divisions soon resurface along the same sectional lines . Belcher believed that the land issues should be resolved by negotiation between the parties , and sought to maintain a position as a neutral arbiter of the dispute . Because he had been propelled into the office by <unk> interests , he refused to unconditionally support the council in moves to advance proprietary interests , but also received little support from the assembly . Because the assembly and council divided over the issue of how to tax undeveloped lands ( which the proprietors owned in large amounts ) , the government was short of funds between 1748 and 1751 . 
 One controversial matter that Belcher was able to finesse was the establishment of the College of New Jersey ( now known as Princeton University ) . The college was proposed by New Jersey 's evangelical Presbyterians , with whom Belcher found religious agreement . However , Quaker leaders and the proprietors had expressed great reservations about the Presbyterians ' drive to gain a charter for the school ( on the grounds that it would be used as a vehicle for converting their children ) , and Governor Morris had refused to grant one . After his death , council president John Hamilton , acting prior to Belcher 's appointment , granted the charter . The college 's opponents pressured Belcher to withdraw the charter ; he instead adopted the college as a cause to support , and expanded its board to include a diversity of religious views . When its first building was constructed in 1754 , the college 's board wanted to name it after Belcher , but he demurred , preferring it to be named in honor of King William , who hailed from the Dutch House of Orange @-@ Nassau . As a result , the building ( which still stands ) is known as Nassau Hall . He also supported the establishment of the college 's library , to which he bequeathed his personal library . 
 The legislature remained divided until after the French and Indian War broke out in 1754 , when the demands for support of military action brought some unity . The assembly objected to increased funding of the militia in 1755 because Belcher refused to authorize the emission of additional paper currency . It later acceded to demands for increased security , but was reluctant to support militia for action outside the province 's boundaries . Legislators also complained that its meetings were too frequently held at Elizabethtown , primarily because of Belcher 's poor health . 
 For much of his New Jersey administration Belcher was ill , suffering from a type of progressive paralytic disorder . In the summer of 1751 he moved from Burlington to Elizabethtown in the hopes that his health would improve ; it did not . Eventually his hands became paralyzed , and his wife was employed to write for him . He died at his home in Elizabethtown on 31 August 1757 ; His body was transported to Massachusetts , where he was buried at Cambridge . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Belcher 's youngest son Jonathan was appointed as Chief Justice of the Nova Scotia Supreme Court and as Lieutenant Governor of Nova Scotia . His other son , Andrew , continued in the family business ( although not to his father 's exacting standards ) , and also served on the Massachusetts Governor 's Council . Belcher had no children with his second wife Louise , although he did prevail on his son Andrew to marry her daughter from her first marriage . Belcher was also the uncle of future Massachusetts Lieutenant Governor Andrew Oliver and Massachusetts Superior Court of Judicature Chief Justice Peter Oliver , and was the great @-@ grandfather of British Admiral Edward Belcher . 
 Belcher had a reputation for exhibiting an abrasive personality — something that was said by contemporaries to heighten divisions in New Jersey . Historian Robert <unk> wrote of Belcher , " [ He ] was almost a caricature of a New England Yankee : arrogant , vindictive , often impetuous despite a most solemn belief in rational action and calculated maneuver . " Once he acquired the governorship , he took potential assaults on his power personally , and reacted vindictively in attempts to destroy or marginalize his enemies . In personal correspondence with friends , family , and supporters , he used condescending names to refer to his opponents , and he applied pressure to the press in Boston to ensure reasonably favorable coverage of him . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Belchertown , Massachusetts is named for him . His home in Elizabethtown survives , and is listed on the National Register of Historic Places as the Belcher @-@ Ogden House . It is also a contributing property to the Belcher @-@ Ogden Mansion @-@ Price , Benjamin @-@ Price @-@ Brittan Houses District . Belcher 's summer home in Milton , Massachusetts was destroyed by fire in 1776 , but portions of it may have survived in its replacement , built by his widow and now known as the Belcher @-@ Rowe House , also listed on the National Register . ( The Jonathan Belcher House in Randolph , Massachusetts is named in recognition of someone from a different time and lineage in the Belcher family genealogy . ) 
 = = Burial = = 
 At his death Gov. Belcher left instructions that he be buried with his ardent friend and cousin , Judge Jonathan Remington ( 1667 @-@ 1745 , father @-@ in @-@ law of William Ellery , a signer of the Declaration of Independence ) . The body of Judge Jonathan Remington was disinterred and placed by his side . The monument which the governor had directed to be raised over his resting @-@ place was never erected . The tomb became the family vault of Jennisons ( Gov. Belcher 's granddaughter married Dr. Timothy <unk> Jennison ) . The site of their grave was forgotten and long search has been made for it . In the late 1800s , local historians found that Gov. Jonathan Belcher and Judge Jonathan Remington were buried in one grave in Old Burying Ground , Cambridge , Ma . Their tomb is contiguous to that of Judge Edmund Trowbridge and Edmund Trowbridge Dana . In that of Judge Trowbridge rest the remains of Washington Allston ; of Chief Justice Francis Dana ; of the poet Richard Henry Dana and others of the family . 
 = Kirkenes Airport , Høybuktmoen = 
 Kirkenes Airport , Høybuktmoen ( Norwegian : Kirkenes lufthavn , Høybuktmoen ; IATA : <unk> , ICAO : <unk> ) is an international airport located at Høybuktmoen , 15 kilometers ( 9 mi ) west of the town of Kirkenes , in the municipality of Sør @-@ Varanger , Finnmark county , Norway . Operated by the state @-@ owned Avinor , the airport has a single 2 @,@ 115 @-@ by @-@ 45 @-@ meter ( 6 @,@ 939 by 148 ft ) asphalt runway numbered 06 – 24 . Scandinavian Airlines and Norwegian Air Shuttle operate Boeing 737 @-@ services to Oslo Airport , Gardermoen , in part generated by Høybuktmoen 's function as a hub for Widerøe 's regional services to other airports in eastern Finnmark . There are also summer charter flights to Central Europe to bring tourists to the Hurtigruten cruises . The airport had 297 @,@ 149 passengers in 2013 . 
 Høybuktmoen was built as a military air station by the Luftwaffe during World War II . Civilian services were introduced after the war , but abandoned in 1948 . The airport reopened in 1963 with a new terminal and an extended runway . Originally the airport was served by Scandinavian Airlines System and Finnair , and from the 1970s also Widerøe and Norving . Since 1990 , five airlines have attempted to provide services to Murmansk , Russia . Originally the airport had two runways , 1 @,@ 600 and 1 @,@ 200 meters ( 5 @,@ 200 and 3 @,@ 900 ft ) long , respectively , but the smaller was closed in 1996 when the longer was extended . A new terminal building was put into use in 2006 . Because of the terrain the runway 's length cannot be exploited under some wind conditions , so there is a proposal to level some of the land . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 The first aircraft to land in Sør @-@ Varanger was part of a trial undertaken in 1922 by the Royal Norwegian Navy Air Service to test the flight time from Horten to Kirkenes . The mission was awarded to Hjalmar Riiser @-@ Larsen and Finn Lützow @-@ Holm , who chose to fly the 45 @-@ hour trip along the coast . The next landing was a military Fokker which landed on the iced lake of <unk> in 1934 . Widerøe undertook several flights within the municipality in 1937 , offering sightseeing and undertaking aerial photography . The first scheduled service started to Kirkenes the following summer with postal flights to Tromsø flown by Widerøe on behalf of Norwegian Air Lines ( DNL ) . The flight allowed post to be sent from Oslo to Kirkenes in one day and was continued the next season . The route was flown from Tromsø with intermediate stops at Vadsø and Hammerfest . There were public demands for passenger services be started . 
 Instead , in 1940 the German occupation of Norway terminated all civilian aviation until 1945 . A limited service was kept in Northern Norway during the resistance , but these were terminated after the German forces took control of the whole country . From 26 September 1940 , three weekly services were operated from Trondheim to Tromsø , with two of these continuing to Kirkenes , using a 16 @-@ passenger Junkers Ju @-@ 52 . This was terminated on 20 March 1941 , after most of the airline 's pilots had fled to the United Kingdom to support the Allied forces . 
 Høybuktmoen was selected by the Luftwaffe as one of three air stations in Northern Norway , along with Bardufoss Airport and Lakselv Airport , Banak . They built two runways , 1 @,@ 000 and 1 @,@ 200 meters ( 3 @,@ 300 and 3 @,@ 900 ft ) long , respectively . Høybuktmoen was primarily used for attacks against the Arctic convoys . With the German withdrawal in Operation Nordlicht in October 1944 , the runways were blasted at several points . The damage proved easy to repair and by January 1945 , both troops of Norwegian police officers from Sweden led by Bernt Balchen and the Soviet Air Forces could land at Høybuktmoen . 
 = = = Reopening = = = 
 The first service after the war was started by DNL on 13 October 1945 and flew to Tromsø , with onwards connection to Trondheim and Oslo . The service only lasted until 1948 , when it was replaced with a Ju @-@ 52 seaplane route with intermediate stops at Vadsø and Hammerfest to Tromsø . The route flew one direction each day , was only operated during the summer and was plagued with poor regularity . The original water aerodrome was located at <unk> at <unk> . Later it was moved to the quay on the north side of <unk> , on the other side as Kirkenes . Passengers were therefore freighted across the fjord by boat to the aircraft . The air traffic control moved from Høybuktmoen to <unk> in 1949 , but returned in 1963 . 
 The route had doubled its patronage since its introduction by 1953 — the last year it was operated by DNL . From 1954 the route was taken over by Widerøe , who introduced smaller Noorduyn Norseman and de Havilland Canada DHC @-@ 3 Otter aircraft . The Widerøe seaplane service was flown on behalf of DNL and later Scandinavian Airlines System ( SAS ) and remained until 1963 . Varangfly — based in Kirkenes — was established in 1959 by general aviation enthusiasts from Kirkenes Flyklubb . The airline originally had two seaplanes , a two @-@ seat Piper J @-@ 3 Cub and a five @-@ seat Norsk <unk> C @-@ 5 Polar . Operations started on 17 June 1960 . The company gradually developed services within scheduled , charter and air ambulance services . Varangfly later also bought an eight @-@ seat land aircraft which was operated to Lakselv and Bardufoss , and to Ivalo Airport in Finland , where i corresponded with Finnair 's service to Helsinki . 
 Planning for a new airport at <unk> was initiated by a committee established by the Ministry of Transport and Communications in 1947 , and resulted in the National Plan of 1952 . Although Kirkenes was included in the plan construction was placed on hold , both because of high costs and because other airports further south had to be completed before or at the same time . Construction at Høybuktmoen started in 1961 and the airport opened on 4 May 1963 . Work consisted of expanding the east – west runway to 1 @,@ 600 meters ( 5 @,@ 200 ft ) and building a new passenger terminal and control tower ; the latter two were not completed in time for the opening . Alta Airport and Lakselv Airport , Banak opened the same year , and Tromsø Airport followed suit the following year . 
 = = = Operational history = = = 
 SAS introduced the 52 @-@ passenger Convair Metropolitan on their domestic services , while Finnair served the airport with the 30 @-@ seat Douglas DC @-@ 3 on their flights to Finland . In the first month the two airlines had 88 aircraft movements , while the Royal Norwegian Air Force had 44 and Varangfly 60 . Both SAS and Finnair replaced Varangfly 's routes , which did not operate scheduled flights from the new airport . Varangfly therefore sold its land aircraft and instead became a seaplane operator . SAS introduced the 122 @-@ passenger Douglas DC @-@ 9 jet aircraft at Kirkenes from 1969 . Helikopter Service flew a civilian helicopter to Høybuktmoen for the first time the same year . Kirkenes Airport served 20 @,@ 638 passengers in 1964 and 40 @,@ 477 in 1970 . 
 Busy Bee was contracted by the Norwegian Armed Forces to fly military charters in June 1968 . They had two 50 @-@ passenger Fokker F27 Friendships stationed at Høybuktmoen and flew two daily services from Kirkenes and other locations in Northern Norway to Bodø , with onwards connection to Stavanger and Oslo on Fridays . This arrangement continued until Busy Bee 's bankruptcy in 1992 . 
 Varangfly merged with two other airlines in 1970 to create the Kirkenes @-@ based Norving . The new airline bought an eight @-@ passenger Britten Norman Islander and started round trips between Kirkenes and the newly upgraded Berlevåg Airport and Mehamn Airport . This was later followed up with routes to Hasvik Airport and <unk> Airport , and in 1975 to Båtsfjord Airport and Vadsø Airport . On the other hand , Widerøe received the concessions to operate to Hammerfest Airport , which opened on 1 August 1973 , and Honningsvåg Airport , which opened in 1977 . To serve the regional services Widerøe originally operated twenty @-@ passenger de Havilland Canada aircraft . 
 Finnair terminated their services to Kirkenes in 1975 . At the same time the ministry and SAS started looking at the airport structure in Finnmark , as all the services in the county were in need of subsidies . The proposals were either for a hike in the ticket prices or a reduction of Kirkenes to a regional @-@ only airport . SAS was flying a 90 @-@ seat aircraft two to three times per day between Kirkenes and Alta with only ten to fifteen passengers . The airport structure was kept , but ticket prices continued to rise . The airport served 110 @,@ 000 passengers in 1983 . Norving continued Varangfly 's air ambulance contract until 1987 , when the service was taken over by Air Express . Later the contract was awarded to Lufttransport , who operated the Beechcraft Super King Air . Norving filed for bankruptcy in 1992 and their routes were taken over by Widerøe . 
 SAS Commuter was established in 1988 and started operations in Northern Norway in May 1990 . This involved a change to the operations so that all DC @-@ 9 services from Kirkenes to Oslo were terminated and instead Fokker 50 services were introduced to Alta and Tromsø . SAS was able to reduce costs by no longer operating local routes with the DC @-@ 9 and instead increased the number of flights . The new system was met with massive opposition in Kirkenes . Emergency meetings were being held between SAS Commuter and the ministry by June 1990 because of low regularity and many cancellations . Non @-@ transfer flights from Kirkenes to Oslo were reintroduced on 1 April 1992 , albeit with the services stopping at Tromsø . 
 Service between Kirkenes and Murmansk Airport were initiated by SAS Commuter in 1990 , but the airline quickly terminated the service . Aeroflot started two weekly services between Kirkenes and Murmansk and onwards to Arkhangelsk Airport in June 1990 . The service was summer @-@ only until 1992 , when they increased to an all @-@ year service . Norving also started a service from Kirkenes to Murmansk , but their service terminated with the airline failing . Widerøe started two weekly services between Kirkenes and Murmansk in 1994 , using Twin Otter aircraft . Aeroflot terminated their service in 1998 and Widerøe followed suit in 2000 . 
 The runway was extended eastwards by 290 meters ( 950 ft ) in the late 1990s . The first expansion took place in 1996 and the second in 2000 . The extensions never received operating permit from the Civil Aviation Authority of Norway as there are two hills which hinder aircraft landing from the east to follow a safe final approach . 
 Arctic Air took over Widerøe 's flights to Vardø in 2000 , using a 19 @-@ passenger Dornier Do 228 . They also flew a service to Murmansk in 2001 and 2002 . They lost the Vardø – Kirkenes contract back to Widerøe in 2003 . SAS bought Braathens in 2002 , resulting in the latter taking over the service and increasing to two daily flights to Oslo . SAS and Braathens merged in 2004 to form SAS Braathens . The airline changed its name back to Scandinavian Airlines in 2007 . Norwegian Air Shuttle started flights from Kirkenes to Oslo in 2004 , at first with four weekly services . The terminal building was almost unchanged since 1963 , although it had seem some smaller upgrades . Avinor decided in 2004 that the terminal would be upgraded , consisting a new road to the airport , parking lot , tarmac and terminal . The investments cost NOK 180 million and opened on 4 May 2006 . Widerøe reopened its Murmansk service in August 2007 , but low patronage caused the airline to terminate the route from December 2008 . SAS reduced from two to one daily trip to Oslo in 2008 . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 The airport is located at Høybuktmoen in Sør @-@ Varanger , about 15 kilometers ( 9 mi ) west of Kirkenes . The terminal has room for six category C aircraft ( Airbus A320 / Boeing 737 ) . During summer the airport experiences a very high traffic peak with both scheduled and charter aircraft arriving at the same time , as both intend to correspond with Hurtigruten ; this causes patronage to rise beyond the airport 's capacity . Kirkenes Airport had a revenue of NOK 26 @.@ 4 million in 2009 , of which commercial income made up fifteen percent , and an operating deficit of NOK 45 @.@ 4 million . The deficit is cross subsidized by profits at Avinor 's largest airports . In 2013 , the airport had 297 @,@ 149 passengers , 8 @,@ 643 aircraft movements and 367 tonnes of cargo . 
 The runway is located southwest – northeast ( 06 – 24 ) and is 2 @,@ 015 by 45 meters ( 6 @,@ 611 ft × 148 ft ) . The touchdown zone from the west is 60 meters ( 200 ft ) from the start of the runway , while it is 420 meters ( 1 @,@ 380 ft ) from the east . There are no parallel taxiways , but two taxiways run from the runway to the tarmac . Because of the terrain to the east the maximum take @-@ off lengths on the runway vary depending on the direction : it is only 1 @,@ 605 meters ( 5 @,@ 266 ft ) from the east compared to 1 @,@ 755 meters ( 5 @,@ 758 ft ) from the west . Runway 24 is equipped with instrument landing system . There is also a closed runway located normally to the main runway ( 14 – 32 ) . It is 1 @,@ 270 meters ( 4 @,@ 170 ft ) long and gravel ; part of the length has been paved and is used as a taxiway . 
 The airport is located next to European Road E6 . Boreal Transport operates an airport coach service from Kirkenes to the airport in connection with all arrivals and departures . The company also serves the airport with coach services from Kirkenes to other parts of Finnmark . Parking , taxis and car rental is available at the airport . 
 = = Airlines and destinations = = 
 Three airlines serve the airport with scheduled flights . Scandinavian Airlines ( SAS ) and Norwegian Air Shuttle both operate a daily flight to Oslo , with SAS operating two services per day during summer ; both airlines use the Boeing 737 . Widerøe flies to various regional airports in Finnmark and Troms , and uses Kirkenes as a hub to feed regional passengers to Oslo flights . Widerøe operates its eight daily services with de Havilland Canada Dash 8 aircraft . Hamburg International operates charter services from Germany from May to September on behalf of Hurtigruten Group with tourist transferring to the Hurtigruten coastal voyage . There are sporadic charters of fishermen operated by Atlantic Airways . 
 = = Future = = 
 In the period 2015 to 2020 , Avinor plans to build a new control tower and a new fire- and rescue station . The former is located too close to the runway while the latter is too small and out of date . There are also plans to expand the terminal building to allow the simultaneous handling of two large and two small aircraft . Finnmark County Municipality is considering establishing a fast ferry service between Kirkenes and Vadsø which would have a service time of 45 minutes . There is a possibility of marketing Kirkenes as an alternative airport for Murmansk as Kirkenes can offer cheaper flights to Oslo than what is available from Murmansk to Moscow . 
 Avinor has also proposed lowering the terrain east of the airport . The terrain is actually flatter to the east , but because the runway was expanded in that direction , the extension cannot be used without removing all ground in the twelve @-@ degree slope . Although it has no impact on smaller aircraft , the reduced runway length has a severe impact on the performance of Boeing 737 aircraft , which are used by both Norwegian and SAS . For instance , during winter a 180 @-@ seat 737 @-@ 800 can only utilize 71 percent of its permitted take @-@ off weight ; this would hinder fully loaded aircraft flying further than Oslo . The impacts for 150 @-@ seat 737 @-@ 700 aircraft are smaller , as they can reach Oslo during winter and Berlin during summer . The airport served 169 @,@ 428 passengers in 1996 and 216 @,@ 000 passengers in 2000 . 
 The project was estimated to cost 267 million Norwegian krone . Estimates show that the benefit for society would be lower than the investment costs ( a negative net present value ) , giving an average estimated NOK 124 million deficit . Norwegian Air Shuttle is building a unified fleet of 737 @-@ 800 aircraft and will only be able to serve the airport during winter if the investments are carried out . The extension would allow increased charter traffic to Central Europe and increased regularity with existing flights . Avinor has stated that it cannot finance the investments without direct subsidies from the state . 
 = The Finale ( Will & Grace ) = 
 " The Finale " is the series finale of Will & Grace and the twenty @-@ third episode of the show 's eighth season . It originally aired on the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) in the United States on May 18 , 2006 , when it was watched by an average of eighteen million viewers , making it the most watched episode of the final two seasons of Will & Grace . In the finale , Will and Grace have a falling @-@ out that lasts for years . They each have a child with their respective partners , and eventually reconcile when their children ( Laila and Ben ) meet at college . Meanwhile , Karen 's arch @-@ enemy Beverley Leslie makes an offer to Jack which ultimately leads to Jack inheriting Beverley 's fortune . 
 The episode was written by series creators and executive producers David Kohan and Max Mutchnick , and directed by James Burrows . Filming took place at CBS Studio Center in Studio City , California in April 2006 . The cast members took the news about the show ending well , but they became emotional as the final scene was being filmed . NBC heavily promoted the finale , and the main cast members appeared on The Oprah Winfrey Show and The Today Show to bid farewell . An hour @-@ long series retrospective , " Say Goodnight Gracie " , featuring interviews with the cast , crew , and guest stars , preceded the hour @-@ long series finale . Since airing , the finale has received mixed reviews from television critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Grace Adler ( Debra Messing ) , heavily pregnant , is having bizarre dreams of the future in which she and her gay friend and roommate Will Truman ( Eric McCormack ) are an old couple , raising their child . In her dream , Jack McFarland ( Sean Hayes ) is married to actor Kevin Bacon , and Karen Walker ( Megan Mullally ) — who has not aged ( her explanation : " Money " ) — is now in a relationship with her maid Rosario Salazar ( Shelley Morrison ) . In Grace 's real life , however , her and Will 's relationship is complicated . Grace is not sure if she wants to spend the rest of her life living with Will . So , when her ex @-@ husband Marvin " Leo " Markus ( Harry Connick , Jr . ) shows up and proposes to her — not even aware that she is pregnant with his child — she immediately accepts . 
 Two years later , Grace moves with Leo to Rome and lives there for a year . They then move back to New York City , where they raise their daughter Laila . Will and Vince D 'Angelo ( Bobby Cannavale ) have since reconciled , and are raising a son , Ben . Karen and Jack grow tired of the fact that Will and Grace are not speaking with each other , so they lure them to the same place and force them to make up . The four meet at Will and Vince 's apartment , and even though Will and Grace have a pleasant evening together , their relationship is tentative and somewhat awkward . They realize a lot has changed since the last time they met , and thus their relationship is not rekindled . Meanwhile , Karen learns that in her divorce from Stan , she will have no money as Stan 's money was all loaned to him , and he is now bankrupt . When learning that Beverley Leslie ( Leslie Jordan ) and his " business associate " Benji ( Brian A. Setzer ) have broken up , Karen plots to have Jack take Benji 's place , after Jack confesses that Beverly offered to share his entire fortune with him . When Beverly dies after being blown off a balcony from high winds , Jack inherits all of his money . 
 Around twenty years later , Laila meets Ben as they both move into college . Will and Grace are reunited under these circumstances , and their children eventually marry . Jack and Karen , meanwhile , are now living comfortably with each other and Rosario . While everyone else is older , Karen — just like in Grace 's dream — has not aged due to extensive plastic surgery , and she and Jack perform a duet of the song " Unforgettable " . The show ends with Will and Grace watching ER together , reminiscing about how their children are to be wed . Feeling uplifted by the good old times the four friends gather at a bar to toast to their friendship , which then flashes back to the four as their younger selves . 
 = = Production = = 
 Will & Grace creators and executive producers David Kohan and Max Mutchnick , who had not served as writers since the season four season finale , wrote the script for the series finale . Regarding the finale , Mutchnick stated : " We wrote about what you want to have happen with people you love . I think Will and Grace end up very fleshed out . They end up as full adults . All the things that matter in life , they end up having . " Three years before the series finale was created , Mutchnick was asked on his opinion regarding how he would like to see the character 's story come to a conclusion , " The truth is that [ Will and Grace ] serve each other 's dysfunction . And the best way for their story to end is to find love . " 
 The episode was shot in Studio City , California on Stage 17 at CBS Studio Center . It was filmed on April 10 , 11 , and 13 , 2006 . The make @-@ up effects used in Grace 's dream and the scenes fifteen years into the future were done by Academy Award @-@ winning make @-@ up artists . Kohan and Mutchnick joined long @-@ time director James Burrows on the set as filming began . The cast and crew tried to remain cheerful in front of the live audience between takes while the writers gathered in a room to rework lines for potentially larger laughs . However , " there were a lot of snotty , tearful faces all around the set . When we got to the very , very last scene , everybody was just a mess . We started sobbing and hugging each other , " said Megan Mullally , who plays Karen . Eric McCormack , who portrays Will , commented that his saddest moment was " the last time I stood in Will 's kitchen . That was the most colorful position for me , standing there and stirring something . It was my pulpit , the place where I delivered my best jokes . " 
 The set was already being broken down the day after filming finished . Debra Messing , who plays Grace , said it was " cordoned off like an accident scene . It was a shock to see parts of it gone already . " Each cast member was allowed to keep their favorite souvenir from the set . Messing took the door to Grace 's office ; she wanted to lean it up against the wall at her house as a piece of modern art . Sean Hayes was given a couple of pieces from Will 's apartment : " There 's a leather box that was on Will ’ s desk that I want to find a place for . " Mullally chose a simple portrait from one of the walls , and McCormack took a small ceramic dog , though he said he would have taken everything if he could . 
 The cast members of the show took the news about the show ending well . Hayes said : " I 'm proud of being a part of something in history and I 'm proud to have been given a platform to make people laugh . " McCormack added , " We have never taken ourselves or this show too seriously but now that it 's over I take our collective achievement very , very seriously . " The actors were satisfied with the episode and thought the viewers would find it satisfying as well . " It 's daring and ambitious and more far @-@ reaching than most finales go . I think people will be quite surprised , " McCormack said . Messing added : " I think Will & Grace fans will be satisfied . Ultimately , [ the episode ] was done beautifully and it ties up loose ends for all of the characters in a way that 's wonderful . " 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 The series finale was heavily promoted by NBC , and the main cast members appeared on The Oprah Winfrey Show , The Today Show , and Live with Regis and Kelly to bid farewell . NBC devoted a two @-@ hour block in its primetime schedule on May 18 , 2006 , for the Will & Grace send @-@ off . An hour @-@ long series retrospective , " Say Goodnight Gracie " , featuring interviews with the cast , crew , and guest stars , preceded the hour @-@ long series finale . The retrospective was viewed by an estimated 12 @.@ 7 million viewers , while the finale drew 18 @.@ 43 million viewers and a Nielsen rating of 11 @.@ 5 / 18 , making it the most watched episode of the final two seasons of Will & Grace . 
 Since airing , the episode has received mixed reviews from television critics . Richard Keller of TV Squad thought the finale 's theme of Will and Grace 's connection to each other was well @-@ presented by director James Burrows . Keller added , " While not as satisfying as , say , the Friends finale or as crushing as the Seinfeld finale , the series finale to Will & Grace did have its moments and came back to the original concept of friendship among a close group of people . There were some moments where I did laugh out loud , but they were few . " CHUD.com 's David Oliver praised the finale for not having characters " go on wild tangents that betray who they were during the entirety of the show 's run . " He also commented that Messing and McCormack are " affecting in their performances " and the episode " nicely summarizes [ Will and Grace 's ] friendship over the course of the entire show . " 
 Setting the finale in several different time periods was criticized by some critics . Jennifer Armstrong of Entertainment Weekly said " we endure a swirl of confusing , unnecessary sequences , from Grace 's dream to current reality to two years later to their kids ' first day of college to their kids ' impending wedding . By the end , instead of being sad to bid adieu , we 're just relieved not to have yet another disbelief @-@ suspending flash @-@ forward thrust upon us . " Jim Schembri of The Sydney Morning Herald wrote : " The time @-@ jumping device is overused and a tad awkward but , by and large , it ’ s a noble finale to one of the better standard three @-@ wall sitcoms from America . " Amy Amatangelo of Zap2it commented that Will & Grace " is a show that spent eight seasons predicated on the lasting friendship of Will and Grace , and we 're supposed to believe that they spent over 20 years not talking to each other just because their lives went in different directions ? That there is no way their friendship could have been sustained once they both found the love of their life ? " Amatangelo enjoyed Jack and Karen 's performance of " Unforgettable " , however , but the rest of the finale she " could have done without . " 
 = Ruff = 
 The ruff ( Philomachus pugnax ) is a medium @-@ sized wading bird that breeds in marshes and wet meadows across northern Eurasia . This highly gregarious sandpiper is migratory and sometimes forms huge flocks in its winter grounds , which include southern and western Europe , Africa , southern Asia and Australia . It is usually considered to be the only member of its genus , and the broad @-@ billed and sharp @-@ tailed sandpipers are its closest relatives . 
 The ruff is a long @-@ necked , pot @-@ bellied bird . This species shows marked sexual dimorphism ; the male is much larger than the female ( the reeve ) , and has a breeding plumage that includes brightly coloured head tufts , bare orange facial skin , extensive black on the breast , and the large collar of ornamental feathers that inspired this bird 's English name . The female and the non @-@ breeding male have grey @-@ brown upperparts and mainly white underparts . Three differently plumaged types of male , including a rare form that mimics the female , use a variety of strategies to obtain mating opportunities at a lek , and the colourful head and neck feathers are erected as part of the elaborate main courting display . The female has one brood per year and lays four eggs in a well @-@ hidden ground nest , incubating the eggs and rearing the chicks , which are mobile soon after hatching , on her own . Predators of wader chicks and eggs include mammals such as foxes , feral cats and stoats , and birds such as large gulls , corvids and skuas . 
 The ruff forages in wet grassland and soft mud , probing or searching by sight for edible items . It primarily feeds on insects , especially in the breeding season , but it will consume plant material , including rice and maize , on migration and in winter . Classified as " least concern " on the IUCN Red List criteria , the global conservation concerns are relatively low because of the large numbers that breed in Scandinavia and the Arctic . However , the range in much of Europe is contracting because of land drainage , increased fertiliser use , the loss of mown or grazed breeding sites , and over @-@ hunting . This decline has seen it listed in the Agreement on the Conservation of African @-@ Eurasian Migratory Waterbirds ( AEWA ) . 
 = = Taxonomy and nomenclature = = 
 The ruff is a wader in the large family <unk> , the typical shorebirds . It is the sole member of the genus Philomachus , and recent research suggests that its closest relatives are the broad @-@ billed sandpiper , <unk> falcinellus , and the sharp @-@ tailed sandpiper , Calidris acuminata . It has no recognised subspecies or geographical variants . 
 This species was first described by Carl Linnaeus in his Systema Naturae in 1758 as Tringa pugnax . It was moved into its current genus by German naturalist Blasius <unk> in 1804 . Both parts of the binomial name refer to the aggressive behaviour of the bird at its mating arenas ; Philomachus is derived from Ancient Greek <unk> " loving " and <unk> " battle " , and pugnax from the Latin term for " combative " . 
 The original English name for this bird , dating back to at least 1465 , is the ree , perhaps derived from a dialectical term meaning " frenzied " ; a later name reeve , which is still used for the female , is of unknown origin , but may be derived from the shire @-@ reeve , a feudal officer , likening the male 's flamboyant plumage to the official 's robes . The current name was first recorded in 1634 , and is derived from the ruff , an exaggerated collar fashionable from the mid @-@ sixteenth century to the mid @-@ seventeenth century , since the male bird 's neck ornamental feathers resemble the neck @-@ wear . 
 = = Description = = 
 The ruff has a distinctive gravy boat appearance , with a small head , medium @-@ length bill , longish neck and pot @-@ bellied body . It has long legs that are variable in colour but usually yellow or orange . In flight , it has a deeper , slower wing stroke than other waders of a similar size , and displays a thin , indistinct white bar on the wing , and white ovals on the sides of the tail . This species shows sexual dimorphism . Although a small percentage of males resemble females , the typical male is much larger than the female and has an elaborate breeding plumage . He is 29 – 32 cm ( 11 – 13 in ) long with a 54 – 60 cm ( 21 – 24 in ) wingspan , and weighs about 180 g ( 6 @.@ 3 oz ) . In the May @-@ to @-@ June breeding season , the typical male 's legs , bill and warty bare facial skin are orange , and he has distinctive head tufts and a neck ruff . These ornaments vary on individual birds , being black , chestnut or white , with the colouring solid , barred or irregular . The grey @-@ brown back has a scale @-@ like pattern , often with black or chestnut feathers , and the underparts are white with extensive black on the breast . The extreme variability of the main breeding plumage is thought to have developed to aid individual recognition in a species that has communal breeding displays , but is usually mute . 
 Outside the breeding season , the typical male 's head and neck decorations and the bare facial skin are lost and the legs and bill become duller . The upperparts are grey @-@ brown , and the underparts are white with grey mottling on the breast and flanks . 
 The female , or " reeve " , is 22 – 26 cm ( 8 @.@ 7 – 10 @.@ 2 in ) long with a 46 – 49 cm ( 18 – 19 in ) wingspan , and weighs about 110 g ( 3 @.@ 9 oz ) . In breeding plumage , she has grey @-@ brown upperparts with white @-@ fringed , dark @-@ centred feathers . The breast and flanks are variably blotched with black . In winter , her plumage is similar to that of the male , but the sexes are distinguishable on size . The plumage of the juvenile ruff resembles the non @-@ breeding adult , but has upperparts with a neat , scale @-@ like pattern with dark feather centres , and a strong buff tinge to the underparts . 
 Typical adult male ruffs start to moult into the main display plumage before their return to the breeding areas , and the proportion of birds with head and neck decorations gradually increases through the spring . Second @-@ year birds lag behind full adults in developing breeding plumage . They have a lower body mass and a slower weight increase than full adults , and perhaps the demands made on their energy reserves during the migration flight are the main reason of the delayed moult . 
 <unk> of both sexes have an additional moult stage between the winter and final summer plumages , a phenomenon also seen in the bar @-@ tailed godwit . Before developing the full display finery with coloured ruff and tufts , the males replace part of their winter plumage with striped feathers . Females also develop a mix of winter and striped feathers before reaching their summer appearance . The final male breeding plumage results from the replacement of both winter and striped feathers , but the female retains the striped feathers and replaces only the winter feathers to reach her summer plumage . The striped prenuptial plumages may represent the original breeding appearance of this species , the male 's showy nuptial feathers evolving later under strong sexual selection pressures . 
 Adult males and most adult females start their pre @-@ winter moult before returning south , but complete most feather replacement on the wintering grounds . In Kenya , males moult 3 – 4 weeks ahead of the females , finishing before December , whereas females typically complete feather replacement during December and early January . Juveniles moult from their first summer body plumage into winter plumage during late September to November , and later undergo a pre @-@ breeding moult similar in timing and duration to that of the adults , and often producing as brightly coloured an appearance . 
 Two other waders can be confused with the ruff . The juvenile sharp @-@ tailed sandpiper is a little smaller than a juvenile female ruff and has a similar rich orange @-@ buff breast , but the ruff is slimmer with a longer neck and legs , a rounder head , and a much plainer face . The buff @-@ breasted sandpiper also resembles a small juvenile ruff , but even the female ruff is noticeably larger than the sandpiper , with a longer bill , more rotund body and scaly @-@ patterned upperparts . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The ruff is a migratory species , breeding in wetlands in colder regions of northern Eurasia , and spends the northern winter in the tropics , mainly in Africa . Some Siberian breeders undertake an annual round trip of up to 30 @,@ 000 km ( 19 @,@ 000 mi ) to the West African wintering grounds . There is a limited overlap of the summer and winter ranges in western Europe . The ruff breeds in extensive lowland freshwater marshes and damp grasslands . It avoids barren tundra and areas badly affected by severe weather , preferring hummocky marshes and deltas with shallow water . The wetter areas provide a source of food , the mounds and slopes may be used for leks , and dry areas with sedge or low scrub offer nesting sites . A Hungarian study showed that moderately intensive grazing of grassland , with more than one cow per hectare ( 2 @.@ 5 acres ) , was found to attract more nesting pairs . When not breeding , the birds use a wider range of shallow wetlands , such as irrigated fields , lake margins , and mining subsidence and other floodlands . Dry grassland , tidal mudflats and the seashore are less frequently used . The density can reach 129 individuals per square kilometre ( 334 per square mile ) , but is usually much lower . 
 The ruff breeds in Europe and Asia from Scandinavia and Great Britain almost to the Pacific . In Europe it is found in cool temperate areas , but over its Russian range it is an Arctic species , occurring mainly north of about 65 ° N. The largest numbers breed in Russia ( more than 1 million pairs ) , Sweden ( 61 @,@ 000 pairs ) , Finland ( 39 @,@ 000 pairs ) and Norway ( 14 @,@ 000 pairs ) . Although it also breeds from Britain east through the Low Countries to Poland , Germany and Denmark , there are fewer than 2 @,@ 000 pairs in these more southerly areas . 
 It is highly gregarious on migration , travelling in large flocks that can contain hundreds or thousands of individuals . Huge dense groups form on the wintering grounds ; one flock in Senegal contained a million birds . A minority winter further east to Burma , south China , New Guinea and scattered parts of southern Australia , or on the Atlantic and Mediterranean coasts of Europe . In Great Britain and parts of coastal western Europe , where the breeding and wintering ranges overlap , birds may be present throughout the year . Non @-@ breeding birds may also remain year round in the tropical wintering quarters . The Ruff is an uncommon visitor to Alaska ( where it has occasionally bred ) , Canada and the contiguous states of the US , and has wandered to Iceland , Middle America , northern South America , Madagascar and New Zealand . It has been recorded as breeding well south of its main range in northern Kazakhstan , a major migration stopover area . 
 The male , which plays no part in nesting or chick care , leaves the breeding grounds in late June or early July , followed later in July by the female and juveniles . Males typically make shorter flights and winter further north than females ; for example , virtually all wintering ruffs in Britain are males , whereas in Kenya most are females . Many migratory species use this differential wintering strategy , since it reduces feeding competition between the sexes and enables territorial males to reach the breeding grounds as early as possible , improving their chances of successful mating . Male ruffs may also be able to tolerate colder winter conditions because they are larger than females . 
 Birds returning north in spring across the central Mediterranean appear to follow a well @-@ defined route . Large concentrations of ruffs form every year at particular stopover sites to feed , and individuals marked with rings or dye reappear in subsequent years . The refuelling sites are closer together than the theoretical maximum travel distance calculated from the mean body mass , and provide evidence of a migration strategy using favoured intermediate sites . The ruff stores fat as a fuel , but unlike mammals , uses lipids as the main energy source for exercise ( including migration ) and , when necessary , keeps warm by shivering ; however , little research has been conducted on the mechanisms by which they oxidise lipids . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 = = = Mating = = = 
 Males display during the breeding season at a lek in a traditional open grassy arena . The ruff is one of the few lekking species in which the display is primarily directed at other males rather than to the females , and it is among the small percentage of birds in which the males have well @-@ marked and inherited variations in plumage and mating behaviour . There are three male forms : the typical territorial males , satellite males which have a white neck ruff , and a very rare variant with female @-@ like plumage . The behaviour and appearance for an individual male remain constant through its adult life , and are determined by its genes ( see § Biology of variation among males ) . 
 The territorial males , about 84 % of the total , have strongly coloured black or chestnut ruffs and stake out and occupy small mating territories in the lek . They actively court females and display a high degree of aggression towards other resident males ; 5 – 20 territorial males each hold an area of the lek about 1 m ( 1 @.@ 1 yd ) across , usually with bare soil in the centre . They perform an elaborate display that includes wing fluttering , jumping , standing upright , crouching with ruff erect , or lunging at rivals . They are typically silent even when displaying , although a soft gue @-@ gue @-@ gue may occasionally be given . 
 Territorial males are very site @-@ faithful ; 90 % return to the same lekking sites in subsequent seasons , the most dominant males being the most likely to reappear . Site @-@ faithful males can acquire accurate information about the competitive abilities of other males , leading to well @-@ developed dominance relationships . Such stable relationships reduce conflict and the risk of injury , and the consequent lower levels of male aggression are less likely to scare off females . Lower @-@ ranked territorial males also benefit from site fidelity since they can remain on the leks while waiting for the top males eventually to drop out . 
 Satellite males , about 16 % of the total number , have white or mottled ruffs and do not occupy territories ; they enter leks and attempt to mate with the females visiting the territories occupied by the resident males . Resident males tolerate the satellite birds because , although they are competitors for mating with the females , the presence of both types of male on a territory attracts additional females . Females also prefer larger leks , and leks surrounded by taller plants , which give better nesting habitat . 
 Although satellite males are on average slightly smaller and lighter than residents , the nutrition of the chicks does not , as previously thought , influence mating strategy ; rather , the inherited mating strategy influences body size . Resident @-@ type chicks will , if provided with the same amount of food , grow heavier than satellite @-@ type chicks . Satellite males do not have to expend energy to defend a territory , and can spend more time foraging , so they do not need to be as bulky as the residents ; indeed , since they fly more , there would be a physiological cost to additional weight . 
 A third type of male was first described in 2006 ; this is a permanent female mimic , the first such reported for a bird . About 1 % of males are small , intermediate in size between males and females , and do not grow the elaborate breeding plumage of the territorial and satellite males , although they have much larger internal testes than the ruffed males . This cryptic male , or " faeder " ( Old English " father " ) obtains access to mating territories together with the females , and " steals " matings when the females crouch to solicit copulation . The faeder moults into the prenuptial male plumage with striped feathers , but does not go on to develop the ornamental feathers of the normal male . As described above , this stage is thought to show the original male breeding plumage , before other male types evolved . A faeder can be distinguished in the hand by its wing length , which is intermediate between those of displaying males and females . Despite their feminine appearance , the faeders migrate with the larger ' normal ' lekking males and spend the winter with them . 
 The faeders are sometimes mounted by independent or satellite males , but are as often " on top " in homosexual mountings as the ruffed males , suggesting that their true identity is known by the other males . Females never mount males . Preliminary research results suggest that the faeder characteristics are genetically controlled by a single dominant gene . Females often seem to prefer mating with faeders to copulation with normal males , and normal males also copulate with faeders ( and vice versa ) relatively more often than with females . The homosexual copulations may attract females to the lek , like the presence of satellite males . 
 Not all mating takes place at the lek , since only a minority of the males attend an active lek . As alternative strategies , males can also directly pursue females ( " following " ) or wait for them as they approached good feeding sites ( " intercepting " ) . Males switched between the three tactics , being more likely to attend a lek when the copulation rate the previous day was high or when fewer females were available after nesting had started . <unk> rates were low in cold weather early in the season when off @-@ lek males spent most of their time feeding . 
 The level of polyandry in the ruff is the highest known for any avian lekking species and for any shorebird . More than half of female ruffs mate with , and have clutches fertilised by , more than one male , and individual females mate with males of both main behavioural morphs more often than expected by chance . In lekking species , females can choose mates without risking the loss of support from males in nesting and rearing chicks , since the males take no part in raising the brood anyway . In the absence of this cost , if polyandry is advantageous , it would be expected to occur at a higher rate in lekking than among pair @-@ bonded species . 
 = = = Nesting and survival = = = 
 The nest is a shallow ground scrape lined with grass leaves and stems , and concealed in marsh plants or tall grass up to 400 m ( 440 yd ) from the lek . Nesting is solitary , although several females may lay in the general vicinity of a lek . The eggs are slightly glossy , green or olive , and marked with dark blotches ; they are laid from mid @-@ March to early June depending on latitude . 
 The typical clutch is four eggs , each egg measuring 44 mm × 31 mm ( 1 @.@ 7 in × 1 @.@ 2 in ) in size and weighing 21 @.@ 0 g ( 0 @.@ 74 oz ) of which 5 % is shell . Incubation is by the female alone , and the time to hatching is 20 – 23 days , with a further 25 – 28 days to fledging . The precocial chicks have buff and chestnut down , streaked and barred with black , and frosted with white ; they feed themselves on a variety of small invertebrates , but are brooded by the female . One brood is raised each year . 
 Predators of waders breeding in wet grasslands include birds such as large gulls , common raven , carrion and hooded crows , and great and Arctic skuas ; foxes occasionally take waders , and the impact of feral cats and stoats is unknown . Overgrazing can increase predation by making nests easier to find . In captivity , the main causes of chick mortality were stress @-@ related sudden death and twisted neck syndrome . Adults seem to show little evidence of external parasites , but may have significant levels of disease on their tropical wintering grounds , including avian malaria in their inland freshwater habitats , and so they might be expected to invest strongly in their immune systems ; however , a 2006 study that analysed the blood of migrating ruffs intercepted in Friesland showed that this bird actually has unexplained low levels of immune responses on at least one measure of resistance . The ruff can breed from its second year , and the average lifespan for birds that have passed the chick stage is about 4 @.@ 4 years , although a Finnish bird lived to a record 13 years and 11 months . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 The ruff normally feeds using a steady walk and pecking action , selecting food items by sight , but it will also wade deeply and submerge its head . On saline lakes in East Africa it often swims like a phalarope , picking items off the surface . It will feed at night as well as during the day . When feeding , the ruff frequently raises its back feathers , producing a loose pointed peak on the back ; this habit is shared only by the black @-@ tailed godwit . 
 During the breeding season , the ruff ’ s diet consists almost exclusively of the adults and larva of terrestrial and aquatic insects such as beetles and flies . On migration and during the winter , the ruff eats insects ( including caddis flies , water @-@ beetles , mayflies and grasshoppers ) , crustaceans , spiders , molluscs , worms , frogs , small fish , and also the seeds of rice and other cereals , sedges , grasses and aquatic plants . Migrating birds in Italy varied their diet according to what was available at each stopover site . Green aquatic plant material , spilt rice and maize , flies and beetles were found , along with varying amounts of grit . On the main wintering grounds in West Africa , rice is a favoured food during the later part of the season as the <unk> dry out . 
 Just before migration , the ruff increases its body mass at a rate of about 1 % a day , much slower than the bar @-@ tailed godwits breeding in Alaska , which fatten at four times that rate . This is thought to be because the godwit cannot use refuelling areas to feed on its trans @-@ Pacific flight , whereas the ruff is able to make regular stops and take in food during overland migration . For the same reason , the ruff does not physiologically shrink its digestive organs to reduce bodyweight before migrating , unlike the godwit . 
 = = Relationship with humans = = 
 <unk> were formerly trapped for food in England in large numbers ; on one occasion , 2 @,@ 400 were served at Archbishop Neville 's enthronement banquet in 1465 . The birds were netted while lekking , sometimes being fattened with bread , milk and seed in holding pens before preparation for the table . 
 ... if expedition is required , sugar is added , which will make them in a fortnight 's time a lump of fat : they then sell for two Shillings or half @-@ a @-@ crown a piece … The method of killing them is by cutting off their head with a pair of <unk> [ sic ] , the quantity of blood that issues is very great , considering the size of the bird . They are dressed like the Woodcock , with their intestines ; and , when killed at the critical time , say the <unk> , are reckoned the most delicious of all morsels . 
 The heavy toll on breeding birds , together with loss of habitat through drainage and collection by nineteenth @-@ century trophy hunters and egg collectors , meant that the species became almost extinct in England by the 1880s , although recolonisation in small numbers has occurred since 1963 . The draining of wetlands from the 1800s onwards in southern Sweden has resulted in the ruff 's disappearance from many areas there , although it remains common in the north of the country . The use of insecticides and draining of wetlands has led to a decrease in the number of ruff in Denmark since the early 1900s . There are still areas where the ruff and other wetland birds are hunted legally or otherwise for food . A large @-@ scale example is the capture of more than one million waterbirds ( including ruffs ) in a single year from Lake <unk> in Malawi . 
 Although this bird eats rice on the wintering grounds , where it can make up nearly 40 % of its diet , it takes mainly waste and residues from cropping and threshing , not harvestable grain . It has sometimes been viewed as a pest , but the deeper water and presence of invertebrate prey in the economically important early winter period means that the wader has little effect on crop yield . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 The ruff has a large range , estimated at 1 – 10 million square kilometres ( 0 @.@ 38 – 3 @.@ 8 million square miles ) and a population of at least 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 birds . The European population of 200 @,@ 000 – 510 @,@ 000 pairs , occupying more than half of the total breeding range , seems to have declined by up to 30 % over ten years , but this may reflect geographical changes in breeding populations . Numbers in Asia do not appear to be declining , and more ruffs are wintering in Africa . The species as a whole is therefore not believed to approach the thresholds for the population decline criterion of the IUCN Red List ( that is , declining more than 30 percent in ten years or three generations ) . For these reasons , the ruff is classified as " least concern " . 
 The most important breeding populations in Europe , in Russia and Sweden are stable , and the breeding range in Norway has expanded to the south , but populations have more than halved in Finland , Poland , Latvia and The Netherlands . Although the small populations in these countries are of limited overall significance , the decline is a continuation of trend towards range contraction that has occurred over the last two centuries . The drop in numbers in Europe has been attributed to drainage , increased fertiliser use , the loss of formerly mown or grazed breeding sites and over @-@ hunting . 
 Fossils from the Pleistocene suggest that this species bred further south in Europe in the cool periods between glaciations than it does now . Its sensitivity to changing climate as well as to water table levels and the speed of vegetation growth has led to suggestions that its range is affected by global warming , and the ruff might act as an indicator species for monitoring climate change . Potential threats to this species may also include outbreaks of diseases to which it is susceptible such as influenza , botulism and avian malaria . 
 The ruff is one of the species to which the Agreement on the Conservation of African @-@ Eurasian Migratory Waterbirds ( AEWA ) applies , where it is allocated to category 2c ; that is , the populations in need of special attention as they are showing " significant long @-@ term decline " in much of its range . This commits signatories to regulate the taking of listed species or their eggs , to establish protected areas to conserve habitats for the listed species , to regulate hunting and to monitor the populations of the birds concerned . 
 = = Biology of variation among males = = 
 The ruff has three male forms , which differ in mating behaviour and in appearance : the typical territorial males which have a dark neck ruff , satellite males which have a white neck ruff , and the very rare cryptic males known as " faeders " which have female @-@ like plumage . The behaviour and appearance of each individual male remain constant through its adult life , and are determined by a simple genetic polymorphism . Territorial behaviour and appearance is recessive to satellite behaviour and appearance . It was originally thought that the difference between the two types of males was due to a sex @-@ linked genetic factor , but in fact the genetic locus relevant for the mating strategy is located on an autosome , or non @-@ sex chromosome . That means that both sexes can carry the two different forms of the gene , not just males . The female does not normally show evidence of its genetic type , but when females are given testosterone implants , they display the male behaviour corresponding to their genotype . 
 Recently two studies further pinpointed the responsible region to chromosome 11 and a 4 @.@ 5 @-@ Mb covering chromosomal rearrangement . The scientists were able to show that the first genetic change happened 3 @.@ 8 million years ago on the resident chromosome , when a part of it broke off and was reintroduced in the wrong direction . This inversion created the faeder allele . About 500 @,@ 000 years ago an other rare recombination event of faeder and resident allele in the very same inverted region lead to the satellite allele . The 4 @.@ 5 Mb inversion covers 90 genes , one of them is the centromere coding gene N- <unk> , which is located exactly at one of the inversion breakpoints . The inactivation of the gene has severe deleterious effects and pedigree data of a captive ruff colony suggests that the inversion is homozygous lethal . Over the course of the past 3 @.@ 8 million years , further mutations have accumulated within the inversion i.e. three deletions ranging from 3 @.@ 3 to 17 @.@ 6 kb . Two of these deletions remove evolutionary highly conserved elements close to two <unk> <unk> and <unk> @-@ both holding important roles in metabolism of steroid hormones . Hormone measurements around mating time showed that whereas residents have a sharp increase of testosterone , faeders and satellites only experience higher androstenedione levels , as substance which is consider an intermediate in the testosterone biosynthesis . The authors conclude , that one or more of the deletions act as a cis @-@ acting regulatory mutation which is altering the expression of one or both genes and eventually contribute to the different male phenotypes and behaviour . 
 = Homme by David Beckham = 
 Homme by David Beckham is a men 's eau de toilette fragrance endorsed by English footballer David Beckham . The scent , which was released by Coty , Inc. in September 2011 , joined his existing scents David Beckham Instinct ( 2005 ) and Intimately Beckham ( 2006 ) , a his @-@ and @-@ hers collection with his wife Victoria Beckham . The fragrance was launched as part of a new branding venture with business partner Simon Fuller , which also included a men 's <unk> line and a number of other projects to capitalize on Beckham 's worldwide commercial appeal . 
 The fragrance is based on wooden and spicy notes , while still giving off a fresh and clean smell . It includes top notes of citrus , ginger , pine and pepper ; heart notes of cashmere wood , leather and rosemary and base notes of mahogany wood , patchouli and skin musk . 
 = = Conception = = 
 It was announced on 19 May 2011 that David Beckham and his business partner , Simon Fuller , would be launching a men 's <unk> line , a men 's fragrance ( with licensing partner Coty , Inc . ) , and a number of other projects to capitalize on Beckham 's worldwide commercial appeal . The fragrance , entitled Homme by David Beckham , would join existing scents David Beckham Instinct ( 2005 ) and Intimately Beckham ( 2006 ) , a his @-@ and @-@ hers collection with his wife Victoria Beckham . Steve <unk> , senior vice president of global marketing for Coty Beauty , told Women 's Wear Daily that the fragrance is a strategic launch for Coty that represents " a key new orientation for the David Beckham fragrance brand — getting back to the male roots of the brand , enhancing David as an athlete and an aspirational man and building a new pillar to the David Beckham franchise . " Speaking of the new venture , Beckham said : 
 It 's not my natural inclination to see myself as a brand , I 'm just a person who has been fortunate to explore other interests and passions outside of the game I love . I will always be associated with my sport but I am now working across other areas that will continue long after my career has finished . 
 A new logo was created for all of Beckham 's commercial ventures in order to create a " uniform visual identity " for the brand . The mark , which was created by <unk> Willis , features the David Beckham name in the Replica Pro font , with a circular hole " punched out of the script " . The hole represents a football and a lens or viewfinder , which can " spotlight a product detail or visual flourish on various marketing materials " . Willis stated that the major challenge when creating the brand identity for Beckham was : " How do you convey through a brand mark the sheer diversity of the David Beckham world ? " . He expanded his comment , stating that the identity needed to represent " the future of the man as well as being true to his core DNA as one of the world 's most respected and talented sportsmen . The identity needed to deliver against all these elements and at the same time be cool , relevant , desirable , versatile and accessible " . Fuller added that the brand should also be aspirational , optimistic and inclusive . 
 = = Development = = 
 For Homme by David Beckham , Beckham wanted to create a modern , masculine fragrance that reflected his own personal style . Additionally , he designed the scent with Victoria 's preferences in mind , as the scent is something that she has to " put up with " being on him . He tested the fragrance out on his three sons , stating that : " That 's the good thing about having three boys , they are so honest and they said it was amazing " . 
 Homme by David Beckham features a " super masculine scent " that is based on wooden and spicy notes , while still giving off a fresh and clean smell . It includes top notes of citrus , ginger , pine and pepper ; heart notes of cashmere wood , leather and rosemary and base notes of mahogany wood , patchouli and skin musk . Beckham has cited rosewood , pink grapefruit and pepper as being three of his favourite scents . According to Beckham , the scents " gives it a kind of leather , cashmere , woody feel " ; something that he has liked in the scents he has worn " over the years " . 
 According to Beckham , Homme by David Beckham is for a man who opts for a " cool , rugged look and one who prefers a clean @-@ cut , sharp aesthetic . " The scent is said to " encapsulate the spirit " of Beckham , which , according to Rebecca Twomey of Digital Spy , is a concept " sure to appeal as much to women as the men it is aimed at . " The fragrance is intended to be a more manly fragrance than Beckham 's previous releases . According to Twomey , the fragrance 's bottle is " refreshingly different " to Beckham 's previous six scents . 
 = = Marketing and reception = = 
 The print campaign for Homme by David Beckham was shot by fashion photographer Alasdair McLellan in March 2011 . The photographs feature Beckham against a dark background , wearing a sleek charcoal gray suit . According to Erin Donnelly of Fashion Etc . , the styling gives Don Draper " a run for his money " . A behind @-@ the @-@ scenes video of the photo shoot was released in on 19 July by British GQ . In the video , he discusses the inspiration behind the scent , poses in a " razor @-@ sharp " suit and " runs around with his shirt off " . 
 The television advert for Homme by David Beckham , which was directed by Anthony Mandler , opens to see Beckham " showing off his physical prowess " as he runs topless along a platform . As he reaches the edge of the platform , Beckham dives into a vat of the fragrance . In the next scene he is fully dressed in one of his trademark tailored suits . Beckham appeared in a sketch on The Ellen DeGeneres Show to promote the fragrance . In the sketch he is " almost unrecognisable " as he stood in the cosmetics aisle at a Target store , offering passing customers a sample spray of the scent . Homme by David Beckham was included in Esquire 's list of the best <unk> for men in 2011 . Digital Spy included the fragrance in their 2012 Christmas gift guide , commenting that : " The man in your life may not look like Mr Beckham – but at least he can smell like him " . 
 = Burzahom archaeological site = 
 The Burzahom archaeological site is located in the Kashmir Valley of the Jammu and Kashmir state . Archaeological excavations have revealed four phases of cultural significance between 3000 BC and 1000 BC . Periods I and II represent the Neolithic era ; Period <unk> the Megalithic era ( of massive stone <unk> and wheel turned red pottery ) ; and Period IV relates to the early Historical Period ( Post @-@ megalithic period ) . The findings , recorded in stratified cultural deposits representing prehistoric human activity in Kashmir , are based on detailed investigations that cover all aspects of the physical evidence of the site , including the ancient flora and fauna . 
 The Burzahom site revealed the transition from the subterranean and ground level housing features of the Neolithic people to the mudbrick structures of the Megalithic people . The large cache of tools and implements made of bone and stone found at the site shows that the inhabitants were hunting and farming . 
 The unearthed Antiquities ( of art , architecture , customs and rituals ) indicate that the prehistoric people of the Burzahom established contact with Central Asia and South West Asia and also had links to the Gangetic plains and peninsular India . The interaction of local and foreign influences is demonstrated by the art , architecture , customs , rituals and language demonstrated by some engravings on pottery and other artifacts . Some historians have stated that the Vedic Aryan culture extended into Kashmir , but archaeological investigation at Burzahom does not support the theory . 
 = = Location = = 
 The Burzahom site is a prehistoric settlement in the village of the same name in the Srinagar District . It is 16 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 9 mi ) to the northeast of Srinagar on the Naseem @-@ Shalimar road . The elevation of the site is 1 @,@ 800 metres ( 5 @,@ 900 ft ) above sea @-@ level . It is the northernmost excavated Neolithic site of India . The site is on an ancient Pleistocene lake bed . The location is in a high terrace which is part of the floodplain of the Jhelum river and has Karewa soil ( clay ) formation . The site has a commanding view of the Dal lake which is about 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) away . In the Kashmiri language ' Burzahom ' means " birch " , a tree species ( that generally grows in the elevation range of 3 @,@ 000 to 4 @,@ 200 metres ( 9 @,@ 800 to 13 @,@ 800 ft ) in the Himalayas ) , which is found in the excavated housing area in the form of roofing material , and thus confirming the existence of the tree even in the pre @-@ historic Neolithic times . 
 = = History = = 
 The first excavation at the Burzahom site was a limited exercise in 1936 , carried out by the Yale – Cambridge Expedition headed by Helmut de Terra and Dr. Thomson Paterson . The Frontier Circle of the Archaeological Survey of India made detailed investigations of the site between 1960 and 1971 ; these were carried out by T.N. <unk> and his associates . 
 The extensive excavations done at this site , unearthing stratified cultural deposits , were the first of their type in Kashmir . In 1944 , Mortimer Wheeler , Director General of the Archaeological Survey of India had conducted the first stratified archaeological excavations on the lines of geological model at other sites . Based on a similar model the Burzahom site has been named as the Northern Neolithic Culture in view of its distinctive structural features with profusion of tools made of bones and stones and tools representing the ritualistic practices . 
 <unk> represents another related site in the area , near the town of <unk> . Also , <unk> , and <unk> , in the same area , are related . 
 Skeletal remains of Neolithic people found at Burzahom are similar to those found in Harappa of the Indus Valley Civilization . Some historians have stated that the Vedic Aryan culture extended into Kashmir , but archaeological investigation at Burzahom does not support the " Aryans in Kashmir " theory 
 The management and protection of the Burzahom site , including the buffer zones , are under the jurisdiction of the Archaeological Survey of India and the State Department of Archaeology conforming to the Ancient Monuments and Sites Remains Act 1958 ( Amended in 2010 ) . 
 This site was nominated on 15 April 2014 for inscription as a UNESCO World Heritage Site , and is yet to be approved . 
 = = Discovery = = 
 The excavation at Burzahom was carried out in both vertical ( depth wise ) and horizontal directions ; the depth provided the stratification features while the phasing of each stratification was provided by the horizontal excavations . Four periods of continuous occupational sequence at the site were documented over a period of 11 years of investigations from 1960 to 1971 . These are : Periods I and II of the Neolithic ( Period I is called <unk> and Period II is called ceramic ) origin , particularly characterized by dwelling pits ( the largest measuring 2 @.@ 74 metres ( 9 ft 0 in ) at the top to 4 @.@ 75 metres ( 15 @.@ 6 ft ) at the base at a depth of 3 @.@ 95 metres ( 13 @.@ 0 ft ) ) ; Period III of the Megalithic sequence noted by the free standing large stone Menhirs installed at the site by shifting boulders manually from the hills ; and Period IV of the early Modern Period . The skeletal remains of the Neolithic humans found at Burzahom are similar to those found in Harappa of the Indus Valley Civilization . 
 Burzahom 's ceramic industry was mostly of hunting based culture and is different from the Chinese Neolithic pottery . The economy of the people was found to be based on hunting and gathering with a nascent stage of cultivation practices . Pottery made in Burzahom showed close affinity to those found in the Swat valley in Pakistan , particularly in respect of its shapes and decorations of the black ware pottery . The burial practices and type of tools recovered from the site were inferred as having close resemblance to those found in the North Chinese Neolithic culture . 
 = = = Period I = = = 
 The remarkable find during this period was of pits which were inferred as dwelling units ; these were in circular or oval shape dug in compact natural Karewa soil formation . Some of the deep pits had steps and ladder access to the bottom level . In some of the pits the stratification revealed ash and charcoal layers , which denoted human occupancy . Post holes on the sides of pits at the surface level denoted the presence of superstructures covered with thatch made of birch . Shallow pits of circular shape of 60 – 91 centimetres ( 24 – 36 in ) diameter adjoining the housing pits were found to contain bones of animals and also tools made of bones ( of antlers used for making tools ) and stones ( harpoons , needles with or without eyes , awls ) . 
 Carbon dating established that the Neolithic culture of this site was traceable to the 3rd millennium BC , the earliest occupation at the site was dated to before 2 @,@ 357 BC . 
 The pottery found at the site were in an early stage of hand crafting , of the coarse variety , in steel @-@ grey , dull red , brown , and buff colours with mat prints at the bottom ; they were in the shape of bowl , vase and stem . The antiquities did not reveal any signs of burials sites . 
 Late Kot @-@ <unk> type pots were found belonging to Period Ib . 
 = = = Period II = = = 
 In the Period II , the finds excavated revealed that people had moved out from pit dwelling to structures built at the ground level . However , the pits and its associated chambers formed the base floor of the superstructure , which was made up by filling the pits and covering it with mud plaster , and occasionally painted in red ochre . Post @-@ holes around the pits revealed that the superstructures were made of wood built over compacted Karewa soil floors . 
 This period also brought out , for the first time , the burial customs of the Neolithic people . Both human and animal skeletons were found in deep oval shaped pits , located either below the floors of the dwelling units or in its precincts . These pits were filled with ash , stones and potsherds . Some of the human skulls found here had trepanning ( bored hole ) marks . In many pits , bones of dogs and antlered deer were found along with human skeletons . The skeletons of humans were found in the burial pits in a sitting position along with bones of animals . 
 Pottery finds showed better finish compared to the earlier Period I. The pots were of polished black ware , mostly handmade , in the form of a dish with stand , a high @-@ necked jar , and so forth . Also found was a wheel turned red ware pot which contained 950 beads made from carnelian and agate ( inferred as items for sale ) , which was thought to belong to the later part of this period . A very impressive painted pottery ware recovered from this period was a globular red ware pot made on a turntable ; the painting on the pot was of a wild goat of black colour with long horns and hanging ears . Another pottery item which is of interest is a polished black ware in globular shape jar with a long neck and flaring mouth . 
 An interesting find of this period is of two standalone finished flat stone slabs . The carving on one is not distinct . The other stone slab is 48 – 27 centimetres ( 19 – 11 in ) which depicts , on one polished side , sketches of hunting scenes such as a hunter spearing ( with a Ker ) an antlered deer and another hunter in the process of releasing an arrow , and a sketch of the movement of the Sun , at two levels . The carved figures are distinctly visible . 
 Agricultural practices were noted during the Periods I and II and crops grown were inferred as wheat , barley and lentil ; finding lentils established a link of the Neolithic people with Central Asia , crossing over the Himalayas . 
 The people who resided here were characterized as " long headed <unk> " . Two female skulls , different from the male skulls , were also reported . The finds did not indicate of any external ethnic intrusions during the entire Neolithic period but showed more affinity to the Harappan people . 
 Burzahom represents the southernmost extent of what is known as Northern Neolithic culture of Asia . 
 = = = Period III = = = 
 Some Megalithic Period Menhirs are next to Neolithic pits , suggesting a gradual transition between the two phases . The Menhirs , boulders formed due the varying temperatures , were brought down from the hills with great effort by the people and installed to mark notable events of the community . These are rough in shape , huge and of considerable weight and height , and are " free @-@ standing " . Craftsmanship was superior during this period with finds of wheel made durable hard red ware , copper objects , and tools made of bone and stone . Structures made of rubble were also found . Finds of a few copper arrowheads indicated knowledge of metallurgy . 
 = = = Period IV = = = 
 Period IV ( dated to the 3rd – 4th century AD ) , the last phase of human occupation at Burzahom , was related to the early Historical Period . The structures built were superior compared to the earlier period , and were made from mud @-@ bricks . Pottery was also superior , of red ware type with slips and wheel turned . Some iron antiquaries were also found . 
 = = Preservation = = 
 The site is maintained in the form that has been excavated , representing the natural setting of the Neolithic people . The exposed pits and the layout are well protected . 
 = Deuces ( song ) = 
 " Deuces " is a song written and performed by American recording artist Chris Brown and American rappers Tyga and Kevin McCall . Produced by McCall , " Deuces " was released digitally on June 25 , 2010 , as the lead single from Brown 's first collaborative effort with Tyga , titled Fan of a Fan ( 2010 ) . The song is a slow , down @-@ tempo R & B ballad featuring elements from the genres of house and pop music , while the song is lyrically about " breaking it off with a girl after failed attempts to make the relationship work " . " Deuces " was later included on Brown 's fourth studio album , F.A.M.E. ( 2011 ) . 
 " Deuces " received positive reviews from music critics , most of whom praised the production . Following its release , critics speculated that the lyrics of the song were about Brown 's former relationship with Barbadian singer Rihanna . " Deuces " earned Brown two award nominations for Best Rap / Sung Collaboration at the 53rd Grammy Awards and Best Collaboration at the 2011 BET Awards . The song was a commercial success in the United States , reaching number 14 on the Billboard Hot 100 and number one on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart , becoming Brown 's first number @-@ one single on the chart since " Say Goodbye " ( 2006 ) . Additionally , it peaked inside the top @-@ thirty in New Zealand and the top @-@ seventy in the United Kingdom . 
 The accompanying music video was directed by Colin Tilley and shot in black and white at the Los Angeles River . Brown performed " Deuces " live on the television show 106 & Park , during his F.A.M.E. Tour ( 2011 ) , and at Supafest ( 2012 ) in Australia . The song 's official remix , featuring rappers Kanye West , T.I. , Drake , Fabolous , Rick Ross and André 3000 , was released as a digital EP on November 2 , 2010 . Recording artists Ciara and Teairra Marí also recorded their own remixes of the song . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " Deuces " was written by Chris Brown , Michael " Tyga " Stevenson and Kevin McCall , who also produced the track . Vocals were recorded by Michael Congdon at the In Your Ear Studios in Richmond , Virginia , with assistance by Dustin <unk> . The recordings were later mixed by Brian Springer at The Record Plant in Los Angeles , California , with assistance by Anthony <unk> . " Deuces " leaked online on May 20 , 2010 , and was later released digitally on June 25 , 2010 as the first single from Brown 's collaborative mixtape with Tyga , Fan of a Fan ( 2010 ) . In an interview with MTV News , Tyga elaborated on " Deuces " and its theme , stating : " Basically it 's about you getting rid of this girl , you tried to make it work , but you got to move on . So you put up one finger , put up another , and then ' Deuces ' " . The song appeared as the opening track on Brown 's fourth studio album , F.A.M.E. ( 2011 ) . 
 Musically , " Deuces " is a slow , down @-@ tempo R & B ballad that displays elements of house and pop music . The song has a length of four minutes and thirty @-@ six seconds . It is backed by synth chords and " eerie harmonies " , with Brown 's " smooth vocals " making use of auto @-@ tune effects . According to Sara D. Anderson of AOL Radio , the song contains lyrical content about " breaking it off with a girl after failed attempts to make the relationship work " . In the first verse , Brown sings : " All that bullshit is for the birds , you ain 't nothing but a vulture / Always hoping for the worst , waiting for me to fuck up / You 'll regret the day when I find another girl , that knows just what I need / She knows just what I mean . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 " Deuces " received positive reviews from music critics . Joanne Dorken of MTV UK wrote that the song was " a good platform for Brown to show off his silky @-@ smooth vocals " . Hannah Ash of The Harber Herald called it " a great rap track " with " fantastic beats " . In an album review for F.A.M.E. , Mark Edward Nero of About.com wrote that " Deuces " was one of " the album 's best material " . A reviewer for Girlfriend magazine wrote that " Deuces " along with " Yeah 3x " and " Beautiful People " , were the only tracks on the album " worth listening to " . Mesfin Fekadu of the Associated Press labeled " Deuces " as one of the " best songs " of 2010 , while August Brown of Los Angeles Times called it his " favorite single " of 2010 . According to Steve Jones of USA Today , the song shows that " Brown is taking it to the next phase " . Sean Fennessey of The Washington Post characterised " Deuces " as " the effervescent kiss @-@ off " track . Shahryar Rizvi of Dallas Observer was critical of the song , writing that it " sounds minimally produced and quiet . As a result , it sounds kind of boring " . 
 Critics also speculated that the lyrics of the song were about Brown 's former relationship with pop singer Rihanna . Becky Bain of Idolator described " Deuces " as a " bitter , women @-@ hating track " that could be " about Rihanna or just females in general " , and wrote that " as damning as some of the lyrics are , this emotional jam is actually a step in the right direction for Brown " . Anthony Benigno of The Faster Times observed that the song could be a reference to " the Rihanna incident " , writing " is it about RiRi ? Maybe , maybe not . He ain 't telling , in any case " . Jayson Rodriguez of MTV News wrote that " Deuces " was indeed a " standout " track from the Fan of a Fan mixtape , and that it " appears to be a dig at Rihanna " . The song was nominated for Best Rap / Sung Collaboration at the 53rd Grammy Awards , and Best Collaboration at the 2011 BET Awards . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 In the United States , " Deuces " debuted on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart at number 72 on the issue dated July 17 , 2010 . It peaked at number one in its ninth week on the chart , becoming Brown 's first number @-@ one single on the chart since " Say Goodbye " ( 2006 ) . " Deuces " was tied with Monica 's single " Everything to Me " ( 2010 ) , for both being the fastest songs in 2010 to climb to the number one spot in nine weeks . " Deuces " peaked at number 14 on the Billboard Hot 100 and spent 19 weeks on the chart . As of January 2011 , the song has sold 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 digital copies in the US . On the New Zealand Singles Chart , " Deuces " debuted and peaked at number 23 on July 26 , 2010 . It spent six weeks on the chart . In the United Kingdom , " Deuces " debuted and peaked at number 68 on November 20 , 2010 , and appeared on the chart for one week . It also charted on the UK R & B Singles Chart at number 14 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The accompanying music videos for " Deuces " and " No Bullshit " premiered simultaneously online on May 24 , 2010 , and both were directed by Colin Tilley . The video was shot in black @-@ and @-@ white , and is set at the Los Angeles River . It begins with a woman walking down the river 's culvert . As the song begins , Brown , wearing a dark sleeveless jacket , sunglasses , and light @-@ colored pants , sings his verse while standing against a car with Tyga and Kevin McCall . This scene is intercut with scenes of Brown singing alone at the culvert , wearing a hooded jumper and skinny jeans . During the chorus , Brown is seen dancing in an underground tunnel . As Tyga raps his verse , he is sitting on a graffitied concrete barrier , while Brown appears in the background . This scene is intercut with scenes of Tyga , Brown and McCall walking down a street with a lowrider driving slowly behind them . As the second chorus begins , earlier scenes from the video are intercut with each other . McCall then begins to rap his verse while leaning against a wall , which is then intercut with scenes of him rapping from previous settings of the video . During the final chorus of the song , more scenes of Brown dancing in the underground tunnel are shown . 
 = = Live performances and remixes = = 
 On May 15 , 2010 , Brown performed " Deuces " with Tyga at the " Virginia Stand Up ! A Call to Action " benefit concert as part of a set list , which included " Say Goodbye " , " Yo ( Excuse Me Miss ) " , " Gimme That " , " Kiss Kiss " , " Take You Down " and " Forever " . The concert was organized by Brown to help with continued relief efforts in Haiti following the January 2010 earthquake . Jayson Rodriguez of MTV News wrote that " the superstar singer couldn 't have been more giving , doing his best to please the packed house " . On December 3 , 2010 , Brown , wearing a charcoal grey suit with Adidas sneakers , performed the song with Tyga and Kevin McCall as part of his set list at the Cali Christmas concert . In March 2011 , Brown and Tyga performed " Deuces " on the television music show , 106 & Park . " Deuces " was also added to the set list of Brown 's F.A.M.E. Tour . In his review of the tour , Jeremy Trucker of The Baltimore Sun criticized Brown for lip syncing his performances , and remained unconvinced that Brown 's " talent was special enough to warrant his continued , well , fame " . In April 2012 , Brown performed " Deuces " at the Supafest tour in Australia as part of a set list , which included " Run It ! " , " Yeah 3x " , " Look at Me Now " , " She Ain 't You " , " Wet the Bed " and " Turn Up the Music " , among others . A reviewer for Rap @-@ Up magazine praised his set , writing " A tatted Chris Brown thrilled with his chart @-@ topping hits " . 
 In September 2010 , during a Ustream session with fans , Brown announced plans of releasing an " all @-@ star " remix to " Deuces " , which would feature rappers Kanye West , T.I. , Drake , Fabolous , Rick Ross , and André 3000 , . " The remix appeared online on October 1 , 2010 , and was released as a digital EP on November 2 , 2010 . A day after the " all @-@ star " remix premiered online , American R & B singer Ciara released her own remix of the song , which was supposed to be included on her Basic Instinct mixtape . American R & B singer Teairra Marí also recorded her own remix of " Deuces " for her mixtape , The Night Before X @-@ Mas ( 2010 ) . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital download 
 " Deuces " ( feat . Tyga & Kevin McCall ) – 4 : 36 
 " No Bullshit " – 4 : 07 
 Digital Remix EP 
 " Deuces " ( feat . Drake & Kanye West ) – 4 : 34 
 " Deuces " ( feat . T.I. & Rick Ross ) – 3 : 42 
 " Deuces " ( feat . Fabolous & André 3000 ) – 4 : 34 
 " Deuces " ( feat . Drake , Kanye West & André 3000 ) – 5 : 38 
 " Deuces " ( feat . Drake , T.I. , Kanye West , Fabolous , Rick Ross , & André 3000 ) – 6 : 43 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Chris Brown – songwriter , lead vocals 
 Kevin McCall – songwriter , producer , featured vocals 
 Brian Springer – audio mixing 
 Anthony <unk> – assistant audio mixing 
 Michael Stevenson – songwriter , featured vocals 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes for F.A.M.E. 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Norfolk Spaniel = 
 The Norfolk Spaniel or Shropshire Spaniel is an extinct breed of dog since the early 20th century . It was originally thought to have originated from the work of one of the Dukes of Norfolk , but this theory was disproven after being in doubt during the later part of the 19th century . The term was used to designate springer type spaniels that were neither Sussex nor Clumber Spaniels , and attempts were made to use it to specify a breed that would later become known as the English Springer Spaniel . 
 With a liver @-@ and @-@ white or black @-@ and @-@ white coat , the Norfolk Spaniel was described as being a large cocker spaniel . The Spaniel Club set out a breed standard for Norfolk Spaniels , but specimens of the breed varied greatly across England . Members of the breed were difficult to train , but formed a strong attachment with their owners and were useful for hunting both on land and in water . The breed ceased to exist after 1903 , when it was rolled into the new English Springer Spaniel breed created by The Kennel Club to contain all spaniels of this type . 
 = = History = = 
 The Norfolk Spaniel was believed to have come about from a cross of spaniels with the Black and Tan Terrier , which was cultivated by an unspecified Duke of Norfolk . However , later historians disagree with this theory , saying that the Duke of Norfolk 's spaniels were of the King Charles type and that terrier stock had nothing to do with the origins of the Norfolk Spaniel . The theory of the Duke of Norfolk @-@ based origins of the Norfolk Spaniel was thought disproved by the investigation of James Farrow , a 19th @-@ century spaniel breeder , who wrote to Henry Fitzalan @-@ Howard , 15th Duke of Norfolk in order to find out the truth about the origins of the breed . The Duke responded , denying any connection to the breed , although he did state that his grandfather , Henry Howard , 13th Duke of Norfolk , owned Sussex Spaniels . The letter from the Duke was printed in The Kennel Gazette in 1899 . An alternative origin was proposed by Rawdon Briggs Lee in volume two of his 1897 work A History and Description of the Modern Dogs of Great Britain and Ireland . Lee argued that the Norfolk Spaniel was descended from a crossing of a curly @-@ coated water spaniel and a Sussex Spaniel or another strain of land spaniel . 
 In the 18th century , spaniels were split into three categories : land spaniels , water spaniels and toy spaniels . The land spaniels were split into two further types , the cocker spaniel and the springer spaniel . It was within the springer spaniel type that the Norfolk Spaniel was placed , along with the Sussex Spaniel and the Clumber Spaniel . By the 1860s , the breed was described as the " commonest breed in England " , but with a description that varies so much that the only standard point is that they averaged 16 inches ( 41 cm ) in height at the withers . 
 The Spaniel Club was formed in 1885 , and issued a breed standard for the Norfolk Spaniel , recognising it as a variety of spaniel . However , the general public saw it only as a generic land spaniel . By the 1890s , the breed had become common throughout the counties of England , leading dog writers such as Rawdon Briggs Lee to question the authenticity of its origins , or that the various liver and white spaniels from around England constituted a single breed ; " Personally , I do not consider the liver and white spaniel any particular variety at all , nor do I believe that it has ever been indigenous to Norfolk . " He states that similar dogs exist in Devonshire that do not trace ancestry to Norfolk , and that liver and white spaniels pre @-@ date the breeding of the Black and Tan Terrier with an ordinary spaniel . <unk> Mercer described the breed in 1890 as being " virtually extinct in its purity " , with its liver and white colours running through any numbers of miscellaneous spaniels , and he too discredits the origins involving the Duke of Norfolk . 
 The Kennel Club ( UK ) designated all medium legged spaniels which were not Clumber nor Sussex Spaniels as English Springer Spaniels in 1902 . The Norfolk Spaniel was included under this designation , with the term " Norfolk Spaniel " considered for use to cover these types of spaniels , but ultimately rejected as the Club believed that the breed was always liver and white in colour . The change in terminology was not smooth or immediate , with James Watson in his 1905 work , The Dog Book , still referring to the Norfolk Spaniel as a breed name . In the modern era , the Norfolk Spaniel is thought to be the previous name for the English Springer Spaniel , prior to recognition by The Kennel Club ( UK ) . 
 = = Temperament = = 
