 The Norfolk Spaniel would typically be unhappy when they were separated from their owners , as they formed a strong attachment . Compared to the springer spaniels of the 19th century , they were more ill @-@ tempered , and could be headstrong and wilful if not successfully broken . Some members of the breed could be noisy , and were described as " babbling " and making noise on the hunt in a similar fashion to hounds , while others were far quieter . 
 Its use in hunting was varied , and the breed was useful both on land and in the water . In particular , it became successful in America and towards the beginning of the 20th century were popular in the area around Boston . They were described by the Spaniel Club of America as being as good in the water as the Chesapeake Bay Retriever . 
 = = Appearance = = 
 The breed was a freckled white dog with either liver or black markings , the breed standard in 1859 set their measurements at 17 – 18 inches ( 43 – 46 cm ) in height at the withers . It had long legs , feathered ears , a white area on forehead , which was said to " [ add ] a great deal to his beauty " , but there were differences from the English Springer , including a broader skull and shorter neck . It was also compared to the English Setter in its build , shape , and proportions , although it was a much smaller size . While other field spaniels of this era displayed colours other than liver and white or liver and black , the Norfolk did not . The breed @-@ specific qualities varied greatly as in some places the breeding lines were not kept particularly pure , those lines having had stock from Sussex and Clumber Spaniels bred into them . 
 By the end of the 19th century the description of a Norfolk Spaniel had changed slightly , The Spaniel Club breed standard for a Norfolk Spaniel in 1897 was for the animal to have a coat of either black and white or liver and white which was not curly , a reasonably heavy body and legs which are longer than other field spaniels but shorter than the Irish Water Spaniel , a deep chest with long sloping shoulders and strength in the back and loins , as well as features typical of a spaniel such as lobular ears . This standard also included the requirement for the tail to be docked . In brief , the standard described the Norfolk as simply looking like a large cocker spaniel . 
 = Asperger syndrome = 
 Asperger syndrome ( AS ) , also known as Asperger 's , is a developmental disorder characterized by significant difficulties in social interaction and nonverbal communication , along with restricted and repetitive patterns of behavior and interests . As a milder autism spectrum disorder ( ASD ) , it differs from other ASDs by relatively normal language and intelligence . Although not required for diagnosis , physical clumsiness and unusual use of language are common . Symptoms usually begin before two years old and typically last for a person 's entire life . 
 The exact cause of Asperger 's is unknown . While it is likely partly inherited , the underlying genetics have not been determined conclusively . Environmental factors are also believed to play a role . Brain imaging has not identified a common underlying problem . The diagnosis of Asperger 's was removed in the 2013 fifth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders ( DSM @-@ 5 ) , and people with these symptoms are now included within the autism spectrum disorder along with autism and pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified . It remains within the tenth edition of the International Classification of Diseases ( ICD @-@ 10 ) as of 2015 . 
 There is no single treatment , and the effectiveness of particular interventions is supported by only limited data . Treatment is aimed at improving poor communication skills , obsessive or repetitive routines , and physical clumsiness . Interventions may include social skills training , cognitive behavioral therapy , physical therapy , speech therapy , parent training , and medications for associated problems such as mood or anxiety . Most children improve as they grow up , but social and communication difficulties usually persist . Some researchers and people on the autism spectrum have advocated a shift in attitudes toward the view that autism spectrum disorder is a difference , rather than a disease that must be treated or cured . 
 In 2013 , Asperger 's was estimated to affect 31 million people globally . The syndrome is named after the Austrian pediatrician Hans Asperger who , in 1944 , described children in his practice who lacked nonverbal communication , had limited understanding of others ' feelings , and were physically clumsy . The modern conception of Asperger syndrome came into existence in 1981 and went through a period of popularization . It became a standardized diagnosis in the early 1990s . Many questions and controversies remain about aspects of the disorder . There is doubt about whether it is distinct from high @-@ functioning autism ( HFA ) . Partly because of this , the percentage of people affected is not firmly established . 
 = = Classification = = 
 The extent of the overlap between AS and high @-@ functioning autism ( HFA — autism unaccompanied by intellectual disability ) is unclear . The ASD classification is to some extent an artifact of how autism was discovered , and may not reflect the true nature of the spectrum ; methodological problems have beset Asperger syndrome as a valid diagnosis from the outset . In the fifth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders ( DSM @-@ 5 ) , published in May 2013 , AS , as a separate diagnosis , was eliminated and folded into autism spectrum disorder . Like the diagnosis of Asperger syndrome , the change was controversial and AS was not removed from the WHO 's ICD @-@ 10 . 
 The World Health Organization ( WHO ) defines Asperger syndrome ( AS ) as one of the autism spectrum disorders ( ASD ) or pervasive developmental disorders ( PDD ) , which are a spectrum of psychological conditions that are characterized by abnormalities of social interaction and communication that pervade the individual 's functioning , and by restricted and repetitive interests and behavior . Like other psychological development disorders , ASD begins in infancy or childhood , has a steady course without remission or relapse , and has impairments that result from maturation @-@ related changes in various systems of the brain . ASD , in turn , is a subset of the broader autism phenotype , which describes individuals who may not have ASD but do have autistic @-@ like traits , such as social deficits . Of the other four ASD forms , autism is the most similar to AS in signs and likely causes , but its diagnosis requires impaired communication and allows delay in cognitive development ; Rett syndrome and childhood disintegrative disorder share several signs with autism but may have unrelated causes ; and pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified ( PDD @-@ NOS ) is diagnosed when the criteria for a more specific disorder are unmet . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 As a pervasive developmental disorder , Asperger syndrome is distinguished by a pattern of symptoms rather than a single symptom . It is characterized by qualitative impairment in social interaction , by stereotyped and restricted patterns of behavior , activities and interests , and by no clinically significant delay in cognitive development or general delay in language . Intense preoccupation with a narrow subject , one @-@ sided verbosity , restricted prosody , and physical clumsiness are typical of the condition , but are not required for diagnosis . Suicidal behavior appears to occur at rates similar to those without ASD . 
 = = = Social interaction = = = 
 A lack of demonstrated empathy affects aspects of communal living for persons with Asperger syndrome . Individuals with AS experience difficulties in basic elements of social interaction , which may include a failure to develop friendships or to seek shared enjoyments or achievements with others ( for example , showing others objects of interest ) , a lack of social or emotional reciprocity ( social " games " give @-@ and @-@ take mechanic ) , and impaired nonverbal behaviors in areas such as eye contact , facial expression , posture , and gesture . 
 People with AS may not be as withdrawn around others , compared with those with other , more debilitating forms of autism ; they approach others , even if awkwardly . For example , a person with AS may engage in a one @-@ sided , long @-@ winded speech about a favorite topic , while misunderstanding or not recognizing the listener 's feelings or reactions , such as a wish to change the topic of talk or end the interaction . This social awkwardness has been called " active but odd " . This failure to react appropriately to social interaction may appear as disregard for other people 's feelings , and may come across as insensitive . However , not all individuals with AS will approach others . Some of them may even display selective mutism , speaking not at all to most people and excessively to specific people . Some may choose only to talk to people they like . 
 The cognitive ability of children with AS often allows them to articulate social norms in a laboratory context , where they may be able to show a theoretical understanding of other people 's emotions ; however , they typically have difficulty acting on this knowledge in fluid , real @-@ life situations . People with AS may analyze and distill their observations of social interaction into rigid behavioral guidelines , and apply these rules in awkward ways , such as forced eye contact , resulting in a demeanor that appears rigid or socially naive . Childhood desire for companionship can become numbed through a history of failed social encounters . 
 The hypothesis that individuals with AS are predisposed to violent or criminal behavior has been investigated , but is not supported by data . More evidence suggests children with AS are victims rather than <unk> . A 2008 review found that an overwhelming number of reported violent criminals with AS had coexisting psychiatric disorders such as schizoaffective disorder . 
 = = = Restricted and repetitive interests and behavior = = = 
 People with Asperger syndrome display behavior , interests , and activities that are restricted and repetitive and are sometimes abnormally intense or focused . They may stick to inflexible routines , move in stereotyped and repetitive ways , preoccupy themselves with parts of objects or compulsive behaviors like lining thing up in patterns . 
 Pursuit of specific and narrow areas of interest is one of the most striking possible features of AS . Individuals with AS may collect volumes of detailed information on a relatively narrow topic such as weather data or star names , without necessarily having a genuine understanding of the broader topic . For example , a child might memorize camera model numbers while caring little about photography . This behavior is usually apparent by age 5 or 6 . Although these special interests may change from time to time , they typically become more unusual and narrowly focused , and often dominate social interaction so much that the entire family may become immersed . Because narrow topics often capture the interest of children , this symptom may go unrecognized . 
 <unk> and repetitive motor behaviors are a core part of the diagnosis of AS and other ASDs . They include hand movements such as flapping or twisting , and complex whole @-@ body movements . These are typically repeated in longer bursts and look more voluntary or ritualistic than tics , which are usually faster , less rhythmical and less often symmetrical . 
 According to the Adult Asperger Assessment ( AAA ) diagnostic test , a lack of interest in fiction and a positive preference towards non @-@ fiction is common among adults with AS . 
 = = = Speech and language = = = 
 Although individuals with Asperger syndrome acquire language skills without significant general delay and their speech typically lacks significant abnormalities , language acquisition and use is often atypical . Abnormalities include verbosity , abrupt transitions , literal interpretations and <unk> of nuance , use of metaphor meaningful only to the speaker , auditory perception deficits , unusually pedantic , formal or idiosyncratic speech , and oddities in loudness , pitch , intonation , prosody , and rhythm . Echolalia has also been observed in individuals with AS . 
 Three aspects of communication patterns are of clinical interest : poor prosody , tangential and circumstantial speech , and marked verbosity . Although inflection and intonation may be less rigid or monotonic than in classic autism , people with AS often have a limited range of intonation : speech may be unusually fast , jerky or loud . Speech may convey a sense of incoherence ; the conversational style often includes monologues about topics that bore the listener , fails to provide context for comments , or fails to suppress internal thoughts . Individuals with AS may fail to detect whether the listener is interested or engaged in the conversation . The speaker 's conclusion or point may never be made , and attempts by the listener to elaborate on the speech 's content or logic , or to shift to related topics , are often unsuccessful . 
 Children with AS may have an unusually sophisticated vocabulary at a young age and have been colloquially called " little professors " , but have difficulty understanding figurative language and tend to use language literally . Children with AS appear to have particular weaknesses in areas of <unk> language that include humor , irony , teasing , and sarcasm . Although individuals with AS usually understand the cognitive basis of humor , they seem to lack understanding of the intent of humor to share enjoyment with others . Despite strong evidence of impaired humor appreciation , anecdotal reports of humor in individuals with AS seem to challenge some psychological theories of AS and autism . 
 = = = Motor and sensory perception = = = 
 Individuals with Asperger syndrome may have signs or symptoms that are independent of the diagnosis , but can affect the individual or the family . These include differences in perception and problems with motor skills , sleep , and emotions . 
 Individuals with AS often have excellent auditory and visual perception . Children with ASD often demonstrate enhanced perception of small changes in patterns such as arrangements of objects or well @-@ known images ; typically this is domain @-@ specific and involves processing of fine @-@ grained features . Conversely , compared with individuals with high @-@ functioning autism , individuals with AS have deficits in some tasks involving visual @-@ spatial perception , auditory perception , or visual memory . Many accounts of individuals with AS and ASD report other unusual sensory and perceptual skills and experiences . They may be unusually sensitive or insensitive to sound , light , and other stimuli ; these sensory responses are found in other developmental disorders and are not specific to AS or to ASD . There is little support for increased fight @-@ or @-@ flight response or failure of habituation in autism ; there is more evidence of decreased responsiveness to sensory stimuli , although several studies show no differences . 
 Hans Asperger 's initial accounts and other diagnostic schemes include descriptions of physical clumsiness . Children with AS may be delayed in acquiring skills requiring motor dexterity , such as riding a bicycle or opening a jar , and may seem to move awkwardly or feel " uncomfortable in their own skin " . They may be poorly coordinated , or have an odd or bouncy gait or posture , poor handwriting , or problems with visual @-@ motor integration . They may show problems with proprioception ( sensation of body position ) on measures of developmental coordination disorder ( motor planning disorder ) , balance , tandem gait , and finger @-@ thumb apposition . There is no evidence that these motor skills problems differentiate AS from other high @-@ functioning ASDs . 
 Children with AS are more likely to have sleep problems , including difficulty in falling asleep , frequent nocturnal awakenings , and early morning awakenings . AS is also associated with high levels of alexithymia , which is difficulty in identifying and describing one 's emotions . Although AS , lower sleep quality , and alexithymia are associated , their causal relationship is unclear . 
 = = Causes = = 
 Hans Asperger described common symptoms among his patients ' family members , especially fathers , and research supports this observation and suggests a genetic contribution to Asperger syndrome . Although no specific gene has yet been identified , multiple factors are believed to play a role in the expression of autism , given the phenotypic variability seen in children with AS . Evidence for a genetic link is the tendency for AS to run in families and an observed higher incidence of family members who have behavioral symptoms similar to AS but in a more limited form ( for example , slight difficulties with social interaction , language , or reading ) . Most research suggests that all autism spectrum disorders have shared genetic mechanisms , but AS may have a stronger genetic component than autism . There is probably a common group of genes where particular alleles render an individual vulnerable to developing AS ; if this is the case , the particular combination of alleles would determine the severity and symptoms for each individual with AS . 
 A few ASD cases have been linked to exposure to teratogens ( agents that cause birth defects ) during the first eight weeks from conception . Although this does not exclude the possibility that ASD can be initiated or affected later , it is strong evidence that it arises very early in development . Many environmental factors have been hypothesized to act after birth , but none has been confirmed by scientific investigation . 
 = = Mechanism = = 
 Asperger syndrome appears to result from developmental factors that affect many or all functional brain systems , as opposed to localized effects . Although the specific underpinnings of AS or factors that distinguish it from other ASDs are unknown , and no clear pathology common to individuals with AS has emerged , it is still possible that AS 's mechanism is separate from other ASDs . <unk> studies and the associations with teratogens strongly suggest that the mechanism includes alteration of brain development soon after conception . Abnormal migration of embryonic cells during fetal development may affect the final structure and connectivity of the brain , resulting in alterations in the neural circuits that control thought and behavior . Several theories of mechanism are available ; none are likely to provide a complete explanation . 
 The underconnectivity theory hypothesizes <unk> high @-@ level neural connections and synchronization , along with an excess of low @-@ level processes . It maps well to general @-@ processing theories such as weak central coherence theory , which hypothesizes that a limited ability to see the big picture underlies the central disturbance in ASD . A related theory — enhanced perceptual functioning — focuses more on the superiority of locally oriented and perceptual operations in autistic individuals . 
 The mirror neuron system ( MNS ) theory hypothesizes that alterations to the development of the MNS interfere with imitation and lead to Asperger 's core feature of social impairment . For example , one study found that activation is delayed in the core circuit for imitation in individuals with AS . This theory maps well to social cognition theories like the theory of mind , which hypothesizes that autistic behavior arises from impairments in ascribing mental states to oneself and others , or hyper @-@ systemizing , which hypothesizes that autistic individuals can systematize internal operation to handle internal events but are less effective at empathizing by handling events generated by other agents . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 Standard diagnostic criteria require impairment in social interaction and repetitive and stereotyped patterns of behavior , activities and interests , without significant delay in language or cognitive development . Unlike the international standard , the DSM @-@ IV @-@ TR criteria also required significant impairment in day @-@ to @-@ day functioning ; DSM @-@ 5 eliminated AS as a separate diagnosis in 2013 , and folded it into the umbrella of autism spectrum disorders . Other sets of diagnostic criteria have been proposed by Szatmari et al. and by Gillberg and Gillberg . 
 Diagnosis is most commonly made between the ages of four and eleven . A comprehensive assessment involves a multidisciplinary team that observes across multiple settings , and includes neurological and genetic assessment as well as tests for cognition , psychomotor function , verbal and nonverbal strengths and weaknesses , style of learning , and skills for independent living . The " gold standard " in diagnosing ASDs combines clinical judgment with the Autism Diagnostic Interview @-@ Revised ( ADI @-@ R ) — a <unk> parent interview — and the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule ( <unk> ) — a conversation and play @-@ based interview with the child . Delayed or mistaken diagnosis can be traumatic for individuals and families ; for example , misdiagnosis can lead to medications that worsen behavior . 
 <unk> and overdiagnosis may be problems . The cost and difficulty of screening and assessment can delay diagnosis . Conversely , the increasing popularity of drug treatment options and the expansion of benefits has motivated providers to <unk> ASD . There are indications AS has been diagnosed more frequently in recent years , partly as a residual diagnosis for children of normal intelligence who are not autistic but have social difficulties . 
 There are questions about the external validity of the AS diagnosis . That is , it is unclear whether there is a practical benefit in distinguishing AS from HFA and from PDD @-@ NOS ; the same child can receive different diagnoses depending on the screening tool . The debate about distinguishing AS from HFA is partly due to a tautological dilemma where disorders are defined based on severity of impairment , so that studies that appear to confirm differences based on severity are to be expected . 
 = = = Differential diagnosis = = = 
 Many children with AS are initially misdiagnosed with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder ( ADHD ) . Diagnosing adults is more challenging , as standard diagnostic criteria are designed for children and the expression of AS changes with age . Adult diagnosis requires painstaking clinical examination and thorough medical history gained from both the individual and other people who know the person , focusing on childhood behavior . Conditions that must be considered in a differential diagnosis include other ASDs , the schizophrenia spectrum , ADHD , obsessive – compulsive disorder , major depressive disorder , semantic pragmatic disorder , nonverbal learning disorder , Tourette syndrome , stereotypic movement disorder , bipolar disorder , and social @-@ cognitive deficits due to brain damage from alcohol abuse . 
 There are considerable similarities and overlap between Asperger 's syndrome and obsessive – compulsive personality disorder ( <unk> ) , such as list @-@ making , inflexible adherence to rules , and obsessive aspects of Asperger 's syndrome , though the former may be distinguished from <unk> especially regarding affective behaviors , worse social skills , difficulties with theory of mind and intense intellectual interests , e.g. an ability to recall every aspect of a hobby . 
 = = Screening = = 
 Parents of children with Asperger syndrome can typically trace differences in their children 's development to as early as 30 months of age . Developmental screening during a routine check @-@ up by a general practitioner or pediatrician may identify signs that warrant further investigation . The United States Preventative Services Task Force in 2016 found it was unclear if screening was beneficial or harmful among children in whom there is no concerns . 
 The diagnosis of AS is complicated by the use of several different screening instruments , including the Asperger Syndrome Diagnostic Scale ( <unk> ) , Autism Spectrum Screening Questionnaire ( <unk> ) , Childhood Autism Spectrum Test ( CAST ) ( previously called the Childhood Asperger Syndrome Test ) , Gilliam Asperger 's disorder scale ( <unk> ) , Krug Asperger 's Disorder Index ( <unk> ) , and the Autism @-@ spectrum quotient ( AQ ; with versions for children , adolescents and adults ) . None have been shown to reliably differentiate between AS and other ASDs . 
 = = Management = = 
 Asperger syndrome treatment attempts to manage distressing symptoms and to teach age @-@ appropriate social , communication and vocational skills that are not naturally acquired during development , with intervention tailored to the needs of the individual based on multidisciplinary assessment . Although progress has been made , data supporting the efficacy of particular interventions are limited . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The ideal treatment for AS coordinates therapies that address core symptoms of the disorder , including poor communication skills and obsessive or repetitive routines . While most professionals agree that the earlier the intervention , the better , there is no single best treatment package . AS treatment resembles that of other high @-@ functioning ASDs , except that it takes into account the linguistic capabilities , verbal strengths , and nonverbal vulnerabilities of individuals with AS . A typical program generally includes : 
 A positive behavior support procedure includes training and support of parents and school faculty in behavior management strategies to use in the home and school ; 
 An applied behavior analysis ( ABA ) technique called social skills training for more effective interpersonal interactions ; 
 Cognitive behavioral therapy to improve stress management relating to anxiety or explosive emotions and to cut back on obsessive interests and repetitive routines ; 
 Medication , for coexisting conditions such as major depressive disorder and anxiety disorder ; 
 Occupational or physical therapy to assist with poor sensory processing and motor coordination ; 
 Social communication intervention , which is specialized speech therapy to help with the pragmatics of the give and take of normal conversation . 
 Of the many studies on behavior @-@ based early intervention programs , most are case reports of up to five participants and typically examine a few problem behaviors such as self @-@ injury , aggression , noncompliance , stereotypies , or spontaneous language ; unintended side effects are largely ignored . Despite the popularity of social skills training , its effectiveness is not firmly established . A randomized controlled study of a model for training parents in problem behaviors in their children with AS showed that parents attending a one @-@ day workshop or six individual lessons reported fewer behavioral problems , while parents receiving the individual lessons reported less intense behavioral problems in their AS children . Vocational training is important to teach job interview etiquette and workplace behavior to older children and adults with AS , and organization software and personal data assistants can improve the work and life management of people with AS . 
 = = = Medications = = = 
 No medications directly treat the core symptoms of AS . Although research into the efficacy of pharmaceutical intervention for AS is limited , it is essential to diagnose and treat comorbid conditions . Deficits in self @-@ identifying emotions or in observing effects of one 's behavior on others can make it difficult for individuals with AS to see why medication may be appropriate . Medication can be effective in combination with behavioral interventions and environmental accommodations in treating comorbid symptoms such as anxiety disorder , major depressive disorder , inattention and aggression . The atypical antipsychotic medications risperidone and olanzapine have been shown to reduce the associated symptoms of AS ; risperidone can reduce repetitive and self @-@ injurious behaviors , aggressive outbursts and impulsivity , and improve stereotypical patterns of behavior and social relatedness . The selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors ( SSRIs ) fluoxetine , fluvoxamine , and sertraline have been effective in treating restricted and repetitive interests and behaviors . 
 Care must be taken with medications , as side effects may be more common and harder to evaluate in individuals with AS , and tests of drugs ' effectiveness against comorbid conditions routinely exclude individuals from the autism spectrum . Abnormalities in metabolism , cardiac conduction times , and an increased risk of type 2 diabetes have been raised as concerns with these medications , along with serious long @-@ term neurological side effects . SSRIs can lead to manifestations of behavioral activation such as increased impulsivity , aggression , and sleep disturbance . Weight gain and fatigue are commonly reported side effects of risperidone , which may also lead to increased risk for extrapyramidal symptoms such as restlessness and dystonia and increased serum prolactin levels . Sedation and weight gain are more common with olanzapine , which has also been linked with diabetes . <unk> side @-@ effects in school @-@ age children have ramifications for classroom learning . Individuals with AS may be unable to identify and communicate their internal moods and emotions or to tolerate side effects that for most people would not be problematic . 
 = = Prognosis = = 
 There is some evidence that children with AS may see a lessening of symptoms ; up to 20 % of children may no longer meet the diagnostic criteria as adults , although social and communication difficulties may persist . As of 2006 , no studies addressing the long @-@ term outcome of individuals with Asperger syndrome are available and there are no systematic long @-@ term follow @-@ up studies of children with AS . Individuals with AS appear to have normal life expectancy , but have an increased prevalence of comorbid psychiatric conditions , such as major depressive disorder and anxiety disorder that may significantly affect prognosis . Although social impairment may be lifelong , the outcome is generally more positive than with individuals with lower functioning autism spectrum disorders ; for example , ASD symptoms are more likely to diminish with time in children with AS or HFA . Most students with AS / HFA have average mathematical ability and test slightly worse in mathematics than in general intelligence , but some are gifted in mathematics . AS has potentially been linked to some accomplishments , such as Vernon L. Smith winning the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences ; however , Smith is self @-@ diagnosed . 
 Although many attend regular education classes , some children with AS may utilize special education services because of their social and behavioral difficulties . Adolescents with AS may exhibit ongoing difficulty with self care or organization , and disturbances in social and romantic relationships . Despite high cognitive potential , most young adults with AS remain at home , yet some do marry and work independently . The " different @-@ ness " adolescents experience can be traumatic . Anxiety may stem from preoccupation over possible violations of routines and rituals , from being placed in a situation without a clear schedule or expectations , or from concern with failing in social encounters ; the resulting stress may manifest as inattention , withdrawal , reliance on obsessions , hyperactivity , or aggressive or oppositional behavior . Depression is often the result of chronic frustration from repeated failure to engage others socially , and mood disorders requiring treatment may develop . Clinical experience suggests the rate of suicide may be higher among those with AS , but this has not been confirmed by systematic empirical studies . 
 Education of families is critical in developing strategies for understanding strengths and weaknesses ; helping the family to cope improves outcomes in children . Prognosis may be improved by diagnosis at a younger age that allows for early interventions , while interventions in adulthood are valuable but less beneficial . There are legal implications for individuals with AS as they run the risk of exploitation by others and may be unable to comprehend the societal implications of their actions . 
 = = Epidemiology = = 
 Prevalence estimates vary enormously . A 2003 review of epidemiological studies of children found autism prevalence rates ranging from 0 @.@ 03 to 4 @.@ 84 per 1 @,@ 000 , with the ratio of autism to Asperger syndrome ranging from 1 @.@ 5 : 1 to 16 : 1 ; combining the geometric mean ratio of 5 : 1 with a conservative prevalence estimate for autism of 1 @.@ 3 per 1 @,@ 000 suggests indirectly that the prevalence of AS might be around 0 @.@ 26 per 1 @,@ 000 . Part of the variance in estimates arises from differences in diagnostic criteria . For example , a relatively small 2007 study of 5 @,@ 484 eight @-@ year @-@ old children in Finland found 2 @.@ 9 children per 1 @,@ 000 met the ICD @-@ 10 criteria for an AS diagnosis , 2 @.@ 7 per 1 @,@ 000 for Gillberg and Gillberg criteria , 2 @.@ 5 for DSM @-@ IV , 1 @.@ 6 for Szatmari et al . , and 4 @.@ 3 per 1 @,@ 000 for the union of the four criteria . Boys seem to be more likely to have AS than girls ; estimates of the sex ratio range from 1 @.@ 6 : 1 to 4 : 1 , using the Gillberg and Gillberg criteria . Females with autism spectrum disorders may be underdiagnosed . 
 Anxiety disorder and major depressive disorder are the most common conditions seen at the same time ; comorbidity of these in persons with AS is estimated at 65 % . Reports have associated AS with medical conditions such as <unk> and <unk> laxity , but these have been case reports or small studies and no factors have been associated with AS across studies . One study of males with AS found an increased rate of epilepsy and a high rate ( 51 % ) of nonverbal learning disorder . AS is associated with tics , Tourette syndrome , and bipolar disorder , and the repetitive behaviors of AS have many similarities with the symptoms of obsessive – compulsive disorder and obsessive – compulsive personality disorder . However many of these studies are based on clinical samples or lack standardized measures ; nonetheless , comorbid conditions are relatively common . 
 = = History = = 
 Named after the Austrian pediatrician Hans Asperger ( 1906 – 1980 ) , Asperger syndrome is a relatively new diagnosis in the field of autism . As a child , Asperger appears to have exhibited some features of the very condition named after him , such as remoteness and talent in language . In 1944 , Asperger described four children in his practice who had difficulty in integrating themselves socially . The children lacked nonverbal communication skills , failed to demonstrate empathy with their peers , and were physically clumsy . Asperger called the condition " autistic psychopathy " and described it as primarily marked by social isolation . Fifty years later , several <unk> of AS as a diagnosis were tentatively proposed , many of which diverge significantly from Asperger 's original work . 
 Unlike today 's AS , autistic psychopathy could be found in people of all levels of intelligence , including those with intellectual disability . Asperger defended the value of high @-@ functioning autistic individuals , writing " We are convinced , then , that autistic people have their place in the organism of the social community . They fulfill their role well , perhaps better than anyone else could , and we are talking of people who as children had the greatest difficulties and caused untold worries to their care @-@ givers . " Asperger also believed some would be capable of exceptional achievement and original thought later in life . His paper was published during wartime and in German , so it was not widely read elsewhere . 
 Lorna Wing popularized the term Asperger syndrome in the English @-@ speaking medical community in her 1981 publication of a series of case studies of children showing similar symptoms , and Uta Frith translated Asperger 's paper to English in 1991 . Sets of diagnostic criteria were outlined by Gillberg and Gillberg in 1989 and by Szatmari et al. in the same year . AS became a standard diagnosis in 1992 , when it was included in the tenth edition of the World Health Organization 's diagnostic manual , International Classification of Diseases ( ICD @-@ 10 ) ; in 1994 , it was added to the fourth edition of the American Psychiatric Association 's diagnostic reference , Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders ( DSM @-@ IV ) . 
 Hundreds of books , articles and websites now describe AS , and prevalence estimates have increased dramatically for ASD , with AS recognized as an important subgroup . Whether it should be seen as distinct from high @-@ functioning autism is a fundamental issue requiring further study , and there are questions about the empirical validation of the DSM @-@ IV and ICD @-@ 10 criteria . In 2013 , DSM @-@ 5 eliminated AS as a separate diagnosis , folding it into the autism spectrum on a severity scale . 
 = = Society and culture = = 
 People identifying with Asperger syndrome may refer to themselves in casual conversation as <unk> ( a term first used in print by Liane Holliday Willey in 1999 ) . The word neurotypical ( abbreviated NT ) describes a person whose neurological development and state are typical , and is often used to refer to non @-@ autistic people . The Internet has allowed individuals with AS to communicate with each other in a way that was not previously possible because of their rarity and geographic dispersal , forming a subculture composed of people with Asperger 's . Internet sites like Wrong Planet have made it easier for individuals to connect . 
 Some autistic people have advocated a shift in perception of autism spectrum disorders as complex syndromes rather than diseases that must be cured . Proponents of this view reject the notion that there is an " ideal " brain configuration and that any deviation from the norm is pathological ; they promote tolerance for what they call neurodiversity . These views are the basis for the autistic rights and autistic pride movements . There is a contrast between the attitude of adults with self @-@ identified AS , who typically do not want to be cured and are proud of their identity , and parents of children with AS , who typically seek assistance and a cure for their children . 
 Some researchers have argued that AS can be viewed as a different cognitive style , not a disorder , and that it should be removed from the standard Diagnostic and Statistical Manual , much as homosexuality was removed . In a 2002 paper , Simon Baron @-@ Cohen wrote of those with AS , " In the social world , there is no great benefit to a precise eye for detail , but in the worlds of maths , computing , cataloging , music , linguistics , engineering , and science , such an eye for detail can lead to success rather than failure . " Baron @-@ Cohen cited two reasons why it might still be useful to consider AS to be a disability : to ensure provision for legally required special support , and to recognize emotional difficulties from reduced empathy . Baron @-@ Cohen argues that the genes for Asperger 's combination of abilities have operated throughout recent human evolution and have made remarkable contributions to human history . 
 By contrast , Pier <unk> and Welin wrote in 2011 that the " broad version of the neurodiversity claim , covering low @-@ functioning as well as high @-@ functioning autism , is problematic . Only a narrow conception of neurodiversity , referring exclusively to high @-@ functioning <unk> , is reasonable . " They say that " higher functioning " individuals with autism may " not [ be ] benefited with such a psychiatric defect @-@ based diagnosis ... some of them are being harmed by it , because of the disrespect the diagnosis displays for their natural way of being " , but " think that it is still reasonable to include other categories of autism in the psychiatric diagnostics . The narrow conception of the neurodiversity claim should be accepted but the broader claim should not . " Jonathan Mitchell , an autistic author and blogger who advocates a cure for autism , has described autism as having " prevented me from making a living or ever having a girlfriend . It 's given me bad fine motor coordination problems where I can hardly write . I have an impaired ability to relate to people . I can 't concentrate or get things done . " He describes neurodiversity as a " tempting escape valve " . 
 = Brush with Greatness = 
 " Brush with Greatness " is the eighteenth episode of The Simpsons ' second season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on April 11 , 1991 . In the episode , Marge revives her high school @-@ era interest in painting by enrolling in an art class after getting encouraged by Lisa . When she wins first prize in a local art competition for a portrait of Homer on the couch in his underwear , Mr. Burns commissions her to paint a portrait of him . Meanwhile , Homer is determined to lose weight after becoming stuck in a water slide at an amusement park . 
 The episode was written by Brian K. Roberts and directed by Jim Reardon . Beatles member Ringo Starr guest starred as himself , while Jon Lovitz starred as Marge 's art teacher , Professor Lombardo . The episode features cultural references to films such as Rocky and Gone with the Wind . Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics , who praised the use of Starr and the central focus on Marge . It acquired a Nielsen rating of 12 @.@ 0 , and was the second highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network the week it aired . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After Bart and Lisa see Krusty the Clown do his show at the Mt . Splashmore water park on TV , they consistently irritate and supplicate Homer about going there . Homer gets annoyed , but reluctantly decides to take them there . The family goes to Mt . Splashmore , where Bart , Lisa and Homer ride an intense water slide named <unk> ! . Due to his weight , Homer gets lodged in a section of the slide and the park 's rescue crew are forced to shut down the ride and remove him with the help of a large crane . Homer is made a fool of on the news for his massive size and admits that he needs to lose weight . 
 Once home , Homer announces to his family that he will go on a diet and exercise more . While Homer is looking for his weights in the attic , Bart stumbles upon several old paintings of Ringo Starr that Marge made as a student in high school , when she had a crush on Starr . Marge tells Lisa that she was scolded by her art teacher for doing those paintings ; she also recalls sending a painting to Starr for an " honest opinion " , but she never got a response . Lisa suggests that Marge take a painting class at Springfield Community College , which she does . She makes a painting of Homer on the couch in his underwear , which her professor , Lombardo , praises . The painting wins the college art show , thus gaining her fame and the headlines of the newspapers . 
 Mr. Burns wants Marge to paint his portrait for the Burns Wing of the Springfield Art Museum . She reluctantly agrees , as long as Burns insists that the painting portray him as a beautiful man . While Burns heckles Marge as she does the painting , Homer finds out that he weighs 239 pounds , which is twenty @-@ one pounds less than what it had been . After Burns insults Homer 's weight , Lisa and Maggie , Marge throws him out and is ready to quit until Homer encourages her to finish the painting : She also gets a reply from Starr , who is decades behind on answering his fanmail , praising her artwork . After working until well into the night , she finishes the painting and then it is unveiled at the opening of the Burns Wing . The painting depicts a naked , frail , and weak Burns . The people are shocked , until Marge explains that it depicts what Burns actually is : a vulnerable human being which will , one day , be no more . Burns is outraged at first , but then , like everyone else , accepts his new glory , praises Marge 's painting and thanks Marge " for not making fun of [ his ] genitalia " , to which Marge replies , " I thought I did . " 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by Brian K. Roberts and directed by Jim Reardon . Prior to writing the episode , Roberts had been an audio and visual editor on the show . Musician Ringo Starr made a guest appearance in the episode as himself . He was the first Beatle to appear on the show ; both George Harrison and Paul McCartney would later guest star on the show in the season five episode " Homer 's Barbershop Quartet " and the season seven episode " Lisa the Vegetarian " respectively . When the story of Marge having a crush on Starr was pitched out , Roberts took the opportunity to write Starr into the script because he had always wanted to meet a Beatle . He then sent the script to Starr , who was then in Southern France . Starr agreed to do the guest appearance after only reading two lines , and he told Roberts that he would be able to do it when he visited Los Angeles a few weeks later . The staff of the show was thrilled when Roberts revealed that Starr had agreed to do it , and they immediately decided to expand Starr 's role in the script . The Simpsons creator Matt Groening said of the guest appearance : " We were so excited that we got Ringo Starr coming in to do the show and we recorded him over at the Complex in West Los Angeles . We were given a list of rules about what we couldn 't do to Ringo , such as ' Don 't touch him ' , ' Don 't approach him ' , and ' Don 't ask for his autograph ' . But of course when he shows up in this big limo , Brian brings out a big poster and asks him to sign it ! " Roberts explained that he had not received the memo with the rules so he showed up with a copy of the script cover and asked Starr to sign it . Groening asked Starr if he wanted to be animated the way he was in Yellow Submarine or the way he was in the cartoon series The Beatles . Starr chose Yellow Submarine because he did not like his appearance in the cartoon . In addition to Starr , the episode features a guest appearance by Jon Lovitz as Lombardo and the doughnut delivery man that delivers doughnuts to the nuclear power plant . Lombardo 's physical appearance was based on an art teacher Reardon had in art school . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The line for the <unk> ! ride reproduces the staircases in the lithograph Ascending and Descending by M. C. Escher . The way Krusty removes the clown make @-@ up from his face resembles the way the Joker removes his make @-@ up in the 1989 film Batman . When Homer announces he is going on a diet , he says : " As God is my witness , I 'll always be hungry again ! " , a reference to the famous line " As God is my witness ... I 'll never be hungry again ! " from the film Gone with the Wind . Homer exercises in a way similar to how Rocky exercises in the 1976 film Rocky . The music that plays as Homer approaches the scale is the main theme from the film The Good , the Bad and the Ugly . A copy of Andy Warhol 's painting Campbell 's Soup Cans is visible at the art gallery . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Brush with Greatness " finished thirty @-@ seventh in the ratings for the week of April 8 – 14 , 1991 , with a Nielsen rating of 12 @.@ 0 , equivalent to approximately eleven million viewing households . It was the second highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , following Married ... with Children . 
 The episode received positive reviews from television critics . Many lauded the use of Starr ; for instance , IGN ranked his performance in the episode , along with Paul McCartney 's performance in " Lisa the Vegetarian " and George Harrison 's performance in " Homer 's Barbershop Quartet " , as the tenth best guest appearance in The Simpsons ' history . They added that " Although none of these appearances were really large , the fact that the most popular band of all time appeared on The Simpsons is a large statement on the popularity and importance of the show . " Doug Pratt , a DVD reviewer and Rolling Stone contributor , wrote that " Brush with Greatness " has a " well thought @-@ out " plot and he enjoyed the use of Starr and Marge 's previously undiscovered talents . Paul A. Cantor , the author of the book Gilligan Unbound : Pop Culture in the Age of Globalization , said the " once again Brian K. Roberts proves his genius with ' Brush with Greatness ' in a superb work where Marge cultivates her wonderful artistic side . " DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson wrote : " From the opening at Mt . Splashmore through Homer ’ s diet and the unveiling of Mr. Burns ’ controversial portrait , the episode packed a lot of great material . It also expanded Marge ’ s character in a pleasing way , as it avoided any semblance of sappiness ; we needed a break from sentiment after ' Old Money ' . Overall , ' Brush with Greatness ' provided a terrific episode . " The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , wrote : " A superb episode , with Marge rightfully centre stage . Despite his general unpleasantness , Mr Burns ' gratitude to Marge is both welcome and unexpected . And the dig at Water Parks is spot on . " 
 In October 2008 , Ringo Starr posted a video on his website in which he said he was too busy to answer fan mail and that all mail sent to him after October 20 would be thrown out . Although Starr did not mention " Brush with Greatness " in the video , several media sources compared his announcement to his portrayal in the episode . 
 = 1904 Tour de France = 
 The 1904 Tour de France was the second Tour de France , held from 2 to 24 July . With a route similar to its previous edition , 1903 Tour de France winner Maurice Garin seemed to have repeated his win by a small margin over Lucien Pothier , while Hippolyte Aucouturier won four of the six stages . But the race became a victim of its own success , plagued by scandals ; cyclists were accused of having taken trains during the race . Twelve cyclists , including the first four of the final classification and all stage winners , were disqualified by the Union Vélocipédique Française ( UVF ) . Henri Cornet , originally the fifth @-@ place finisher , was awarded the victory four months after the race . The problems caused the Tour de France to be provisionally cancelled , and subsequently the 1905 Tour de France was run with different rules from the 1903 and 1904 edition . 
 = = Background = = 
 The initial Tour de France of 1903 had been a large success , and it was quickly decided to organize it again in 1904 . The route was identical , with the same six stages . The rules were the same as in 1903 , with one exception : cyclists could not enter in just one stage , but had to join for the entire race . The favourites for the victory were Garin , Pothier and Aucouturier , who had performed well in the 1903 Tour de France . Among the competitors was Henri <unk> who , at 50 years old , still holds the record of oldest Tour de France cyclist . 
 In the 1903 Tour de France , the organisation guaranteed that the first 50 cyclists in the final general classification would earn at least 5 francs per day . In 1904 , if not more than 50 cyclists would finish , also cyclists who dropped out during the race would still get 5 francs for the days they had been in the race . This rule was added to attract cyclists who otherwise would not enter , because the Tour needed enough competitors to remain credible . 
 = = Participants = = 
 = = Race incidents = = 
 In the first stage , the riders fell after only a few kilometres . Lipman broke a finger , and became the first rider to abandon this Tour . Around 100 km in the race , Lucien Pothier lost ten minutes to the main group , led by Maurice Garin , because of a broken bicycle . In <unk> , at 174 km , Pothier had reached the leading group . Aucouturier had lost more than one hour at that point . Just before the next control post in Nevers , Aucouturier fell on his face , and continued the race covered in blood . In the last part of the race , Maurice Garin and Lucien Pothier rode away from the others . They were attacked by four masked men in a car , but still finished as the first two , with Garin beating Pothier by 50 m . The many flat tires and crashes of Aucouturier , seemingly the results of sabotage , gave him a time loss of several hours . 
 After the stage , three cyclists were punished : Aucouturier and Samson received fines of 500 and 250 francs , Aucouturier for having a cyclist not in the race following him , Samson for riding in the slipstream of a car . Chevallier , who had finished third , was disqualified for resting in a car for 45 minutes . During the stage , Ferdinand <unk> had been disqualified . Some sources indicate he was helped by a motor , other that he was helped by riders not in the race . In that first stage , Garin had asked the race official Lefèvre for food , which was illegal . Lefèvre , who knew that Garin was the star of the race , broke the rules and gave him the food , because he did not want to be responsible for Garin leaving the race because of hunger . The news that Garin had received illegal help quickly spread , and caused the fanatical crowd to take action . 
 For the second stage , the organisers had made the option to postpone the start by two hours , in case the <unk> wind was making cycling difficult . This was not necessary , so the riders started at midnight as planned . During this stage , Antoine Fauré lead close to his hometown , and 200 fans tried to stop the rest of the cyclists from following him . Garin hurt his hand during the incident , and Giovanni Gerbi was knocked unconscious , and had to give up with broken fingers . The situation was only solved after race officials fired shots in the air . Further on , nails and broken glass had been spread along the road , which caused many flat tires . Because of this help , Fauré was the first on top of the Col de la République , but was taken over by the favourites later . Aucouturier won the sprint . When the riders reached Marseille , they complained that there had been too many incidents in this stage , and the stage results should be cancelled . In the last part , they had been stopped by a large group of cyclists . Maurice Garin had been attacked , and his arm had been injured : he finished the stage steering with only one hand . There was so much confusion at the last <unk> post , that the exact arrival times of the cyclists were not recorded . 
 In the third stage , the Tour reached Nîmes , near the home town of <unk> , whose fans were angry because of his disqualification . They threw rocks at the riders , and barricaded the road . The cyclists had troubles passing through Nîmes , and several were injured . The most important event for the general classification was when César Garin 's bicycle was broken by attackers ; he had to find a new bicycle , which took him 15 minutes . Further on , nails and broken glass were spread along the road . Many riders punctured , but there were no serious falls . The cyclists passed this part walking . After Nîmes , a leading group of five cyclists was formed : Maurice Garin , Pothier , Aucouturier , Cornet and <unk> . Aucouturier and Cornet escaped , and Aucouturier won , beating Cornet in the sprint . 
 The fourth stage was run without the incidents that plagued the first three stages . Pothier , Maurice and César Garin and <unk> reached Bordeaux together , and the stage was decided by the final kilometre in the velodrome , where Pothier recorded the fastest time . 
 In the fifth stage , nails on the road again causing punctures . As mechanical assistance was not allowed , Cornet had to ride the last 40 km on two flat tires . Aucouturier won this stage , his third one , but was way behind in the general classification , which Garin lead , with only 28 seconds margin to Pothier . 
 In the sixth stage , Aucouturier , Garin and <unk> escaped in the last kilometres . Aucouturier signed first at the control post in Ville @-@ d 'Avray . From that point , the race was neutralised until the velodrome Parc @-@ des @-@ Princes , where the riders would ride the final kilometre . At the moment that the riders arrived in Paris , it started to rain . The organisers decided together with the cyclists to exclude the final kilometre from the race , and make the control post in Ville @-@ d 'Avray the end of the race . This made Aucouturier the winner of the stage . Maurice Garin finished second , which made him the overall winner . 
 = = Initial results before disqualifications = = 
 Initially , Maurice Garin was the winner , having led the race from start to end . Hippolyte Aucouturier won four stages . In total , 27 cyclists finished . For each cyclist , the times they had needed in each stage was added up for the general classification . The cyclist with the least accumulated time after the last stage was the winner . 
 = = Disqualification = = 
 During the race , nine riders were excluded because of , among other actions , illegal use of cars or trains . The Tour organizers were happy with the result , but the Union Vélocipédique Française ( UVF ) started an investigation after complaints from other cyclists . Their investigative committee heard testimony from dozens of competitors and witnesses , and , in December 1904 , disqualified all the stage winners and the first four finishers ( Maurice Garin , Pothier , César Garin , and Aucouturier ) . Ten of those disqualified were banned for one year , Garin for two years and the remaining two for life . In total , 29 riders were punished . The reasons for the disqualification were never made public . 
 Fifth @-@ placed Henri Cornet , aged 19 , then became the youngest ever winner of the Tour . Cornet had also been warned after he had received a lift by a car . Only 15 cyclists from the original 27 that finished were not disqualified . 
 Following the disqualifications , the Tour de France came nearest in history to being permanently cancelled . The race organiser Henri Desgrange , said he would never run the race again because it had been overtaken by the " blind emotions " of those who attacked or helped riders as they passed . Desgrange was also upset that the UVF had imposed judgement on his race when he had already disciplined riders as he saw fit . 
 An angry exchange ensued between Desgrange and the UVF but the letters and the detailed complaints that led to the UVF 's actions were lost when the Tour de France archives were transported south in 1940 to avoid the German invasion and were never seen again . 
 Until the end of his life , Garin always said that he was the rightful winner of the 1904 Tour de France , but according to Les Woodland , Garin confessed to a friend that he had cheated . 
 = = Final results = = 
 After the disqualifications , the first four cyclists of the initial classification were disqualified . In the new classification , only 15 cyclists had finished : 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Because of the scandals associated with this Tour , Desgrange wanted to stop the race . He however changed his mind , and the rules were changed to prevent cyclists from cheating : the 1905 Tour de France would be decided with a points system . Tour de France 1904 winner Cornet would enter the Tour de France for seven more times , but would never again play an important role . 
 = International Mathematical Olympiad = 
 The International Mathematical Olympiad ( IMO ) is an annual six @-@ problem mathematical <unk> for pre @-@ college students , and is the oldest of the International Science Olympiads . The first IMO was held in Romania in 1959 . It has since been held annually , except in 1980 . About 100 countries send teams of up to six students , plus one team leader , one deputy leader , and observers . 
 The content ranges from extremely difficult algebra and pre @-@ calculus problems to problems on branches of mathematics not conventionally covered at school and often not at university level either , such as projective and complex geometry , functional equations and well @-@ grounded number theory , of which extensive knowledge of theorems is required . Calculus , though allowed in solutions , is never required , as there is a principle that anyone with a basic understanding of mathematics should understand the problems , even if the solutions require a great deal more knowledge . Supporters of this principle claim that this allows more universality and creates an incentive to find elegant , deceptively simple @-@ looking problems which nevertheless require a certain level of ingenuity . 
 The selection process differs by country , but it often consists of a series of tests which admit fewer students at each progressing test . Awards are given to the lowest percentage of the individual contestants . Teams are not officially recognized — all scores are given only to individual contestants , but team scoring is unofficially compared more than individual scores . Contestants must be under the age of 20 and must not be registered at any tertiary institution . Subject to these conditions , an individual may participate any number of times in the IMO . 
 = = History = = 
 The first IMO was held in Romania in 1959 . Since then it has been held every year except in 1980 . That year , it was cancelled due to internal strife in Mongolia . It was initially founded for eastern European member countries of the Warsaw Pact , under the Soviet bloc of influence , but later other countries participated as well . Because of this eastern origin , the IMOs were first hosted only in eastern European countries , and gradually spread to other nations . 
 Sources differ about the cities hosting some of the early IMOs . This may be partly because leaders are generally housed well away from the students , and partly because after the competition the students did not always stay based in one city for the rest of the IMO . The exact dates cited may also differ , because of leaders arriving before the students , and at more recent IMOs the IMO Advisory Board arriving before the leaders . 
 Several students , such as Zhuoqun Alex Song , Teodor von Burg , Lisa Sauermann , and Christian Reiher , have performed exceptionally well in the IMO , winning multiple gold medals . Others , such as Grigory Margulis , Jean @-@ Christophe <unk> , Laurent <unk> , Stanislav Smirnov , Terence Tao , <unk> Sarkar , Grigori Perelman , Ngô Bảo Châu and Maryam <unk> have gone on to become notable mathematicians . Several former participants have won awards such as the Fields Medal . 
 In January 2011 , Google gave € 1 million to the International Mathematical Olympiad organization . The donation helped the organization cover the costs of the next five global events ( 2011 – 2015 ) . 
 = = Scoring and format = = 
 The examination consists of six problems . Each problem is worth seven points , so the maximum total score is 42 points . No calculators are allowed . The examination is held over two consecutive days ; each day the contestants have four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half hours to solve three problems . The problems chosen are from various areas of secondary school mathematics , broadly classifiable as geometry , number theory , algebra , and combinatorics . They require no knowledge of higher mathematics such as calculus and analysis , and solutions are often short and elementary . However , they are usually disguised so as to make the solutions difficult . <unk> featured are algebraic inequalities , complex numbers , and construction @-@ oriented geometrical problems , though in recent years the latter has not been as popular as before . 
 Each participating country , other than the host country , may submit suggested problems to a Problem Selection Committee provided by the host country , which reduces the submitted problems to a shortlist . The team leaders arrive at the IMO a few days in advance of the contestants and form the IMO Jury which is responsible for all the formal decisions relating to the contest , starting with selecting the six problems from the shortlist . The Jury aims to order the problems so that the order in increasing difficulty is Q1 , Q4 , Q2 , Q5 , Q3 and <unk> . As the leaders know the problems in advance of the contestants , they are kept strictly separated and observed . 
 Each country 's marks are agreed between that country 's leader and deputy leader and coordinators provided by the host country ( the leader of the team whose country submitted the problem in the case of the marks of the host country ) , subject to the decisions of the chief coordinator and ultimately a jury if any disputes cannot be resolved . 
 = = Selection process = = 
 The selection process for the IMO varies greatly by country . In some countries , especially those in east Asia , the selection process involves several tests of a difficulty comparable to the IMO itself . The Chinese contestants go through a camp . In others , such as the USA , possible participants go through a series of easier standalone competitions that gradually increase in difficulty . In the USA , the tests include the American Mathematics Competitions , the American Invitational Mathematics Examination , and the United States of America Mathematical Olympiad , each of which is a competition in its own right . For high scorers in the final competition for the team selection , there also is a summer camp , like that of China . 
 In countries of the former Soviet Union and other eastern European countries , a team has in the past been chosen several years beforehand , and they are given special training specifically for the event . However , such methods have been discontinued in some countries . In Ukraine , for instance , selection tests consist of four <unk> comparable to the IMO by difficulty and schedule . While identifying the winners , only the results of the current selection <unk> are considered . 
 = = Awards = = 
 The participants are ranked based on their individual scores . Medals are awarded to the highest ranked participants ; slightly fewer than half of them receive a medal . The cutoffs ( minimum scores required to receive a gold , silver or bronze medal respectively ) are then chosen so that the numbers of gold , silver and bronze medals awarded are approximately in the ratios 1 : 2 : 3 . Participants who do not win a medal but who score seven points on at least one problem receive an honorable mention . 
 Special prizes may be awarded for solutions of outstanding elegance or involving good generalisations of a problem . This last happened in 1995 ( Nikolay <unk> , Bulgaria ) and 2005 ( Iurie Boreico ) , but was more frequent up to the early 1980s . The special prize in 2005 was awarded to Iurie Boreico , a student from Moldova , who came up with a brilliant solution to question 3 , which was an inequality involving three variables . 
 The rule that at most half the contestants win a medal is sometimes broken if it would cause the total number of medals to deviate too much from half the number of contestants . This last happened in 2010 ( when the choice was to give either 226 ( 43 @.@ 71 % ) or 266 ( 51 @.@ 45 % ) of the 517 contestants ( excluding the 6 from North Korea — see below ) a medal ) , 2012 ( when the choice was to give either 226 ( 46 @.@ 35 % ) or 277 ( 50 @.@ 55 % ) of the 548 contestants a medal ) , and 2013 , when the choice was to give either 249 ( 47 @.@ 16 % ) or 278 ( 52 @.@ 65 % ) of the 528 contestants a medal . 
 = = Penalties = = 
 North Korea was disqualified for cheating at the 32nd IMO in 1991 and again at the 51st IMO in 2010 . It is the only country to have been accused of cheating . There is some debate as to whether North Korea was actually cheating , especially in the 51st IMO . 
 = = Recent and future IMOs = = 
 The 51st IMO was held in Astana , Kazakhstan , July 2 – 15 , 2010 . 
 The 52nd IMO was held in Amsterdam , Netherlands , July 13 – 24 , 2011 . 
 The 53rd IMO was held in Mar del Plata , Argentina , July 4 – 16 , 2012 . 
 The 54th IMO was held in Santa Marta , Colombia , July 18 – 28 , 2013 . 
 The 55th IMO was held in Cape Town , South Africa , July 3 – 13 , 2014 . 
 The 56th IMO was held in Chiang Mai , Thailand in 2015 . 
 The 57th IMO was held in Hong Kong in 2016 . 
 The 58th IMO will be held in Brazil in 2017 . 
 The 59th IMO will be held in Romania in 2018 . 
 The 60th IMO will be held in UK in 2019 . 
 The 61st IMO will be held in St. Petersburg , Russia in 2020 . 
 = = Notable achievements = = 
 The following nations have achieved the highest team score in the respective competition : 
 China , 19 times ( from the first participation in 1985 until 2014 ) : in every year from 1989 to 2014 except 1991 , 1994 , 1996 , 1998 , 2003 , 2007 ; 
 Soviet Union , 14 times : in 1963 , 1964 , 1965 , 1966 , 1967 , 1972 , 1973 , 1974 , 1976 , 1979 , 1984 , 1986 , 1988 , 1991 ; 
 Hungary , 6 times : in 1961 , 1962 , 1969 , 1970 , 1971 , 1975 ; 
 United States , 6 times : in 1977 , 1981 , 1986 , 1994 , 2015 , 2016 ; 
 Romania , 5 times : in 1959 , 1978 , 1985 , 1987 , 1996 ; 
 West Germany , 2 times : in 1982 and 1983 ; 
 Russia , 2 times : in 1999 and 2007 ; 
 Bulgaria , once : in 2003 ; 
 Iran , once : in 1998 ; 
 South Korea , once : in 2012 . 
 East Germany , once : in 1968 
 The following nations have achieved an all @-@ members @-@ gold IMO with a full team : 
 China , 11 times : in 1992 , 1993 , 1997 , 2000 , 2001 , 2002 , 2004 , 2006 , 2009 , 2010 and 2011 . 
 United States , 3 times : in 1994 , 2011 , and 2016 . 
 Russia , 2 times : in 2002 and 2008 . 
 South Korea , once : in 2012 . 
 Bulgaria , once : in 2003 . 
 The only countries to have their entire team score perfectly in the IMO were the United States in 1994 ( they were coached by Paul Zeitz ) ; and Luxembourg , whose 1 @-@ member team had a perfect score in 1981 . The US 's success earned a mention in TIME Magazine . Hungary won IMO 1975 in an unorthodox way when none of the eight team members received a gold medal ( five silver , three bronze ) . Second place team East Germany also did not have a single gold medal winner ( four silver , four bronze ) . 
 Several individuals have consistently scored highly and / or earned medals on the IMO : As of July 2015 , Zhuoqun Alex Song ( Canada ) is the most successful participant with five gold medals ( including one perfect score in 2015 ) and one bronze medal . Reid Barton ( United States ) was the first participant to win a gold medal four times ( 1998 @-@ 2001 ) . Barton is also one of only eight four @-@ time Putnam Fellow ( 2001 – 04 ) . Christian Reiher ( Germany ) , Lisa Sauermann ( Germany ) , Teodor von Burg ( Serbia ) , and <unk> Pitimanaaree ( Thailand ) are the only other participants to have won four gold medals ( 2000 – 03 , 2008 – 11 , 2009 – 12 , 2010 – 13 , and 2011 – 14 respectively ) ; Reiher also received a bronze medal ( 1999 ) , Sauermann a silver medal ( 2007 ) , von Burg a silver medal ( 2008 ) and a bronze medal ( 2007 ) , and Pitimanaaree a silver medal ( 2009 ) . Wolfgang Burmeister ( East Germany ) , Martin <unk> ( West Germany ) , Iurie Boreico ( Moldova ) , and <unk> Lim ( Singapore ) are the only other participants besides Reiher , Sauermann , von Burg , and Pitimanaaree to win five medals with at least three of them gold . Ciprian Manolescu ( Romania ) managed to write a perfect paper ( 42 points ) for gold medal more times than anybody else in the history of the competition , doing it all three times he participated in the IMO ( 1995 , 1996 , 1997 ) . Manolescu is also a three @-@ time Putnam Fellow ( 1997 , 1998 , 2000 ) . Evgenia <unk> ( Soviet Union ) is the highest @-@ scoring female contestant in IMO history . She has 3 gold medals in IMO 1989 ( 41 points ) , IMO 1990 ( 42 ) and IMO 1991 ( 42 ) , missing only 1 point in 1989 to precede Manolescu 's achievement . 
 Terence Tao ( Australia ) participated in IMO 1986 , 1987 and 1988 , winning bronze , silver and gold medals respectively . He won a gold medal when he just turned thirteen in IMO 1988 , becoming the youngest person at that time to receive a gold medal ( a feat matched in 2011 by Zhuoqun Alex Song of Canada ) . Tao also holds the distinction of being the youngest medalist with his 1986 bronze medal , alongside 2009 bronze medalist Raúl Chávez Sarmiento ( Peru ) , at the age of 10 and 11 respectively . Representing the United States , Noam Elkies won a gold medal with a perfect paper at the age of 14 in 1981 . Note that both Elkies and Tao could have participated in the IMO multiple times following their success , but entered university and therefore became ineligible . 
 The top 10 countries with the best all @-@ time results are as follows : 
 = = Media coverage = = 
 A documentary , " Hard Problems : The Road To The World 's Toughest Math Contest " was made about the United States 2006 IMO team . 
 A BBC documentary titled Beautiful Young Minds aired July 2007 about the IMO . 
 A BBC fictional film titled X + Y released in September 2014 tells the story of an autistic boy who took part in the Olympiad . 
 = = = Official = = = 
 Official IMO web site 
 Old central IMO web site 
 = = = Resources = = = 
 <unk> Olympiad resources - IMO problems and solutions , IMO <unk> , IMO <unk> and one of the largest collection of Olympiad problems in the world . 
 = Perl = 
 Perl is a family of high @-@ level , general @-@ purpose , interpreted , dynamic programming languages . The languages in this family include Perl 5 and Perl 6 . 
 Though Perl is not officially an acronym , there are various <unk> in use , the most well @-@ known being " Practical Extraction and Reporting Language " . Perl was originally developed by Larry Wall in 1987 as a general @-@ purpose Unix scripting language to make report processing easier . Since then , it has undergone many changes and revisions . Perl 6 , which began as a redesign of Perl 5 in 2000 , eventually evolved into a separate language . Both languages continue to be developed independently by different development teams and liberally borrow ideas from one another . 
 The Perl languages borrow features from other programming languages including C , shell script ( sh ) , <unk> , and sed . They provide powerful text processing facilities without the arbitrary data @-@ length limits of many contemporary Unix <unk> tools , facilitating easy manipulation of text files . Perl 5 gained widespread popularity in the late 1990s as a CGI scripting language , in part due to its unsurpassed regular expression and string parsing abilities . 
 In addition to CGI , Perl 5 is used for graphics programming , system administration , network programming , finance , bioinformatics , and other applications . It has been nicknamed " the Swiss Army chainsaw of scripting languages " because of its flexibility and power , and possibly also because of its " ugliness " . In 1998 , it was also referred to as the " duct tape that holds the Internet together " , in reference to both its ubiquitous use as a glue language and its perceived inelegance . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early versions = = = 
 Larry Wall began work on Perl in 1987 , while working as a programmer at Unisys , and released version 1 @.@ 0 to the <unk> newsgroup on December 18 , 1987 . The language expanded rapidly over the next few years . 
 Perl 2 , released in 1988 , featured a better regular expression engine . Perl 3 , released in 1989 , added support for binary data streams . 
 Originally the only documentation for Perl was a single ( increasingly lengthy ) man page . In 1991 , Programming Perl , known to many Perl programmers as the " Camel Book " because of its cover , was published and became the de facto reference for the language . At the same time , the Perl version number was bumped to 4 , not to mark a major change in the language but to identify the version that was well documented by the book . 
 = = = Early Perl 5 = = = 
 Perl 4 went through a series of maintenance releases , culminating in Perl 4 @.@ 036 in 1993 . At that point , Wall abandoned Perl 4 to begin work on Perl 5 . Initial design of Perl 5 continued into 1994 . The <unk> @-@ porters mailing list was established in May 1994 to coordinate work on porting Perl 5 to different platforms . It remains the primary forum for development , maintenance , and porting of Perl 5 . 
 Perl 5 @.@ 000 was released on October 17 , 1994 . It was a nearly complete rewrite of the interpreter , and it added many new features to the language , including objects , references , lexical ( my ) variables , and modules . Importantly , modules provided a mechanism for extending the language without modifying the interpreter . This allowed the core interpreter to stabilize , even as it enabled ordinary Perl programmers to add new language features . Perl 5 has been in active development since then . 
 Perl 5 @.@ 001 was released on March 13 , 1995 . Perl 5 @.@ 002 was released on February 29 , 1996 with the new prototypes feature . This allowed module authors to make subroutines that behaved like Perl <unk> . Perl 5 @.@ 003 was released June 25 , 1996 , as a security release . 
 One of the most important events in Perl 5 history took place outside of the language proper and was a consequence of its module support . On October 26 , 1995 , the Comprehensive Perl Archive Network ( CPAN ) was established as a repository for Perl modules and Perl itself ; as of June 2015 , it carries over 150 @,@ 775 modules in 31 @,@ 896 distributions , written by more than 12 @,@ 219 authors , and is mirrored worldwide at more than 253 locations . 
 Perl 5 @.@ 004 was released on May 15 , 1997 , and included among other things the <unk> package , giving Perl a base object to which all classes were automatically derived and the ability to require versions of modules . Another significant development was the inclusion of the <unk> module , which contributed to Perl 's popularity as a CGI scripting language . 
 Perl is also now supported running under Microsoft Windows and several other operating systems . 
 Perl 5 @.@ 005 was released on July 22 , 1998 . This release included several enhancements to the regex engine , new hooks into the backend through the B : : * modules , the qr / / regex quote operator , a large selection of other new core modules , and added support for several more operating systems , including <unk> . 
 = = = 2000 – present = = = 
 Perl 5 @.@ 6 was released on March 22 , 2000 . Major changes included 64 @-@ bit support , Unicode string representation , large file support ( i.e. files over 2 GiB ) and the " our " keyword . When developing Perl 5 @.@ 6 , the decision was made to switch the versioning scheme to one more similar to other open source projects ; after 5 @.@ 005 _ 63 , the next version became 5 @.@ 5 @.@ 640 , with plans for development versions to have odd numbers and stable versions to have even numbers . 
 In 2000 , Wall put forth a call for suggestions for a new version of Perl from the community . The process resulted in 361 RFC ( request for comments ) documents that were to be used in guiding development of Perl 6 . In 2001 , work began on the apocalypses for Perl 6 , a series of documents meant to summarize the change requests and present the design of the next generation of Perl . They were presented as a digest of the RFCs , rather than a formal document . At this point , Perl 6 existed only as a description of a language . 
 Perl 5 @.@ 8 was first released on July 18 , 2002 , and had nearly yearly updates since then . Perl 5 @.@ 8 improved Unicode support , added a new I / O implementation , added a new thread implementation , improved numeric accuracy , and added several new modules . As of 2013 this version still remains the most popular version of Perl and is used by Red Hat 5 , <unk> 10 , Solaris 10 , HP @-@ UX 11 @.@ 31 and <unk> 5 . 
 In 2004 , work began on the <unk> – documents that originally summarized the <unk> , but which became the specification for the Perl 6 language . In February 2005 , Audrey Tang began work on Pugs , a Perl 6 interpreter written in Haskell . This was the first concerted effort towards making Perl 6 a reality . This effort stalled in 2006 . 
 On December 18 , 2007 , the 20th anniversary of Perl 1 @.@ 0 , Perl 5 @.@ 10 @.@ 0 was released . Perl 5 @.@ 10 @.@ 0 included notable new features , which brought it closer to Perl 6 . These included a switch statement ( called " given " / " when " ) , regular expressions updates , and the smart match operator , " ~ ~ " . Around this same time , development began in earnest on another implementation of Perl 6 known as Rakudo Perl , developed in tandem with the Parrot virtual machine . As of November 2009 , Rakudo Perl has had regular monthly releases and now is the most complete implementation of Perl 6 . 
 A major change in the development process of Perl 5 occurred with Perl 5 @.@ 11 ; the development community has switched to a monthly release cycle of development releases , with a yearly schedule of stable releases . By that plan , <unk> point releases will follow the stable releases every three months . 
 On April 12 , 2010 , Perl 5 @.@ 12 @.@ 0 was released . Notable core enhancements include new package <unk> <unk> syntax , the Yada Yada operator ( intended to mark placeholder code that is not yet implemented ) , implicit strictures , full <unk> compliance , regex conversion overloading , <unk> support , and Unicode 5 @.@ 2 . On January 21 , 2011 , Perl 5 @.@ 12 @.@ 3 was released ; it contains updated modules and some documentation changes . Version 5 @.@ 12 @.@ 4 was released on June 20 , 2011 . The latest version of that branch , 5 @.@ 12 @.@ 5 , was released on November 10 , 2012 . 
 On May 14 , 2011 , Perl 5 @.@ 14 was released . <unk> support is built @-@ in as of 5 @.@ 14 @.@ 2 . The latest version of that branch , 5 @.@ 14 @.@ 4 , was released on March 10 , 2013 . 
 On May 20 , 2012 , Perl 5 @.@ 16 was released . Notable new features include the ability to specify a given version of Perl that one wishes to emulate , allowing users to upgrade their version of Perl , but still run old scripts that would normally be incompatible . Perl 5 @.@ 16 also updates the core to support Unicode 6 @.@ 1 . 
 On May 18 , 2013 , Perl 5 @.@ 18 was released . Notable new features include the new <unk> hooks , lexical subs , more CORE : : subs , overhaul of the hash for security reasons , support for Unicode 6 @.@ 2 . 
 On May 27 , 2014 , Perl 5 @.@ 20 was released . Notable new features include subroutine signatures , hash slices / new slice syntax , postfix <unk> ( experimental ) , Unicode 6 @.@ 3 , rand ( ) using consistent random number generator . 
 Some observers credit the release of Perl 5 @.@ 10 with the start of the Modern Perl movement . In particular , this phrase describes a style of development that embraces the use of the CPAN , takes advantage of recent developments in the language , and is rigorous about creating high quality code . While the book " Modern Perl " may be the most visible standard @-@ bearer of this idea , other groups such as the Enlightened Perl Organization have taken up the cause . 
 In late 2012 and 2013 several projects for alternative implementations for Perl 5 started : <unk> in <unk> by the Rakudo Perl team , moe by Stevan Little and friends , p2 by the <unk> team under <unk> Urban , <unk> by <unk> , and <unk> a <unk> project led by Will <unk> and affiliated with the <unk> project . 
 = = = PONIE = = = 
 PONIE is an acronym for Perl On New Internal Engine . The PONIE Project existed from 2003 until 2006 and was to be a bridge between Perl 5 and Perl 6 . It was an effort to rewrite the Perl 5 interpreter to run on Parrot , the Perl 6 virtual machine . The goal was to ensure the future of the millions of lines of Perl 5 code at thousands of companies around the world . 
 The PONIE project ended in 2006 and is no longer being actively developed . Some of the improvements made to the Perl 5 interpreter as part of PONIE were folded into that project . 
 = = = Name = = = 
 Perl was originally named " Pearl " . Wall wanted to give the language a short name with positive connotations ; he claims that he considered ( and rejected ) every three- and four @-@ letter word in the dictionary . He also considered naming it after his wife Gloria . Wall discovered the existing PEARL programming language before Perl 's official release and changed the spelling of the name . 
 When referring to the language , the name is normally capitalized ( Perl ) as a proper noun . When referring to the interpreter program itself , the name is often <unk> ( perl ) because most Unix @-@ like file systems are case @-@ sensitive . Before the release of the first edition of Programming Perl , it was common to refer to the language as perl ; Randal L. Schwartz , however , capitalized the language 's name in the book to make it stand out better when typeset . This case distinction was subsequently documented as canonical . 
 The name is occasionally expanded as Practical Extraction and Report Language , but this is a backronym . Other expansions have been suggested as equally canonical , including Wall 's own humorous <unk> Eclectic Rubbish Lister . Indeed , Wall claims that the name was intended to inspire many different expansions . 
 = = = Camel symbol = = = 
 Programming Perl , published by O 'Reilly Media , features a picture of a dromedary camel on the cover and is commonly called the " Camel Book " . This image of a camel has become an unofficial symbol of Perl as well as a general hacker emblem , appearing on T @-@ shirts and other clothing items . 
 O 'Reilly owns the image as a trademark but licenses it for non @-@ commercial use , requiring only an acknowledgement and a link to <unk> Licensing for commercial use is decided on a case by case basis . O 'Reilly also provides " Programming Republic of Perl " logos for non @-@ commercial sites and " Powered by Perl " buttons for any site that uses Perl . 
 = = = Onion symbol = = = 
 The Perl Foundation owns an alternative symbol , an onion , which it licenses to its subsidiaries , Perl <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and others . The symbol is a visual pun on pearl onion . 
 = = Overview = = 
 According to Wall , Perl has two slogans . The first is " There 's more than one way to do it " , commonly known as <unk> . The second slogan is " Easy things should be easy and hard things should be possible " . 
 = = = Features = = = 
 The overall structure of Perl derives broadly from C. Perl is procedural in nature , with variables , expressions , assignment statements , brace @-@ delimited blocks , control structures , and subroutines . 
 Perl also takes features from shell programming . All variables are marked with leading sigils , which allow variables to be interpolated directly into strings . However , unlike the shell , Perl uses sigils on all accesses to variables , and unlike most other programming languages that use sigils , the sigil doesn 't denote the type of the variable but the type of the expression . So for example , to access a list of values in a hash , the sigil for an array ( " @ " ) is used , not the sigil for a hash ( " % " ) . Perl also has many built @-@ in functions that provide tools often used in shell programming ( although many of these tools are implemented by programs external to the shell ) such as sorting , and calling operating system facilities . 
 Perl takes lists from Lisp , hashes ( " associative arrays " ) from <unk> , and regular expressions from sed . These simplify and facilitate many parsing , text @-@ handling , and data @-@ management tasks . Also shared with Lisp are the implicit return of the last value in a block , and the fact that all statements have a value , and thus are also expressions and can be used in larger expressions themselves . 
 Perl 5 added features that support complex data structures , first @-@ class functions ( that is , closures as values ) , and an object @-@ oriented programming model . These include references , packages , class @-@ based method dispatch , and lexically scoped variables , along with compiler directives ( for example , the strict <unk> ) . A major additional feature introduced with Perl 5 was the ability to package code as reusable modules . Wall later stated that " The whole intent of Perl 5 's module system was to encourage the growth of Perl culture rather than the Perl core . " 
 All versions of Perl do automatic data @-@ typing and automatic memory management . The interpreter knows the type and storage requirements of every data object in the program ; it allocates and frees storage for them as necessary using reference counting ( so it cannot deallocate circular data structures without manual intervention ) . Legal type conversions — for example , conversions from number to string — are done automatically at run time ; illegal type conversions are fatal errors . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 The design of Perl can be understood as a response to three broad trends in the computer industry : falling hardware costs , rising labor costs , and improvements in compiler technology . Many earlier computer languages , such as Fortran and C , aimed to make efficient use of expensive computer hardware . In contrast , Perl was designed so that computer programmers could write programs more quickly and easily . 
 Perl has many features that ease the task of the programmer at the expense of greater CPU and memory requirements . These include automatic memory management ; dynamic typing ; strings , lists , and hashes ; regular expressions ; introspection ; and an eval ( ) function . Perl follows the theory of " no built @-@ in limits " , an idea similar to the Zero One Infinity rule . 
 Wall was trained as a linguist , and the design of Perl is very much informed by linguistic principles . Examples include Huffman coding ( common constructions should be short ) , good end @-@ weighting ( the important information should come first ) , and a large collection of language primitives . Perl favors language constructs that are concise and natural for humans to write , even where they complicate the Perl interpreter . 
 Perl 's syntax reflects the idea that " things that are different should look different . " For example , scalars , arrays , and hashes have different leading sigils . Array indices and hash keys use different kinds of braces . Strings and regular expressions have different standard delimiters . This approach can be contrasted with languages such as Lisp , where the same S @-@ expression construct and basic syntax are used for many different purposes . 
 Perl does not enforce any particular programming paradigm ( procedural , object @-@ oriented , functional , or others ) or even require the programmer to choose among them . 
 There is a broad practical bent to both the Perl language and the community and culture that surround it . The preface to Programming Perl begins : " Perl is a language for getting your job done . " One consequence of this is that Perl is not a tidy language . It includes many features , tolerates exceptions to its rules , and employs heuristics to resolve syntactical ambiguities . Because of the forgiving nature of the compiler , bugs can sometimes be hard to find . Perl 's function documentation remarks on the variant behavior of built @-@ in functions in list and scalar contexts by saying , " In general , they do what you want , unless you want consistency . " 
 No written specification or standard for the Perl language exists for Perl versions through Perl 5 , and there are no plans to create one for the current version of Perl . There has been only one implementation of the interpreter , and the language has evolved along with it . That interpreter , together with its functional tests , stands as a de facto specification of the language . Perl 6 , however , started with a specification , and several projects aim to implement some or all of the specification . 
 = = = Applications = = = 
 Perl has many and varied applications , compounded by the availability of many standard and third @-@ party modules . 
 Perl has chiefly been used to write CGI scripts : large projects written in Perl include <unk> , Slash , <unk> , RT , <unk> , and Movable Type ; high @-@ traffic websites that use Perl extensively include <unk> , Craigslist , IMDb , LiveJournal , <unk> , Slashdot and Ticketmaster . It is also an optional component of the popular LAMP technology stack for Web development , in lieu of PHP or Python . 
 Perl is often used as a glue language , tying together systems and interfaces that were not specifically designed to <unk> , and for " data <unk> " , that is , converting or processing large amounts of data for tasks such as creating reports . In fact , these strengths are intimately linked . The combination makes Perl a popular all @-@ purpose language for system administrators , particularly because short programs , often called " one @-@ liner programs " , can be entered and run on a single command line . 
 Perl code can be made portable across Windows and Unix ; such code is often used by suppliers of software ( both COTS and bespoke ) to simplify packaging and maintenance of software <unk> and deployment @-@ scripts . 
 Graphical user interfaces ( GUIs ) may be developed using Perl . For example , Perl / Tk and <unk> are commonly used to enable user interaction with Perl scripts . Such interaction may be synchronous or asynchronous , using callbacks to update the GUI . 
 = = = Implementation = = = 
 Perl is implemented as a core interpreter , written in C , together with a large collection of modules , written in Perl and C. As of 2010 . The interpreter is 150 @,@ 000 lines of C code and compiles to a 1 MB executable on typical machine architectures . Alternatively , the interpreter can be compiled to a link library and embedded in other programs . There are nearly 500 modules in the distribution , comprising 200 @,@ 000 lines of Perl and an additional 350 @,@ 000 lines of C code ( much of the C code in the modules consists of character encoding tables ) . 
 The interpreter has an object @-@ oriented architecture . All of the elements of the Perl language — scalars , arrays , hashes , <unk> , file handles — are represented in the interpreter by C <unk> . Operations on these <unk> are defined by a large collection of macros , typedefs , and functions ; these constitute the Perl C API . The Perl API can be bewildering to the uninitiated , but its entry points follow a consistent naming scheme , which provides guidance to those who use it . 
 The life of a Perl interpreter divides broadly into a compile phase and a run phase . In Perl , the phases are the major stages in the interpreter 's life @-@ cycle . Each interpreter goes through each phase only once , and the phases follow in a fixed sequence . 
 Most of what happens in Perl 's compile phase is compilation , and most of what happens in Perl 's run phase is execution , but there are significant exceptions . Perl makes important use of its capability to execute Perl code during the compile phase . Perl will also delay compilation into the run phase . The terms that indicate the kind of processing that is actually occurring at any moment are compile time and run time . Perl is in compile time at most points during the compile phase , but compile time may also be entered during the run phase . The compile time for code in a string argument passed to the eval built @-@ in occurs during the run phase . Perl is often in run time during the compile phase and spends most of the run phase in run time . Code in <unk> blocks executes at run time but in the compile phase . 
 At compile time , the interpreter parses Perl code into a syntax tree . At run time , it executes the program by walking the tree . Text is parsed only once , and the syntax tree is subject to optimization before it is executed , so that execution is relatively efficient . Compile @-@ time optimizations on the syntax tree include constant folding and context propagation , but peephole optimization is also performed . 
 Perl has a Turing @-@ complete grammar because parsing can be affected by run @-@ time code executed during the compile phase . Therefore , Perl cannot be parsed by a straight Lex / <unk> <unk> / parser combination . Instead , the interpreter implements its own <unk> , which coordinates with a modified GNU bison parser to resolve ambiguities in the language . 
 It is often said that " Only perl can parse Perl " , meaning that only the Perl interpreter ( perl ) can parse the Perl language ( Perl ) , but even this is not , in general , true . Because the Perl interpreter can simulate a Turing machine during its compile phase , it would need to decide the halting problem in order to complete parsing in every case . It is a long @-@ standing result that the halting problem is undecidable , and therefore not even perl can always parse Perl . Perl makes the unusual choice of giving the user access to its full programming power in its own compile phase . The cost in terms of theoretical purity is high , but practical inconvenience seems to be rare . 
 Other programs that undertake to parse Perl , such as source @-@ code analyzers and auto @-@ <unk> , have to contend not only with ambiguous syntactic constructs but also with the <unk> of Perl parsing in the general case . Adam Kennedy 's PPI project focused on parsing Perl code as a document ( retaining its integrity as a document ) , instead of parsing Perl as executable code ( that not even Perl itself can always do ) . It was Kennedy who first conjectured that " parsing Perl suffers from the ' halting problem ' " , which was later proved . 
 Perl is distributed with over 250 @,@ 000 functional tests for core Perl language and over 250 @,@ 000 functional tests for core modules . These run as part of the normal build process and extensively exercise the interpreter and its core modules . Perl developers rely on the functional tests to ensure that changes to the interpreter do not introduce software bugs ; additionally , Perl users who see that the interpreter passes its functional tests on their system can have a high degree of confidence that it is working properly . 
 = = = Availability = = = 
 Perl is dual licensed under both the Artistic License 1 @.@ 0 and the GNU General Public License . Distributions are available for most operating systems . It is particularly prevalent on Unix and Unix @-@ like systems , but it has been ported to most modern ( and many obsolete ) platforms . With only six reported exceptions , Perl can be compiled from source code on all POSIX @-@ compliant , or otherwise @-@ Unix @-@ compatible platforms . 
 Because of unusual changes required for the Mac OS Classic environment , a special port called <unk> was shipped independently . 
 The Comprehensive Perl Archive Network carries a complete list of supported platforms with links to the distributions available on each . CPAN is also the source for publicly available Perl modules that are not part of the core Perl distribution . 
 = = = = Windows = = = = 
 Users of Microsoft Windows typically install one of the native binary distributions of Perl for Win32 , most commonly Strawberry Perl or ActivePerl . Compiling Perl from source code under Windows is possible , but most installations lack the requisite C compiler and build tools . This also makes it difficult to install modules from the CPAN , particularly those that are partially written in C. 
 ActivePerl is a closed source distribution from <unk> that has regular releases that track the core Perl releases . The distribution also includes the Perl package manager ( <unk> ) , a popular tool for installing , removing , upgrading , and managing the use of common Perl modules . Included also is <unk> , a Windows Script Host ( <unk> ) engine implementing the Perl language . Visual Perl is an <unk> tool that adds Perl to the Visual Studio .NET development suite . 
 Strawberry Perl is an open source distribution for Windows . It has had regular , quarterly releases since January 2008 , including new modules as feedback and requests come in . Strawberry Perl aims to be able to install modules like standard Perl distributions on other platforms , including compiling XS modules . 
 The Cygwin emulation layer is another way of running Perl under Windows . Cygwin provides a Unix @-@ like environment on Windows , and both Perl and CPAN are available as standard pre @-@ compiled packages in the Cygwin setup program . Since Cygwin also includes gcc , compiling Perl from source is also possible . 
 A perl executable is included in several Windows Resource kits in the directory with other scripting tools . 
 Implementations of Perl come with the MKS Toolkit and <unk> . 
 = = Database interfaces = = 
 Perl 's text @-@ handling capabilities can be used for generating SQL queries ; arrays , hashes , and automatic memory management make it easy to collect and process the returned data . For example , in Tim Bunce 's Perl DBI application programming interface ( API ) , the arguments to the API can be the text of SQL queries ; thus it is possible to program in multiple languages at the same time ( e.g. , for generating a Web page using HTML , JavaScript , and SQL in a here document ) . The use of Perl variable interpolation to programmatically customize each of the SQL queries , and the specification of Perl arrays or hashes as the structures to programmatically hold the resulting data sets from each SQL query , allows a high @-@ level mechanism for handling large amounts of data for post @-@ processing by a Perl <unk> . In early versions of Perl , database interfaces were created by <unk> the interpreter with a client @-@ side database library . This was sufficiently difficult that it was done for only a few of the most @-@ important and most widely used databases , and it restricted the resulting perl executable to using just one database interface at a time . 
 In Perl 5 , database interfaces are implemented by Perl DBI modules . The DBI ( Database Interface ) module presents a single , database @-@ independent interface to Perl applications , while the DBD ( Database Driver ) modules handle the details of accessing some 50 different databases ; there are DBD drivers for most ANSI SQL databases . 
 DBI provides caching for database handles and queries , which can greatly improve performance in long @-@ lived execution environments such as mod perl , helping high @-@ volume systems avert load spikes as in the Slashdot effect . 
 In modern Perl applications , especially those written using web frameworks such as Catalyst , the DBI module is often used indirectly via object @-@ relational <unk> such as <unk> : : Class , Class : : DBI or Rose : : DB : : Object that generate SQL queries and handle data transparently to the application author . 
 = = Comparative performance = = 
 The Computer Language Benchmarks Game , a project hosted by <unk> , compares the performance of implementations of typical programming problems in several programming languages . The submitted Perl implementations typically perform toward the high end of the memory @-@ usage spectrum and give varied speed results . Perl 's performance in the benchmarks game is typical for interpreted languages . 
 Large Perl programs start more slowly than similar programs in compiled languages because perl has to compile the source every time it runs . In a talk at the <unk> : : Europe 2005 conference and subsequent article " A Timely Start " , Jean @-@ Louis Leroy found that his Perl programs took much longer to run than expected because the perl interpreter spent significant time finding modules within his over @-@ large include path . Unlike Java , Python , and Ruby , Perl has only experimental support for pre @-@ compiling . Therefore , Perl programs pay this overhead penalty on every execution . The run phase of typical programs is long enough that amortized startup time is not substantial , but benchmarks that measure very short execution times are likely to be skewed due to this overhead . 
 A number of tools have been introduced to improve this situation . The first such tool was Apache 's mod perl , which sought to address one of the most @-@ common reasons that small Perl programs were invoked rapidly : CGI Web development . ActivePerl , via Microsoft <unk> , provides similar performance improvements . 
 Once Perl code is compiled , there is additional overhead during the execution phase that typically isn 't present for programs written in compiled languages such as C or C + + . Examples of such overhead include bytecode interpretation , reference @-@ counting memory management , and dynamic type @-@ checking . 
 = = = Optimizing = = = 
 Because Perl is an interpreted language , it can give problems when efficiency is critical ; in such situations , the most critical routines can be written in other languages ( such as C ) , which can be connected to Perl via simple Inline modules or the more complex but flexible XS mechanism . 
 = = Perl 6 = = 
 At the 2000 Perl Conference , Jon <unk> made a case for a major new language @-@ initiative . This led to a decision to begin work on a redesign of the language , to be called Perl 6 . Proposals for new language features were solicited from the Perl community at large , which submitted more than 300 RFCs . 
 Wall spent the next few years digesting the RFCs and synthesizing them into a coherent framework for Perl 6 . He has presented his design for Perl 6 in a series of documents called " apocalypses " - numbered to correspond to chapters in Programming Perl . As of January 2011 , the developing specification of Perl 6 is encapsulated in design documents called <unk> - numbered to correspond to <unk> . 
 Perl 6 is not intended to be backward compatible , although there will be a compatibility mode . Perl 6 and Perl 5 are distinct languages with a common ancestry . 
 Thesis work by Bradley M. Kuhn , overseen by Wall , considered the possible use of the Java virtual machine as a runtime for Perl . Kuhn 's thesis showed this approach to be problematic . In 2001 , it was decided that Perl 6 would run on a cross @-@ language virtual machine called Parrot . This will mean that other languages targeting the Parrot will gain native access to CPAN , allowing some level of cross @-@ language development . 
 In 2005 , Audrey Tang created the pugs project , an implementation of Perl 6 in Haskell . This acted as , and continues to act as , a test platform for the Perl 6 language ( separate from the development of the actual implementation ) - allowing the language designers to explore . The pugs project spawned an active Perl / Haskell cross @-@ language community centered around the <unk> # <unk> IRC channel . 
 As of 2012 , a number of features in the Perl 6 language show similarities to Haskell . 
 As of 2012 , Perl 6 development centers primarily around two compilers : 
 Rakudo Perl 6 , an implementation running on the Parrot virtual machine and the Java virtual machine . Developers are also working on <unk> , a C language @-@ based virtual machine designed specifically for Rakudo . 
 <unk> , which targets the Common Language Runtime . 
 = = Future of Perl 5 = = 
 Development of Perl 5 is also continuing . Perl 5 @.@ 12 @.@ 0 was released in April 2010 with some new features influenced by the design of Perl 6 , followed by Perl 5 @.@ 14 @.@ 1 ( released on June 17 , 2011 ) , Perl 5 @.@ 16 @.@ 1 ( released on August 9 , 2012 . ) , and Perl 5 @.@ 18 @.@ 0 ( released on May 18 , 2013 ) . Perl 5 development versions are released on a monthly basis , with major releases coming out once per year . 
 Future plans for Perl 5 include making the core language easier to extend from modules , and providing a small , extensible meta @-@ object protocol in core . 
 The relative proportion of Internet searches for ' Perl programming ' , as compared with similar searches for other programming languages , steadily declined from about 10 % in 2005 to about 2 % in 2011 , and has remained around the 2 % level since . 
 = = Perl community = = 
 Perl 's culture and community has developed alongside the language itself . Usenet was the first public venue in which Perl was introduced , but over the course of its evolution , Perl 's community was shaped by the growth of broadening Internet @-@ based services including the introduction of the World Wide Web . The community that surrounds Perl was , in fact , the topic of Wall 's first " State of the Onion " talk . 
 = = = State of the Onion = = = 
 State of the Onion is the name for Wall ’ s yearly keynote @-@ style summaries on the progress of Perl and its community . They are characterized by his hallmark humor , employing references to Perl ’ s culture , the wider hacker culture , Wall ’ s linguistic background , sometimes his family life , and occasionally even his Christian background . 
 Each talk is first given at various Perl conferences and is eventually also published online . 
 = = = Perl pastimes = = = 
 <unk> 
 In email , Usenet , and message board postings , " Just another Perl hacker " ( <unk> ) programs are a common trend , originated by Randal L. Schwartz , one of the earliest professional Perl trainers . In the parlance of Perl culture , Perl programmers are known as Perl hackers , and from this derives the practice of writing short programs to print out the phrase " Just another Perl hacker " . In the spirit of the original concept , these programs are moderately obfuscated and short enough to fit into the signature of an email or Usenet message . The " canonical " <unk> as developed by Schwartz includes the comma at the end , although this is often omitted . 
 Perl golf 
 Perl " golf " is the pastime of reducing the number of characters ( key " strokes " ) used in a Perl program to the bare minimum , much in the same way that golf players seek to take as few shots as possible in a round . The phrase 's first use emphasized the difference between pedestrian code meant to teach a newcomer and terse hacks likely to amuse experienced Perl programmers , an example of the latter being <unk> that were already used in signatures in Usenet postings and elsewhere . Similar stunts had been an unnamed pastime in the language APL in previous decades . The use of Perl to write a program that performed RSA encryption prompted a widespread and practical interest in this pastime . In subsequent years , the term " code golf " has been applied to the pastime in other languages . A Perl Golf Apocalypse was held at Perl Conference 4 @.@ 0 in Monterey , California in July 2000 . 
 <unk> 
 As with C , obfuscated code competitions were a well known pastime in the late 1990s . The <unk> Perl Contest was a competition held by The Perl Journal from 1996 to 2000 that made an arch virtue of Perl 's syntactic flexibility . Awards were given for categories such as " most powerful " — programs that made efficient use of space — and " best four @-@ line signature " for programs that fit into four lines of 76 characters in the style of a Usenet signature block . 
 Poetry 
 Perl poetry is the practice of writing poems that can be compiled as legal Perl code , for example the piece known as Black Perl . Perl poetry is made possible by the large number of English words that are used in the Perl language . New poems are regularly submitted to the community at <unk> . 
 = = = Perl on IRC = = = 
 There are a number of IRC channels that offer support for the language and some modules . 
 = = = CPAN Acme = = = 
 There are also many examples of code written purely for entertainment on the CPAN . <unk> : : Romana : : <unk> , for example , allows writing programs in Latin . Upon execution of such a program , the module translates its source code into regular Perl and runs it . 
 The Perl community has set aside the " Acme " namespace for modules that are fun in nature ( but its scope has widened to include exploratory or experimental code or any other module that is not meant to ever be used in production ) . Some of the Acme modules are deliberately implemented in amusing ways . This includes Acme : : Bleach , one of the first modules in the Acme : : namespace , which allows the program 's source code to be " whitened " ( i.e. , all characters replaced with whitespace ) and yet still work . 
 = = Example code = = 
 In older versions of Perl , one would write the Hello World program as : 
 In later versions , which support the say statement , one can also write it as : 
 Good Perl practices require more complex programs to add the use strict ; and use warnings ; <unk> , leading into something like : 
 Here is a more complex Perl program , that counts down the seconds up to a given threshold : 
 The perl interpreter can also be used for one @-@ off scripts on the command line . The following example ( as invoked from an sh @-@ compatible shell , such as Bash ) translates the string " Bob " in all files ending with <unk> in the current directory to " Robert " : 
 = = Criticism = = 
 Perl has been referred to as " line noise " by some programmers who claim its syntax makes it a write @-@ only language . The earliest such mention was in the first edition of the book Learning Perl , a Perl 5 tutorial book written by Randal L. Schwartz , in the first chapter of which he states : " Yes , sometimes Perl looks like line noise to the uninitiated , but to the seasoned Perl programmer , it looks like <unk> line noise with a mission in life . " He also stated that the accusation that Perl is a write @-@ only language could be avoided by coding with " proper care " . The Perl overview document <unk> states that the names of built @-@ in " magic " scalar variables " look like punctuation or line noise " . The <unk> document states that line noise in regular expressions could be mitigated using the / x modifier to add whitespace . 
 According to the Perl 6 FAQ , Perl 6 was designed to mitigate " the usual suspects " that elicit the " line noise " claim from Perl 5 critics , including the removal of " the majority of the punctuation variables " and the sanitization of the regex syntax . The Perl 6 FAQ also states that what is sometimes referred to as Perl 's line noise is " the actual syntax of the language " just as <unk> and prepositions are a part of the English language . In a December 2012 blog posting , despite claiming that " Rakudo Perl 6 has failed and will continue to fail unless it gets some adult supervision " , chromatic stated that the design of Perl 6 has a " well @-@ defined grammar " as well as an " improved type system , a unified object system with an intelligent <unk> , <unk> , and a clearer system of context that provides for such niceties as pervasive laziness " . He also stated that " Perl 6 has a coherence and a consistency that Perl 5 lacks . " 
 = Battle of Tigranocerta = 
 The Battle of Tigranocerta ( Armenian : <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) was fought on October 6 , 69 BC between the forces of the Roman Republic and the army of the Kingdom of Armenia led by King Tigranes the Great . The Roman force was led by Consul Lucius Licinius Lucullus , and Tigranes was defeated . His capital city of Tigranocerta was lost to Rome as a result . 
 The battle arose from the Third Mithridatic War being fought between Roman Republic and Mithridates VI of Pontus , whose daughter Cleopatra was married to Tigranes . Mithridates fled to seek shelter with his son @-@ in @-@ law , and Rome invaded the Kingdom of Armenia . Having laid siege to Tigranocerta , the Roman forces fell back behind a nearby river when the large Armenian army approached . Feigning retreat , the Romans crossed at a ford and fell on the right flank of the Armenian army . After the Romans defeated the Armenian cataphracts , the balance of Tigranes ' army , which was mostly made up of raw levies and peasant troops from his extensive empire , panicked and fled , and the Romans remained in charge of the field . 
 = = Background = = 
 Tigranes ' expansion into the Near East led to the creation of an Armenian empire that stretched almost across the entire region . With his father @-@ in @-@ law and ally securing the empire 's western flank , Tigranes was able to conquer territories in Parthia and Mesopotamia and annex the lands of the Levant . In Syria , he began the construction of the city of Tigranocerta ( also written Tigranakert ) , which he named after himself , and imported a multitude of peoples , including Arabs , Greeks , and Jews , to populate it . The city soon became the king 's headquarters in Syria and flourished as a great center for Hellenistic culture , complete with theaters , parks and hunting grounds . 
 This period of Armenian hegemony in the region , however , was coming close to an end with a series of Roman victories in the Roman – Mithridatic Wars . Friction between the two had existed for several decades , although it was during the Third Mithridatic War that the Roman armies under Lucullus made significant progress against Mithridates , forcing him to take refuge with Tigranes . Lucullus sent an ambassador named Appius Claudius to Antioch to demand that Tigranes surrender his father @-@ in @-@ law ; should he refuse , Armenia would face war with Rome . Tigranes refused Appius Claudius ' demands , stating that he would prepare for war against the Republic . 
 Lucullus was astonished upon hearing this in the year 70 , and he began to prepare for an immediate invasion of Armenia . Although he had no mandate from the Senate to authorize such a move , he attempted to justify his invasion by distinguishing as his enemy king Tigranes and not his subjects . In the summer of 69 , he marched his troops across <unk> and the Euphrates river and entered the Armenian province of <unk> <unk> ' , where Tigranocerta was located . 
 = = The siege of Tigranocerta = = 
 Tigranes , who was residing at Tigranocerta in the summer of 69 , was not only astonished by the speed of Lucullus ' rapid advance into Armenia but by the fact that he had even launched such an operation in the first place . Unable to reconcile with this reality for a certain period of time , he belatedly sent a general named <unk> with 2 @,@ 000 to 3 @,@ 000 cavalrymen to slow down Lucullus ' advance but his forces were cut to pieces and routed by the 1 @,@ 600 cavalry led by <unk> , one of the legates serving under Lucullus . Learning of <unk> ' defeat , Tigranes entrusted the defense of his namesake city to <unk> and left to recruit a fighting force in the Taurus Mountains . Nevertheless , Lucullus ' legates were able to disrupt two separate detachments coming to the aid of Tigranes and even located and engaged the king 's forces in a canyon in the Taurus . Lucullus , nevertheless , chose not to pursue Tigranes while he had an unimpeded path towards Tigranocerta ; he advanced and began to lay siege to it . 
 Tigranocerta was still an unfinished city when Lucullus laid siege to it in the late summer of 69 . The city was heavily fortified and according to the Greek historian Appian , had thick and towering walls that stood 25 meters high , providing a formidable defense against a prolonged siege . The Roman siege engines that were employed at Tigranocerta were effectively repelled by the defenders by the use of naphtha , making Tigranocerta , according to one scholar , the site of " perhaps the world 's first use of chemical warfare . " 
 However , the loyalty of the city 's population was untested : since Tigranes had forcibly removed many of its inhabitants from their native lands and brought them to Tigranocerta , their allegiance to the king was cast into doubt . They soon proved their unreliability : when Tigranes and his army appeared on a hill overlooking the city , the inhabitants " greeted his [ Lucullus ] appearance with shouts and din , and standing on the walls , threateningly pointed out the Armenians to the Romans . " 
 = = Forces = = 
 Appian claims that Lucullus had embarked from Rome with only a single legion ; upon entering Anatolia to make war against Mithridates , he added four more legions to his army . The overall size of this force consisted of 30 @,@ 000 infantry and 1 @,@ 600 cavalry . Following Mithridates ' retreat to Armenia , Appian estimates Lucullus ' invading force to be only two legions and 500 horsemen , although it is highly improbable that he would have undertaken the invasion of Armenia with such a small army . Historian Adrian Sherwin @-@ White places the size of Lucullus ' force to 12 @,@ 000 seasoned legionaries ( composed of three legions ) , and 4 @,@ 000 provincial cavalry and light infantry . The Roman army was further bolstered by several thousand allied Gallic , Thracian , and <unk> infantry and cavalry . 
 Tigranes ' army clearly held a numerical superiority over that of Lucullus ' . According to Appian , it numbered 250 @,@ 000 infantry and 50 @,@ 000 cavalry . Many scholars , however , doubt these figures accurately reflect the true number of Tigranes ' army and believe they are highly inflated . Some historians , most notably Plutarch , wrote that Tigranes considered Lucullus ' army far too small , and upon seeing it , is quoted to have said that " If they come as ambassadors , they are too many ; if they are soldiers , too few , " although some have expressed doubt on the veracity of this quote . Tigranes also possessed several thousand cataphracts , formidable heavily armored cavalry that were clad in mail armor and armed with lances , spears or bows . 
 = = Disposition and engagement = = 
 The two armies converged toward the Batman @-@ Su river slightly to the southwest to Tigranocerta . 
 Tigranes ' army was positioned on the east bank of the river while Lucullus , who had left a rear guard to continue the siege of the city , met the Armenian army on the river 's west bank . The Armenian army was formed of three sections . Two of Tigranes ' vassal kings led the left and right flanks , while Tigranes led his cataphracts in the center . The rest of his army stood in front of a hill , a position Lucullus soon exploited . 
 Roman troops at first attempted to dissuade Lucullus from engaging in battle since October 6 marked the day of the disastrous battle of Arausio , where the general Quintus Servilius Caepio and his Roman army were delivered a crushing defeat by the Germanic Cimbri and <unk> tribes . Ignoring his troops ' superstitious beliefs , Lucullus is said to have responded , " Verily , I will make this day , too , a lucky one for the Romans . " 
 Cowan and Hook suggest that Lucullus would have deployed the Romans in a simplex <unk> , that is to say a single line , so making the frontage of the army as wide as possible as a counter to the cavalry . He took several of his troops downriver , where the river was the easiest to ford , and at one moment , Tigranes believed that this move meant Lucullus was withdrawing from the battlefield . 
 Lucullus had initially decided to make a running charge with his infantry , a Roman military tactic that minimized the amount of time an enemy could utilize its archers and sling infantry prior to close combat engagement . However , he decided against this at the last moment when he realized that the Armenian cataphracts posed the greatest threat to his men , ordering instead a diversionary attack with his Gallic and Thracian cavalry against the cataphracts . 
 With the cataphracts ' attention fixated elsewhere , Lucullus formed two cohorts into maniples and then ordered them to ford across the river . His objective was to outflank Tigranes ' cataphracts by circling counterclockwise around the hill and attacking them from the rear . 
 Lucullus personally led the charge on foot and upon reaching the top of the hill , he yelled to his soldiers in an effort to buoy their morale : " The day is ours , the day is ours , my fellow soldiers ! " With this , he gave special instructions to the cohorts to attack the horses ' legs and thighs , since these were the only areas of the cataphracts which were not armored . Lucullus charged downwards along with his cohorts and his orders soon proved fatal : the lumbering cataphracts were caught by surprise and , in their attempts to break free from their attackers , careened into the ranks of their own men as the lines began to collapse . 
 The infantry , which was also made up of many non @-@ Armenians , began to break rank and confusion spread to the rest of the body of Tigranes ' army . While the great king himself took to flight with his baggage train northwards , the entire line of his army gave way . The casualties reported for Tigranes ' army are immense , with estimates given from 10 @,@ 000 to as many as 100 @,@ 000 men . 
 Plutarch says that on the Roman side , " only a hundred were wounded , and only five killed , " although such low figures are highly unrealistic . Cowan and Hook , while considering these losses ridiculous , think it 's clear that the battle was won with disproportionate losses . 
 = = Aftermath and legacy = = 
 With no army left to defend Tigranocerta , and a foreign populace that gleefully opened the gates to the Romans , Lucullus ' army began the wholesale looting and plunder of the city . The city was literally deconstructed piece by piece . The king 's treasury , estimated to be worth 8 @,@ 000 talents , was looted and each soldier in the army was awarded 800 drachma . The battle also resulted in severe territorial losses : most of the lands in Tigranes ' empire to the south of the Taurus fell under the sway of Rome . 
 Despite the heavy losses Tigranes suffered , the battle was not decisive in ending the war . In retreating northwards , Tigranes and Mithridates were able to elude Lucullus ' forces , though losing again against the Romans during the battle of Artashat . In 68 , Lucullus ' forces ' began to mutiny , longing to return home , and he withdrew his forces from Armenia the following year . 
 The battle is highlighted by many historians specifically because Lucullus overcame the numerical odds facing his army . The Italian philosopher Niccolò Machiavelli remarked upon the battle in his book , The Art of War , where he critiqued Tigranes ' heavy reliance on his cavalry over his infantry . 
 = German Eastern Marches Society = 
 German Eastern Marches Society ( German : Deutscher Ostmarkenverein , also known in German as Verein zur <unk> des <unk> in den <unk> ) was a German radical , extremely nationalist xenophobic organization founded in 1894 . Mainly among Poles , it was sometimes known <unk> as Hakata or H @-@ K @-@ T after its founders von Hansemann , <unk> and von <unk> . Its main aims were the promotion of Germanization of Poles living in Prussia and destruction of Polish national identity in German eastern provinces . Contrary to many similar nationalist organizations created in that period , the Ostmarkenverein had relatively close ties with the government and local administration , which made it largely successful , even though it opposed both the policy of seeking some modo vivendi with the Poles pursued by Chancellor Theobald von Bethmann Hollweg and Leo von Caprivi 's policies of relaxation of anti @-@ Polish measures . While of limited significance and often overrated , the organization formed a notable part of German anti @-@ democratic pluralist part of the political landscape of the Wilhelmine era . 
 Initially formed in Posen , in 1896 its main headquarters was moved to Berlin . In 1901 it had roughly 21 @,@ 000 members , the number rose to 48 @,@ 000 in 1913 , though some authors claim the membership was as high as 220 @,@ 000 . After Poland was re @-@ established following World War I in 1918 , the society continued its rump activities in the Weimar Republic until it was closed down by the Nazis in 1934 who created the new organisation with similar activity Bund Deutscher Osten . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following the Partitions of Poland in late 18th century , a large part of the former Polish @-@ Lithuanian Commonwealth ( namely the regions of Greater Poland and Royal , the later West Prussia ) was annexed by the Kingdom of Prussia , the predecessor of the German Empire , which was formed in 1871 . Primarily inhabited by Poles , Greater Poland initially was formed into a semi @-@ autonomous Grand Duchy of Posen , granted with a certain level of self @-@ governance . However , under Otto von Bismarck 's government , the ethnic and cultural tensions in the region began to rise . This was paired by growing tendencies of nationalism , imperialism , and chauvinism within the German society . The tendencies went in two different directions , but were linked to each other . On one hand , a new world order was demanded with desires of creating a German colonial empire . And on the other , feelings of hostility towards other national groups within the German state were growing . 
 The situation was further aggravated by Bismarck 's policies of Kulturkampf that in Posen Province took on a much more nationalistic character than in other parts of Germany and included a number of specifically anti @-@ Polish laws that resulted in the Polish and German communities living in a virtual apartheid . Many observers believed these policies only further stoked the Polish independence movement . There is also a question regarding possible personal antipathy towards Poles behind Bismarck 's motivation in pursuing the Kulturkampf . Unlike in other parts of the German Empire , in Greater Poland — then known under the German name of <unk> Posen — the Kulturkampf did not cease after the end of the decade . Although Bismarck finally signed an informal alliance with the Catholic Church against the socialists , the policies of Germanization did continue in Polish @-@ inhabited parts of the country . However , with the end of von Bismarck 's rule and the advent of Leo von Caprivi , the pressure for Germanisation was lessened and many German landowners feared that this would lead to lessening the German control over the Polish areas and in the end deprive Germany of what they saw as a natural reservoir of workforce and land . Although the actual extent of von Caprivi 's concessions towards the Poles was very limited , the German minority of Greater Poland feared that this was a step too far , and that von Caprivi 's government would cede the power in Greater Poland to the Polish clergy and nobility . The Hakata slogan was : " You are standing opposite to the most dangerous , fanatic enemy of German existence , German honour and German reputation in the world : The Poles . " 
 = = Society = = 
 Under such circumstances a number of nationalist organizations and pressure groups was formed , all collectively known as the nationale <unk> . Among them were the Pan @-@ German League , German Navy League , German Colonial Society , German Anti @-@ Semitic Organization , and the Defence League . Many landowners feared that their interests would not be properly represented by those organizations and decided to form their own society . It was officially launched November 3 , 1894 in Poznań , then referred to under its German name of Posen . The opening meeting elected an assembly and a general committee composed of 227 members , among them 104 from the Province of Posen and Province of West Prussia , and additional 113 from other parts of German Empire . The social base of the newly founded society was wide and included a large spectrum of people . Some 60 % of the representatives of areas of Germany primarily inhabited by Poles were the Junkers , the landed aristocracy , mostly with ancient feudal roots . The rest were all groups of middle class Germans , that is civil servants ( 30 % ) , teachers ( 25 % ) , merchants , craftsmen , Protestant priests , and clerks . 
 The official aims of the society was " strengthening and rallying of <unk> in the Eastern Marches through the revival and consolidation of German national feeling and the economic strengthening of the German people " in the area . This was seen as justified due to alleged passivity of Germans in the eastern territories . Officially it was to work for the Germans rather than against the Poles . However , in reality the aims of the society were anti @-@ Polish and aimed at ousting the Polish landowners and peasants from their land at all cost . It was argued that the Poles were an insidious threat to German national and cultural integrity and domination in the east . The propagandistic rationale behind formation of the H @-@ K @-@ T was presented as a national Polish @-@ German struggle to assimilate one group into the other . It was argued that either the Poles would be successfully Germanized , or the Germans living in the east would face the Polonization themselves . This conflict was often portrayed as a constant biological struggle between the " eastern barbarity " and " European culture " . To counter the alleged threat , the Society promoted the destruction of Polish national identity in the Polish lands held by Germany , and prevention of <unk> of the Eastern Marches , that is the growing national sentiment amongst local Poles paired with migration of Poles from rural areas to the cities of the region . 
 In accordance with the views of Chancellor von Bismarck himself , the Society saw the language question as a key factor in determining one 's loyalty towards the state . Because of this view , it insisted on extending the ban on usage of the Polish language in schools , to other instances of everyday life , including public meetings , books , and newspapers . During a 1902 meeting in Danzig ( modern Gdańsk ) , the Society demanded from the government that the Polish language be banned even from voluntary classes in schools and universities , that the language be banned from public usage and that the Polish language newspapers be either liquidated or forced to be printed in bilingual versions . 
 With limited local success and support , the Ostmarkenverein functioned primarily as a nationwide propaganda and pressure group . Its press organ , the Die Ostmark ( Eastern March ) was one of the primary sources of information on the Polish Question for the German public and shaped the national @-@ conservative views towards the ethnic conflict in the eastern territories of Germany . The Society also opened a number of libraries in the Polish @-@ dominated areas , where it supported the literary production of books and novels promoting an aggressive stance against the Poles . The popular <unk> ( Ostmark novels ) depicted Poles as non @-@ white and struggled to portray a two race dichotomy between " black " Poles and " white " Germans 
 However , it did not limit itself to mere cultural struggle for domination but also promoted a physical removal of the Poles from their lands in order to make space for the German colonization . The pressure of the H @-@ K @-@ T indeed made the government of von Caprivi adopt a firmer stance against the Poles . The ban on Polish schools was reintroduced and all teaching was to be done in German language . The ban was also used by the German police to harass the Polish trade union movement as they interpreted all public meetings as educational undertakings . 
 An important issue was the colonisation of Polish territory : the organisation actively supported the nationalist policy of Germanisation through removal of Polish population and promoting settlement of ethnic Germans in the eastern regions of the German Empire . It was among the main supporters of creation of the Settlement Commission , an official authority with a fund to buy up the land from the Poles and redistribute it among German settlers . Since 1905 the organisation also proposed and lobbied for a law that would allow forced eviction of Polish owners of land , and succeed in 1908 when the law was eventually passed . However , it remained on paper in the following years , to which the H @-@ K @-@ T responded with large scale propaganda campaign in the press . The campaign proved to be successful and on October 12 , 1912 the Prussian government issued a decision allowing eviction of Polish property owners in Greater Poland . 
 = = Social base = = 
 Interestingly , although the H @-@ K @-@ T is to this day primarily associated with the Junkers , it was one of the groups to oppose the Society 's goals the most . Initially treated with reserve by most of the conservative Prussian aristocracy , with time it became actively opposed by many of them . The Society opposed any immigration of Poles from the Russian Poland to the area , while the Junkers gained large profits from seasonal workers migrating there every year , mostly from other parts of Poland . Also the German colonists brought to formerly Polish lands by the Settlement Commission or the German government largely benefited from the cooperation with their Polish neighbours and mostly either ignored the <unk> or even actively opposed their ideas . This made the Ostmarkenverein an organization formed mostly by the German bourgeoisie and settlers , that is middle class members of the local administration , and not the Prussian Junkers . Other notable group of supporters included the local artisans and businessmen , whose interests were endangered by the organic work , that is the Polish response to the economical competition promoted by the Settlement Commission and other similar organizations . In a sample probe of H @-@ K @-@ T 's members , the social classes represented were as follows : 
 26 @.@ 6 % of civil servants and members of German administration 
 17 @.@ 6 % of artisans 
 15 @.@ 7 % of businessmen 
 14 @.@ 0 % of teachers 
 10 @.@ 7 % of landowners 
 4 @.@ 2 % of clergymen 
 2 @.@ 7 % of army officers 
 0 @.@ 7 % of <unk> 
 6 @.@ 5 % of other professions 
 1 @.@ 3 % of people with no designation 
 = = Effects and after @-@ life = = 
 = = = In Poland = = = 
 By 1913 the Society had roughly 48 @,@ 000 members . Despite its fierce rhetoric , support from the local administration and certain popularity of its goals , the Society proved to be largely unsuccessful as were the projects it promoted . Much like other similar organizations , the H @-@ K @-@ T not only managed to incite some public awareness to the Polish Question within German public and <unk> the German policies in the area , but also sparked a Polish reaction . As an effect of the external pressure , the Poles living in the German Empire started to organize themselves in order to prevent the plans of Germanisation . In addition , the main opposition centre on the Polish side became the middle class rather than aristocracy , which strengthened the Polish resistance and intensified the national sentiment within the Polish society . Also , the pressure from the German nationalists resulted in strengthening the Polish national @-@ democrats , particularly the Polish National @-@ Democratic Party of Roman Dmowski and Wojciech <unk> . 
 For instance , the Settlement Commission throughout the 27 years of its existence managed to plant about 25 @,@ 000 German families on 1 @,@ 240 km ² ( 479 mi ² ) of land in Greater Poland and Pomerania . However , at the same time the reaction of Polish societies resulted in about 35 @,@ 000 new Polish farmers being settled in the area of roughly 1 @,@ 500 km ² ( 579 mi ² ) of land . Similarly , the attempts at banning the teaching of religion in Polish language met with a nationwide resistance and several school strikes that sparked a campaign in foreign media . 
 = = = In Germany = = = 
 All in all , even though the H @-@ K @-@ T Society was not the most influential and its exact influence on the German governments is disputable , it was among the best @-@ heard and for the Polish people became one of the symbols of oppression , chauvinism , and national discrimination , thus poisoning the Polish @-@ German relations both in the borderland and in entire Germany . On the eve of World War I the <unk> on both sides ran high and the liberal politicians who were seeking some compromise with the German Empire were seen as traitors , while German politicians trying to tone down the aggressive rhetoric on both sides were under attack from the <unk> . This situation proved vital to the failure of German plans of creation of Mitteleuropa during the Great War , as the Polish political scene was taken over mostly by politicians hostile to Germany . 
 = = = Post @-@ war organisation = = = 
 The works of the Ostmarkenverein practically ceased during the war . At its end , some of its members joined the Deutsche Vereinigung ( German Association ) , a society that aimed at preventing newly restored Poland from acquiring the lands that were formerly in Prussia . Many more of its members feared possible Polish reprisals after the take @-@ over of Greater Poland , Pomerania and Silesia , and were among the first to pack their belongings and head westwards after the armistice , while others stayed in the lands that were taken over by Poland , protected by the Minority Treaty . Even though the Ostmarkenverein had lost its main rationale as Germany had no influence over the lands of the Republic of Poland , it continued to exist in a rump form . Headed from Berlin , it tried to force the government of the Weimar Republic to use the threat of reprisals against the remaining Polish minority in Germany in order to win further concessions for the German minority in Poland . However , the post @-@ war government of Gustav Stresemann mostly rejected the pleas as there were many more Germans in Poland than Poles in Germany , and such a tit @-@ for @-@ tat tactics would harm the German side more . The Society continued to exist in Berlin , limiting its activities mostly to a press campaign and rhetoric , but its meaning was seriously limited . Finally , after the advent of Adolf Hitler 's rule in Germany , it was disbanded by the Nazis . Some of its former members , now living in Poland , remained members of other German societies and organizations , and formed the core of the German Fifth column during the German Invasion of Poland of 1939 . 
 = Darren Aronofsky = 
 Darren Aronofsky ( born February 12 , 1969 ) is an American film director , screenwriter , film producer and environmentalist . He has received acclaim for his often surreal , disturbing films and has been noted for frequent collaborations with cinematographer Matthew Libatique , film editor Andrew <unk> and composer Clint Mansell . His films have generated controversy and are known for their often violent , bleak subject matter . " The themes in the six Aronofsky ’ s films from 1998 to 2014 include the search for perfection , the search for happiness , longing for love , intoxication with publicity , the pain of alienation , and the burden of responsibility . " 
 Aronofsky attended Harvard University , where he studied film and social anthropology , and the American Film Institute where he studied directing . He won several film awards after completing his senior thesis film , Supermarket Sweep , which went on to become a National Student Academy Award finalist . Aronofsky 's feature debut , the surrealist psychological thriller Pi , was shot in November 1997 . The low @-@ budget , $ 60 @,@ 000 production , starring Sean <unk> , was sold to Artisan Entertainment for $ 1 million , and grossed over $ 3 million ; Aronofsky won the Directing Award at the 1998 Sundance Film Festival and an Independent Spirit Award for best first screenplay . 
 Aronofsky 's followup , the psychological drama Requiem for a Dream , was based on the novel of the same name by Hubert Selby , Jr . The film garnered strong reviews and received an Academy Award nomination for Ellen Burstyn 's performance . After turning down an opportunity to direct an entry in the Batman film series and writing the World War II horror film Below , Aronofsky began production on his third film , the romantic fantasy sci @-@ fi drama The Fountain . The film received mixed reviews and performed poorly at the box @-@ office , but has since garnered a cult following . 
 His fourth film , the sports drama The Wrestler , was released to critical acclaim and both of the film 's stars , Mickey Rourke and Marisa Tomei , received Academy Award nominations . In 2010 Aronofsky was an executive producer on The Fighter and his fifth feature film , the psychological horror film Black Swan , received further critical acclaim and many accolades , being nominated for five Academy Awards including Best Picture and Best Director and winning Best Actress for Natalie Portman 's performance in the film . Aronofsky received nominations for Best Director at the Golden Globes , and a Directors Guild of America Award nomination . His sixth film , the biblically inspired epic Noah , was released in theaters on March 28 , 2014 . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Aronofsky was born in Brooklyn , New York , in 1969 , the son of public school teachers Charlotte and Abraham Aronofsky . He grew up in the borough 's Manhattan Beach neighborhood , where " I was raised culturally Jewish , but there was very little spiritual attendance in temple . It was a cultural thing — celebrating the holidays , knowing where you came from , knowing your history , having respect for what your people have been through . " He graduated from Edward R. Murrow High School . He has one sister , Patti , who attended a professional ballet school through high school . His parents would often take him to Broadway theater performances , which sparked his keen interest in show business . 
 During his youth , he trained as a field biologist with The School for Field Studies in Kenya in 1985 and Alaska in 1986 . He attended school in Kenya to pursue an interest in learning about ungulates . He later said , " [ T ] he School for Field Studies changed the way I perceived the world " . Aronofsky 's interest in the outdoors led him to backpack his way through Europe and the Middle East . In 1987 he entered Harvard University , where he majored in social anthropology and studied filmmaking ; he graduated in 1991 . 
 He became seriously interested in film while attending Harvard after befriending Dan Schrecker , an aspiring animator . He met Sean <unk> at Harvard , who would go on to star in Aronofsky 's first film , Pi . His other cinematic influences included Akira Kurosawa , Roman Polanski , Terry Gilliam , Shinya Tsukamoto , Hubert Selby , Jr . Spike Lee , and Jim Jarmusch . 
 Aronofsky 's senior thesis film , Supermarket Sweep , was a finalist in the 1991 Student Academy Awards . In 1992 , Aronofsky received his MFA degree in directing from the AFI Conservatory , where his classmates included Todd Field , Doug Ellin , Scott Silver and Mark Waters . He won the institute 's Franklin J. Schaffner Alumni Medal . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early work = = = 
 Aronofsky 's debut feature , Pi ( also known as π ) , was shot in November 1997 . The film was financed entirely from $ 100 donations from friends and family . In return , he promised to pay each back $ 150 if the film made money , and they would at least get screen credit if the film lost money . While visiting Israel as a youth he spent a couple days in an Orthodox yeshiva , an experience that later informed the movie . Producing the film with an initial budget of $ 60 @,@ 000 , Aronofsky premiered Pi at the 1998 Sundance Film Festival , where he won the Best Director award . The film itself was nominated for a special Jury Award . Artisan Entertainment bought distribution rights for $ 1 million . The film was released to the public later that year to critical acclaim and it grossed a total of $ 3 @,@ 221 @,@ 152 at the box @-@ office . 
 Aronofsky followed his debut with Requiem for a Dream , a film based on Hubert Selby , Jr . ' s novel of the same name . He was paid $ 50 @,@ 000 , and worked for three years with nearly the same production team as his previous film . Following the financial breakout of Pi , he was capable of hiring established stars , including Ellen Burstyn and Jared Leto , and received a budget of $ 3 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 to produce the film . Production of the film occurred over the period of one year , with the film being released in October 2000 . The film went on to gross $ 7 @,@ 390 @,@ 108 worldwide . Aronofsky received acclaim for his stylish direction , and was nominated for another Independent Spirit Award , this time for Best Director . The film itself was nominated for five awards in total , winning two , for Best Actress and Cinematography . Clint Mansell 's soundtrack for the film was also well @-@ regarded , and since their first collaboration in 1996 , Mansell has composed the music to every Aronofsky film . Ellen Burstyn was nominated for numerous awards , including for an Academy Award for Best Actress , and ultimately won the Independent Spirit Award . Aronofsky was awarded the PRISM Award from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation with the National Institute on Drug Abuse for the film ’ s depiction of drug abuse . 
 In May 2000 , Aronofsky was briefly attached to make an adaptation of David Wiesner 's 1999 children 's book Sector 7 for Nickelodeon Movies , the project remains unmade . In mid @-@ 2000 , Warner Bros. hired Aronofsky to write and direct Batman : Year One , which was to be the fifth film in the Batman franchise . Aronofsky , who collaborated with Frank Miller on an unproduced script for Ronin , brought Miller to co @-@ write Year One with him , intending to reboot the series . " It 's somewhat based on the comic book , " Aronofsky later said . " Toss out everything you can imagine about Batman ! Everything ! We 're starting completely anew . " Regular Aronofsky collaborator Matthew Libatique was set as cinematographer , and Aronofsky had also approached Christian Bale for the role of Batman . Bale later would be cast in the role for Batman Begins . After that project failed to develop , Aronofsky declined the opportunity to direct an entry in the Batman franchise . 
 In March 2001 , he helped write the screenplay to the horror film Below , which he also produced . In April 2001 , Aronofsky entered negotiations with Warner Bros. and Village Roadshow to direct a then @-@ untitled science fiction film , with Brad Pitt in the lead role . In June 2001 , actress Cate Blanchett entered talks to join the film , which Aronofsky , wanting the title to remain secret , had given the working title of The Last Man . Production was postponed to wait for a pregnant Blanchett to give birth to her child in December 2001 . Production was ultimately set for late October 2002 in Queensland and Sydney . By now officially titled The Fountain , the film had a budget of $ 70 million , co @-@ financed by Warner Bros. and New Regency , which had filled the gap after Village Roadshow withdrew . Pitt left the project seven weeks before the first day of shooting , halting production . In February 2004 , Warner Bros. resurrected it on a $ 35 million budget with Hugh Jackman in the lead role . In August , actress Rachel Weisz filled the vacancy left by Blanchett . The Fountain was released on November 22 , 2006 , a day before the American Thanksgiving holiday ; ultimately it grossed $ 15 @,@ 978 @,@ 422 in theaters worldwide . Audiences and critics were divided in their responses to it . 
 = = = Breakthrough = = = 
 In 2007 , Aronofsky hired writer Scott Silver to develop The Fighter with him . He had approached actor Christian Bale for the film , but Aronofsky dropped out because of its similarities to The Wrestler and to work on MGM 's RoboCop remake . In July 2010 , Aronofsky had left the project due to uncertainty over the financially distressed studio 's future . When asked about the film , he said , " I think I 'm still attached . I don 't know . I haven 't heard from anyone in a while . " Later during 2007 , Aronofsky said he was planning to film a movie about Noah 's Ark . 
 Aronofsky had the idea for The Wrestler for over a decade . He hired Robert D. Siegal to turn his idea into a script . The actor Nicolas Cage entered negotiations in October 2007 to star as Randy , the film 's protagonist . The following month Cage left the project , and Mickey Rourke replaced him in the lead role . Aronofsky said that Cage pulled out of the movie because the director wanted Rourke to star ; Aronofsky said , stating that Cage was " a complete gentleman , and he understood that my heart was with Mickey and he stepped aside . I have so much respect for Nic Cage as an actor and I think it really could have worked with Nic but , you know , Nic was incredibly supportive of Mickey and he is old friends with Mickey and really wanted to help with this opportunity , so he pulled himself out of the race . " Cage responded , " I wasn 't quote ' dropped ' from the movie . I resigned from the movie because I didn 't think I had enough time to achieve the look of the wrestler who was on steroids , which I would never do . " The roughly 40 @-@ day shoot began in January 2008 . 
 The Wrestler premiered at the 65th Venice International Film Festival . Initially flying under the radar , the film wound up winning the Golden Lion , the highest award at the world 's oldest film festival . The Wrestler received great critical acclaim , and both Rourke and co @-@ star Marisa Tomei received Academy Award , Golden Globe , SAG , and BAFTA nominations for their performances . Rourke won a Golden Globe , as did Bruce Springsteen for his original song written for the film . The Wrestler grossed $ 44 @,@ 674 @,@ 354 worldwide on a budget of $ 6 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 making it Aronofsky 's highest grossing film to that point . 
 Aronofsky 's next film was Black Swan , which had been in development since 2001 , a psychological thriller horror film about a New York City ballerina . The film starred actress Natalie Portman , whom Aronofsky had known since 2000 . She introduced Aronofsky to Mila Kunis , who joined the cast in 2009 . Black Swan had its world premiere as the opening film at the 67th Venice Film Festival on October 2010 . It received a standing ovation whose length Variety said made it " one of the strongest Venice openers in recent memory " . 
 Black Swan has received high praise from film critics , and received a record 12 Broadcast Film Critics Association nominations , four Independent Spirit Award nominations , four Golden Globe nominations , three SAG nominations , and many more accolades . Aronofsky received a Golden Globe nomination for Best Director . The film broke limited @-@ release box @-@ office records and grossed an unexpectedly high $ 329 @,@ 398 @,@ 046 . On January 25 , 2011 , the film was nominated for a total of five Academy Awards ; Best Picture , Best Director , Best Actress , Best Cinematography and Best Film Editing and in March , Portman won as Best Actress . The film was awarded the PRISM Award from the Substance Abuse & Mental Health Services Administration for its depiction of mental health issues . Aronofsky served as an executive producer on The Fighter , which was also nominated for Best Picture at the Oscars . 
 = = = Larger budget production = = = 
 Aronofsky was attached to The Wolverine , which was scheduled to begin production in March 2011 , but he left the project due to scheduling issues . The film was set to be sixth entry of the X @-@ Men film series , featuring a story revolving around Wolverine 's adventures in Japan . In December 2011 , Aronofsky directed the music video for Lou Reed and Metallica 's " The View " from their album Lulu . 
 In 2011 , Aronofsky tried to launch production on Noah , a retelling of the Bible story of Noah 's Ark , projected for a $ 115 million budget . By the following year , the film had secured funding and distribution from New Regency and Paramount Pictures , with Russell Crowe hired for the title role . The film adapted a serialized graphic novel written by Aronofsky and Ari Handel , published in French in October 2011 by the Belgian publisher Le Lombard . By July 2012 , Aronofsky 's crews were building an ark set in Oyster Bay , Long Island , New York . Aronofsky announced the start of filming on Noah on Twitter in the same month , tweeting shots of the filming in Iceland . The film featured Emma Watson , Anthony Hopkins , Logan Lerman , and Jennifer Connelly , with the latter having also starred in Requiem for a Dream . During its opening weekend , Noah held the largest non @-@ sequel opening within Russia and Brazil , and the fourth @-@ largest opening of all time . Aronofsky did not use live animals for the film , saying in a PETA video that " There 's really no reason to do it anymore because the technology has arrived . " The HSUS gave him their inaugural Humane Filmmaker Award in honor of his use of computer @-@ generated animals . 
 Aronofsky was set to direct an HBO series pilot called Hobgoblin . Announced on June 16 , 2011 , the series would have depicted a group of magicians and con artists who use their powers of deception to defeat Hitler during World War II . He was set to work on this project with Pulitzer Prize winning author Michael Chabon and his wife Ayelet Waldman . In June , 2013 , it was announced that HBO had dropped the show and Aronofsky had pulled out , as well . It was also announced that Aronofsky will produce an upcoming horror film , <unk> , written by Black Swan writer Mark Heyman . George <unk> of the The Adjustment Bureau is set to direct the project , which will be overseen by Aronofsky . 
 On October 13 , 2015 , Variety reported that he was eyeing a spring start of his next directional untitled project based on his own script , and Jennifer Lawrence was in talks to join the film while there were no greenlit on any of her other projects . The project was not yet attached with any studio but it would probably go to New Regency under the first @-@ look deal with Aronofsky . Domhnall Gleeson , Michelle Pfeiffer & Ed Harris were added to the cast in April 2016 . On May 25 , 2016 the title was revealed as Day 6 and that the film would begin shooting in June in Montreal . The film began shooting on June 27 , 2016 . 
 = = Directing style = = 
 Aronofsky 's first two films , Pi and Requiem for a Dream , were low @-@ budget and used montages of extremely short shots , also known as hip hop montages . While an average 100 @-@ minute film has 600 to 700 cuts Requiem features more than 2 @,@ 000 . Split @-@ screen is used extensively , along with extremely tight closeups . Long tracking shots ( including those shot with an apparatus strapping a camera to an actor , called the <unk> ) and time @-@ lapse photography are also prominent stylistic devices . Often with his films , Aronofsky alternates between extreme closeups and extreme distance shots to create a sense of isolation . 
 With The Fountain , Aronofsky restricted the use of computer @-@ generated imagery . Henrik Fett , the visual effects supervisor of Look Effects , said , " Darren was quite clear on what he wanted and his intent to greatly minimize the use of computer graphics ... [ and ] I think the results are outstanding . " He used more subtle directing in The Wrestler and Black Swan , which less visceral directing style showcases the acting and narratives . Aronofsky filmed both works with a muted palette and a grainy style . The cinematographer Matthew Libatique has collaborated with Aronofsky on five films , and film composer Clint Mansell has worked with him on all six films . Mansell 's music is an often important element of the films . 
 = = = Themes and influences = = = 
 Pi features several references to mathematics and mathematical theories . In a 1998 interview , Aronofsky acknowledged several influences for " Pi " : 
 " I 'm a big fan of Kurosawa and Fellini . In this film in particular I think there 's a lot of Roman Polanski influence and Terry Gilliam influence as well as a Japanese director named Shinya Tsukamoto — he directed The Iron Man , Tetsuo . " 
 The visual style of " Pi " ( and even " Requiem for a Dream " ) features numerous similarities to the Japanese film Tetsuo : The Iron Man . 
 The majority of reviewers characterized Requiem for a Dream in the genre of " drug movies " , along with films like The Basketball Diaries , Trainspotting , Spun , and Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas . But , Aronofsky placed his movie in a wider context , saying : 
 Requiem for a Dream is not about heroin or about drugs ... The Harry @-@ Tyrone @-@ Marion story is a very traditional heroin story . But putting it side by side with the Sara story , we suddenly say , ' Oh , my God , what is a drug ? ' The idea that the same inner monologue goes through a person 's head when they 're trying to quit drugs , as with cigarettes , as when they 're trying to not eat food so they can lose 20 pounds , was really fascinating to me . I thought it was an idea that we hadn 't seen on film and I wanted to bring it up on the screen . 
 With his friend Ari Handel , Aronofsky developed the plot for The Fountain ; the director wrote the screenplay . In 1999 , Aronofsky thought that The Matrix redefined the science fiction genre in film . He sought to make a science fiction film that explored new territory , as did The Matrix and its predecessors Star Wars and 2001 : A Space Odyssey . He wanted to go beyond science fiction films with plots driven by technology and science . 
 In the Toronto International Film Festival interview conducted by James Rocchi , Aronofsky credited the 1957 Charles Mingus song " The Clown " as a major influence on The Wrestler . It 's an instrumental piece , with a poem read over the music about a clown who accidentally discovers the bloodlust of the crowds and eventually kills himself in performance . 
 Aronofsky called Black Swan a companion piece to The Wrestler , recalling one of his early projects about a love affair between a wrestler and a ballerina . He eventually separated the wrestling and the ballet worlds , considering them as " too much for one movie " . He compared the two films : " Wrestling some consider the lowest art — if they would even call it art — and ballet some people consider the highest art . But what was amazing to me was how similar the performers in both of these worlds are . They both make incredible use of their bodies to express themselves . " About the psychological thriller nature of Black Swan , actress Natalie Portman compared the film 's tone to Polanski 's 1968 film Rosemary 's Baby , while Aronofsky said Polanski 's Repulsion ( 1965 ) and The Tenant ( 1976 ) were " big influences " on the final film . Actor Vincent Cassel also compared Black Swan to Polanski 's early films , commenting that it was also influenced by Alejandro Jodorowsky ' movies and David Cronenberg 's early work . 
 = = Controversy = = 
 Several aspects of Aronofsky 's films have been controversial , most notably Requiem for a Dream , The Wrestler and Black Swan . Requiem for a Dream was originally set for release in 2000 , but it met with controversy in the United States , being rated NC @-@ 17 by the MPAA due to a graphic sex scene . Aronofsky appealed the rating , claiming that cutting any portion of the film would dilute its message . The appeal was denied and Artisan decided to release the film unrated . 
 The Wrestler has been condemned as an " anti @-@ Iranian " film in many Iran newspapers and websites , in response to a scene in which Mickey Rourke violently breaks a pole bearing an Iranian flag in half across his knee . Borna News , a state @-@ run Iranian newspaper , also criticized the heel ( bad @-@ guy ) wrestler character " The Ayatollah . " Portrayed as a villain , he wears Arabic items of clothing ( keffiyeh and <unk> ) , which the newspaper believed was intended to lead audiences to associate Iranians with Arabs . In the wrestling ring , he wears a skimpy leotard in the pattern of an Iranian flag with the <unk> character , representing the first letter of the word Ayatollah . 
 Some Iranian newspapers avoided mentioning the character , presumably to avoid offending Iran 's clerical rulers . On March 2009 , Javad <unk> , cultural adviser to President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad , demanded an apology from a delegation of Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences actors and producers visiting Iran for what he characterized as negative and unfair portrayals of the Islamic republic in The Wrestler and other Hollywood films . 
 The question of who had designed 40 ballet costumes for Portman and the dancers in Black Swan was one publicized controversy related to the film . The media gave substantial coverage to the dance double controversy : how much credit for the dancing in the film was being given to Portman and how much to her " dance double " , Sarah Lane , an American Ballet Theatre soloist . Lane claimed to have danced more than she was credited . The director and Fox Searchlight disputed Lane 's claim . Their released statements said , " We were fortunate to have Sarah there to cover the more complicated dance sequences and we have nothing but praise for the hard work she did . However , Natalie herself did most of the dancing featured in the final film . " 
 Aronofsky said in an interview with Entertainment Weekly : 
 " I had my editor count shots . There are 139 dance shots in the film . 111 are Natalie Portman untouched . 28 are her dance double Sarah Lane . If you do the math , that 's 80 % Natalie Portman . What about duration ? The shots that feature the double are wide shots and rarely play for longer than one second . There are two complicated longer dance sequences that we used face replacement . Even so , if we were judging by time , over 90 % would be Natalie Portman . And to be clear , Natalie did dance en pointe in pointe shoes . If you look at the final shot of the opening prologue , which lasts 85 seconds , and was danced completely by Natalie , she exits the scene on pointe . That is completely her without any digital magic . " 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Aronofsky began dating English actress Rachel Weisz in the summer of 2001 , and in 2005 they were engaged . Their son , Henry Chance Aronofsky , was born on May 31 , 2006 , in New York City . The couple resided in the East Village in Manhattan . In November 2010 , Weisz and Aronofsky announced that they had been apart for months , but remain close friends and are committed to raising their son together in New York . In 2012 , he began dating Canadian film and television producer Brandi @-@ Ann <unk> . They were engaged but separated in 2015 . 
 He said of his spiritual beliefs in 2014 , " I think I definitely believe . My biggest expression of what I believe is in The Fountain " . 
 In April 2011 , Aronofsky was announced as the President of the Jury for the 68th Venice International Film Festival . 
 In November 2014 , Aronofsky was announced as the President of the Jury for the 65th Berlin International Film Festival , for February 2015 . 
 = = = Environmental activism = = = 
 Aronofsky is known for his environmental activism . In 2014 he traveled to the Alberta Tar Sands with the Sierra Club ’ s Michael Brune and Leonardo DiCaprio . In 2015 he traveled to Alaska 's Arctic National Wildlife Refuge with Brune , Kerri Russell , and the leaders of several veterans groups . 
 He has received the Humanitarian Award from both the Humane Society of the United States and PETA . 
 In 2015 , he collaborated with the artist JR on “ The Standing March , ” a public art installation in Paris encouraging diplomats at <unk> to take action against climate change . 
 He is a board member of The Sierra Club Foundation and The School of Field Studies . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Feature films = = = 
 = = = Unreleased short films = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 One Strange Rock 
 = = Accolades = = 
 = Woohoo ( Christina Aguilera song ) = 
 " Woohoo " is a song by American recording artist Christina Aguilera , featuring American rapper Nicki Minaj . The song was written by Aguilera , Onika Maraj , Claude Kelly , Ester Dean and Jamal " Polow da Don " Jones , and produced by Polow da Don , for Aguilera 's sixth studio album , Bionic ( 2010 ) . " Woohoo " was serviced to rhythmic contemporary crossover airplay as the album 's second radio single on May 25 , 2010 . The song , which contains a sample of the 1972 song " Add már <unk> az <unk> " by Kati Kovács , lyrically speaks about the act of oral sex . 
 " Woohoo " has been described as an electro @-@ R & B and dancehall track . The song received mixed to positive reviews from critics , some of whom praised Minaj 's appearance and Aguilera 's vocals . Many noted its similarities to Kelis 's " Milkshake " . However , others expressed distaste for the song 's sexual nature . " Woohoo " debuted and peaked at 46 and 79 in Canada and the United States , respectively . Aguilera performed the song in a medley with " Bionic " and " Not Myself Tonight " at the 2010 MTV Movie Awards . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Woohoo " was written by Aguilera , Maraj , Claude Kelly , Ester Dean and Polow da Don . The song is an electro , R & B and dancehall track . Aguilera 's vocals are distorted in parts . " Woohoo " contains a sample from the Hungarian song " Add már <unk> az <unk> " , originally sung by the Hungarian singer Kati Kovács in 1972 . The song 's chorus has been described as " shouty " and " sing @-@ song " . Rob Harvilla of The Village Voice noted that the song sounded like a mix of " Milkshake " and " Lip Gloss " with " electro synths " . Lyrically , the song is about the act of oral sex . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Woohoo " received mixed to positive reviews from critics , most of them commended Aguilera 's vocals and praising Minaj 's appearance . However , the others were not impressed with the song 's sexual nature . Sara D. Anderson of AOL Music said the " provocative , dancehall track nicely fuses Aguilera 's powerful voice with Minaj 's MC tactics " . Benjamin Boles of Now Magazine called the track the top track on Bionic , commenting that Minaj 's cameo " rescues " the song . Alexis Petridis of The Guardian , said , " If you 're going to do a five @-@ minute song about cunnilingus , it 's a good idea to enlist foul @-@ mouthed rapper Nicki Minaj , whose bug @-@ eyed contribution lends the proceedings an air of gripping abandon . " Chris Ryan of MTV Buzzworthy called the song " sexually explicit , funky club pop " , saying " In Nicki Minaj , Aguilera has found the perfect partner for her erotic @-@ pop adventures " . He also called the song a " dirtier cousin of Rihanna 's ' Rude Boy ' or ' Hollaback Girl ' " , and commended Minaj 's verse . 
 Becky Bain of Idolator said the song 's " catchiness " was " miles ahead " of " Not Myself Tonight " , also compared it to " Hollaback Girl " . Bain also said , " If there 's one person who can match Christina Aguilera 's naughtiness , it 's Nicki Minaj , so these two pretty much make a perfect pair for this type of song . " Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic said the track had an " incessant title loop piercing like a dental drill " and said it " doesn 't work as temptation " . He also commented " her crassness is no longer alienating as it was on Stripped " . Michael Cragg of musicOMH also compared the song to dental work , commenting that the song , " which is about oral sex but is about as sexy as going to the dentist . " Genevieve Koski of The A.V. Club called the song along with the " meat " of Bionic , " already @-@ passé electro trash . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In its first week of release , " Woohoo " debuted at 46 on the Canadian Hot 100 , and 79 on the Billboard Hot 100 . The song became Aguilera 's 15th straight single to hit both charts , keeping her streak of having all of her singles chart on the Billboard Hot 100 . The song fell off both charts the following week . However , due to increased digital sales after her performance at the 2010 MTV Movie Awards and the release of Bionic , the song re @-@ entered the Billboard Hot 100 at number 99 . The song also charted at number 148 on the UK Singles Chart after the release of Bionic . 
 = = Live performance = = 
 Aguilera sang a portion of the song , alongside " Bionic " and " Not Myself Tonight " , at the 2010 MTV Movie Awards . During " Woohoo " , the last of the set , Aguilera and her backup dancers removed their leather capes and revealing painted red hearts on their groins , ending with Aguilera 's LED heart glowing . James Montgomery of MTV News referred to the song as a " seriously sexy dance number . " Montgomery described the performance 's ending , stating , " Not to be outdone , Aguilera ended things by standing tall at center stage , the camera zooming in on her midsection , which now bore a beating heart of its own . " 
 Most critics were not impressed with the medley , comparing it to Aguilera 's identity during the Bionic era . Tamar Anitai , also of MTV Buzzworthy summarized the performance saying it " was all about her " I @-@ I 'm @-@ still @-@ a @-@ diva " vocals , frenzied stage show , and adult @-@ only innuendo ... And then this happened . " She went on to comment also sarcastically , " This is so just Christina Aguilera 's way of saying she loves you ! And that the diminutive diva still has a sense of humor .... It 's like a little knowing wink that assures you that when she 's not changing diapers and doing mommy stuff , <unk> 's hanging out at dance party sex dungeons and wailing from the bottom of her light @-@ up hoo @-@ ha . She is <unk> not the same girl who once <unk> around on the Disney Channel in a <unk> . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital download 
 " Woohoo " – 5 : 29 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Songwriting – Christina Aguilera , Onika Maraj , Claude Kelly , Ester Dean , Polow da Don 
 Production – Polow da Don 
 Vocal production — additional by Claude Kelly 
 Mixing – Jaycen Joshua , assisted by Giancarlo Lino 
 Engineering – assistant , Matt <unk> 
 Recording — Josh Mosser and Jeremy Stevenson 
 Vocal recording — Oscar Ramirez 
 Source 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Radio and release history = = 
 = Pornography ( album ) = 
 Pornography is the fourth studio album by English rock band the Cure , released on 4 May 1982 by the record label Fiction . Preceded by the non @-@ album single " Charlotte Sometimes " late the previous year , Pornography was the band 's first album with a new producer , Phil Thornalley , and was recorded at RAK Studios from January to April . The sessions saw the group on the brink of collapse , with heavy drug use , band in @-@ fighting and group leader Robert Smith 's depression fuelling the album 's musical and lyrical content . Pornography represents the conclusion of the group 's early dark , gloomy musical phase which began with Seventeen Seconds in 1980 . 
 Following its release , bass guitarist Simon Gallup left the band and the Cure switched to a much brighter and more radio @-@ friendly new wave sound . While poorly received by critics at the time of release , Pornography was their most popular album to date , reaching No. 8 in the UK charts . Pornography has since gone on to gain acclaim from critics , and is now considered an important milestone in the development of the gothic rock genre . The band has performed the album live in its entirety as part of the Trilogy concerts . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 Following the band 's previous album , 1981 's Faith , the non @-@ album single " Charlotte Sometimes " was released . The single , in particular its nightmarish and hallucinatory B @-@ side " <unk> in Her Head " , would hint at what was to come in Pornography . 
 In the words of Robert Smith , regarding the album 's conception , " I had two choices at the time , which were either completely giving in [ committing suicide ] or making a record of it and getting it out of me " . He also claims he " really thought that was it for the group . I had every intention of signing off . I wanted to make the ultimate ' fuck off ' record , and then sign off [ the band ] " . Smith was mentally exhausted during that period of time : " I was in a really depressed frame of mind between 1981 and 1982 " . The band " had been touring for about 200 days a year and it all got a bit too much because there was never any time to do anything else " . 
 The band , Smith in particular , wanted to make the album with a different producer than Mike Hedges , who had produced Seventeen Seconds and Faith . The group settled on Phil Thornalley . Pornography is the last Cure album to feature founding band member Lol Tolhurst as the band 's drummer ( he then became the band 's keyboardist ) , and also marked the first time he played keyboards on a Cure release . The album was recorded at RAK Studios from January to April 1982 . 
 On the album 's recording sessions , Smith noted " there was a lot of drugs involved " . The band took LSD and drank a lot of alcohol , and to save money , they slept in the office of their record label . The musicians usually turned up at eight , and left at midday looking " fairly deranged " . Smith related : " We had an arrangement with the off @-@ licence up the road , every night they would bring in supplies . We decided we weren ’ t going to throw anything out . We built this mountain of empties in the corner , a gigantic pile of debris in the corner . It just grew and grew " . According to Tolhurst , " we wanted to make the ultimate , intense album . I can 't remember exactly why , but we did " . The recording sessions commenced and concluded in three weeks . Smith noted , " At the time , I lost every friend I had , everyone , without exception , because I was incredibly obnoxious , appalling , self @-@ centered " . He also noted that with the album , he " channeled all the self @-@ destructive elements of my personality into doing something " . 
 Polydor Records , the company in charge of Fiction Records , the label on which the album was released , was initially displeased with the album 's title , which it saw as being potentially offensive . Following the album 's release , Simon Gallup left the group . 
 = = Content = = 
 Regarding the album 's musical style , NME reviewer Dave Hill wrote , " The drums , guitars , voice and production style are pressed scrupulously together in a murderous unity of surging , textured mood " . Hill further described it as " Phil Spector in Hell " . Trouser Press said about the track " A Short Term Effect " : It " stresses <unk> with Smith 's echo @-@ laden voice decelerating at the end of each phrase " . Ira Robbins observed that " the song closest to basic pop " is " A Strange Day " : It " has overdubbed backing vocals plus a delineated verse and chorus wrapped in some strangely consonant guitar figures " . The journalist also commented : the song " Cold " " gets the full gothic treatment " , with " grandiose minor @-@ mode organ swells " . Describing the title track , writer Dave McCullough said that it " tries to copy Cabaret Voltaire , all shuddering tape noise " . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Pornography was released on 3 May 1982 . The album debuted and peaked at No. 8 in the UK Albums Chart , staying in the chart for nine weeks . Fiction owner Chris Parry found " The Hanging Garden " to be the album 's only potential single , and after being " polished " by <unk> and Smith , was released as a single on 12 July , reaching No. 32 in the UK Singles Chart . 
 Despite the commercial performance of the album , Pornography was not well received by most music critics upon its release . Rolling Stone initially gave the album 1 @.@ 5 stars out of 5 , with reviewer J. D. Considine commenting that the Cure 's lyrics " [ seem ] stuck in the terminal malaise of adolescent existentialism " . Considine concluded , " Pornography comes off as the aural equivalent of a bad toothache . It isn 't the pain that irks , it 's the persistent dullness " . Robert Christgau , writing in The Village Voice , derided Smith 's " glum " lyrics and felt that he should " cheer up " . NME reviewer Dave Hill was ambivalent towards the album : " The Cure have collected the very purest feelings endemic to their age , and [ hold ] them right on the spot in their most unpleasantly real form [ ... ] This record portrays and parades its currency of exposed futility and naked fear with so few distractions or adornments , and so little sense of shame . It really piles it on " . Melody Maker 's Adam Sweeting shared a similar point of view , saying : " It 's downhill all the way , into ever @-@ darkening shadows ... passing through chilly marbled archways to the final rendezvous with the cold comfort of the slab " . Sounds wrote that despite a " genuine talent still at work " , the album " has too much music too cluttered a backing for Smith 's well @-@ intended observance [ ... ] Robert Smith seems locked in himself , a spiralling nightmare that leaves The Cure making a pompous sounding music that is , when all 's said and done , dryly meaningless " . At the opposite , Trouser Press was one of the very few magazines to write a favourable review . Writer Charles McCardell observed that " The Cure imposes an order that at first seems contrary to the basic preconceptions of rock ' n ' roll . For them , lyrics are everything . Instruments may set the scene , but they seldom stray from merely creating atmosphere " . McCardell finally hailed Pornography as a " uncompromising and challenging " work . 
 Retrospective views of the album have been favourable . Uncut called the album " a masterpiece of claustrophobic self @-@ loathing " . In their 2004 review , BBC opined , " Indeed , were it not for its sonic depth and sheer relentless conviction , Pornography 's extraordinary misanthropy would be laughable " . Rolling Stone gave the album a higher rating , 3 out of 5 stars , in The Rolling Stone Album Guide than the initial 1982 review . 
 In his biography of the Cure , Never Enough : The Story of the Cure , Jeff Apter explained : " Pornography turned out to be the kind of album — just like Lou Reed 's Berlin or Bowie 's coke @-@ fueled Low — that required some distance and a good few years of music history to be really appreciated " . Mark Coleman of Rolling Stone opined in 1995 : " Though Pornography is revered by <unk> as a masterstroke , normal listeners will probably find it impenetrable " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In 2005 , Spin cited the album as a " high @-@ water mark for goth 's musical evolution " . NME described Pornography as " arguably the album that invented goth " . Slant Magazine listed the album at No. 79 on its list of the best albums of the 1980s . In 2011 , NME listed Pornography at No. 6 on its " 50 Darkest Albums Ever " list . Mojo placed it at No. 83 in their list " 100 Records That Changed the World " . AllMusic critic Stewart Mason also described the record as " as one of the key goth rock albums of the ' 80s " . 
 According to Apter , Pornography would prove to be " enormously influential " , and has been cited as an influence by bands such as Deftones and System of a Down . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 In the period preceding and following the release of Pornography , the band started to develop their trademark image of big hair , smudged makeup and black clothes . Smith applied lipstick smeared around the eyes and the mouth . Under the lights , the lipstick melted , making it look , as Smith later put it " like we 'd been smacked in the face " . It was supposed to symbolise the violence of the new material but backstage , another kind of violence had begun to surface from the first dates of the tour . 
 The band performed in the UK in April 1982 . NME considered that the show " was all very skillfully deployed : a bruisingly clear sound of scathing force , a clockwork , Pavlovian <unk> , a variegation of light and shade in the song order that builds to the <unk> force of ' Pornography ' itself as the climax " . However , the mood on stage was not good : The journalist noted that Smith looked " dejected and tired " for his birthday . Behind the scene , Smith 's relationship with Gallup was deteriorating . When the tour reached Europe , tension was so high between the two musicians that they had a fight after a concert in Strasbourg . Tolhurst found out the next day that his two partners " had both gone back to England " . At home , Smith heard his father telling him : " Get right back out on that tour ! People have bought tickets ! " After two more weeks of touring , the band played their final show in Brussels . Tolhurst later related : " I remember sitting in the dressing room thinking , ' oh well , that 's the end of the band , then ' [ ... ] I went off to France for a bit . I guess I ran away . Escaping from the reality of The Cure " . Back in England , Smith took a rest with a month 's camping holiday to the Lake District to " clean up " . 
 In 2002 , 20 years after the release of Pornography , The Cure performed the album live in its entirety , along with Disintegration and Bloodflowers , as part of the Trilogy concerts . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written by the Cure ( Robert Smith , Simon Gallup and Lol Tolhurst ) 
 Side A 
 One Hundred Years – 6 : 40 
 A Short Term Effect – 4 : 22 
 The Hanging Garden – 4 : 33 
 Siamese Twins – 5 : 29 
 Side B 
 The <unk> – 6 : 15 
 A Strange Day – 5 : 04 
 Cold – 4 : 26 
 Pornography – 6 : 27 
 = = Personnel = = 
 The Cure 
 Robert Smith – vocals , guitar , keyboards ( " One Hundred Years " , " The Hanging Garden " , " Cold " , " Pornography " ) , cello ( " Cold " ) , production , engineering 
 Simon Gallup – bass guitar , keyboards ( " A Strange Day " , " Cold " , " Pornography " ) , production 
 Lol Tolhurst – drums , keyboards ( " One Hundred Years " ) , production 
 Technical 
 Phil Thornalley – production , engineering assistance 
 Mike <unk> – engineering 
 Michael <unk> – sleeve photography 
 Ben Kelly – sleeve design 
 = = Charts = = 
 = United Airlines Flight 232 = 
 United Airlines Flight 232 was a DC @-@ 10 ( registered N1819U ) that on July 19 , 1989 crash @-@ landed in Sioux City , Iowa after suffering catastrophic failure of its tail @-@ mounted engine , which led to the loss of all flight controls . The flight was en route from Stapleton International Airport in Denver , Colorado to O 'Hare International Airport in Chicago . Of the 296 people on board , 111 died in the accident and 185 survived . Despite the deaths , the accident is considered a prime example of successful crew resource management due to the large number of survivors and the manner in which the flight crew handled the emergency and landed the airplane without conventional control . The flight crew became well known as a result of their actions , in particular the captain , Alfred C. Haynes , and a DC @-@ 10 instructor on board who offered his assistance , Dennis E. Fitch . 
 = = General = = 
 The National Transportation Safety Board determined that the probable cause of this accident was the inadequate consideration given to human factors limitations in the inspection and quality control procedures used by United Airlines ' engine overhaul facility . These resulted in the failure to detect a fatigue crack originating from a previously undetected metallurgical defect located in a critical area of the stage 1 fan disk that was manufactured by General Electric Aircraft Engines . The uncontained manner in which the engine failed resulted in high @-@ speed metal fragments being hurled from the engine ; these fragments penetrated the hydraulic lines of all three independent hydraulic systems on board the aircraft , which rapidly lost their hydraulic fluid . The subsequent catastrophic disintegration of the disk resulted in the liberation of debris in a pattern of distribution and with energy levels that exceeded the level of protection provided by design features of the hydraulic systems that operate the DC @-@ 10 's flight controls ; the flight crew lost its ability to operate nearly all of them . Despite these losses , the crew was able to attain and then maintain limited control by using the throttles to adjust thrust to the remaining wing @-@ mounted engines . By using each engine independently , the crew made rough steering adjustments , and by using the engines together they were able to roughly adjust altitude . The crew guided the crippled jet to Sioux Gateway Airport and lined it up for landing on one of the runways . Without the use of flaps and slats , they were unable to slow down for landing , and were forced to attempt landing at a very high ground speed . The aircraft also landed at an extremely high rate of descent due to the inability to flare ( reduce the rate of descent before touchdown by increasing pitch ) . As a result , upon touchdown the aircraft broke apart , rolled over and caught fire . The largest section came to rest in a cornfield next to the runway . Despite the ferocity of the accident , 185 ( 62 @.@ 5 % ) passengers and crew survived owing to a variety of factors including the relatively controlled manner of the crash and the early notification of emergency services . 
 = = Involved = = 
 = = = Aircraft = = = 
 The accident airplane , a McDonnell Douglas DC @-@ 10 @-@ 10 ( registration N1819U ) , was delivered in 1971 and had been owned by UAL since then . Before departure on the flight from Denver on July 19 , 1989 , the airplane had been operated for a total of 43 @,@ 401 hours and 16 @,@ 997 cycles . The airplane was powered by General Electric Aircraft Engines ( GEAE ) CF6 @-@ 6D high bypass ratio turbofan engines . 
 = = = Flight crew = = = 
 Captain Alfred C. Haynes , 57 , was hired by United Airlines on February 23 , 1956 . He had 29 @,@ 967 hours of total flight time with United Airlines , of which 7 @,@ 190 was in the DC @-@ 10 . He held Airline Transport Pilot Certificate , latest issue September 21 , 1985 , with type ratings in the DC @-@ 10 and <unk> . He was type rated in the DC @-@ 10 on May 11 , 1983 . On April 6 , 1987 , he was <unk> as a DC @-@ 10 captain after having served as a B @-@ 727 captain since September 1985 . His most recent proficiency check in the DC @-@ 10 was completed on April 26 , 1989 . 
 First Officer William R. Records , 48 , was hired by National Airlines on August 25 , 1969 . He subsequently worked for Pan American World Airways . His first pilot activity at United Airlines was completion of the United Airlines indoctrination course ( <unk> Pilots to UAL ) on December 26 , 1985 . He estimated that he had accumulated approximately 20 @,@ 000 hours of total flight time . United 's records indicate that he has accrued 665 hours of flight time as a DC @-@ 10 first officer . Records completed United 's DC @-@ 10 transition course on August 8 , 1988 . This was also the date of his last proficiency check . 
 Second Officer Dudley J. Dvorak , 51 , was hired by United Airlines on May 19 , 1986 . He estimated that he had approximately 15 @,@ 000 hours of total flying time . United 's records indicate that he had accumulated 1 @,@ 903 hours as a second officer in the B @-@ 727 and 33 hours as a second officer in the DC @-@ 10 . Dvorak completed DC @-@ 10 transition training on June 8 , 1989 . This was also the date of his last check ride . 
 Training Check Airman Captain Dennis E. Fitch , 46 , was hired by United Airlines on January 2 , 1968 . He estimated that prior to his employment with United he had accrued between 1 @,@ 400 and 1 @,@ 500 hours of flight time with the Air National Guard . His total DC @-@ 10 time with United was 2 @,@ 987 hours , of which 1 @,@ 943 hours were accrued as a second officer , 965 hours as a first officer , and 79 hours as a captain . He was assigned as a DC @-@ 10 training check airman ( TCA ) at United 's Training Center in Denver , Colorado . 
 = = Events of crash = = 
 = = = Take off , engine failure , hydraulic system unresponsive = = = 
 Flight 232 took off at 14 : 09 ( CDT ) from Stapleton International Airport , Denver , Colorado , bound for O 'Hare International Airport in Chicago with continuing service to Philadelphia International Airport . 
 At 15 : 16 , while the plane was in a shallow right turn at 37 @,@ 000 feet , the fan disk of its tail @-@ mounted General Electric CF6 @-@ 6 engine failed and disintegrated . The debris from the failed disk was not contained by the engine 's nacelle , a housing that protects the engine . Pieces of the disk penetrated the aircraft 's tail section structure in numerous places , including the horizontal stabilizer . This fragmentation punctured the lines of all three hydraulic systems , allowing the fluid to rapidly drain away . 
 The pilots felt a jolt go through the aircraft . Warning lights illuminated that indicated that the autopilot had disengaged and the tail @-@ mounted number two engine was malfunctioning . Captain Haynes watched First Officer Records place his hands on the flight controls in response to the autopilot disconnecting and therefore focused his attention on the malfunctioning engine . Second Officer Dvorak obtained the engine failure checklist and read the first item : throttle power must be reduced to idle . Haynes was unable to move the throttle ; the linkage had been jammed as a result of the engine failure . The second item called for the fuel supply lever to be pulled to shutoff , but it would not move either . At this point , at Dvorak 's suggestion , the firewall shutoff valve was actuated , and the fuel flow to the engine was shut off . This part of the emergency took 14 seconds . 
 Meanwhile , First Officer Records noticed that the airliner was off @-@ course , and moved his control column to correct this , but the plane did not respond . Records reported to Captain Haynes that he could not control the airplane . Haynes , having just shut off the fuel supply to the malfunctioning engine , looked at Records and was surprised by what he saw : Records had the control column turned all the way to the left , commanding maximum left aileron , and pulled all the way back , commanding maximum up elevator . These inputs would never be utilized simultaneously in normal flight . What was more , despite these inputs , which command a roll to the left and the aircraft 's nose to rise , the aircraft was instead banking to the right with the nose dropping . Haynes took the flight controls and attempted to level the aircraft with his own control column . When this was ineffective , both Haynes and Records utilized their control columns at the same time in an attempt to recover from the steepening bank . The aircraft still did not respond . Out of options , and in danger of the aircraft rolling into a completely inverted position ( an unrecoverable situation which would result in a crash ) , the crew took the throttle for the left wing @-@ mounted number 1 engine and reduced the power to idle , while also taking the throttle for the right wing @-@ mounted number 3 engine and commanding maximum power . The resulting differential thrust ( no power on the left side and maximum power on the right side ) caused the airplane to slowly level out . 
 With the imminent danger over , the crew began to diagnose the situation on the flight deck . Dvorak discovered that the pressure gauges and quantity gauges on his instrument panel for the three hydraulic systems were registering zero , and reported this to Haynes . The three hydraulic systems were separate ; a single event in one system would not disable the other systems , but lines for all three systems shared the same 10 @-@ inch @-@ wide ( 250 mm ) route through the tail where the engine debris had penetrated . There was no additional backup system . The flight crew quickly realized that the initial failure had left all hydraulic systems , and therefore all control surfaces , inoperative . The crew called United Airlines ' maintenance base using one of their radios , but as a total loss of hydraulics on the DC @-@ 10 was considered " virtually impossible " , there were no procedures or guidelines for dealing with such an event . 
 = = = Help from Fitch , emergency landing and crash = = = 
 Due to the damage in the tail , the plane had a continual tendency to turn right , and without flight controls it was difficult to maintain a stable course . The plane began to slowly oscillate vertically in a phugoid cycle , which is characteristic of planes in which control surface command is lost . With each iteration of the cycle the aircraft lost approximately 1 @,@ 500 feet ( 460 m ) of altitude . Dennis E. Fitch , an off @-@ duty United Airlines DC @-@ 10 flight instructor , was seated in the first class section and , noticing the crew was having trouble controlling the airplane , offered his assistance to the flight attendants . Upon being informed that there was a DC @-@ 10 instructor on board , Haynes immediately invited him to the cockpit , hoping his instructional knowledge of the aircraft would help them regain control . 
 When he entered the cockpit and looked at the hydraulic gauges , Fitch concluded that the situation was beyond anything he had ever faced . The flight crew , while using the engines to control the airplane , were also still trying to fly the airplane using their control columns . Haynes asked Fitch to go into the passenger cabin and see if their control inputs were having any effect on the ailerons . Fitch reported back that the ailerons were not moving at all . Despite this news , the crew would continue trying to fly the airplane with their control columns for the remainder of the flight , hopeful that it was at least having some effect . Fitch , his first task concluded , asked how he might be of further assistance . Haynes , still trying to fly the airplane with his control column while simultaneously working the throttles , asked Fitch to work the throttles instead . With one throttle in each hand , Fitch was able to mitigate the phugoid cycle and make rough steering adjustments . 
 Air traffic control ( ATC ) was contacted and an emergency landing at nearby Sioux Gateway Airport was organized . Haynes kept his sense of humor during the emergency , as recorded on the plane 's cockpit voice recorder ( CVR ) : 
 Fitch : " I 'll tell you what , we 'll have a beer when this is all done . " 
 Haynes : " Well I don 't drink , but I 'll sure as shit have one . " 
 and later : 
 Sioux City Approach : " United Two Thirty @-@ Two Heavy , the wind 's currently three six zero at one one ; three sixty at eleven . You 're cleared to land on any runway . " 
 Haynes : " [ laughter ] Roger . [ laughter ] You want to be particular and make it a runway , huh ? " ( Haynes was alluding to the extreme difficulty in controlling the aircraft and their low chances of making it to a runway at all . ) 
 A more serious remark often quoted from Haynes was made when ATC asked the crew to make a left turn to keep them clear of the city : 
 Haynes : " Whatever you do , keep us away from the city . " 
 Haynes later noted that " We were too busy [ to be scared ] . You must maintain your composure in the airplane or you will die . You learn that from your first day flying . " 
 As the crew began to prepare for arrival at Sioux City , they questioned whether they should deploy the landing gear or belly @-@ land the aircraft with the gear retracted . They decided that having the landing gear down would provide some shock absorption on impact . The complete hydraulic failure left the landing gear lowering mechanism inoperative . Two options were available to the flight crew . The DC @-@ 10 is designed such that if hydraulic pressure to the landing gear is lost , the gear will fall down slightly and rest on the landing gear doors . Placing the regular landing gear handle in the down position will unlock the doors mechanically , and the doors and landing gear will then fall down into place and lock due to gravity . An alternative system is also available using a lever in the cockpit floor to cause the landing gear to fall into position . This lever has the added benefit of unlocking the outboard ailerons , which are not used in high @-@ speed flight and are locked in a neutral position . The crew hoped that there might be some trapped hydraulic fluid in the outboard ailerons and that they might regain some use of flight controls by unlocking them . They elected to extend the gear with the alternative system . Although the gear deployed successfully , there was no change in the controllability of the aircraft . 
 Landing was originally planned on the 9 @,@ 000 @-@ foot ( 2 @,@ 700 m ) Runway 31 . Difficulties in controlling the aircraft made lining up almost impossible . While dumping some of the excess fuel , the plane executed a series of mostly right @-@ hand turns ( it was easier to turn the plane in this direction ) with the intention of lining up with Runway 31 . When they came out they were instead lined up with the shorter ( 6 @,@ 888 ft ) and closed Runway 22 , and had little capacity to maneuver . Fire trucks had been placed on Runway 22 , anticipating a landing on nearby Runway 31 , so all the vehicles were quickly moved out of the way before the plane touched down . Runway 22 had been permanently closed a year earlier in 1988 . 
 ATC also advised that I @-@ 29 ran North and South just East of the airport they could land on if they didn 't think they could make the runway . The pilot opted to try for the runway instead . 
 Fitch continued to control the aircraft 's descent by adjusting engine thrust . With the loss of all hydraulics , the crew were unable to control airspeed independent from sink rate . On final descent , the aircraft was going 220 knots and sinking at 1 @,@ 850 feet per minute ( approximately 440 km / h forward and 34 km / h downward speed ) , while a safe landing would require 140 knots and 300 feet per minute ( approximately 260 and 5 km / h respectively ) . Fitch needed a seat for landing ; Dvorak offered up his own , as it could be moved to a position behind the throttles . Dvorak sat in the cockpit 's jump seat for landing . Fitch noticed the high sink rate , and pushed the throttles forward . The left engine <unk> up faster than the right engine , causing it to bank sharply to the right . The flight crew had no time to react . The tip of the right wing hit the runway first , spilling fuel , which ignited immediately . The tail section broke off from the force of the impact , and the rest of the aircraft bounced several times , shedding the landing gear and engine nacelles and breaking the fuselage into several main pieces . On the final impact , the right wing was shorn off and the main part of the aircraft skidded sideways , rolled over onto its back , and slid to a stop upside @-@ down in a corn field to the right of Runway 22 . Witnesses reported that the aircraft " cartwheeled " end @-@ over @-@ end , but the investigation did not confirm this . The reports were due to misinterpretation of the video of the crash that showed the flaming right wing tumbling end @-@ over @-@ end and the intact left wing , still attached to the fuselage , rolling up and over as the fuselage flipped over . 
 = = Post @-@ crash response = = 
 = = = Injuries to persons = = = 
 Of the 296 people on board , 111 died in the crash . Most were killed by injuries sustained in the multiple impacts , but 35 people in the middle fuselage section directly above the fuel tanks died from smoke inhalation in the post @-@ crash fire . Of those , 24 had no traumatic blunt @-@ force injuries . The majority of the 185 survivors were seated behind first class and ahead of the wings . Many passengers were able to walk out through the ruptures to the structure , and in many cases got lost in the high field of corn adjacent to the runway until rescue workers arrived on the scene and escorted them to safety . 
 Of all of the passengers : 
 35 died due to smoke inhalation ( none were in first class ) 
 76 died for reasons other than smoke inhalation ( 17 in first class ) 
 47 were seriously injured ( eight in first class ) 
 125 had minor injuries ( one in first class ) 
 13 had no injuries ( none in first class ) 
 The passengers who died for reasons other than smoke inhalation were seated in rows 1 – 4 , 24 – 25 and 28 – 38 . Passengers who died due to smoke inhalation were seated in rows 14 , 16 and 22 – 30 . The person assigned to 20H moved to an unknown seat and died of smoke inhalation . 
 One crash survivor died 31 days after the accident ; he was classified according to NTSB regulations as a survivor with serious injuries . 
 Fifty @-@ two children , including four " lap children " without their own seats , were on board the flight due to the United Airlines " Children 's Day " promotion . Eleven children , including one lap child , died . Many of the children had traveled alone . 
 Rescuers initially ignored the cockpit , as it had been compressed in the crash to approximately waist high and was completely unrecognizable . It was not until 35 minutes after the crash that rescuers discovered that the debris was the cockpit and that the four pilots were still alive inside . All four recovered from their injuries and returned to work : Haynes , Records and Dvorak returned in three months , while Fitch , more seriously injured than the others , returned in 11 months . 
 = = Investigation = = 
 National Transportation Safety Board officials were on scene within hours of the accident . N1819U had been in service since 1972 and was 17 years old , about mid @-@ life for a DC @-@ 10 , when the accident occurred . The rear section of the aircraft containing the number two engine was intact . Because of this , investigators were easily able to see inside engine number 2 . As the investigation unfolded , it became apparent that the entire fan disk and blade assembly from engine number 2 , a component approximately 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) in diameter and made of titanium alloy , was missing from the accident scene . Despite an extensive search in the weeks following the crash , the missing disk and blade assembly could not be located . Realizing that that disk potentially held the key to understanding the reasons for the engine failure , the engine 's manufacturer , General Electric , offered a $ 50 @,@ 000 reward to whoever located the disk , and $ 1 @,@ 000 for each fan blade . On October 10 , 1989 , three months after the crash , Janice Sorenson , a farmer harvesting corn near Alta , Iowa , felt resistance on her combine , and after getting out to investigate , discovered most of the fan disk with a number of blades still attached partially buried in her cornfield . The rest of the fan disk and most of the additional blades were located later in the harvest . 
 Investigators discovered an impurity and fatigue crack in the disk . Titanium reacts with air when melted , which creates impurities which can initiate fatigue cracks like that found in the crash disk . To prevent this , the ingot that would become the fan disk was formed using a " double vacuum " process : the raw materials were melted together in a vacuum , allowed to cool and solidify , then melted in a vacuum once more . After the double vacuum process , the ingot was shaped into a billet , a sausage @-@ like form about 16 inches in diameter , and tested using ultrasound to look for defects . Defects were located and the ingot was further processed to remove them , but some contamination remained . ( GE later changed to an improved triple @-@ vacuum process because of their investigation into failing rotating titanium engine parts . ) 
 The contamination caused what is known as a hard alpha inclusion , a brittle part of the metal , which cracked during forging and then fell out during final machining . This formed a cavity with microscopic cracks at the edges . For the next 18 years , the crack grew slightly each time the engine was powered up and brought to operating temperature . Eventually the crack grew large enough to cause structural failure of the disk . 
 Significant irregularities and gaps in GE Aircraft engines ’ and its suppliers ’ manufacturing records of the crash disk noted in the NTSB report leave doubts about the origins of the crash disk . Records found after the accident indicated that two rough @-@ machined forgings having the serial number of the crash disk had been routed through GEAE manufacturing . Records indicated that Alcoa supplied GE with TIMET titanium forgings for one disk with the serial number of the crash disk . Some records show that this disk “ was rejected for an unsatisfactory ultrasonic indication ” , that an outside lab performed an ultrasound inspection of this disk , that this disk was subsequently returned to GE , and that this disk should have been scrapped . The FAA report stated “ There is no record of warranty claim by GEAE for defective material and no record of any credit for GEAE processed by Alcoa or TIMET ” . 
 GE records of the second disk having the serial number of the crash disk indicate that it was made with an RMI titanium billet supplied by Alcoa . Research of GE records showed no other titanium parts were manufactured at GE from this RMI titanium billet during the period of 1969 to 1990 . GE records indicate that final finishing and inspection of the crash disk were completed on December 11 , 1971 . Alcoa records indicate that this RMI titanium billet was first cut in 1972 and that all forgings made from this material were for airframe parts . If the Alcoa records were accurate , the RMI titanium could not have been used to manufacture the crash disk , indicating that the initially rejected TIMET disk with “ an unsatisfactory ultrasonic indication ” was the crash disk . 
 CF6 engines like that containing the crash disk were used to power many civilian and military aircraft at the time of the crash . Due to concerns that the accident could recur , a large number of disks that were in service were examined by ultrasound for indications of defects . At least two “ sister disks ” were found to have defects like that of the crash disk . Prioritization and efficiency of inspections of the many engines under suspicion would have been aided by determination of the titanium source of the crash disk . Chemical analyses of the crash disk intended to determine its source were inconclusive . The NTSB report stated that if examined disks were not from the same source , “ the records on a large number of GEAE disks are suspect . It also means that any AD action that is based on the serial number of a disk could fail to have its intended effect because suspect disks could remain in service . ” The FAA report did not explicitly address the impact of these uncertainties on operations of military aircraft that might have contained a suspect disk . 
 = = Cause = = 
 The investigation , while praising the actions of the flight crew for saving lives , would later identify the cause of the accident as a failure by United Airlines maintenance processes and personnel to detect an existing fatigue crack . The Probable Cause in the report by the NTSB read as follows : 
 The National Transportation Safety Board determines that the probable cause of this accident was the inadequate consideration given to human factors limitations in the inspection and quality control procedures used by United Airlines ' engine overhaul facility which resulted in the failure to detect a fatigue crack originating from a previously undetected metallurgical defect located in a critical area of the stage 1 fan disk that was manufactured by General Electric Aircraft Engines . The subsequent catastrophic disintegration of the disk resulted in the liberation of debris in a pattern of distribution and with energy levels that exceeded the level of protection provided by design features of the hydraulic systems that operate the DC @-@ 10 's flight controls . 
 Post @-@ crash analysis of the crack surfaces showed the presence of a penetrating fluorescent dye used to detect cracks during maintenance . The presence of the dye indicated that the crack was present and should have been detected at a prior inspection . The detection failure arose from poor attention to human factors in United Airlines ' specification of maintenance processes . 
 = = Influence on the industry = = 
 The National Transportation Safety Board ( NTSB ) investigation , after subsequent reconstructions of the accident in flight simulators , deemed that training for such an event involved too many factors to be practical . While some level of control was possible , no precision could be achieved , and a landing under these conditions was stated to be " a highly random event " . The NTSB further noted that " under the circumstances the UAL flight crew performance was highly commendable and greatly exceeded reasonable expectations . " 
 The manufacturing process for titanium was changed in order to eliminate the type of gaseous anomaly that served as the starting point for the crack . Newer batches of titanium use much higher melting temperatures and a " triple vacuum " process in an attempt to eliminate such impurities . 
 Because this type of aircraft control ( with loss of control surfaces ) is difficult for humans to achieve , some researchers have attempted to integrate this control ability into the computers of fly @-@ by @-@ wire aircraft . Early attempts to add the ability to real airplanes were not very successful ; the software was based on experiments conducted in flight simulators where jet engines are usually modeled as " perfect " devices with exactly the same thrust on each engine , a linear relationship between throttle setting and thrust , and instantaneous response to input . Later , computer models were updated to account for these factors , and planes have been successfully flown with this software installed . 
 Newer aircraft designs such as the McDonnell Douglas MD @-@ 11 have incorporated hydraulic fuses to isolate a punctured section and prevent a total loss of hydraulic fluid . Following the UAL 232 accident , such fuses were installed in the number 3 hydraulic system in the area below the number 2 engine on all DC @-@ 10 aircraft to ensure sufficient control capability remained if all three hydraulic system lines should be damaged in the tail area . Although elevator and rudder control would be lost , the aircrew would still be able to control the aircraft 's pitch ( up and down ) with stabilizer trim , and would be able to control roll ( left and right ) with some of the aircraft 's ailerons and spoilers . Although not an ideal situation , the system provides a greater measure of control than was available to the crew of United 232 . 
 It is still possible to lose all three hydraulic systems if serious damage occurs elsewhere , as nearly happened to a cargo airliner in 2002 during takeoff when a main gear tire exploded in the wheel well area . The damage in the left wing area caused total fluid loss from the number 1 and the number 2 hydraulic systems . The number 3 system was dented but not penetrated . DC @-@ 10s still have no fuse protection for any of the three hydraulic systems in the event of an exploding main gear tire . 
 Of the four children deemed too young to require seats of their own ( " lap children " ) , one died from smoke inhalation . The NTSB added a safety recommendation to the FAA on its " List of Most Wanted Safety Improvements " in May 1999 suggesting a requirement for children under 2 to be safely restrained , which was removed in November 2006 . The accident sparked a campaign led by United Flight 232 's senior flight attendant , Jan Brown Lohr , for all children to have seats on aircraft . Though it is no longer on the " most wanted " list , aircraft restraints for children under 2 is still recommended practice by the NTSB and FAA , though it is not required by the FAA as of May 2016 . The NTSB asked the International Civil Aviation Organization to make this a requirement in September 2013 . 
 The accident has since become a prime example of successful crew resource management . For much of aviation 's history , the captain was considered the final authority , and crews were to respect the captain 's expertise and not question him . This began to change in the 1970s , especially after the Tenerife airport disaster . Crew Resource Management , while still considering the captain the final authority , instructs crewmembers to speak up when they detect a problem , and instructs captains to listen to their concerns . United Airlines instituted a Crew Resource Management class in the early 1980s . The NTSB would later credit this training as valuable toward the success of United 232 's crew in handling their emergency . The FAA made Crew Resource Training mandatory in the aftermath of the accident . 
 = = Factors contributing to survival rate = = 
 Of the 296 people aboard , 111 were killed in the crash , while 185 survived . Captain Haynes later told of three contributing factors regarding the time of day that allowed for a greater number of passengers surviving : 
 The accident occurred during daylight hours in good weather ; 
 The accident occurred as a shift change was occurring at both a regional trauma center and a regional burn center in Sioux City , allowing for more medical personnel to treat the injured ; 
 The accident occurred when the Iowa Air National Guard was on duty at Sioux Gateway Airport , allowing for 285 trained personnel to assist with triage and evacuation of the injured . 
 " Had any of those things not been there , " Haynes said , " I 'm sure the fatality rate would have been a lot higher . " 
 Captain Haynes also credited Crew Resource Management as being one of the factors that saved his own life , and many others . 
 … the preparation that paid off for the crew was something … called Cockpit Resource Management … Up until 1980 , we kind of worked on the concept that the captain was THE authority on the aircraft . What he said , goes . And we lost a few airplanes because of that . Sometimes the captain isn 't as smart as we thought he was . And we would listen to him , and do what he said , and we wouldn 't know what he 's talking about . And we had 103 years of flying experience there in the cockpit , trying to get that airplane on the ground , not one minute of which we had actually practised , any one of us . So why would I know more about getting that airplane on the ground under those conditions than the other three . So if I hadn 't used CRM , if we had not let everybody put their input in , it 's a cinch we wouldn 't have made it . 
 As with the Eastern Air Lines Flight 401 crash of a similarly @-@ sized Lockheed L @-@ 1011 in 1972 , the relatively shallow angle of descent likely played a large part in the relatively high survival rate . The National Transportation Safety Board concluded that under the circumstances , " a safe landing was virtually impossible . " 
 = = Notable survivors = = 
 Spencer Bailey – subject of a famous photograph showing Lt. Colonel Dennis Nielsen carrying the three @-@ year @-@ old survivor to safety . His brother Brandon also survived the crash , but their mother , Francie , did not . A statue in part of Sioux City 's riverfront development is based on the picture . The 1994 memorial commemorates the rescue efforts by the Sioux City community following the crash , and features contemplative areas and a tree @-@ lined approach with plaques describing the accident . Bailey is now the editor @-@ in @-@ chief of Surface magazine and has been a contributor to The New York Times Magazine and Bloomberg Businessweek . He is a graduate of Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism and a trustee of the Noguchi Museum . He lives in New York City . 
 Jerry <unk> – radio announcer for the Colorado Rockies , Denver 's Major League Baseball team , and a former radio announcer for the Denver Nuggets , Denver 's National Basketball Association basketball team . He wrote a book about United Airlines Flight 232 titled Chosen to Live , and was credited with saving the life of a child in the crash . 
 Michael R. Matz – trainer of the 2006 Kentucky Derby favorite and winner Barbaro and the 2012 Belmont Stakes winner Union Rags . He was credited with saving the lives of four children in the crash , three from the same family . Matz competed for the US in equestrian show jumping in several Summer Olympics , winning silver in the team show jumping event at the 1996 games . 
 Alfred C. Haynes – the captain of United Airlines flight 232 . His actions , along with the actions of the flight crew , are credited for saving the lives of the survivors . He returned to flying after recovering from his injuries and would continue to fly DC @-@ 10s as captain until reaching mandatory retirement age in 1991 . Several rescuers , crew members and passengers from flight 232 flew with Haynes on his final flight . Haynes became a public speaker soon after the accident , giving speeches about what happened aboard flight 232 . He continued these after retirement , and credits this work with helping his own healing process . 
 Dennis E. Fitch – a DC @-@ 10 pilot and instructor , he helped Captain Haynes fly United Airlines Flight 232 . " For the 30 minutes I was up there , " Fitch said , " I was the most alive I 've ever been . That is the only way I can describe it to you . " Fitch died at the age of 69 on May 7 , 2012 , after a battle with brain cancer . 
 Pete Wernick – banjo player with the Hot Rize bluegrass band and instructor , he was on his way to a festival in the Albany , New York , area . Wernick walked away from the crash with his young son , and along with his wife , they took a later flight to go to the festival . He gave his personal account of the day 's events in the song " A Day in ' 89 ( You Never Know ) " . Wernick has yet to release a recording of the song , but has published the lyrics on his website . 
 Jan Brown Lohr – United 232 's Senior Flight Attendant . She was forced by regulation to ask parents with " lap children " aboard flight 232 to place their children on the cabin floor during the flight 's final moments before impact . One of four children died from smoke inhalation . The dead child 's mother confronted Lohr at the crash scene . Since then , Lohr has lobbied in Washington D.C. for new federal regulations requiring all children to have a seat belt on every flight . 
 = = Depictions = = 
 The accident was the subject of the 1992 television movie A Thousand Heroes , also known as Crash Landing : The Rescue of Flight 232 . 
 It was featured in an episode of Seconds From Disaster on the National Geographic Channel and MSNBC Investigates on the MSNBC news channel . 
 The History Channel distributed a documentary named Shockwave ; a portion of Episode 7 ( originally aired January 25 , 2008 ) detailed the events of the crash . 
 The episode " A Wing and a Prayer " of Survival in the Sky ( UK title : Black Box ) featured the accident . 
 The Biography Channel series I Survived ... explained in detail the events of the crash through passenger Jerry , flight attendant Jan Brown Lohr , and pilot Alfred Haynes . 
 Mayday ( also known as Air Crash Investigation in the UK , Australia and Asia and Air Emergency or Air Disasters in the United States ) produced a one @-@ hour docudrama about the crash entitled " Impossible Landing " . 
 The episode " Crisis in the Cockpit " ( Season 2 , Episode 1 ) of " Why Planes Crash " on The Weather Channel featured the accident . 
 The 1999 play Charlie Victor Romeo ( made into a film in 2013 ) dramatically reenacted the incident using transcripts from the flight deck voice recorder . 
 The 1991 novel Cold Fire , by Dean Koontz , includes a fictional crash based on Flight 232 . 
 The 1993 film Fearless portrayed a fictional air crash based in part on the crash of Flight 232 . 
 = = Survivor accounts = = 
 Dennis Fitch described his experiences in Errol Morris 's television show First Person . 
 Martha Conant told her story of survival to her daughter @-@ in @-@ law , Brittany Conant , on " <unk> " during NPR 's Morning Edition of January 11 , 2008 . 
 Flight 232 : A Story of Disaster and Survival by Laurence Gonzales ( 2014 , W. W. Norton & Company ; ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 393 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 ) . 
 Miracle in the Cornfield – an inside survivor narrative by Joseph <unk> ( 1999 , <unk> Plus , Appleton , WI ; ISBN <unk> ) . 
 When the World Breaks Your Heart : Spiritual Ways of Living With Tragedy by Gregory S. Clapper , a chaplain in the National Guard who relates the stories of some of the survivors he aided in the aftermath of the crash ( 1999 ; 2016 , <unk> and Stock ; ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 498 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 ) . 
 = = Similar accidents = = 
 The odds against all three hydraulic systems failing simultaneously had previously been calculated as high as a billion to one . Yet such calculations assume that multiple failures must have independent causes , an unrealistic assumption , and similar flight control failures have indeed occurred : 
 In 1971 a Pan American 747 struck approach light structures for the reciprocal runway as it lifted off the runway at San Francisco Airport . Major damage to the belly and landing gear resulted , which caused the loss of hydraulic fluid from three of its four flight control systems . The fluid which remained in the fourth system gave the captain very limited control of some of the spoilers , ailerons , and one inboard elevator . That was sufficient to circle the plane while fuel was dumped and then to make a hard landing . There were no fatalities , but there were some injuries . 
 In 1981 , a Lockheed L @-@ 1011 , operating as Eastern Airlines Flight 935 , suffered a similar failure of its tail @-@ mounted number two engine . The shrapnel from that engine inflicted damage on all four of its hydraulic systems , which were also close together in the tail structure . Fluid was lost in three of the four systems . The fourth hydraulic system was impacted with shrapnel , but not punctured . The hydraulic pressure remaining in that fourth system enabled the captain to land the plane safely with some limited use of the outboard spoilers , the inboard ailerons , and the horizontal stabilizer , plus differential engine power of the remaining two engines . There were no injuries . 
 On August 12 , 1985 , Japan Airlines Flight 123 , a Boeing 747 @-@ <unk> , suffered a rupture of the pressure bulkhead in its tail section , caused by undetected damage during a faulty repair to the rear bulkhead after a <unk> seven years earlier . Pressurized air subsequently rushed out of the bulkhead and blew off the plane 's vertical stabilizer , also severing all four of its hydraulic control systems . The pilots were able to keep the plane airborne for almost 30 minutes using differential engine power , but without any hydraulics or the stabilizing force of the vertical stabilizer , the plane eventually crashed in mountainous terrain . There were only 4 survivors among the 524 on board . This accident is the deadliest single @-@ aircraft accident in history . 
 In 1994 , <unk> , a Tupolev Tu @-@ 154 operating as Baikal Airlines Flight 130 , crashed near Irkutsk shortly after departing from Irkutsk Airport , Russia . Damage to the starter caused a fire in engine number two ( located in the rear fuselage ) . High temperatures during the fire destroyed the tanks and pipes of all three hydraulic systems . The crew lost control of the aircraft . The unmanageable plane , at a speed of 275 knots , hit the ground at a dairy farm and burned . All passengers and crew , as well as a dairyman on the ground , died . 
 In 2003 , OO @-@ DLL , a DHL Airbus A300 , was struck by a surface @-@ to @-@ air missile shortly after departing from Baghdad International Airport , Iraq . The missile struck the port @-@ side wing , rupturing a fuel tank and causing the loss of all three hydraulic systems . With the flight controls disabled , the crew used differential thrust to execute a safe landing at Baghdad . 
 The disintegration of a turbine disc , leading to loss of control , was a direct cause of two major aircraft disasters in Poland : 
 On March 14 , 1980 , LOT Polish Airlines Flight 007 , an Ilyushin Il @-@ 62 , attempted a go @-@ around when the crew experienced troubles with a gear indicator . When thrust was applied , the low pressure turbine disc in engine number 2 disintegrated because of material fatigue ; parts of the disc damaged engines number 1 and 3 and severed control pushers for both horizontal and vertical stabilizers . After 26 seconds of uncontrolled descent , the aircraft crashed , killing all 87 people on board . 
 On May 9 , 1987 , improperly assembled bearings in Il @-@ <unk> engine number 2 on LOT Polish Airlines Flight 5055 overheated and exploded during cruise over the village of <unk> , causing the shaft to break in two ; this caused the low @-@ pressure turbine disc to spin to enormous speeds and disintegrate , damaging engine number 1 and cutting the control pushers . The crew managed to return to Warsaw , using nothing but trim tabs to control the crippled aircraft , but on the final approach , the trim controlling links burned and the crew completely lost control over the aircraft . Soon after , it crashed on the outskirts of Warsaw ; all 183 on board perished . Had the plane stayed airborne for 40 seconds more , it would have been able to reach the runway . 
 = Distinguished Warfare Medal = 
 The Distinguished Warfare Medal was a planned United States military decoration announced by former U.S. Secretary of Defense Leon Panetta on 13 February 2013 . It would have been the first American combat @-@ related award to be created since the Bronze Star Medal in 1944 . The blue , red and white @-@ <unk> medal was to be awarded to individuals for " extraordinary achievement " related to a military operation occurring after 11 September 2001 . It was intended to recognize military achievement in cyberwarfare or combat drone operations for actions that did not include valor in combat . 
 Reception for the medal was mixed , with veterans criticizing the placement of the medal in the order of precedence . Production of the medal was halted on 12 March 2013 , pending a review of its precedence as ordered by Secretary of Defense , Chuck Hagel . It was subsequently cancelled by Secretary Hagel on 15 April 2013 who made the decision to instead create and offer a new distinguishing device to existing medals . On January 8 , 2016 , the DoD presented two new award devices . 
 = = Criteria = = 
 The intention of the Distinguished Warfare Medal involved recognizing - in the name of the Secretary of Defense - extraordinary achievement by members of the United States Armed Forces . Such achievement would have taken place after 11 September 2001 , and need not have involved acts of valor . The criteria required that the qualifying achievement must have had a direct impact , through any domain , on combat or other military operations . These operations must have occurred under one of the following circumstances : 
 engaged in military operations against enemies of the United States 
 engaged in operations in conflict against an opposing foreign force 
 while serving with friendly foreign forces engaged in operations with an opposing armed force where the United States is not a belligerent party 
 The achievement would have had to have had such an outstanding or exceptional nature as to set the individual apart from peers serving in similar duties or situations . The medal was only to be awarded for single exemplary acts and would not have been awarded for sustained operational service . The Distinguished Warfare Medal could have been awarded posthumously . 
 Additional awards of the Distinguished Warfare Medal would be shown with oak leaf clusters for U.S. Army and U.S. Air Force awardees , and with 5 / 16 inch stars for U.S. Navy , U.S. Marine Corps , and U.S. Coast Guard awardees . 
 Prior to cancellation , the service secretaries had not completed developing the criteria for the medal for each of their military services . The awarding criteria would have been included in the next Manual of Military Decorations and Awards . 
 = = Appearance = = 
 The Distinguished Warfare Medal was to consist of a 1 7 / 8 inch bronze medallion . The obverse would have depicted a grid lined globe surrounded by a laurel wreath . <unk> over the globe is the eagle from the Seal of the United States Department of Defense in front of a lozenge . The top of the medallion is surmounted by a six @-@ pointed star . The reverse continues the laurel wreath design surmounted by a six @-@ pointed star . In the center is a blank space for engraving the recipients name . Above the space is the inscription DISTINGUISHED <unk> , below is the inscription <unk> OF <unk> . 
 The medallion would have been borne by a light blue ribbon with dark blue edges . In the center would have been two white stripes bordered by red on their outsides and dark blue on the inside . 
 The symbolism of the medal would have stated as the following : 
 The wreath honors the recipient 's significant meritorious achievement to battlefield operations . The globe and gridlines signify that the operational support or other military engagement may be performed remotely . The diamond shape symbolizes the four corners of the globe , representing the operational reach of our armed forces in the defense of liberty and justice . The DoD Eagle indicates that the medal is presented in the name of the Secretary of Defense . Operational magnitude and mission success are denoted by the six pointed star , symbolizing an ordinance burst and target neutralization . 
 Designed by the United States Army Institute of Heraldry , it was reviewed by the United States Commission of Fine Arts . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The medal 's order of precedence was criticized by the Veterans of Foreign Wars . The commander of this organization , John Hamilton , explained , " It is very important to properly recognize all who faithfully serve and excel , but this new medal – no matter how well intended – could quickly deteriorate into a morale issue . Medals that can only be earned in direct combat must mean more than medals awarded in the rear . " The Military Order of the Purple Heart joined in condemnation , stating " To rank what is basically an award for meritorious service higher than any award for heroism is degrading and insulting to every American Combat Soldier , Airman , Sailor or Marine who risks his or her life and endures the daily rigors of combat in a hostile environment . The Military Order of the Purple Heart strongly urges the newly appointed Secretary of Defense and the Joint Chiefs of Staff to either reconsider the precedence of the Distinguished Warfare Medal or develop another way to recognize the achievements of those whose indirect actions contribute greatly to the accomplishment of the mission without diminishing the sacrifice of life and limb by those who confront the enemy firsthand on the battlefield . " The Association of the United States Navy also expressed criticism of the medal 's placement , stating " While <unk> supports the medal itself , as well as the achievements and importance of the cyber warfare community , the concern lies with the ranking of the medal . " Doug Sterner , military medals expert and curator of the Military Times Hall of Valor , expressed confusion , saying , " I understand the need to recognize the guys at the console who are doing some pretty important things . But to see it ranking above the Bronze Star ( with ) V ? " Nick McDowell , a member of the Orders and Medals Society of America said that an alternative to adding a new medal could be adding a new ribbon device to an existing medal , and said that " The problem is that we 're adding another non @-@ valor personal decoration into a system that is already crowded with non @-@ valor personal decorations . " 
 Outgoing Secretary of Defense Leon Panetta defended the award 's precedence , saying " Our military reserves its highest decorations obviously for those who display gallantry and valor in actions when their lives are on the line and we will continue to do so . But we should also have the ability to honor the extraordinary actions that make a true difference in combat operations . The contribution they make does contribute to the success of combat operations , particularly when they remove the enemy from the field of battle , even if those actions are physically removed from the fight . " Pentagon spokesman , Lieutenant Commander Nate Christensen , added , " Extraordinary achievement directly impacting combat operations at this level deserves to be recognized with a distinctive medal , not a device on an existing medal . The <unk> is visionary in that it fills a need for a non @-@ valorous combat impact medal . " 
 On 26 February , three military veteran congressmen ( Duncan D. Hunter , Tom Rooney , and Tim Murphy ) introduced legislation in the House of Representatives to reduce the precedence of the medal , by banning it from being rated equal to , or above , the Purple Heart . At the time of the medal 's cancellation , that bill had gained 124 cosponsors , while a corresponding bill introduced in the Senate on 6 March had gained 31 cosponsors . 
 = = Cancellation = = 
 On 12 March 2013 , it was reported that the Secretary of Defense , Chuck Hagel , ordered a review of the medal and its initial place in the order of precedence . On 15 April , he announced its cancellation , noting that it would be an " unnecessary " medal . Initially , it was speculated that the precedence order of the medal would be lowered from its current position above the Purple Heart and Bronze Star Medal . Instead , Hagel announced that the medal would be replaced by a new " distinguishing " device that could be attached to an existing medal or service ribbon . 
 = Who 's That Girl ( Madonna song ) = 
 " Who 's That Girl " is a song by American singer Madonna from the soundtrack album to the 1987 film Who 's That Girl . It was released on June 30 , 1987 , by Sire Records as the first album single . The song was later included on the two @-@ disc edition of Madonna 's 2009 greatest hits album Celebration . While shooting for the film , then called Slammer , Madonna had requested Patrick Leonard to develop an uptempo song that captured the nature of her film persona . She later added the lyrics and vocals to the demo tape developed by Leonard , and decided to rename the song as well as the film to " Who 's That Girl " . 
 Featuring instrumentation from drums , bass , and stringed instruments , " Who 's That Girl " continued Madonna 's fascination with Hispanic culture by incorporating Spanish lyrics and using the effect of double vocals . Although it received mixed reactions from reviewers , the song became Madonna 's sixth single to top the Billboard Hot 100 , while peaking atop the charts in countries like the United Kingdom , Canada , Netherlands , Ireland and Belgium . It was also nominated for " Best Song From A Motion Picture " at the 1988 Grammy Awards and " Best Original Song " at the 1988 Golden Globe Awards . 
 The music video portrayed a different persona of Madonna , rather than her film character for which it was released . Like the song , it incorporated Hispanic culture and portrayed her dressed in Spanish style as a young lady in search of a treasure . Madonna has performed the song on her Who 's That Girl World Tour ( 1987 ) and on the Rebel Heart Tour ( 2015 – 16 ) . The song has been covered by many artists and has appeared in compilations and tribute albums . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1986 , Madonna was shooting for her third motion picture Who 's That Girl , known at the time as Slammer . Needing songs for the soundtrack of the movie , she contacted Patrick Leonard and Stephen Bray , who had written and produced her third studio album True Blue in 1986 . Madonna explained to them that she needed an uptempo song and a downtempo song . She came to the studio one Thursday as Leonard developed the chorus of the song . He handed over that cassette to Madonna , who went to the backroom and finished the melody and the lyrics of the song , while Leonard worked on the other parts of the song . 
 After finishing the lyrics , Madonna declared that she wanted the song to be named " Who 's That Girl " and changed the movie to the same , rather than Slammer , considering it to be a better title . In Fred Bronson 's The Billboard Book of Number 1 Hits book , Leonard explained that the song was recorded in one day with Madonna adding her vocals only once . Additional instrumental tracks with guitars and percussion were included by Leonard and Bray later . Regarding the development of the music for the film , Madonna further explained 
 " I had some very specific ideas in mind , music that would stand on its own as well as support and enhance what was happening on screen and the only way to make that a reality was to have a hand in writing the tunes myself . [ ... ] The songs aren 't necessarily about Nikki [ her character name in the movie ] or written to be sung by someone like her , but there 's a spirit to this music that captures both what the film and the characters are about , I think . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 The song is composed in Madonna 's typical style — mingling the drum machine , a bubbling bass synth line , and the sound of stringed instruments . The three parts of the song , namely the bridge , where Madonna sings " what can help me now " , the chorus and the verse flow together strongly . The chorus has a haunting effect in it . According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com , the song is composed in the time signature of common time , with a key of A minor and a medium tempo of 104 beats per minute . Madonna 's vocals span from the notes of G3 to B4 . The song follows a basic sequence of <unk> – G – Csus2 – <unk> – G – Dm as its chord progression . 
 The song epitomizes Madonna 's interest with Hispanic culture that continued after the release of " La Isla Bonita " , by adding Spanish phrases in the chorus and over the trumpets of the second verse , and also by the added instrumental break in the middle . It also uses the sonic effect brought about by the combination of multiple vocal lines , which had been previously used by groups like The Beach Boys in their singles " God Only Knows " ( 1966 ) and " I Get Around " ( 1964 ) as well as R.E.M. ' s singles " Fall on Me " ( 1986 ) and " Near Wild Heaven " ( 1991 ) . " Who 's That Girl " employs this effect on the last chorus where three or four different vocal hooks are intertwined . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Critical reaction to the song has been mixed . In his book The Complete Guide to the Music of Madonna , author Rikky Rooksby explained that the song was Madonna 's best take on her original music style . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic commented that " Who 's That Girl " along with " Causing a Commotion " were not amongst Madonna 's best singles . Biographer J. Randy Taraborrelli , in his book Madonna : An Intimate Biography called the song " quintessential Madonna music " and went on to describe it as " funky , sassy and melodic , with a Latin accent . " 
 Noah Robischon from Entertainment Weekly opined that with both the song and the movie , Madonna had pushed " synergy over the borderline . " Enio Chiola of PopMatters.com listed " Who 's That Girl " as one of the top @-@ fifteen singles of Madonna 's career , stating that it is an " insta @-@ party from the moment in begins . " The song was nominated for " Best Song From A Motion Picture " at the 1988 Grammy Awards and " Best Original Song " at the 1988 Golden Globe Awards . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 " Who 's That Girl " was released in the United States in June 1987 . It debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 at number 43 , reached the top of the chart in its seventh week , maintained the top position for one week , and spent 16 weeks on the chart . It became Madonna 's sixth number @-@ one single in the United States , making her the first artist to accumulate six number @-@ one singles in the 1980s , and the first female performer to get that many number @-@ ones as a solo act . The song peaked at number 44 on the Hot Dance Club Play chart . In 2000 , the song came tenth in a vote conducted to determine the favourite Madonna song . In Canada , the song debuted at number 83 on the RPM singles chart on July 11 , 1987 , reached the top for one week on August 29 , 1987 , and stayed on the chart for 23 weeks . It placed at number 12 on the RPM Year @-@ end chart for 1987 . 
 In the United Kingdom , " Who 's That Girl " was released on July 14 , 1987 , and debuted at number three on the UK Singles Chart , climbing to number one the next week to become Madonna 's fifth number @-@ one single in the United Kingdom . According to the Official Charts Company , the song has sold 380 @,@ 000 copies there . It received a silver certification from the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) . Across Europe , " Who 's That Girl " also topped the singles charts in Belgium , Italy , Ireland , and the Netherlands , as well as peaking in the top five in Austria , France , Germany , Norway , Sweden , and Switzerland . It was certified gold by the Syndicat National de l 'Édition Phonographique for shipment of 500 @,@ 000 copies in France . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video was shot over two days , at A & M <unk> in Hollywood , California . Madonna had adopted a garish , platinum blond hairstyle for the Who 's That Girl movie which she used in the music video ; it was her way of reviving the comedy heroine of the 1930s Hollywood screwball comedies . She continued with her Hispanic look from the " La Isla Bonita " music video , this time she appeared dressed boyishly in a wide @-@ brimmed Spanish hat and bolero jacket — a combination which would later become a fashion trend . 
 The music video , directed by Peter Rosenthal , begins with Madonna entering a park . After meeting two children and a teenage boy , they start roaming around the park , with Madonna singing the song . These scenes are interchanged with scenes from the motion picture , which show Madonna as the movie character Nikki Fynn . As the music video progresses , Madonna is shown to be in search of an Egyptian treasure casket . After being directed to it by a version of the High Priestess tarot card displaying her cartoon impersonation , Madonna opens it to find a huge diamond . She looks up happily to the children . The video ends with them continuing dancing and Madonna carrying away the casket . 
 The video portrayed a different image of Madonna rather than her real self . According to Vincent Canby of The New York Times , Madonna at that time was shrewdly pragmatic about her persona and appearance — resembling Marilyn Monroe , but with the " comic tartness " of Jean Harlow . This persona was reflected in the second half of the Who 's That Girl film . However , the music video chose not to capture her real self and qualities , or to promote the movie for which it was specifically created . Instead , it concentrated on the humorous off @-@ putting personality of Madonna 's film character depicted in the first half of the film . 
 = = Live performances and covers = = 
 Madonna performed the song on two of her tours . On her 1987 Who 's That Girl World Tour where it was performed as a part of the encore . Madonna came out on the stage in a bright red flamenco dress and performed the song , assisted by her backup singers Niki Haris , Donna De Lory and Debra Parson . Two different performances of the song on this tour can be found on the videos : Who 's That Girl : Live in Japan , filmed in Tokyo , Japan , on June 22 , 1987 , and Ciao Italia : Live from Italy , filmed in Turin , Italy , on September 4 , 1987 . Almost 30 years later , Madonna performed an acoustic , guitar @-@ driven version of the song during the Rebel Heart Tour ( 2015 – 16 ) . The wardrobe for the performance consisted of a gypsy inspired ensemble , made up of shawl , lace gloves , long black skirt with silk fringes , a hat with silk flowers on it , and high @-@ heeled knee @-@ high lace @-@ up leather boots . After the song , the singer admitted that it took her " a hell of a long time " to answer who the titular girl was in the song . 
