 The song has been covered many times , mostly on tribute albums . In 1999 , The Countdown Singers made a sound @-@ alike cover version for the album Hit Parade of 80 's , Vol . 2 . The Royal Philharmonic Orchestra ( RPO ) made an instrumental version of the song for the 1998 album Material Girl : RPO Plays Music of Madonna . German actress Eva Mattes covered the song for her 2006 album Language of Love . In 2007 , The Bubonic Plague recorded a cover of the song that was included on the tribute album Through the Wilderness . 
 = = Formats and track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Madonna – lyrics , producer , vocals 
 Patrick Leonard – lyrics , producer 
 Michael Barbiero – additional production , audio mixing 
 Steve Thompson – additional production , audio mixing 
 Credits adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Terri Schiavo case = 
 The Terri Schiavo case was a legal struggle over end @-@ of @-@ life care in the United States from 1990 to 2005 , involving Theresa Marie " Terri " Schiavo , a woman in an irreversible persistent vegetative state . Schiavo 's husband and legal guardian argued that Schiavo would not have wanted prolonged artificial life support without the prospect of recovery , and elected to remove her feeding tube . Schiavo 's parents argued in favor of continuing artificial nutrition and hydration and challenged Schiavo 's medical diagnosis . The highly publicized and prolonged series of legal challenges presented by her parents , which ultimately involved state and federal politicians up to the level of President George W. Bush , caused a seven @-@ year delay before Schiavo 's feeding tube was ultimately removed . 
 Schiavo suffered a cardiac arrest in her St. Petersburg , Florida , home on February 25 , 1990 . She was resuscitated , but suffered massive brain damage due to lack of oxygen to her brain and was left comatose . After two and a half months without improvement , her diagnosis was changed to that of a persistent vegetative state . For the next two years , doctors attempted speech and physical therapy and other experimental therapy , hoping to return her to a state of awareness , without success . In 1998 , Schiavo 's husband , Michael , petitioned the Sixth Circuit Court of Florida to remove her feeding tube pursuant to Florida law . He was opposed by Terri 's parents , Robert and Mary Schindler , who argued that she was conscious . The court determined that Schiavo would not have wished to continue life @-@ prolonging measures , and on April 24 , 2001 , her feeding tube was removed for the first time , only to be reinserted several days later . On February 25 , 2005 , a Pinellas County judge again ordered the removal of Terri Schiavo 's feeding tube . Several appeals and federal government intervention followed , which included U.S. President George W. Bush returning to Washington D.C. to sign legislation designed to keep her alive . After appeals through the federal court system upheld the original decision to remove the feeding tube , staff at the Pinellas Park hospice facility disconnected the feeding tube on March 18 , 2005 , and Schiavo died on March 31 , 2005 . 
 In all , the Schiavo case involved 14 appeals and numerous motions , petitions , and hearings in the Florida courts ; five suits in federal district court ; extensive political intervention at the levels of the Florida state legislature , then @-@ governor Jeb Bush , the U.S. Congress , and President George W. Bush ; and four denials of certiorari from the Supreme Court of the United States . The case also spurred highly visible activism from the pro @-@ life movement , the right @-@ to @-@ die movement , and disability rights groups . Since Schiavo 's death , both her husband and her family have written books on their sides of the case , and both have also been involved in activism over its larger issues . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Terri Schiavo was born Theresa Marie Schindler on December 3 , 1963 , in Lower Moreland Township , Montgomery County , Pennsylvania , a suburb of Philadelphia . Overweight throughout her childhood , as a teenager Terri stood 5 ' 3 " ( 160 cm ) tall and weighed 200 pounds ( 91 kg ) . She attended <unk> Jesuit High School . Through dieting she had lost 65 pounds ( 29 kg ) by the time she attended college . She attended Bucks County Community College , where she met Michael Schiavo in 1982 . The two began dating and were married on November 10 , 1984 . They moved to Florida in 1986 , following Terri 's parents . Michael worked as a restaurant manager , while Terri took up a job with an insurance company . 
 = = = Initial medical crisis : 1990 = = = 
 In the early morning of February 25 , 1990 , Terri Schiavo collapsed in a hallway of her St. Petersburg , Florida , apartment . Firefighters and paramedics arriving in response to her husband Michael 's 9 @-@ 1 @-@ 1 call found her face @-@ down and unconscious . She was not breathing and had no pulse . They attempted to resuscitate her and she was transported to the Humana Northside Hospital . Paramedics had her intubated and ventilated . 
 = = = = Initial medical assessments = = = = 
 Her medical chart contained a note that " she apparently has been trying to keep her weight down with dieting by herself , drinking liquids most of the time during the day and drinking about 10 – 15 glasses of iced tea . " Upon admission to the hospital , she was noted as suffering from hypokalemia ( low potassium levels ) : her serum potassium level was an abnormally low 2 @.@ 0 mEq / L ( the normal range for adults is 3 @.@ 5 – 5 @.@ 0 mEq / L ) . Her sodium and calcium levels were normal . <unk> imbalance is often caused by drinking excessive fluids . A serious consequence of hypokalemia can be heart rhythm abnormalities , including sudden arrhythmia death syndrome . Vomiting , a self @-@ induced act for many bulimic patients , is another cause of low potassium levels . Terri was eventually switched from being fed by a nasogastric feeding tube to a percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy ( PEG ) feeding tube . 
 Dr. Garcia J. <unk> , board @-@ certified neurologist in St. Petersburg , Florida , who previously treated Terri Schiavo , cared for her during her initial admission to Humana Northside ; both he and Dr. Victor Gambone , an internist and Schiavo family physician , independently made the diagnosis of persistent vegetative state ( PVS ) within approximately one year after her sudden cardiac arrest . 
 = = = Relationship between Terri 's husband and parents = = = 
 From 1990 to 1993 , Michael Schiavo and the Schindlers ( Terri Schiavo 's parents ) enjoyed an amicable relationship , with the Schindlers allowing Michael to live rent @-@ free in their condominium for several months . 
 = = = Rehabilitation efforts : 1990 – 1993 = = = 
 In November 1990 , Michael Schiavo took Terri to the University of California , San Francisco for experimental nerve stimulation with a thalamic stimulator . The treatment took several months and was unsuccessful . He returned to Florida with her in January 1991 and admitted her as an inpatient to the <unk> Rehabilitation Center in Bradenton , Florida . On July 19 , 1991 , Terri Schiavo was transferred to the Sabal Palms Skilled Care Facility , where she received neurological testing and regular speech and occupational therapy until 1994 . In mid @-@ 1993 , Michael Schiavo requested a do not resuscitate order for her after she contracted a urinary tract infection . The court @-@ appointed guardian ad litem , Jay Wolfson , later wrote a report stating that Michael Schiavo 's decision was " predicated on his reasoned belief that there was no longer any hope for Terri 's recovery . " 
 = = Legal cases 1992 – 2002 = = 
 = = = Malpractice = = = 
 In 1992 Michael filed a malpractice suit against Terri 's obstetrician on the basis that he failed to diagnose bulimia as the cause of her infertility . Terri had gone to the doctor because she had stopped menstruating but the doctor had failed to take her medical history into account which might have revealed an eating disorder . During the case , one of Terri 's friends testified that she knew Schiavo was bulimic . In November 1992 , Michael won the case and was awarded $ 6 @.@ 8 million by the jury , later reduced to $ 2 million as Terri was found partly at fault for her condition . After attorneys ' fees and other expenses , Michael received $ 300 @,@ 000 and $ 750 @,@ 000 was put in a trust fund for Terri 's medical care . According to Michael , in early 2003 the Schindlers demanded that he share the malpractice money with them . 
 = = = Petition to remove feeding tube = = = 
 On June 18 , 1990 , the court appointed Michael Schiavo as Terri Schiavo 's legal guardian ; this appointment was not disputed by the Schindlers at the time . In May 1998 , Michael Schiavo filed a petition to remove Terri Schiavo 's feeding tube , which her parents opposed . Richard Pearse was appointed by the court as a second guardian ad litem ( GAL ) , and on December 29 , 1998 , reported " Dr. Jeffrey Karp 's opinion of the ward 's condition and prognosis is substantially shared among those physicians who have recently been involved in her treatment . " Pearse concluded from Karp 's and Dr. Vincent Gambone 's diagnosis of PVS that Schiavo was legally in a persistent vegetative state as defined by Florida Statutes , Title XLIV , Chapter 765 , § 101 ( 12 ) . This includes the " absence of voluntary action " and an " inability to communicate or interact purposefully . " 
 Pearse found that there was no possibility of improvement but that Michael Schiavo 's decisions might have been influenced by the potential to inherit what remained of Terri Schiavo 's estate as long as he remained married to her . Due to a lack of a living will and questions regarding Michael 's credibility , Pearse recommended denying his petition to remove her feeding tube . Pearse reported that the issue of conflict of interest applied to the Schindlers as well since , had Michael divorced Terri as they wanted him to , they would have inherited the remainder of Mrs. Schiavo 's estate upon her death . 
 = = = Schiavo end @-@ of @-@ life wishes = = = 
 Given the lack of a living will , a trial was held before Pinellas County Judge George Greer during the week of January 24 , 2000 , to determine what Terri Schiavo 's wishes would have been regarding life @-@ prolonging procedures . Michael Schiavo was represented by attorney George Felos , who had won a landmark right @-@ to @-@ die case before the Florida Supreme Court in 1990 . 
 The trial included testimony from eighteen witnesses regarding her medical condition and her end @-@ of @-@ life wishes . Michael Schiavo claimed that his wife would not want to be kept on a machine where her chance for recovery was minuscule . According to Abstract Appeal Trial Order , her parents " claimed that Terri was a devout Roman Catholic who would not wish to violate the Church 's teachings on euthanasia by refusing nutrition and hydration . " Judge Greer issued his order granting the petition for authorization to discontinue artificial life support for Terri Schiavo in February 2000 . In this decision , the court found that Terri Schiavo was in a persistent vegetative state and that she had made reliable oral declarations that she would have wanted the feeding tube removed . This decision was upheld by the Florida Second District Court of Appeal ( 2nd DCA ) and came to be known by the court as Schiavo I in its later rulings . 
 = = = Oral feeding and the Second Guardianship Challenge = = = 
 In March 2000 , the Schindlers filed a motion to permit assisted feeding of Terri , which is not considered a life @-@ prolonging procedure under Florida law . Since clinical records indicated that Terri Schiavo was not responsive to swallowing tests and required a feeding tube , Judge Greer ruled that she was not capable of orally ingesting sufficient nutrition and hydration to sustain life , and denied the request . The Medical Examiner in his postmortem report was more definitive and reaffirmed that Schiavo could not have swallowed . 
 In 2000 , the Schindlers again challenged Michael Schiavo 's guardianship . The Schindlers suggested that he was wasting the assets within the guardianship account by transferring Terri Schiavo to a Pinellas Park , Florida hospice " after it was clear that she was not ' terminal ' within Medicare guidelines " for hospices . By this time , while still legally married to Terri Schiavo , Michael Schiavo was in a relationship with Jodi <unk> , and had fathered their first child . He said he chose not to divorce his wife and relinquish guardianship because he wanted to ensure her final wishes ( not to be kept alive in a PVS ) were carried out . The court denied the motion to remove the guardian , allowing that the evidence was not sufficient and in some instances , not relevant . It set April 24 , 2001 as the date on which the tube was to be removed . 
 = = = Schiavo II = = = 
 In April 2001 , the Schindlers filed a motion for relief from judgment citing new evidence of Terri Schiavo 's wishes . Judge Greer denied the motion as untimely under Rule 1 @.@ 540 ( b ) ( 5 ) of the Florida Rules of Civil Procedure . The Second District Court of Appeal upheld Greer 's decision but remanded the issue in order to give the Schindlers an opportunity to file a new motion . On April 24 , 2001 Terri 's feeding tube was removed for the first time . The Schindlers filed a civil suit against Michael Schiavo alleging perjury , which was assigned to another court . The judge , Frank Quesada , issued an injunction against the removal of feeding tube until this was settled . The feeding tube was reinserted on April 26 , 2001 . On appeal by Michael Schiavo , the Second District Court of Appeal reversed Judge Quesada 's order . In the same time frame , Michael Schiavo filed a motion to enforce the mandate of the guardianship court ( that the feeding tube be removed ) . The Second District Court of Appeal denied the motion . ( These three decisions , all published in a single order by Florida 's Second District Court of Appeal , came to be known by the court as Schiavo II in its later rulings . ) 
 = = = Schiavo III & IV : PVS diagnosis challenge = = = 
 On August 10 , 2001 , on remand from the Florida Second District Court of Appeal , Judge Greer heard a motion from the Schindlers claiming that new medical treatment could restore sufficient cognitive ability such that Terri Schiavo herself would be able to decide to continue life @-@ prolonging measures . The court also heard motions from the Schindlers to remove the guardian ( Michael Schiavo ) and to require Judge Greer to recuse himself . Judge Greer denied the motions and the Schindlers appealed to the Second District Court of Appeals . On October 17 , 2001 the Court of Appeal affirmed the denials of the motions to remove and recuse . The Court of Appeals acknowledged that their opinion misled the trial court , and they remanded the question of Terri Schiavo 's wishes back to the trial court and required an evidentiary hearing to be held . The court specified that five board certified neurologists were to testify . The Schindlers were allowed to choose two doctors to present findings at an evidentiary hearing while Michael Schiavo could introduce two rebuttal experts . Finally , the trial court itself would appoint a new independent physician to examine and evaluate Terri Schiavo 's condition . ( These decisions , all published in a single order by the Florida Second District Court of Appeal , came to be known by the court as Schiavo III in its later rulings . ) In October 2002 , on remand by the Second District Court of Appeal , an evidentiary hearing was held in Judge Greer 's court to determine whether new therapy treatments could help Terri Schiavo restore any cognitive function . In preparation for the trial , a new computed axial tomography scan ( CAT scan ) was performed , which showed severe cerebral atrophy . An EEG showed no measurable brain activity . The five physicians chosen were Dr. William Maxfield , a radiologist , and four neurologists : Dr. William Hammesfahr , Dr. Ronald Cranford , Dr. Melvin Greer and Dr. Peter <unk> . 
 The five doctors examined Terri Schiavo 's medical records , brain scans , the videos , and Terri herself . Drs. Cranford , Greer , and <unk> testified that Terri Schiavo was in a persistent vegetative state . Drs. Maxfield and Hammesfahr testified that she was in a minimally conscious state . As part of the court @-@ ordered medical exam , six hours of video of Terri Schiavo were taped and filed at the Pinellas County courthouse . The tape included Terri Schiavo with her mother and neurologist William Hammesfahr . The entire tape was viewed by Judge Greer , who wrote , Terri " clearly does not consistently respond to her mother " . From that six hours of video , the Schindlers and their supporters produced six clips showing reactions and emotions , totaling less than six minutes , and released those clips to public websites . Judge Greer ruled that Terri Schiavo was in a PVS , and was beyond hope of significant improvement . The trial court order was particularly critical of Hammesfahr 's testimony , which claimed positive results in similar cases by use of vasodilation therapy , the success of which is unsupported in the medical literature . This ruling was later affirmed by Florida 's Second District Court of Appeal , which stated that " this court has closely examined all of the evidence in the record , " and " we have ... carefully observed the video tapes in their entirety . " The court concluded that " ... if we were called upon to review the guardianship court 's decision de novo , we would still affirm it . " ( This decision by the Second District Court of Appeals came to be known as Schiavo IV in later rulings . ) 
 Around the start of 2003 , the Schindlers began to create more publicity by lobbying for their case to keep their daughter alive . They selected pro @-@ life activist Randall Terry as their spokesman and continued to pursue their available legal options . On September 11 , 2003 , the Schindlers petitioned the court to forestall removal of the feeding tube to provide for " eight weeks ' therapy " . Accompanying the petition were four affidavits from members of the Schindler family and one from Dr. Alexander T. <unk> . At the hearing , the Schindlers ' counsel read into the record additional affidavits from three speech professionals and two nurses . 
 On September 17 , 2003 Judge George Greer denied the petition , and wrote that " the Petition is an attempt by Mr. and Mrs. Schindler to re @-@ litigate the entire case . It is not even a veiled or disguised attempt . The exhibits relied upon by them clearly demonstrate this to be true . " Regarding ( Nurse ) Iyer 's statements , Greer wrote that they were " incredible to say the least " and that " Ms. Iyer details what amounts to a 15 @-@ month cover @-@ up April 1995 through July 1996 which include the staff of Palm Garden of Largo Convalescent Center , the Guardian of the Person , the guardian ad litem , the medical professionals , the police and , believe it or not , Mr. and Mrs. Schindler ... It is impossible to believe that Mr. and Mrs. Schindler would not have subpoenaed Ms. Iyer for the January 2000 evidentiary hearing had Iyer contacted them in 1996 as her affidavit alleges " . 
 = = Terri 's Law and other government delays = = 
 On October 15 , 2003 , Schiavo 's feeding tube was removed . Within a week , when the Schindlers ' final appeal was exhausted , State Rep. Frank <unk> and the Florida Legislature hastily passed " Terri 's Law , " giving Governor Jeb Bush the authority to intervene in the case . Governor Bush immediately ordered the feeding tube reinserted . Governor Bush sent the Florida Department of Law Enforcement ( <unk> ) to remove Schiavo from the hospice . She was taken to Morton Plant Rehabilitation Hospital in Clearwater , where her feeding tube was surgically reinserted . She was then returned to the hospice . Part of the legislation required the appointment of a guardian ad litem ( GAL ) , Dr. Jay Wolfson , to " deduce and represent the best wishes and best interests " of Schiavo , and report them to Governor Bush . Wolfson 's report did not change Michael 's role as her legal guardian and did not otherwise obstruct him legally . 
 Michael Schiavo opposed the Governor 's intervention in Schiavo 's case , and was represented , in part , by the American Civil Liberties Union ( ACLU ) . At the same time , Robert and Mary Schindler , her parents , attempted to intervene and participate in the " Terri 's Law " case but were denied by Judge W. Douglas Baird , a Circuit Judge in the Florida Sixth Circuit , the same circuit as for Judge George W. Greer . They appealed , and , on February 13 , the Florida Second District Court of Appeal ( Second District Court of Appeals ) reversed Baird 's ruling , allowing them to participate . On March 17 , Baird denied the Schindlers the right to intervene a second time , and the Schindlers , represented by the American Center for Law and Justice ( <unk> ) , appealed the right to participate in the " Terri 's Law " case , with the court scheduling an oral argument date for June 14 . The Schindlers ' other attorney , Pat Anderson , was concurrently challenging Michael Schiavo 's right to be her guardian , and , on June 16 , she made a petition for writ of Quo <unk> . 
 On May 5 , 2004 , Baird found " Terri 's Law " unconstitutional , and struck it down . Bush appealed this order to the Second District Court of Appeals , but on May 12 , the court issued an " Order Relinquishing Case for Entry of Final Judgment and Order to Show Cause Why this Proceeding Should Not be Certified to the Supreme Court As Requiring Immediate Resolution . " The Second District Court of Appeals , in sending it directly to the Florida Supreme Court , invoked " pass through " jurisdiction . 
 The Florida Supreme Court then overturned the law as unconstitutional . 
 = = Final feeding tube removal and federal involvement = = 
 = = = Early 2005 motions = = = 
 On February 23 , 2005 , the Schindlers filed a motion for relief from judgment pending medical evaluations . The Schindlers wanted Schiavo to be tested with an fMRI and given a swallowing therapy called <unk> . The motion was accompanied by thirty @-@ three affidavits from doctors in several specialties , speech @-@ language pathologists and therapists , and a few neuropsychologists , all urging that new tests be undertaken . Patricia Fields Anderson , the Schindler family attorney , still held out hope " that Terri might be able to take nourishment orally , despite past findings that she is incapable . " Judge Greer formally denied the motion and ordered the " removal of nutrition and hydration from the ward " and set the time and date for the removal of the feeding tube as , " 1 : 00 p.m. on Friday , March 18 , 2005 . " 
 On February 28 , 2005 the Schindlers filed a motion , asking for permission to attempt to provide Schiavo with " Food and Water by Natural Means . " This second motion asked for permission to " attempt to feed " Schiavo by mouth . Judge Greer denied the second motion on March 8 , saying " it has become clear that the second motion is part and parcel of the previous motion on medical evaluations . The same declarations are being used for both motions and the motion appears to be an alternative pleading to the previous motion . Both are asking for an experimental procedure . " The following day , Greer denied the first motion as well , citing that an <unk> doctor for Michael cautioned that fMRI was an experimental procedure that should be conducted in an academic setting , because Schiavo had already undergone swallowing tests and failed , and because <unk> had only been performed on patients who were not in a PVS . Greer noted that " most of the doctor affidavits submitted are based on their understanding of Schiavo 's condition from news reports or video clips they have seen . Many are obviously not aware of the medical exams undertaken for the 2002 trial . ... " 
 Following Greer 's order on March 18 , 2005 to remove the feeding tube , Republicans in the United States Congress subpoenaed both Michael and Terri Schiavo to testify at a congressional hearing . Greer told congressional attorneys , " I have had no cogent reason why the ( congressional ) committee should intervene . " He also stated that last @-@ minute action by Congress does not invalidate years of court rulings . 
 = = = Palm Sunday Compromise = = = 
 President Bush and Congressional Republicans anticipated Greer 's adverse ruling well before it was delivered and worked on a daily basis to find an alternative means of overturning the legal process by utilizing the authority of the United States Congress . On March 20 , 2005 , the Senate , by unanimous consent , passed their version of a relief bill ; since the vote was taken by voice vote , there was no official tally of those voting in favor and those opposed . Soon after Senate approval , the House of Representatives passed an identical version of the bill <unk> , which came to be called the " Palm Sunday Compromise " and transferred jurisdiction of the Schiavo case to the federal courts . The bill passed the House on March 21 , 2005 at 12 : 41 a.m. ( UTC @-@ 5 ) . U.S. President George W. Bush flew to Washington , D.C. from his vacation in Texas in order to sign the bill into law at 1 : 11 a.m. 
 While the bill had been proposed by Republican Senators Rick Santorum and Mel Martinez , it also had the support of Democratic Senator Tom Harkin due to disability rights concerns in the Schiavo case . Harkin had worked with disability rights groups for years and co @-@ authored the 1990 Americans with Disabilities Act . American disability rights groups traditionally tend to ally themselves with Democrats and the political left ; however , in the Schiavo case they joined pro @-@ life organizations in opposing the removal of her feeding tube and supporting the Palm Sunday Compromise . According to Marilyn Golden , Harkin 's support was necessary for passage of the bill , as any voice opposition by Democrats would have delayed it . 
 As in the state courts , all of the Schindlers ' federal petitions and appeals were denied , and the U.S. Supreme Court declined to grant certiorari , effectively ending the Schindlers ' judicial options . At the same time , the so @-@ called Schiavo memo surfaced , causing a political firestorm . The memo was written by Brian Darling , the legal counsel to Florida Republican senator Mel Martinez . It suggested the Schiavo case offered " a great political issue " that would appeal to the party 's base ( core supporters ) and could be used against Senator Bill Nelson , a Democrat from Florida , because he had refused to co @-@ sponsor the bill . Nelson easily won re @-@ election in 2006 . 
 Senator and physician Bill Frist opposed the removal of her feeding tube and in a speech delivered on the Senate Floor , challenged the diagnosis of Schiavo 's physicians of Schiavo being in a persistent vegetative state ( PVS ) : " I question it based on a review of the video footage which I spent an hour or so looking at last night in my office " . Frist was criticized by a medical ethicist at Northwestern University for making a diagnosis without personally examining the patient and for questioning the diagnosis when he was not a neurologist . After her death , the autopsy showed signs of long @-@ term and irreversible damage to her brain consistent with PVS . Frist defended his actions after the autopsy . 
 = = Final local motions , death , autopsy , and burial = = 
 On March 24 , 2005 , Judge Greer denied a petition for intervention by the Department of Children & Families ( <unk> ) and signed an order forbidding the department from " taking possession of Theresa Marie Schiavo or removing her " from the hospice and directed " each and every and singular sheriff of the state of Florida " to enforce his order . The order was appealed to the Second District Court of Appeals the following day , which resulted in an automatic stay under state law . While the stay was in effect , Florida Department of Law Enforcement personnel prepared to take custody of Terri and transfer her to a local hospital for reinsertion of the feeding tube . Once Greer was made aware of the stay , he ordered it lifted and all parties stood down . Governor Bush decided to obey the court order despite enormous pressure from the political right . If Bush ( or the Florida Legislature ) had ignored Greer 's order by attempting to remove her from the hospice , a confrontation between the Pinellas Park Police Department and the <unk> agents could have ensued . In jest , one official said local police discussed " ... whether we had enough officers to hold off the National Guard . " 
 Terri Schiavo died at a Pinellas Park hospice on March 31 , 2005 . Although there was concern that Schiavo would experience significant symptoms from dehydration with the removal of the feeding tube , studies have shown that patients who have their feeding tubes removed , such as the case of Schiavo , usually have a peaceful death . 
 After her death , Schiavo 's body was taken to the Office of the District 6 Medical Examiner for Pinellas and Pasco counties , based in Largo , Florida . The autopsy occurred on April 1 , 2005 . It revealed extensive brain damage . The manner of death was certified as " undetermined " . The autopsy was led by Chief Medical Examiner Jon R. Thogmartin , M.D. In addition to consultation with a neuropathologist ( Stephen J. Nelson , M.D. ) , Dr. Thogmartin also arranged for specialized cardiac and genetic examinations to be made . The official autopsy report was released on June 15 , 2005 . In addition to studying Terri Schiavo 's remains , Thogmartin scoured court , medical and other records and interviewed her family members , doctors and other relevant parties . Examination of Schiavo 's nervous system by neuropathologist Stephen J. Nelson , M.D. , revealed extensive injury . The brain itself weighed only 615 g ( 21 @.@ 7 oz ) , only half the weight expected for a female of her age , height , and weight , an effect caused by the loss of a massive number of neurons . Microscopic examination revealed extensive damage to nearly all brain regions , including the cerebral cortex , the thalami , the basal ganglia , the hippocampus , the cerebellum , and the midbrain . The <unk> changes in her brain were precisely of the type seen in patients who enter a PVS following cardiac arrest . Throughout the cerebral cortex , the large pyramidal neurons that comprise some 70 % of cortical cells – critical to the functioning of the cortex – were completely lost . The pattern of damage to the cortex , with injury tending to worsen from the front of the cortex to the back , was also typical . There was marked damage to important relay circuits deep in the brain ( the thalami ) – another common pathologic finding in cases of PVS . The damage was , in the words of Thogmartin , " irreversible , and no amount of therapy or treatment would have regenerated the massive loss of neurons . " 
 The cardiac pathologist who studied Schiavo 's heart found it and the coronary vessels to be healthy , which excludes the possibility that her initial collapse was the result of myocardial infarction , although there was a localized area of healed inflammation ( opening the possibility of myocarditis ) . Thogmartin found that " there was no proof that Terri Schiavo ever had an eating disorder such as bulimia . " Regarding the possibility of strangulation or domestic violence as a cause of Schiavo 's initial collapse , the report states : " No trauma was noted on any of the numerous physical exams or radiographs performed on Mrs. Schiavo on the day of , in the days after , or in the months after her initial collapse . Indeed , within an hour of her initial hospital admission , radiographic examination of her cervical spine was negative . Specifically , external signs of strangulation including cutaneous or deep neck injury , facial / conjunctival petechiae , and other blunt trauma were not observed or recorded during her initial hospital admission . Autopsy examination of her neck structures 15 years after her initial collapse did not detect any signs of remote trauma , but , with such a delay , the exam was unlikely to show any residual neck findings . " 
 Regarding the cause and manner of Schiavo 's death , Thogmartin wrote , " Mrs. Schiavo suffered severe anoxic brain injury . The cause of which cannot be determined with reasonable medical certainty . The manner of death will therefore be certified as undetermined . " 
 " We were not surprised the medical examiner said Terri 's brain was damaged , " said Bobby Schindler , Jr . , her brother , in an interview hours after the autopsy report was released . " The fact that the medical examiner ruled out bulimia and ruled out a heart attack , without a doubt , adds more questions . " 
 = = = Burial = = = 
 Schiavo 's body was cremated following the autopsy . Her parents offered a memorial Mass for her at the Holy Name of Jesus Catholic Church in Gulfport on April 5 . Father Frank <unk> , founder of Priests for Life , delivered the main homily ( Audio : MP3 Format ) . 
 On May 7 , Schiavo 's parents made public a complaint that they had not been informed of when and where the ashes of their daughter had been ( or were to be ) buried by Michael Schiavo . He was under court order to provide this information to them . 
 On June 20 , the cremated remains of Terri Schiavo were buried . The Schindlers ' attorney stated that the family was notified by fax only after the memorial service ; by then , the family had already started getting calls from reporters . The ashes were interred at Sylvan Abbey Memorial Park in Clearwater , Florida . 
 The epitaph ( pictured ) reads : 
 = = Ethical and legal issues = = 
 = = = Right @-@ to @-@ die = = = 
 The Schiavo case has often been compared to those of Karen Ann Quinlan and Nancy Cruzan , two other highly influential right @-@ to @-@ die cases . Quinlan entered a persistent vegetative state in 1975 , and her family was allowed to remove her from a ventilator in 1976 after a ruling by the New Jersey Supreme Court . She died of pneumonia in 1985 . Cruzan was diagnosed with PVS in 1983 and her legal case reached the Supreme Court , which ruled that " clear and convincing evidence " of her wishes to die under such circumstances was needed . Cruzan 's family did not have enough evidence of that , but later produced more . She died after being removed from life support in 1990 . 
 The Schiavo case differed from the Quinlan and Cruzan cases by involving settled law rather than breaking new legal ground on the right @-@ to @-@ die issue . The case instead involved a dispute between family members over what Schiavo 's wishes would have been for such a situation . According to medical ethicist Matthew <unk> , " The movement to challenge the decisions made for Terri Schiavo threatened to destabilize end @-@ of @-@ life law that had developed over the last quarter of the 20th century , principally through the cases of Karen Ann Quinlan and Nancy Cruzan . " 
 The outcome of the Schiavo case was also in part determined by a 1990 Florida case , Guardianship of Estelle Browning . In that case , George Felos , the attorney for Michael Schiavo in the Schiavo case , represented a Browning relative . Felos successfully argued before the Florida Supreme Court that Browning 's feeding tube should be removed . The elderly Browning had expressed in a living will her wish not to be kept alive by any artificial means , including receiving food and water " by a gastric tube or intravenously . " At that time it was common to remove people from ventilators , but the law in Florida wasn 't clear on removing them from feeding tubes . In a landmark ruling , the Florida Supreme Court decided that Browning had " the constitutional right to choose or refuse medical treatment , and that right extends to all relevant decisions concerning one 's health . " 
 = = = Disability rights = = = 
 During the years of legal proceedings , disability rights groups and activists closely monitored and involved themselves in the case . In March 2003 , twelve disability rights groups , led by Not Dead Yet , along with four other amici , filed an amicus curiae brief in which they opposed the removal of Schiavo 's feeding tube . They also used the Schiavo case to advocate for federal review in cases where third parties decide to withdraw life support from patients unable to give consent . They argued that persistent vegetative state is frequently misdiagnosed , and that the reasons for withdrawal of life support from a patient should be scrutinized since even family member surrogates can have conflicts of interest . The Palm Sunday Compromise granted the federal review they sought , but it was limited to only the Schiavo case . 
 = = Public opinion and activism = = 
 The seven @-@ year case generated a great deal of public attention and activism . There was extensive media coverage and both sides courted public opinion . In 2000 , the Schindlers created the Terri Schindler @-@ Schiavo Foundation to garner support . During the weeks when Schiavo 's feeding tube was removed in 2005 , activists kept up an around @-@ the @-@ clock vigil outside her hospice . The protests were described as loud but non @-@ violent . There were dozens of arrests , with most being for crossing a police line with water for Schiavo . 
 Two polls conducted shortly after Schiavo 's feeding tube was removed for the final time in 2005 showed that a large majority of Americans believed that Michael Schiavo should have had the authority to make decisions on behalf of his wife , Terri , and that the United States Congress overstepped its bounds with its intervention in the case . However , other polls seemed to favor the Schindler family 's position , and questions were raised about the wording of all the polls . 
 = = Developments since Schiavo 's death = = 
 Since Terri Schiavo 's death in March 2005 , her family and Michael Schiavo have clashed a number of times . Each side has also worked to promote their own causes related to the case . In April 2005 , the families disagreed over Schiavo 's burial . The Schindlers had wanted her body to be buried in Florida , while Michael Schiavo said at the time that he would cremate her body and then have her ashes buried in her home state of Pennsylvania . In June 2005 , however , Schiavo 's ashes were buried in Florida instead . The words " I kept my promise " were included on the marker , referring to his promise to follow what he said was her wish not to be kept alive artificially . The statement angered the Schindlers . 
 In December 2005 , Michael Schiavo created a political action committee , <unk> . It was formed to raise money to support right @-@ to @-@ die candidates and oppose candidates who had voted for government involvement in the Schiavo case . In 2007 , <unk> paid a $ 1 @,@ 350 fine to the Federal Election Commission for failing to file complete and timely records . Schiavo shut down the PAC later that year . 
 The Schindlers continued operation of the Terri Schindler Schiavo Foundation , with a new goal of helping individuals in situations similar to Terri 's . In April 2010 , Michael Schiavo charged that the Schindlers were improperly using Terri 's name , as he held the rights to it , and that the family was using the foundation in order to make money . A Florida television station looked at the foundation 's tax records and found that for 2008 , it paid 64 % of the $ 91 @,@ 568 it raised in salaries to Terri 's father , Robert Schindler , Sr. , her sister , Suzanne <unk> , and her brother , Robert Schindler , Jr . Their attorney said the foundation does its work effectively and that the high percentage for salaries was due to the small amount of money the foundation raises . He also said that the Schindlers had the right to use Terri 's name as she is a public figure . The foundation had been fined $ 1 @,@ 000 shortly before Schiavo 's death for failing to file timely paperwork . In September 2010 , the Schindlers renamed the organization the " Terri Schiavo Life and Hope Network . " 
 In 2006 , both Michael Schiavo and the Schindlers released books telling their sides of the story . Schiavo 's was called Terri : The Truth , while the Schindlers ' was titled A Life that Matters : The Legacy of Terri Schiavo – A Lesson for Us All . 
 = Stone Sour ( album ) = 
 Stone Sour is the debut studio album by American heavy metal band Stone Sour . It was recorded and produced by the band and Tom <unk> at Catamount Studios in Cedar Falls , Iowa , and was released on August 27 , 2002 , through Roadrunner Records . Writing for the album began in 2000 while vocalist Corey Taylor and guitarist Jim Root were still actively involved in their other band , Slipknot . Work began on the album after Slipknot had gone on hiatus following touring in support of their second album Iowa . 
 Following the release of the album , Stone Sour went on to promote it for almost a year ; releasing three singles and touring in several regions , including the United States and several countries in Europe . The album received generally positive reviews . It was praised for showing a diversity in Taylor 's vocals , which was not presented in Slipknot 's early albums . It was also certified Gold in the United States and two singles from the album received Grammy Award nominations for Best Metal Performance in consecutive years . 
 = = Development = = 
 In 2000 , Josh Rand contacted Corey Taylor after Taylor had returned from touring in Japan with his other band Slipknot about material he had been working on . Speaking about the experience , Taylor said , " we just started writing stuff and it started to happen " . The duo wrote 14 songs and began working in a studio on some demos . Taylor added that it got to a point where he said to Rand , " I think we 're going to have to put a real band together , because this is just too serious ! " After further enlisting the help of Joel Ekman and previous Stone Sour members Shawn Economaki and Jim Root , the band began working on the album at Catamount Studios in Cedar Falls , Iowa . Before the release of the album , the band went through several different names , most notably <unk> , before later announcing that they would use their original name Stone Sour . 
 = = Marketing = = 
 Prior to the release of the album , the track " Bother " was featured on the soundtrack for the film Spider @-@ Man ; however , it was only credited to Corey Taylor . In support of the album , Stone Sour released two singles in quick succession ; " Get Inside " was the band 's first music video and it included live footage . Released shortly after , " Bother " also featured a music video . 
 Throughout October and November 2002 , Stone Sour toured the United States in support of the album with Chevelle and <unk> . In 2003 , the band continued to tour in support of the album ; including a European tour with Saliva , an American tour with Powerman 5000 , several appearances at European festivals , a UK tour with Murderdolls , amongst others . 
 The third single from the album , " Inhale , " was released in early 2003 , shortly after the previously unreleased track " Inside the Cynic " was featured on the soundtrack for Freddy vs. Jason . On October 21 , 2003 , a special edition version of Stone Sour was released which included " Inside the Cynic " , four additional unreleased tracks , a DVD which featured all three music videos and alternative cover artwork . 
 = = Musical style = = 
 Corey Taylor touted Stone Sour as " melodic hard rock with content and initiative . " Jason D. Taylor of Allmusic noted that although it is not displayed on early Slipknot releases , " [ Corey ] Taylor has the ability to actually sing , " citing Alice in Chains and Soundgarden as influences . Jason Taylor went on to state the album gets better after multiple listens . Jeff Modzelewski of 411mania wrote the album mixed " hostility , reservation , brutality and melody . " According to Modzelewski , the album has a " mainstream sound " with each of the band 's members standing out during one song or another . Don Kaye of Blabbermouth.net felt the message of " Bother " did not differ from Slipknot tracks , but was " presented in an utterly different musical vein " . Kaye also felt the album " holds its own ... in terms of heaviness and power . " " The band knows how to put together an energetic rocker , " wrote NY Rock ; elements such as the " melodic twist to the songs ... will please hardcore and metal fans . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Stone Sour received generally positive reviews . Most reviewers offered some comparison to that of vocalist Taylor and guitarist Root 's other band Slipknot . While reviewing the album , Don Kaye wrote that " it 's rare that a musician offers up another venue for their talents that proves to be equal to their <unk> outfit , " stating that Stone Sour is one such case . While Rowan Shaeffer of Counterculture states that " Get Inside " is " the closest to Slipknot that Stone Sour get , " even comparing it to the Slipknot single " Left Behind " . Citing " the chugging rhythm , manic kick @-@ drums and shout @-@ along vocals " as specific elements that are reminiscent of Slipknot , adding that it was " an obvious choice for a single " as it would not alienate their potential audience of Slipknot fans . Jason D. Taylor noted the similarity in lyrical content to that of Slipknot 's ; however , he stated that vocalist Taylor comes across as less infuriated which " allows the songs themselves to settle smoothly , yet motivate the listener to feel the emotion " . NY Rock stated that the album has a " more balanced feel to it " than that of Slipknot 's most recent release at that time , Iowa . 
 Reviewers also noted upon the album 's versatility , specifically that of Taylor 's vocal range and abilities . Jeff Modzelewski praised the opening track " Get Inside " explaining , " the scorching speed @-@ metal verse and screaming chorus are played off pretty well against the melodic pre @-@ chorus " . Jason D. Taylor cited " Orchids " and " Take a Number " as songs which stand out because they " strike with surprising force for an alternative rock group " . On a similar note , Don Kaye said the album includes some " sinister , groove @-@ oriented metal gems that refreshingly stay away from nu metal cliches " . The most melodic track on the album , " Bother " , received specific attention from most reviewers . Modzelewski said that the track " seems to be the song that the album has been preparing everyone for " , further adding that Taylor proves " that he is a legitimate vocalist who doesn 't need to rely on destroying his vocal chords to make a good song " . In his review , Rowan Shaeffer stated the track was a specific highlight , but said that the change in style was " at odds with the rest of the material " on the album . 
 In 2003 , Stone Sour 's first single from the album , " Get Inside " , was nominated for the Best Metal performance at the 45th Grammy Awards . On March 20 , 2003 , Stone Sour was certified Gold in the United States . The following year , the album 's third single , " Inhale " , was also nominated for Best Metal Performance at the 46th Grammy Awards . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All lyrics written by Corey Taylor , all music composed and performed by Stone Sour . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = Crewe Hall = 
 Crewe Hall is a Jacobean mansion located near Crewe Green , east of Crewe , in Cheshire , England . Described by Nikolaus Pevsner as one of the two finest Jacobean houses in Cheshire , it is listed at grade I. Built in 1615 – 36 for Sir Randolph Crewe , it was one of the county 's largest houses in the 17th century , and was said to have " brought London into Cheshire " . 
 The hall was extended in the late 18th century and altered by Edward Blore in the early Victorian era . It was extensively restored by E. M. Barry after a fire in 1866 , and is considered among his best works . Other artists and craftsmen employed during the restoration include J. Birnie Philip , J. G. Crace , Henry Weekes and the firm of Clayton and Bell . The interior is elaborately decorated and contains many fine examples of wood carving , chimneypieces and plasterwork , some of which are Jacobean in date . 
 The park was landscaped during the 18th century by Lancelot Brown , William Emes , John Webb and Humphry Repton , and formal gardens were designed by W. A. Nesfield in the 19th century . On the estate are cottages designed by Nesfield 's son , William Eden Nesfield , which Pevsner considered to have introduced features such as tile hanging and pargetting into Cheshire . The stables quadrangle is contemporary with the hall and is listed at grade II * . 
 The hall remained the seat of various branches of the Crewe family until 1936 , when the land was sold to the Duchy of Lancaster . It was used as offices after the Second World War , serving as the headquarters for the Wellcome Foundation for nearly thirty years . As of 2013 , it is used as a hotel , restaurant and health club . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Sir Randolph Crewe , Civil War and the Restoration = = = 
 Crewe was the seat of the de Crewe ( or de <unk> ) family in the 12th and 13th centuries ; they built a timber @-@ framed manor house there in around 1170 . The manor passed to the de <unk> family of Barthomley in 1319 by the marriage of Johanna de Crewe to Richard de <unk> . Later in the 14th century it passed to the <unk> ( or <unk> ) family , who held the manor jointly with that of Barthomley until around 1575 , when the estate was dispersed . Legal problems resulted in the lands being acquired by Sir Christopher Hatton , from whose heirs Sir Randolph Crewe ( 1559 – 1646 ) purchased an extensive estate including the manors of Crewe , Barthomley and Haslington in 1608 for over £ 6 @,@ 000 ( £ 1 @.@ 03 million today ) . 
 Born in nearby Nantwich , reputedly the son of a tanner , Sir Randolph ( or Ranulph ) had risen through the legal profession to become a judge , member of parliament and the parliamentary Speaker . His fortune derived from his successful practice in chancery and other London courts . He briefly served as Lord Chief Justice in 1625 – 26 , but was dismissed by Charles I for his refusal to endorse a forced loan without the consent of parliament . He divided his enforced retirement between his London house and the Crewe estate . In 1615 , he commenced building a substantial hall at Crewe , either adjacent to the old house , which was by then in disrepair , or after demolishing it . He later wrote that " it hath pleased God of his abundant goodness to reduce the house and <unk> of the name to the name againe . " 
 A few years after the hall 's completion in 1636 , Civil War broke out . Like most of the legal families of Cheshire , the Crewe family was parliamentarian , and the hall was used as a garrison . In December 1643 , royalist forces under the command of Lord Byron occupied the area as they surrounded Nantwich , a major parliamentarian stronghold early in the First Civil War which lay some 5 miles ( 8 km ) to the south west . A contemporary diarist , Edward <unk> , vicar of nearby Acton , described the subsequent action : " The royalists laid siege to Crewe Hall , where they within the house slew sixty , and wounded many , on St. John 's Day ; but wanting victuals and ammunition , they were forced to yield it up the next day , and themselves , a hundred and thirty @-@ six , became prisoners , stout and valiant soldiers , having quarter for life granted them . " On 4 February 1644 , shortly after the decisive parliamentarian victory at the Battle of Nantwich , the hall was retaken by Sir Thomas Fairfax 's forces . 
 Sir Randolph Crewe died a couple of years later , before the end of the First Civil War . His male line died out in 1684 , and the hall passed to the Offley family by the marriage of Sir Randolph 's great @-@ granddaughter , Anne Crewe , to John Offley of Madeley Old Manor , Staffordshire . Their eldest son , also John ( 1681 – 1749 ) , took the name Crewe in 1708 . The Offley – Crewe family was very wealthy at this time : John Offley Crewe 's income at his death was estimated at £ 15 @,@ 000 per year ( £ 2 @.@ 1 million today ) . Both John Offley Crewe and his son John Crewe ( 1709 – 1752 ) served as members of parliament for Cheshire . 
 = = = Barons Crewe and Marquess of Crewe = = = 
 Anne Crewe 's great @-@ grandson , John Crewe ( 1742 – 1829 ) , was created the first Baron Crewe in 1806 . A prominent Whig politician , he was a lifelong friend and supporter of Charles James Fox ; his wife Frances Crewe ( née Greville ; 1748 – 1818 ) was a famous beauty and political hostess who gave lavish entertainments at the hall . The <unk> ' social circle included many of the major figures of the day , and visitors to the hall during this period included politicians Fox and George Canning , philosopher Edmund Burke , playwright Richard Brinsley Sheridan , poet William Spencer , musicologist Charles Burney , and artists Sir Joshua Reynolds and Sir Thomas Lawrence . John Crewe had the park landscaped and the hall extended , and also had the interior remodelled in the neo @-@ Classical style then fashionable . Some forty years later , his grandson Hungerford Crewe ( 1812 – 94 ) went to considerable expense to have the interiors redecorated in a more sympathetic Jacobethan style . 
 The house was insured in 1857 for £ 10 @,@ 000 ( £ 900 thousand today ) ; the contents at that time included books and wines ( insured for £ 2 @,@ 250 ) , mathematical and musical instruments ( £ 250 ) , and pictures ( £ 1 @,@ 000 ) . The art collection included several family portraits and other works by Sir Joshua Reynolds , which were saved from the fire that gutted the building early in January 1866 . Extensive restoration work for Hungerford Crewe was completed in 1870 . 
 Hungerford Crewe never married and on his death in 1894 , the barony became extinct . The hall was inherited by his nephew , Robert Milnes , Baron Houghton ( 1858 – 1945 ) , the son of Annabella Hungerford Crewe ; he adopted the name Crewe , to become Crewe @-@ Milnes . The Crewe title was revived as an earldom for him in 1895 , and he later became the Marquess of Crewe . A Liberal politician and poet , Crewe @-@ Milnes held several key Cabinet positions between 1905 and 1916 , and was a trusted aide to Asquith . He was also a friend of George V , and the King and Queen Mary stayed at the hall for three days in 1913 , while touring the Staffordshire Potteries . 
 The Crewe @-@ Milnes family left Crewe Hall in 1922 , and the house stood empty until the Second World War . Crewe @-@ Milnes offered the hall to Cheshire County Council as a gift in 1931 , ostensibly because his heirs did not wish to live in the house . After the council 's refusal , the majority of the estate was sold to the Duchy of Lancaster in 1936 . His grandson , writer Quentin Crewe , described Crewe @-@ Milnes as " both extravagant and poorly advised " . 
 = = = Calmic , Wellcome and hotel = = = 
 Early in the Second World War , Crewe Hall was used as a military training camp , repatriation camp for Dunkirk troops and a US army camp , becoming the gun operations headquarters for the north @-@ west region in 1942 . It housed a prisoner @-@ of @-@ war camp for German officers from 1943 . The hall was leased as offices in 1946 , becoming the headquarters of Calmic Limited , who eventually employed nearly 800 people at Crewe Hall . Calmic produced hygiene and medical products on the site including tablets , creams , analgesics and antibiotic aerosols ; they constructed industrial facilities adjacent to the hall including a drying and filtration plant and pharmaceutical packaging unit . After Wellcome 's acquisition of Calmic in 1965 , the hall served as the UK and Ireland headquarters of the Wellcome Foundation until the merger with Glaxo in 1995 . Wellcome produced liquids , tablets , creams and antibiotic aerosols at the site ; the hall itself was used for administration , but the stables block was rebuilt internally for use as laboratories and the industrial facilities were expanded . 
 In 1994 , the Duchy of Lancaster sold the Crewe Hall buildings and the adjacent industrial site , which became Crewe Hall Enterprise Park . The Crewe Hall buildings remained empty after Wellcome moved out and were sold to a hotel developer in 1998 ; the hall became a 26 @-@ bedroom hotel the following year . Several additional buildings in a modern style were constructed in the 21st century to extend the accommodation . 
 = = Architectural history = = 
 The Jacobean hall was built for Sir Randolph Crewe between 1615 and 1636 . The architect of the original building is unknown , although some historians have concluded that its design was based on drawings by Inigo Jones . Although of a relatively conservative design , similar to that of Longleat from half a century earlier , the hall seems to have been considered progressive in provincial Cheshire . The historian Thomas Fuller wrote in 1662 : 
 Sir Randal first brought the model of excellent building into these remoter parts ; yea , brought London into Cheshire , in the loftiness , <unk> , and pleasantness of their structures . 
 Hearth @-@ tax assessments of 1674 show the original hall to have been one of the largest houses in Cheshire , its 42 hearths being surpassed only by Cholmondeley House and <unk> , neither of which have survived . As depicted in a painting of around 1710 , the original building was square with sides of around 100 feet ( 30 m ) , and featured gabled projecting bays and groups of octagonal chimney stacks . Built around a central open courtyard , the interior had a great hall and long gallery ; the main entrance led to a screens passage and the main staircase was in a small east hall . Externally , there was a walled forecourt and formal walled gardens ; a range of separate service buildings was located to the west . 
 = = = Georgian and Jacobethan alterations = = = 
 The house remained unaltered for much of the 18th century , in contrast to most of the other principal seats in the county . It was described in 1769 as " a square of very old date ... more to be admired now for its antiquity than elegance or conveniency . " Work was carried out during the 1780s and 90s for John Crewe ( later the first Baron Crewe ) . A service wing to the west in a Jacobean revival style was added to the hall in 1780 . The principal interiors of the old building were redecorated in neo @-@ Classical style at this time , although the original layout with great hall , long gallery and drawing room was retained . Improvements were made to the wine cellars and bedrooms in 1783 , and J. Cheney was employed to build a new attic staircase and seven bedrooms in 1796 . Edmund Burke wrote in 1788 , " I am vastly pleased with this place . We build no such houses in our time . " The second Lord Palmerston , visiting in the same year , wrote : 
 But now by taste and judgment <unk> 'd , 
 Throughout these scenes we find 
 The work of Art 's improving hand , 
 With ancient splendour join 'd . 
 The house was altered again in 1837 – 42 by Edward Blore for Hungerford Crewe . Blore replaced a local architect , George Latham , who had been commissioned in 1836 . Many of Blore 's working drawings survive in the Royal Institute of British Architects archive . He carried out decorative work to the interior in the Jacobethan style and made major changes to the plan of the ground floor , which included replacing the screens passage with an entrance hall and covering the central courtyard to create a single @-@ storey central hall . He also fitted plate glass windows throughout and installed a warm @-@ air heating system . The total cost , including his work on estate buildings , was £ 30 @,@ 000 ( £ 2 @.@ 5 million today ) . 
 = = = E. M. Barry restoration = = = 
 Most of Blore 's work to the main hall was destroyed in the fire of 1866 . Hungerford Crewe is said to have asked Blore , then retired , to restore the building , but he declined . The restoration work was instead carried out by E. M. Barry , son of Sir Charles Barry , the architect of the Palace of Westminster , and the contractors Cubitt & Co . ; it was completed in 1870 , at a cost of £ 150 @,@ 000 ( £ 12 @.@ 9 million today ) . In a lecture to the Royal Academy , Barry later outlined his strategy for the restoration : 
 The greatest care has been taken to recover the design of Sir Randolph for such of the work as it has been possible to restore ... although with less roughness of execution and <unk> of detail , particularly in respect of the human figure . Such peculiarities cannot , I think , be properly repeated in a modern reconstruction ... it is not the part of the nineteenth century restorer to reproduce matters which at best were the weaknesses of his predecessors . He ... should not seek , by a clever imitation of bygone tricks of construction or design , to deceive the spectator as to the age of his own work , and so pass off the latter as something which it is not . 
 Nikolaus Pevsner describes Barry 's reconstruction as " an extremely sumptuous job . " Peter de Figueiredo and Julian Treuherz consider it his finest work , attributing his success to being " directed by the powerful character of the existing building . " Barry 's work is considered to be , in general , more elaborate and more regular than the original . For the restoration of the interior , he employed several of the leading artists and craftsmen of the time , who had previously worked on the Palace of Westminster . Barry 's principal innovation was the addition of a tower to the west wing , which was required for water storage . Intended to unite the east and west wings of the hall , the effect is limited by the tower 's Victorian design . He also reorganised the plan of the building , opening up Blore 's central hall to create a two @-@ storey atrium , as well as providing more ground @-@ floor service rooms and generating twenty extra servants ' bedrooms in an attic by modifying the roof . 
 Local architect Thomas Bower performed some alterations to the house for Robert Crewe @-@ Milnes in 1896 , including extending the service wing . Few changes to the hall itself occurred during Calmic 's tenancy . The company installed central heating in around 1948 , and later constructed an office extension on the north side of the house , which was demolished a few years after the building 's conversion into an hotel . Calmic had undertaken only cosmetic maintenance work , and by the 1970s the fabric of the building was in poor repair . A major stonework fall from the north gable during high winds in 1974 led Wellcome to carry out an extensive restoration programme to both the interior and the exterior , which was completed in 1979 at a cost of £ 500 @,@ 000 ( £ 2 @.@ 3 million today ) . 
 = = Main hall = = 
 Crewe Hall is a grade @-@ I @-@ listed mansion located at <unk> in the civil parish of Crewe Green , ½ mile ( 1 km ) from the edge of Crewe . The architecture historian Nikolaus Pevsner considered the main hall to be one of the two finest Jacobean houses in Cheshire , the other being Dorfold Hall at Acton . Constructed in red brick with stone dressings and a lead and slate roof , the hall has two storeys with attics and basements . The eastern half of the present building largely represents the original Jacobean hall . The exterior survived the fire of 1866 and the majority of the diapered brickwork is original , although some of the stonework of the porch and the tops of the gables was renewed by E. M. Barry . 
 The south ( front ) face of the eastern wing has seven bays , with a balustraded parapet at eaves level . The central bay is set forward to form a stone centrepiece around the arched main entrance , which is flanked by fluted Ionic columns . Immediately above the entrance are doubled tapering pilasters flanking a three @-@ light window , all surmounted by a large cartouche decorated with strapwork . On the first floor of the central bay is a triple @-@ mullion window , and above the parapet is a coat of arms . Flanking the centrepiece are two bays with diapered brickwork and single @-@ mullion windows . The two ends of the south face are also set forward ; they have canted , triple @-@ mullion bay windows and are surmounted above the parapet by shaped gables with attic windows . All the main windows of this face are double transomed . 
 The east face of the eastern wing has four bays with canted bay windows , shaped end gables and a central cartouche . In the centre of the northern ( garden ) face is a large bow window , originally Jacobean , which illuminates the chapel ; it has stone panels decorated with cartouches below arched stained glass lights . This face otherwise reverses the main façade , with the addition of mezzanine windows . 
 The western half of the building is stepped forward ( southwards ) by two bays from the original building . Originally the service wing , it is plainer than the eastern building and dates from the Georgian era . Though using Georgian proportions , it was built in an early Jacobean revival style which has been heightened by subsequent alterations , particularly the addition of a central gable . The main part of the south ( front ) face has seven bays , with a balustraded parapet running along the entire façade at eaves level . In the centre of the five east bays is a canted bay window beneath a shaped gable ; the flanking bays have single @-@ mullion , double @-@ transomed windows . The two west bays are set backwards and have a central oriel window on the first floor with two single @-@ mullion , double @-@ transomed windows on the ground floor . 
 The western wing is dominated by a square tower of stone @-@ dressed brick which rises two storeys above the roof and is capped by an ogee <unk> surrounded by four corner chimneys . Designed by Barry in the High Victorian style , it was added after the fire . A slender bell tower also rises from the west wing . At the rear is a loggia with a vaulted ceiling supported by Tuscan columns . The western end of this wing is a single @-@ storey extension by Thomas Bower dating from 1896 . 
 = = = Interior = = = 
 The interior of Crewe Hall contains a mixture of original Jacobean work , faithful reproductions of the original Jacobean designs ( which in some cases had been recorded ) , and work in the High Victorian style designed by Barry . The entrance hall in the east wing was remodelled by both Edward Blore and Barry . It is panelled in oak and contains a marble chimneypiece with Tuscan columns featuring the Crewe arms . It opens via a columned screen into the central hall , which was an open courtyard in the Jacobean house . <unk> by Blore at the first @-@ floor level , Barry converted the space into an atrium featuring cloisters around the walls , with a wooden gallery over them at the mezzanine level and a tunnel @-@ vaulted first @-@ floor gallery above . The floor is paved with a pattern of coloured marbles and the first @-@ floor gallery corridors have stained glass panels . The atrium has a hammerbeam roof supported by columns at the gallery level . To the east of the central hall is an accurate reconstruction by Barry of the original staircase , which Nikolaus Pevsner described as " one of the most ingeniously planned and ornately executed in the whole of Jacobean England . " Heavily carved , the <unk> feature heraldic animals , which were originally gilded and painted . 
 To the east of the entrance lies the dining room , which was formerly the Jacobean great hall . The room least damaged by the fire , it was restored by Barry to its 17th @-@ century appearance , with facsimiles of the original ceiling and carved wooden screen . It contains an overmantel featuring a relief of Plenty , considered to be original , and a large stone chimneypiece , which is believed to be the only surviving work by Blore on the interior . The oak parlour , in the south west , contains a large wooden Jacobean overmantel , featuring Green Men carving . The Jacobean carving here and in the dining room is noticeably cruder than the Victorian work . The carved parlour is another reproduction by Barry of the original . <unk> in oak , it has a plaster frieze of the Elements , Graces and Virtues . The alabaster chimneypiece depicts the winged figure of Time rewarding Industry and punishing Sloth , symbolised by two boys , which is surmounted by a carved portrait of Sir Randolph Crewe . 
 A small chapel lies to the north of the central hall . Originally rather austere , it was lavishly decorated by Barry in the High Victorian style . There is much elaborate wood carving , with the altar rail featuring angels and the benches poppyheads . The marble apse has alabaster carved heads of the prophets and evangelists by J. Birnie Philip , and the wall panelling features bronze medallions depicting biblical characters by the same artist . The ornate choir gallery , reached from the central hall 's mezzanine gallery , contains the family pew . The stained glass and wall murals are by Clayton and Bell , and the painting and stencilling are by J. G. Crace . 
 The suite of state rooms on the first floor of the east wing contains the long gallery , library , drawing room ( great chamber ) , small drawing room and two bedrooms . All date originally from the Jacobean mansion , but are likely to have been significantly altered by John Crewe and then extensively reworked by Blore in neo @-@ Jacobean style . They were restored to Barry 's designs , usually with little attempt to reproduce the Jacobean appearance , probably because records of most of the original designs were lacking . Crace performed much of the decoration work in these rooms . All the state rooms contain elaborate plasterwork and stone chimneypieces , often flanked with Corinthian columns or pilasters . 
 The long gallery , along the north side , has a chimneypiece in coloured marbles with busts by Henry Weekes depicting Sir Randolph Crewe and Nathaniel Crew , 3rd Baron Crew , Bishop of Durham . The library , above the carved parlour , contains statuettes of book lovers by Philip and a frieze of scenes from literature by J. Mabey . The drawing room has a facsimile of the Jacobean ceiling , which had been recorded by architect William Burn . Identical in pattern to one at the Reindeer Inn in Banbury , of which the Victoria and Albert Museum has a plaster cast , it was presumably originally the work of the same craftsman . One of the state bedrooms has another survivor of the fire , a Jacobean stone fireplace with a plaster overmantel relief depicting Cain and Abel . 
 = = Stables , outbuildings and gate lodges = = 
 The former stables , in red brick with a tiled roof , were completed around 1636 and are contemporary with the Jacobean mansion ; they are listed at grade II * . They form a quadrangle immediately to the west of the hall , enclosing a rectangular courtyard . The main east face of the quadrangle stands at right angles to the front of the house ; it has nine bays of two storeys and an attic . Its centrepiece , added by Edward Blore in around 1837 , consists of an arched stone entrance flanked by pilasters , above which a clock tower rises from the first @-@ floor level . The tower features twinned arrow @-@ slit windows and clock faces with stone surrounds , and is topped by a bell chamber and ogee cupola with finials . In addition to the centrepiece , the east face has four bays which are set forward and have shaped gables topped with finials . The north and south ends of this east building also have shaped gables . 
 The north and south sides of the quadrangle have large arched carriage openings beneath shaped gables ; the keystones are carved with horse 's heads . The walls within the carriageway opening are decorated with bands of blue brick . The east , north and south faces are all finished with an openwork brick parapet with a stone coping . The west building has twelve arched openings accessed from the courtyard . The main storeys of the quadrangle mainly have three @-@ light , stone @-@ dressed mullion windows , with two @-@ light windows at the attic level . All the roofs have tall octagonal chimneys and feature decorative ridge tiles . The interior of the stables block was rebuilt during the building 's conversion to its present use of laboratories and offices . 
 The Apple House , a small red @-@ brick building to the west of the stables quadrangle , also dates from around 1636 , and can be seen in a painting of Crewe Hall from around 1710 . Originally a dovecote , it is used as a storehouse . Built on an octagonal plan with two storeys , it has two oval windows with stone surrounds . The lower entrance has a stone semicircular arch ; a second doorway is located at first @-@ floor height . The pyramidal tiled roof is topped by a glazed lantern with a lead cap . The building is listed at grade II . 
 The park has two gate lodges ; both are listed at grade II . The northern lodge at Slaughter Hill is by Blore and dates from 1847 . In red brick with darker @-@ brick diapering , stone dressings and a slate roof , it has a T @-@ shaped plan with a single storey , and is Jacobean in style . It features two shaped gables , each decorated with a panel carved with Crewe Estate emblems , and a hexagonal central bay with a pyramidal roof which forms a porch . The Elizabethan @-@ style Weston or Golden Gates Lodge to the south of the house dates from before 1865 and is attributed to William Eden Nesfield , although it is not typical of his style . In red brick with blue @-@ brick zig – zag diapering , ashlar dressings and a slate roof , the lodge has two storeys , with a projecting canted bay to the road face . The driveway face has an ashlar panel with a shield bearing the Crewe family coat of arms . 
 = = Gardens and park = = 
 The National Register of Historic Parks and Gardens lists 201 hectares ( 497 acres ) of the gardens and surrounding parkland at grade II . An early engraving shows a walled forecourt to the south of the original hall , with a large stone gateway carved with Sir Randolph Crewe 's arms and motto . The forecourt had terraces , balustrades and a path decorated with diamond patterns . As depicted in a painting of around 1710 , the grounds were laid out in extensive formal walled pleasure gardens with parterres . 
 During the 18th century , the park was landscaped in a more naturalistic style for John Crewe ( later the first Baron Crewe ) by Lancelot Brown ( before 1768 ) , William Emes ( 1768 – 71 ) , and Humphry Repton and John Webb ( 1791 ) . Repton 's design included an ornamental lake of 23 hectares ( 57 acres ) immediately north of the house , created by damming <unk> Brook , which still runs through the park . He also created new approaches to the house . The lake drained away in 1941 when a dam burst , and the area is now planted with poplars . A stone statue of Neptune with a reclining female , originally located on the banks of the lake , now stands in woodland ; it dates from the early 19th century . A boathouse , originally at the head of the lake , was in need of restoration in 2007 . A Temple of Peace formerly stood on the north shore of the lake , but was demolished some time after 1892 . Much of the parkland is now covered with mixed woodland , including Rookery Wood and Temple of Peace Wood . 
 Formal gardens were laid out around the house by W. A. Nesfield in around 1840 – 50 for Hungerford Crewe . Nesfield 's design included statuary , gravelled walks and elaborate parterres realised using low box hedges and coloured minerals . <unk> terraces were also constructed on the north and south sides of the hall , probably designed by E. M. Barry , and incorporating statues of lions , griffins and other heraldic beasts , echoing the interior staircase . Military usage during the Second World War , however , destroyed parts of the gardens ; army buildings were erected near the house , and the area in front of the hall served as a parade ground and later was ploughed up to grow potatoes . The grounds were further neglected while the house was used as offices , and little has survived except the terraces , gates and statues . In 2009 , English Heritage placed the hall on the Heritage at Risk Register as highly vulnerable , considering that the historic character of the gardens and park is compromised by recent developments to the hotel complex , in particular the conference centre , spa and associated parking area . 
 The entrance gates and wall separating the gardens from the park and farmland date from 1878 and are listed at grade II . The wrought @-@ iron gates are by Cubitt & Co . , and were exhibited at the Paris Exhibition of 1878 . Two outer single gates and a double inner gate are supported by four sandstone piers . The outer pair of gate piers are capped by a bud @-@ shaped device supported on scrolls ; the inner pair are surmounted by a griffin and a lion , mirroring the statuary of the hall 's terraces . The lower gate sections of lyre @-@ like panels with leaf and spearhead motifs are topped with Jacobean @-@ style arched panels . The ornate gate overthrows include shields and emblems capped with crowns , sheaves and sickles . The inner gates bear the inscription Quid <unk> domino ( " What can I render to the Lord ? " ) , while the outer gates bear the date . The wall , of brick with stone dressings , features arcading and has piers surmounted with ogee caps carved to match the tiles of the main hall tower . A further feature of the gardens to survive is a grade @-@ II @-@ listed sundial dating from the early 19th century , which stands to the rear of the house . 
 = = Crewe estate = = 
 = = = History = = = 
 The original estate purchased by Sir Randolph Crewe in 1608 included the manors of Crewe , Barthomley and Haslington and cost over £ 6 @,@ 000 . Lands from the Offley estate in Staffordshire and the Done estate in Cheshire were acquired by marriage and inheritance in the late 17th and early 18th centuries , and in common with the other great Cheshire estates , the estate flourished during the 18th century . The estate of 1804 included land or property in Barthomley , <unk> , Crewe , Crowton , Elton , Hale , <unk> , Rushton , Sandbach , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and Weston in Cheshire , as well as Madeley in Staffordshire and <unk> in Shropshire . The predominant land use was dairy farming , but the estate also included some arable land ; tenancies ranged from crofts of 1 or 2 acres ( less than a hectare ) to large farms of over 300 acres ( 120 ha ) . The gardens , park and home farm occupied 583 acres ( 236 ha ) . Hungerford Crewe was the fifth greatest landowner in the county in 1871 , with a total of 10 @,@ 148 acres ( 4 @,@ 107 ha ) . The majority of the Crewe estate was sold by Robert Crewe @-@ Milnes to the Duchy of Lancaster in 1936 . 
 = = = Estate buildings = = = 
 Crewe Hall Farmhouse , the estate 's home farm , stands on the edge of the grounds , ¼ mile to the south east of the hall ; it dates from around 1702 and is listed at grade II . In brown brick with a slate roof , it has two storeys and five bays to the front . Two of the adjacent farm buildings , dating from 1883 – 4 , are also listed . As of 2009 , the Duchy of Lancaster is developing outbuildings at Crewe Hall Farm , including the two listed buildings , into leasehold offices totalling 27 @,@ 850 square feet ( 2 @,@ 590 m2 ) . 
 Several estate cottages near Weston Lodge were designed by W. E. Nesfield between 1860 and 1866 , and are among his earliest works . They include Stowford and Magnolia Cottages ( 1864 – 65 ) , which Nikolaus Pevsner describes as " cheerful and just a little Kate Greenaway " , Smithy Cottage ( around 1865 ) and Fir Tree Cottage ( 1865 ) , all listed at grade II , as well as a half @-@ timbered farmhouse on Weston Road . Rather than either the Jacobean mansion or its High Victorian interiors , their style derives from buildings of the Home Counties , with tile hanging , incised pargetting , half @-@ hipped gables and high chimneys . Pevsner credits Nesfield with introducing these features to Cheshire . 
 = = Modern hotel and Crewe estate = = 
 As of 2013 , Crewe Hall is a hotel in the <unk> group , set in 8 acres ( 3 @.@ 2 ha ) of parkland , with a restaurant , brasserie , conference facilities , tennis courts and health club , including a gym , spa and swimming pool . There are 117 bedrooms , of which 25 are located in the old building . The hotel has four AA stars ; the restaurant and brasserie each have two AA Rosettes . The hall is licensed for civil wedding ceremonies . The hall and park are not otherwise open to the public . The Duchy of Lancaster retains ownership of a large area of the estate , which is mainly managed as dairy farms and woodland , with some commercial development near Crewe and at Crewe Hall Farm . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Confessions of a Dangerous Mind = 
 Confessions of a Dangerous Mind is a 2002 biographical spy comedy film depicting the life of popular game show host and producer Chuck Barris , who claimed to have also been an assassin for the Central Intelligence Agency ( CIA ) . The film was directed by George Clooney ( as his feature film directorial debut ) . It was written by Charlie Kaufman , and starred Sam Rockwell , Julia Roberts , Drew Barrymore , and Clooney . 
 Columbia Pictures had planned to produce a film adaptation of Barris 's memoir of the same name in the late 1980s . When the film rights were purchased by producer Andrew Lazar , Charlie Kaufman was commissioned to write a new script , which attracted various A @-@ list actors and filmmakers to the project . Bryan Singer at one point planned to direct the film with Johnny Depp in the lead role , but the production was canceled . The production resumed when Clooney took over directing duties . 
 Barris remained heavily involved in production in an attempt to portray the film from his point of view . To accommodate the $ 30 million budget , Clooney convinced actresses Drew Barrymore and Julia Roberts to lower their asking prices . Confessions of a Dangerous Mind was released with respectful reviews from critics and was modestly successful at the box office . Rockwell , in particular , was praised for his acting and won the Silver Bear for Best Actor at the 2003 Berlin International Film Festival . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Tired of being rejected by the beautiful women he lusts after , Chuck Barris ( Rockwell ) moves to Manhattan to become an NBC page with dreams of becoming famous in television but is eventually fired . He moves back to Philadelphia and becomes Dick Clark 's personal assistant on American Bandstand in 1961 . He writes the successful song " Palisades Park " and becomes romantically involved with a woman named Penny Pacino ( Barrymore ) . Chuck is given permission to pitch the concept for The Dating Game at the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) ; he receives $ 7 @,@ 500 to create a television pilot for the studio . However , ABC abandons The Dating Game in favor of Hootenanny . 
 One night after Barris is kicked out of a bar for fighting , he is approached by CIA agent Jim Byrd ( Clooney ) , who recruits him as an assassin . Returning from a mission in Mexico , Barris finds that Penny has become a Hippie . Meanwhile , ABC decides to greenlight The Dating Game , and by 1967 the TV show is a phenomenon . 
 Barris takes another mission for the CIA in Helsinki , Finland , where he meets female operative Patricia Watson ( Roberts ) . He finds more success back home when The Newlywed Game goes on air . He and Penny decide to move to Los Angeles into a house , but Barris is cautious of marriage , much to Penny 's dismay . The journey in Barris 's life is tied in to the story of Thomas Carlyle 's main character in Sartor Resartus , <unk> , and this parallel is referred to throughout the film . In 1970 , Byrd convinces Barris to go on another mission in East Berlin to assassinate communist Hans Colbert ( Norman Roy ) . Barris is introduced there to German @-@ American agent Keeler ( Rutger Hauer ) , whom he helps to murder Colbert . However , he is captured by the KGB and , after some weeks , freed during a West @-@ East spies exchange . 
 In 1976 , in Los Angeles , Barris creates The Gong Show and becomes even more famous as its host ; he is also criticized for lowering the general quality of television . Meanwhile , Keeler is murdered and Byrd warns Chuck of a mole in the agency . His TV shows are canceled due to poor ratings , and Penny threatens to leave him after catching him cheating on her . One night , Barris finds Byrd sitting atop the diving board of his backyard pool . Byrd reveals to Barris why he was chosen by the CIA to become an assassin : he is the son of a serial killer and has been raised during his infancy as a girl by his mother , so he " fit the profile " . Barris threatens to kill Byrd , and the film cuts to a point soon after Byrd is killed , with Barris still pointing his gun at him . 
 Faced with the unpleasant truth about himself , Barris begins to spiral out of control . After almost having a nervous breakdown on one of his shows , Barris shuts himself away in a New York City hotel . Penny manages to find him there and tries in vain to convince him to return to California to get married . 
 Barris finally leaves his room and confronts Patricia in Boston . After a cup of coffee with her , Barris falls to the floor , seemingly poisoned . Patricia then reveals that she is the mole . However , Barris actually tricked Patricia into drinking from the poisoned cup , and he himself wasn 't actually poisoned at all . After her death , he returns home and begins to write his autobiography , Confessions of a Dangerous Mind . He finally decides to marry Penny . At the end of the ceremony , he notices some of the people he previously killed among the crowd . Distraught , he confesses to her his double life as a CIA agent and assassin , but she merely laughs , assuming he is joking , and he decides not to correct her . In 2002 , he prepares for an interview for the film adaptation of his autobiography . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Sam Rockwell as Chuck Barris , a successful game show host and producer who lives a double life as a CIA assassin 
 Michael Cera as young Chuck Barris 
 Drew Barrymore as Penny Pacino ; she first meets Chuck in the 1960s and remains his girlfriend for years 
 George Clooney as Jim Byrd , a CIA agent who recruits Chuck 
 Julia Roberts as Patricia Watson , a female agent 
 Rutger Hauer as Keeler , a German @-@ American spy and World War II veteran who befriends Chuck 
 Jerry Weintraub as Larry Goldberg , the president of the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) 
 Robert John Burke as Instructor Jenks , an eccentric FCC instructor 
 Michael Ensign as Simon Oliver , a British CIA supervisor who is the first of Patricia 's murders 
 Maggie Gyllenhaal as Debbie , a stagehand who works with Barris on the set for American Bandstand , and who eventually sleeps with him 
 Rachelle Lefevre as Tuvia 
 Kristen Wilson as Loretta 
 Daniel Zacapa as <unk> 
 Emilio Rivera as Benitez 
 Carlos Carrasco as <unk> 
 Richard Kind as Casting executive 
 Brad Pitt and Matt Damon ( cameos ) as The Dating Game bachelors , Brad and Matt 
 Akiva Goldsman ( uncredited ) as Playboy party guest 
 Barris , Dick Clark , Jim Lange , Murray Langston ( The Unknown Comic ) , Jaye P. Morgan , and Gene Patton ( Gene Gene the Dancing Machine ) are featured in the film through interviews central to the storyline through self @-@ referencing events . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Chuck Barris first sold the film rights of his " unauthorized autobiography " to Columbia Pictures in the late 1980s . Columbia president Dawn Steel greenlighted Confessions of a Dangerous Mind with Jim McBride directing . McBride offered the lead role to Richard Dreyfuss , who refused to read the script because he believed Barris 's morbid humor was distasteful . The project was abandoned at Columbia when Steel was fired in 1989 . Producer Andrew Lazar optioned the film rights from Columbia in 1997 and set Confessions of a Dangerous Mind at Warner Bros. Pictures that same year . Charlie Kaufman entered discussions to write a new screenplay in June 1997 and finished his first draft later that year . Barris gave positive feedback to Kaufman 's script and Curtis Hanson instantly agreed to direct with Sean Penn in the lead role and George Clooney and Drew Barrymore attached to co @-@ star . 
 Hanson eventually dropped out , but with the financial success of My Best Friend 's Wedding ( 1997 ) , P. J. Hogan entered discussions with Warner Bros. to direct in January 1998 . Mike Myers signed on to replace Sean Penn , who vacated the lead role . However , negotiations with Hogan fell through ; Sam Mendes , David Fincher and Darren Aronofsky all became interested in taking over the director 's position . Fincher and Myers were fast tracking production for Confessions in April 2000 but Fincher dropped out and , by that October , Brian De Palma was attached to direct with Renaissance Pictures co @-@ financing . Later that month , Warner Bros. put the project in turnaround , and Myers lost interest . Russell Crowe , Kevin Spacey , and Edward Norton had also been attached to the film in the early development stages . 
 In December 2000 , Ben Stiller was in discussions to star as Chuck Barris , with Bryan Singer directing and Clooney still aboard . However , Stiller was forced to vacate Confessions due to scheduling conflicts with Zoolander ( 2001 ) and The Royal Tenenbaums ( 2001 ) . Although Singer was interested in Sam Rockwell in the lead role , the director cast Johnny Depp to replace Stiller and commenced pre @-@ production in January 2001 on a planned $ 35 million budget . Renaissance Pictures was holding international distribution rights , but the filmmakers still needed more financing as well as a studio to cover distribution duties in the United States . 
 Grosvenor Park was interested in co @-@ financing with Renaissance , but the next month ( February 2001 ) , Confessions was once again stalled in development . Miramax Films had been negotiating for domestic rights , but difficulties arose when Miramax also wanted to cover international rights . Renaissance was also unable to close the financing in time to accommodate both the " production insurance " deadline and the 65 @-@ day shooting schedule , which was set to primarily take place in Montreal and British Columbia , Canada . Artisan Entertainment then became interested in covering North American distribution rights but dropped out after the bid went over $ 8 million . Johnny Depp eventually went to work on other films . 
 = = = Director = = = 
 With Singer busy preparing X2 , Confessions was rejuvenated with Clooney taking over as director . Miramax Films agreed to cover distribution duties and co @-@ finance the film . In the end , funding for Confessions came from Miramax , Clooney 's own Section Eight Productions , Village Roadshow Pictures , producer Andrew Lazar 's Mad Chance , Allied Filmmakers , and The Kushner @-@ Locke Company . Clooney explained , " I thought if I came on board as a director , for scale , and was able to bring everybody else on inexpensively , if I could get the film back down to $ 30 million , then I was going to be able to get the film made . That was a big part of my pitch to Harvey Weinstein at Miramax . " 
 Because Confessions was his directing debut , Clooney took inspiration from friends Steven Soderbergh and the Coen brothers for his filmmaking style . Writer Charlie Kaufman said he was dissatisfied with the way Clooney treated the screenplay . " I spent a lot of time working on the script , " he explained , " but I don 't think he was interested in the things I was interested in . I 've moved on and I don 't have any animosity towards Clooney , but it 's a movie I don 't really relate to . " Clooney acknowledged that Kaufman 's original script contained " really funky scenes that would never reach the green light of being a studio film . " A drug addiction subplot was removed based on Barris 's request for historical authenticity . 
 Clooney was adamant that Barris become heavily involved during production in an attempt to portray the film from his point of view . Barris was so enthusiastic with Clooney 's work on the film that he began writing Bad Grass Never Dies ( ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 7867 @-@ 1379 @-@ 0 ) , the sequel to Confessions ; Miramax also owns the film rights to Bad Grass . Barris filmed cameo appearances of himself during the shoot in Canada and taped a voice @-@ over in Clooney 's house . 
 When asked about Barris 's claim of being a CIA assassin , Clooney commented , " I don 't know how much I believed it . I didn 't want to officially ask him , because I didn 't want him to say , ' I made it up . ' I wanted to tell the story and I thought how interesting , if it was all made up , why someone as wealthy and as successful as Chuck Barris would have to do that . I thought that was an interesting person to explore , and that 's what we wanted to do with the film . " Clooney acknowledged that his upbringing with father Nick Clooney had a great bearing on his choice of depicting the 1960 / 70s game shows . " My father had a game show when I was growing up called The Money Maze . I know what those sets look like . I showed the guy how to do cue cards . I grew up on them , " the director reflected , " and knew what it looked like and smelled like . And I know something about some of the trappings of fame , so I thought I had a unique take on it . " 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Casting the lead role of Barris was a long , difficult process . " After two months of screen tests and everything I still wasn 't able to get Sam Rockwell , " Clooney reflected . Rockwell had always been Clooney 's first choice ever since they worked together on Welcome to Collinwood ( 2002 ) . Both Clooney and Barris also believed Rockwell shared an uncanny resemblance to Barris . " I didn ’ t want someone too famous to play the role , " the director reasoned . " In my opinion , you cannot have famous people playing famous people . It doesn ’ t work . Sam was the guy for the part , ready to break and hadn 't yet . " 
 Prior to his audition , Rockwell " immersed " himself in the role by watching episodes of The Gong Show in an attempt to impress the filmmakers . " I went to LA [ and ] did an old @-@ fashioned screen test , like a real Scarlett O 'Hara @-@ type screen test , which you know they don 't really do anymore , " the actor remembered . For research , Rockwell spent two and a half months with Barris . " We went to coffee shops and dinner and movies , took walks , went to the zoo ; I even filmed him , " Rockwell explained . " I had him tape my lines in a tape recorder , and I listened to that to get his voice down . " 
 Clooney cast Julia Roberts as the mysterious CIA agent Patricia Watson due to their positive working relationship in Ocean 's Eleven ( 2001 ) . Her role was originally set for Nicole Kidman , who dropped out over scheduling conflicts with The Hours . After Rockwell 's casting , Confessions was once again briefly postponed ; Miramax did not greenlight the film until Roberts signed on . Clooney commented , " Julia really helped me . Her doing the part made it possible for me to cast Sam Rockwell . He can 't drive a $ 28 million film , but Julia certainly can . " Renée Zellweger and Gwyneth Paltrow were considered for the Penny Pacino role , which eventually went to Drew Barrymore . 
 Miramax was unsure of Clooney 's decision to cast Rockwell over other famous actors such as Robert Downey , Jr . , and Ben Stiller . Clooney convinced the studio into giving him the right of final cut privilege and casting Rockwell in exchange for first look deals on Full Frontal ( 2002 ) and other low @-@ budget films from Clooney 's Section Eight Productions . Clooney also agreed to cameo in Miramax 's Spy Kids 2 : The Island of Lost Dreams ( 2002 ) so Rockwell could be cast . To accommodate the $ 30 million budget , Clooney convinced Roberts and Barrymore to lower their asking prices . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Under Clooney 's direction , filming was initially set to begin in September 2001 , but principal photography did not start until January 14 , 2002 . From January to March 2002 , production for Confessions of a Dangerous Mind took place primarily in California and Montreal . The Playboy Mansion scene was shot in early April at Los Angeles , California ; the remaining two weeks of production took place around the Mexico – United States border . Filming for Confessions ended in late April 2002 . 
 Clooney and cinematographer Newton Thomas Sigel used various techniques when portraying the different decades of Barris 's life . " We thought in order to go back in time , most people remember things through film , " Clooney reasoned . " I don 't remember the 1950s – I wasn 't around for them – I know the 50s through Technicolor . Not Technicolor as it was shot , but Technicolor as it has faded now . " The filmmakers studied various films and magazine issues of that decade for inspiration on the color palette . Racking focuses were highly stylized for scenes set in the 1960s , similar to the Spaghetti Westerns of that era . Hand @-@ held cameras were used for scenes set in the 1970s , an homage to the films of Sidney Lumet , Mike Nichols and Alan J. Pakula , primarily Klute ( 1971 ) , Carnal Knowledge ( 1971 ) , and The Parallax View ( 1974 ) . Bob Fosse 's All That Jazz also influenced Clooney 's direction . 
 Clooney commented that post @-@ production for Confessions was stressful because he was simultaneously acting in Solaris ( 2002 ) . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Release = = = 
 To tie in with the release of the film , Miramax Books republished Barris 's 1984 book . The film premiered out @-@ of @-@ competition at the May 2002 Cannes Film Festival before Miramax Films gave it a limited release in the United States on December 31 , 2002 ; the wide release came on January 23 , 2003 . The film only barely recouped its production costs , grossing only $ 33 @.@ 01 million , of which $ 16 million was domestic revenue and $ 17 @.@ 01 million came from foreign markets . It also suffered poor sales in its September 2003 Region 1 DVD release . The DVD includes over 20 minutes of deleted scenes , Rockwell 's three screen tests , a short documentary titled The Real Chuck Barris , Clooney 's audio commentary , and a making @-@ of featurette . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The film received positive responses from critics . Based on 159 reviews collected by Rotten Tomatoes , 79 % of the reviewers enjoyed Confessions of a Dangerous Mind with an average rating of 7 @.@ 2 / 10 . Metacritic calculated an average score of 67 / 100 , based on 33 reviews . Confessions of a Dangerous Mind was shown at the Berlin International Film Festival on February 10 , 2003 . Sam Rockwell won the Silver Bear for Best Actor and George Clooney was nominated the Golden Bear but lost to Michael Winterbottom of In This World . 
 Roger Ebert gave Confessions a positive review . " George Clooney 's directorial debut is not only intriguing as a story but great to look at , " Ebert said , " a marriage of bright pop images from the 1960s and 1970s and dark , cold <unk> that seem to have wandered in from John le Carré . " Peter Travers of Rolling Stone magazine wrote that the film carried a perfect balance of dark humor and psychological drama . " Clooney tackles a far @-@ reaching absurdist fantasy with Barris as a paradigm of paranoia , " Travers reviewed . " He wisely hooks up with talent he worked with as an actor : cinematographer Newton Thomas Sigel , from Three Kings ( 1999 ) , and editor Stephen Mirrione from Ocean 's Eleven ( 2001 ) . " 
 Mick LaSalle from the San Francisco Chronicle wrote that " there may be more entertaining and less problematic movies , but Confessions of a Dangerous Mind has something about it that hangs in there , working on the mind like a dog gnawing on a table leg . The movie makes a case for itself through sheer oddness and perversity . I 'm not sure Confessions is a good movie , but I am sure I like it . " Owen Gleiberman , writing in Entertainment Weekly , observed that " Sam Rockwell is handsome in a rumpled , slightly goofy rabbit @-@ toothed way , but he doesn 't really have the look , or aura , of a movie star , " Glieberman stated . " He 's more like a weirdly sincere space cadet , babbling to himself with <unk> befuddlement , breaking into funky soft dance moves that look as if he 's been doing them in his bedroom since he was 8 . All of which makes him an inspired choice to play Chuck Barris . " 
 Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times gave a negative review . He disliked the characterization of Chuck Barris and commented that " with its multiplicity of over @-@ stylized looks and slick gimmicks , Dangerous Mind was doubtless more stimulating to direct than it will be for audiences to experience . " Internet reviewer James Berardinelli wrote a mixed critique . " George Clooney is eager to show how much he has learned at the hands of the A @-@ list filmmakers he has toiled under . So we get a style that is about 50 % Steven Soderbergh and 50 % Coen brothers . Sometimes it works , but mostly it comes across as too artsy , with all sorts of bizarre angles and unusual shots . " 
 = Monsters , Inc . = 
 Monsters , Inc. is a 2001 American computer @-@ animated comedy film directed by Pete Docter at his directorial debut , produced by Pixar Animation Studios , and released by Walt Disney Pictures . John Lasseter and Andrew Stanton both served as executive producers . The film was co @-@ directed by Lee Unkrich and David Silverman and stars the voices of John Goodman , Billy Crystal , Steve Buscemi , James Coburn and Jennifer Tilly . 
 The film centers on two monsters employed at the titular Monsters , Inc . : top scarer James P. " Sulley " Sullivan ( John Goodman ) and his one @-@ eyed partner and best friend Mike Wazowski ( Billy Crystal ) . Monsters , Inc. employees generate their city 's power by targeting and scaring children , but they are themselves afraid that the children may contaminate them ; when one child enters Monstropolis , Mike and Sulley must return her . 
 Docter began developing the film in 1996 and wrote the story with Jill Culton , Jeff Pidgeon , and Ralph Eggleston . Fellow Pixar director Andrew Stanton wrote the screenplay with screenwriter Daniel Gerson . The characters went through many incarnations over the film 's five @-@ year production process . The technical team and animators found new ways to render fur and cloth realistically for the film . Randy Newman , who composed the music for Pixar 's three prior films , returned to compose its fourth . 
 Monsters , Inc. was praised by critics and proved to be a major box office success from its release on November 2 , 2001 , generating over $ 562 million worldwide . Monsters , Inc. saw a 3D re @-@ release in theaters on December 19 , 2012 . Twelve years later , a prequel , Monsters University , directed by Dan Scanlon , was released on June 21 , 2013 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The parallel city of Monstropolis is inhabited entirely by monsters , and is powered by electricity which is generated from the screams of human children . At the Monsters , Inc. factory , skilled individuals called " scarers " access the human world through closet doors in children 's bedrooms , to scare the children , and harvest their screams . It is considered dangerous work , as human children are believed to be " toxic " to monsters . Energy production is falling because children are becoming more difficult to scare . The company 's chairman , Henry J. Waternoose , is determined to find a solution . James P. " Sulley " Sullivan is the organization 's top scarer , however , he is goaded in a fierce rivalry with a chameleon @-@ like monster , Randall Boggs . 
 One day , Sulley discovers that Randall left a door activated on the <unk> , and a small girl has entered the factory . After desperate failed attempts to put her back , Sulley takes her home . His best friend , Mike Wazowski is on a date with his girlfriend Celia , and chaos erupts when the child is discovered . Sulley and Mike escape the Child Detection Agency ( CDA ) and gradually discover that the little girl is actually not toxic . Sulley grows attached to her and names her " Boo " . They smuggle her into the factory in an attempt to send her home . Randall discovers that Boo is there , and tries to kidnap her , but instead kidnaps Mike . Randall reveals that he has built a large machine named " The Scream Extractor " in an attempt to extract all possible screams out of captured human children to help avert the company 's production problems . Randall straps Mike to the machine , but Sulley unplugs it and reports Randall to Waternoose . However , Waternoose is secretly in league with Randall , and instead exiles Mike and Sulley to the Himalayas . The two are taken in by a Yeti , who tells them about a nearby village which can enable them to return to the factory . Sulley heads out , but a frustrated Mike refuses to follow . Meanwhile , Randall straps Boo to the Scream Extractor , but Sulley saves her by destroying the machine . Waternoose sends Randall to capture Sulley . Mike returns to reconcile , but thinks Sulley is ignoring him because an invisible Randall is attacking Sulley . Sulley temporarily incapacitates Randall , and flees with Mike and Boo . 
 Randall pursues them as they speed through the factory , riding on the doors that are heading into a giant vault where millions of doors are stored . Boo 's laughter activates the doors , which allows the pursuit to pass in and out of the human world . Randall attempts to kill Sulley , but Boo attacks him . Sulley and Mike trap Randall in the human world , at a trailer park , where two residents beat him with a shovel . Sulley and Mike find Boo 's door , but Waternoose sends it back to the <unk> . While Mike distracts the CDA , Sulley confronts and argues with Waternoose , who reveals that he is working with Randall to kidnap kids and use the Scream Extractor to keep the company from going out of business and to stop its failing energy production . The CDA arrests him after discovering the recorded confession . The CDA 's leader is revealed to be Roz , who has worked undercover for two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years , trying to expose Waternoose 's plot . Sulley and Mike say goodbye to Boo and return her to her home as Boo 's door is subsequently shredded to prevent any more escapes . 
 With the factory shut down , Sulley comes up with a way to end the company 's production problems , and is promoted as a new CEO of Monsters , Inc . The monsters now enter children 's bedrooms to make them laugh as laughter is ten times more powerful than screams , averting the energy crisis . Mike takes Sulley aside , revealing he has rebuilt Boo 's door , and only needs one more piece , which Sulley took as a memento . Sulley enters and happily reunites with Boo . 
 = = Voice cast = = 
 John Goodman as James P. " Sulley " Sullivan , a large , furry blue monster with horns and purple spots . Even though Sully excels at scaring children , he is kindhearted and thoughtful by nature . At the film 's beginning , Sully has been the " Best Scarer " at Monsters , Inc. for several months running . 
 Billy Crystal as Michael " Mike " Wazowski , a short , round green monster with a single big eyeball and skinny limbs . Mike is Sulley 's <unk> and coach on the scare floor , and the two are close friends and roommates . Mike is charming and generally the more organized of the two , but is prone to neurotics and his ego sometimes leads him astray . He is dating Celia Mae , who calls him " <unk> @-@ Bear " . He makes cameo appearances in Finding Nemo , Cars , WALL @-@ E , and Toy Story 3 . 
 Mary Gibbs as Mary " Boo " , a three @-@ year @-@ old human girl who is unafraid of any monster except Randall , the scarer assigned to her door . She believes Sulley is a large cat and refers to him as " Kitty " . The book based on the film gives Boo 's " real " name as Mary Gibbs , the name of her voice actress . In the film , one of Boo 's drawings is covered with the name " Mary " . 
 Steve Buscemi as Randall Boggs , a purple eight @-@ legged lizard monster with a chameleon @-@ like ability to change skin color and blend in completely with his surroundings . He is a snide and preening character who makes himself a rival to Mike and Sulley in scream collection . 
 James Coburn as Henry J. Waternoose , an <unk> monster with a crab @-@ like lower body . Waternoose is the CEO of Monsters , Inc . , a job passed down through his family for three generations . He acts as a mentor to Sully , holding great faith in him as a scarer . 
 Jennifer Tilly as Celia Mae , a gorgon @-@ like monster with one eye and tentacle @-@ like legs . Celia is the receptionist for Monsters , Inc. and Mike 's girlfriend . 
 Bob Peterson as Roz , a slug @-@ like monster with a raspy voice reminiscent of Selma Diamond 's who administrates for <unk> F where Sully , Mike and Randall work . At the end of the movie , it is revealed that Roz is the " number 1 " agent of the CDA , and has worked undercover at Monsters , Inc. for about 2 years . 
 John Ratzenberger as Yeti aka . The Abominable Snowman , a furry white monster who was banished to the Himalayas . He was inspired by the Abominable Snowman from the 1964 Rankin / Bass animated special Rudolph the Red @-@ Nosed Reindeer . 
 Frank Oz as Jeff Fungus , Randall 's red @-@ skinned , three @-@ eyed assistant . He is generally incompetent and is often bullied by Randall . 
 Dan Gerson as Smitty and Needleman , two goofy adolescent monsters with cracking voices who work as janitors and operate the Door Shredder when required . The pair of them idolize Sully , and are generally seen as a nuisance by Mike . 
 Steve Susskind as Jerry <unk> , a red seven @-@ fingered monster who manages Scare Floor F and is a good friend of Waternoose . 
 Bonnie Hunt as Ms. Flint , a female monster who trains new monsters to scare children . 
 Jeff Pidgeon as Thaddeus " <unk> " Bile , a trainee scarer for Monsters , Inc . 
 Samuel Lord Black as George Sanderson , a chubby , <unk> @-@ furred monster with a sole horn on top of his head . A running gag throughout the film involves George repeatedly making contact with artifacts of human clothing ( socks and the like cling to his fur via static ) , which prompts his scare coach to trigger " 23 – 19 " incidents with the CDA resulting in him mobbed and shaved bald . 
 Phil Proctor as Charlie , George 's assistant with sea @-@ green skin and tendrils for limbs . He is friend with George , Mike and Sully but is quick to call the CDA on his scarer at the drop of a hat . 
 Joe Ranft as Pete " Claws " Ward , a blue monster with razor @-@ sharp claws and horrifying breath . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The idea for Monsters , Inc. was conceived in a lunch in 1994 attended by John Lasseter , Pete Docter , Andrew Stanton and Joe Ranft during the production of Toy Story . One of the ideas that came out of the brainstorming session was a film about monsters . " When we were making Toy Story " , Docter said , " everybody came up to me and said ' Hey , I totally believed that my toys came to life when I left the room . ' So when Disney asked us to do some more films , I wanted to tap into a childlike notion that was similar to that . I knew monsters were coming out of my closet when I was a kid . So I said , ' Hey , let 's do a film about monsters . ' " 
 Docter began work on the film that would become Monsters , Inc. in 1996 while others focused on A Bug 's Life ( 1998 ) and Toy Story 2 ( 1999 ) . Its code name was Hidden City , named for Docter 's favorite restaurant in Point Richmond . By early @-@ February 1997 , Docter had drafted a treatment together with Harley Jessup , Jill Culton , and Jeff Pidgeon that bore some resemblance to the final film . Docter pitched the story to Disney with some initial artwork on February 4 that year . He and his story team left with some suggestions in hand and returned to pitch a refined version of the story on May 30 . At this pitch meeting , longtime Disney animator Joe Grant – whose work stretched back to Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs ( 1937 ) – suggested the title Monsters , Inc . , a play on the title of a gangster film Murder , Inc . , which stuck . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Docter 's initial concept for the film went through many changes , but he found the notion of monsters living in their own world to be an appealing and workable one . His original idea featured a 30 @-@ year @-@ old man dealing with monsters that he drew in a book as a child coming back to bother him as an adult . Each monster represented a fear he had , and conquering those fears caused the monsters eventually to disappear . 
 After Docter scrapped the initial concept of a 30 @-@ year @-@ old terrified of monsters , he decided on a buddy story between a monster and a child titled simply Monsters , in which the monster character of Sulley ( known at this stage as Johnson ) was an up @-@ and @-@ comer at his workplace , where the company 's purpose was to scare children . Sulley 's eventual sidekick , Mike Wazowski , had not yet been added . 
 Between 1996 and 2000 , the lead monster and child went through radical changes as the story evolved . As the story continued to develop , the child varied in age and gender . Ultimately , the story team decided that a girl would be the best counterpart for a furry , 8 feet ( 96 in ) tall co @-@ star . After a girl was settled upon , the character continued to undergo changes , at one point being from Ireland and at another time being an African @-@ American character . Originally the character of the little girl , known as Mary , became a fearless seven @-@ year @-@ old who has been toughened by years of teasing and pranks from four older brothers . In stark contrast , Johnson is nervous about the possibility of losing his job after the boss at Monsters , Inc. announces a downsizing is on the way . He feels envious because another scarer , Ned ( who later became Randall ) , is the company 's top performer . Through various drafts , Johnson 's occupation went back @-@ and @-@ forth from being a scarer and from working in another area of the company such as a janitor or a refinery worker , until his final incarnation as the best scarer at Monsters , Inc . Johnson was originally planned to have tentacles for feet ; however , this caused many problems in early animation tests . The idea was later largely rejected , as it was thought that audiences would be distracted by the tentacles . Mary 's age also differed from draft to draft until the writers settled on the age of 3 . " We found that the younger she was , the more dependent she was on Sulley " , Docter said . 
 Eventually Johnson was renamed Sullivan . The name was suggested by an animator who had attended Texas A & M University , inspired by one of Texas A & M 's historic icons , Lawrence Sullivan Ross , nicknamed " Sully " by students . Sullivan was also planned to wear glasses throughout the film . However , the creators found it a dangerous idea because the eyes were a perfectly readable and clear way of expressing a character 's personality ; thus , the idea was rejected . 
 The idea of a monster buddy for the lead monster emerged at an April 6 , 1998 " story summit " in Burbank with employees from Disney and Pixar . A term coined by Lasseter , a " story summit " was a crash exercise that would yield a finished story in only two days . Such a character , the group agreed , would give the lead monster someone to talk to about his predicament . Development artist Ricky <unk> drew a concept sketch of a rounded , one @-@ eyed monster as a concept for the character , and everyone was generally receptive to it . Docter named the character Mike for the father of his friend Frank Oz , a director and Muppet performer . Jeff Pidgeon and Jason Katz story @-@ boarded a test in which Mike helps Sulley choose a tie for work , and Mike Wazowski soon became a vital character in the film . Originally , Mike had no arms and had to use his legs as appendages ; however , due to some technical difficulties , arms were soon added to him . 
 Screenwriter Dan Gerson joined Pixar in 1999 and worked on the film with the filmmakers on a daily basis for almost two years . He considered it his first experience in writing a feature film . He explained , " I would sit with Pete [ Docter ] and David Silverman and we would talk about a scene and they would tell me what they were looking for . I would make some suggestions and then go off and write the sequence . We 'd get together again and review it and then hand it off to a story artist . Here 's where the collaborative process really kicked in . The board artist was not beholden to my work and could take liberties here and there . Sometimes , I would suggest an idea about making the joke work better visually . Once the scene moved on to animation , the animators would plus the material even further . " 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Bill Murray was considered for the voice role of James P. " Sulley " Sullivan . He screen tested for the role and was interested , but when Pete Docter was unable to make contact with him , he took it as a " no " . The voice role of Sulley went to John Goodman , the longtime co @-@ star of the comedy series Roseanne and a regular in the films of the Coen brothers . Goodman interpreted the character to himself as the monster equivalent of a National Football League player . " He 's like a seasoned lineman in the tenth year of his career , " he said at the time . " He is totally dedicated and a total pro . " Billy Crystal , having regretted turning down the part of Buzz Lightyear years prior , accepted that of Mike Wazowski , Sulley 's one @-@ eyed best friend and scare assistant . The casting of Steve Buscemi as Randall , Sulley 's rival , saw a reunion between himself and John Goodman ; they had previously worked together on The Big Lebowski and Barton Fink . 
 = = = Animation = = = 
 In November 2000 , early in the production of Monsters , Inc . , Pixar packed up and moved for the second time since its Lucasfilm years . The company 's approximately 500 employees had become spread among three buildings , separated by a busy highway . The company moved from Point Richmond to a much bigger campus , co @-@ designed by Lasseter and Steve Jobs , in Emeryville . 
 In production , Monsters Inc. differed from earlier Pixar features in that each main character had its own lead animator — John Kahrs on Sulley , Andrew Gordon on Mike , and Dave <unk> on Boo . Kahrs found that the " bearlike quality " of Goodman 's voice provided an exceptionally good fit with the character . He faced a difficult challenge , however , in dealing with Sulley 's sheer mass ; traditionally , animators conveyed a figure 's heaviness by giving it a slower , more belabored movement , but Kahrs was concerned that such an approach to a central character would give the film a sluggish feel . Like Goodman , Kahrs came to think of Sulley as a football player , one whose athleticism enabled him to move quickly in spite of his size . To help the animators with Sulley and other large monsters , Pixar arranged for Rodger Kram , a University of California , Berkeley expert on the locomotion of heavy mammals , to lecture on the subject . 
 Adding to Sulley 's lifelike appearance was an intense effort by the technical team to refine the rendering of fur . Other production houses had tackled realistic fur , most notably Rhythm & Hues in its 1993 polar bear commercials for Coca @-@ Cola and in its talking animals ' faces in Babe ( 1995 ) . Monsters , Inc . , however , required fur on a far larger scale . From the standpoint of Pixar 's engineers , the quest for fur posed several significant challenges . One was figuring out how to animate the huge numbers of hairs – 2 @,@ 320 @,@ 413 on Sulley – in a reasonably efficient way . Another was making sure the hairs cast shadows on other hairs . Without self @-@ shadowing , fur or hair takes on an unrealistic flat @-@ colored look . ( The hair on Andy 's toddler sister , as seen in the opening sequence of Toy Story , is an example of hair without self @-@ shadowing . ) 
 The first fur test had Sullivan run an obstacle course . Results were not satisfactory , as objects would catch the fur and stretch it out because of the extreme amount of motion . Another similar test was also unsuccessful , with the fur going through the objects . 
 Eventually Pixar set up a Simulation department and created a new fur simulation program called Fizt ( short for " physics tool " ) . After a shot with Sulley had been animated , the Simulation department took the data for the shot and added his fur . Fizt allowed the fur to react in a natural way . When Sulley moved , the fur would automatically react to his movements , taking into account the effects of wind and gravity as well . The Fizt program also controlled movement on Boo 's clothing , which provided another breakthrough . The deceptively simple @-@ sounding task of animating cloth was also a challenge to animate because of the hundreds of creases and wrinkles that automatically occurred in the clothing when the wearer moved . It also meant solving the complex problem of how to keep cloth untangled – that is , how to keep it from passing through itself when parts of it intersect . Fizt applied the same system to Boo 's clothes as to Sulley 's fur . Boo would first be animated shirtless ; the Simulation department then used Fizt to apply the shirt over Boo 's body , and when she moved , her clothes would react to her movements in a natural manner . 
 To solve the problem of cloth @-@ to @-@ cloth collisions , Michael Kass , Pixar 's senior scientist , was joined on Monsters , Inc. by David <unk> and Andrew Witkin and developed an algorithm they called " global intersection analysis " to handle the problem . The complexity of the shots in Monsters , Inc . – including elaborate sets such as the door vault – required more computing power to render than any of Pixar 's earlier efforts combined . The render farm in place for Monsters , Inc. was made up of 3500 Sun Microsystems processors , compared with 1400 for Toy Story 2 and only 200 for Toy Story . 
 = = Release = = 
 The film premiered on October 28 , 2001 at the El Capitan Theatre in Hollywood , California . It was theatrically released on November 2 , 2001 in the United States , in Australia on December 26 , 2001 , and in the United Kingdom on February 8 , 2002 . The theatrical release was accompanied with the Pixar short animated film For the Birds . As in A Bug 's Life and Toy Story 2 , a montage of " outtakes " and a performance of the company play were made and included in the end credits of the film sometime later . After the success of the 3D re @-@ release of The Lion King , Disney and Pixar re @-@ released Monsters , Inc. in 3D on December 19 , 2012 . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Monsters , Inc. was released on VHS and DVD on September 17 , 2002 . It was then released on Blu @-@ ray on November 10 , 2009 , and on Blu @-@ ray 3D on February 19 , 2013 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Monsters , Inc. ranked number 1 at the box office on its opening weekend , grossing $ 62 @,@ 577 @,@ 067 in North America alone . The film had a small drop @-@ off of 27 @.@ 2 % over its second weekend , earning another $ 45 @,@ 551 @,@ 028 . In its third weekend , the film experienced a larger decline of 50 @.@ 1 % , placing itself in the second position just after Harry Potter and the Philosopher 's Stone . In its fourth weekend , however , there was an increase of 5 @.@ 9 % , making $ 24 @,@ 055 @,@ 001 that weekend for a combined total of over $ 525 million . As of May 2013 , it is the eighth @-@ biggest fourth weekend ever for a film . 
 The film made $ 289 @,@ 916 @,@ 256 in North America , and $ 272 @,@ 900 @,@ 000 in other territories , for a worldwide total of $ 562 @,@ 816 @,@ 256 . The film is Pixar 's ninth highest @-@ grossing film worldwide and sixth in North America . For a time , the film surpassed Toy Story 2 as the second highest @-@ grossing animated film of all time , only behind 1994 's The Lion King . 
 In the U.K. , Ireland , and Malta , it earned £ 37 @,@ 264 @,@ 502 ( $ 53 @,@ 335 @,@ 579 ) in total , marking the sixth highest @-@ grossing animated film of all time in the country and the thirty @-@ second highest @-@ grossing film of all time . In Japan , although earning $ 4 @,@ 471 @,@ 902 during its opening and ranking second behind The Lord of the Rings : The Fellowship of the Ring for the weekend , it moved to first place on subsequent weekends due to exceptionally small decreases or even increases and dominated for six weeks at the box office . It finally reached $ 74 @,@ 437 @,@ 612 , standing as 2001 's third highest @-@ grossing film and the third largest U.S. animated feature of all time in the country behind Toy Story 3 and Finding Nemo . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a score of 96 % based on 192 reviews , with an average score of 8 / 10 . The critical consensus was : " Clever , funny , and delightful to look at , Monsters , Inc. delivers another resounding example of how Pixar elevated the bar for modern all @-@ ages animation . " Another review aggregator , Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 top reviews from mainstream critics , calculated a score of 78 based on 34 reviews , indicating " generally favorable reviews . " 
 Charles Taylor from Salon.com stated : " It 's agreeable and often funny , and adults who take their kids to see it might be surprised to find themselves having a pretty good time . " Elvis Mitchell from The New York Times gave a positive review , praising the film 's use of " creative energy " : " There hasn 't been a film in years to use creative energy as efficiently as Monsters , Inc . " Although Mike Clark from USA Today thought the comedy was sometimes " more frenetic than inspired and viewer emotions are rarely touched to any notable degree , " he thought the film to be as " visually inventive as its Pixar predecessors . " 
 ReelViews film critic James Berardinelli , who gave the film 31 ⁄ 2 stars out of 4 , wrote that Monsters , Inc. was " one of those rare family films that parents can enjoy ( rather than endure ) along with their kids . " Roger Ebert , film critic from Chicago Sun @-@ Times , who gave the film 3 out of 4 stars , called the film " cheerful , high @-@ energy fun , and like the other Pixar movies , has a running supply of gags and references aimed at grownups . " Lisa Schwarzbaum , a film critic for Entertainment Weekly , giving the film a B , praised the film 's animation , stating " Everything from Pixar Animation Studios , the snazzy , cutting @-@ edge computer animation outfit , looks really , really terrific , and <unk> with a liberated , <unk> @-@ moms @-@ and @-@ dads @-@ on @-@ the @-@ block iconoclasm . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Monsters , Inc. won the Academy Award for Best Original Song ( Randy Newman , after fifteen previous nominations , for If I Didn 't Have You ) . It was one of the first animated films to be nominated for Best Animated Feature ( lost to Shrek ) . It was also nominated for Best Original Score ( lost to The Lord of the Rings : The Fellowship of the Ring ) and Best Sound Editing ( lost to Pearl Harbor ) . At the Kid 's Choice Awards in 2002 , it was nominated for " Favorite Voice in an Animated Movie " for Billy Crystal ( who lost to Eddie Murphy in Shrek ) . The American Film Institute nominated " If I Didn 't Have You " in the AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Songs category . The film was also nominated in the AFI 's 10 Top 10 animated film category . 
 = = Music = = 
 Monsters Inc. was Randy Newman 's fourth feature film collaboration with Pixar . The end credits song " If I Didn 't Have You " was sung by John Goodman and Billy Crystal . 
 The album was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Original Score and a Grammy Award for Best Score Soundtrack for Visual Media . The score lost both these awards to The Lord of the Rings : The Fellowship of the Ring , but after sixteen nominations , the song " If I Didn 't Have You " finally won Newman his first Academy Award for Best Original Song . It also won a Grammy Award for Best Song Written for Visual Media . 
 All songs written and composed by Randy Newman . 
 Chart positions 
 = = Lawsuits = = 
 Shortly before the film 's release , Pixar was sued by children 's songwriter Lori Madrid of Wyoming , stating that the company had stolen her ideas from her 1997 poem " There 's a Boy in My Closet . " 
 Madrid mailed her poem to six publishers in October 1999 , notably Chronicle Books , before turning it into a local stage musical in August 2001 . After seeing the trailer for Monsters , Inc . , Madrid concluded that Chronicle Books had passed her work to Pixar and that the film was based on her work . In October 2001 , she filed the suit against Chronicle Books , Pixar , and Disney in a federal court in Cheyenne , Wyoming . Her lawyer asked the court to issue a preliminary injunction , that would forbid Pixar and Disney from releasing the film while the suit was pending . 
 In a hearing on November 1 , 2001 – the day before the film 's scheduled release on 5 @,@ 800 screens in 3 @,@ 200 theaters across the country – the judge refused to issue the injunction . On June 26 , 2002 , he ruled that the film had nothing in common with the poem . 
 In November 2002 , Stanley Mouse filed a lawsuit , in which he alleged that the characters of Mike and Sulley were based on drawings of Excuse My Dust , a film that he had tried to sell to Hollywood in 1998 . The lawsuit also stated that a story artist from Pixar visited Mouse in 2000 , and discussed Mouse 's work with him . A Disney spokeswoman responded , by saying that the characters in Monsters , Inc. were " developed independently by the Pixar and Walt Disney Pictures creative teams , and do not infringe on anyone 's copyrights " . The case was ultimately settled under undisclosed terms . 
 = = Prequel = = 
 A prequel , titled Monsters University , was released on June 21 , 2013 . John Goodman , Billy Crystal , and Steve Buscemi reprised their roles of Sulley , Mike , and Randall , while Dan Scanlon directed the film . The prequel 's plot focuses on Sulley and Mike 's studies at Monsters University , where they start off as rivals but soon become best friends . 
 = = Other media = = 
 An animated short , Mike 's New Car , was made by Pixar in 2002 in which the two main characters have assorted misadventures with a car Mike has just bought . This film was not screened in theaters , but is included with all home video releases of Monsters , Inc . , and on Pixar 's Dedicated Shorts DVD . In August 2002 , a manga version of Monsters , Inc. was made by Hiromi <unk> and distributed in Kodansha 's Comic Bon Bon magazine in Japan ; the manga was published in English by Tokyopop until it went out of print . A series of video games , including a multi @-@ platform video game were created based on the film . The video games included Monsters , Inc . , Monsters , Inc . Scream Team and Monsters , Inc . Scream Arena . A game titled Monsters , Inc . Run was released on the App Store for iPhone , iPod Touch , and iPad on December 13 , 2012 . 
 Feld Entertainment toured a Monsters , Inc. edition of their Walt Disney 's World on Ice skating tour from 2003 to 2007 . Monsters , Inc. has inspired three attractions at Disney theme parks around the world . In 2006 Monsters , Inc . Mike & Sulley to the Rescue ! opened at Disneyland Resort 's Disney California Adventure in Anaheim , California . In 2007 , Monsters , Inc . Laugh Floor opened at Walt Disney World Resort 's Magic Kingdom in Lake Buena Vista , Florida , replacing The <unk> . The show is improvisational in nature , and features the opportunity for Guests to interact with the monster comedians and submit jokes of their own via text message . In 2009 Monsters , Inc . Ride & Go Seek opened at Tokyo Disney Resort 's Tokyo Disneyland in Chiba , Japan . 
 In 2009 , Boom ! Studios produced a Monsters Inc. comic book mini @-@ series that ran for four issues . The storyline takes place after the movie and focuses on Sulley and Mike 's daily struggles to operate Monsters Inc. on its new laughter @-@ focused company policy . At the same time , their work is impeded by the revenge schemes of Randall and Waternoose , as well as a human child ( indirectly revealed to be Sid Phillips from the Toy Story franchise ) who has hijacked the company 's closet door technology to commit a string of toy thefts throughout the human world . 
 = Andrei Rublev ( film ) = 
 Andrei Rublev ( Russian : <unk> <unk> , Andrey <unk> ) , also known as The Passion According to Andrei ( Russian : <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , is a 1966 Soviet biographical historical drama film directed by Andrei Tarkovsky and co @-@ written with Andrei Konchalovsky . The film is loosely based on the life of Andrei Rublev , the great 15th @-@ century Russian icon painter . The film features Anatoly Solonitsyn , Nikolai Grinko , Ivan Lapikov , Nikolai Sergeyev , Nikolai Burlyayev and Tarkovsky 's wife Irma Raush . Savva <unk> , a famous Russian restorer and art historian , was a scientific consultant of the film . 
 Andrei Rublev is set against the background of 15th @-@ century Russia . Although the film is only loosely based on the life of Andrei Rublev , it seeks to depict a realistic portrait of medieval Russia . Tarkovsky sought to create a film that shows the artist as " a world @-@ historic figure " and " Christianity as an axiom of Russia ’ s historical identity " during a turbulent period of Russian history that ultimately resulted in the Tsardom of Russia . The film 's themes include artistic freedom , religion , political ambiguity , <unk> , and the making of art under a repressive regime . Because of this , it was not released domestically in the officially atheist and authoritarian Soviet Union for years after it was completed , except for a single 1966 screening in Moscow . A version of the film was shown at the 1969 Cannes Film Festival , where it won the FIPRESCI prize . In 1971 , a censored version of the film was released in the Soviet Union . The film was further cut for commercial reasons upon its U.S. release through Columbia Pictures in 1973 . As a result , several versions of the film exist . 
 Although these issues with censorship obscured and truncated the film for many years following its release , since being restored to its original version , Andrei Rublev has come to be regarded as one of the greatest films of all time , and has often been ranked highly in both the Sight & Sound critics ' and directors ' polls . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 Note : The following synopsis refers to the original , 205 minute version of the film . 
 Andrei Rublev is divided into eight chapters , with a prologue and an epilogue only loosely related to the main film . The main film charts the life of the great icon painter through several episodes of his life . The background is 15th century Russia , a turbulent period characterized by fighting between rival princes and the Tatar invasions . 
 The film 's prologue shows the preparations for a hot air balloon ride . The balloon is tethered to the spire of a church next to a river , with a man named Yefim ( Nikolay <unk> ) attempting to make the flight by use of a harness roped beneath the balloon . At the very moment of his attempt an ignorant mob arrive from the river and attempt to thwart the flight , putting a firebrand into the face of one of the men on the ground assisting Yefim . In spite of this the balloon is successfully released and Yefim is overwhelmed and delighted by the view from above and the sensation of flying , but he can not prevent a crash landing shortly after . He is the first of several creative characters , representing the daring escapist , whose hopes are easily crushed . After the crash , a horse is seen rolling on its back by a pond , a symbol of life – one of many horses in the movie . 
 I. The Jester ( Summer 1400 ) 
 Andrei ( Anatoly Solonitsyn ) , Daniil ( Nikolai Grinko ) and Kirill ( Ivan Lapikov ) are wandering monks and religious icon painters , looking for work . The three represent different creative characters . Andrei is the observer , a humanist who searches for the good in people and wants to inspire and not frighten . Daniil is withdrawn and resigned , and not as bent on creativity as on self @-@ realization . Kirill lacks talent as a painter , yet still strives to achieve prominence . He is jealous , self @-@ righteous , very intelligent and perceptive . The three have just left the Andronikov Monastery , where they have lived for many years , heading to Moscow . During a heavy rain shower they seek shelter in a barn , where a group of villagers is being entertained by a jester ( <unk> Bykov ) . The jester , or skomorokh , is a bitterly sarcastic enemy of the state and the Church , who earns a living with his scathing and obscene social commentary and by making fun of the Boyars . He ridicules the monks as they come in , and after some time Kirill leaves unnoticed . Shortly , a group of soldiers arrive to arrest the skomorokh , whom they take outside , knock unconscious and take away , also smashing his musical instrument . As the rain has stopped the three monks thank the villagers for allowing them to shelter and continue on their way . As they walk on the heavy rain starts again . 
 II . Theophanes the Greek ( Summer – Winter – Spring – Summer 1405 – 1406 ) 
 Kirill arrives at the workshop of Theophanes the Greek ( Nikolai Sergeyev ) , a prominent and well @-@ recognized master painter , who is working on a new icon of Jesus Christ . Theophanes is portrayed as a complex character : an established artist , humanistic and God @-@ fearing in his views yet somewhat cynical , regarding his art more as a craft and a chore in his disillusion with other people . His young apprentices have all run away to the town square , where a wrongly convicted criminal is about to be tortured and executed . Kirill talks to Theophanes , and the artist , impressed by the monk 's understanding and erudition , invites him to work as his apprentice on the decoration of the Cathedral of the Annunciation in Moscow . Kirill refuses at first , but then accepts the offer on the condition that Theophanes will personally come to the Andronikov Monastery and invite Kirill to work with him in front of all the fraternity and Andrei Rublev , who according to Theophanes ' comments has some fame as an icon painter in the outside world . 
 A short while later at the Andronikov Monastery , a messenger arrives from Moscow to ask Andrei for his assistance in decorating the Annunciation Cathedral with Theophanes the Greek . Both Daniil and Kirill are agitated by the recognition that Andrei receives . Daniil refuses to accompany Andrei and reproaches him for accepting Theophanes ’ offer without considering his fellows , but soon repents of his temper and tearfully wishes Andrei well when the younger monk comes to say goodbye to his friend . Kirill is jealous of Andrei and in a fit of anger , decides to leave the monastery for the secular world , throwing accusations of greed in the face of his fellow monks , who also dismiss him . Kirill stumbles out of the monastery into the snowy countryside and is pursued by his dog , but Kirill savagely beats it with his walking stick and leaves it for dead . Andrei leaves for Moscow with his young apprentice Foma ( Mikhail <unk> ) . Foma is another creative character , representing the light @-@ hearted and practical @-@ minded commercial artist . Still he seems to be contemplative enough to get along with Andrei . 
 III . The Passion According to Andrei ( 1406 ) 
 While walking in the woods , Andrei and Foma have a conversation about Foma ’ s faults , especially lying . Foma confesses to taking honey from the bee garden , after Andrei notices his cassock is tacky , and smears mud on his face to soothe a bee sting . While Foma has talent as an artist , he is less concerned with the deeper meaning of his work and more concerned with practical aspects of the job , like perfecting his azure , a colour which in painting was often considered unstable to mix . They encounter Theophanes in the forest , and the old master sends Foma away . As he leaves , the apprentice finds a dead swan and pokes at it with a stick . We cut to banks of a stream where Andrei and Theophanes are arguing about religion , while Foma cleans his masters paint brushes . Theophanes argues that the ignorance of the Russian people is due to stupidity , while Andrei says that he doesn ’ t understand how he can be a painter and maintain such views . This section contains a reenactment of Christ 's Crucifixion on a snow @-@ covered hillside which plays out as Andrei recounts the story and expresses his belief that the men who crucified Jesus were obeying God 's will and loved him . 
 IV . The Feast ( 1408 ) 
 Camping for the night on a riverbank , Andrei and Foma are collecting firewood for their group when Andrei hears the distant sounds of celebration further upstream in the woods . Going to investigate he encounters a large group of naked pagans , who are conducting a torch lit ritual for Midsummer . Andrei is intrigued and excited by the behaviour of the pagans but is caught spying on a couple making love , is tied to the crossbeam of a hut in a mockery of Jesus ' crucifixion and is threatened with drowning in the morning . A woman named Marfa ( Nelly <unk> ) , dressed only in a fur coat approaches Andrei . After explaining that her people are persecuted for their beliefs she drops her coat , kisses Andrei and then unties him . Andrei runs away , and is lost in the dense woods , scratching his face . The next morning Andrei returns to his group , including Daniil , and as they leave on their boats a group of soldiers appear on the riverbank chasing after several of the pagans including Marfa . Her partner is captured but she escapes by swimming into the river past Andrei ’ s boat . He and his fellow monks look away in shame . 
 V. The Last Judgment ( Summer 1408 ) 
 Andrei and Daniil are working on the decoration of a church in Vladimir . Although they have been there for several months the walls are still white and bare as Andrei is doubting himself . A messenger arrives with word from the furious Bishop to say they have until the Autumn to finish the job . On a nearby road in the middle of a field of flowers Andrei confides to Daniil that the task disgusts him and that he is unable to paint a subject such as the Last Judgement as he doesn ’ t want to terrify people into submission . He comes to the conclusion that he has lost the ease of mind that an artist needs for his work . Foma , impatient and ambitious , resigns and leaves Andrei 's group to take up the offer of painting a smaller , less prestigious , church . Stone carvers and decorators of Andrei 's party have also been working on the Grand Prince 's mansion . The Prince wants the work to be done again more in line with his tastes but the workers already have another job , at the mansion of the Grand Prince 's brother , and refuse . On a path through the woods soldiers accost the artisans on the orders of the Grand Prince and gouge their eyes out , so that they cannot replicate their work . Back at the church Andrei is dismayed by the news of their fate and angrily throws paint and smears it on one of the walls . Sergei ( Vladimir Titov ) one of the young apprentices who escaped the attack unharmed reads a random section of the bible aloud , at Daniil 's request , concerning women . Durochka ( Irma Raush ) ( whose name identifies her as a holy fool or <unk> ) , wanders in out of the rain and is upset by the sight of the paint on the wall . Her feeble @-@ mindedness and innocence leads Andrei to the idea to paint a feast . 
 VI . The Raid ( Autumn 1408 ) 
 While the Grand Prince is away in Lithuania , his power hungry younger brother forms an allegiance with a group of Tatars and raids Vladimir . We see flashbacks of the Grand Prince and his brother attending a religious service in the church , and see the rivalry and animosity between them . The invasion of the combined armed forces on horseback and the resulting carnage is shown in great detail . The city is burned , the citizens are murdered and women raped and killed . One scene shows a horse falling from a flight of stairs and being stabbed by a spear . Another shows a cow being set on fire . Foma narrowly escapes being killed in the city and escapes into the nearby countryside . As he is crossing a river a Tatar sentry shoots him in the back with an arrow , as he dies he falls into the river and is swept away . The Tatars force their way into the barricaded church , now fully decorated with Andrei 's paintings , where the majority of the citizens have taken refuge . The Tatars show no mercy and massacre the people inside and burn all the painted wooden altarpieces . Andrei saves Durochka from being raped by killing the invader with an axe . The Bishop 's messenger is cruelly tortured to make him reveal the location of the city 's gold , which he refuses to do . After being repeatedly burned , he has liquid metal from a melted crucifix poured into his mouth and is dragged away tied to a horse . In the aftermath only Andrei and Durochka are left alive in the church . Andrei imagines a conversation with the dead Theophanes the Greek , lamenting the loss of his work and the evil of mankind , while Durochka <unk> plaits the hair of a dead woman . Andrei decides to give up painting and takes a vow of silence to atone for killing another man . 
 VII . The Silence ( Winter 1412 ) 
 Andrei is once again at the Andronikov Monastery as famine and war grip the country . He no longer paints and never speaks , and keeps Durochka with him as a fellow companion in silence . Several refugees discuss the problems in their respective home towns , and one man talks in a broken voice of his escape from Vladimir . He is recognised by a younger monk as the long absent Kirill . He has suffered during his time away from the monastery and begs the father superior to allow him to return . His wish is granted but he is instructed to copy out the holy scriptures fifteen times in penance . A group of Tatars stops at the monastery while travelling through the region , much to the concern of Andrei and Kirill who experienced their brutality first hand . Durochka is too simple minded to remember what the Tatars did and is fascinated by one of the soldier 's shining breastplate . The group taunt and play with her , but the soldier takes a liking to her , putting his horned helmet on her head and dressing her as a bride , finally deciding to take her away with him as his eighth , and only Russian , wife . Andrei attempts to stop her from leaving , but she is determined and rides away with the Tatars . Kirill talks to Andrei for the first time since they both left the monastery , and he assures him that <unk> won 't be in any danger , as harming a holy fool is considered bad luck , and she will be let go . Andrei continues his menial work of carrying large hot stones from a fire with tongs to heat water for the monastery , but drops the stone in the snow . 
 VIII . The Bell ( Spring – Summer – Winter – Spring 1423 – 1424 ) 
 Andrei ’ s life turns around as he witnesses the casting of a bell for the Grand Prince . The <unk> and all his family have died of a plague that has ravaged the area , and only his son Boriska ( Nikolai Burlyayev ) has survived . He tells the Prince 's men that he is the only one who possesses his father 's secret , delivered on his death bed , of casting a bronze bell and persuades them to take him with them as he is the only person left alive who can make it successfully . Boriska is put in charge of the project and frequently contradicts and challenges the instincts of his co @-@ workers when choosing the location of the pit , the selection of the proper clay , the building of the mold , the firing of the furnaces and finally the hoisting of the bell . The process of making the bell grows into a huge , expensive endeavour with many hundreds of workers and Boriska makes several risky decisions , guided only by his instincts . As the furnaces are opened and the molten metal pours into the mould , he privately asks God for help . Andrei silently watches Boriska during the casting , and the younger man notices him too . 
 During the bell @-@ making , the skomorokh from the first sequence makes a reappearance amongst the crowds who have come to watch the bell being raised up and he threatens to kill Andrei , whom he mistakes for the man who denounced him years earlier and therefore led to his arrest , torture and prison sentence . Kirill intervenes on behalf of the silent Andrei and later privately confesses that his sinful envy of Andrei ’ s talent dissipated once he heard Andrei had abandoned painting and that it was he , Kirill , who had denounced the skomorokh . Kirill then criticises Andrei for allowing his God @-@ given talent for painting to go to waste and pleads with him to resume his artistry , to no response . 
 As the bell @-@ making nears completion , Boriska ’ s confidence slowly transforms into a stunned , detached disbelief that he ’ s succeeded at the task . The work crew takes over as Boriska makes several attempts to fade into the background of the activity . Once the bell has been hoisted into its tower the Grand Prince and his entourage arrive for the inaugural ceremony as the bell is blessed by the priests . As the bell is prepared to be rung the royal entourage is overhead discussing their doubts that it will . It is revealed that Boriska and the work crew know if the bell fails to ring the Grand Prince will have them all beheaded . ( It is also overheard that the Grand Prince had his brother , who raided Vladimir in The Raid sequence , beheaded . ) There is a quiet , agonizing tension as the foreman slowly coaxes the bell 's clapper back and forth , nudging it closer to the lip of the bell with each swing . A pan across the assembly reveals white @-@ robed Durochka , leading a horse ( preceded by a boy , presumably her son ) as she walks through the crowd . At the critical moment the bell rings perfectly and she smiles . After the ceremony , Andrei finds Boriska collapsed on the ground , sobbing as he admits his father never told him the secret of casting a bell . Andrei comforts him , breaking his vow of silence and telling the boy that they should carry on their work together : “ You ’ ll cast bells . I ’ ll paint icons . ” Andrei sees Durochka , the boy , and the horse walk off across a muddy field in the distance . 
 The epilogue is the only part of the film in colour and shows time @-@ aged , but still vibrant , details of several of Andrei Rublev ’ s actual icons . The icons are shown in the following order : Enthroned Christ , Twelve Apostles , The Annunciation , Twelve Apostles , Jesus entering Jerusalem , Birth of Christ , Enthroned Christ , Transfiguration of Jesus , Resurrection of Lazarus , The Annunciation , Resurrection of Lazarus , Birth of Christ , Trinity , Archangel Michael , Paul the Apostle , The Redeemer . The final scene crossfades from the icons and shows four horses standing by a river in the rain . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Anatoly Solonitsyn – Andrei Rublev 
 Nikolai Grinko – Daniel <unk> 
 Nikolai Sergeyev – Theophanes the Greek 
 Nikolai Burlyayev – Boriska 
 Ivan Lapikov – Kirill 
 Yuri <unk> – <unk> 
 Yuriy <unk> – Prince Yury of Zvenigorod / Grand Prince Vasily I of Moscow 
 <unk> Bykov – the <unk> 
 Irma Raush – Durochka ( the holy fool girl ) 
 Mikhail <unk> – Foma 
 Nikolay <unk> – Yefim 
 <unk> <unk> – <unk> , Khan of the Nogai Horde 
 Irina <unk> – Mary Magdalene 
 = = Production = = 
 In 1961 , while working on his first feature film Ivan 's Childhood , Tarkovsky made a proposal to Mosfilm for a film on the life of Russia 's greatest icon painter , Andrei Rublev . The contract was signed in 1962 and the first treatment was approved in December 1963 . Tarkovsky and his co @-@ screenwriter Andrei Konchalovsky worked for more than two years on the script , studying medieval writings and chronicles and books on medieval history and art . In April 1964 the script was approved and Tarkovsky began working on the film . At the same time the script was published in the influential film magazine Iskusstvo Kino , and was widely discussed among historians , film critics and ordinary readers . The discussion on Andrei Rublev centered on the sociopolitical and historical , and not the artistic aspects of the film . 
 According to Tarkovsky , the original idea for a film about the life of Andrei Rublev was due to the film actor Vasily <unk> . <unk> proposed to write a screenplay together with Tarkovsky and Konchalovsky while they were strolling through a forest on the outskirts of Moscow . He also mentioned that he would love to play Andrei Rublev . Tarkovsky did not intend the film to be a historical or a biographical film about Andrei Rublev . Instead , he was motivated by the idea of showing the connection between a creative character 's personality and the times through which he lives . He wanted to show an artist 's maturing and the development of his talent . He chose Andrei Rublev for his importance in the history of Russian culture . 
 Tarkovsky cast Anatoli Solonitsyn for the role of Andrei Rublev . At this time Solonitsyn was an unknown actor at a theater in Sverdlovsk . According to Tarkovsky everybody had a different image of the historical figure of Andrei Rublev , thus casting an unknown actor who would not remind viewers of other roles was his favoured approach . Solonitsyn , who had read the film script in the film magazine Iskusstvo Kino , was very enthusiastic about the role , traveled to Moscow at his own expense to meet Tarkovsky and even declared that no one could play this role better than him . Tarkovsky felt the same , saying that " with Solonitsyn I simply got lucky " . For the role of Andrei Rublev he required " a face with great expressive power in which one could see a <unk> single @-@ mindedness " . To Tarkovsky , Solonitsyn provided the right physical appearance and the talent of showing complex psychological processes . Solonitsyn would continue to work with the director , appearing in Solaris , The Mirror , and Stalker , and in the title role of Tarkovsky 's 1976 stage production of Hamlet in Moscow 's <unk> Theatre . Before his death from cancer in 1982 , Solonitsyn was also intended to play protagonist Andrei <unk> in Tarkovsky 's 1983 Italian @-@ Russian co @-@ production Nostalghia , and to star in a project titled The Witch which Tarkovsky would significantly alter into his final production , The Sacrifice . 
 Tarkovsky chose to shoot the main film in black and white and the epilogue , showing some of Rublev 's icons , in color . In an interview he motivated his choice with the claim that in everyday life one does not consciously notice colors . Consequently , Rublev 's life is in black and white , whereas his art is in color . The film was thus able to express the co @-@ dependence of an artist 's art and his personal life . The color sequence of Rublev 's icons begins with showing only selected details , climaxing in Rublev 's most famous icon , The Trinity . One reason for including this color final was , according to Tarkovsky , to give the viewer some rest and to allow him to detach himself from Rublev 's life and to reflect . The film finally ends with the image of horses at river in the rain . To Tarkovsky horses symbolized life , and including horses in the final scene ( and in many other scenes in the film ) meant that life was the source of all of Rublev 's art . 
 Filming did not begin until April 1965 , one year after approval of the script . The initial budget was 1 @.@ 6 million Rubles , but it was cut several times to one million Rubles ( In comparison , Sergei Bondarchuk 's War and Peace had a budget of eight and half million Rubles ) . As a result of the budget restrictions several scenes from the script were cut , including an opening scene showing the Battle of Kulikovo . Other scenes that were cut from the script are a hunting scene , where the younger brother of the Grand Prince hunts swans , and a scene showing peasants helping Durochka giving birth to her Russian @-@ Tatar child . In the end the film cost 1 @.@ 3 million Rubles , with the cost overrun due to heavy snowfall , which disrupted shooting from November 1965 until April 1966 . The film was shot on location , on the <unk> River and the historical places of Vladimir / Suzdal , Pskov , <unk> and <unk> . 
 Several scenes within the film depict violence , torture and cruelty toward animals , leading to controversy and censorship attempts upon completion of the film . Most of these scenes took place during the raid of Vladimir , showing for example the blinding and the torture of a monk . Most of the scenes involving cruelty toward animals were simulated . For example , during the Tatar raid of Vladimir a cow is set on fire . In reality the cow had an asbestos @-@ covered coat and was not physically harmed ; however , one scene depicts the real death of a horse . The horse falls from a flight of stairs and is then stabbed by a spear . To produce this image , Tarkovsky injured the horse by shooting it in the neck and then pushed it from the stairs , causing the animal to falter and fall down the flight of stairs . From there , the camera pans off the horse onto some soldiers to the left and then pans back right onto the horse , and we see the horse struggling to get its footing having fallen over on its back before being stabbed by the spear . The animal was then shot in the head afterward off camera . This was done to avoid the possibility of harming what was considered a lesser expendable , highly prized stunt horse . The horse was brought in from a slaughterhouse , killed on set , and then returned to the abattoir for commercial consumption . In a 1967 interview for <unk> <unk> , interviewer Aleksandr <unk> suggested to Tarkovsky that " the cruelty in the film is shown precisely to shock and stun the viewers . And this may even repel them . " In an attempt to downplay the cruelty Tarkovsky responded : " No , I don 't agree . This does not hinder viewer perception . Moreover we did all this quite sensitively . I can name films that show much more cruel things , compared to which ours looks quite modest . " 
 The film is referenced in Tarkovsky 's two films that followed this one . It is first referenced in Solaris , made in 1972 , by having an icon by Andrei Rublev being placed in the main character 's room . It is next referenced by having a poster of the film being hanged on a wall in The Mirror , made in 1975 . It thus forms the first part in a series of three films by Tarkovsky referencing Andrei Rublev . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 The first cut of the film was completed in July 1966 and was named The Passion According to Andrei and ran 205 minutes . Goskino demanded cuts to the film , citing its length , negativity , violence , and nudity . After Tarkovsky completed this first version , it would be five years before the film was widely released in the Soviet Union . 
 The ministry 's demands for cuts first resulted in a 190 @-@ minute version . Despite Tarkovsky 's objections expressed in a letter to Alexey Romanov , the chairman of Goskino , the ministry demanded further cuts , and Tarkovsky trimmed the length to 186 minutes . The film premiered with a single screening at the Dom Kino in Moscow in 1966 . Audience reaction was enthusiastic , despite some criticism of the film 's naturalistic depiction of violence . In February 1967 , Tarkovsky and Alexei Romanov complained that the film was not yet approved for a wide release and refused to cut further scenes from the film . Tarkovsky 's refusal resulted in Andrei Rublev not being released for years , despite being a topic of discussion at the top level of Mosfilm , Goskino and even during a meeting of the Central Committee of the Communist Party . 
 Andrei Rublev was invited to the Cannes Film Festival in 1967 as part of a planned retrospective of Soviet film on occasion of the 50th anniversary of the October Revolution . The official answer was that the film was not yet completed and could not be shown at the film festival . A second invitation was made by the organizers of the Cannes Film Festival in 1969 . Soviet officials accepted this invitation , but they only allowed the film to screen at the festival out of competition , and it was screened just once at 4 A.M. on the final day of the festival . Audience response nevertheless was enthusiastic , and the film won the FIPRESCI prize . Soviet officials tried to prevent the official release of the film in France and other countries , but were not successful as the French distributor had legally acquired the rights in 1969 . 
 In the Soviet Union , influential admirers of Tarkovsky 's work — including the film director Grigori <unk> , the composer Dmitri Shostakovich and Yevgeny <unk> , the editor of Iskusstvo Kino — began pressuring for the release of Andrei Rublev . Tarkovsky and his second wife , Larisa Tarkovskaya wrote letters to other influential personalities in support of the film 's release , and Larisa Tarkovskaya even went with the film to Alexei Kosygin , then the Premier of the Soviet Union . 
 Despite Tarkovsky 's refusal to make further cuts , Andrei Rublev finally was released on December 24 , 1971 in the 186 @-@ minute 1966 version . The film was released in 277 prints and sold 2 @.@ 98 million tickets . When the film was released , Tarkovsky complained in his diary that in the entire city not a single poster for the film could be seen but that all theaters were sold out . 
 Despite the cuts having originated with Goskino 's demands , Tarkovsky ultimately endorsed the 186 @-@ minute cut the film over the original 205 @-@ minute version : 
 Nobody has ever cut anything from Andrei Rublev . Nobody except me . I made some cuts myself . In the first version the film was 3 hours 20 minutes long . In the second — 3 hours 15 minutes . I shortened the final version to 3 hours 6 minutes . I am convinced the latest version is the best , the most successful . And I only cut certain overly long scenes . The viewer doesn 't even notice their absence . The cuts have in no way changed neither the subject matter nor what was for us important in the film . In other words , we removed overly long scenes which had no significance . 
 We shortened certain scenes of brutality in order to induce psychological shock in viewers , as opposed to a mere unpleasant impression which would only destroy our intent . All my friends and colleagues who during long discussions were advising me to make those cuts turned out right in the end . It took me some time to understand it . At first I got the impression they were attempting to pressure my creative individuality . Later I understood that this final version of the film more than fulfils my requirements for it . And I do not regret at all that the film has been shortened to its present length . 
 In 1973 , the film was shown on Soviet television in a 101 @-@ minute version that Tarkovsky did not authorize . Notable scenes that were cut from this version were the raid of the Tartars and the scene showing naked pagans . The epilogue showing details of Andrei Rublev 's icons was in black and white as the Soviet Union had not yet fully transitioned to color TV . In 1987 , when Andrei Rublev was once again shown on Soviet TV , the epilogue was once again in black and white , despite the Soviet Union having completely transitioned to color TV . Another difference from the original version of the film was the inclusion of a short explanatory note at the beginning of the film , detailing the life of Andrei Rublev and the historical background . When the film was released in the U.S. and other countries in 1973 , the distributor Columbia Pictures cut it by an additional 20 minutes , making the film an incoherent mess in the eyes of many critics and leading to unfavorable reviews . 
 In the mid @-@ 1990s , Criterion Collection released the original , 205 @-@ minute version of Andrei Rublev on laserdisc , which Criterion re @-@ issued on DVD in 1999 . ( Criterion advertises this version as the " director 's cut , " despite Tarkovsky 's stated preference for the 186 @-@ minute version . ) According to Tarkovsky 's sister , Marina Tarkovskaya , one of the editors of the film , Lyudmila <unk> , secretly kept a print of the 205 @-@ minute cut under her bed . Criterion 's producer from the project stated that the video transfer was sourced from a film print that filmmaker Martin Scorsese had acquired while visiting Russia . 
 = = Awards = = 
 Andrei Rublev won several awards . In 1969 , the film was screened at the Cannes Film Festival . Due to pressure by Soviet officials , the film could only be shown out of competition , and was thus not eligible for the Palme d 'Or or the Grand Prix . Nevertheless , it won the prize of the international film critics , FIPRESCI . In 1971 Andrei Rublev won the Critics Award of the French Syndicate of Cinema Critics , and in 1973 the Jussi Award for best foreign film . 
 = = = Regard = = = 
 In 2010 , the film was honored when it came equal second in a U.K. newspaper series of the " Greatest Films of All Time " as voted by critics from The Guardian and The Observer . 
 The film was ranked No. 87 in Empire magazine 's " The 100 Best Films Of World Cinema " in 2010 . 
 Also in 2010 , the Toronto International Film Festival released its " Essential 100 " list of films in which Andrei Rublev also placed No. 87 . 
 The film is rated at No. 25 on the Rate Your Music website 's top 100 films chart . 
 = = Influence = = 
 The film inspired Polish composer , Kasia <unk> to construct a 2009 audio @-@ visual performance called " Quasi Rublev , " inspired by the film , with <unk> <unk> playing harpsichord and Roos <unk> performing live visuals . 
 = Salt March = 
 The Salt March ' , also known as the Dandi March and the Dandi Satyagraha , was an act of nonviolent civil disobedience in colonial India initiated by Mohandas Gandhi to produce salt from seawater , as was the practice of the local populace until British officials introduced taxation on salt production , deemed their sea @-@ salt reclamation activities illegal , and then repeatedly used force to stop it . The 24 @-@ day march began on 12 March 1930 as a direct action campaign of tax resistance and nonviolent protest against the British salt monopoly , and it gained worldwide attention which gave impetus to the Indian independence movement and started the nationwide Civil Disobedience Movement . 
 The march was the most significant organised challenge to British authority since the Non @-@ cooperation movement of 1920 – 22 , and directly followed the Purna Swaraj declaration of sovereignty and self @-@ rule by the Indian National Congress on 26 January 1930 . 
 Gandhi led the Dandi March from his base , Sabarmati Ashram , near the city of Ahmedabad . 78 people began the march with Gandhi , who intended to walk 240 miles ( 390 km ) to the coastal village of Dandi , which was located at a small town called <unk> in the state of Gujarat . As Gandhi and the others continued on what would become a 24 @-@ day march to Dandi to produce salt without paying the tax , growing numbers of Indians joined them along the way . When Gandhi broke the salt laws at 6 : 30 am on 6 April 1930 , it sparked large scale acts of civil disobedience against the British Raj salt laws by millions of Indians . The campaign had a significant effect on changing world and British attitudes towards Indian sovereignty and self @-@ rule and caused large numbers of Indians to join the fight for the first time . 
 After making salt at Dandi , Gandhi continued southward along the coast , producing salt and addressing meetings on the way . The Congress Party planned to stage a satyagraha at the Dharasana Salt Works , 25 miles south of Dandi . However , Gandhi was arrested on the midnight of 4 – 5 May 1930 , just days before the planned action at Dharasana . The Dandi March and the ensuing Dharasana Satyagraha drew worldwide attention to the Indian independence movement through extensive newspaper and newsreel coverage . The satyagraha against the salt tax continued for almost a year , ending with Gandhi 's release from jail and negotiations with Viceroy Lord Irwin at the Second Round Table Conference . Over 80 @,@ 000 Indians were jailed as a result of the Salt Satyagraha . However , it failed to result in major concessions from the British . 
 The Salt Satyagraha campaign was based upon Gandhi 's principles of nonviolent protest called satyagraha , which he loosely translated as " truth @-@ force " or " truthful demand " . " Literally , it is formed from the Sanskrit words satya , " truth " , and agraha , " insistence " . In early 1930 the Indian National Congress chose satyagraha as their main tactic for winning Indian sovereignty and self @-@ rule from British rule and appointed Gandhi to organise the campaign . Gandhi chose the 1882 British Salt Act as the first target of satyagraha . The Salt March to Dandi , and the beating by British police of hundreds of nonviolent protesters in Dharasana , which received worldwide news coverage , demonstrated the effective use of civil disobedience as a technique for fighting social and political injustice . The satyagraha teachings of Gandhi and the March to Dandi had a significant influence on American activists Martin Luther King , Jr . , James Bevel , and others during the movement for civil rights for blacks and other minority groups in the 1960s . 
 = = Declaration of sovereignty and self @-@ rule = = 
 At midnight on 31 December 1929 , the Indian National Congress raised the tricolour flag of India on the banks of the Ravi at Lahore . The Indian National Congress , led by Gandhi and Jawaharlal Nehru , publicly issued the Declaration of sovereignty and self @-@ rule , or Purna Swaraj , on 26 January 1930 . ( Literally in Sanskrit , <unk> , " complete , " swa , " self , " <unk> , " rule , " so therefore " complete self @-@ rule " . ) The declaration included the readiness to withhold taxes , and the statement : 
 We believe that it is the inalienable right of the Indian people , as of any other people , to have freedom and to enjoy the fruits of their toil and have the necessities of life , so that they may have full opportunities of growth . We believe also that if any government deprives a people of these rights and oppresses them the people have a further right to alter it or abolish it . The British government in India has not only deprived the Indian people of their freedom but has based itself on the exploitation of the masses , and has ruined India economically , politically , culturally and spiritually . We believe therefore , that India must sever the British connection and attain Purna Swaraj or complete sovereignty and self @-@ rule . 
 The Congress Working Committee gave Gandhi the responsibility for organising the first act of civil disobedience , with Congress itself ready to take charge after Gandhi 's expected arrest . Gandhi 's plan was to begin civil disobedience with a satyagraha aimed at the British salt tax . The 1882 Salt Act gave the British a monopoly on the collection and manufacture of salt , limiting its handling to government salt depots and levying a salt tax . Violation of the Salt Act was a criminal offence . Even though salt was freely available to those living on the coast ( by evaporation of sea water ) , Indians were forced to purchase it from the colonial government . 
 = = Choice of salt as protest focus = = 
 Initially , Gandhi 's choice of the salt tax was met with incredulity by the Working Committee of the Congress , Jawaharlal Nehru and <unk> Sahoo were ambivalent ; Sardar Patel suggested a land revenue boycott instead . The Statesman , a prominent newspaper , wrote about the choice : " It is difficult not to laugh , and we imagine that will be the mood of most thinking Indians . " 
 The British establishment too was not disturbed by these plans of resistance against the salt tax . The Viceroy himself , Lord Irwin , did not take the threat of a salt protest seriously , writing to London , " At present the prospect of a salt campaign does not keep me awake at night . " 
 However , Gandhi had sound reasons for his decision . The salt tax was a deeply symbolic choice , since salt was used by nearly everyone in India , to replace the salt lost by sweating in India 's tropical climate . An item of daily use could resonate more with all classes of citizens than an abstract demand for greater political rights . The salt tax represented 8 @.@ 2 % of the British Raj tax revenue , and hurt the poorest Indians the most significantly . Explaining his choice , Gandhi said , " Next to air and water , salt is perhaps the greatest necessity of life . " In contrast to the other leaders , the prominent Congress statesman and future Governor @-@ General of India , C. Rajagopalachari , understood Gandhi 's viewpoint . In a public meeting at Tuticorin , he said : 
 Suppose , a people rise in revolt . They cannot attack the abstract constitution or lead an army against proclamations and statutes ... Civil disobedience has to be directed against the salt tax or the land tax or some other particular point — not that ; that is our final end , but for the time being it is our aim , and we must shoot straight . 
 Gandhi felt that this protest would dramatise Purna Swaraj in a way that was meaningful to the lowliest Indians . He also reasoned that it would build unity between Hindus and Muslims by fighting a wrong that touched them equally . 
 After the protest gathered steam , the leaders realised the power of salt as a symbol . Nehru remarked about the unprecedented popular response , “ it seemed as though a spring had been suddenly released . ” 
 = = Satyagraha = = 
 Mahatma Gandhi , along with many members of the Congress Party , had a long @-@ standing commitment to nonviolent civil disobedience , which he termed satyagraha , as the basis for achieving Indian sovereignty and self @-@ rule . Referring to the relationship between satyagraha and Purna Swaraj , Gandhi saw " an inviolable connection between the means and the end as there is between the seed and the tree . " He wrote , " If the means employed are impure , the change will not be in the direction of progress but very likely in the opposite . Only a change brought about in our political condition by pure means can lead to real progress . " 
 Satyagraha is a synthesis of the Sanskrit words Satya ( truth ) and <unk> ( insistence on ) . For Gandhi , satyagraha went far beyond mere " passive resistance " and became strength in practising nonviolent methods . In his words : 
 Truth ( satya ) implies love , and firmness ( agraha ) engenders and therefore serves as a synonym for force . I thus began to call the Indian movement Satyagraha , that is to say , the Force which is born of Truth and Love or nonviolence , and gave up the use of the phrase “ passive resistance ” , in connection with it , so much so that even in English writing we often avoided it and used instead the word “ satyagraha ” .... 
 His first significant attempt in India at leading mass satyagraha was the non @-@ cooperation movement from 1920 – 1922 . Even though it succeeded in raising millions of Indians in protest against the British created Rowlatt Acts , violence broke out at Chauri Chaura , where a mob killed 22 unarmed policemen . Gandhi suspended the protest , against the opposition of other Congress members . He decided that Indians were not yet ready for successful nonviolent resistance . The Bardoli Satyagraha in 1928 was much more successful . It succeeded in paralysing the British government and winning significant concessions . More importantly , due to extensive press coverage , it scored a propaganda victory out of all proportion to its size . Gandhi later claimed that success at Bardoli confirmed his belief in Satyagraha and Swaraj : " It is only gradually that we shall come to know the importance of the victory gained at Bardoli ... Bardoli has shown the way and cleared it . Swaraj lies on that route , and that alone is the cure ... " Gandhi recruited heavily from the Bardoli Satyagraha participants for the Dandi march , which passed through many of the same villages that took part in the Bardoli protests . 
 = = Preparing to march = = 
 On 5 February , newspapers reported that Gandhi would begin civil disobedience by defying the salt laws . The salt satyagraha would begin on 12 March and end in Dandi with Gandhi breaking the Salt Act on 6 April . Gandhi chose 6 April to launch the mass breaking of the salt laws for a symbolic reason — it was the first day of " National Week " , begun in 1919 when Gandhi conceived of the national <unk> ( strike ) against the Rowlatt Act . 
 Gandhi prepared the worldwide media for the march by issuing regular statements from Sabarmati , at his regular prayer meetings and through direct contact with the press . Expectations were heightened by his repeated statements anticipating arrest , and his increasingly dramatic language as the hour approached : " We are entering upon a life and death struggle , a holy war ; we are performing an all @-@ embracing sacrifice in which we wish to offer ourselves as oblation . " Correspondents from dozens of Indian , European , and American newspapers , along with film companies , responded to the drama and began covering the event . 
 For the march itself , Gandhi wanted the strictest discipline and adherence to satyagraha and ahimsa . For that reason , he recruited the marchers not from Congress Party members , but from the residents of his own ashram , who were trained in Gandhi 's strict standards of discipline . The 24 @-@ day march would pass through 4 districts and 48 villages . The route of the march , along with each evening 's stopping place , was planned based on recruitment potential , past contacts , and timing . Gandhi sent scouts to each village ahead of the march so he could plan his talks at each resting place , based on the needs of the local residents . Events at each village were scheduled and publicised in Indian and foreign press . 
 On 2 March 1930 Gandhi wrote to the Viceroy , Lord Irwin , offering to stop the march if Irwin met eleven demands , including reduction of land revenue assessments , cutting military spending , imposing a tariff on foreign cloth , and abolishing the salt tax . His strongest appeal to Irwin regarded the salt tax : 
 If my letter makes no appeal to your heart , on the eleventh day of this month I shall proceed with such co @-@ workers of the Ashram as I can take , to disregard the provisions of the Salt Laws . I regard this tax to be the most iniquitous of all from the poor man 's standpoint . As the sovereignty and self @-@ rule movement is essentially for the poorest in the land , the beginning will be made with this evil . 
 As mentioned earlier , the Viceroy held any prospect of a ' salt protest ' in disdain . After he ignored the letter and refused to meet with Gandhi , the march was set in motion . Gandhi remarked , " On bended knees I asked for bread and I have received stone instead . " The eve of the march brought thousands of Indians to Sabarmati to hear Gandhi speak at the regular evening prayer . An American academic writing for The Nation reported that " 60 @,@ 000 persons gathered on the bank of the river to hear Gandhi 's call to arms . This call to arms was perhaps the most remarkable call to war that has ever been made . " 
 = = March to Dandi = = 
 On 12 March 1930 , Gandhi and 80 satyagrahis many of them were scheduled castes , set out on foot for the coastal village of Dandi , Gujarat , over 390 kilometres ( 240 mi ) from their starting point at Sabarmati Ashram . The Salt March was also called the White Flowing River because all the people were joining the procession wearing white khadi . 
 According to The Statesman , the official government newspaper which usually played down the size of crowds at Gandhi 's functions , 100 @,@ 000 people crowded the road that separated Sabarmati from <unk> . The first day 's march of 21 kilometres ( 13 mi ) ended in the village of <unk> , where Gandhi spoke to a crowd of about 4 @,@ 000 . At <unk> , and the other villages that the march passed through , volunteers collected donations , registered new satyagrahis , and received resignations from village officials who chose to end co @-@ operation with British rule . 
 As they entered each village , crowds greeted the marchers , beating drums and cymbals . Gandhi gave speeches attacking the salt tax as inhuman , and the salt satyagraha as a " poor man 's struggle " . Each night they slept in the open . The only thing that was asked of the villagers was food and water to wash with . Gandhi felt that this would bring the poor into the struggle for sovereignty and self @-@ rule , necessary for eventual victory . 
 Thousands of satyagrahis and leaders like Sarojini Naidu joined him . Every day , more and more people joined the march , until the procession of marchers became at least two miles long . To keep up their spirits , the marchers used to sing the Hindu bhajan <unk> Raghava Raja Ram while walking . At Surat , they were greeted by 30 @,@ 000 people . When they reached the railhead at Dandi , more than 50 @,@ 000 were gathered . Gandhi gave interviews and wrote articles along the way . Foreign journalists and three Bombay cinema companies shooting newsreel footage turned Gandhi into a household name in Europe and America ( at the end of 1930 , Time magazine made him " Man of the Year " ) . The New York Times wrote almost daily about the Salt March , including two front page articles on 6 and 7 April . Near the end of the march , Gandhi declared , " I want world sympathy in this battle of right against might . " 
 Upon arriving at the seashore on 5 April , Gandhi was interviewed by an Associated Press reporter . He stated : 
 I cannot withhold my compliments from the government for the policy of complete non interference adopted by them throughout the march .... I wish I could believe this non @-@ interference was due to any real change of heart or policy . The wanton disregard shown by them to popular feeling in the Legislative Assembly and their high @-@ handed action leave no room for doubt that the policy of heartless exploitation of India is to be persisted in at any cost , and so the only interpretation I can put upon this non @-@ interference is that the British Government , powerful though it is , is sensitive to world opinion which will not tolerate repression of extreme political agitation which civil disobedience undoubtedly is , so long as disobedience remains civil and therefore necessarily non @-@ violent .... It remains to be seen whether the Government will tolerate as they have tolerated the march , the actual breach of the salt laws by countless people from tomorrow . 
 The following morning , after a prayer , Gandhi raised a lump of salty mud and declared , " With this , I am shaking the foundations of the British Empire . " He then boiled it in seawater , producing illegal salt . He implored his thousands of followers to likewise begin making salt along the seashore , " wherever it is convenient " and to instruct villagers in making illegal , but necessary , salt . 
 = = The first 80 Marchers = = 
 79 Marchers accompanied Gandhi on his march . Most of them were between the ages of 20 and 30 . These men hailed from almost all parts of the country . The march gathered more people as it gained momentum , but the following list of names were the first 79 marchers who were with Gandhi from the beginning of the Dandi March until the end . Most of them simply dispersed after the march was over . 
 A memorial has been created inside the campus of IIT Bombay honouring these <unk> . 
 = = Mass civil disobedience = = 
 Mass civil disobedience spread throughout India as millions broke the salt laws by making salt or buying illegal salt . Salt was sold illegally all over the coast of India . A pinch of salt made by Gandhi himself sold for 1 @,@ 600 rupees ( equivalent to $ 750 at the time ) . In reaction , the British government arrested over sixty thousand people by the end of the month . 
 What had begun as a Salt Satyagraha quickly grew into a mass Satyagraha . British cloth and goods were boycotted . Unpopular forest laws were defied in the Maharashtra , Karnataka and Central Provinces . Gujarati peasants refused to pay tax , under threat of losing their crops and land . In Midnapore , Bengalis took part by refusing to pay the <unk> tax . The British responded with more laws , including censorship of correspondence and declaring the Congress and its associate organisations illegal . None of those measures slowed the civil disobedience movement . 
 In Peshawar , satyagraha was led by a Muslim Pashto disciple of Gandhi , Ghaffar Khan , who had trained 50 @,@ 000 nonviolent activists called Khudai Khidmatgar . On 23 April 1930 , Ghaffar Khan was arrested . A crowd of Khudai Khidmatgar gathered in Peshawar 's <unk> <unk> ( Storytellers ) Bazaar . The British ordered troops of 2 / 18 battalion of Royal Garhwal Rifles to open fire with machine guns on the unarmed crowd , killing an estimated 200 – 250 . The Pashtun satyagrahis acted in accord with their training in nonviolence , willingly facing bullets as the troops fired on them . One British Indian Army Soldier Chandra Singh <unk> and troops of the renowned Royal Garhwal Rifles , refused to fire at the crowds . The entire platoon was arrested and many received heavy penalties , including life imprisonment . 
 While Gandhi marched along India 's west coast , his close associate C. Rajagopalachari , who would later become sovereign India 's first Governor @-@ General , organized the Vedaranyam salt march in parallel on the east coast . His group started from Tiruchirappalli , in Madras Presidency ( now part of Tamil Nadu ) , to the coastal village of Vedaranyam . After making illegal salt there , he too was arrested by the British . 
 The civil disobedience in 1930 marked the first time women became mass participants in the struggle for freedom . Thousands of women , from large cities to small villages , became active participants in satyagraha . Gandhi had asked that only men take part in the salt march , but eventually women began manufacturing and selling salt throughout India . Usha Mehta , an early Gandhian activist , remarked that " Even our old aunts and great @-@ aunts and grandmothers used to bring pitchers of salt water to their houses and manufacture illegal salt . And then they would shout at the top of their voices : ' We have broken the salt law ! ' " The growing number of women in the fight for sovereignty and self @-@ rule was a " new and serious feature " according to Lord Irwin . A government report on the involvement of women stated " thousands of them emerged .... from the seclusion of their homes ... in order to join Congress demonstrations and assist in picketing : and their presence on these occasions made the work the police was required to perform particularly unpleasant . " 
 There were outbreaks of violence in Calcutta ( now Kolkata ) , Karachi , and Gujarat . Unlike his suspension of satyagraha after violence broke out during the Non @-@ co @-@ operation movement , this time Gandhi was " unmoved " . Appealing for violence to end , at the same time Gandhi honoured those killed in Chittagong and congratulated their parents " for the finished sacrifices of their sons .... A warrior 's death is never a matter for sorrow . " 
 British documents show that the British government was shaken by satyagraha . Nonviolent protest left the British confused about whether or not to jail Gandhi . John Court Curry , a British police officer stationed in India , wrote in his memoirs that he felt nausea every time he dealt with Congress demonstrations in 1930 . Curry and others in British government , including Wedgwood Benn , Secretary of State for India , preferred fighting violent rather than nonviolent opponents . 
 = = Dharasana Satyagraha and Aftermath = = 
 Gandhi himself avoided further active involvement after the march , though he stayed in close contact with the developments throughout India . He created a temporary ashram near Dandi . From there , he urged women followers in Bombay ( now Mumbai ) to picket liquor shops and foreign cloth . He said that " a bonfire should be made of foreign cloth . Schools and colleges should become empty . " 
 For his next major action , Gandhi decided on a raid of the Dharasana Salt Works in Gujarat , 25 miles south of Dandi . He wrote to Lord Irwin , again telling him of his plans . Around midnight of 4 May , as Gandhi was sleeping on a cot in a mango grove , the District Magistrate of Surat drove up with two Indian officers and thirty heavily armed constables . He was arrested under an 1827 regulation calling for the jailing of people engaged in unlawful activities , and held without trial near Poona ( now Pune ) . 
 The Dharasana Satyagraha went ahead as planned , with Abbas <unk> , a seventy @-@ six @-@ year @-@ old retired judge , leading the march with Gandhi 's wife Kasturba at his side . Both were arrested before reaching Dharasana and sentenced to three months in prison . After their arrests , the march continued under the leadership of Sarojini Naidu , a woman poet and freedom fighter , who warned the satyagrahis , " You must not use any violence under any circumstances . You will be beaten , but you must not resist : you must not even raise a hand to ward off blows . " Soldiers began clubbing the satyagrahis with steel tipped <unk> in an incident that attracted international attention . United Press correspondent Webb Miller reported that : 
 Not one of the marchers even raised an arm to fend off the blows . They went down like ten @-@ pins . From where I stood I heard the sickening whacks of the clubs on unprotected skulls . The waiting crowd of watchers groaned and sucked in their breaths in sympathetic pain at every blow . Those struck down fell sprawling , unconscious or writhing in pain with fractured skulls or broken shoulders . In two or three minutes the ground was quilted with bodies . Great patches of blood widened on their white clothes . The survivors without breaking ranks silently and doggedly marched on until struck down .... Finally the police became enraged by the non @-@ resistance .... They commenced savagely kicking the seated men in the abdomen and testicles . The injured men writhed and squealed in agony , which seemed to inflame the fury of the police .... The police then began dragging the sitting men by the arms or feet , sometimes for a hundred yards , and throwing them into ditches . 
 <unk> Patel , former Speaker of the Assembly , watched the beatings and remarked , " All hope of reconciling India with the British Empire is lost forever . " Miller 's first attempts at telegraphing the story to his publisher in England were censored by the British telegraph operators in India . Only after threatening to expose British censorship was his story allowed to pass . The story appeared in 1 @,@ 350 newspapers throughout the world and was read into the official record of the United States Senate by Senator John J. Blaine . 
 Salt Satyagraha succeeded in drawing the attention of the world . Millions saw the newsreels showing the march . Time magazine declared Gandhi its 1930 Man of the Year , comparing Gandhi 's march to the sea " to defy Britain 's salt tax as some New Englanders once defied a British tea tax . " Civil disobedience continued until early 1931 , when Gandhi was finally released from prison to hold talks with Irwin . It was the first time the two held talks on equal terms , and resulted in the Gandhi – Irwin Pact . The talks would lead to the Second Round Table Conference at the end of 1931 . 
 = = Long @-@ term effect = = 
 Salt Satyagraha produced scant progress toward dominion status or self @-@ rule for India , and did not win any major concessions from the British . It also failed to attract Muslim support . Congress leaders decided to end satyagraha as official policy in 1934 . Nehru and other Congress members drifted further apart from Gandhi , who withdrew from Congress to concentrate on his Constructive Programme , which included his efforts to end untouchability in the Harijan movement . Even though British authorities were again in control by the mid @-@ 1930s , Indian , British , and world opinion increasingly began to recognise the legitimacy of claims by Gandhi and the Congress Party for sovereignty and self @-@ rule . The Satyagraha campaign of the 1930s also forced the British to recognise that their control of India depended entirely on the consent of the Indians – Salt Satyagraha was a significant step in the British losing that consent . 
 Nehru considered the Salt Satyagraha the high @-@ water mark of his association with Gandhi , and felt that its lasting importance was in changing the attitudes of Indians : 
 " Of course these movements exercised tremendous pressure on the British Government and shook the government machinery . But the real importance , to my mind , lay in the effect they had on our own people , and especially the village masses .... Non @-@ cooperation dragged them out of the mire and gave them self @-@ respect and self @-@ reliance .... They acted courageously and did not submit so easily to unjust oppression ; their outlook widened and they began to think a little in terms of India as a whole .... It was a remarkable transformation and the Congress , under Gandhi 's leadership , must have the credit for it . " 
 More than thirty years later , Satyagraha and the March to Dandi exercised a strong influence on American civil rights activist Martin Luther King , Jr . , and his fight for civil rights for blacks in the 1960s : 
 " Like most people , I had heard of Gandhi , but I had never studied him seriously . As I read I became deeply fascinated by his campaigns of nonviolent resistance . I was particularly moved by his Salt March to the Sea and his numerous fasts . The whole concept of Satyagraha ( Satya is truth which equals love , and agraha is force ; Satyagraha , therefore , means truth force or love force ) was profoundly significant to me . As I delved deeper into the philosophy of Gandhi , my skepticism concerning the power of love gradually diminished , and I came to see for the first time its potency in the area of social reform . " 
 = = Partial re @-@ enactment in 2005 = = 
 To commemorate the Great Salt March , the Mahatma Gandhi Foundation proposed a partial re @-@ enactment of the first few kilometres on the 75th anniversary . The event was known as the " International Walk for Justice and Freedom " . Mahatma Gandhi 's great @-@ grandson Tushar Gandhi and several hundred fellow marchers followed the same route to Dandi . The start of the march on 12 March 2005 in Ahmedabad was attended by Sonia Gandhi , Chairperson of the United Progressive Alliance , as well as several Indian Cabinet Ministers , many of whom walked for the first few kilometres . The participants halted at Dandi on the night of 5 April , with the commemoration ending on 7 April . 
 A series of commemorative stamps were issued on the 75th anniversary of the Dandi March — denomination INR 5 , Date of Issue : 5 April 2005 . 
 = German submarine U @-@ 27 ( 1936 ) = 
 German submarine U @-@ 27 was a Type VIIA U @-@ boat of Nazi Germany 's Kriegsmarine built for service in World War II . Her keel was laid down in November 1935 in Bremen . She was commissioned in August 1936 with Korvettenkapitän Hans Ibbeken in command . Ibbeken was relieved on 4 October 1937 , by Johannes Franz , who commanded the boat until 6 June 1939 when Hans @-@ Georg von Friedeburg assumed command for barely one month . He was relieved on 8 July again by Johannes Franz , who commanded the boat until her loss on 20 September 1939 . 
 U @-@ 27 had a very short career , with only one war patrol and only two enemy ships sunk . Following the sinking of two British trawlers , Davara on 13 September and Rudyard Kipling on 16 September , U @-@ 27 was hunted down and sunk west of Lewis , Scotland , by depth charges from the British destroyers HMS Fortune , Faulknor and Forester . All 38 crewmen survived and were made prisoner for the remainder of the war . 
 = = Construction and design = = 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 U @-@ 27 was ordered by the Kriegsmarine on 1 April 1935 as part of Plan Z and in violation of the Treaty of Versailles . Her keel was laid down in the AG Weser shipyard in Bremen as yard number 908 on 11 November 1935 . After about nine months of construction , she was launched on 24 June 1936 and commissioned into the Kriegsmarine as the second Type VIIA submarine , ( after U @-@ 33 , which was commissioned a few months earlier ) , on 12 August under the command of Korvettenkapitän Hans Ibbeken . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 Like all Type VIIA submarines , U @-@ 27 displaced 626 tonnes ( 616 long tons ) on the surface and 745 t ( 733 long tons ) submerged . She was 64 @.@ 51 m ( 211 ft 8 in ) in overall length and had a 45 @.@ 50 m ( 149 ft 3 in ) pressure hull . U @-@ 27 's propulsion consisted of two MAN 6 @-@ cylinder 4 @-@ stroke M 6 V 40 / 46 diesel engines that totaled 2 @,@ 100 – 2 @,@ 310 PS ( 1 @,@ 540 – 1 @,@ 700 kW ; 2 @,@ 070 – 2 @,@ 280 bhp ) at maximum between 470 and 485 rpm giving a maximum speed of 17 knots ( 31 km / h ; 20 mph ) on the surface and a range of 6 @,@ 200 nmi ( 11 @,@ 500 km ; 7 @,@ 100 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . The submarine was also equipped with two Brown , Boveri & Cie GG UB 720 / 8 electric motors that totaled 750 PS ( 550 kW ; 740 shp ) . Their maximum rpm was 322 and they could propel the submarine 95 nmi ( 176 km ; 109 mi ) at 4 knots ( 7 @.@ 4 km / h ; 4 @.@ 6 mph ) when submerged , with an underwater maximum speed of 8 knots ( 15 km / h ; 9 @.@ 2 mph ) . The U @-@ boat 's test depth was 220 m ( 720 ft ) , but she could go as deep as 230 – 250 m ( 750 – 820 ft ) without having her hull crushed . U @-@ 27 's armament consisted of five 53 @.@ 3 cm ( 21 in ) torpedo tubes ( four located in the bow and one in the stern ) . She could have up to 11 torpedoes on board or 22 TMA mines or 33 TMB mines . U @-@ 27 was also equipped with a 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) L / 45 deck gun with 220 rounds . Her anti @-@ aircraft defenses consisted of one 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) anti @-@ aircraft gun . U @-@ 27 had a crew of four officers and 40 to 56 enlisted men . 
 = = Service history = = 
 U @-@ 27 had a very short career , conducting only one war patrol and sinking only two enemy vessels before she herself was sunk . She left Wilhelmshaven on her first war patrol on 23 August 1939 . For a period of 24 days , she traveled down the coast of Germany and neutral Belgium and the Netherlands , through the English Channel and out into the Atlantic Ocean off the coast of Ireland . Here , the boat sank two British trawlers , totaling 624 tons . The first attack took place at 2 : 55 on 13 September , 21 nmi ( 39 km ; 24 mi ) northwest of Tory Island , when the trawler Davara was shelled by U @-@ 27 's deck gun . Following the sinking of Davara , her captain and 11 other crew members were picked up by the steam merchant ship <unk> . The second vessel to be sunk was the trawler Rudyard Kipling . The attack took place at 3 : 53 on 16 September , 100 nmi ( 190 km ; 120 mi ) west of the west coast of neutral Ireland , with the ship being sunk by scuttling charges from U @-@ 27 . Following the sinking of Rudyard Kipling , the submarine picked up the crew of the trawler who were then given food and warm clothes . Eight hours later , Rudyard Kipling 's crew were allowed to re @-@ enter their lifeboats to row the remaining 5 nmi ( 9 @.@ 3 km ; 5 @.@ 8 mi ) to Ireland . 
 = = = Fate = = = 
 The destroyers HMS Fortune and HMS Faulknor ( who sank U @-@ 39 six days earlier ) , had been part of a concerted effort to find and sink the U @-@ Boat that had been attacking trawlers . On 20 September 1939 , three torpedoes were fired at the warships , but failed to do any damage when they exploded prematurely . The British vessels replied with a series of depth charge attacks , one of which damaged the German submarine sufficiently to force it to the surface . Fortune 's ramming attack was curtailed when it became apparent that the U @-@ Boat was surrendering . All 38 crewmen survived and were taken prisoner . U @-@ 27 became the second German submarine to be sunk in World War II after U @-@ 39 was sunk on 14 September 1939 . 
 U @-@ 27 's skipper , Kapitänleutnant Johannes Franz was able , via code , to inform <unk> , the U @-@ boat high command , of the situation regarding the malfunctioning torpedoes from his prison camp . 
 = = Summary of raiding history = = 
 = 1904 Chappaqua tornado = 
 The 1904 Chappaqua tornado was an intense tornado that struck northern Westchester County , New York during the afternoon of July 16 , 1904 . As of 2009 , this tornado ranks as the strongest tornado to touch down in the county , ranking as F3 on the modern @-@ day Fujita Scale . The tornado formed around 3 : 30 pm EST within a severe thunderstorm near Chappaqua , New York . The tornado quickly began to produce damage in the hamlet , destroying several structures and killing two people . Homes were knocked off their foundations and rolled over along the tornado 's path . By 4 : 00 pm EST , the tornado dissipated and left $ 100 @,@ 000 ( 1904 USD ; $ 2 @.@ 4 million 2009 USD ) worth of damage in its wake . Hail associated with the same storm cell also inflicted damage upon a few structures . The tornado is known as the worst disaster in the history of Chappaqua . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 During the afternoon of July 16 , 1904 , a severe thunderstorm produced a strong tornado that touched down around 3 : 30 pm EST in Chappaqua , New York . Residents reported the first indication of the thunderstorm was a large black cloud approaching the region . The sky was reportedly completely dark as torrential rain and high winds commenced . Intense lightning and loud thunder prompted people to seek shelter in their cellars . The tornado tracked directly through Chappaqua before moving towards the Hudson River . Upon reaching the river , the tornado became a waterspout that was powerful enough to uncover the river bed below it . The waterspout eventually dissipated by 4 : 00 pm EST . The tornado was later rated as F3 on the modern @-@ day Fujita scale . 
 = = Impact = = 
 At the time of the tornado , roughly 1 @,@ 000 people lived in the hamlet of Chappaqua . Five homes and three barns were destroyed by the tornado and two people , 80 @-@ year @-@ old Mrs. Mary Hibbs and an unknown woman , were killed ; six additional people were injured . Orchards in the path of the tornado were completely destroyed and greenhouses were leveled . The severity of lightning during the storm caused many women to faint according to The New York Times . 
 The five homes destroyed were wood @-@ frame , two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ story buildings , one of which was lifted off its foundation and flipped over before falling to the ground , being demolished on impact . One of the home 's occupants was killed after the chimney fell on her . Another person died from shock after seeing her home destroyed . The other four homes were all located within 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) of each other . One of the destroyed homes belonged to Walter <unk> ; he saw the tornado approaching his home and saved his life by jumping out a window before the home was rolled over by the tornado . Another home belonged to Mrs. Hester Cox ; she sustained minor bruises after her home was also rolled over . Nearby , the home of Mr. Marrow was also destroyed ; at the time of the tornado , he , his daughter and his niece were inside . The home was turned over on its side ; debris injured the two girls , knocking the niece unconscious . 
 A barn belonging to Charles Dodge was destroyed , while the Kensico Cemetery sustained significant hail damage . All the glass on one of the conservatories was shattered . Within hours after the tornado , nearby firefighters rushed to the hamlet to assist victims of the storm . During the nighttime hours , they patrolled the streets and watched over destroyed homes to prevent looters from stealing any valuable items left in the debris . Property damage from the tornado was estimated at $ 100 @,@ 000 ( 1904 USD ) and five families were left homeless . Following an assessment of the damage , debris from destroyed homes was found upwards of 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) from Chappaqua , including a marriage certificate . A calf was picked up and tossed roughly 0 @.@ 25 miles ( 0 @.@ 40 km ) before landing in an open field unharmed . Two plants were also thrown roughly 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) by the tornado . 
 = A5 ( Croatia ) = 
 The A5 motorway ( Croatian : Autocesta A5 ) is a motorway in Croatia spanning 55 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 34 @.@ 5 mi ) . It connects Osijek , the largest city in Slavonia region , to the Croatian motorway network at the Sredanci interchange of the A3 motorway . The A5 represents a significant north – south transportation corridor in Croatia and is a part of the European route E73 . The A5 motorway route also follows Pan @-@ European corridor Vc . In addition to Osijek , the A5 motorway also passes near Đakovo . 
 The first section of the A5 , joining the Sredanci interchange to Đakovo , was opened in 2007 ; the route to Osijek opened in 2009 . As of September 2011 , the section south of the A3 , extending to the Sava River and border of Bosnia and Herzegovina , is under construction . Once the entire Pan @-@ European corridor Vc is completed , motorists will recognize the A5 's importance as a transit route . When completed , the corridor shall entail the A5 itself extended to the Hungarian border and connected to the Hungarian M6 motorway as well as Bosnia and Herzegovina 's A1 motorway and the A10 motorway , completing the corridor route at the Adriatic Sea coast . The current route requires no major structures , but as of September 2011 , two major bridges are under construction — across Sava and Drava rivers as the motorway extends south and north respectively . 
 The motorway consists of two traffic lanes and an emergency lane in each driving direction separated by a central reservation . All intersections of the A5 motorway are grade separated . There are four exits and four rest areas operating along the route . The motorway is tolled using a ticket system , integrated with the A3 , and each exit includes a toll plaza . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The A5 is an important north – south motorway covering 55 kilometres ( 34 mi ) in the eastern Croatian region of Slavonia , connecting the region 's largest city , Osijek , to the remainder of the Croatian motorway system . The A5 's southern terminus joins the A3 motorway at the Sredanci interchange ; its northern terminus is near Osijek , connecting to the city 's southern bypass . As a part of the road network of Croatia , the A5 is a part of European route E73 . The motorway is of great importance to Croatia 's economic development , especially tourism , as it represents a major southward transport route from southern Hungary . The Pan @-@ European corridor Vc will include the A5 , and its completion will highlight the importance of the A5 motorway . 
 The cities and towns with an immediate connection to the A5 include Đakovo via the D7 and <unk> via the <unk> county road . The A5 motorway consists of two traffic lanes and an emergency lane in each driving direction , with carriageways separated by the median . All existing interchanges are trumpet interchanges , except for Sredanci , which is a cloverleaf . The A5 features a number of rest areas which provide various services including restrooms , filling stations and restaurants . The motorway has four interchanges , providing access to several towns and cities and the Croatian state road network . The motorway is maintained and operated by the state @-@ owned management company Hrvatske autoceste . 
 An automatic traffic monitoring and guidance system is in place along the motorway . It consists of measuring , control and signaling devices , located in zones where driving conditions may vary — at interchanges , near viaducts and bridges , and areas where fog is common . The system uses variable traffic signs to communicate driving conditions , possible restrictions and other information to motorists . 
 The A5 motorway runs through plains crossed by a number of watercourses and railways running perpendicular to the motorway route , requiring a variety of bridges and viaducts . Particular attention to the environment is also necessary , due to water supply and natural heritage zones , as well as nearby agricultural production . 
 = = Toll = = 
 The A5 is a tolled motorway based on the vehicle classification in Croatia using a closed toll system . Toll charged along the A5 route between Osijek and the Sredanci interchange depends on the route traveled and ranges from 4 @.@ 00 kuna ( 0 @.@ 54 euro ) to 30 @.@ 00 kuna ( 4 @.@ 05 euro ) for passenger cars and 13 @.@ 00 kuna ( 1 @.@ 76 euro ) to 98 @.@ 00 kuna ( 13 @.@ 24 euro ) for semi @-@ trailer trucks . Motorcycles are charged approximately half of the passenger car rate . The toll is payable in either Croatian kuna or euros using major credit cards , debit cards and a number of prepaid toll collection systems . The latter include smart cards issued by the motorway operator and ENC , an electronic toll collection system which is used by motorways across Croatia , with discounted rates for dedicated lanes at toll plazas . Toll collection systems along the A5 and A3 are unified ; vehicles switching from one motorway to the other at Sredanci , for example , do not pass toll plazas at the interchange . 
 In the first half of 2011 Hrvatske autoceste collected 508 @.@ 1 million kuna ( 68 @.@ 7 million euro ) in toll revenue , an increase of 2 @.@ 25 % compared to the same period in 2010 . However , the company reports revenue for the entire motorway network and does not provide data for individual motorways . 
 = = History = = 
 The first section of the A5 motorway , covering 23 @-@ kilometre ( 14 mi ) between the Sredanci interchange and Đakovo was opened on 9 November 2007 . This was Croatia 's first commitment to improve transport facilities along the Pan @-@ European transport corridor Vc , while providing a feeder motorway to the A3 toward Osijek , the largest city in the east of the country . Hrvatske autoceste invested 1 @.@ 4 billion kuna ( 189 million euro ) to construct the first section , completed in eighteen months by a consortium of Croatian construction companies . When the first section opened , construction on a second stretch of the A5 , reaching 32 @.@ 5 @-@ kilometre ( 20 @.@ 2 mi ) between Đakovo and Osijek , was announced on 15 November , with completion scheduled for December 2008 . 
 The route extension to Osijek was delayed by four months , but opened on 17 April 2009 . The construction works were completed in 17 months at a price of 2 @.@ 13 billion kuna ( 287 million euro ) . Completion of this section marked the start of toll collection on the A5 motorway . The motorway is nicknamed " <unk> " , presumably because it spans Slavonia from North to South , although the Sredanci interchange with the A3 motorway is also called <unk> by some media . 
 In general , motorways in Croatia have led to a positive economic impact on the cities and towns they connected , as well as aiding tourism in Croatia . 
 = = Further construction = = 
 As of September 2011 , 3 @.@ 5 @-@ kilometre ( 2 @.@ 2 mi ) Sredanci – <unk> border crossing section was under construction , representing the southernmost section of the A5 motorway . The new section includes an additional exit to <unk> , a mainline toll plaza , a border crossing and a bridge across the Sava River . This bridge leads to Bosnia and Herzegovina , where the motorway is scheduled to continue as A1 motorway towards Sarajevo , Mostar and Ploče , reconnecting to the Croatian motorway network — A10 motorway . The section is scheduled for completion in 2014 . 
 An extension is also planned for the A5 motorway north of Osijek , across the Drava River , to the Hungarian border , where it will connect to the Hungarian M6 motorway at a <unk> Vrh / <unk> border crossing . This route will also contain two new exits near <unk> and Beli Manastir and a new bridge over the Drava River . In July 2011 , a groundbreaking ceremony was held at the bridge construction site , as a preparation for extension of the A5 . In May 2012 , Hrvatske autoceste — the investor in the construction works contract — proposed cancellation of the construction works as a cost @-@ cutting measure , even though funding of the works was secured through European Investment Bank and European Bank for Reconstruction and Development loans . 
 = = Traffic volume = = 
 Traffic is regularly counted and reported by Hrvatske autoceste , the operator of the motorway , and is published by Hrvatske ceste . Variations between AADT and average summer daily traffic ( ASDT ) traffic volumes are attributed to the fact that the motorway carries substantial tourist traffic to the Adriatic Sea resorts during the summer . On average , the A5 motorway carries 14 % more ASDT than AADT . The largest increase , 15 % , of ASDT relative to AADT is observed on the Đakovo – Sredanci section . 
 The variations between the AADT and the ASDT traffic volumes are attributed to the fact that the motorway carries certain tourist traffic from Hungary to the Croatian motorway network and ultimately to the Adriatic Sea . On average the motorway carries 15 % increased volume of traffic during summer months . As the Hungarian M6 motorway is gradually extended towards the Croatian border and the A5 motorway 's northern terminus , the number of tourists traveling along this route in summer months is increasing . 
 = = Rest areas = = 
 There are four rest areas along the A5 motorway . Legislation identifies four types of rest areas : A @-@ type rest areas comprise a full range of amenities , including a filling station , a restaurant and a hotel or motel ; B @-@ type rest areas have no lodging ; C @-@ type rest areas are very common and include a filling station and a café , but no restaurants or accommodations ; D @-@ type rest areas only offer parking spaces , possibly picnicking tables and benches and restrooms . Most rest areas along the A2 motorway generally follow this ranking system , although some offer extra services . Many filling stations along the Croatian motorway network have small convenience stores , and some offer LPG fuel . 
 The primary motorway operator , Hrvatske autoceste ( HAC ) , leases the A , B and C type rest areas to various operators through public tenders . There is a single such rest area operator on the A5 motorway : Petrol . The rest area operators are not permitted to sub @-@ lease fuel operations . The A5 motorway rest areas are accessible from both directions of the motorway and operate 24 hours a day , seven days a week . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 = Bobby Timmons = 
 Robert Henry " Bobby " Timmons ( December 19 , 1935 – March 1 , 1974 ) was an American jazz pianist and composer . He was a sideman in Art Blakey 's Jazz Messengers for two periods ( July 1958 to September 1959 ; February 1960 to June 1961 ) , between which he was part of Cannonball Adderley 's band . Several of Timmons ' compositions written when part of these bands – including " Moanin ' " , " Dat Dere " , and " This Here " – enjoyed commercial success and brought him more attention . In the early and mid @-@ 1960s he led a series of piano trios that toured and recorded extensively . 
 Timmons was strongly associated with the soul jazz style that he helped initiate ; this link to apparently simple writing and playing , coupled with drug and alcohol addiction , led to a decline in his career . Timmons died , aged 38 , from cirrhosis . His contribution to jazz remains undervalued . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Timmons was born in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , the son of a minister . He had a sister , Eleanor . Both of his parents , and several aunts and uncles , played the piano . From an early age Timmons studied music with an uncle , Robert <unk> , who also taught McCoy Tyner . Timmons first played at the church where his grandfather was minister ; this influenced his later jazz playing . He grew up in the same area as other future musicians , including the Heath brothers , Jimmy , Percy , and Tootie . Timmons ' first professional performances were in his local area , often as a trio that included Tootie Heath on drums . After graduating from high school Timmons was awarded a scholarship to study at the Philadelphia Musical Academy . 
 = = 1954 to spring 1961 = = 
 Timmons moved to New York in 1954 . He played with Kenny Dorham in 1956 , making his recording debut with the trumpeter in a live set in May of that year . He went on to play and record with Chet Baker in 1956 – 57 ( bassist Scott <unk> was part of this band for a time ) , Sonny Stitt in 1957 , and Maynard Ferguson in 1957 – 58 . He also recorded as a sideman with <unk> Curtis Fuller , Hank Mobley , and Lee Morgan , all for Blue Note Records in 1957 . 
 Timmons became best known as a member of Art Blakey 's band the Jazz Messengers , which he was first part of from July 1958 to September 1959 , including for a tour of Europe . He was recruited for the Messengers by saxophonist Benny Golson , who said that " He was inventive , [ ... ] He could play bebop and he could play funky – he could play a lot of things , and I thought it was the element that Art needed . He hadn 't had anybody quite like Bobby , who could go here or go there , rather than walking in a single corridor . " By late 1958 Timmons was sharing bandmate Morgan 's East Sixth Street apartment and the pair had bought a piano , allowing Timmons to practice and Morgan to work on composing . From around the time he joined Blakey , Timmons , along with some of his fellow band members , was a heroin user . After leaving Blakey , Timmons joined Cannonball Adderley 's band , in October 1959 . 
 Timmons was also known as a composer during this period : The Encyclopedia of Jazz states that his compositions " Moanin ' " ( from the 1958 album of the same title ) , " This Here " , and " Dat Dere " " helped generate the gospel @-@ tinged ' soul jazz ' style of [ the ] late ' 50s and early ' 60s . " The first was written when Timmons was first with Blakey ; the others were composed when he was with Adderley . " This Here " ( sometimes " Dis Here " ) was a surprise commercial success for Adderley : recorded in concert in 1959 , it was released as part of the The Cannonball Adderley Quintet in San Francisco album while the band was still on tour , and they discovered its popularity only when they arrived back in New York and found crowds outside the Village Gate , where they were due to play . 
 Timmons was reported to be dissatisfied with the money he had received from " This Here " , and was enticed in February 1960 into leaving Adderley and returning to Blakey 's band by the offer of more pay . Timmons then appeared on further well @-@ known albums with the drummer , including A Night in Tunisia , The Freedom Rider and The Witch Doctor . His own recording debut as sole leader was This Here Is Bobby Timmons in 1960 , which contained his first versions of his best @-@ known compositions . In the same year , he played on recordings led by Nat Adderley , Arnett Cobb , and Johnny Griffin , among others ; on the first of these , Work Song , Timmons did not appear on all of the tracks , because he had been drinking heavily . 
 = = Summer 1961 to 1974 = = 
 Timmons left Blakey for the second time in June 1961 , encouraged by the success of his compositions , including jukebox plays of " Dat Dere " , which Oscar Brown had recorded after adding lyrics . Timmons then formed his own bands , initially with Ron Carter on bass and Tootie Heath on drums . They toured around the US , including the West Coast , but played most in and around New York . In the initial stages of this trio , Timmons liked the group sounds of the trios led by Red Garland and Ahmad Jamal . According to Tootie Heath , Timmons was at the peak of his fame at that point , but was addicted to heroin , and used a lot of the money that the band was paid maintaining his habit . 
 In 1963 Timmons ' playing , with Lewis Powers on bass and Ron McCurdy on drums , was described by a Washington Post reviewer as " flexible and adventuresome [ ... ] <unk> over everything is an undeniable sheen of church music and spirituals . " In 1965 the same reviewer commented that Timmons was employing musicians who were of much lower ability : " Timmons lacks a certain passion but I wonder if this is not the fault of his sidemen . " Timmons started playing vibes in the mid @-@ 1960s . He occasionally played organ , but recorded only one track on that instrument – a 1964 version of " Moanin ' " on From the Bottom . Recordings as a leader continued , usually as part of a trio or quartet , but , after joining Milestone Records around 1967 , Timmons ' album Got to Get It ! featured him as part of a nonet , playing arrangements by Tom McIntosh . 
 Timmons ' career declined quickly in the 1960s , in part because of drug abuse and alcoholism and partly as a result of frustration at being typecast as a composer and player of seemingly simple pieces of music . In 1968 he made his second , final , recording for Milestone , Do You Know the Way ? In the following year he played in a quartet led by Sonny Red , with Dexter Gordon on one of the saxophonist 's temporary returns to the US from Europe , and in a trio backing vocalist Etta Jones . Timmons continued to play in the early 1970s , mostly in small groups or in combination with other pianists , and mainly in the New York area . 
 According to saxophonist Jimmy Heath , Timmons joined Clark Terry 's big band for a tour of Europe in 1974 . He was unwell and drank on the plane to Sweden , and fell while drinking at the bar before the band 's first concert , in Malmö . Susceptible to blood clotting , he was flown back to the US . On March 1 , 1974 , he died from cirrhosis , at the age of 38 , at St Vincent 's Hospital in New York . He had been in hospital for a month . He was buried in Philadelphia , and was survived by his wife , Estelle , and son , also Bobby . 
 = = Playing style and influence = = 
 Timmons was known for using block chords , " a style in which the right hand creates the melody and the left hand moves with the rhythm of the right hand , but does not change voicing except to accommodate the chord changes . " His use of them was more aggressive , and less melodic , than that of Garland . The Penguin Guide to Jazz suggested that " Timmons ' characteristic style was a rolling , gospelly funk , perhaps longer on sheer energy than on harmonic sophistication . " In the opinion of Scott Yanow , stylistically , " somehow Bobby Timmons never grew beyond where he was in 1960 . " Gary Giddins , however , highlighted other facets of Timmons ' playing : the " lush [ Bud ] Powell @-@ inspired ballads , his clear , sharp , unsentimental long lines . " Carter also identified Powell as a primary influence on Timmons , and commented that his partner in the trio " was very giving , very loyal , played every night like it was his last chance to get it right . " 
 The funky aspects of Timmons ' playing influenced fellow pianists , including Les McCann , Ramsey Lewis , and Benny Green . Timmons is often mentioned as being under @-@ rated ; jazz writer Marc Myers commented in 2008 that " today , Timmons ' contribution to jazz – as an accompanist , writer , leader and innovator of a new sound – is vastly overlooked and undervalued . " 
 = = Compositions = = 
 Timmons wrote " a steady stream of infectious funky tunes " , stated Giddins . Timmons dismissed the idea that he was deliberately a composer : " I 'm a dilettante as a composer . I have never consciously sat down and tried to write a song . " He stated that his method of composing a new song might involve " whistling , playing around with the notes , or at a club . I 'll tell one musician to play this note , another that note , and we kick it around . " One account of the creation of " Moanin ' " was given by Golson : Timmons had the opening eight bars , which he often played between tunes , but formed the complete song only after Golson encouraged him to add a bridge . 
 = = Personality = = 
 Tootie Heath reported that , when they were on tour and Timmons was addicted to heroin , the pianist would routinely lie and sometimes pull out a knife to threaten people with . Carter , the bassist from that tour , stated that Timmons offered his bandmates a lot of encouragement to experiment and improve from performance to performance , and that he " was a really multi @-@ talented person and he was just a real sweetheart , a sweetheart of a man . " In Golson 's words , Timmons " had no ego about him , [ ... ] He was always upbeat , never downbeat , and he never maligned anybody unless it was in a humorous way . " 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = As leader / co @-@ leader = = = 
 = = = As sideman = = = 
 Sources : 
 = Elizabeth Alkin = 
 Elizabeth Alkin ( c . 1600 – c . 1655 ) was a publisher , nurse and spy for the Parliamentarian forces during the English Civil War . Among the many derogatory names she was called by royalist sympathisers , that of Parliament Joan is one by which she is also commonly known . 
 = = Background and Civil War activities = = 
 Nothing is known of Alkin until 1645 ; because of comments of her age made later in life , her date of birth is taken to be around 1600 . She was the wife of Francis Alkin , a spy for the Parliamentarians who was hanged early in the English Civil War by royalist forces for his activities . She was the mother of three children . 
 In 1645 Alkin was employed by the earl of Essex , Sir William Waller , to be a spy for the Parliamentarians . She received a similar commission from Sir Thomas Fairfax two years later . Parliamentary records show that in 1645 she received payment from the Committee for the Advance of Money for uncovering the activities of George <unk> , a Surrey @-@ based iron merchant , who was supplying metal to the royalist forces . 
 In the seventeenth century , daily news was published in newsbooks which tended to be small eight @-@ page publications , the forerunners of newspapers . They were usually sold on the street by what the historian Bob Clarke describes as " semi @-@ destitute female hawkers , known as Mercury Women " . Those publications supporting the royalist cause were closed down and the publishers prosecuted , and Alkin became involved in uncovering those behind the publication . In 1648 the royalist newsbooks the Mercurius <unk> and the Parliament Kite both referred to her attempts to uncover them , and the following year the Mercurius <unk> called her an " old Bitch " who could " smell out a <unk> @-@ hearted man as soon as the best Blood @-@ hound in the Army " . 
 Although Alkin acted as one of the <unk> sellers , between 1650 and 1651 she published several short @-@ lived newsbooks , including The Impartial Scout , The Moderne Intelligencer , Mercurius Anglicus ( formerly a royalist title which she appropriated ) and Mercurius Scoticus , or , The Royal Messenger . Clarke believes Alkin may have used formerly royalist titles , or royalist @-@ sounding names to win the confidence of royalist sympathisers , and get them to reveal the location of illicit printers . The historian Marcus <unk> disagrees , and argues that Alkin was " <unk> Royalist titles for Parliamentarian consumption " . In total she produced ten notebook issues of differing titles . 
 One of those she uncovered was William Dugard , who ran four presses at the Merchant Taylors ' School in London ; Dugard was imprisoned in February 1650 . The following year she was paid £ 10 for discovering the printers of Edward Hall 's work Manus testium lingua testium , and received further recompense from the Committee for the Advance of Money for other , unknown services . 
 = = Post Civil War = = 
 In 1653 , during the First Anglo @-@ Dutch War , Alkin assisted Daniel Whistler in setting up a network of casualty reception stations in Portsmouth , Harwich and East Anglia . The stations treated both English and Dutch casualties . 
 Alkin made financial claims from the state for her nursing , some of which were paid , although a petition of 1654 refers to her severe illness . The same letter stated that she had had to sell many of her possessions , including her bed . A petition for financial relief from May 1655 is the last recorded note on her , and it is presumed that she died soon afterwards . 
 = Battle of Gythium = 
 The Battle of Gythium was fought in 195 BC between Sparta and the coalition of Rome , Rhodes , the Achaean League and Pergamum . As the port of Gythium was an important Spartan base the allies decided to capture it before they advanced inland to Sparta . The Romans and the Achaeans were joined outside the city by the Pergamese and Rhodian fleets . The Spartans held out but one of the joint commanders , Dexagoridas , decided to surrender the city to the Roman legate . When Gorgopas , the other commander , found out he killed Dexagoridas and took solo command of the city . After Dexagoridas ' murder the Spartans held out more vigorously . However , Titus Quinctius Flamininus of the allied forces arrived with 4 @,@ 000 more men and the Spartans decided to surrender the city on the condition that the garrison could leave unharmed . The result of this battle forced Nabis , the tyrant of Sparta , to abandon the surrounding land and withdraw to the city of Sparta . Later that year , Sparta capitulated to the allies . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 The Macedonians had been defeated in the Second Macedonian War in 197 BC which left the Spartans in control of Argos . This Spartan gain was a setback for the Achaean League who had been trying to incorporate Sparta into their league for many years . The Romans had won the Second Macedonian War and it left them in control of Greek affairs . However , they decided not to occupy Greece but to garrison some cities for five years . The tyrant of Sparta , Nabis , who had declared himself king , was troubling the Achaean League and was also threatening to destroy the peace in Greece . 
 In 195 BC , Flamininus summoned his army in Greece and that of his allies at Plataea in Boeotia . He then marched from Plataea to Argos where he was joined by 10 @,@ 000 Achean infantry and 1 @,@ 000 cavalry . After a few brief skirmishes , the allies decided to abandon the siege and they pitched in Tegea . They then advanced upon <unk> where they were joined by 1 @,@ 500 Macedonians and 400 Thessalian cavalry . 
 Nabis also made his own preparations . Nabis had always been on good terms with Cretan leaders and he requested 1 @,@ 000 of their best soldiers who were hand picked to assist him . As well as the Cretans , he hired 3 @,@ 000 mercenaries and 10 @,@ 000 citizens . The Romans and their allies then advanced upon Sellasia not far north of Sparta . The Romans were defeated in a small battle and they retreated . The Romans then won another battle against the Spartans and forced them to retreat into the city . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Some coastal cities surrendered to the Romans which allowed the Romans to have a base in the coastal regions of Laconia . Gythium was a large city and had been made by the Spartans as their main port and naval arsenal . The Romans advanced upon the city and they were joined there by the combined Rhodian and Pergamese fleets . The sailors from the Roman , Pergamese and Rhodian fleets built siege engines which had devastating effects on the walls . One of the city 's joint commanders , Dexagoridas , offered to surrender the city to the Roman legate in charge of the fleet while Flamininus was gone . When the other commander Gorgopas found out he murdered Dexagoridas . 
 Now with the city under Gorgopas ' command the defenders became reinvigorated . The siege was proving more difficult until Flamininus arrived with 4 @,@ 000 Roman soldiers . With the arrival of the new soldiers , the allied soldiers were encouraged and began bombarding the city again with their siege engines while the Rhodian and Pergamese fleet continued to put pressure on the Spartans from the sea . The Spartans knew that they did not have much of a chance of withstanding the renewed allied assault and Gorgopas decided to surrender the city to the Romans under the condition that the garrison was allowed to leave the city unharmed . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 When Nabis found out that Gythium had fallen to the allies he decided to abandon the remaining Laconian countryside that he controlled . Nabis sent envoys to Flamininus who offered Nabis a parley . The Romans attacked Sparta when the parley ended but the Spartans withstood the initial allied assaults . Nabis , however , seeing that the situation was hopeless agreed to surrender the city to the Romans . The Romans forced Nabis to abandon Argos and most of the coastal cities of Laconia . The Romans formed all the cities that had broken off from Sparta on the Laconian coast into the Union of Free Laconians . However , the Romans didn 't strip Nabis of his powers because they wanted a state in the Peloponnese to counter the growing Achaean League . Nabis attacked Gythium two or three years later only to retreat after being unable to capture the city but in 192 BC he was assassinated by the Aetolians before he had a chance to attempt another attack on the city . In 189 BC , the Spartans , having been deprived of a port , attacked and captured the city of Las . The <unk> , threatened by the attack , demanded the surrender of those responsible for the attack and when that was refused they captured the city . 
 = General Aircraft Hamilcar = 
 The General Aircraft Limited GAL . 49 Hamilcar or Hamilcar Mark I was a large British military glider produced during the Second World War , which was designed to carry heavy cargo , such as the Tetrarch or M22 Locust light tank . When the British airborne establishment was formed in 1940 by the order of Prime Minister Winston Churchill it was decided to develop a large glider which would be able to transport heavy equipment in support of airborne troops . General Aircraft Limited were chosen in January 1941 to develop this glider , which they designated the GAL . 49 ' Hamilcar ' . It was designed to transport a single light tank or two Universal Carriers . A number of problems , which included vacillation by the War Office on the number of gliders that it wanted and poor management by GAL , led to delays in the production of the Hamilcar , and the first production glider was only assembled in mid @-@ 1943 . These problems were only partially solved , and production of the glider continued to be slow , hampered by difficulties in finding suitable locations to store and construct the Hamilcars once their parts were produced . A total of 344 Hamilcars had been built when production ended in 1946 . 
 Hamilcars were only used on three occasions , and only in support of British airborne forces . They first saw action in June 1944 , when approximately thirty were used to carry 17 @-@ pounder anti @-@ tank guns , transport vehicles and Tetrarch light tanks into Normandy in support of British airborne forces during Operation Tonga . In September 1944 a similar number of Hamilcars were used to transport anti @-@ tank guns , transport vehicles and supplies for airborne troops as part of Operation Market Garden . They were used a third and final time in March 1945 during Operation Varsity , when they transported M22 Locust light tanks and other supplies . The gliders proved to be successful in all three operations , although their slow speed and large size made them easy targets for anti @-@ aircraft fire , which resulted in a number of gliders being damaged or destroyed . A powered variant of the Hamilcar was produced , the Hamilcar Mark X , in an attempt to extend the range of the Hamilcar so it could serve in the Pacific War ; however , the conflict in the Pacific ended before the design could see combat . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The British airborne establishment was formed in June 1940 under the orders of the Prime Minister , Winston Churchill , in response to the German use of airborne forces during the Battle of France . When the equipment to be used by the airborne forces was being developed , it had been decided by officials at the War Office that gliders would be an integral component of such a force ; these would be used to transport troops and heavy equipment , which by 1941 had been expanded to include artillery and some form of tank . By the beginning of 1941 , the War Office had issued four specifications for military gliders to be used by the airborne forces . The first was Air Ministry specification <unk> / 40 , which called for an eight @-@ seater glider similar to the German DFS 230 , which eventually became the General Aircraft Hotspur I ; the second was specification <unk> / 40 which became the Slingsby Hengist , a fifteen @-@ seat glider ; the third was specification <unk> / 40 , the 25 @-@ seater Airspeed Horsa ; and the last , <unk> / 40 was for a glider that could carry a light tank or other heavy loads . The number of aeronautical firms able to design and produce gliders was limited , especially since several were already committed to producing other prop @-@ driven aircraft for the government ; as such , contracts for the gliders were allocated to firms as the government saw fit , rather than through any competitive process . Slingsby was chosen to develop <unk> / 40 because it was believed to be too small to build larger gliders , and Airspeed would eventually build the Horsa . Because it had already developed the Hotspur , which first flew in November 1940 , and was considered to have a sufficiently developed production capacity capable of producing a larger glider , General Aircraft Limited were chosen to develop <unk> / 40 . 
 Before being selected , the company had already been in the process of developing designs for a glider which would carry a single Mk VII ' Tetrarch ' light tank . The design was a low @-@ wing aircraft designed so that the tank driver also functioned as the glider pilot , and flew the glider from his seat in the tank through a series of internal modifications to the tank . The idea behind the design was to save on specially @-@ trained glider pilots and allow the tank to be brought into action as soon as the glider landed ; surviving illustrations of the design show the tank encased in the glider 's fuselage but with the turret outside the airframe , possibly so that it could engage targets as it landed . However , the design was considered to be impractical , both by the company and the War Office , and a more conventional design was finally arrived at in a joint meeting between the two in January 1941 . It called for a glider which would be constructed primarily out of wood capable of carrying a Tetrarch light tank and two universal carriers with a combined maximum weight of approximately <unk> lbs ; a surviving requisition form from the Air Ministry to GAL confirms a cost of £ 50 @,@ 000 per glider . By early February 1941 the basic design for the glider had been completed by the company 's chief designer , and had been designated the GAL . 49 ' Hamilcar ' ; the name came from the Carthaginian general Hamilcar Barca . 
 Such a large glider had never been constructed before by the British military , and in order to test the design , a half @-@ scale prototype model was first designed ; designated GAL . 50 it still required an Armstrong Whitworth Whitley medium bomber to act as a tug to get it airborne , and was first flown in September 1941 . However , it only flew once ; the test pilot approached the landing area too low , attempted to raise the flaps for extra glide , and instead crashed the prototype and wrecked it . However , the trial was considered to be a success and the first full @-@ scale prototype model was finished at GAL 's works in Hanworth , Middlesex in March 1942 . The Hamilcar was transported to RAF Snaith in Yorkshire , as GAL 's airfield at Hanworth was too short for the glider to take off from ; moving the glider to a secure military airfield would also ensure that it remained secret . Its first flight was conducted on 27 March 1942 , towed by a Handley Page Halifax bomber . A second prototype was completed in June 1942 , and further testing and development took place at a number of different airfields , including the Airborne Forces Experimental Establishment at RAF Beaulieu ; all flight trials appear to have been successful , and there were few differences between the prototypes and the production models . 
 = = = Production problems = = = 
 The number of Hamilcars that the War Office required frequently fluctuated . In May 1942 the War Office asked GAL for 360 Hamilcars to be used in two major airborne operations , but this was found to be unrealistic ; not only was the production rate for the glider far too slow to accommodate this large number , the same number of tugs needed to tow the gliders could not be found . In November 1943 the War Office issued another report in which it increased the number of required gliders to 800 , an even more unrealistic number ; by the time production of the Hamilcar ended , a total of 344 had been built . GAL produced an initial run of 22 Hamilcars , which included the two prototype models and ten pre @-@ production aircraft required for evaluation trials . Subsequent production of parts was assigned to a series of sub @-@ contractors called the ' Hamilcar Production Group ' , which included the Birmingham Railway Carriage and Wagon Company , the Co @-@ operative Wholesale Society and AC Cars . Production for the glider was targeted to begin in late 1941 with approximately 40 @-@ 50 to be completed by the end of that year ; in reality this was <unk> , with the planned 40 @-@ 50 only being completed by June 1944 . 
 The slow rate of production for the Hamilcar appears to be the result of a combination of factors . There was a great demand on the specific types of wood required to build the glider , and difficulty in finding suitably large airfields with enough skilled personnel where the gliders could be constructed and stored ; it also appears that a lack of official priority and poor management at GAL also impeded production . Between March and August 1942 GAL had promised eighteen Hamilcars would be built and delivered , but by September only one had actually appeared ; this slow rate of production so concerned the Ministry of Aircraft Production that it appointed an ' Industrial Panel ' of three senior industrial experts to visit GAL and detail the causes of the problems . The panel visited GAL in early September 1942 and issued a report on 24 September which stated that the root of the problems was that GAL appeared to have taken a bigger workload than it could handle , which was exacerbated by poor organization and management skills . There were also conflicts between GAL and the Hamilcar Production Group which hurt production ; the Group had been formed by the Ministry on 28 July in an attempt to speed up production , but senior GAL managers resented this and failed to cooperate fully with the Group . The panel also identified a ' piecemeal method of ordering ' by the Ministry of Aircraft Production as a cause of further delays . Ultimately several senior managers and staff at GAL were replaced on the recommendation of the panel in an attempt to decrease internal conflicts and speed up production . 
 The ten pre @-@ production gliders were eventually delivered by the end of 1942 , and the first production glider was put together between March and April 1943 . Production of parts and the building of complete gliders continued throughout 1943 , but production schedules continued to fall behind , particularly when the United States Army Air Forces became interested in the glider , requiring a significant number to be completed for Operation Overlord , the airborne landings in Normandy , and a number of others to be used in the Far East . This placed further pressure on GAL and the Hamilcar Production Group , as the USAAF demands would require further production and new flight trials to see if the glider would operate effectively in a tropical climate . In late 1943 the USAAF required 140 Hamilcars , which would be used to transport bulldozers and other construction equipment for airfield building , and in November it was agreed that 50 would be supplied to them by June 1944 . However , the continued slow production of the gliders so concerned the USAAF that it cancelled its requirement in February 1944 ; this meant that American personnel who had been helping with the production of the gliders were withdrawn and production times were further delayed . It also meant that only British airborne forces would utilize the Hamilcar . By January 1944 only 27 Hamilcars had been erected and were ready for use ; a total of 53 had been produced , but the rest were in storage awaiting parts to complete them or to be erected . Finding personnel to erect the gliders , and airfields to store them , continued to be a problem . By June , however , eighty of the gliders had been manufactured and erected and were ready for use in airborne operations , in time for a small number to be used during Operation Tonga , the British airborne landings in Normandy . Production continued throughout the conflict and finally ended in 1946 , with a total of 344 being produced . 
 = = Design = = 
 The Hamilcar was constructed primarily from wood , mainly birch and spruce , with fabric @-@ covered plywood forming the skin , and high grade steel reinforcement beams in critical areas . It had a wingspan of 110 feet ( 34 m ) , a length of 68 feet ( 21 m ) and a height of 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) to the top of the fin with the tail down . < > It weighed 18 @,@ 400 pounds ( 8 @,@ 300 kg ) when empty , and could transport a military load of 17 @,@ 600 pounds ( 8 @,@ 000 kg ) to give a total weight of 36 @,@ 000 pounds ( 16 @,@ 000 kg ) . The whole aircraft was broken down into smaller sections for transport . It was so large and heavy that it required the largest and most powerful aircraft to pull it off the airfield and subsequently tow it ; four @-@ engined bombers were used , most frequently the Handley Page Halifax . Both wing and cockpit were set above the fuselage to provide the greatest amount of room for the cargo compartment , and to ensure that they did not interfere with the loading of vehicles ; the compartment measured approximately 32 feet 31 @.@ 5 inches ( 10 @.@ 554 m ) , 7 feet 10 @.@ 5 inches ( 2 @.@ 400 m ) inches wide and between 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) and 7 feet 7 inches ( 2 @.@ 31 m ) inches in height . The nose of the glider was hinged and opened to the side for ease of loading vehicles and cargo , and the crew of two pilots were seated in tandem in a cockpit on the top of the fuselage , which was accessed via an internal ladder and was fifteen feet above ground ; they were eventually protected by a bullet @-@ proof windscreen and a plate of armour behind the second pilot . An intercom was also added to provide communication between the pilots and the personnel below them . An initial design feature , which was eventually removed prior to full @-@ scale production , was the installation of an under @-@ fuselage hatch which would allow the prone firing of a Bren light machine gun as the glider approached the landing zone . 
 The ratio between length and wingspan was practically the same as that of an Avro Lancaster bomber , which had a wingspan of 102 feet ( 31 m ) and a length of 69 feet 6 inches ( 21 @.@ 18 m ) , in contrast to modern sport gliders which possess a particularly large wingspan to enhance gliding performance . This was the result of a decision taken by the War Office in early 1940 on how military gliders would be used ; the idea was for the glider to be released at a low altitude close to the landing zone and conduct a steep descent to reduce time in the air and exposure to enemy fire . The glider also possessed large flaps which assisted in a steep and rapid descent , and through adjustments of their angle during landing a precise control over descent rate and point of landing could be achieved ; they also allowed a slower touchdown speed to be attained . They were operated through a small bottle of compressed air large enough only for a single landing ; a small bottle not only saved weight , but gave a smaller chance of it being hit by enemy fire , thereby exploding and damaging the glider . Standard approach speed for the Hamilcar was 100 miles per hour ( 160 km / h ) , although for shorter landings this could be slowed to 80 miles per hour ( 130 km / h ) , and stalling speeds were 64 miles per hour ( 103 km / h ) with flaps up or 52 miles per hour ( 84 km / h ) with flaps deployed . The Hamilcar was fitted with tailwheel landing gear , with oleo @-@ pneumatic shock absorbers that could be deflated to bring the fuselage nose down for loading or unloading purposes . A jettisonable undercarriage was initially designed for the glider , as it was discovered that it travelled for a shorter distance when it landed only on its skids . However , this was eventually replaced with a fixed undercarriage - the same as had been designed for ferrying operations - as pilots found that they preferred to land on wheels because of the extra control it gave them and the ability to avoid other gliders and potential collisions in the landing area . The wheeled undercarriage was not fitted until after the glider had been loaded ; two 15 @-@ ton jacks were used to lift the aircraft for the fitting . 
 When the glider was carrying tanks or other vehicles , common practice was that their engines would be started in the air , usually just prior to the glider casting off from the tug ; special exhaust ducts were fitted to the glider to expel exhaust fumes . The Tetrarch and M22 Locust light tanks were so large that they barely fit inside the glider , and as such their crews stayed inside the tank for the duration of the flight . Once the glider landed , the anchorages keeping the vehicle stationary would be released by the driver pulling a lanyard within his reach , and the driver would then drive the tank forward , which automatically pulled a line that operated the swing door release . However , Universal Carriers and other vehicles relied on one of the pilots operating the door line manually . This was achieved by the pilot sliding down the fuselage and then dropping to the ground . They would then go to each undercarriage leg and release the valves there , which would expel hydraulic fluid and allow the shock absorbers struts to deflate , and then enter the glider and operate the door release line . If the swing door was jammed after the glider had landed , it was possible for tanks to break through the unopened forward fuselage and drive straight out of the glider , which occurred in both airborne operations where Hamilcars transported tanks . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 When the parts for a Hamilcar were completed and the glider was erected , it was flown to RAF North <unk> in Rutland to have its specific cargo placed on board , and it was then flown to RAF Tarrant Rushton , which had been selected as the Hamilcar training and operational base in November 1943 . It was not possible to tow the glider empty , so any empty gliders usually carried Universal Carriers or concrete blocks as ballast . Training with the Hamilcar appears to have taken place primarily at RAF Tarrant Rushton , and began sometime between the end of 1943 and the first months of 1944 . Hamilcar training began with dual instruction , where an instructor accompanied the pilots for several hours , and then moved onto flying solo flights . Most of this training consisted of ' circuits and bumps ' , where the pilots practiced controlling the glider as it took off from an airfield under tow , and then landing it after the tow rope was detached ; cross @-@ country navigation was also practiced . It was common practice for members of airlanded units to be inside the gliders as cargo when training took place , although there is evidence that tank crews only acted as cargo for one or two flights , probably due to the risk of accidents which might cost the lives of specialized troops and equipment . Those flights that tank crews did experience usually consisted of gliders landing on carefully marked airfields instead of the open countryside in order to minimize the risks involved , and also make recovery of the glider easier . Accidents do not seem to have been a common occurrence . During training by ' C ' Squadron of the Glider Pilot Regiment , part of the Army Air Corps , which specialized in flying Hamilcars , over 2800 lifts were made with an average of 50 lifts per crew . Only three incidents resulted in fatalities or injuries , with seven pilots killed during the training . 
 = = = Operation Tonga = = = 
 Operation Tonga originated in the planning of Operation Overlord , the plan for the eventual invasion of France and the opening of a Second Front in North @-@ Western Europe . Planning for the invasion of Europe by the Allies had begun in May 1943 when President of the United States Franklin Delano Roosevelt and British Prime Minister Winston Churchill had met at the Washington Conference . The two Allied leaders decided that all available Allied forces in the theatre should be concentrated in Great Britain , and that planning for the invasion of North @-@ Western Europe should begin . A provisional target date of May 1944 was set , the code @-@ name Overlord decided upon , and a joint Anglo @-@ American planning staff created under Lieutenant @-@ General Frederick E. Morgan , who was given the title of Chief of Staff to the Supreme Allied Commander ( COSSAC ) . The plan eventually agreed upon called for the British 6th Airborne Division and the American 82nd and 101st Airborne Divisions to land either side of the landing areas to secure their flanks and protect the landing troops from counterattack . The British airborne forces were to land in the east and the American airborne forces to land to the west of Bayeux in support of the infantry and armoured units advancing from the beachheads . The operation began on the night of 5 June , with the deployment of 6th Airborne Division to eastern Normandy . It was tasked with protecting the eastern flank of the Allied seaborne landings , securing strategically important areas east of Caen , capturing several important bridges over the Caen Canal and River Dives , and destroying a coastal artillery battery . 
 The division would use approximately 350 gliders for the operation , the majority of which would transport 6th Airlanding Brigade . This number included thirty @-@ four Hamilcars ; four would land in landing zone ' N ' between 03 : 00 and 04 : 30 in support of the operations of 3rd Parachute Brigade and 5th Parachute Brigade , and would carry four 17 @-@ pounder anti @-@ tank guns and their transport vehicles and crews . The other thirty would land at approximately 21 : 00 in landing @-@ zone ' W ' as part of a reinforcement lift . Twenty of the Hamilcars would carry Tetrarch light tanks and their crews which belonged to 6th Airborne Armoured Reconnaissance Regiment , four more carried three Rota trailers without crews , and another three carried Universal Carriers with their crews . The last three carried two Universal Carriers converted to accommodate a 3 @-@ inch mortar , one Universal Carrier which carried a slave battery , sixteen motorcycles and a jeep . The four Hamilcars which were to land in support of 3rd and 5th Parachute Brigades took off from Tarrant Rushton at 02 : 10 on 6 June and were due to land at approximately 03 : 30 ; however , only two landed successfully . One suffered a broken tow rope shortly after it took off , although it was able to land safely at an airfield in England ; the other reached the Normandy coast , but the tow rope was disconnected too early and it landed a considerable distance away from the landing zone . When dawn broke , it was discovered by German forces and attacked ; four of the crew and passengers were killed and one captured , but the rest managed to escape . 
 The remaining Hamilcars took off between 18 : 40 and 19 : 35 with the rest of the gliders which would transport 6th Airlanding Brigade and began their journey towards the landing zone . One Hamilcar , which was transporting a Tetrarch light tank , was lost over the English Channel when the tank broke loose of its shackles and crashed through the nose of the glider that was carrying it , causing both to fall into the sea mid @-@ flight . The rest of the gliders arrived safely at the landing zone at approximately 21 : 00 , flying astern of each other as closely as possible ; several accounts mention that the sight of the Hamilcars and other gliders as they landed was a great morale booster for Allied troops who saw them . However , their landings were not all without incident . Two Hamilcars collided with each other in the landing zone , destroying themselves and the Tetrarchs they carried ; a third Hamilcar hit another Tetrarch as it was being unloaded and flipped the tank upside down , rendering it unusable , although the crew escaped without injury . Another Hamilcar rammed several of the wooden poles that had been driven into the ground by the Germans to damage gliders , which resulted in one of its wings being completely torn off as it landed . However , there were few casualties and actual German opposition to the gliders as they landed was minimal . Of those gliders that survived the journey and made a successful landing , many later suffered heavy damage from German artillery and mortar fire , as well as the movement of Allied armour through the landing zones . Although approximately forty gliders were later repaired and flown back to Britain , none of these were Hamilcars as their size precluded any attempt to recover them . 
 = = = Operation Market Garden = = = 
 After major defeats in Normandy in July to August 1944 , remnants of German forces withdrew across the Low Countries and eastern France towards the German border . In the north in the first week of September , the British 21st Army Group under Field Marshal Bernard Montgomery was advancing on a line running from Antwerp to the northern border of Belgium with its British Second Army under Lieutenant @-@ General Sir Miles Dempsey while its First Canadian Army under Lieutenant @-@ General Harry Crerar had commenced its task of recapturing the ports of Dieppe , Le Havre and Boulogne @-@ sur @-@ Mer . To the south , the U.S. 12th Army Group under Lieutenant General Omar Bradley was nearing the German border and had been ordered to orient on the Aachen gap with Lieutenant General Courtney Hodges ' U.S. First Army in support of Montgomery 's advance on the Ruhr , while its U.S. Third Army under Lieutenant General George S. Patton moved eastward towards the Saar . The U.S. 6th Army Group under General Jacob L. Devers was advancing towards Germany after their landings in southern France . Field @-@ Marshal Bernard Montgomery devised an ambitious plan called Operation Market Garden which would take place in mid @-@ September ; it was intended to bypass the Siegfried Line by hooking around its northern end and thereby allow the Allies to cross the Rhine with large @-@ scale forces and trap the German Fifteenth Army between Arnhem and the shores of the IJsselmeer . Market , the airborne element of the plan , would employ four of the six divisions of the First Allied Airborne Army . The U.S. 101st Airborne Division , under Major General Maxwell D. Taylor , would drop in two locations just north of XXX Corps to take the bridges northwest of Eindhoven at Son and <unk> . The 82nd Airborne Division , under Brigadier General James M. Gavin , would drop northeast of them to take the bridges at Grave and Nijmegen , and the British 1st Airborne Division , under Major @-@ General Roy Urquhart , and the Polish 1st Independent Parachute Brigade would drop at the extreme north end of the route , to take the road bridge at Arnhem and rail bridge at Oosterbeek . 
 A lack of sufficient transport aircraft meant that 1st Airborne Division would be dropped in three separate lifts over three successive days . 1st Parachute Brigade and most of 1st Airlanding Brigade would land on 17 September , 4th Parachute Brigade and the rest of 1st Airlanding Brigade would land on 18 September , and on 19 September the Polish 1st Independent Parachute Brigade would land , along with a supplies for the entire division . The division would utilize approximately 650 gliders during the operation , of which 39 would be Hamilcars . It appears that the Hamilcars that had been utilized by 6th Airborne Division and subsequently abandoned in June had been replaced , as records state that 64 of the gliders were available by September . Thirteen Hamilcars would be flown on 17 September and land in landing zone ' Z ' . Eight of the gliders would carry 17 @-@ pounder anti @-@ tank guns , their towing vehicles and crews , and the other five would carry ten Universal Carriers , two apiece ; the Carriers were to act as transports for the airborne troops . On 18 September fifteen Hamilcars would land in landing zone ' X ' ; eight would carry a 17 @-@ pounder anti @-@ tank gun , their towing vehicles and crews each , and the other four would carry eight Universal Carriers , which would once again act as transport for the airborne troops that were flown in . The final three were packed with ammunition and stores , as well as a number of sappers from the Royal Engineers ; these were experimental loads , as it was believed that the Hamilcar might be a more efficient way of transporting supplies rather than the Horsa due to its larger size . On 19 September , ten Hamilcars would transport American engineers who belonged to the American <unk> Aviation Engineer Battalion and their equipment , which included bulldozers , cranes and graders ; they were to construct a forward airfield in landing zone ' W ' after the gliders had been cleared away . 
 All fifteen Hamilcars which participated in the first lift on 17 September arrived over the landing zones safely , but problems were experienced when they came in to land . Two of the gliders landed on soft ground , which caused them to rapidly decelerate ; this , combined with the majority of their equipment being in the front of the gliders , resulted in them flipping onto their backs . Three of the pilots were killed and the fourth was badly wounded and later taken prisoner , and several passengers were wounded ; the 17 @-@ pounder anti @-@ tank guns on board the gliders were damaged beyond repair . The rest of the Hamilcars landed successfully , although one overran the landing zone and hit a railway embankment ; this damaged the two Universal Carriers being carried by the glider , although both were later salvaged . The lift on 18 September was delayed for several hours due to poor weather conditions , and the glider force did not take off until approximately 11 : 00 . En route to the landing zones , one Hamilcar was forced to cast off and land at an airfield in England after its tow aircraft developed engine trouble , and another ditched in the English Channel when its tug developed engine troubles as well ; both had been carrying 17 @-@ pounder anti @-@ tank guns . The rest of the Hamilcars encountered heavy anti @-@ aircraft fire as they landed , with several being hit . As a result , one Hamilcar landed short of the landing zone after being hit in the wing , and another was forced to make an emergency landing far from the landing zone after being hit ; the stores , pilots and passengers were captured by German forces shortly after the glider landed . The rest of the Hamilcars landed successfully . The third lift on 19 September did not take place due to weather problems , and because several of 1st Airborne Division 's landing zones had been overrun . Finally on 21 September the weather cleared , but due to 1st Airborne Division 's deteriorating situation it was decided that the <unk> Aviation Engineer Battalion would not be delivered . As such , only a single Hamilcar accompanied 1st Polish Independent Parachute Brigade when it set off for its drop near the town of Driel ; this was the same Hamilcar which had been forced to land in England on 19 September when its tug had experienced engine trouble . However , the tow rope between the glider and tug snapped over Belgium , and it was forced to land near Ghent . 
 = = = Operation Varsity = = = 
 By March 1945 , the Allied armies had advanced into Germany and had reached the River Rhine . The Rhine was a formidable natural obstacle to the Allied advance , but if breached would allow the Allies to access the North German Plain and ultimately advance on Berlin and other major cities in Northern Germany . Following the " Broad Front Approach " laid out by General Dwight D. Eisenhower , the Supreme Allied Commander of the Allied Expeditionary Force , it was decided to attempt to breach the Rhine in several areas . Field Marshal Bernard Montgomery , commanding the British 21st Army Group , devised a plan to allow the forces under his command to breach the Rhine , which he entitled Operation Plunder , and which was subsequently authorized by Eisenhower . Plunder envisioned the British Second Army under Lieutenant @-@ General Sir Miles Dempsey and the U.S. Ninth Army under Lieutenant General William Simpson crossing the Rhine on three fronts ; at Rees , Wesel , and in the area south of the Lippe Canal . To ensure the operation 's success , Montgomery insisted that the amphibious assaults be supported by an airborne landing , which was code @-@ named Operation Varsity . Varsity was initially planned with three airborne divisions in mind , with all three to be dropped behind German lines in support of 21st Army Group as it conducted its amphibious assaults to breach the Rhine . However , during the earliest stages of planning , it became apparent to the planners that the 13th Airborne Division would be unable to participate in the operation , as there were only enough combat transport aircraft in the area to effectively transport two divisions . The plan for the operation was therefore altered to accommodate the two remaining airborne divisions , the British 6th Airborne and the US 17th Airborne Division . The two airborne divisions would be dropped behind German lines , with their objective to land around Wesel and disrupt enemy defences in order to aid the advance of the British Second Army towards Wesel . 
 6th Airborne Division would be dropped in a single lift , unlike Operation Market Garden , and was to seize the high ground north of the town of Bergen , capture the town of Hamminkeln and several bridges over the river IJssel , and then hold the northern portion of the operational area until relieved by Allied ground forces . The division would utilize 440 gliders for the operation , which included a large number of the new Horsa Mark II and 48 Hamilcars . The loads assigned to the Hamilcars were similar to those used during Operation Market Garden , with sixteen of the gliders transporting 17 @-@ pounder anti @-@ tank guns , as well as their vehicles and crews . Twelve were assigned to 716th Airborne Light Composite Company of the Royal Army Service Corps , and were loaded with twelve Universal Carriers , trailers and stores of ammunition and equipment . The company were to use the Universal Carriers and trailers , along with transport to be provided by 6th Airlanding Brigade , to collect , control and issue supplies dropped by aerial resupply drops to the airborne troops as they fought . Eight Hamilcars were to transport M22 Locust light tanks which belonged to 6th Airborne Armoured Reconnaissance Regiment , and another four were to carry panniers of supplies . Two more were to carry a single Royal Engineers D4 bulldozer each , and finally 3rd Parachute Brigade and 5th Parachute Brigade were assigned three Hamilcars each ; these would each carry a Universal Carrier for use as transport by the headquarters staff of the brigades . 
 All of the gliders successfully took off at 07 : 20 on 24 March , but seven were lost en route to the landing zones , the majority being forced to cast off and land in Allied territory due to their tugs suffering engine failures ; however , one Hamilcar which carried an M22 Locust broke up in mid @-@ air as it approached the Rhine , possibly due to structural failure , and all aboard were killed . Three more of the gliders were destroyed by German anti @-@ aircraft fire as they approached the landing zones , as their slow speed made them easy targets . The thirty @-@ eight that remained landed successfully between 10 : 46 and 11 : 00 , although a number of them suffered damage from anti @-@ aircraft fire . Particularly hard hit were the Hamilcars that carried the RASC personnel and supplies ; eight landed successfully , but only three were sufficiently undamaged to allow the stores they carried to be recovered . Of the eight Hamilcars that transported the M22 Locusts of 6th Airborne Armoured Reconnaissance Regiment , seven reached the landing zones intact but had problems when they landed due to anti @-@ aircraft fire and smoke obscuring the area . Four landed safely , but the other three came under heavy German anti @-@ aircraft fire and crashed as they landed ; one tank survived with a damaged machine gun , another crashed through a house which put its wireless radio set and main armament out of action , and the third broke loose of the glider as it landed and was flipped over onto its turret , which rendered it useless . After the operation had come to an end , a few of the undamaged Hamilcars were dismantled and their parts shipped to England to aid in the construction of further gliders . 
 = = = Post @-@ war = = = 
 Operation Varsity was the last time that the Hamilcar would be used in combat , but the model did remain in service for a number of years after the end of the Second World War ; they were particularly useful for transporting large and heavy loads . On 31 December 1945 64 Hamilcars were recorded as being present at RAF Tarrant Rushton , where they were used for routine training exercises . However , in January 1946 a process was begun to dispose of ' surplus ' Hamilcars , with 44 moved to disposal facilities and twenty remaining . The remainder continued to be used for routine flying exercises until July , when six more were disposed of due to ' glue deterioration ' , and by February 1947 only twelve were left in operation . These last few Hamilcars appear to have remained in service until 1950 , with several used in airshows and public displays by the RAF , and were ultimately phased out as obsolescent by the mid @-@ 1950s . 
 = = Variants = = 
 Several variants on the Hamilcar Mark I were planned , although only one was actually produced . The Hamilcar Mark X , also known as the GAL . 58 , was designed to specification X 4 / 44 in an attempt to allow Hamilcars to be used in the tropical climate of the Pacific , where high temperatures and the high altitudes of many airfields reduced the efficiency of piston @-@ engined aircraft . This meant that Halifax bombers could not tow Hamilcars without a drastically reduced fuel load , which in turn narrowed the range of the Hamilcar . Two initial solutions were proposed to correct this problem ; the first was to convert a Hamilcar into a rocket @-@ assisted take off ( <unk> ) aircraft . Two cylindrical steel cylinders filled with twenty @-@ four three @-@ inch rockets were attached to either side of the glider to provide it with 20 @,@ 000 lbs of mean thrust as it took off ; they would then be jettisoned once the glider was airborne . Initial trials conducted in January 1943 proved to be successful , but was not pursued any further for unknown reasons . The second solution was double towing , where two Halifax aircraft , one stripped of all unnecessary equipment , attached tow ropes to a Hamilcar and then took off from an airfield ; once airborne the normal Halifax would then detach its <unk> and land , and the modified Halifax would tow the glider to its destination . However , this idea went no further than initial trials in England , as it was considered to be a high risk operation with a high probability of a serious accident occurring . As such , a powered version of the Hamilcar , the Mark X , was decided upon , as it offered the possibility of long @-@ range airborne operations and the ability to retrieve the glider once it had been used . The decision was taken to start developing the Mark X in November 1943 when the potential for airborne operations against Japan itself began to be considered by the Allies ; however , for some reason a relaxed view was taken to the development of the production models , and the first was not available until the early months of 1945 . 
 The first prototype was converted from a Hamilcar Mark I. Two Bristol Mercury radial piston engines , capable of producing 965 hp , were added to the wings of the glider , and the wings and fuselage were strengthened so they could take the weight of the engines . Extra controls were added to the cockpit and duplicated in the two pilot positions , although space restrictions meant that the glider could only be started from the rear seat , and fuel tanks were added to the wings , with the possibility of a third being carried in the fuselage . These additions increased the glider 's weight to 47 @,@ 000 pounds ( 21 @,@ 000 kg ) , but its other dimensions remained unchanged , including the carrying capacity in the fuselage . The first flight of the Mark X , under its own power , took place in February 1945 and the initial flight and further trials showed that the glider operated as had been expected . With engines installed , a Mark X could be towed by a fully loaded Halifax and achieve an operational radius of approximately 900 miles ( 1 @,@ 400 km ) . However , if the glider itself was fully loaded and took off on its own power , it was discovered that it could not maintain height even at full power ; this resulted in a decision to decrease the amount of cargo it could carry under its own power , which in turn decreased its weight to 32 @,@ 500 pounds ( 14 @,@ 700 kg ) . Two Hamilcar Mark Is were converted for initial trials , and when these proved satisfactory a further eight Mark Is were converted and ten Mark Xs built from scratch ; any further orders were cancelled when the conflict ended in August 1945 , although further tests were conducted in the United States . One other Hamilcar variant was proposed , although it never went into production or appeared to go further than the design stage . This was a proposal to mate a Lockheed P @-@ 38 Lightning fighter to the top of a Hamilcar , as the fighter would provide enough power to keep both aircraft in flight and relieve the glider pilots of the task of controlling the glider until it cast off to land . 
 While the unpowered glider needed ballast to be flown empty , the Hamilcar X was less sensitive to centre of gravity issues . The performance of the Hamilcar X under its own power was not dissimilar to performance under tow , notwithstanding the low load . At 32 @,@ 500 lb , it could take off in 1 @,@ 385 yards . Its maximum speed was 145 miles per hour ( 233 km / h ) but it could cruise at 120 miles per hour ( 190 km / h ) . With 400 gallons of fuel it could manage 705 miles ( 1 @,@ 135 km ) in still air or 1 @,@ 675 miles ( 2 @,@ 696 km ) with 860 gallons onboard replacing the cargo capacity . 
 = = Operators = = 
 United Kingdom 
 British Army 
 Royal Air Force 
 = = Survivors = = 
 A significant proportion of the fuselage of Hamilcar <unk> is preserved at the Museum of Army Flying in Hampshire , England . A badly preserved section of the fuselage of <unk> is part of the collection of the Bovington Tank Museum , where it is displayed with a Tetrarch tank . 
 = = Specifications = = 
 Data from Jane 's All The World 's Aircraft 1945 @-@ 1946 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : 2 
 Capacity : 7 tons 
 Length : 68 ft ( 20 @.@ 73 m ) 
 Wingspan : 110 ft ( 33 @.@ 53 m ) 
 Height : 20 ft 3 in ( 6 @.@ 17 m ) 
 Wing area : 1 @,@ 657 @.@ 5 ft2 ( 153 @.@ 98 m2 ) 
 Airfoil : <unk> modified 
 Empty weight : 18 @,@ 400 lb ( 8 @,@ 346 kg ) 
 Max. takeoff weight : 36 @,@ 000 lb ( 16 @,@ 329 kg ) 
 Performance 
 Never exceed speed : 187 mph ( 300 km / h ) 
 Maximum speed : 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) 
 Stall speed : 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) 
 Wing loading : 22 @.@ 37 lb / ft ² ( 109 @.@ 2 kg / m ² ) 
 = Within the Woods = 
 Within the Woods is a 1978 horror short film written , directed and produced by Sam Raimi . Raimi drew inspiration from his earlier short film Clockwork , deciding to produce a " prototype " horror film to help build the interest of potential investors . Raimi cast his friends Bruce Campbell and Ellen Sandweiss as the two protagonists and produced the film for $ 1600 . Shot on location in a remote cabin in the woods , production was a difficult process because of the low budget . Several of the special effects presented in the film were done in a severely low budget manner , some of which were improvised on set . The film centers around demonic possession and mysterious forces originating from the woods . 
 Raimi convinced a local theater manager to screen the film alongside The Rocky Horror Picture Show which sparked minor interest . Initially a meager success , the film screened well to test audiences and inspired a larger budget remake directed by Raimi , called The Evil Dead ( 1981 ) . The film was the first in the Evil Dead franchise , and launched the careers of both Campbell and Raimi . Several of the aesthetic qualities found in Within the Woods later defined Raimi 's films . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Two romantic couples , consisting of four teenagers , decide to spend a weekend together located in a remote cabin found in the woods . An unseen force stalks and watches the group without their knowledge . Ellen ( Ellen Sandweiss ) and her boyfriend Bruce ( Bruce Campbell ) enter the woods to have a picnic lunch . The other couple , Scotty ( Scott Spiegel ) and Shelly ( Mary Valenti ) , remain at the cabin playing Monopoly to pass time . During their lunch , Bruce announces to Ellen that they 're camping on an Indian burial ground . Ellen is concerned , but Bruce assures her that they will be fine as long as they don 't disturb the graves of the dead . Bruce then explores the area and discovers an ancient dagger belonging to the Indians . Ignoring his own advice , he takes the dagger with him . 
 After lunch , Ellen takes a nap . When she awakes , she finds Bruce missing and wanders into the woods looking for him . To her horror , she finds Bruce 's dead body , horribly mutilated with apparent knife wounds . She is then startled by the presence of a demonic entity hiding within the woods , and quickly runs back to the cabin . While fleeing , she is attacked by unseen forces . She runs back to the cabin and screams to be let in immediately , being let in just as the entity is approaching her . Ellen tells her friends that Bruce has been murdered , but Scotty dismisses the whole thing as a joke and goes to find Bruce . Shelly - Scotty 's girlfriend - , and Ellen are concerned when Scotty doesn 't return right away . Shelly walks outside to begin a search for the missing men , but a possessed Bruce assaults and strangles her , eventually stabbing her in the neck and killing her with the dagger that he found , moaning " join us . " 
 Ellen encounters her possessed friend and flees into another room , grabbing knives to protect her . Something attempts to enter the room where Ellen is hiding , and she blindly lashes out with a knife - mistakenly stabbing Scotty who had just returned to the cabin . While horrified , Ellen is then attacked by the possessed Bruce . Ellen manages to trap Bruce outside , stabbing Bruce 's hand several times in the process . The bleeding Scotty tells Ellen to look into the cellar for the gun they brought along . While walking down the stairs to the cellar , she trips on a broken step and injures herself . After finding the gun , she goes back up stairs and discovers that Scotty had been stabbed to death while she was downstairs . The demonic Bruce then attacks her , but she manages to cut off his hand . 
 Ellen attempts to flee but is severely beaten by the possessed Bruce , who throws her around the cabin . While being strangled , Ellen picks up Bruce 's mutilated hand which is still holding the dagger found from before , and she uses it to stab Bruce . A large amount of blood is expended by Bruce , who lies motionless for a moment , only to then continue his assault on Ellen . Ellen mutilates Bruce 's body even further with an axe , chopping off nearly every limb from the writhing body . Severely disturbed by the things she has witnessed , Ellen rocks back and forth muttering to herself . The corpse of Scotty suddenly springs up , before turning towards the oblivious Ellen , ready to attack . The screen then cuts to black , leaving the fate of Ellen ambiguous . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Before the development stages of Within the Woods , Sam Raimi and Bruce Campbell were long time friends who had grown up with each other . The duo had produced several low @-@ budget films with super 8 mm film during their youth . During the early parts of Raimi 's career , he directed films that were mostly classified as comedies , such as Booby Bartenders , <unk> Eats the Moon and The Great Bogus Monkey <unk> Swindle . While those films were described as " goofy " and primitive by members of the cast and crew , Raimi eventually produced the short film It 's Murder ! , which featured mostly comedic moments . One of the sequences of the film involved a suspenseful moment where a criminal jumped on an unsuspecting individual . Raimi later dismissed the short film , but complimented that scene , stating that it was " the only part of It 's Murder ! that really worked well . 
 While working on the film , it inspired Raimi to approach the horror genre with more enthusiasm , leading to the conception of his next short film Clockwork . The film featured a woman being stalked by a demented man , and launched an interest in Raimi to pursue working on more horror films . While both Raimi and Campbell expressed a positive opinion on the genre , they admitted they had little experience with the genre and went to drive @-@ in theaters to research various science fiction and horror films . Raimi developed the motto " the gore the <unk> " during these sessions at the drive @-@ in , and quickly developed an interest in films featuring high levels of blood . Raimi gained an appeal in B movie cinema , which led him to want to pursue the production of a more ambitious film for his next project . In order to gain the interest of producers , Raimi and Campbell set out to produce a " prototype " film that would serve as a showcase of their talents . The film would work as a trailer to help promote further cinematic productions . 
 The prototype film was called Within the Woods . In addition to Raimi 's interest in various horror films , one of the main inspirations came in the writing of H. P. Lovecraft , who introduced the concept of the " book of the dead " to Raimi . Raimi studied the concept of magical books , in particular the Necronomicon , which formed the basis of the film . Campbell described the film as a combination of " creative writing and ancient history " . In order to flesh out of the idea , Raimi came up with a concept where a group of teenagers went into the woods and were attacked by demonic spirits , summoned by the disturbance of an Indian burial ground . The book of the dead concept was not present in the finished film , but appeared extensively in later films by Raimi . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Raimi was able to secure $ 1600 to produce the film . Raimi and Campbell collected a group of their friends and family who were interested in participating in the production of the film . The film was primarily shot at a farm house belonging to one of Raimi 's friends located in Marshall , Michigan . One of the regular actors involved with Raimi 's early short films , Ellen Sandweiss , was cast as the film 's protagonist . This decision stemmed from the notion that most horror films at the time involved female leads , who were more enjoyable to watch terrorized . The current boyfriend of Sandweiss was cast as the film 's antagonist , a demon who threatens the cast . Campbell was cast as one of the protagonists , though he initially was not familiar with horror cinema and instead identified as a fan of comedies . One of the films that inspired Campbell 's interest in the genre was John Carpenter 's film Halloween . Another Raimi regular , Scott Spiegel , was also cast as a protagonist based on his prior collaborations with the group . 
 The effects of the film were entirely low @-@ budget . Nearly every effect in the film was done via things picked up at a make @-@ up and Halloween store located close to where the film was shot . The effects in the film were notably more intricate than the simple ones featured in Raimi 's prior projects , and contained mutilated bodies , stabbed body parts and demonic possession skin @-@ attachments . Tom Sullivan was one of the primary make @-@ up supervisors on set , and he found it difficult working presentable effects out of such low budgets . One notable example involved a chest stabbing rig that had to be attached to Spiegel 's chest by straps and duct tape . 
 Campbell had to sleep wearing his make @-@ up . Because of several scenes that required to be shot in both the day and the night , it was considered easiest to have Campbell sleep all night wearing his make @-@ up , since removing it was too complicated . When Campbell eventually had the effect removed , he was alarmed to notice that his face had actually " changed shape " because of how long the make @-@ up had been applied , though it returned to normal after an extended amount of time . This serves as one of several moments where the film @-@ makers had to be creative to make the film considering the low budget . Other examples include blacking out the windows to make scenes darker and shooting all night long to make the filming schedule . Raimi had to get increasingly inventive during production , often coming up with " bizarre " ideas while shooting scenes . This led to him experimenting with camera moves and camera speeds , " taking it a little further than we had gone before , recording synch @-@ sound at a third slower for a more monstrous effect . 
 = = = Post @-@ production = = = 
 Though production was difficult for many of the actors involved , especially Campbell , the film was eventually completed within acceptable budget limits . Raimi had completed the filming of his " prototype " and sought out to develop and edit the film as cheaply as possible . Though at the time it was unknown how the film was going to be distributed . Raimi had shot the film in the same style as many of his earlier films , with 8mm film . He intended to blow the footage up after filming to the industry standard of 35mm in order to save money , though Campbell noted that the idea was without precedent . Though the request was " obscure " in nature , a company in San Francisco managed to accommodate the task with little difficulty . Upon testing how the footage looked at a local movie theater , it came out mostly acceptable , until further tests led to the footage appearing grainy and difficult to make out . 
 = = Distribution and reception = = 
 After production , Raimi virtually had no idea how the film was going to be distributed and what would come of it . The main idea behind shooting the film was to make a trailer to show to future investors , but even that was proving to be difficult . Eventually , Raimi got in contact with a manager at a movie theater in Detroit who was " open and flexible " . The same theater played The Rocky Horror Picture Show every single week and was open to more unusual cinema . To Raimi 's shock , the manager agreed to screen Within the Woods right before a midnight showing of The Rocky Horror Picture Show . The premiere of the film received a positive reception by the audience , and the cast and crew was paid just over $ 10 , all of which was donated to the American Cancer Society . The film , however , was never commercially released . 
 While critics mostly ignored the locally distributed , low @-@ budget horror film , local The Detroit News critic Michael McWilliams watched the premiere of the film , writing that " it will probably never be advertised alongside the glossy , big @-@ budget horror movies of our time , but you won 't easily forget a locally produced little film called Within the Woods . He compared the low @-@ budget film to the blockbuster The Amityville Horror , writing that it provided more scares . Tom Sulivan , the make @-@ up supervisor of the film , stated that the film " really packs a punch " , and expressed a positive opinion of working on the project . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In order to produce a follow @-@ up picture , Raimi needed nearly $ 150 @,@ 000 . Raimi approached Phil Gillis , a lawyer to one of his friends , asking if he wanted to invest money into the production of a remake . Gillis was unimpressed with Within the Woods , but offered Raimi legal advice on how to approach further productions . Raimi approached several investors , " begging " for money , and eventually acquired nearly $ 90 @,@ 000 of the funds needed and set out to make the movie anyway . 
 Within the Woods was later retooled by Raimi with a vastly higher production value and a full @-@ length running time as the 1981 film The Evil Dead . The Evil Dead would go on to be the first installment of a film franchise spawning two sequels , Evil Dead II ( 1987 ) , and Army of Darkness ( 1992 ) , both of which were directed by Raimi and featured Campbell as Ash Williams . A remake , known as Evil Dead , was released in 2013 with Raimi and Campbell as producers and creative consultants . In 2015 , the Starz television network began airing the ongoing comedy horror series Ash vs Evil Dead , which features Bruce Campbell returning as an older Ash Williams . 
 Several aspects of Within the Woods were later presented in future Raimi films , including the use of the " Raimi @-@ cam " , a camera rig that creates a fluent flow of camera movement . Other elements , such as graphic imagery , bleak endings , and mutilations , defined many of Raimi 's other films . Raimi has put Campbell in cameo roles in all three of Raimi 's Spider @-@ Man trilogy , as well as several other films . 
 Academy Award winning film @-@ making duo the Coen brothers were inspired by Raimi 's decision to produce a short film as a trailer , utilizing the concept to produce funding for their debut Blood Simple ( 1984 ) . The Coen brothers served as editors for The Evil Dead , and developed a friendship with Raimi . The duo have cast Campbell in some of their films such as The Hudsucker Proxy ( 1994 ) and Fargo ( 1996 ) , the former of which was co @-@ written by Raimi . 
 = Psilocybe allenii = 
 Psilocybe allenii is a species of agaric fungus in the family Hymenogastraceae . Described as new to science in 2012 , it is named after John W. Allen , who provided the type collection . It is found in the northwestern North America from Los Angeles , California to British Columbia , Canada , most commonly within 10 miles ( 16 km ) of the Pacific coast . 
 The fruitbodies ( mushrooms ) grow on rotting wood , especially wood chips used in garden landscaping . The caps of the mushrooms are brown to buff , broadly convex to flattened and have a diameter up to 9 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) , while the white stipes are up to 9 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) long and 0 @.@ 7 cm ( 0 @.@ 3 in ) thick . As a bluing species in the genus Psilocybe , P. allenii contains the psychoactive compounds psilocin and psilocybin , and it is consumed recreationally for its hallucinogenic properties . It is closely related to Psilocybe cyanescens , from which it differs macroscopically by the lack of a wavy cap margin . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Psilocybe allenii was described as new to science in 2012 by Jan Borovička , Alan Rockefeller , and Peter G. Werner . Borovička received material collected from Seattle , Washington , which he noted was microscopically similar to Psilocybe cyanescens , but lacked the wavy cap margins characteristic of that species . In previous publications , Borovička had noted that both macro- and microscopic characters of certain Psilocybe species were highly variable , which could also account for the differences observed in the Seattle material . However , DNA sequencing revealed a 5 @-@ base pair change in the internal transcribed spacer regions ( a segment of RNA often used in molecular phylogenetics to identify or distinguish fungal species ) between P. cyanescens and the Seattle collections . This difference , in addition to the readily observable macroscopic differences , was deemed sufficient to warrant describing the taxon as a new species . Additional molecular studies published by Borovička and colleagues in 2015 identified P. azurescens , P. cyanescens , P. <unk> , P. cubensis , and P. <unk> as closely related to P. allenii . 
 For several years before its official description , the taxon was known in the San Francisco Bay Area , and suspected of being an undescribed species . The authors suggest that a color photograph of " P. cyanescens " in David Arora 's popular 1986 guidebook Mushrooms Demystified may actually depict P. allenii . Mycologist Paul Stamets suggested in 2005 that it " probably is new , or least a newly imported species " . It is commonly called " Psilocybe <unk> " in the online mycological community , but this name is grammatically incorrect Latin and has never been validly published in scientific literature . The specific epithet allenii honors John W. Allen , who collected the original material and provided the impetus for the study . Allen collected the type material from the University of Washington Campus in November 2009 . He first collected the fungus in Capitol Hill in 1982 , and several times later from Seattle . Some of these collections he sent to Mexican Psilocybe specialist Gastón Guzmán , who initially thought them to be P. cyanescens because of their overlapping spore size ranges . 
 = = Description = = 
 Fruitbodies of P. allenii are variable in size , depending on the substrate in which they grow . The caps are 1 @.@ 5 – 9 cm ( 0 @.@ 6 – 3 @.@ 5 in ) in diameter , and range from broadly convex to flattened , sometimes with a slight depression in the center . The cap margin is either straight and slightly curved inward , rarely slightly wavy , and sometimes has radial grooves in moist specimens . The surface is smooth , sticky when moist , with a gelatinous cap cuticle that can be peeled . Wet fruitbodies are so slippery that they are difficult to collect . Caps are hygrophanous , and so will change color depending on how moist they are . They are pale orange brown to caramel brown when moist , but dry to yellowish @-@ buff . Gills have an adnate to sinuate attachment to the stipe , and are initially cream to pale gray brown , but become dark purple as the spores mature . 
 The cylindrical , hollow stipe typically measures 4 – 7 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 – 2 @.@ 8 in ) long by 0 @.@ 2 – 0 @.@ 7 cm ( 0 @.@ 1 – 0 @.@ 3 in ) thick , with the base slightly thicker . The top of the stipe is pruinose ( covered with white powdery granules ) , while the base is connected to thick white rhizomorphs . The stipe surface is smooth to silky fibrillose ( as if made of silky , slender fibers ) , and its color initially white before yellowing slightly in age . <unk> at the base of the stipe is white or stained blue . All parts of the fruitbody stain blue if bruised or handled . Young specimens have a white partial veil that later disappears , or remains as a zone on the stipe that can be colored purplish brown by spores . The odor and taste of the mushroom is farinaceous — similar to freshly ground flour . 
 Spore prints are dark brown , sometimes with violet shades . Spores are thick @-@ walled with an apical pore , and elongated ellipsoid to equilateral in face view , and somewhat inequilateral in side view , typically measuring 12 @.@ 0 – 12 @.@ 6 – 13 @.@ 1 by 6 @.@ 8 – 7 @.@ 1 – 7 @.@ 4 μm . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are cylindrical , four @-@ spored with sterigmata up to 5 @.@ 5 μm long , and have dimensions of 27 – 37 by 9 – 11 μm . Clamp connections are present in hyphae . Cheilocystidia ( cystidia on the gill edge ) are abundant . They are hyaline ( translucent ) , thin @-@ walled , and variably shaped , and range from narrow clubs to narrow flasks with a neck no longer than 8 μm ; their dimensions are typically 20 – 30 by 6 – 8 μm . The pleurocystidia ( found on the gill face ) are common ; they are broadly club @-@ shaped but taper to a point ( sometimes with a rounded tip at the end ) , and measure 25 – 35 by 9 – 14 μm . Caulocystidia ( found on the stipe ) are also present , with variable shapes similar to the cheilo- and pleurocystidia . 
 The mushrooms are consumed for their psychoactive properties , and have a potency roughly similar to P. cyanescens . Borovička and colleagues say they are " commonly sought out by some mushroom hunters " . According to Rockefeller , " If you go to Golden Gate Park in December you will see hundreds of hippies looking at the wood chip landscaping for Psilocybe cyanescens and Psilocybe allenii . " 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Several Psilocybe species have an appearance roughly similar to P. allenii , but these can usually be distinguished by differences in morphology or distribution . The European species P. <unk> var. <unk> has a similar cap and stipe , but is generally more slender than P. allenii . The closely related P. cyanescens is indistinguishable by microscopic characteristics , but features a wavy cap in maturity , a longer fruiting season ( from late September through April ) , and lacks a ring zone on the stipe often seen in P. allenii . P. azurescens has a broader cap , an umbo that may be broad or acute , a longer stipe up to 20 cm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) , and a growing season similar to that of P. cyanescens . The authors also note that the Australian P. subaeruginosa is similar ( including three taxa that have since been synonymized : P. <unk> , P. <unk> , and P. tasmaniana ) but suggest that further research is required to better understand the delimitation of this species complex . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Psilocybe allenii is found in the northwestern North America , with a range extending from British Columbia south to Los Angeles , California . It is most common in areas up to 10 miles ( 16 km ) from the Pacific coast , although it has been collected 100 miles ( 160 km ) inland . Fruitbodies grow scattered , in groups , or ( more rarely ) in clusters , on woody debris , such as wood chips often used in landscaping . Favored substrates include hardwood <unk> made of oak , eucalyptus , Douglas fir , and alder . Fruiting occurs in cold weather , generally from late September to January . The species can be readily cultivated on agar , grain spawn , and cellulosic material , including wood chips and sawdust . 
 = Suillellus luridus = 
 Suillellus luridus ( formerly Boletus luridus ) , commonly known as the lurid bolete , is a fungus of the bolete family , found in deciduous woodlands on chalky soils in Asia , Europe , and eastern North America . Fruit bodies appear in summer and autumn and may be abundant . It is a solid bolete with an olive @-@ brown cap up to 20 cm ( 8 in ) in diameter , with small red pores on the underside . The stout ochre stem reaches 8 – 14 cm ( 3 – 6 in ) high and 1 – 3 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 1 @.@ 2 in ) wide , and is patterned with a red mesh @-@ work . Like several other red @-@ pored boletes , it stains blue when bruised or cut . Though edible when cooked , it can cause gastric upset when eaten raw and can be confused with the poisonous Boletus satanas , though the latter species has a pale cap ; as a result , some guidebooks recommend avoiding consumption altogether . When consumed with alcohol , Suillellus luridus has been implicated in causing adverse reactions similar to those caused by the compound coprine , though laboratory testing has not revealed any evidence of coprine in the mushroom . 
 First described in 1774 , the species has been transferred to various Boletaceae genera in its taxonomic history , although it retained the original name given to it by German botanist Jacob Christian Schaeffer until a transfer to genus Suillellus in 2014 . Several varieties , a subspecies , and a form have been described by European mycologists . Suillellus luridus is mycorrhizal , forming a symbiotic association with deciduous trees such as oak , birch and beech , and has been found to have a growth @-@ enhancing effect on conifers in experiments . The fruit bodies are highly attractive to , and often infested by , insects , and several species of fly have been recorded feeding on them . Chemical analyses have revealed some aspects of the mushroom 's components , including its volatile flavour compounds , its fatty acid and amino acid compositions , and the identities of the carotenoid compounds responsible for its colour . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Boletus luridus was described by German botanist Jacob Christian Schäffer in 1774 , in his series on fungi of Bavaria and the Palatinate , Fungorum qui in Bavaria et Palatinatu circa Ratisbonam nascuntur <unk> . The specific epithet is the Latin adjective luridus , ' sallow ' . French botanist Pierre Bulliard 's 1791 Boletus <unk> is a <unk> synonym ( based on a different type ) . The following year , Johann Friedrich Gmelin called it Boletus <unk> , from the Latin words sub " nearly " or " under " , and <unk> " edible " . However , this is a nomen nudum . Several taxonomical synonyms arose when the species was transferred to different genera within the family Boletaceae by different authorities , including Leccinum by Samuel Frederick Gray in 1821 , Tubiporus by Petter Karsten in 1881 , Dictyopus by Lucien Quélet in 1888 , and Suillellus by William Murrill in 1909 . 
 The variety Boletus luridus var. <unk> , published as " beta " by Elias Magnus Fries in his 1821 Systema Mycologicum , is synonymous with Boletus <unk> . Boletus luridus var. rubriceps was originally described from Spain ( as a species of Tubiporus ) by René Maire in 1937 , and later formally transferred to Boletus by Aurel Dermek in 1987 . Other varieties of B. luridus include Roman Schulz 's var. obscurus and var. <unk> published in 1924 ; Josef Velenovský 's 1939 var. <unk> , found in the Czech Republic ; and Jean Blum 's 1969 var. <unk> and var. <unk> , originally described from France and Spain , respectively . Boletus <unk> , originally described as a distinct species by Jan <unk> , was later published as the variety B. luridus var. <unk> by Albert Pilát and Dermek in 1979 , and finally as a subspecies by Jiri <unk> in 1995 . Carmine <unk> and Giampaolo Simonini defined the form <unk> from Sardinia in 1997 . Rolf Singer 's 1947 variety caucasicus is currently considered an independent species , Boletus caucasicus Singer ex . Alessio . Similarly , B. luridus f. sinensis , found in Hainan Province , China , was later elevated to distinct species status as B. sinensis . 
 Boletus luridus is the type species of Boletus section Luridi , originally circumscribed by Fries in 1838 . This section includes species producing medium to large fruit bodies with thick , swollen stems , and minute pores that are coloured red , orange , or brown . However , the genus as a whole is strongly paraphyletic and will probably be fragmented once further studies have resolved relationships to a finer detail . Manfred Binder and David Hibbett showed B. luridus to be most closely related to a group containing B. torosus and B. luteocupreus , with B. <unk> and Pulveroboletus ravenelii as more distant relatives , based on molecular phylogenetics inferred from ribosomal DNA sequences . In a separate molecular study of ten frequently eaten European boletes , B. luridus clustered together with B. rhodoxanthus . Genetic analysis published in 2013 shows that B. luridus and many ( but not all ) red @-@ pored boletes are part of a dupainii clade ( named for Boletus dupainii ) , well @-@ removed from the core group of Boletus edulis and relatives within the Boletineae . For this reason , it is now considered a species of Suillellus . 
 The English common name is lurid bolete . Both it and Boletus satanas are known as <unk> , " bear mushroom " , in Eastern Turkey . 
 = = Description = = 
