 = = = The Southern Pawnees move north = = = 
 The ancestors of the modern Pawnee people were not a single unified tribe . At the middle of the 18th century , they consisted of two major groups . The Skidis , or Wolf Pawnees , had migrated northward with the <unk> , and had probably been in Nebraska since 1600 or earlier . By the beginning of the 18th century , they were established on the Loup River , which flows through central Nebraska into the Platte River from the north . 
 The second major division of the ancestral Pawnees was the Southern , or Black Pawnees . Their migration history is not well documented ; but by 1750 they , with the related and allied Wichitas , had established what seemed to be a secure territory on the Arkansas River . 
 The security of the southern bands depended on French trade in arms , and this was disrupted by the French and Indian War ( 1754 – 63 ) . In 1763 , France surrendered the Louisiana Territory under the terms of the Treaty of Fontainebleau . Great Britain obtained the portion of the territory east of the Mississippi River . Spain received the territory west of the Mississippi , including New Orleans , although they did not make their claim to that city effective until Governor Alejandro O 'Reilly suppressed the Rebellion of 1768 . Once in control of New Orleans , the Spanish imposed severe restrictions on trade up the Mississippi , cutting off the supply of arms to the Southern Pawnees and Wichitas . 
 The neighboring Osages were not so affected , as they had access to arms smuggled by French traders from British territory in present @-@ day Illinois . With superior weaponry , they drove between the Southern Pawnees and the Wichitas , pushing the latter group southward to the Red River . The Pawnees moved northward into Nebraska , possibly because of news that modern weapons were available from traders on the Platte . 
 The dates of the moves are not known exactly . The Wichita move from the Arkansas to the Red occurred at some time between 1768 and 1772 . The Osages occupied the former Pawnee @-@ Wichita hunting grounds on the Arkansas in 1774 , indicating that the Pawnees had left by then ; in 1777 , a Spanish report indicated that they were in Nebraska . 
 The Southern Pawnees were divided into three bands : the Chauis , or Grand Pawnees ; the Pitahawiratas , or <unk> Pawnees ; and the Kitkehahkis , or Republican Pawnees . The Chauis were regarded as the nominal leaders , and in the traditional account they led the migration to Nebraska , followed by the Pitahawiratas . However , the Kitkehahkis declined to follow the Chaui chiefs to their new settlements on the Platte ; instead , they established themselves on the Republican River , near what is now the Nebraska @-@ Kansas border . 
 = = = Occupation history = = = 
 There is much debate among historians and archaeologists concerning the dates of occupation of the Webster County village . Four Kitkehahki village sites on the Republican are known , two of them quite large : this one , and the Pawnee Indian Village Site near Republic , Kansas , 49 kilometres ( 30 mi ) downstream . The band inhabited the Republican valley intermittently from the 1770s to the 1820s . Unfortunately , there is little information on which villages were occupied at what times , although there is a strong consensus that this village is the one visited by Pike in 1806 . The following account , therefore , can only describe what is known about Kitkehahki occupation and abandonment of the Republican valley , and not the history of this particular village . 
 The Pawnees did not live in their villages year @-@ round . In the spring , they planted and <unk> crops near their villages . In mid @-@ June , they left on their summer buffalo hunt . In September , they returned to harvest the crops and to hold their harvest festival ; they then cached a portion of their food in their villages and left on the winter buffalo hunt , from which they did not return until planting time in the spring . Thus the villages were deserted for at least eight months of the year . 
 The Kitkehahkis also moved , both in small groups and en masse , between the Republican and the Platte . The Pitahawiratas and the Chauis seem to have lived together amicably from the time of their arrival in Nebraska . However , the Kitkehahkis were divided between those who wanted to live independently on the Republican , and those who wanted to live near the Chauis on the Platte . The three bands frequently moved together on the summer and winter buffalo hunts , so there was regular contact between them . It was common for people to move from one household to another , especially upon returning from a buffalo hunt ; this would have facilitated moves from village to village . 
 At times , the entire Kitkehahki band abandoned the Republican and moved to the Platte . Generally , this took place in times of war , when the bands sought protection in numbers . Movement between the Republican and the Platte probably occurred continually until about 1825 . 
 = = = War with the Skidis = = = 
 When the Southern Pawnees arrived in Nebraska , the Skidis were not pleased to see them on lands that they regarded as their own . Nevertheless , they were willing to accept them as neighbors , so long as they kept to the south side of the Platte . However , the Chaui leaders demanded that they be recognized as the heads of the entire Pawnee people , above the Skidi chiefs . They defied the Skidis by sending a large hunting party to Prairie Creek , on the north side of the Platte within sight of the Skidi villages on the Loup . The Skidis responded by attacking the Chaui hunters and driving them back across the Platte . The Chauis and Pitahawiratas resolved on war , and summoned the Kitkehahki fighters to join them against the Skidis ; the Kitkehahkis , unwilling to leave their people unprotected against Skidi raids , left the Republican and moved to the Platte near the other bands . 
 The conflict with the Skidis probably took place sometime between 1770 and 1775 . It concluded with the defeat of the Skidis , who , although nominally conquered , remained on the Loup and continued to hunt separately from the other three bands . By 1777 , the Kitkehahkis had moved back to the Republican . 
 At some time between 1777 and 1785 , the Kitkehahkis again abandoned and then re @-@ occupied the Republican valley . A Spanish account of 1785 describes a village on the south side of the Platte in Butler County , not far from the modern town of Linwood , Nebraska ; this village was occupied by the Kitkehahkis until about 1785 , when they returned to the Republican . 
 = = = War with the Omahas = = = 
 War came to the Kitkehahkis on the Republican in 1798 . The Omahas , under the leadership of Chief Blackbird , had become perhaps the most powerful group in Nebraska . They were located at the junction of the French trade route up the Missouri River and an overland route across northern Iowa whereby the Sac and Fox brought British arms and goods westward . This allowed them to levy tribute and exercise control over trade on the Missouri . 
 During the height of their power in the late 1790s , bands of Omaha warriors frequently visited the Kitkehahkis to perform the calumet ceremony . This traditional peacemaking ritual had degenerated into what the Omahas called " smoking for horses " : the Kitkehahkis were obliged to give feasts and presents of horses to their uninvited guests . In 1798 , a group of Omahas under Little Grizzly Bear went for this purpose to the Republican . The Kitkehahkis , feeling imposed upon by the frequency of these visits , stripped and beat the Omahas and drove them out of the village . 
 When Blackbird learned of this , he ordered an attack on the Kitkehahkis . The Omahas descended upon the band 's village , burned and plundered many of the lodges , and killed about one hundred Pawnees at the cost of about fifteen of their own men . The remaining Kitkehahkis had withdrawn into four lodges , occupying a position too strong for the Omahas to reach them and massacre them without unacceptable losses . 
 Whether the Republican valley was abandoned after the Omaha attack is not recorded . The invading Omahas had camped on the Platte , undisturbed by the Chauis , on their way to the Kitkehahkis ; this might indicate that the two Pawnee bands were on bad terms at the time . The power of the Omahas was broken soon thereafter : in about 1801 , a smallpox epidemic spread from the Skidis to the Omahas , killing half of the tribe , Blackbird among them . 
 When the Lewis and Clark Expedition reached the Platte in 1804 , they found the Kitkehahkis ( whom they mistakenly called <unk> ) living there . They were told that the band had returned to the Republican about ten years before ( that is , before the conflict with the Omahas ) , but had recently moved to the Platte under pressure from the Kanzas . By 1806 , however , the Kitkehahkis were at peace with the Kanzas , and were once again living on the Republican . 
 = = 1806 : Melgares and Pike = = 
 Under the 1800 Treaty of San Ildefonso , Spain returned the Louisiana Territory to France . In connection with this transfer , France agreed not to sell the territory to a third party ; French foreign minister Talleyrand had indicated that a strong French Louisiana would halt the expansion of Britain and the United States in the New World . 
 Napoleon quickly reneged on this agreement . In the 1803 Louisiana Purchase , France sold the territory to the United States . This led to conflict between the latter nation and Spain . The Spanish contended that the sale of Louisiana to the United States was invalid , and that the territory had reverted to them . Although they were unable to prevent American occupation of New Orleans , they sought to check American activity west of the Mississippi River . 
 Spain and the United States both sought allies among the Native Americans of the disputed territory . In June 1806 , Lieutenant Facundo Melgares and 600 men were dispatched from the Spanish provincial capital of Santa Fe down the Red River and then northward into present @-@ day Nebraska . Although no Spanish records of the Melgares expedition are known to exist , it is believed that its purpose was to find and arrest the Lewis and Clark party , and to establish alliances with the Native Americans of the region , including the Pawnees . 
 About a month later , Lieutenant Zebulon Pike left St. Louis with an American party of 23 men , and orders to negotiate peace between the Kanzas and Osages , to contact the Comanches of the high plains , and to explore the headwaters of the Red and Arkansas Rivers . For guides and interpreters to the Comanches , Pike turned to the Pawnees ; his Osage and Pawnee guides led him northwest through present @-@ day Kansas toward the Kitkehahki village on the Republican . 
 Melgares was the first to arrive at the village . His journey north had not been easy . Mutiny had broken out and been suppressed among his New Mexican militia ; and many of his horses had gone lame , or had been stolen by Pawnee raiders . He had left 240 of his men on the Arkansas in southern Kansas before turning northward with the other half of his force . In the Republican village , he met with Kitkehahki and Chaui leaders , to whom he presented gifts , including Spanish flags . The Pawnees agreed to expel Americans from their territory , but also opposed the Melgares expedition 's continuing to the Missouri River . In the face of this opposition , and with no supply lines and a force too large to live off the country , Melgares returned to the Arkansas and thence to Santa Fe . 
 = = = Pike at the village = = = 
 Pike 's party reached the Kitkehahki village on September 25 , 1806 , shortly after Melgares 's departure . Upon his arrival , he was greeted by the ranking chief , Sharitarish , who invited him to eat in his lodge and told him of Melgares 's recent visit . The Pawnees presented eight horses to the Osages accompanying Pike , and members of the two tribes smoked pipes together . Pike 's party established a camp fortified with rifle pits on a hill on the north bank of the Republican opposite the village . 
 On the following day , a delegation of 12 Kanzas arrived at the village ; on September 28 , they held a council with the Osages . Pipes were smoked in token of peace between the tribes . 
 On September 29 , Pike held a " grand council " with the Pawnees . At this council , one of Melgares 's Spanish flags was displayed at the chief 's lodge . Pike urged the Pawnees to haul it down and replace it with that of the United States . When the Pawnee chiefs demurred , 
 ... I again reiterated the demand for the flag , adding " that it was impossible for the nation to have two fathers ; that they must either be the children of the Spaniards , or acknowledge their American father " . After a silence of some time an old man rose , went to the door , took down the Spanish flag , brought it and laid it at my feet ; he then received the American flag , and elevated it on the staff which had lately borne the standard of his Catholic Majesty . 
 This was favorably received by the Osages and Kanzas , but apparently caused distress to the Pawnees . Perceiving this , Pike returned the Spanish flag to them , asking only that they not fly it during his party 's stay in the village . " At this , there was a general shout of applause ... " 
 Pike had planned for the Pawnees to guide him to the Comanches . However , upon his arrival at the village , he was informed that the two tribes were at war . When Pike expressed his intention of continuing inland toward the headwaters of the Arkansas , Sharitarish urged him to turn back : he had prevented the Spanish from going further into American territory , and would likewise resist an American movement toward Spanish land . 
 Pike refused to be intimidated . He told the chief 
 ... that the young warriors of his great American father were not women , to be turned back by words ; that I should therefore proceed , and if he thought proper to stop me , he could attempt it ; but that we were men , well armed , and would sell our lives at a dear rate to his nation ; that we knew our great father would send his young warriors there to gather our bones and revenge our deaths on his people ... 
 The Pawnees relented , though unwillingly and with much dissent . Pike obtained horses from them , and set out on October 7 . He ordered his party to stay in a compact body , with guns and bayonets and sabers at the ready ; he estimated that " it would have cost them at least 100 men to have exterminated us " . With no guides to the Comanches , he was forced to abandon that part of the mission ; instead , he returned south into Kansas , where he attempted to follow Melgares 's trail toward the Arkansas . 
 = = 1806 – 1833 = = 
 Sharitarish was a Chaui who , at some time before 1805 , had been involved in a struggle over the leadership of that band . In the course of this struggle , he had brought his clan to the Kitkehahki village on the Republican , where he had deposed <unk> , the hereditary chief of the Kitkehahki . Although the exact situation is not known , it is thought that Sharitarish was trying to bring the Kitkehahkis back to the Platte , to support his faction in the Chaui village . 
 After 1806 , the Spanish continued their efforts to win the friendship of the Pawnees . Messages were dispatched to the Pawnee chiefs , urging them to come to Santa Fe ; and most of these messages went to Sharitarish . The fact that he received them while Long Hair , the Chaui head chief , was ignored , fed his self @-@ importance . In 1809 , in an ill @-@ judged attempt to impress the Pawnees , he led the Kitkehahki to war with the Kanzas . By 1811 he had been defeated , and the Kitkehahkis had been forced to abandon the Republican and move to the Platte . 
 There is no firm documentary evidence of occupation of the Webster County village after 1809 . However , analysis of pottery and glass beads suggests that the site was re @-@ occupied during the second decade of the 19th century ; and three letters from 1823 and 1825 suggest that the Kitkehahki were living on the Republican . By 1833 , however , the village had been abandoned and the band was living on the Loup River . In that year , the four Pawnee bands , treated as a single tribe by the U.S. government , signed a treaty in which they gave up their lands south of the Platte . 
 = = Rediscovering the village = = 
 Webster County was opened to homesteaders in 1870 . In 1872 , the village site was homesteaded and placed under cultivation . 
 In 1875 , Elizabeth Johnson discovered the remains of a Pawnee village in Republic County , Kansas . She thought that it might be the site of Pike 's flag incident ; but hearing of another village in Webster County , Nebraska , she dispatched her husband and another man to investigate this site . Because the surface had been altered by cultivation , they found little evidence of habitation , and Johnson was persuaded that the Republic County site was Pike 's village . She prevented its being plowed on several occasions , and eventually purchased the land . 
 Johnson 's claim was supported by Elliott Coues , who had edited Pike 's journal ; with his endorsement , it was accepted by the Kansas State Historical Society . In 1901 , Johnson donated the land to the state of Kansas , which built a 26 @-@ foot ( 7 @.@ 9 m ) granite monument commemorating Pike 's symbolic triumph over Spain . At the dedication of the monument , several of the speakers drew parallels between the Pike episode and the recent American victory in the Spanish – American War . In 1906 , a four @-@ day festival was held to celebrate the centennial of the flag incident . 
 = = = A. T. Hill = = = 
 One of those attending the 1906 ceremonies at the Kansas monument was A. T. Hill , a resident of Logan , Kansas . Hill had no formal training as an archaeologist — indeed , his formal education had ended in the fourth grade . However , he had developed a strong interest in the history and archaeology of the Great Plains . 
 Upon reading Pike 's journal , Hill became convinced that the Kansas site could not be the correct one . To him , the local topography did not appear to match that described by Pike ; and when he attempted to retrace Pike 's route , he concluded that the actual village site must be some distance northwest of the Kansas monument . 
 In 1912 , Hill moved to Hastings , Nebraska , where he went to work for an automobile dealership . In his job , he traveled throughout central Nebraska ; in the course of this , he spoke with many collectors and investigated possible Pike sites . When he reached a managerial position at the dealership , he recruited his salesmen to bring him reports on archaeological sites and collections . 
 In 1923 , Hill learned of the remains of a Spanish saddle obtained from the George DeWitt farm in Webster County . He visited the farm , and learned from DeWitt , the son of the original homesteader , that when the land was first plowed , it was covered with Native American relics . Hill opened a grave and found a Spanish bridle bit and spur ; across the river , on land that had never been plowed , he found traces of a camp , including rifle pits . The topography of the site closely matched Pike 's description ; and when Hill attempted to follow Pike 's route from the site to the Arkansas River , he recognized a number of landmarks from Pike 's account . 
 Hill called the attention of the Nebraska State Historical Society ( <unk> ) to the site and , in 1924 , joined representatives of the Society in conducting further excavations , showing that a village of considerable size had existed there . In 1925 , to ensure archaeological access to the site and to protect it from relic @-@ hunting , he bought the two farms on whose land it lay . Between 1924 and 1930 , he excavated two lodges and over fifty graves . 
 = = = Nebraska versus Kansas = = = 
 By 1927 , Hill and the <unk> were persuaded that the Webster County site was the scene of the Pike flag incident . In that year , they challenged Kansas 's claim . A full issue of the Society 's journal , Nebraska History , was devoted to the matter . The issue , provocatively titled " The War Between Nebraska and Kansas " , included articles by representatives of the Nebraska society and of the Kansas Historical Society , each claiming the Pike site for his own state . 
 More than historical accuracy was at stake . In a 1901 address delivered at the Republic County site , Katherine S. Lewis of the Kansas Daughters of the American Revolution had declared that " we have been seeking out antiquity for Kansas ; we felt that our state was too new to be interesting " . In 1927 , Kansans still regarded their Pike site as a focus of state pride , and were unwilling to give it up : in the Nebraska History issue , George Morehouse of the <unk> wrote , " It is now very strange that ... our Nebraska friends should become so enthusiastic in trying to take from our Pike 's Pawnee Republic Village its halo of glory . " 
 In their articles , the champions of each state argued that Pike 's account of his route supported their site , and entirely ruled out the other . Both sides also argued that Pike 's description of the local topography matched their site and differed significantly from the other . 
 The proponents of the Nebraska site cited the artifacts that had been recovered from their village . These included a Spanish peace medal dated 1797 and bearing the image of Charles IV , an American peace medal of the type issued after 1801 , and soldier 's buttons and brass medallions bearing 15 stars , one of which bore the number " 1 " , that of Pike 's infantry regiment . 
 The Kansans had no such artifacts to show . However , they argued that the Nebraska village postdated the Pike episode . The Kansas village , they stated , had been the one visited by Pike , and was occupied by the Pawnees until they were driven north by the Delawares in the early 1830s ; the fleeing Pawnees had then established the village on the Republican , where they had been devastated by smallpox . In this account the epidemic , and not long habitation , explained the number of graves found by Hill ; the medals had not been buried with their original owners , but had been treasured by the band for decades , until the time that the pestilence was blamed on " evil gifts from the whites " and they were cast away . 
 Further work at both sites strengthened the case for Nebraska . Kansas supporters gave ground reluctantly : a major celebration was held at the Republic County site in 1933 , and as late as 1947 , an article in the Kansas Historical Quarterly spoke of the issue as " debatable ground " . Today , however , the Webster County site is generally acknowledged as the true one : an exhibit at the Republic County site states as much , and a Kansas historical marker near the 1901 monument states that " the village was long believed ... to be that visited by Zebulon M. Pike " . 
 Although Elizabeth Johnson was mistaken about the Pike village site , her mistake is held to be a fortunate one . The Webster County site had been subjected to decades of cultivation and relic hunting . The Republic County site was not entirely pristine , due to surface collecting and possibly to amateur excavation ; but it was far better preserved . Today , the Kansas Historical Society operates a museum on the site , built in 1967 over one of the excavated earth lodges . 
 = = Investigation history = = 
 Hill continued work at the site through 1930 . In that year , he was joined by William Duncan Strong , who the previous year had been named a professor of anthropology at the University of Nebraska , and by Strong 's research assistant Waldo Wedel . The collaboration of these three was crucial to the new science of Central Plains archaeology , and to Pawnee studies in particular : up to this time , the conventional wisdom among anthropologists was that there was no useful archaeological work to be done on the Plains . In 1936 , Wedel published his 1930 master 's thesis as the seminal An Introduction to Pawnee Archaeology . 
 In the summer of 1941 , a WPA crew excavated a number of lodges , cache pits , and graves at the site . Some testing and surface collecting were conducted in 1943 . More recently , a magnetic survey was conducted over a portion of the village in 1982 , and some testing was carried out in 1987 . 
 Hill plotted the remains of 102 lodges . Pike reported finding 44 lodges at the village ; the difference is probably due to the abandonment or destruction of lodges and the building of new ones on different sites . At least 90 graves have been investigated by archaeologists ; an estimated 75 – 100 additional graves are thought to have been opened by relic hunters . 
 = = Preservation = = 
 In 1964 , the site was listed as a National Historic Landmark . In 1966 , it was added to the National Register of Historic Places . The boundaries of the historic site were expanded to nearly 300 acres ( 120 ha ) at some time in 1977 or later . 
 The site is owned and preserved by the Nebraska State Historical Society Foundation . There is no museum or visitor center there , and the site is not open to the public . 
 = Australia national baseball team = 
 The Australian national baseball team represents Australia in international baseball tournaments and competitions . They are ranked as the top team in Oceania , and are the Oceanian Champions , having been awarded the title in 2007 when New Zealand withdrew from the Oceania Baseball Championship . After achieving a last ( 16th ) place in the 2013 World Baseball Classic , their ranked dropped to 13 , which is the lowest rank Australia ever got . The highest rank they have achieved was 9th . 
 The Australian team participated in the Summer Olympic Games in 1996 , 2000 and 2004 , but failed to qualify for 2008 . The team has also participated in both of the other major international baseball tournaments recognised by the International Baseball Federation ( IBAF ) : the Baseball World Cup and most recently the World Baseball Classic ( WBC ) . 
 The team is controlled by the Australian Baseball Federation , which is represented in the Baseball Confederation of Oceania ( <unk> ) . Prior to the <unk> 's formation , Australia competed in the Asian Baseball Championship under the Baseball Federation of Asia ( BFA ) . Australia continues to have a relationship with the BFA ; the 2011 resumption of the Asia Series includes the Australian Baseball League 's champion team . 
 = = Current roster = = 
 On 17 January 2013 , the Australian Baseball Federation announced the 28 players that made up the provisional roster for Australia at the 2013 World Baseball Classic in March . The final roster was announced on 20 February , and included only one change from the provisional roster : Shane Lindsay was added after Peter Moylan withdrew himself from the team as a result of signing with a new team , the Los Angeles Dodgers . 
 Of the players named in the roster , eight have previous Major League experience , four pitchers and four position players : Brad Harman , Justin Huber , Luke Hughes , Shane Lindsay , Chris <unk> , Ryan Rowland @-@ Smith , Chris Snelling and Brad Thomas . Assistant Coach Graeme Lloyd has also had 10 seasons as a Major League pitcher , including two World Series championships with the New York Yankees . Coaches Greg <unk> and Glenn Williams have also had Major League experience as players . Peter Moylan , 
 * – Player has not played for Australia in international competition prior to 2013 WBC 
 † – Player did not play for Australia in WBC prior to 2013 
 = = World ranking = = 
 In January 2009 the International Baseball Federation created a ranking system so that the nations involved in international competition could be compared independently . Teams receive points based on the position they finish at the end of tournaments . The system takes into account results not only of the senior men 's teams but also of junior teams . <unk> that emphasise the importance of certain tournaments are based on the number of teams competing , the number of continents represented ( or eligible to be represented ) , and in the case of continental tournaments such as the Oceania Baseball Championship the relative strength of teams eligible . Only results within the previous four years are used , so points are added and removed over time . Since the system began , the rankings have been adjusted after the completion of tournaments qualifying for the ranking process ; the most recent was the 2009 Baseball World Cup . 
 When the rankings were first introduced , Australia was listed at 10th position . The high @-@ water mark was after the 2009 World Baseball Classic when they were in 9th . The lowest position they have been in the ranking since its inception is 11th . At the end of 2010 , Australia had returned to their original position of 10th . 
 * – The tournaments that Australia participated in since the previous release of the rankings . 
 * * – Multiple tournaments were held since the previous release of the rankings . 
 † – Denotes a rankings release that had no tournaments Australia participated in . 
 = = International competition = = 
 In January 2009 the IBAF , in releasing the first edition of the world rankings , announced the classifications of various tournaments that contributed to the rankings themselves . In doing so , they identified that of the " world " tournaments , there were different levels with differing levels of weighting towards the ranks : major world championships , minor world championships , world qualifying tournaments and continental championships / qualifying tournaments . 
 = = = Major world championships = = = 
 There are currently three recognised tournaments that are considered " major " by the IBAF : the World Baseball Classic , the Summer Olympic Games and the Baseball World Cup . Of those , the Summer Olympics will be phased out of the rankings structure , as baseball will no longer be contested as an Olympic event . 
 = = = = World Baseball Classic = = = = 
 Australia has competed in all three editions of the World Baseball Classic . All sixteen teams that played in the 2006 edition were invited to compete in the second in 2009 . By virtue of their third @-@ place finish in their first @-@ round pool , Australia qualified compete at the 2013 edition of the WBC . ; however , they were eliminated with an 0 – 3 record and finished in last place overall . 
 Australia , which has not progressed beyond the first round of competition , achieved its highest finish , 12th , in the 2009 tournament . Unusual for international competition in baseball , the squads selected in the World Baseball Classic tournaments featured players active in Major League Baseball in addition to Minor League , Nippon Professional Baseball and local players . Generally players in the Major Leagues are unavailable for international representative teams due to their contracts with the respective clubs . 
 = = = = = United States , 2006 = = = = = 
 Prior to formally starting their campaign , Australia played an exhibition game , which they lost , against a Boston Red Sox squad at City of Palms Park in Fort Myers , Florida . This was also the site of their training camp . 
 Australia competed in Pool D — along with Dominican Republic , Italy and Venezuela — in the first round at Cracker Jack Stadium in Orlando , Florida . The other three teams were able to field a large number of Major League players . Of players born outside the United States on 2006 Major League Opening Day rosters , the Dominican Republic ( 85 ) and Venezuela ( 43 ) had more than all other countries and between them accounted for more than 57 % of foreign @-@ born players in the leagues . Italy is among the top nations in Europe and had access to Italian @-@ American players under the eligibility rules for the tournament . Thus , Australia was considered the underdog in the pool . 
 Having failed to win any of their round @-@ robin pool games , they finished last in their pool , and were eliminated with Canada , China , Chinese Taipei , Italy , Netherlands , Panama and South Africa . The eventual champions were Japan . 
 = = = = = Mexico , 2009 = = = = = 
 Australia was based in Peoria , Arizona — the site of the Seattle Mariners spring training camp — for their preparation for the formal start of their 2009 campaign . Unlike 2006 , in which they had one exhibition game , they competed against three different Major League clubs : the Seattle Mariners , the Milwaukee Brewers and the Chicago White Sox . Their game against Seattle was Ken Griffey , Jr . ' s first game playing for the Mariners since October 1999 , and was also their first victory as part of a World Baseball Classic tour . 
 Australia was drawn in Pool B for the 2009 tournament , along with Cuba , Mexico and South Africa , competing at Foro Sol Stadium in Mexico City . After beating Mexico in their opening game , they lost their next two games to Cuba and Mexico , and were eliminated from the tournament . The Australians set a WBC record against Mexico : 22 hits in a single game is more than any other team has achieved in either tournament . 
 = = = = = Taiwan , 2013 = = = = = 
 In June 2011 , it was announced that the field for the 2013 WBC would be expanded to include an additional 12 teams and that a qualifying round would be several months prior to the main tournament . The qualifying tournament involved the 12 newly invited teams , as well as the four lowest @-@ placed teams from the 2009 tournament ; all teams who did not win a game . The qualifying tournament broke the teams into four pools of four teams each , which competed in a six @-@ game , modified double @-@ elimination format , similar to the first round of the 2009 tournament , with the winners of the sixth game in each pool proceeding to the main tournament . Australia , having finished 12th after beating Mexico in their first game in 2009 , automatically qualified for the main tournament . 
 The main tournament combined elements of both previous WBC editions . The first round was split all teams into four pools , where the teams competed in a round @-@ robin , as was the case in the 2006 tournament . The second round used the same modified double @-@ elimination format as used in the 2009 tournament and the 2013 qualifying tournament . The final round was contested in the same manner as both previous tournaments : the top two teams from each group in the second round qualifying for the two semi @-@ final matches , the winners of which played in the championship game . 
 Australia was drawn into Pool B , which was held at the Taichung Intercontinental Baseball Stadium in Taiwan . In their opener , they fell to host and qualifiers Chinese Taipei , 4 – 1 . They followed up with a 6 – 0 loss to South Korea before finishing with a 4 – 1 defeat to the Netherlands . 
 = = = = Olympic Games = = = = 
 Australia was the third nation , after the United States and Sweden , to participate in baseball at the Summer Olympics , making their first appearance at the 1956 Games in Melbourne , and again as part of its demonstration at the 1988 Games in Seoul . Though the sport has applied for re @-@ admission for 2016 , baseball is no longer contested as a medal event at the Olympics . 
 Since baseball was first included as a medal sport at the 1992 Games in Barcelona , Australia has participated in three of the five tournaments . The best result achieved was in the 2004 Games in Athens , where Australia lost the gold medal match to Cuba to receive silver . Their medal tally puts them at 5th , equal to Chinese Taipei . 
 = = = = World Cup = = = = 
 Australia has participated in ten of the IBAF World Cup tournaments . To date its best result has been 5th , which Australia has achieved twice in both of the most recent tournaments held — 2009 and 2011 . At the 2007 tournament , Trent <unk> became the first Australian player to be named in a World Cup All Star team , in recognition of his tournament @-@ leading hitting and base @-@ running statistics . Australia is currently participating in the 2011 tournament in Panama . 
 Until 1986 , the World Cup was actually referred to as the " Amateur World Series " . The Amateur World Series only made use of round @-@ robin fixtures , with teams ranked at the end of the tournament . Australia 's first appearance was in Italy in 1978 . Out of the ten teams to compete , Australia finished 9th ahead of the other debuting team , Belgium . 
 Since the 1988 tournament , it has held the " World Cup " name , with the IBAF recognising the past Amateur World Series winners as World Cup winners . With the change of name came a change in format for the tournament : a round @-@ robin phase , followed by a knockout phase for the top four teams . ( Later tournaments would see two pools used in the first phase , and an expanded knockout phase including the top four teams from each pool . ) In the " World Cup Era " , Australia has reached the final phase four times , finishing 7th in 1998 , 6th in 2007 and most recently 5th in 2009 and 2011 . 
 = = = Minor world championships = = = 
 There are six separate tournaments that the IBAF currently recognises as " minor world championships " . Of those , Australia has only participated in one senior tournament : the Intercontinental Cup . ( Australia has also participated in the World Junior Baseball Championship and the World Youth Baseball Championship , both of which are also included in the same category for the IBAF rankings . ) 
 = = = = Intercontinental Cup = = = = 
 Australia is one of five nations to have won the Intercontinental Cup , winning the 1999 tournament by beating Cuba 4 – 3 in extra innings in front of a home crowd in Sydney . It was the first time Australia had won an international baseball tournament , and through 2009 the only win outside of the Oceania Baseball Championship . The team enjoyed several individual successes as well : 
 Dave Nilsson named tournament MVP , to go along with leading the tournament for runs batted in ( 12 ) and being named in the tournament all @-@ star team ( as catcher ) 
 Shayne Bennett led the tournament pitching with the best win – loss record ( 3 – 0 ) 
 Adam Burton led the tournament batting with the most runs scored ( 9 ) 
 Michael Moyle shared the lead in the tournament with Oscar Macias ( Cuba ) , with the most home runs ( 3 ) 
 two other Australians were selected along with Dave Nilsson in the all @-@ star team : Adrian Meagher ( right @-@ handed pitcher ) and Michael Moyle ( designated hitter ) 
 It was only the third time Cuba had been beaten in the gold medal match in the tournament 's history , having reached the tournament decider every time they have participated . Australia also shares another honour with Cuba : of the nine nations to have hosted the tournament , only Australia and Cuba have won as hosts , combining for five tournament wins from five times hosted . ( Cuba in 1979 , 1987 , 1995 and 2002 , Australia in 1999 . ) 
 Australia first participated in the tournament at the 1981 Intercontinental Cup , managing only one win out of their seven games , finishing 8th . Missing the 1983 Intercontinental Cup , they returned in 1985 to repeat their previous performance : 1 win , 8th @-@ place finish . They would not reappear at the tournament until 1993 where they improved to a 5 – 4 record to finish in 6th position . Australia 's first medal performance at the Intercontinental Cup ( and their first medal at a world tournament ) was at the 1997 tournament . In their best performance through the preliminary round , they put together a 6 – 1 record losing only to eventual silver @-@ medalists Cuba , and beating eventual gold @-@ medalists Japan . They lost to Japan in the semi @-@ final , but beat the United States for the second time in the tournament to secure the bronze . 
 Australia also competed in the most recent tournament in 2006 . There they finished in 5th position , compiling a 3 – 4 record . This is likely to be the last edition of the tournament for the foreseeable future . 
 = = = Continental tournaments = = = 
 Australia is the second of only two nations to have participated in IBAF @-@ sanctioned continental tournaments for more than one continent : the Asian Baseball Championship between 1971 – 1993 , and the Oceania Baseball Championship since 2003 . The first nation to achieve this was Guam , who competed in the Asian tournament within the same timeframe as Australia , though they were involved in the first Oceania tournament in 1999 . 
 = = = = Asian Baseball Championship = = = = 
 Australia is one of thirteen nations to have participated in the Asian Baseball Championship since the tournament was first held in 1954 . The last time they contested the championship was in 1993 , as a result of joining the newly formed Baseball Confederation of Oceania . Though their best result was a bronze medal in the 1975 , the only teams to consistently finish ahead of Australia were Japan , South Korea and Chinese Taipei — the top three teams in Asia , and all in the top five in the world . 
 = = = = Oceania Baseball Championship = = = = 
 Though scheduled to participate on three separate occasions , Australia has only contested the Oceania Baseball Championship once in 2003 . The two other times , Australia 's scheduled opponents — Guam in 2004 and New Zealand in 2007 — withdrew from competition in the lead up to each series , both times scheduled to be held in Sydney . Australia was awarded the championship both times , and as a result represented Oceania at the 2004 Summer Olympics and at the 2007 Baseball World Cup respectively . 
 Held during late April 2003 , Australia won its first continental championship , beating hosts Guam 12 – 1 , 12 – 1 and 5 – 1 to win the best of five series three games to one . ( Guam won the third game 8 – 2 . ) 
 = Donkey Kong Country 3 : Dixie Kong 's Double Trouble ! = 
 Donkey Kong Country 3 : Dixie Kong 's Double Trouble ! is an adventure platform video game developed by Rare and published by Nintendo for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System ( SNES ) . It was first released on 22 November 1996 in North America , 23 November in Japan and on 18 December 1996 in Europe and Australia . It is the third instalment of the Donkey Kong Country series , and serves as a direct sequel to Donkey Kong Country 2 : Diddy 's Kong Quest . It was also re @-@ released for the Game Boy Advance in 2005 . The game was made available to download on the Wii 's Virtual Console service in 2007 , as well as for the Wii U 's Virtual Console in 2014 . 
 The plot revolves around Dixie Kong and her cousin , Kiddy Kong , in their attempts to rescue the kidnapped Donkey Kong and Diddy Kong from series antagonist King K. Rool . The game is set in the " Northern Kremisphere " , a fictionalised version of northern Europe and Canada . Dixie Kong 's Double Trouble ! utilises the same Silicon Graphics technology from its predecessors , which feature the use of pre @-@ rendered 3D imagery . The game received positive reviews upon release . Critics praised the visuals and various aspects of gameplay , however most were divided over the game 's soundtrack . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Dixie Kong 's Double Trouble ! is a platform game where players control Dixie Kong and her cousin , Kiddy Kong , through eight worlds which comprise a total of 48 levels . Many of the gameplay elements from previous games in the series mark a return in this game , such as barrels , bonus levels which reward the player with special " bonus coins " , DK coins , animal helpers and a multiplayer mode . Both of the two playable Kongs have unique abilities , such as Dixie 's ability to slow her descent by spinning her ponytail , and Kiddy 's ability to bounce across open water . The Kongs may also pick each other up to throw each other around levels ; the impact of the other player @-@ character can reveal cracked floors , hidden switches or secret areas . At any time , the player can switch Kongs during a level . 
 Levels in the game include a mixture of platforming , swimming and on @-@ rails levels . They are based around several returning themes including forests , cliff @-@ sides , factories and mountain tops . The level design is more diverse compared to its predecessors , which includes more complex puzzles and obstacles . Every level has an enemy called a <unk> ; each of these enemies bears the DK Coin of their respective level , holding it as a shield . As these enemies always face towards the player , they must be defeated by throwing a steel barrel over them so it bounces off a wall behind them in order to strike them from behind . The game overworld is also more complex , allowing players to explore between each area instead of forcing them along a linear path . To achieve this , the game includes several vehicles such as a speedboat and hovercraft which can be used to traverse the overworld and access different worlds . 
 The game features " Animal Friends " , which return from its predecessors . Returning animals include Enguarde the swordfish , <unk> the spider and Squawks the parrot . New animals include Ellie the elephant , who can suck up water in her trunk to spray enemies with , and Parry the " parallel bird " , who flies directly above the player @-@ characters and can be used to collect out @-@ of @-@ reach items . As in the previous game , players can directly control animals instead of just riding them . Scattered around the Northern Kremisphere overworld are the Brothers Bear , a family of bears who provide the players with hints , key items or other services . Players can collect items in levels to trade with the bears for other items or to help progress to later levels ; one such item is the Bear Coin , which acts as the game 's currency . Other members from the Kong family , such as Cranky Kong , Wrinkly Kong , Swanky Kong and Funky Kong can also be found around the overworld , each of whom offer their own services . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 The player @-@ characters in this game are Dixie Kong , who is Diddy Kong 's girlfriend , and her younger cousin , Kiddy Kong . Scattered around the overworld are various other characters : Wrinkly Kong appears in " save caves , " which when entered allow the player to save their game ; Funky Kong plays a key role in the game , as he supplies the player with vehicles to traverse the overworld ; Swanky Kong , reappearing from the previous game , allows players to challenge Cranky Kong in a contest involving throwing balls at targets in exchange for Bear Coins . New to the series are the Brothers Bear , thirteen bears providing the player with services in exchange for Bear Coins , some of whom are instrumental for advancing through the game . The main antagonist of the previous games , King K. Rool , reappears under the moniker of " Baron K. Roolenstein " . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 Shortly after the events of Donkey Kong Country 2 , Donkey Kong and Diddy Kong suddenly disappear in the Northern Kremisphere , which bears a geographical resemblance to Canada and northern Europe . Dixie Kong sets off to find the pair and is joined by her cousin Kiddy Kong , aided by Funky Kong 's vehicles to traverse the land . They reach Kastle KAOS , the lair of a robot named KAOS , who was thought to be the new leader of the Kremlings . After they destroy KAOS , the curtain in the background rolls up to reveal the robot was being controlled by Baron K. Roolenstein , the new moniker of King K. Rool . After the duo fights him , Donkey and Diddy pop out of the destroyed KAOS , implying they were being used to power the robot . 
 Dixie and Kiddy uncover the extinct volcanic island of Krematoa . They meet Boomer , an exiled member of the Brothers Bear , inside his Anderson shelter . He agrees to destroy the rocks hindering the path in exchange for bonus coins . After Dixie and Kiddy find all bonus coins and five <unk> hidden in Krematoa , the duo give the cogs to Boomer , who puts them into a machine which reactivates Krematoa , revealing the <unk> , K. Roolenstein 's personal submarine . The Kongs board the submarine and battle against him in there , however he escapes once again . 
 Once the Kongs collect all DK coins , they give the coins to Funky , who in exchange gives them a gyrocopter . The duo then finds an enigmatic creature called the Banana Bird Queen , who is bound to a barrier cast by K. Roolenstein . She tells the Kongs that she can only be freed if her separated children are returned to her , and that she will rid the land of K. Rool if she is freed . The Kongs find each of her children in a cave , where one of the birds is trapped in an egg which hatches when the Kongs complete a Simon @-@ like memory game . After rescuing them and completing a large trade sequence between the Brothers Bear , the Kongs return the children to the Queen . The Queen and her children all sing , annihilating the barrier . The Queen proceeds to chase K. Rool , who is fleeing in a hovercraft . When she catches up to him , she drops a giant eggshell on top of him , which Dixie and Kiddy land on . The Kongs repeatedly knock on the shell , annoying K. Rool . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 Similar to its predecessors , Dixie Kong 's Double Trouble ! utilises the same Silicon Graphics ( SGI ) and Advanced Computer Modelling ( ACM ) rendering technology , in which pre @-@ rendered 3D animations are turned into 2D sprites . Rare founder Tim Stamper re @-@ took the role as the game 's director , whereas Rare staffers Andrew Collard and Paul Weaver designed the game . Development of Dixie Kong 's Double Trouble ! began shortly after the release of Diddy 's Kong Quest . Rare took significant financial risks in purchasing the expensive SGI equipment used to render the graphics . David Wise , Rare 's composer from 1985 to 1994 , admitted that the workstations Rare purchased were worth £ 80 @,@ 000 each . A new compression technique they developed allowed them to incorporate more detail and animation for each sprite for a given memory footprint than previously achieved on the SNES , which better captured the pre @-@ rendered graphics . Dixie Kong 's Double Trouble ! ' s soundtrack was composed by Eveline Fischer and David Wise , with Fischer producing most of the game 's music . 
 Dixie Kong 's Double Trouble ! was first released in North America on 22 November 1996 and Europe and Australia on 18 December 1996 . It was also made available to download on the Wii 's Virtual Console service in 2007 , as well as for the Wii U 's Virtual Console in 2014 . While the game sold over 3 @.@ 5 million units worldwide , it has been believed that its sales were hurt by its November 1996 release , which was when the Nintendo 64 console had the majority of industry 's attention . 1 @.@ 7 million copies were sold in Japan and 1 @.@ 12 million copies sold in the United States . Dixie Kong 's Double Trouble ! has sold the least amount of copies in the Donkey Kong Country series , with the exception of Donkey Kong Country : Tropical Freeze for the Wii U. 
 = = Reception = = 
 The game received positive reviews upon release . The SNES version holds an aggregate score of 86 % from GameRankings , whereas the Game Boy Advance version holds a score of 76 % . 
 The graphics and gameplay were the most praised aspects of the game . Frank Provo of GameSpot stated that the graphics were colourful , vibrant and " top @-@ notch " . Lucas Thomas of IGN opined that Dixie Kong 's Double Trouble ! ' s visuals were not as awe @-@ inspiring as the pre @-@ rendered CGI of Donkey Kong Country , however he admitted that they " still looked great " for the third instalment . In a retrospective review , Marcel van Duyn of NintendoLife praised the game 's visuals and detailed backgrounds , stating that they were " fantastic " for the SNES . Reviewing the Game Boy Advance version , a reviewer from GamePro thought that the graphics appeared " washed out " on the system 's backlit screen ; stating that the pre @-@ rendered sprites did not " show up very well " . A reviewer from Nintendo Master thought that the game 's main strengths were its " beautiful graphics and script " . A reviewer from <unk> asserted that the various aspects of gameplay made Dixie Kong 's Double Trouble ! a hallmark of the series . 
 The music received mixed opinions from critics . Although Provo stated that the game 's music was " catchy " , he noted that devotees to the original Donkey Kong Country may not like it . Thomas thought compared to the other Donkey Kong Country games , the music in Dixie Kong 's Double Trouble ! stands out the least , although he stated that it was an " impressive effort " . Van Duyn similarly stated that the soundtrack was not as " legendary " as it was in its previous instalment , however he still admitted that it had some " great " tracks . In addition , Van Duyn criticised the Game Boy Advance 's port for replacing all of the original music with remixed versions . However , Provo stated that the music was " just as good " as the original , regarding the soundtrack on the Game Boy Advance port . 
 = Herb Pennock = 
 Herbert Jefferis Pennock ( February 10 , 1894 – January 30 , 1948 ) was an American professional baseball pitcher . He played in Major League Baseball from 1912 through 1933 . He is best known for his time spent with the star @-@ studded New York Yankee teams of the mid to late 1920s and early 1930s . 
 Connie Mack signed Pennock to his Philadelphia Athletics in 1912 . After using Pennock sparingly , and questioning his competitive drive , Mack sold Pennock to the Boston Red Sox in 1915 . After returning from military service in 1919 , Pennock became a regular contributor for the Red Sox . The Yankees acquired Pennock from the Red Sox after the 1922 season , and he served as a key member of the pitching staff as the Yankees won four World Series championships during his tenure with the team . After retiring as a player , Pennock served as a coach and farm system director for the Red Sox , and as general manager of the Philadelphia Phillies . 
 Pennock was regarded as one of the greatest left @-@ handed pitchers in baseball history . Mack later called his sale of Pennock to the Red Sox his greatest mistake . Pennock died of a cerebral hemorrhage in 1948 ; later that year , he was posthumously inducted into the National Baseball Hall of Fame . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Pennock was born on February 10 , 1894 in Kennett Square , Pennsylvania . His father , Theodore Pennock , and mother Mary Louise Pennock ( née Sharp ) were of Scotch @-@ Irish and Quaker descent . His ancestors came to the United States with William Penn . Herb was the youngest of four children . 
 Pennock attended Westtown School and Cedarcroft Boarding School , where he played for the baseball team . After struggling as a first baseman , with a weak offensive output and throwing arm that resulted in curved throws , his Cedarcroft coach converted Pennock into a pitcher . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Philadelphia Athletics = = = 
 While pitching at Cedarcroft , Pennock threw a no @-@ hitter to catcher Earle Mack , the son of Connie Mack , manager of the Philadelphia Athletics , in 1910 . Pennock agreed to sign with the Athletics at a later date . Mack signed Pennock in 1912 to play for his collegiate team based in Atlantic City . Pennock 's father insisted that he sign under an alias in order to protect his collegiate eligibility . Pennock threw a no @-@ hitter against a traveling Negro league baseball team , and Mack promoted him to the Athletics . Mack intended for Pennock to be one of the prospects who would replace star pitchers Eddie Plank , Chief Bender , and Jack Coombs . 
 Pennock made his major league debut with the Athletics during the 1912 season on May 14 , allowing one hit in four innings pitched . He was the youngest person to play in the American League ( AL ) that season . Former major leaguer Mike Grady , a neighbor of Pennock 's in Kennett Square , took Pennock under his wing , while Bender taught Pennock to throw a screwball . 
 Pennock missed most of the 1913 season with an illness . In the 1914 season , Pennock posted an 11 – 4 win – loss record with a 2 @.@ 79 earned run average ( ERA ) in 151 2 ⁄ 3 innings pitched for the Athletics , and pitched three scoreless innings in the 1914 World Series , which the Athletics lost to the Boston Braves . Mack let Bender go after the season , naming Pennock his Opening Day starting pitcher in 1915 . On Opening Day , Pennock threw a one @-@ hit complete game shutout against the Boston Red Sox . However , as the Athletics struggled , Pennock 's nonchalant playing style drew Mack 's ire . Concluding that Pennock " lacked ambition " , Mack sold Pennock to the Red Sox for the waiver price of $ 2 @,@ 500 ( $ 58 @,@ 479 in current dollar terms ) . Mack later regarded this sale as his greatest mistake . 
 = = = Boston Red Sox = = = 
 With a deep pitching staff in place , the Red Sox loaned Pennock to the Providence Grays of the International League in August for the remainder of the 1915 season . He split the 1916 season between the Red Sox and the Buffalo Bisons , also in the International League . With Buffalo , Pennock pitched to a 1 @.@ 67 ERA , as Buffalo won the league pennant . Though the Red Sox won the 1915 and 1916 World Series , Pennock did not appear in either series . 
 Pitching in minor league baseball , Pennock began to regain confidence . However , Boston manager Jack Barry used Pennock sparingly in the 1917 season , and Pennock enlisted in the United States Navy in 1918 . Pennock pitched for a team fielded by the Navy , defeating a team composed of members of the United States Army in an exhibition for George VI , the King of England , in Stamford Bridge . After the game , Ed Barrow , the new manager of the Red Sox , signed Pennock to a new contract after promising to use him regularly during the 1919 season . 
 Pennock received only one start apiece in the months of April and May , as the 1919 Red Sox relied on George Dumont , Bill James , and Bullet Joe Bush , leading Pennock to threaten to quit in late @-@ May unless Barrow fulfilled his earlier promise to Pennock . Barrow continued to use Pennock regularly after Memorial Day , and Pennock finished the season with a 16 – 8 win @-@ loss record and a 2 @.@ 71 ERA in 219 innings pitched . He served as the team 's ace pitcher in the 1920 season , but subsequently settled in as the Red Sox ' third starter . After the 1922 Red Sox campaign , in which he went 10 – 17 , and had seven wild pitches , leading the AL , the New York Yankees began to negotiate with the Red Sox to acquire Pennock . The Yankees traded Norm McMillan , George Murray , and Camp Skinner to the Red Sox for Pennock that offseason . 
 = = = New York Yankees = = = 
 Pennock pitched to a 19 – 6 win @-@ loss record in the 1923 season , his first with the Yankees , leading the American League ( AL ) in winning percentage ( <unk> ) and finishing sixth in wins . Pitching in the 1923 World Series , Pennock defeated the New York Giants in game two , on October 11 , to end their eight @-@ game World Series winning streak . He recorded a save in securing the Yankees ' win in game four , and pitched to the win in game six on one day of rest , clinching the Yankees ' first World Series championship . Umpire Billy Evans called it " the greatest pitching performance I have ever seen " , as Pennock " had nothing . " 
 In the 1924 season , he pitched to a 21 – 9 win @-@ loss record with a 2 @.@ 83 ERA while striking out a career @-@ high 101 batters . His win total was second in the AL , behind Walter Johnson , while his ERA was third behind Johnson and Tom Zachary , and he finished fourth in strikeouts behind Johnson , Howard <unk> , and teammate Bob Shawkey . Pennock 's 277 innings pitched and 1 @.@ 220 walks plus hits per inning pitched ( WHIP ) ratio led the AL in the 1925 season , while his 2 @.@ 96 ERA was second @-@ best , behind Stan Coveleski . In the 1926 season , he posted a career @-@ high 23 wins , finishing second in the AL to George Uhle . He again led the AL in WHIP ( 1 @.@ 265 ) , and issued the fewest walks per nine innings pitched ( 1 @.@ 453 ) . During the pennant race , The Sporting News called Pennock the " best left @-@ hander in the majors " . Pennock earned the wins in game one and game five of the 1926 World Series . He finished game seven of the series , which the Yankees lost to the St. Louis Cardinals . 
 The Yankees reached the World Series , facing the Pittsburgh Pirates . Pennock pitched a complete game against the Pirates in game three of the 1927 World Series , not allowing a hit until the eighth inning . Pennock 's performance drew praise from teammate Babe Ruth . The Yankees swept the series from Pittsburgh . After pitching a three @-@ hit shutout against the Red Sox on August 12 , 1928 , he missed the remainder of the season , including the 1928 World Series , with an arm injury . His five shutouts and 0 @.@ 085 home runs per nine innings pitched led the AL . His 2 @.@ 56 ERA trailed only Garland Braxton , while his 17 wins tied for eighth place . Though the Yankees defeated the Cardinals in the 1928 World Series , the Yankees ' starting rotation without Pennock was likened to " a three @-@ stringed ukulele . " 
 In the 1929 season , Pennock saw his pitching time and pitching quality diminish . Over the rest of his career , he never posted more than 189 innings pitched in a season and his ERA rose to over 4 @.@ 00 . He suffered from bouts of neuritis in 1929 and 1930 . Pennock won his 200th career game during the 1929 season , becoming the third left @-@ handed pitcher to reach that mark . He led the AL in walks per nine innings pitched in 1930 ( 1 @.@ 151 ) and 1931 ( 1 @.@ 426 ) . Pennock pitched four innings of relief against the Chicago Cubs in the 1932 World Series , recording two saves . The New York chapter of the Baseball Writers ' Association of America named him their player of the year . 
 In 1933 , serving exclusively as a relief pitcher , Pennock had a 7 – 4 win @-@ loss record in 23 appearances . After the 1933 season , the Yankees honored Pennock with a testimonial dinner on January 6 , 1934 , and then gave him his release . 
 = = = Return to Boston = = = 
 Eddie Collins , a former teammate with the Athletics now serving as the general manager of the Red Sox , signed Pennock to their 1934 roster . In his last season pitching in the major leagues , Pennock served as a relief pitcher for the Red Sox . 
 Pennock retired with a career record of 240 wins , 162 losses , and a 3 @.@ 60 ERA . Pennock pitched in five World Series , one with Philadelphia and four with New York . He was a member of four World Series championship teams . In World Series play , Pennock amassed a 5 – 0 career win @-@ loss record with three saves , becoming the second pitcher to win five World Series games , after Coombs . Pennock was a part of seven World Series championship teams ( 1913 , 1915 , 1916 , 1923 , 1927 , 1928 , and 1932 ) , though he played in four World Series ' as a member of the winning team . Many , including Mack , consider Pennock among the greatest left @-@ handed pitchers of all time . 
 = = Post @-@ playing career = = 
 Pennock became the general manager of the Charlotte Hornets , a Red Sox ' farm team of the Piedmont League , prior to the 1935 season . He returned to the Red Sox in 1936 , serving as the first base and pitching coach under manager Joe Cronin . He served in this role through the 1938 season . In 1939 , Pennock served as the Assistant Supervisor of Boston 's minor league system , reporting to Evans . Pennock succeeded Evans as Director of Minor League Operations late in the 1940 season . 
 In December 1943 , R. R. M. Carpenter , Jr . , the new owner of the Philadelphia Phillies , hired Pennock as his general manager , after receiving a recommendation from Mack . Carpenter gave Pennock a lifetime contract . Pennock filled Carpenter 's duties when the team 's owner was drafted into service during World War II in 1944 . As general manager , Pennock changed the team 's name to the " Blue Jays " , and invested $ 1 million ( $ 13 @,@ 442 @,@ 344 in current dollar terms ) into players who would become known as the " Whiz Kids " , who won the National League pennant in 1950 , including Curt Simmons and Willie Jones . He also created a " Grandstand Managers Club " , the first in baseball history , allowing fans to give feedback to the team , and advocated for the repeal of the Bonus Rule . 
 Pennock opposed racial integration in baseball . In 1947 , when Jackie Robinson was signed to the Brooklyn Dodgers , Pennock called Dodgers team president Branch Rickey before the Dodgers ' series in Philadelphia and told him not to " bring that nigger here with the rest of the team . " He further threatened to boycott a 1947 game between the Phillies and Dodgers if Robinson played . 
 In 1948 , at the age of 53 , one week and four days before his 54th birthday , Pennock collapsed in the lobby of the Waldorf @-@ Astoria Hotel as a result of a cerebral hemorrhage . He was pronounced dead upon his arrival at Midtown Hospital . Pennock had been healthy , even inviting friends to join him at Madison Square Garden to attend a boxing match . 
 = = Honors = = 
 Pennock was honored with " Herb Pennock Day " on April 30 , 1944 in Kennett Square . Weeks after his death , Pennock was elected to the National Baseball Hall of Fame . An attempt to erect a statue in Kennett Square in his honor was blocked due to his support of segregation in baseball . 
 Fred <unk> , a teammate of Pennock , once called him the smartest ball player he knew . In 1981 , Lawrence Ritter and Donald Honig included Pennock in their book The 100 Greatest Baseball Players of All Time . He was inducted in the International League Hall of Fame in 1948 . Noted baseball photographer Charles M. Conlon considered Pennock one of his favorite subjects to photograph . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Pennock was nicknamed " the Squire of Kennett Square . " He married Esther M. Freck , his high school sweetheart and the younger sister of a childhood friend , on October 28 , 1915 . Esther often attended spring training and traveled with her husband 's team during the season . Together , the couple had a daughter , Jane ( born 1920 ) , and a son , Joe ( born 1925 ) . Jane later married Eddie Collins , Jr .. While a member of the Yankees , Pennock rented an apartment on Grand Concourse in The Bronx , where his wife and children stayed while the Yankees played their home games . 
 Pennock was a proficient horse rider . He also raised hounds and silver foxes for their pelts . He also grew flowers and vegetables on his farm . 
 = 4th Armoured Brigade ( Australia ) = 
 The 4th Armoured Brigade was an armoured formation of the Australian Army established during the Second World War . It was formed in February 1943 to provide armoured support for infantry units operating in the South West Pacific Area . Its composition varied over time , but usually comprised several armoured regiments equipped with Matilda II or M3 Grant tanks as well as some support units . 
 The brigade 's main role throughout its existence was to provide a pool of armoured units and sub @-@ units that could be deployed to augment infantry forces . It was also responsible for developing specialised variants of armoured vehicles . Elements of the 4th Armoured Brigade were detached to support most of the Australian Army 's major operations from 1943 until the end of the war , and from September 1944 it was the Army 's only armoured brigade . The formation was disbanded , after the war , in February 1946 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Establishment = = = 
 The 4th Armoured Brigade was established in February 1943 as part of a reorganisation of the Australian Army 's armoured units . As there was no longer any threat of Japanese forces invading Australia , the 2nd Armoured Division was disbanded to free up manpower for other purposes . However , it was decided to retain the headquarters of that division 's 6th Armoured Brigade to command armoured units that were intended to take part in offensive operations in New Guinea and other locations in the South West Pacific . This specialised formation was designated the 4th Armoured Brigade . The need for armoured support of infantry forces had been demonstrated by the Army 's experiences in the New Guinea Campaign during 1942 and early 1943 . 
 The main role of the 4th Armoured Brigade was to provide detachments of tanks to support infantry units . As it was not practical or necessary to deploy large armoured units in the jungle terrain common across the South West Pacific , the brigade was organised into several self @-@ supporting regimental groups . These regimental groups could in turn provide sub @-@ units with the necessary logistics support to form the armoured component of other units during combat operations . This held in practice ; during combat deployments regiments from the 4th Armoured Brigade were attached to infantry divisions or brigades , and their squadrons and troops generally operated independently as part of combined arms forces . 
 Upon formation , the main units of the 4th Armoured Brigade were the 1st Army Tank Battalion , 2 / 6th Armoured Regiment and 2 / 9th Armoured Regiment . The 1st Army Tank Battalion was equipped with Matilda II infantry tanks and had previously formed part of the 3rd Army Tank Brigade . The 2 / 6th Armoured Regiment had formed part of the 1st Armoured Division until August 1942 when it and its M3 Stuart light tanks were transferred to New Guinea . Elements of the regiment saw combat in the Battle of Buna – Gona , where the Stuart tanks were too lightly armoured to be effective . The 2 / 9th Armoured Regiment was transferred from the 3rd Armoured Division and equipped with M3 Grant medium tanks . The brigade also had several supporting engineer , medical , signals and services units . As the brigade was not intended to operate as a single unit , it lacked the armoured reconnaissance , artillery , combat engineer and infantry units which were standard elements of other Australian Army armoured brigades . The 4th Armoured Brigade 's commander from its establishment until its disbandment was Brigadier Denzil Macarthur @-@ Onslow . 
 = = = Combat operations = = = 
 The units of the 4th Armoured Brigade were concentrated at Singleton , New South Wales , on 10 March 1943 . As of April that year , the brigade formed part of the Land Headquarters Reserve . The 1st Army Tank Battalion was subsequently transferred to Caboolture in southern Queensland and reorganised as a self @-@ supporting battalion group while remaining part of the 4th Armoured Brigade . The unit was redesignated the 1st Tank Battalion on 10 June 1943 , and in August that year was shipped to Milne Bay in New Guinea . It subsequently supported the 9th Division during the Landing at Lae and Huon Peninsula campaign . The 1st Tank Battalion returned to Australia in June 1944 and was redesignated again to become the 1st Armoured Regiment . In the meantime the 2 / 4th Armoured Regiment was added to the 4th Armoured Brigade in October 1943 ; this unit had previously formed part of the 3rd Armoured Division and was re @-@ equipped with Matilda II tanks . Also in October 1943 , a party from the 4th Armoured Brigade armed with pistols was sent to <unk> Camp near Brisbane to put down a riot by soldiers being held under detention there , but did not need to use force . During March 1944 the 2 / 6th Armoured Regiment was transferred to the 1st Armoured Brigade Group , and the 2 / 5th Armoured Regiment was transferred from that formation to the 4th Armoured Brigade . 
 By mid @-@ 1944 the 4th Armoured Brigade was located in Southport , Queensland . As of 1 June , the brigade had a strength of 4 @,@ 719 men and was scheduled to be ready for offensive operations by October that year . During June it also established a training area at <unk> in Queensland , where armoured units could practice operating in tropical conditions . In September 1944 the brigade gained the 2 / 1st Armoured Brigade Reconnaissance Squadron when the 1st Armoured Brigade Group was disbanded ; this unit was reorganised to become the Armoured Squadron ( Special Equipment ) in January 1945 . The 2 / 6th Armoured Regiment was also re @-@ assigned to the 4th Armoured Brigade , but was stationed in the Sydney area . Following the disbandment of the 1st Armoured Brigade Group the 4th Armoured Brigade was the last remaining armoured brigade in the Australian Army . 
 The 4th Armoured Brigade 's structure continued to change during late 1944 and 1945 . The 2 / 1st Armoured Amphibious Squadron was authorised to be raised as part of the brigade in October 1944 , but not established until May the next year . This squadron was to operate troop @-@ carrying Landing Vehicles Tracked , but they did not arrive in time for the unit to see action before the end of the war . In January 1945 the 2 / 6th Armoured Regiment was transferred to the direct control of Land Headquarters , and moved to Puckapunyal in Victoria the next month . This change proved short @-@ lived though , as the 2 / 6th Armoured Regiment rejoined the 4th Armoured Brigade at Southport during July ; B Squadron of this regiment had been transferred to the brigade in April ahead of the remainder of the regiment moving from Victoria to Queensland . 
 One of the 4th Armoured Brigade 's regimental groups supported Australian Army offensive operations in New Guinea and Bougainville during 1944 and 1945 . The 2 / 4th Armoured Regiment was transferred to New Guinea in August 1944 , and came under the command of the First Australian Army . From January 1945 until the end of the war , C Squadron of the 2 / 4th Armoured Regiment supported the 6th Division during the Aitape – Wewak campaign . The regimental headquarters and two other squadrons took part in the Bougainville Campaign from October 1944 until the end of the war as part of II Corps . 
 During 1945 two 4th Armoured Brigade regimental groups saw action in the Borneo campaign . C Squadron of the 2 / 9th Armoured Regiment was attached to the 26th Brigade Group during the invasion of Tarakan in May 1945 . The remainder of this regiment subsequently supported the 9th Division during the early stages of the Battle of North Borneo from 10 June . The 1st Armoured Regiment and Armoured Squadron ( Special Equipment ) were attached to the 7th Division , and took part in the Battle of Balikpapan from 1 July . 
 = = = Trials and development work = = = 
 Along with its combat role , the 4th Armoured Brigade was responsible for developing and deploying specialised types of tanks . Macarthur @-@ Onslow played an important role in guiding these processes , including by helping his subordinates to overcome institutional barriers . Variants of the Matilda II trialled or developed by the brigade included the " Frog " flame throwing tank , Matilda dozer and the bomb @-@ throwing Matilda Hedgehog . The 2 / 5th Armoured Regiment also trialled a bulldozer variant of the Grant in 1945 . The Frog and Matilda dozer were used in combat by the Armoured Squadron ( Special Equipment ) during the Borneo Campaign . The 2 / 4th Armoured Regiment was issued six Matilda <unk> , but they did not arrive in Bougainville until after the end of the war . The 4th Armoured Brigade also trialled modifications to the Matilda II and Grant that sought to waterproof the tanks so they could travel through rivers and coastal waters . As well as trialling new tank variants , the Brigade developed an ammunition and fuel trailer , which could be towed by Matilda II tanks ; these trailers were used in combat zones by the 2 / 4th and 2 / 9th Armoured Regiments . 
 During 1944 the 4th Armoured Brigade provided crews for comparative trials of the American M4 Sherman and British Churchill tank in New Guinea conditions that were conducted by the Australian Army in response to a request from the British War Office . Before the tanks were sent to New Guinea , the 4th Armoured Brigade trialled two Sherman tanks alongside Grants and Matilda IIs in Queensland during mid @-@ 1944 . The Churchills and Shermans were subsequently trialled in the Madang region of New Guinea ; the Churchill proved better suited to jungle conditions . The Australian Army later ordered 510 Churchills , but none were delivered before the end of the war . 
 = = = Disbandment = = = 
 By July 1945 the only elements of the 4th Armoured Brigade in Australia were the unit 's headquarters , the 2 / 5th and 2 / 6th Armoured Regiments and the 2 / 1st Armoured Amphibious Squadron . The two regiments were preparing for offensive operations , including a planned but later cancelled invasion of Java , but did not leave Australia . 
 Most of the 4th Armoured Brigade 's units were rapidly disbanded following the war . The 2 / 1st Armoured Amphibious Squadron was dissolved in August 1945 , and the Armoured Squadron ( Special Equipment ) followed in October that year . The 4th Armoured Brigade headquarters and 2 / 5th and 2 / 6th Armoured Regiments were disbanded in February 1946 , and the 2 / 9th Armoured Regiment during the early part of the year . Only the 1st Armoured Regiment remained an active unit , and returned to its pre @-@ war designation of the 1st Royal New South Wales Lancers in 1949 . Volunteers from the 4th Armoured Brigade manned the 1st Armoured Car Squadron , which was established in 1946 for service with the British Commonwealth Occupation Force in Japan ; in 1949 this squadron was expanded to form the 1st Armoured Regiment , which remains an active part of the Australian Army . A memorial to the 4th Armoured Brigade was dedicated at Caboolture in 1993 . 
 = = Works consulted = = 
 Beale , Peter ( 2011 ) . Fallen Sentinel : Australian Tanks in World War II . Newport , NSW : Big Sky Publishing . ISBN <unk> . 
 Dexter , David ( 1961 ) . The New Guinea Offensives . Australia in the War of 1939 – 1945 . Series 1 – Army . Volume VI . Canberra : Australian War Memorial . OCLC <unk> . 
 Handel , Paul ( 2003 ) . Dust , Sand and Jungle : A History of Australian Armour During Training and Operations , 1927 – 1948 . Puckapunyal , Victoria : RAAC Memorial and Army Tank Museum . ISBN <unk> . 
 Handel , Paul ( 2004 ) . The Vital Factor : A History of 2 / 6th Australian Armoured Regiment 1941 – 1946 . Loftus , NSW : Australian Military History Publications . ISBN <unk> . 
 Hopkins , <unk> ( 1978 ) . Australian Armour : A History of the Royal Australian Armoured Corps 1927 – 1972 . Canberra : Australian Government Publishing Service . ISBN <unk> . 
 Long , Gavin ( 1963 ) . The Final Campaigns . Australia in the War of 1939 – 1945 . Series 1 – Army . Volume VII . Canberra : Australian War Memorial . OCLC 1297619 . 
 Threlfall , Adrian ( 2014 ) . Jungle Warriors : From Tobruk to Kokoda and beyond , how the Australian Army became the world 's most deadly jungle fighting force . Sydney : Allen & Unwin . ISBN <unk> . 
 = Crawl ( Chris Brown song ) = 
 " Crawl " is a song by American recording artist Chris Brown . It is the second single from his third studio album Graffiti , released as a digital download on November 24 , 2009 . The song was produced by The Messengers and was written by Nasri Atweh , Adam Messinger , Luke Boyd , and Brown . The song is about yearning to rebuild a failed relationship and was interpreted by critics as being about Brown 's former relationship with Barbadian singer Rihanna . However , Brown has stated the song is not about any of his previous relationships . 
 The song received positive to mixed reviews . It charted in the top twenty in Japan and New Zealand , and the top forty in the United Kingdom and Ireland . It peaked in the United States at number fifty @-@ three . The accompanying music video features Brown and American R & B singer Cassie as his love interest . In the video , he yearns for their relationship on a winter night in a city and in a desert scene . Brown performed the song on his 2009 Fan Appreciation Tour , and on BET 's SOS : Help for Haiti Telethon , which benefited victims of the 2010 Haiti earthquake . 
 = = Background = = 
 The song was leaked to internet on October 21 , 2009 , one day after ex @-@ girlfriend Rihanna 's ballad " Russian Roulette " was also leaked . The song , which has been described as " melancholy " , sees Brown singing about a relationship that has slipped out of his hands with its chorus calling for an " incremental reconciliation " of the unspecified relationship . Jayson Rodriguez of MTV News noted that both " Crawl " and Rihanna 's " Russian Roulette " would inevitably be interpreted as being about Brown and Rihanna 's relationship . 
 In an interview with MTV News , Brown stated that the song is not about Rihanna or any of his previous relationships . He called the message of the song " universal " , and not just about love but " any type of heartache . " About the track he said , " When I heard the whole concept and everything I was like , ' Yo , this is crazy . So being able to express the feelings , it was like , probably one of the best [ records I 've done . ] But it was more than me trying to do a record that meant crawl to love , crawl back to love . Meaning whether it 's from your negative situations , whether it 's from any problems you 've dealt with , like anybody 's situation . " Although he stated his concept for the song was about love , he said for anybody , the song could be " inspired as far it being the war or a death in the family , whether it 's anything , anybody just crawl back to love . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The song received mixed to positive reviews . Greg Kot of the Chicago Tribune said the song was one of several on parent album Graffiti that " flirt with a public apology . " Kot went on to state that a " funeral organ " hovers over the song , and " the narrator longs for a second chance : " ' So where do we go from here / With all of this fear in your eyes ? ' " Jon Caramanica of The New York Times said that both " Crawl " and another song from Graffiti , " So Cold " , come off as " thoughtful , even if they 're not quite mea <unk> " and further suggested that " In these moments Mr. Brown is pining , mildly apologetic . " Leah Greenblatt of Entertainment Weekly called the song a " genuinely affecting second single " , and stated that " Less forgiving listeners " looking for " signs of contrition " may find them on the track . Dan Gennoe of Yahoo ! Music UK said that , of the six tracks on the album 's deluxe edition that could be interpreted as dealing with Brown 's relationship with Rihanna directly , " Crawl " is " by far the most catchily contrite . " Rap @-@ Up said that the song shows Brown " taking baby steps back to love and into the spotlight , " and said that it found Brown " longing to mend a broken relationship " as in his 2008 Jordin Sparks collaboration , “ No Air ” . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 After the song 's premiere on Brown 's <unk> website , " Crawl " made its official debut on the R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart at number ninety @-@ nine . After its release for digital download on November 23 , 2009 , it later peaked at fifty @-@ nine . On the week ending December 12 , 2009 , " Crawl " debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 at sixty @-@ eight and peaked at fifty @-@ three . 
 On December 19 , 2009 , " Crawl " debuted on the UK Singles Chart at seventy @-@ six . In February , the song re @-@ entered the chart at eighty @-@ five , and debuted on the UK R & B chart at twenty @-@ five . On the week of February 27 , 2010 , the song reached its peak of number thirty @-@ five on the singles chart , and eventually peaked at number eight on the R & B chart . The song debuted and peaked on the New Zealand Singles Chart at number sixteen on the week beginning February 1 , 2010 . The song debuted and peaked at number thirty @-@ nine on the Irish Singles Chart , and reached number eight on the Dutch singles chart . It peaked at number twenty on the Japan Hot 100 , and ninety @-@ seven on the European Hot 100 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video was edited by David Blackburn and directed by Joseph Kahn , who also worked with Brown on the " I Can Transform Ya " and " Forever " videos . The video features American R & B singer Cassie as Brown 's love interest . Kahn had previously directed the video for Britney Spears 's 2008 ' comeback ' song , " Womanizer " , after her public breakdown . In an interview with MTV News , Kahn said , " I seem to be the guy that record companies go to when they need help , " he joked . " I truly feel [ Brown ] is remorseful . You don 't drop people just because they made a mistake ( even if it was a big mistake ) . " 
 Kahn said that the entire idea for the video was Brown 's : " It 's an interesting video for me , because it 's so rare that music videos ever try to achieve anything emotional . Chris just basically told me a story of what he felt this video was going to be , with his heart glowing and how he 's , like , cold . It is a very personal story . But it 's told in such a graphic manner that I fell in love with the idea . It 's Chris ' story . Period . I am the pencil that put it down on the paper . " When comparing the song 's video to that of " I Can Transform Ya " , the director said , " ' Crawl ' is my favorite one , because — gosh , I 'm going to let you in on this — ' cause it 's probably his most personal thing he 's ever done . " He went on to say , " I mean , everything that 's happened to him in the year , I think this is going to be his big statement , in terms of what he 's feeling and what he 's living through right now . " When talking about the ideas and concepts of the video , Kahn said that the video , his first ballad with Brown , should speak for itself through the ideas that he had and the " genesis " of what that idea was . 
 On November 2 , 2009 , several stills from the video were released onto the internet . The photos focused on two sets of the video , a desert location , and a snow and puddle @-@ spotted alleyway . In both settings , Brown wears the same thick black glasses , brown leather trench coat , white t @-@ shirt , and fingerless gloves , among other attire . Cassie appears in a photo from the alleyway scenes , as the desert scenes show Brown in " deep contemplation " . The video first aired on The Wendy Williams Show on Friday , November 13 , 2009 , when Brown was a guest on the show . The video opens with Brown sitting on an edge of a bed wearing a plain white t @-@ shirt . As the music begins and he starts singing , his heart is shown lit up red and beating in his chest . The singer then walks into an alleyway on a winter 's night , revealed in the air as he breathes . Brown walks past several storefronts , seeing images of Cassie broadcast on television . He then sees paparazzi taking photos of her , but she does not notice him . Brown is shown in a desert scene , and then returns to the winter night scene as Cassie sees him and they walk towards each other meeting face @-@ to @-@ face . They gather close , but Brown does not reel her in as the video ends . The music video ranked at forty @-@ eight on the BET : Notarized Top 100 Videos of 2009 countdown . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Brown performed the song on his 2009 Fan Appreciation Tour , and on Black Entertainment Television 's SOS Saving Ourselves : Hope for Haiti Telethon , to raise money for the country after the 2010 earthquake that devastated the area . Eric Ditzian of MTV News noted that although the song was rumored to be about Rihanna , " the lyrics also at times seemed to fit the evening 's focus , like when Brown sang , " If we crawl till we can walk again / Then we 'll run until we 're strong enough to jump . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital download 
 " Crawl " – 3 : 57 
 Germany Digital download 
 Crawl - 3 : 56 
 Graffiti - 5 : 12 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Songwriting - Chris Brown , Nasri Atweh , Adam Messinger , Luke Boyd 
 Production - Adam Messinger , Nasri Atweh 
 Background vocals - Adam Messinger , Nasri Atweh 
 Vocal recording - Brian Springer 
 Mixing - Manny Marroquin , assisted by Christian Plata & Erik Madrid 
 Source 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = = Weekly charts = = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Missoula , Montana = 
 Missoula / <unk> / is a city in the U.S. state of Montana and is the county seat of Missoula County . It is located along the Clark Fork River near its confluences with the Bitterroot and Blackfoot Rivers in western Montana and at the convergence of five mountain ranges , thus is often described as the " hub of five valleys " . In 2015 , the United States Census Bureau estimated the city 's population at 71 @,@ 022 and the population of the Missoula Metropolitan Area at 114 @,@ 181 . In the 1990s , Missoula overtook Great Falls as Montana ’ s second ‑ largest city , behind Billings . Missoula is home to the University of Montana , a public research university . 
 Missoula was founded in 1860 as Hellgate Trading Post while still part of Washington Territory . By 1866 , the settlement had moved east , 5 miles ( 8 km ) upstream , and renamed Missoula Mills , later shortened to Missoula . The mills provided supplies to western settlers traveling along the Mullan Road . The establishment of Fort Missoula in 1877 to protect settlers further stabilized the economy . The arrival of the Northern Pacific Railway in 1883 brought rapid growth and the maturation of the local lumber industry . In 1893 , the Montana Legislature chose the city as the site for the state 's first university . Along with the U.S. Forest Service headquarters founded in 1908 , lumber and the university remained staples of the local economy for the next hundred years . 
 By the 1990s , Missoula 's lumber industry had gradually disappeared , and as of 2009 , the city 's largest employers were the University of Montana , Missoula County Public Schools , and Missoula 's two hospitals . The city is governed by a mayor – council government with twelve city council members , two from each of the six wards . In and around Missoula are 400 acres ( 160 ha ) of parkland , 22 miles ( 35 km ) of trails , and nearly 5 @,@ 000 acres ( 2 @,@ 000 ha ) of open @-@ space conservation land with adjacent Mount Jumbo home to grazing elk and mule deer during the winter . The city is also home to both Montana 's largest and its oldest active breweries as well as the Montana Grizzlies , one of the strongest college football programs in the Division I Football Championship Subdivision of the National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) . Notable residents include the first woman in the U.S. Congress , Jeannette Rankin , and the United States ' longest @-@ serving Senate Majority Leader , Mike Mansfield . 
 = = History = = 
 Archaeological artifacts date the Missoula Valley 's earliest inhabitants to the end of the last ice age 12 @,@ 000 years ago with settlements as early as 3500 BCE . From the 1700s until European settlements began a hundred years later , it was primarily the Salish , Kootenai , Pend d 'Oreille , Blackfeet , and Shoshone who used the land . Located at the confluence of five mountain valleys , the Missoula Valley was heavily traversed by local and distant native tribes that periodically went to the Eastern Montana plains in search of bison , leading to conflict . The narrow valley at Missoula 's eastern entrance was so strewn with human bones from repeated ambushes that French fur trappers would later refer to this area as Porte de l 'Enfer , translated as " Gate of Hell " . Hell Gate would remain the name of the area until it was renamed " Missoula " in 1866 . 
 The Lewis and Clark Expedition brought the first U.S. citizens to the area . They twice stopped just south of Missoula at Traveler 's Rest . They camped there the first time on their westbound trip in September 1805 . When they stayed there again on their return in June – July 1806 , Clark left heading south along the Bitterroot River and Lewis traveled north , then east , through Hellgate Canyon . In 1860 , Hell Gate Village was established 5 miles ( 8 km ) west of present @-@ day downtown by Christopher P. Higgins and Frank Worden as a trading post to serve travelers on the recently completed Mullan Road , the first wagon road to cross the Rocky Mountains to the inland of the Pacific Northwest . The desire for a more convenient water supply to power a lumber and flour mill led to the movement of the settlement to its modern location in 1864 . 
 The Missoula Mills replaced Hell Gate Village as the economic power of the valley and replaced it as the county seat in 1866 . The name " Missoula " came from the Salish name for the Clark Fork River , " <unk> " , which roughly translates as " place of frozen water " . Fort Missoula was established in 1877 to help protect further arriving settlers . Growth accelerated with the arrival of the Northern Pacific Railway in 1883 , and the Town of Missoula was chartered the same year . In 1893 , Missoula was chosen as the location of the state 's first university , the University of Montana . The need for lumber for the railway and its bridges spurred the opening of multiple saw mills in the area and , in turn , the beginning of Missoula 's lumber industry , which remained the mainstay of the area 's economy for the next hundred years . The continued economic windfall from railroad construction and lumber mills led to a further boom in Missoula 's population . A. B. Hammond and Copper Kings Marcus Daly and William A. Clark competed fiercely in the region over lumber share and Missoula investments . The United States Forest Service work in Missoula began in 1905 . Missoula is also home of the smokejumpers ' headquarters and will be the site of the National Museum of Forest Service History . Nationally , there are nine Forest Service regions ; Region 1 is headquartered in Missoula . 
 Logging remained a mainstay of industry in Missoula with the groundbreaking of the Hoerner @-@ Waldorf pulp mill in 1956 , which resulted in protests over the resultant air pollution . An article in Life magazine thirteen years later speaks of Missoulians sometimes needing to drive with headlights on during the day to navigate through the smog . In 1979 , still almost 40 % of the county 's labor income came from the wood and paper products sector . The lumber industry was hit hard by the recession of the early 1980s , and Missoula 's economy began to diversify . By the early 1990s , the disappearance of many of the region 's log yards , along with legislation , had helped clean the skies dramatically . 
 As of 2009 , education and healthcare were Missoula 's leading industries ; the University of Montana , Missoula County Public Schools , and the city 's two hospitals were the largest employers . St. Patrick Hospital and Health Sciences Center , founded in 1873 , is the region 's only Level II trauma center and has undergone three major expansions since the 1980s . Likewise , the University of Montana grew 50 % and built or renovated 20 buildings from 1990 – 2010 . It is expected that these industries as well as expansions in business and professional services , and retail will be the main engines of future growth . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Missoula is located at the western edge of Montana approximately 45 miles ( 70 km ) from the Idaho border . The city is at an elevation of 3 @,@ 209 feet ( 978 m ) above sea level , with nearby Mount Sentinel and Mount Jumbo steeply rising to 5 @,@ 158 feet ( 1 @,@ 572 m ) and 4 @,@ 768 feet ( 1 @,@ 453 m ) respectively . According to the Census Bureau 's 2015 figures , the city had a total area of 29 @.@ 08 square miles ( 75 @.@ 3 km2 ) , of which , 28 @.@ 90 square miles ( 74 @.@ 9 km2 ) was land and 0 @.@ 184 square miles ( 0 @.@ 48 km2 ) was water . 
 Approximately 13 @,@ 000 years ago , the entire valley was at the bottom of Glacial Lake Missoula and as could be expected for a former lake bottom , the layout of Missoula is relatively flat and surrounded by steep hills . Evidence of the city of Missoula 's lake @-@ bottom past can be seen in the form of ancient horizontal wave @-@ cut shorelines on nearby Mount Sentinel and Mount Jumbo . At the location of present @-@ day University of Montana , the lake once had a depth of 950 feet ( 290 m ) . The Clark Fork River enters the Missoula Valley from the east through Hellgate Canyon after joining the nearby Blackfoot River at the site of the former Milltown Dam . The Bitterroot River and multiple smaller tributaries join the Clark Fork on the western edge of Missoula . The city also sits at the convergence of five mountain ranges : the Bitterroot Mountains , Sapphire Range , Garnet Range , Rattlesnake Mountains , and the Reservation Divide , thus is often described as being the " hub of five valleys " . 
 = = = Flora and fauna = = = 
 Located in the Northern Rockies , Missoula has a typical Rocky Mountain ecology . Local wildlife includes populations of white @-@ tailed deer , black bears , osprey , and bald eagles . During the winter , rapid snowmelt on Mount Jumbo due to its steep slope leaves grass available for grazing elk and mule deer . The rivers around Missoula provide nesting habitats for bank swallows , northern rough @-@ winged swallows and belted kingfishers . <unk> and spotted sandpipers can be seen foraging for insects along the gravel bars . Other species include song sparrows , catbirds , several species of warblers , and the pileated woodpecker . The rivers also provide cold , clean water for native fish such as westslope cutthroat trout and bull trout . The meandering streams also attract beaver and wood ducks . The parks also host a variety of snakes such as racers , garter snakes , and rubber boa . 
 Native riparian plant life includes sandbar willows and cottonwoods with Montana 's state tree , the ponderosa pine , also being prevalent . Other native plants include wetland species such as cattails and beaked @-@ sedge as well as shrubs and berry plants like Douglas hawthorn , chokecherry , and western <unk> . To the chagrin of local farmers , Missoula is also home to several noxious weeds , which multiple programs have set out to eliminate . Notable ones include Dalmatian toadflax , spotted knapweed , leafy spurge , St. John 's wort , and sulfur cinquefoil . Controversially , the Norway maples that line many of Missoula 's older streets have also been declared an invasive species . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Missoula has a semi @-@ arid climate ( Köppen climate classification BSk ) , with cold and moderately snowy winters , hot and dry summers , and short , crisp springs and autumns . Winters are usually milder than much of the rest of the state due to its location west of the Rockies , allowing it to be influenced more by mild , moist Pacific air and avoiding the worst of cold snaps ; however , this means precipitation is not at a strong minimum during winter . Winter snowfall averages 39 @.@ 5 inches ( 100 cm ) , on average occurring between October 30 and April 20 . As with the rest of the state , summers are very sunny , and the average diurnal temperature variation is more than 30 ° F ( 17 ° C ) from late June through late September , due to the relative aridity . The monthly daily average temperature ranges from 23 @.@ 9 ° F ( − 4 @.@ 5 ° C ) in December to 68 @.@ 6 ° F ( 20 @.@ 3 ° C ) in July . There is an average of 24 days with temperatures above 90 ° F ( 32 ° C ) , 45 days where the temperature does not rise above freezing , and 7 @.@ 8 days with temperatures below 0 ° F ( − 18 ° C ) . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 The median income for a household in the city was $ 30 @,@ 366 , and the median income for a family was $ 42 @,@ 103 . Males had a median income of $ 30 @,@ 686 versus $ 21 @,@ 559 for females . The per capita income for the city was $ 17 @,@ 166 . About 11 @.@ 7 % of families and 19 @.@ 7 % of the population were below the poverty line , including 20 @.@ 5 % of those under age 18 and 9 @.@ 3 % of those age 65 or over . 40 @.@ 3 % of Missoula residents age 25 and older have a bachelor 's or advanced college degree . 
 = = = 2010 census = = = 
 As of 2010 's census , there were 66 @,@ 788 people , 29 @,@ 081 households , and 13 @,@ 990 families residing in the city . The population density was 2 @,@ 427 @.@ 8 inhabitants per square mile ( 937 @.@ 4 / km2 ) . There were 30 @,@ 682 housing units at an average density of 1 @,@ 115 @.@ 3 per square mile ( 430 @.@ 6 / km2 ) . The racial makeup of the city was 92 @.@ 1 % White , 0 @.@ 5 % African American , 2 @.@ 8 % Native American , 1 @.@ 2 % Asian , 0 @.@ 1 % Pacific Islander , 0 @.@ 5 % from other races , and 2 @.@ 8 % from two or more races . Hispanic or Latino of any race were 2 @.@ 9 % of the population . 
 There were 29 @,@ 081 households of which 23 @.@ 6 % had children under the age of 18 living with them , 34 @.@ 4 % were married couples living together , 9 @.@ 6 % had a female householder with no husband present , 4 @.@ 1 % had a male householder with no wife present , and 51 @.@ 9 % were non @-@ families . 35 @.@ 0 % of all households were made up of individuals and 9 @.@ 1 % had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2 @.@ 18 and the average family size was 2 @.@ 82 . 
 The median age in the city was 30 @.@ 9 years . 17 @.@ 9 % of residents were under the age of 18 ; 19 @.@ 7 % were between the ages of 18 and 24 ; 29 @.@ 6 % were from 25 to 44 ; 22 @.@ 1 % were from 45 to 64 ; and 10 @.@ 7 % were 65 years of age or older . The gender makeup of the city was 49 @.@ 9 % male and 50 @.@ 1 % female . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Missoula began as a trading post in the 1860s situated along the Mullan Military Road to take advantage of the first route across the Bitterroot Mountains to the plains of Eastern Washington . Its designation as county seat in 1866 and location of the hastily built Fort Missoula in 1877 ensured Missoula 's status as a regional commercial center ; a status further consolidated in 1883 with the arrival of the Northern Pacific Railway . The railroad expanded Missoula 's trade area to cover a 150 @-@ mile radius , and Missoula 's location as the railway 's division point and repair shops provided hundreds of jobs . When the railway began expanding again in 1898 , increased freight shipments came through the city , and with the arrival of the Milwaukee Road and regional office for the U.S. Forest Service as well as the opening of the Flathead Indian Reservation to settlement all within a couple years of each other beginning in 1908 , the economy began to rapidly expand . 
 Lumber mills , originally built to provide construction @-@ grade materials for homes and business but then expanded to entice and then meet the demands of the railroad , profited from an increase in demand from railroad expansion and the nation at large . The Bonner mill , owned the Northern Pacific and Copper King Marcus Daly , became the largest producer of lumber in the northwest . In 1908 , Missoula 's location as both a major lumber producer and a regional commercial center helped land the city the regional office for the newly establish U.S. Forest Service created to help manage the nation 's timber supply . Over the next century , Missoula 's various lumber industries was consolidated under various entities such as the Anaconda Company in the 1970s and Champion International Paper through the 1980s until most were under control of Plum Creek Timber , all the while demand in timber dropped . In 2007 , a downward spiral of Missoula 's lumber industry began with the closure of a plywood plant in Bonner , the closure of Bonner 's sawmill in 2008 , and the closing of the Smurfit @-@ Stone Container pulp mill in 2010 . 
 Since opening in 1895 , the University of Montana has had a major impact on the development of Missoula 's economy . In addition to the economic advantage from accommodating the student body , it gave the city an educated workforce not available in most of the state . The university has a close relationship with the city as Missoula 's largest employer and with the millions of dollars the school brings into the city through visitors of school @-@ sponsored sporting and cultural events . The university also houses Missoula 's only business incubator , the Montana Technology Enterprise Center ( <unk> ) , and several start @-@ up businesses . 
 Beyond timber and education , Missoula 's economic mainstay has been of one as a regional trade center . Missoula has an immediate trade area of approximately 180 @,@ 000 residents . The Missoula is the hub of its Bureau of Economic Analysis ( BEA ) Economic Area , which includes the Montana Counties of Flathead , Lake , Lincoln , Mineral , Missoula , <unk> , and Sanders . As of 2011 , the BEA listed the economic area population at 306 @,@ 050 . Key businesses sectors serving the area include health care , retail shopping , transportation , financial services , government and social services , education , events , arts and culture . Health care in particular is one of Missoula 's fastest growing industries with St. Patrick Hospital ( western Montana 's only Level II Trauma center ) and the Community Medical Center already the city 's second and third largest employers behind the university . 55 % of employment in Missoula is made up of the service and retail sectors . Export industries are concentrated in heavy and civil engineering , construction , beverage production , technical services , truck transportation , and <unk> , <unk> , and wood @-@ related industries . In addition to nearly 4 million out @-@ of @-@ state visitors annually , which makes tourism a significant aspect of the Missoula economy , Missoula also is home to a vibrant sector of alternative healthcare . 
 As of 2013 , Missoula ranked 299 nationally in gross metropolitan product with an output of $ 5 billion , while the city 's total personal income ranked 333 at $ 4 @.@ 18 billion , an increase of more than 47 % since 2003 . As of 2013 , per capita personal income ranked 239 at $ 37 @,@ 397 a year , 84 % of the national average . The Missoula metropolitan area 's unemployment rate was 3 @.@ 7 % As of June 2015 , dropping nearly 0 @.@ 8 % in the twelve months prior . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Missoula , often considered the cultural center of Montana , is the location of the state 's first university , and an eclectic mix of loggers , hippies , college students , sports fans , and retirees . Community events generally take place downtown either outdoors or in one of the several downtown buildings listed on the National Historic Registry . 
 Since 2006 , the River City Roots Festival has been an event each August with music , beer , food , and art , and generally attracts crowds of 15 @,@ 000 . The longest @-@ standing event downtown has been the Missoula Farmers Market that was founded in 1972 , which provides an outlet for Western Montana produce on Saturday mornings from May to October as well as Tuesday evenings from July to early September . An arts and crafts People 's Market and a Clark Fork Market run concurrently . Downtown hosts " First Friday Missoula " , a gallery walk on the first Friday of the month to feature local art from museums and galleries , such as that of Monte <unk> . Missoula celebrates " First Night Missoula " on New Year 's Eve , which includes food and live entertainment . The " Festival of the Book " to celebrate the literature of the American West was rebranded the " Montana Book Festival " in 2015 . Missoula 's two historic theatres both hold annual film festivals : the Roxy hosting the International Wildlife Film Festival , established in 1977 as the first juried wildlife film festival in the world ; and since 2003 , the Wilma accommodating the largest film event in Montana , the Big Sky Documentary Film Festival . In performance arts , the Missoula Community Theatre has held performances of musical and non @-@ musical plays since 1977 , with its affiliated Missoula Children 's Theatre also acting as an international touring program that visits nearly 1 @,@ 000 communities per year around the world . 
 The Montana Museum of Art & Culture , which became a state museum in 2001 , is one Montana 's oldest cultural reserves , having begun in 1894 ; its permanent collection of more than 10 @,@ 000 original works . The Missoula Museum of Art is housed in a former Carnegie library ; it features contemporary art and annually features 20 – 25 group and solo exhibits . Fort Missoula is home to the Historic Museum , dedicated to preserving the history of Western Montana , and to the Rocky Mountain Museum of Military History and the Northern Rockies Heritage Center . The National Museum of Forest Service History is constructing the National Conservation Legacy and Education Center in Missoula as well . 
 Opened in 1987 , Missoula 's Bayern Brewing is the oldest active brewery in Montana . Big Sky Brewing opened in 1995 and with a production of over 38 @,@ 000 barrels in 2008 , it is by far Montana 's largest brewery , and produces the best @-@ selling beer brewed in Montana , Moose Drool Brown Ale . Missoula has also been home to Kettle House Brewing since 1995 and Draught Works opened in 2011 . Big Sky , Bayern , and <unk> represent the first , second , and third largest breweries respectively in the state of Montana . Also in 2011 , Tamarack Brewing and Flathead Lake Brewing Company from nearby Lake County opened pub houses at downtown Missoula locations . The city also holds annual the Garden City <unk> and Winterfest , and also periodically hosts the Montana Brewers Festival . 
 Missoula 's celebration of the outdoors can also be seen in notable non @-@ profits based in the city such as the Adventure Cycling Association , the conservationist @-@ hunting organizations Boone and Crockett Club and Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation , and the Outdoor Writers Association of America . In an attempt to reduce harmful emissions , the non @-@ profit Missoula in Motion promotes environmentally sustainable transportation options for commuters , such as walking , biking , carpooling , public transportation , and telecommuting . Other non @-@ profits headquartered in Missoula illustrate the city 's liberal reputation in Montana . Promoter of marijuana law reform NORML has its state headquarters in Missoula , as does the Montana Hemp Council . Forward Montana is a " left @-@ leaning though officially nonpartisan group that seeks to engage young people in politics " . The Montana Justice Foundation , founded in 1979 , is a charitable organization that helps underprivileged and underserved <unk> to access to civil legal aid . The Western Montana Community Center supports the LGBTIQ community and the Jeannette Rankin Peace Center focuses on " nonviolence , social justice and environmental sustainability " . The largest emergency homeless shelter and soup kitchen in Montana , the <unk> Center , is also located in Missoula . 
 = = Sports = = 
 Missoula plays host to a variety of intercollegiate , youth , and amateur sports organizations in addition to a Minor league baseball team . The Montana Grizzlies ' football and basketball teams of the University of Montana have the highest attendance . The Montana Grizzlies football team has a successful program within the NCAA D @-@ 1 FCS level . Their home games at Washington – Grizzly Stadium have a near 90 % winning percentage and average over 25 @,@ 000 spectators in attendance . All games are televised throughout Montana . The Grizzlies men 's and Lady Griz basketball teams have also been successful at the conference level where they both rank at or near the top in attendance , about 4 @,@ 000 and 3 @,@ 000 respectively , and play their home games at Dahlberg Arena . 
 Missoula is also home to the Missoula Osprey , a rookie affiliate of the Arizona Diamondbacks that plays in the Rocky Mountain @-@ based Pioneer Baseball League . They play their home games at <unk> Park at Allegiance Field . Also competing regionally are the Hellgate Rollergirls , a roller derby team that competes at the Adam 's Center . Since 1977 , Missoula has also held " <unk> " , a festival @-@ style rugby tournament hosted by the Missoula Maggots Rugby Club the first weekend in May . The non @-@ elimination tournament focuses on the fun aspect of the game , attracting 36 teams ( male and female ) from around the United States and Canada . In regular season play , the Missoula Maggots compete as part of the Montana Rugby Union alongside another local rugby team , the University of Montana Jesters . 
 = = Parks and recreation = = 
 The city has over 400 acres ( 160 ha ) of parkland , 22 miles ( 35 km ) of trails , and nearly 5 @,@ 000 acres ( 2 @,@ 000 ha ) of conserved open @-@ space . Located at the confluence of three rivers ( the Clark Fork , Bitterroot , and Blackfoot ) , the area is also popular for white water rafting and , thanks largely to the novel and subsequent film A River Runs Through It by Missoula native Norman Maclean , is well known for its fly fishing . Additionally , Missoula has two aquatic parks , multiple golf courses , is home to the Adventure Cycling Association , and hosts what Runner 's World called the " best overall " marathon in the U.S. There are also three ski areas within 100 miles ( 160 km ) : Montana Snowbowl , Discovery Ski Area , and Lost Trail Powder Mountain . Slightly farther away are Lookout Pass , Blacktail Mountain , and Big Mountain . 
 A system of public parks was developed in Missoula in 1902 with the donation by lumber baron Thomas Greenough and his wife Tessie . They gave a 42 @-@ acre ( 17 ha ) tract of land along Rattlesnake Creek for Greenough Park , on the condition that " the land forever be used as a park and for park purposes to which the people of Missoula may . . . find a comfortable , romantic and poetic retreat " . In a follow @-@ up nine years later in a letter to the Missoulian , he stressed his interest in having the park remain in as close to a native state as possible . That request , along with the discovery that non @-@ native Norway maples were inhibiting the growth of native trees and shrubs such as cottonwoods , ponderosa pines and Rocky Mountain maples , led to the controversial decision to remove Norway maples from the park with the hope of returning it to its natural state . 
 In 1924 , Bonner Park was created out of John L. Bonner 's estate near the university . The park today has multiple athletic fields and courts in addition a band shell used by the Missoula City band through the summer . The Kiwanis club set up a park downtown in 1934 , making Kiwanis Park the first of a string of parks which line both sides of the Clark Fork River . One of those parks on the southern bank of the river is McCormick Park , which was created with WPA funds out of surplus highway land , a parcel from the American Hide and Fur Company , and land donated from the Kate McCormick estate . The 26 @-@ acre ( 11 ha ) park , named for Washington J. McCormick and his wife is home to a skate park , aquatics center , a free bike check @-@ out and a children 's fishing pond . Other popular parks include the Jacobs Island Bark Park , a designated area for dogs to play off @-@ leash ; the Montana State veterans ' memorial rose garden ; <unk> Garden , a " living laboratory " garden utilizing water conservation techniques ; and Splash Montana <unk> at Playfair Park . 
 = = = Caras Park = = = 
 Caras Park is located just south of the historic Wilma Theatre downtown . It is located on land reclaimed when the Higgins Avenue Bridge was widened from two lanes to four in 1962 . Before the reclamation , the Clark Fork River divided to create an island with the north channel 's bank extending to nearby buildings such as the Wilma Theatre . The south channel was deepened for the increased water flow and the infilled land later became Caras Park . Events in the park were not common until the early 1980s and permanent fixtures like " Out to Lunch " , which began in 1986 . The Missoula Downtown Association took over from Parks and Recreation for management of the park and made improvements to make Caras Park more event @-@ friendly . Seating , event circles , brick plazas , restrooms , and storage structures were added . Large temporary tents were used for events until 1997 when a permanent pavilion was constructed . The park is a hub of city festivities including include " Out to Lunch " , the International Wildlife Film Festival , First Night Missoula , Garden City <unk> and offered intimate concert settings for artists such as Jewel , Chris Isaak , Santana , Ziggy Marley , and B.B. King . Located next to Caras Park is A Carousel for Missoula , a wooden , hand @-@ carved and volunteer @-@ built carousel ; and Dragon Hollow , a children 's recreational area adjacent to the carousel . 
 = = Government and politics = = 
 Missoula 's system of government has changed four times since 1883 when an aldermanic form of government was approved with the town charter . The city adopted a commission @-@ council form of government in 1911 with the opening of new City Hall and a council – manager government in 1954 before returning to an aldermanic form of government in 1959 . Since January 1 , 1997 , Missoula has been governed in accordance with the Missoula City Charter , which calls for a mayor @-@ council system of government . 
 The current system comprises a mayor and city treasurer elected in a citywide vote and twelve city council members who must reside in and are elected from one of six wards with each ward having two council members . All positions are nominally nonpartisan . Council members and the mayor are elected to four @-@ year terms with council @-@ member elections being staggered to allow only one member from each ward to up for re @-@ election . There are no term limits for either position . 
 Missoula 's state legislative delegation is the second largest in the Montana Legislature and is represented by districts 91 – 100 in the Montana House of Representatives and districts 46 – 50 in the Montana Senate . Having thirteen Democrats and two Republicans in its state legislative delegation , Missoula is known as a more liberal area than the rest of the state . 
 Though Missoula 's political leanings may not be unique for a college town , its initiative to make marijuana possession the lowest priority of law enforcement in 2006 , and symbolic resolutions calling on Congress to withdraw from Iraq in 2007 , and to amend the U.S. Constitution to declare that " corporations are not human beings " in 2011 , often put it at odds with the rest of the state . In 2011 , the Montana legislature , with a Republican House majority , attempted to overturn Missoula 's marijuana law and revoke its ability to have an anti @-@ discrimination ordinance that included the LGBT community . The marijuana repeal was vetoed by then – Governor Brian Schweitzer and the attempt to repeal the other died in the Senate . 
 = = Education = = 
 Missoula 's first school was opened in late 1869 with sixteen students from around the region and their teacher Emma C. Slack who had come to Missoula via a two @-@ month trip by horseback , railroad , and boat from Baltimore at the invitation of her brother . She resigned two years later upon marrying William H. H. Dickinson ( the first couple married in Missoula ) and was replaced by Elizabeth Countryman who later married Missoula 's first mayor , Frank H. Woody . The first public high school was opened in 1904 but was converted back to a grade school after the A. J. Gibson @-@ designed Missoula County High School ( now Hellgate High School ) was opened in 1908 . After several expansions , Stanford University was commissioned in 1951 to create a master building plan to manage future growth . It suggested purchasing land and building an additional campus at the Garden City Airport 's Hale Field , which was gradually being replaced by the Missoula County Airport , which was then southwest of town . The new school ( now Sentinel High School ) was opened in 1957 . Initially the two campuses were separated between upper and lower classmen with upper classmen in the new school , but in 1965 , the two campuses became separate high schools . In 1974 , the private Loyola Sacred Heart Catholic High School was created from a merger of the all @-@ girls Sacred Heart Academy ( est . 1873 ) and the all @-@ boys Loyola High School ( est . 1912 ) . In 1980 , Missoula 's third public high school , Big Sky , was established . 
 Missoula 's public schools are part of the Missoula County Public School districts 1 , 4 , 20 , and 23 . In Missoula , there are nine public elementary schools ( kindergarten to 5th grade ) , three public middle schools ( 6th to 8th grades ) , four public high schools ( 9th to 12th grades ) , and three public schools serving kindergarten to 8th grade . Missoula also has several private schools including an international school , religious @-@ affiliated schools , as well as Next Step Prep , a theater academy high school operated by the Missoula Children 's Theatre . 
 The University of Montana dominates higher education in Missoula . The university , established in 1893 , was Montana 's first , and has the state 's second @-@ largest enrollment , with 12 @,@ 922 students as of 2015 ) . The campus houses six colleges and three schools including Montana 's first and only law school , the Alexander Blewett III School of Law at the University of Montana . The university is also the location of the state 's Regional Federal Depository Library , and houses the state Arboretum . The University of Montana College of Technology , established in 1956 and formerly known as the Missoula Vocational Technical Center , offers fast @-@ track learning programs . Multiple vocational programs not affiliated with the university ranging from photography and massage to truck driving also have a presence in Missoula . 
 = = Media = = 
 = = = Broadcast = = = 
 Missoula 's single – broadcast over – air television media market is the largest in Montana and ranked 165 nationally in as of 2015 . Though Missoula itself is second in population to Billings , Montana , Missoula 's single @-@ broadcast over @-@ air television media market includes all of Missoula , <unk> , Granite , Mineral , Lake , Flathead , and Sanders Counties in the more densely populated western region of Montana and serves over 112 @,@ 600 television homes as of 2015 . Missoula is home to three local affiliate channels : <unk> @-@ TV ( CBS / MTN , The CW ; founded 1970 ; channel 8 ) , <unk> @-@ TV ( NBC ; founded 1954 as <unk> @-@ TV ; channel 13 , and <unk> @-@ TV ( ABC , FOX ; founded 1991 ; channel 23 ) . Also based in Missoula at the University of Montana is Montana PBS ( founded 1984 ; channel 11 ) . There are seventeen FM radio stations and four AM radio stations licensed in the city . 
 = = = Print = = = 
 Missoula has four main sources of print media : the Missoulian ( primary daily ) , Missoula Independent ( alternative weekly ) , Montana <unk> ( college ) , and New West ( digital , progressive ) . The Missoulian was founded as a weekly publication in 1870 as The Missoula and Cedar Creek Pioneer . As of 2015 , the Missoulian remains Missoula 's most popular newspaper with a circulation of over 26 @,@ 000 , making it the third most read daily newspaper in Montana behind the Billings Gazette and the Great Falls Tribune . The Missoula Independent ( founded 1991 ) is the largest weekly newspaper in Montana and the states only member of the Association of Alternative <unk> . With over 21 @,@ 000 readers it has twice the circulation of second place Billings Outpost . The newspaper is distributed free to more than 600 locations across Western Montana from Hamilton in the south to Whitefish in the north . The Montana <unk> ( founded 1891 ) is likewise distributed free throughout parts of Missoula with heavy student traffic from the University of Montana where the newspaper is printed Monday through Friday during the school year . New West was founded in 2005 as a left @-@ leaning " next @-@ generation media company " that focused on culture , environment , economy , and politics in the Rocky Mountain West . 
 = = Infrastructure = = 
 = = = Health care = = = 
 Missoula has two primary health care facilities : St. Patrick Hospital and Health Sciences Center and Community Medical Center . St. Patrick 's was founded in 1873 under the sponsorship of the Sisters of Providence . It is the only Level II trauma center in the region , the largest medical facility in Western Montana , and has undergone three major expansions since the 1980s . The hospital has 195 acute @-@ care beds , and admitted over 9 @,@ 700 patients in 2003 . The name was changed from " St. Patrick Hospital " to " St. Patrick Hospital and Health Sciences Center " in 2000 to reflect an increasing involvement with national medical research and education . The Community Medical Center and its adjacent medical facilities are located near Fort Missoula and is part of a modern complex that includes a nursing home , the Missoula Crippled Children 's Center , and private offices . It was founded in 1922 as Thornton Hospital by doctors Will Thornton and Charles Thornton and has been at its current location since 1972 . It is the only facility providing obstetrical and newborn care in Missoula County and the only hospital in Western Montana with a separate Pediatric Intensive Care Unit . The center is partnered with Seattle Children 's Hospital . The nearest Level I trauma center to Missoula is Harborview Medical Center in Seattle , Washington . 
 = = = Utilities = = = 
 The earliest Missoulians drew their water directly from the Clark Fork River or nearby Rattlesnake Creek . The first water system consisted of a Native American known as One @-@ Eyed Riley and his friend filling buckets of water from the Rattlesnake Creek and hauling them door to door on a donkey cart . In 1871 city co @-@ founder Frank Worden began construction of a log pipe and wooden main system that flowed from the Rattlesnake Creek 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 km ) north of the city . With the addition of two small covered reservoirs , the first municipal water system was begun in 1880 . With an intake dam built in 1901 with a settling basin capacity of 3 million US gallons ( 11 @,@ 000 m3 ) , the Rattlesnake Creek continued to meet demands of the city until 1935 when five wells were added to respond to increased summer and fall demand . This system is still maintained as an emergency backup , but was discontinued as a primary source after Giardia outbreak in 1983 . Since then , Missoula has relied on the Missoula Valley Aquifer as the sole source of water . In 1889 , the first electrical plant was built by A. B. Hammond to power his major downtown properties such as the Missoula Mercantile and the Florence Hotel . In 1905 , the Missoula Mercantile ( by then owned by Copper King William A. Clark purchased the water system and consolidated it with its vast electrical holdings to create the Missoula Light and Water Company ( ML & W ) a year later . Electricity and water remained bundled after ML & W 's sale to the Montana Power Company ( MPC ) in 1929 . In 1979 , MPC sold its water utility holdings as Mountain Water Company to Park Water Company in Downey , California , which since 2011 has been a subsidiary of The Carlyle Group . In 2015 , the City of Missoula was legally granted its " ' right to acquire ' the water system by exercising its power of eminent domain " , but as of June 2015 , that decision is under appeal . 
 Following the deregulation of Montana 's electricity market in 1997 , Montana Power Company began to divest its energy business . MPC sold substantially all its electrical generating assets to the PPL Corporation in December 1997 and its energy transmission and distribution business to NorthWestern Corporation in February 2002 . Despite filing for bankruptcy in 2002 , NorthWestern Corporation 's subsidiary NorthWestern Energy is the primary provider of electric and natural gas service to Missoula in addition to the Rural Utilities Service 's Missoula Electric Cooperative . 
 Local telephone service in the area is provided by CenturyLink and Blackfoot Telecommunications . Major cell phone providers include AT & T , Sprint , Verizon , and T @-@ Mobile . Trash collection in Missoula is handled by Allied Waste Industries and Grant Creek Water Systems . Allied Waste also handles recycling through a program where customers can purchase special blue bags to designate recyclables . Recycling has also been offered by Missoula Valley Recycling since 1992 , by Garden City Recycling since 2010 which offers curbside pickup , and by Pacific Steel & Recycling which offers drop @-@ off recycling . Sewer service is handled by the City of Missoula Wastewater Division . 
 = = = City layout and development = = = 
 In the mid @-@ 1860s , C. P. Higgins and Frank Worden began plotting what would become the town of Missoula along the Mullan Military Road , which ran parallel to the Clark Fork River . Through downtown Missoula , the route of the road is now Front Street . It is intersected by Higgins Avenue , to which a bridge across the Clark Fork was added in 1873 . The intersection of these two streets became the default center of the city , and remains the numerical center regarding city street addresses . The arrival of the Northern Pacific Railway in 1883 led to a housing boom along the tracks , particularly on the northern side where many of the railway workers would reside . When the Higgins Avenue Bridge was replaced in 1893 , they debated whether the bridge should continue southwest toward the Bitterroot Valley as it had earlier , or due south . Attorneys W. M. Bickford and W. J. Stephens had already laid out plots of land five years earlier for what they hoped would be a new town of " South Missoula " . The streets there were perpendicular to the Bitterroot Wagon Road while Judge Hiram Knowles who owned the land just south of the river preferred the north @-@ south plan and did not want to become part of South Missoula . The result was a 7 × 14 – block area along the west side of Higgins Avenue commonly referred to as the Slant Streets centered along what is now Stephens Avenue . Stephens Avenue and Brooks Street are the only arterials to traverse the city diagonally along with the Bitterroot Branch of Montana Rail Link . The rest of the city , with the exception of Downtown , where streets follow the angle of the river , and newer expansions into the hills , strictly follow the grid plan . With the establishment of the University of Montana in 1893 and the announcement that the now @-@ defunct Milwaukee Road would be located south of the river , houses began to spread quickly throughout the university and south side districts . The area near the university was promoted as high @-@ end and luxurious homes appeared on Hammond Avenue ( then nicknamed " Millionaires Row " and known today as Gerald Avenue ) . The arrival of Interstate 90 in the mid @-@ 1960s forced the removal of 60 homes , including the Greenough Mansion . The north side of Missoula became isolated between the Interstate and the tracks while the Greenough Mansion was moved to a South Hills golf course and converted to a restaurant . This dichotomy has prevailed with the North Side feeling neglected by the city while the South Hills became an upscale neighborhood . With the release of the latest Missoula Downtown Master Plan in 2009 , increased emphasis was directed toward redeveloping the North Side 's former rail yard and the area just south of the tracks . 
 The city is divided into 18 neighborhood councils of which all Missoula residents are a member . The city further contains 10 historical districts : Downtown Missoula , East Pine Street , Fort Missoula , Lower Rattlesnake , McCormick , Northside , Southside , University Area and , the campus of the University of Montana . 
 = = = = Trail system = = = = 
 Missoula has an extensive trail system for both commuting and recreation that extends over 22 miles ( 35 km ) . The city is actively trying to connect its various sections within the city to each other and to recreational trails extending beyond the city . The heart of the Missoula Commuter Bike Network are the trails along either side of the Clark Fork River that link Downtown with surrounding neighborhoods , the university , city parks , and outlying open space with smooth surfaces and three bicycle / pedestrian bridges . The most southern of these is Milwaukee Trail which follows the path of the former Milwaukee Railroad and continues east out of town as the Kim Williams Nature Trail beside Mount Sentinel . The Bitterroot Branch Trail connects to the Riverfront trails west of Downtown and , when completed , will provide a trail from Downtown to Southgate Mall . Near the Bitterroot Branch Trail , but not connected , is the South Avenue Trail on the west side of Reserve Street that connects the Community Medical Center with Fort Missoula , nearby athletic fields , and the Bitterroot River . The South Hills neighborhood has its own system of trails that is also approaching , but not quite meeting , the larger network . 
 = = = Transportation = = = 
 Due to its rural location , highway access is especially important to Missoula . Interstate 90 runs east – west along the northern edge of Missoula at the base of the North Hills , with all but a small portion of the city located south of the highway . Completed in 1965 at the expense of 60 homes , the Garden City Brewery , and the Greenough Mansion , I ‑ 90 has four city exits and makes connections with U.S. Route 93 , U.S. Route 12 , and Montana Highway 200 . The original U.S. 12 , approved by the AASHO in 1939 to extend west into Montana did not include Missoula until the highway was rerouted along State Route 6 in October 1959 and was not extended west from Missoula until 1962 . The road now crosses Missoula southwest – northeast . U.S. 93 serves as a major economic corridor for western Montana connecting Missoula with the Bitterroot Valley communities to the south and Flathead Lake , Kalispell , and Glacier National Park to the north . Montana Highway 200 , the longest state highway in the United States enters Missoula from the east and provides access along the Blackfoot River and a direct route to Great Falls . 
 Public transportation in Missoula began as early as 1890 with a horse @-@ drawn streetcar system ( electrified in 1910 ) operated by the Missoula Street Railway Company that connected Downtown Missoula with the University , Bonner , the fairgrounds , and Fort Missoula . These streetcars were then replaced by buses in 1932 due to cost . Bus service today is provided by Mountain Line , a public transit agency created by public vote in 1976 as part of the Missoula Urban Transportation District ( <unk> ) that began operation in December 1977 . Mountain Line operates twelve bus routes within a 36 @-@ square @-@ mile ( 93 km2 ) area , serving Missoula , East Missoula , Bonner , Target Range , Rattlesnake , and the airport . Additionally the line has offered paratransit services since 1991 to assist the disabled , senior van since 2008 , and has four park ‑ and ‑ ride lots throughout Missoula . Special bus service is offered to the University of Montana through three of the city 's park ‑ and ‑ ride lots in addition to a late @-@ night <unk> shuttle that offers service between the University and Downtown . As of January 2015 a three @-@ year pilot program of zero fare transportation on all Mountain Line busses began , with the goal of increasing use by 45 percent . 
 Direct intercity ground travel needs are provided by bus carriers Greyhound Lines and <unk> Trailways . Intercity rail travel was available from 1883 , when the Northern Pacific Railway began service through Missoula , until 1979 when Amtrak discontinued its North Coast Hiawatha route across southern Montana . In 1901 , Northern Pacific built their station at the terminus of Higgins Avenue ; since 1985 , it has been on the National Register of Historic Places . A feasibility study was commissioned by Congress in 2008 to examine the merits of reopening the North Coast Hiawatha , but as of 2008 , the nearest rail station to Missoula is the Whitefish station of Amtrak 's Empire Builder , 136 miles ( 219 km ) to the north . 
 = = = = Air = = = = 
 Air travel to Missoula began in 1927 , which is served by Missoula International Airport at Johnson @-@ Bell Field , a public airport run by the Missoula County Airport Authority . It is the largest airport in western Montana , serving 582 @,@ 821 passengers in 2011 . The current building contains three jet bridges and three ground ‑ level boarding gates . There are direct flights year ‑ round to Billings , Denver , Las Vegas , Minneapolis , Phoenix , Portland , Salt Lake City , Seattle , and seasonally to Atlanta , Chicago , Los Angeles , Oakland , and San Francisco . Four airlines operate out of Missoula ( Allegiant Air , Delta Air Lines , Horizon / Alaska Airlines , and United Airlines ) in addition to cargo carriers FedEx Express , and UPS Airlines . The airport is also home to Homestead Helicopters and fixed ‑ base operators Minuteman Jet Center ( an <unk> fuel provider ) , and Northstar Jet ( a Phillips 66 fuel provider ) . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 Missoula has produced and been home to a number of notable individuals in varying fields . Its natives and residents are referred to as " Missoulians " . In politics , Jeannette Rankin , the first woman in congress , was born and raised in Missoula while Senators Mike Mansfield , the U.S. ' s longest serving Senate Majority Leader , and Max Baucus , Montana 's longest serving U.S. Senator both established careers and joined politics while living in the city . Noted athletes who were born or resided in Missoula include five Olympic medalists , Pro Football Hall of Fame Quarterback John Elway , and former Milwaukee Bucks coach Larry <unk> . Actor Dana Carvey , filmmaker David Lynch , and award ‑ winning biologist Leroy Hood were born in Missoula while Carroll O 'Connor and J. K. Simmons both attended the University of Montana . Composer David <unk> , musician Jeff Ament , and musician and <unk> Hank Green reside in Missoula . Academically , Missoula has been home to Nobel Prize winners Harold C. Urey and Steve Running as well as 20th century Montana historian K. Ross Toole Noted names in literature include Native @-@ American poet James Welch , crime novelist James Crumley , former head of the University of Montana 's Creative Writing Program Richard Hugo , and Norman Maclean , whose A River Runs Through It chronicles his life in early 20th @-@ century Missoula . 
 = = Sister cities = = 
 Missoula has two sister cities , as designated by Sister Cities International : 
 <unk> , Germany 
 Palmerston North , New Zealand 
 Missoula 's Sister City relationship with Palmerston North , New Zealand , began after Missoula resident and later University of Montana professor Harold <unk> returned from obtaining his PhD from Massey University . The relationship was made official in 1983 after a meeting between then UM President Neil Bucklew and officials from Massey University . Each May , Missoula celebrates " New Zealand Day " in honor of the relationship with rugby , food , and entertainment . Missoula 's second Sister City relationship began in 1991 after a <unk> delegation , led by Mayor Oskar Schuster , visited Missoula following a Fulbright @-@ sponsored faculty exchange between Heidelberg University and the University of Montana . Every September the Missoula Cultural Council holds an annual " <unk> " to celebrate German culture and this relationship . 
 = = Portrayal in media = = 
 Author Norman Maclean grew up in Missoula and wrote about it in his 1976 autobiographical novella A River Runs Through It . The work was adapted into a 1992 motion picture of the same name , directed by Robert Redford , starring Brad Pitt and Craig Sheffer . 
 Missoula : Rape and the Justice System in a College Town is the title of a 2015 book by Jon Krakauer that looked at the Justice Department 's investigation into a " pattern of disrespect and indifference toward alleged victims " by Missoula law enforcement in sexual assault cases between 2010 and 2012 , some involving football players from the Montana Grizzlies . While being interviewed on NPR about the book , John Krakauer stated " I don 't mean to single out Missoula : Its rape rate is a little less than the national average ; I think its problems with dealing with rape are pretty depressingly typical " . 
 There is a lengthy study of Missoula in the title essay of Jonathan Raban 's Driving Home : An American Journey : despite writing that on his arrival , " I had the powerful impression that I had driven deep into the Rocky Mountains and somehow arrived in Rotherham or Barnsley , " and that " the overall effect [ of the city ] was oddly unsettling ; the streets too open for comfort , the town too closed in , inducing mild claustrophobia and agoraphobia at the same time " , he notes the literary heritage of the city and its reputation as a " kindly town " ( evidenced by its being a place where " odds and ends naturally collected and <unk> " ) . 
 Missoula was portrayed in an episode of the CBS show Criminal Minds . The episode aired on November 5 , 2014 . 
 Missoula ( as well as <unk> , MT ) was also portrayed in the movie Chill Factor released in 1999 starring Skeet Ulrich and Cuba Gooding , Jr . 
 = Gene = 
 A gene is a locus ( or region ) of DNA which is made up of nucleotides and is the molecular unit of heredity . The transmission of genes to an organism 's offspring is the basis of the inheritance of phenotypic traits . Most biological traits are under the influence of <unk> ( many different genes ) as well as the gene – environment interactions . Some genetic traits are instantly visible , such as eye colour or number of limbs , and some are not , such as blood type , risk for specific diseases , or the thousands of basic biochemical processes that comprise life . In July 2016 , scientists reported identifying a set of 355 genes from the Last Universal Common Ancestor ( LUCA ) of all organisms living on Earth . 
 Genes can acquire mutations in their sequence , leading to different variants , known as alleles , in the population . These alleles encode slightly different versions of a protein , which cause different phenotype traits . Colloquial usage of the term " having a gene " ( e.g. , " good genes , " " hair colour gene " ) typically refers to having a different allele of the gene . Genes evolve due to natural selection or survival of the fittest of the alleles . 
 The concept of a gene continues to be refined as new phenomena are discovered . For example , regulatory regions of a gene can be far removed from its coding regions , and coding regions can be split into several exons . Some viruses store their genome in RNA instead of DNA and some gene products are functional non @-@ coding RNAs . Therefore , a broad , modern working definition of a gene is any discrete locus of heritable , genomic sequence which affect an organism 's traits by being expressed as a functional product or by regulation of gene expression . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Discovery of discrete inherited units = = = 
 The existence of discrete inheritable units was first suggested by Gregor Mendel ( 1822 – 1884 ) . From 1857 to 1864 , he studied inheritance patterns in 8000 common edible pea plants , tracking distinct traits from parent to offspring . He described these mathematically as 2n combinations where n is the number of differing characteristics in the original peas . Although he did not use the term gene , he explained his results in terms of discrete inherited units that give rise to observable physical characteristics . This description prefigured the distinction between genotype ( the genetic material of an organism ) and phenotype ( the visible traits of that organism ) . Mendel was also the first to demonstrate independent assortment , the distinction between dominant and recessive traits , the distinction between a heterozygote and homozygote , and the phenomenon of discontinuous inheritance . 
 Prior to Mendel 's work , the dominant theory of heredity was one of blending inheritance , which suggested that each parent contributed fluids to the fertilisation process and that the traits of the parents blended and mixed to produce the offspring . Charles Darwin developed a theory of inheritance he termed pangenesis , from Greek pan ( " all , whole " ) and genesis ( " birth " ) / genos ( " origin " ) . Darwin used the term <unk> to describe hypothetical particles that would mix during reproduction . 
 Mendel 's work went largely unnoticed after its first publication in 1866 , but was rediscovered in the late 19th @-@ century by Hugo de Vries , Carl Correns , and Erich von <unk> , who ( claimed to have ) reached similar conclusions in their own research . Specifically , in 1889 , Hugo de Vries published his book Intracellular <unk> , in which he postulated that different characters have individual hereditary carriers and that inheritance of specific traits in organisms comes in particles . De Vries called these units " pangenes " ( <unk> in German ) , after Darwin 's 1868 pangenesis theory . 
 Sixteen years later , in 1905 , the word genetics was first used by William Bateson , while Eduard Strasburger , amongst others , still used the term <unk> for the fundamental physical and functional unit of heredity . In 1909 the Danish botanist Wilhelm Johannsen shortened the name to " gene " . 
 = = = Discovery of DNA = = = 
 Advances in understanding genes and inheritance continued throughout the 20th century . <unk> acid ( DNA ) was shown to be the molecular repository of genetic information by experiments in the 1940s to 1950s . The structure of DNA was studied by Rosalind Franklin and Maurice Wilkins using X @-@ ray crystallography , which led James D. Watson and Francis Crick to publish a model of the double @-@ stranded DNA molecule whose paired nucleotide bases indicated a compelling hypothesis for the mechanism of genetic replication . Collectively , this body of research established the central dogma of molecular biology , which states that proteins are translated from RNA , which is transcribed from DNA . This dogma has since been shown to have exceptions , such as reverse transcription in retroviruses . The modern study of genetics at the level of DNA is known as molecular genetics . 
 In 1972 , Walter Fiers and his team at the University of Ghent were the first to determine the sequence of a gene : the gene for <unk> MS2 coat protein . The subsequent development of chain @-@ termination DNA sequencing in 1977 by Frederick Sanger improved the efficiency of sequencing and turned it into a routine laboratory tool . An automated version of the Sanger method was used in early phases of the Human Genome Project . 
 = = = Modern evolutionary synthesis = = = 
 The theories developed in the 1930s and 1940s to integrate molecular genetics with Darwinian evolution are called the modern evolutionary synthesis , a term introduced by Julian Huxley . Evolutionary biologists subsequently refined this concept , such as George C. Williams ' gene @-@ centric view of evolution . He proposed an evolutionary concept of the gene as a unit of natural selection with the definition : " that which segregates and recombines with appreciable frequency . " In this view , the molecular gene transcribes as a unit , and the evolutionary gene inherits as a unit . Related ideas emphasizing the centrality of genes in evolution were popularized by Richard Dawkins . 
 = = Molecular basis = = 
 = = = DNA = = = 
 The vast majority of living organisms encode their genes in long strands of DNA ( deoxyribonucleic acid ) . DNA consists of a chain made from four types of nucleotide subunits , each composed of : a five @-@ carbon sugar ( 2 ' <unk> ) , a phosphate group , and one of the four bases adenine , cytosine , guanine , and thymine . 
 Two chains of DNA twist around each other to form a DNA double helix with the phosphate @-@ sugar backbone spiralling around the outside , and the bases pointing inwards with adenine base pairing to thymine and guanine to cytosine . The specificity of base pairing occurs because adenine and thymine align to form two hydrogen bonds , whereas cytosine and guanine form three hydrogen bonds . The two strands in a double helix must therefore be complementary , with their sequence of bases matching such that the <unk> of one strand are paired with the <unk> of the other strand , and so on . 
 Due to the chemical composition of the pentose residues of the bases , DNA strands have directionality . One end of a DNA polymer contains an exposed hydroxyl group on the deoxyribose ; this is known as the 3 ' end of the molecule . The other end contains an exposed phosphate group ; this is the 5 ' end . The two strands of a double @-@ helix run in opposite directions . Nucleic acid synthesis , including DNA replication and transcription occurs in the 5 ' → 3 ' direction , because new nucleotides are added via a dehydration reaction that uses the exposed 3 ' hydroxyl as a nucleophile . 
 The expression of genes encoded in DNA begins by transcribing the gene into RNA , a second type of nucleic acid that is very similar to DNA , but whose monomers contain the sugar ribose rather than deoxyribose . RNA also contains the base uracil in place of thymine . RNA molecules are less stable than DNA and are typically single @-@ stranded . Genes that encode proteins are composed of a series of three @-@ nucleotide sequences called codons , which serve as the " words " in the genetic " language " . The genetic code specifies the correspondence during protein translation between codons and amino acids . The genetic code is nearly the same for all known organisms . 
 = = = Chromosomes = = = 
 The total complement of genes in an organism or cell is known as its genome , which may be stored on one or more chromosomes . A chromosome consists of a single , very long DNA helix on which thousands of genes are encoded . The region of the chromosome at which a particular gene is located is called its locus . Each locus contains one allele of a gene ; however , members of a population may have different alleles at the locus , each with a slightly different gene sequence . 
 The majority of eukaryotic genes are stored on a set of large , linear chromosomes . The chromosomes are packed within the nucleus in complex with storage proteins called histones to form a unit called a nucleosome . DNA packaged and condensed in this way is called chromatin . The manner in which DNA is stored on the histones , as well as chemical modifications of the histone itself , regulate whether a particular region of DNA is accessible for gene expression . In addition to genes , eukaryotic chromosomes contain sequences involved in ensuring that the DNA is copied without degradation of end regions and sorted into daughter cells during cell division : replication origins , telomeres and the centromere . Replication origins are the sequence regions where DNA replication is initiated to make two copies of the chromosome . <unk> are long stretches of repetitive sequence that cap the ends of the linear chromosomes and prevent degradation of coding and regulatory regions during DNA replication . The length of the telomeres decreases each time the genome is replicated and has been implicated in the aging process . The centromere is required for binding spindle fibres to separate sister chromatids into daughter cells during cell division . 
 Prokaryotes ( bacteria and archaea ) typically store their genomes on a single large , circular chromosome . Similarly , some eukaryotic organelles contain a remnant circular chromosome with a small number of genes . Prokaryotes sometimes supplement their chromosome with additional small circles of DNA called plasmids , which usually encode only a few genes and are transferable between individuals . For example , the genes for antibiotic resistance are usually encoded on bacterial plasmids and can be passed between individual cells , even those of different species , via horizontal gene transfer . 
 Whereas the chromosomes of prokaryotes are relatively gene @-@ dense , those of eukaryotes often contain regions of DNA that serve no obvious function . Simple single @-@ celled eukaryotes have relatively small amounts of such DNA , whereas the genomes of complex multicellular organisms , including humans , contain an absolute majority of DNA without an identified function . This DNA has often been referred to as " junk DNA " . However , more recent analyses suggest that , although protein @-@ coding DNA makes up barely 2 % of the human genome , about 80 % of the bases in the genome may be expressed , so the term " junk DNA " may be a misnomer . 
 = = Structure and function = = 
 The structure of a gene consists of many elements of which the actual protein coding sequence is often only a small part . These include DNA regions that are not transcribed as well as untranslated regions of the RNA . 
 Firstly , flanking the open reading frame , all genes contain a regulatory sequence that is required for their expression . In order to be expressed , genes require a promoter sequence . The promoter is recognized and bound by transcription factors and RNA polymerase to initiate transcription . A gene can have more than one promoter , resulting in messenger RNAs ( mRNA ) that differ in how far they extend in the 5 ' end . Promoter regions have a consensus sequence , however highly transcribed genes have " strong " promoter sequences that bind the transcription machinery well , whereas others have " weak " promoters that bind poorly and initiate transcription less frequently . Eukaryotic promoter regions are much more complex and difficult to identify than prokaryotic promoters . 
 Additionally , genes can have regulatory regions many kilobases upstream or downstream of the open reading frame . These act by binding to transcription factors which then cause the DNA to loop so that the regulatory sequence ( and bound transcription factor ) become close to the RNA polymerase binding site . For example , enhancers increase transcription by binding an activator protein which then helps to recruit the RNA polymerase to the promoter ; conversely silencers bind repressor proteins and make the DNA less available for RNA polymerase . 
 The transcribed pre @-@ mRNA contains untranslated regions at both ends which contain a ribosome binding site , terminator and start and stop codons . In addition , most eukaryotic open reading frames contain untranslated introns which are removed before the exons are translated . The sequences at the ends of the introns , dictate the splice sites to generate the final mature mRNA which encodes the protein or RNA product . 
 Many prokaryotic genes are organized into operons , with multiple protein @-@ coding sequences that are transcribed as a unit . The products of operon genes typically have related functions and are involved in the same regulatory network . 
 = = = Functional definitions = = = 
 Defining exactly what section of a DNA sequence comprises a gene is difficult . Regulatory regions of a gene such as enhancers do not necessarily have to be close to the coding sequence on the linear molecule because the intervening DNA can be looped out to bring the gene and its regulatory region into proximity . Similarly , a gene 's introns can be much larger than its exons . Regulatory regions can even be on entirely different chromosomes and operate in trans to allow regulatory regions on one chromosome to come in contact with target genes on another chromosome . 
 Early work in molecular genetics suggested the model that one gene makes one protein . This model has been refined since the discovery of genes that can encode multiple proteins by alternative splicing and coding sequences split in short section across the genome whose mRNAs are concatenated by trans @-@ splicing . 
 A broad operational definition is sometimes used to encompass the complexity of these diverse phenomena , where a gene is defined as a union of genomic sequences encoding a coherent set of potentially overlapping functional products . This definition categorizes genes by their functional products ( proteins or RNA ) rather than their specific DNA loci , with regulatory elements classified as gene @-@ associated regions . 
 = = Gene expression = = 
 In all organisms , two steps are required to read the information encoded in a gene 's DNA and produce the protein it specifies . First , the gene 's DNA is transcribed to messenger RNA ( mRNA ) . Second , that mRNA is translated to protein . RNA @-@ coding genes must still go through the first step , but are not translated into protein . The process of producing a biologically functional molecule of either RNA or protein is called gene expression , and the resulting molecule is called a gene product . 
 = = = Genetic code = = = 
 The nucleotide sequence of a gene 's DNA specifies the amino acid sequence of a protein through the genetic code . Sets of three nucleotides , known as codons , each correspond to a specific amino acid . Additionally , a " start codon " , and three " stop codons " indicate the beginning and end of the protein coding region . There are 64 possible codons ( four possible nucleotides at each of three positions , hence 43 possible codons ) and only 20 standard amino acids ; hence the code is redundant and multiple codons can specify the same amino acid . The correspondence between codons and amino acids is nearly universal among all known living organisms . 
 = = = Transcription = = = 
 Transcription produces a single @-@ stranded RNA molecule known as messenger RNA , whose nucleotide sequence is complementary to the DNA from which it was transcribed . The mRNA acts as an intermediate between the DNA gene and its final protein product . The gene 's DNA is used as a template to generate a complementary mRNA . The mRNA matches the sequence of the gene 's DNA coding strand because it is synthesised as the complement of the template strand . Transcription is performed by an enzyme called an RNA polymerase , which reads the template strand in the 3 ' to 5 ' direction and synthesizes the RNA from 5 ' to 3 ' . To initiate transcription , the polymerase first recognizes and binds a promoter region of the gene . Thus , a major mechanism of gene regulation is the blocking or sequestering the promoter region , either by tight binding by repressor molecules that physically block the polymerase , or by organizing the DNA so that the promoter region is not accessible . 
 In prokaryotes , transcription occurs in the cytoplasm ; for very long transcripts , translation may begin at the 5 ' end of the RNA while the 3 ' end is still being transcribed . In eukaryotes , transcription occurs in the nucleus , where the cell 's DNA is stored . The RNA molecule produced by the polymerase is known as the primary transcript and undergoes post @-@ transcriptional modifications before being exported to the cytoplasm for translation . One of the modifications performed is the splicing of introns which are sequences in the transcribed region that do not encode protein . Alternative splicing mechanisms can result in mature transcripts from the same gene having different sequences and thus coding for different proteins . This is a major form of regulation in eukaryotic cells and also occurs in some prokaryotes . 
 = = = Translation = = = 
 Translation is the process by which a mature mRNA molecule is used as a template for synthesizing a new protein . Translation is carried out by ribosomes , large complexes of RNA and protein responsible for carrying out the chemical reactions to add new amino acids to a growing polypeptide chain by the formation of peptide bonds . The genetic code is read three nucleotides at a time , in units called codons , via interactions with specialized RNA molecules called transfer RNA ( tRNA ) . Each tRNA has three unpaired bases known as the anticodon that are complementary to the codon it reads on the mRNA . The tRNA is also covalently attached to the amino acid specified by the complementary codon . When the tRNA binds to its complementary codon in an mRNA strand , the ribosome attaches its amino acid cargo to the new polypeptide chain , which is synthesized from amino terminus to carboxyl terminus . During and after synthesis , most new proteins must folds to their active three @-@ dimensional structure before they can carry out their cellular functions . 
 = = = Regulation = = = 
 Genes are regulated so that they are expressed only when the product is needed , since expression draws on limited resources . A cell regulates its gene expression depending on its external environment ( e.g. available nutrients , temperature and other stresses ) , its internal environment ( e.g. cell division cycle , metabolism , infection status ) , and its specific role if in a multicellular organism . Gene expression can be regulated at any step : from transcriptional initiation , to RNA processing , to post @-@ translational modification of the protein . The regulation of lactose metabolism genes in E. coli ( lac operon ) was the first such mechanism to be described in 1961 . 
 = = = RNA genes = = = 
 A typical protein @-@ coding gene is first copied into RNA as an intermediate in the manufacture of the final protein product . In other cases , the RNA molecules are the actual functional products , as in the synthesis of ribosomal RNA and transfer RNA . Some RNAs known as ribozymes are capable of enzymatic function , and microRNA has a regulatory role . The DNA sequences from which such RNAs are transcribed are known as non @-@ coding RNA genes . 
 Some viruses store their entire genomes in the form of RNA , and contain no DNA at all . Because they use RNA to store genes , their cellular hosts may synthesize their proteins as soon as they are infected and without the delay in waiting for transcription . On the other hand , RNA retroviruses , such as HIV , require the reverse transcription of their genome from RNA into DNA before their proteins can be synthesized . RNA @-@ mediated epigenetic inheritance has also been observed in plants and very rarely in animals . 
 = = Inheritance = = 
 Organisms inherit their genes from their parents . Asexual organisms simply inherit a complete copy of their parent 's genome . Sexual organisms have two copies of each chromosome because they inherit one complete set from each parent . 
 = = = Mendelian inheritance = = = 
 According to Mendelian inheritance , variations in an organism 's phenotype ( observable physical and behavioral characteristics ) are due in part to variations in its genotype ( particular set of genes ) . Each gene specifies a particular trait with different sequence of a gene ( alleles ) giving rise to different phenotypes . Most eukaryotic organisms ( such as the pea plants Mendel worked on ) have two alleles for each trait , one inherited from each parent . 
 <unk> at a locus may be dominant or recessive ; dominant alleles give rise to their corresponding phenotypes when paired with any other allele for the same trait , whereas recessive alleles give rise to their corresponding phenotype only when paired with another copy of the same allele . For example , if the allele specifying tall stems in pea plants is dominant over the allele specifying short stems , then pea plants that inherit one tall allele from one parent and one short allele from the other parent will also have tall stems . Mendel 's work demonstrated that alleles assort independently in the production of gametes , or germ cells , ensuring variation in the next generation . Although Mendelian inheritance remains a good model for many traits determined by single genes ( including a number of well @-@ known genetic disorders ) it does not include the physical processes of DNA replication and cell division . 
 = = = DNA replication and cell division = = = 
 The growth , development , and reproduction of organisms relies on cell division , or the process by which a single cell divides into two usually identical daughter cells . This requires first making a duplicate copy of every gene in the genome in a process called DNA replication . The copies are made by specialized enzymes known as DNA polymerases , which " read " one strand of the double @-@ helical DNA , known as the template strand , and synthesize a new complementary strand . Because the DNA double helix is held together by base pairing , the sequence of one strand completely specifies the sequence of its complement ; hence only one strand needs to be read by the enzyme to produce a faithful copy . The process of DNA replication is <unk> ; that is , the copy of the genome inherited by each daughter cell contains one original and one newly synthesized strand of DNA . 
 After DNA replication is complete , the cell must physically separate the two copies of the genome and divide into two distinct membrane @-@ bound cells . In prokaryotes ( bacteria and archaea ) this usually occurs via a relatively simple process called binary fission , in which each circular genome attaches to the cell membrane and is separated into the daughter cells as the membrane <unk> to split the cytoplasm into two membrane @-@ bound portions . Binary fission is extremely fast compared to the rates of cell division in eukaryotes . Eukaryotic cell division is a more complex process known as the cell cycle ; DNA replication occurs during a phase of this cycle known as S phase , whereas the process of segregating chromosomes and splitting the cytoplasm occurs during M phase . 
 = = = Molecular inheritance = = = 
 The duplication and transmission of genetic material from one generation of cells to the next is the basis for molecular inheritance , and the link between the classical and molecular pictures of genes . Organisms inherit the characteristics of their parents because the cells of the offspring contain copies of the genes in their parents ' cells . In asexually reproducing organisms , the offspring will be a genetic copy or clone of the parent organism . In sexually reproducing organisms , a specialized form of cell division called meiosis produces cells called gametes or germ cells that are haploid , or contain only one copy of each gene . The gametes produced by females are called eggs or ova , and those produced by males are called sperm . Two gametes fuse to form a diploid fertilized egg , a single cell that has two sets of genes , with one copy of each gene from the mother and one from the father . 
 During the process of meiotic cell division , an event called genetic recombination or crossing @-@ over can sometimes occur , in which a length of DNA on one chromatid is swapped with a length of DNA on the corresponding sister chromatid . This has no effect if the alleles on the chromatids are the same , but results in reassortment of otherwise linked alleles if they are different . The Mendelian principle of independent assortment asserts that each of a parent 's two genes for each trait will sort independently into gametes ; which allele an organism inherits for one trait is unrelated to which allele it inherits for another trait . This is in fact only true for genes that do not reside on the same chromosome , or are located very far from one another on the same chromosome . The closer two genes lie on the same chromosome , the more closely they will be associated in gametes and the more often they will appear together ; genes that are very close are essentially never separated because it is extremely unlikely that a crossover point will occur between them . This is known as genetic linkage . 
 = = Molecular evolution = = 
 = = = Mutation = = = 
 DNA replication is for the most part extremely accurate , however errors ( mutations ) do occur . The error rate in eukaryotic cells can be as low as 10 − 8 per nucleotide per replication , whereas for some RNA viruses it can be as high as 10 − 3 . This means that each generation , each human genome accumulates 1 – 2 new mutations . Small mutations can be caused by DNA replication and the aftermath of DNA damage and include point mutations in which a single base is altered and frameshift mutations in which a single base is inserted or deleted . Either of these mutations can change the gene by missense ( change a codon to encode a different amino acid ) or nonsense ( a premature stop codon ) . Larger mutations can be caused by errors in recombination to cause chromosomal abnormalities including the duplication , deletion , rearrangement or inversion of large sections of a chromosome . Additionally , the DNA repair mechanisms that normally revert mutations can introduce errors when repairing the physical damage to the molecule is more important than restoring an exact copy , for example when repairing double @-@ strand breaks . 
 When multiple different alleles for a gene are present in a species 's population it is called polymorphic . Most different alleles are functionally equivalent , however some alleles can give rise to different phenotypic traits . A gene 's most common allele is called the wild type , and rare alleles are called mutants . The genetic variation in relative frequencies of different alleles in a population is due to both natural selection and genetic drift . The wild @-@ type allele is not necessarily the ancestor of less common alleles , nor is it necessarily fitter . 
 Most mutations within genes are neutral , having no effect on the organism 's phenotype ( silent mutations ) . Some mutations do not change the amino acid sequence because multiple codons encode the same amino acid ( synonymous mutations ) . Other mutations can be neutral if they lead to amino acid sequence changes , but the protein still functions similarly with the new amino acid ( e.g. conservative mutations ) . Many mutations , however , are deleterious or even lethal , and are removed from populations by natural selection . Genetic disorders are the result of deleterious mutations and can be due to spontaneous mutation in the affected individual , or can be inherited . Finally , a small fraction of mutations are beneficial , improving the organism 's fitness and are extremely important for evolution , since their directional selection leads to adaptive evolution . 
 = = = Sequence homology = = = 
 Genes with a most recent common ancestor , and thus a shared evolutionary ancestry , are known as homologs . These genes appear either from gene duplication within an organism 's genome , where they are known as <unk> genes , or are the result of divergence of the genes after a speciation event , where they are known as orthologous genes , and often perform the same or similar functions in related organisms . It is often assumed that the functions of orthologous genes are more similar than those of <unk> genes , although the difference is minimal . 
 The relationship between genes can be measured by comparing the sequence alignment of their DNA . The degree of sequence similarity between homologous genes is called conserved sequence . Most changes to a gene 's sequence do not affect its function and so genes accumulate mutations over time by neutral molecular evolution . Additionally , any selection on a gene will cause its sequence to diverge at a different rate . Genes under stabilizing selection are constrained and so change more slowly whereas genes under directional selection change sequence more rapidly . The sequence differences between genes can be used for phylogenetic analyses to study how those genes have evolved and how the organisms they come from are related . 
 = = = Origins of new genes = = = 
 The most common source of new genes in eukaryotic lineages is gene duplication , which creates copy number variation of an existing gene in the genome . The resulting genes ( paralogs ) may then diverge in sequence and in function . Sets of genes formed in this way comprise a gene family . Gene duplications and losses within a family are common and represent a major source of evolutionary biodiversity . Sometimes , gene duplication may result in a nonfunctional copy of a gene , or a functional copy may be subject to mutations that result in loss of function ; such nonfunctional genes are called pseudogenes . 
 De novo or " orphan " genes , whose sequence shows no similarity to existing genes , are extremely rare . Estimates of the number of de novo genes in the human genome range from 18 to 60 . Such genes are typically shorter and simpler in structure than most eukaryotic genes , with few if any introns . Two primary sources of orphan protein @-@ coding genes are gene duplication followed by extremely rapid sequence change , such that the original relationship is undetectable by sequence comparisons , and formation through mutation of " cryptic " transcription start sites that introduce a new open reading frame in a region of the genome that did not previously code for a protein . 
 Horizontal gene transfer refers to the transfer of genetic material through a mechanism other than reproduction . This mechanism is a common source of new genes in prokaryotes , sometimes thought to contribute more to genetic variation than gene duplication . It is a common means of spreading antibiotic resistance , virulence , and adaptive metabolic functions . Although horizontal gene transfer is rare in eukaryotes , likely examples have been identified of protist and alga genomes containing genes of bacterial origin . 
 = = Genome = = 
 The genome is the total genetic material of an organism and includes both the genes and non @-@ coding sequences . 
 = = = Number of genes = = = 
 The genome size , and the number of genes it encodes varies widely between organisms . The smallest genomes occur in viruses ( which can have as few as 2 protein @-@ coding genes ) , and viroids ( which act as a single non @-@ coding RNA gene ) . Conversely , plants can have extremely large genomes , with rice containing > 46 @,@ 000 protein @-@ coding genes . The total number of protein @-@ coding genes ( the Earth 's proteome ) is estimated to be 5 million sequences . 
 Although the number of base @-@ pairs of DNA in the human genome has been known since the 1960s , the estimated number of genes has changed over time as definitions of genes , and methods of detecting them have been refined . Initial theoretical predictions of the number of human genes were as high as 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . Early experimental measures indicated there to be 50 @,@ 000 – 100 @,@ 000 transcribed genes ( expressed sequence tags ) . Subsequently , the sequencing in the Human Genome Project indicated that many of these transcripts were alternative variants of the same genes , and the total number of protein @-@ coding genes was revised down to ~ 20 @,@ 000 with 13 genes encoded on the mitochondrial genome . Of the human genome , only 1 – 2 % consists of protein @-@ coding genes , with the remainder being ' noncoding ' DNA such as introns , <unk> , and noncoding <unk> organism has all his genes in all cells of his body but it is not important that every gene must function in every cell . 
 = = = Essential genes = = = 
 Essential genes are the set of genes thought to be critical for an organism 's survival . This definition assumes the abundant availability of all relevant nutrients and the absence of environmental stress . Only a small portion of an organism 's genes are essential . In bacteria , an estimated 250 – 400 genes are essential for Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis , which is less than 10 % of their genes . Half of these genes are orthologs in both organisms and are largely involved in protein synthesis . In the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae the number of essential genes is slightly higher , at 1000 genes ( ~ 20 % of their genes ) . Although the number is more difficult to measure in higher eukaryotes , mice and humans are estimated to have around 2000 essential genes ( ~ 10 % of their genes ) . The synthetic organism , Syn 3 , has a minimal genome of 473 essential genes and quasi @-@ essential genes ( necessary for fast growth ) , although 149 have unknown function . 
 Essential genes include Housekeeping genes ( critical for basic cell functions ) as well as genes that are expressed at different times in the organisms development or life cycle . Housekeeping genes are used as experimental controls when analysing gene expression , since they are constitutively expressed at a relatively constant level . 
 = = = Genetic and genomic nomenclature = = = 
 Gene nomenclature has been established by the HUGO Gene Nomenclature Committee ( <unk> ) for each known human gene in the form of an approved gene name and symbol ( short @-@ form abbreviation ) , which can be accessed through a database maintained by <unk> . Symbols are chosen to be unique , and each gene has only one symbol ( although approved symbols sometimes change ) . Symbols are preferably kept consistent with other members of a gene family and with homologs in other species , particularly the mouse due to its role as a common model organism . 
 = = Genetic engineering = = 
 Genetic engineering is the modification of an organism 's genome through biotechnology . Since the 1970s , a variety of techniques have been developed to specifically add , remove and edit genes in an organism . Recently developed genome engineering techniques use engineered nuclease enzymes to create targeted DNA repair in a chromosome to either disrupt or edit a gene when the break is repaired . The related term synthetic biology is sometimes used to refer to extensive genetic engineering of an organism . 
 Genetic engineering is now a routine research tool with model organisms . For example , genes are easily added to bacteria and lineages of knockout mice with a specific gene 's function disrupted are used to investigate that gene 's function . Many organisms have been genetically modified for applications in agriculture , industrial biotechnology , and medicine . 
 For multicellular organisms , typically the embryo is engineered which grows into the adult genetically modified organism . However , the genomes of cells in an adult organism can be edited using gene therapy techniques to treat genetic diseases . 
 = Dynamics of the celestial spheres = 
 Ancient , medieval and Renaissance astronomers and philosophers developed many different theories about the dynamics of the celestial spheres . They explained the motions of the various nested spheres in terms of the materials of which they were made , external movers such as celestial intelligences , and internal movers such as motive souls or impressed forces . Most of these models were qualitative , although a few of them incorporated quantitative analyses that related speed , motive force and resistance . 
 = = The celestial material and its natural motions = = 
 In considering the physics of the celestial spheres , scholars followed two different views about the material composition of the celestial spheres . For Plato , the celestial regions were made " mostly out of fire " on account of fire 's mobility . Later Platonists , such as Plotinus , maintained that although fire moves naturally upward in a straight line toward its natural place at the periphery of the universe , when it arrived there , it would either rest or move naturally in a circle . This account was compatible with Aristotle 's meteorology of a fiery region in the upper air , dragged along underneath the circular motion of the lunar sphere . For Aristotle , however , the spheres themselves were made entirely of a special fifth element , Aether ( <unk> ) , the bright , untainted upper atmosphere in which the gods dwell , as distinct from the dense lower atmosphere , Aer ( <unk> ) . While the four terrestrial elements ( earth , water , air and fire ) gave rise to the generation and corruption of natural substances by their mutual transformations , aether was unchanging , moving always with a uniform circular motion that was uniquely suited to the celestial spheres , which were eternal . Earth and water had a natural heaviness ( gravitas ) , which they expressed by moving downward toward the center of the universe . Fire and air had a natural lightness ( <unk> ) , such that they moved upward , away from the center . Aether , being neither heavy nor light , moved naturally around the center . 
 = = The causes of celestial motion = = 
 As early as Plato , philosophers considered the heavens to be moved by immaterial agents . Plato believed the cause to be a world @-@ soul , created according to mathematical principles , which governed the daily motion of the heavens ( the motion of the Same ) and the opposed motions of the planets along the zodiac ( the motion of the Different ) . Aristotle proposed the existence of divine unmoved movers which act as final causes ; the celestial spheres mimic the movers , as best they could , by moving with uniform circular motion . In his Metaphysics , Aristotle maintained that an individual unmoved mover would be required to insure each individual motion in the heavens . While stipulating that the number of spheres , and thus gods , is subject to revision by astronomers , he estimated the total as 47 or 55 , depending on whether one followed the model of Eudoxus or Callippus . In On the Heavens , Aristotle presented an alternate view of eternal circular motion as moving itself , in the manner of Plato 's world @-@ soul , which lent support to three principles of celestial motion : an internal soul , an external unmoved mover , and the celestial material ( aether ) . 
 = = = Later Greek interpreters = = = 
 In his Planetary Hypotheses , Ptolemy ( <unk> – 168 ) rejected the Aristotelian concept of an external prime mover , maintaining instead that the planets have souls and move themselves with a voluntary motion . Each planet sends out motive emissions that direct its own motion and the motions of the epicycle and deferent that make up its system , just as a bird sends out emissions to its nerves that direct the motions of its feet and wings . 
 John Philoponus ( 490 – 570 ) considered that the heavens were made of fire , not of aether , yet maintained that circular motion is one of the two natural motions of fire . In a theological work , On the Creation of the World ( De <unk> mundi ) , he denied that the heavens are moved by either a soul or by angels , proposing that " it is not impossible that God , who created all these things , imparted a motive force to the Moon , the Sun , and other stars – just as the inclination to heavy and light bodies , and the movements due to the internal soul to all living beings – in order that the angels do not move them by force . " This is interpreted as an application of the concept of impetus to the motion of the celestial spheres . In an earlier commentary on Aristotle 's Physics , Philoponus compared the innate power or nature that accounts for the rotation of the heavens to the innate power or nature that accounts for the fall of rocks . 
 = = = Islamic interpreters = = = 
 The Persian philosophers al @-@ Farabi ( <unk> – <unk> ) and Avicenna ( <unk> – 1037 ) , following Plotinus , maintained that Aristotle 's movers , called intelligences , came into being through a series of emanations beginning with God . A first intelligence emanated from God , and from the first intelligence emanated a sphere , its soul , and a second intelligence . The process continued down through the celestial spheres until the sphere of the Moon , its soul , and a final intelligence . They considered that each sphere was moved continually by its soul , seeking to emulate the perfection of its intelligence . Avicenna maintained that besides an intelligence and its soul , each sphere was also moved by a natural inclination ( <unk> ) . 
 An interpreter of Aristotle from Muslim Spain , al @-@ Bitruji ( d. <unk> ) , proposed a radical transformation of astronomy that did away with epicycles and eccentrics , in which the celestial spheres were driven by a single unmoved mover at the periphery of the universe . The spheres thus moved with a " natural nonviolent motion " . The mover 's power diminished with increasing distance from the periphery so that the lower spheres lagged behind in their daily motion around the Earth ; this power reached even as far as the sphere of water , producing the tides . 
 More influential for later Christian thinkers were the teachings of Averroes ( 1126 – 1198 ) , who agreed with Avicenna that the intelligences and souls combine to move the spheres but rejected his concept of emanation . Considering how the soul acts , he maintained that the soul moves its sphere without effort , for the celestial material has no tendency to a contrary motion . 
 Later in the century , a commentator on the Islamic theologian Adud al @-@ Din al @-@ Iji ( 1281 – 1355 ) rejected non @-@ religious science and astronomy , following the Ash 'ari doctrine of <unk> , which maintained that all physical effects were caused directly by God 's will rather than by natural causes . He maintained that the celestial spheres were " imaginary things " and " more tenuous than a spider 's web " . 
 = = = Medieval Western Europe = = = 
 In the Early Middle Ages , Plato 's picture of the heavens was dominant among European philosophers , which led Christian thinkers to question the role and nature of the world @-@ soul . With the recovery of Aristotle 's works in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries , Aristotle 's views supplanted the earlier Platonism , and a new set of questions regarding the relationships of the unmoved movers to the spheres and to God emerged . 
 In the early phases of the Western recovery of Aristotle , Robert Grosseteste ( <unk> – 1253 ) , influenced by medieval Platonism and by the astronomy of al @-@ Bitruji , rejected the idea that the heavens are moved by either souls or intelligences . Adam Marsh 's ( <unk> – 1259 ) treatise On the Ebb and Flow of the Sea , which was formerly attributed to Grosseteste , maintained al @-@ Bitruji 's opinion that the celestial spheres and the seas are moved by a peripheral mover whose motion weakens with distance . 
 Thomas Aquinas ( <unk> – 1274 ) , following Avicenna , interpreted Aristotle to mean that there were two immaterial substances responsible for the motion of each celestial sphere , a soul that was an integral part of its sphere , and an intelligence that was separate from its sphere . The soul shares the motion of its sphere and causes the sphere to move through its love and desire for the unmoved separate intelligence . Avicenna , al @-@ Ghazali , Moses Maimonides , and most Christian scholastic philosophers identified Aristotle 's intelligences with the angels of revelation , thereby associating an angel with each of the spheres . Moreover , Aquinas rejected the idea that celestial bodies are moved by an internal nature , similar to the heaviness and lightness that moves terrestrial bodies . Attributing souls to the spheres was theologically controversial , as that could make them animals . After the Condemnations of 1277 , most philosophers came to reject the idea that the celestial spheres had souls . 
 Robert Kilwardby ( c . 1215 – 1279 ) discussed three alternative explanations of the motions of the celestial spheres , rejecting the views that celestial bodies are animated and are moved by their own spirits or souls , or that the celestial bodies are moved by angelic spirits , which govern and move them . He maintained , instead , that " celestial bodies are moved by their own natural inclinations similar to weight " . Just as heavy bodies are naturally moved by their own weight , which is an intrinsic active principle , so the celestial bodies are naturally moved by a similar intrinsic principle . Since the heavens are spherical , the only motion that could be natural to them is rotation . Kilwardby 's idea had been earlier held by another Oxford scholar , John <unk> ( c . 1175 – 1248 ) . 
 In two slightly different discussions , John Buridan ( <unk> – 1358 ) suggested that when God created the celestial spheres , he began to move them , impressing in them a circular impetus that would be neither corrupted nor diminished , since there was neither an inclination to other movements nor any resistance in the celestial region . He noted that this would allow God to rest on the seventh day , but he left the matter to be resolved by the theologians . 
 Nicole Oresme ( <unk> @-@ 1382 ) explained the motion of the spheres in traditional terms of the action of intelligences but noted that , contrary to Aristotle , some intelligences are moved ; for example , the intelligence that moves the Moon 's epicycle shares the motion of the lunar orb in which the epicycle is embedded . He related the spheres ' motions to the proportion of motive power to resistance that was impressed in each sphere when God created the heavens . In discussing the relation of the moving power of the intelligence , the resistance of the sphere , and the circular velocity , he said " this ratio ought not to be called a ratio of force to resistance except by analogy , because an intelligence moves by will alone ... and the heavens do not resist it . " 
 According to Grant , except for Oresme , scholastic thinkers did not consider the force @-@ resistance model to be properly applicable to the motion of celestial bodies , although some , such as Bartholomeus Amicus , thought <unk> in terms of force and resistance . By the end of the Middle Ages it was the common opinion among philosophers that the celestial bodies were moved by external intelligences , or angels , and not by some kind of an internal mover . 
 = = = The movers and Copernicanism = = = 
 Although Nicolaus Copernicus ( 1473 – 1543 ) transformed Ptolemaic astronomy and Aristotelian cosmology by moving the Earth from the center of the universe , he retained both the traditional model of the celestial spheres and the medieval Aristotelian views of the causes of its motion . Copernicus follows Aristotle to maintain that circular motion is natural to the form of a sphere . However , he also appears to have accepted the traditional philosophical belief that the spheres are moved by an external mover . 
 Johannes Kepler 's ( 1571 – 1630 ) cosmology eliminated the celestial spheres , but he held that the planets were moved both by an external motive power , which he located in the Sun , and a motive soul associated with each planet . In an early manuscript discussing the motion of Mars , Kepler considered the Sun to cause the circular motion of the planet . He then attributed the inward and outward motion of the planet , which transforms its overall motion from circular to oval , to a moving soul in the planet since the motion is " not a natural motion , but more of an animate one " . In various writings , Kepler often attributed a kind of intelligence to the inborn motive faculties associated with the stars . 
 In the aftermath of Copernicanism the planets came to be seen as bodies moving freely through a very subtle <unk> medium . Although many scholastics continued to maintain that intelligences were the celestial movers , they now associated the intelligences with the planets themselves , rather than with the celestial spheres . 
 = Greg Wohlwend = 
 Greg Wohlwend is an American independent video game developer and artist whose games include Threes ! , Ridiculous Fishing , Hundreds , Gasketball , Puzzlejuice , and Solipskier . He originally formed Intuition Games with Iowa State University classmate Mike Boxleiter in 2007 where they worked on Dinowaurs and other small Adobe Flash games . Trained as an artist , Wohlwend worked mainly on the visual assets . As Mikengreg , they released Solipskier ( 2010 , iOS ) , whose success let the two take a more experimental approach with Gasketball , which did not fare as well . At the same time , Wohlwend collaborated with Asher Vollmer to make Puzzlejuice and with Adam Saltsman to make Hundreds based on Wohlwend 's first game design . He later released Threes ! with Vollmer in 2014 to critical acclaim . He was named among Forbes ' 2014 " 30 under 30 " in the games industry . Mikengreg released TouchTone in 2015 following two years of development . 
 = = Career = = 
 Wohlwend studied graphic design at Iowa State University and graduated in 2008 . He has described his aesthetic as " simple and elegant " , and has said about his practice that he is not good at character design and that he prefers to work with vector file formats in Adobe Illustrator so that the images can work at all resolutions . Wohlwend also feels that creativity is a skill that is cultivated and not inborn . He has been influenced by his lifelong experience playing video games , and his favorite game is Baldur 's Gate II : Shadows of Amn . His writings on the lifestyle required for indie development have been noted by games journalists . Wohlwend was named among Forbes ' 2014 " 30 under 30 " in the games industry . 
 = = = Intuition and Mikengreg = = = 
 Wohlwend met Mike Boxleiter in an experimental video game development class they took together at Iowa State University . Wohlwend had attempted to help Boxleiter with a project , but quit after drawing a few aliens . They met again as coworkers at the university 's Virtual Reality Application Center during Boxleiter 's final year of college . Upon discovering their close interests , they began to work on an Adobe Flash game named Dinowaurs while they completed college . So as to make money while they worked on the game , they founded Intuition Games at the university 's Research Park around May 2007 . They decided to stay in Ames , Iowa due to its financial feasibility and local connections , but two other team members ( friends from Iowa State ) lived farther away . They saw Flash games as an easy entry point into full @-@ time self @-@ employment , but planned to eventually work on console platforms such as WiiWare . 
 In their development process , Boxleiter and Wohlwend both proposed and worked on each other 's ideas , and would drop the ideas they found unexciting . Wohlwend said they often argued over aspects of their games , which he found normal and natural . Their labor as a team was divided in that Wohlwend always did the art and Boxleiter the programming , as reflective of their skills at the time . The pair agreed to an assessment of their partnership as " left @-@ brain right @-@ brain " , and saw the majority of their joint work as " editing " . Aside from the business aspects , they were grateful to have the " creative freedom " to do their own work . Wohlwend appreciated the benefits of not doing contract work , but struggled with the relative " isolation " of having few colleagues , a low salary , and job instability . He disagreed with the " cinematic action games " he saw to be popular at the time and hoped to contribute more compelling ideas to the young industry . They thought of themselves as artists and of their work as experimental . Boxleiter and Wohlwend worked long hours when making the Flash games , which they found exciting and unsustainable . At Intuition , they worked on games such as Dinowaurs , Gray , Fig . 8 , and <unk> and participated in at least six game jams . As of April 2010 , they had created 10 games together . 
 Intuition 's first game , Dinowaurs , is a Flash @-@ based strategy and action game where two players compete as dinosaurs to seize the most cavemen settlements so as to upgrade their own capacity and eventually kill the other dinosaur . It features online matchmaking . The concept came from one of Boxleiter 's unfinished projects and another Intuition member 's drawing of a stegosaurus with a jetpack . The team was funded then @-@ new Flash site Kongregate by November 2007 as one of the first five games for Kongregate platform . It was finished in two years for a 2009 release . IndieGames.com reported mixed reviews from players . 
 Their later games would only take a few months each , in comparison . They abandoned the use of design documents after Dinowaurs , and instead chose to refine and experiment in process . Intuition released Effing Hail and Gray around April 2009 . Players in action game Effing Hail control hail and wind to destroy the most buildings and midair objects within a time limit . The game was published through Kongregate . In Gray , players control a single character and try to end a riot by influencing other individuals in the crowd . The game was featured at IndieCade in 2009 . In the case of Fig . 8 . , Wohlwend thought of the idea based on a college art project . In the project , Wohlwend followed a bike trail in the snow , metaphorically related it to the tribulations of romantic relationship , and made an art installation involving a bike spray @-@ painted black with two errant red and blue tracks painted on the floor . The concept went unused on their whiteboard for four months until they needed an idea , whereupon Boxleiter added game mechanics to the visuals . In their next game , Liferaft , the player @-@ character is a young woman set to escape " a post @-@ apocalyptic sci @-@ fi ... test chamber " , with core gameplay that revolves around a " Bionic Commando @-@ style grappling hook " . Wohlwend used a 16 @-@ bit era graphics style . They sought crowdfunding from Kickstarter , but later canceled and put the project on hiatus in October 2009 . 
 In March 2010 and under the moniker Mikengreg , Boxleiter and Wohlwend 's 4fourths was selected for Kokoromi 's Gamma IV showcase . Based on the showcase 's " one button game " theme , four players control two spaceships using one button apiece to cooperatively destroy enemy ships . It was Michael Rose of <unk> 's favorite game of the Gamma IV selections , was later displayed at the 2010 Game Developers Conference and in Brandon Boyer 's 2011 Wild Rumpus event . 
 Mikengreg announced Liferaft : Zero and Solipskier in November 2010 . The former is a " prequel teaser " to Liferaft : a game of trial @-@ based challenges with wall @-@ jumping and grappling wherein girl clones attempt to swing and jump around test chambers to reach and ring a bell . Wohlwend and Boxleiter made the shorter version to limit the scope creep of the overall project . IndieGames.com named the Flash game their third best browser platformer of the year . Their other game , 4fourths , was put on hiatus for lack of resources . They were interested in making games outside the Flash market . 
 = = = Solipskier = = = 
 Their first game as Mikengreg was the sport @-@ inspired Solipskier , where the player 's finger draws the ground for the on @-@ screen skier to pass through a level filled with gates , tunnels , and walls . It was designed as a Flash game , which set the limitations for its mechanics . The game concept came from a brainstorming session about parallax scrolling , and was revised in fits of creativity . They paired the parallax scrolling with speed and began to prototype . Wohlwend saved the skier 's character design for last since he felt it was his weakest area . Mikengreg then decided to develop for iOS in addition to Flash , and to release both versions simultaneously . It was released simultaneously for Kongregate ( Flash ) and iOS on August 29 , 2010 . Solipskier became their first game to receive public appreciation . The iOS version made around $ 70 @,@ 000 in its first two months ( as compared to $ 15 @,@ 000 from the Flash release ) , which gave them enough stability to branch out into non @-@ Flash platforms . 
 = = = Gasketball = = = 
 Riding the earnings from Solipskier , Mikengreg continued to pay themselves their same salary but now had the means to try new ideas . Wohlwend estimated that they discarded about six " fairly polished prototypes " over the development of their next game , Gasketball . They were able to live on $ 20 – 25 @,@ 000 a year each in Iowa for the next two years while working on the new game . Wohlwend made somewhat more income due to other collaborations , such as Puzzlejuice with Asher Vollmer , but shared his income with Boxleiter . Even though Solipskier was successful , the duo did not have a following comparable to indie developers like Team Meat and thus felt like their external pressure was low . Instead , their pressure was internal . Wohlwend said he worked 100 @-@ hour weeks with no weekends or vacations while living off of the Solipskier funds . In making Gasketball , Boxleiter and Wohlwend felt that their game quality had improved continually , but found the idea of a million @-@ person audience " daunting " . Wohlwend questioned whether he could even recreate Solipskier 's success . When they ran out of money , Boxleiter borrowed money from his parents , and eventually they both went homeless , living off of the couches of friends . 
 Gasketball was released for iPad on August 9 , 2012 . They had decided to release the game as an ethically non @-@ coercive free @-@ to @-@ play game , with a free base game and in @-@ app purchases for the extended content . Not as many players paid for the content as expected . This was due , in part , to the players ' difficulty in finding the purchase function . The game had been downloaded 200 @,@ 000 times in its August 2012 launch week and was briefly ranked near the top of an iTunes top downloads ranking , though it did not break the top 200 grossing chart . 
 = = = Puzzlejuice = = = 
 Wohlwend began to collaborate with Asher Vollmer when Vollmer reached out to Wohlwend for aesthetic advice on a game he was designing , Puzzlejuice . The game has been compared to a cross between Boggle , Tetris , and tile @-@ matching , where tetromino blocks fall from the top of the screen that players turn into letters and rearrange into words . Wohlwend and Vollmer communicated nonverbally through the entire development process via a 365 @-@ message email chain . Vollmer served as the game 's programmer , Wohlwend as the artist , and Jimmy Hinson as the composer . Puzzlejuice was selected for the PAX 10 , a spotlighted group of indie games , in July 2012 . It was released as a universal app for iPhone and iPad on January 19 , 2012 . 
 = = = Hundreds = = = 
 Upon finishing his role as artist on Solipskier , Wohlwend wanted to experiment with game programming by designing his own game . He developed Hundreds from an idea he had while staring at a ceiling , where he imagined a circle growing without overlapping another when growing . He found this to be a good core game concept and based the game around " patience and persistence " . The game 's style inadvertently borrowed from his first year in art school , where Wohlwend composed in black , white , and red so as to focus on composition rather than color . While Wohlwend 's design style is " simple and elegant " , the game 's minimalism was also functional due to his inexperience with programming . The code was " brute forced " and written in a single file . He finished Hundreds as a Flash game in 2010 , but when Flash sites were not interested in purchasing it , Wohlwend chose to open source the code ( partly with the intent to spur " non @-@ coders " to try coding , as he had ) . This version is available online at Newgrounds . 
 At a lull in @-@ between projects , programmer Eric Johnson of Semi Secret Software found the open source code and ported the game to iPad in a weekend before notifying Wohlwend . At the time , Wohlwend did not have an iOS device to test the port , and had to purchase an iPad . Johnson 's iPad version spurred Wohlwend to consider how Hundreds would work with multitouch and cooperative play , and Semi Secret 's Adam Saltsman to consider a Hundreds collaborative iOS release . The project was intended to be a quick level expansion , but quickly surpassed its several month estimate . Wohlwend and Saltsman extended the game 's mechanics with new circles and puzzles , and many of their implemented ideas were later removed . Wohlwend was happy with the final result and credited the game 's " emergent interaction " qualities to Saltsman . They built on each other 's level designs , though Wohlwend said that Saltsman made " basically all the levels " . The new team enjoyed working with each other . 
 In Hundreds , players touch circles to make them grow without overlapping . There are 100 puzzles that increase in complexity . The Flash version was much simpler in design , and added circles onscreen as the game progressed . The iOS version added a new gameplay mode and a narrative element based on ciphers and codes , and was released on January 7 , 2013 for iPhone and iPad , and later for Android . It was nominated for several Independent Games Festival awards , and The Atlantic critic Ian Bogost wrote that the game functioned like a design object , a feat unique for the video game medium . 
 = = = Ridiculous Fishing = = = 
 Wohlwend produced the art for Vlambeer 's Ridiculous Fishing . The four @-@ person team — Vlambeer designer Jan Willem Nijman and marketer Rami Ismail alongside iOS developer Zach Gage — was described by games journalists as an " indie supergroup " and a " dream team " . In Ridiculous Fishing , the player uses motion and touch controls to catch fish and consequently shoot them out of the sky for cash . The game is known for its developers ' battle against a cloned version of their game released by another company . The team worked separately and sporadically with little progress as disheartened by their cloned game predicament , until an August 2012 road trip home across the United States from Penny Arcade Expo in Seattle to New York convinced the team to set a deadline . They scrapped " 90 percent " of their work , and Wohlwend moved to New York City to live with Gage and work 14 @-@ hour days during the final weeks . 
 The last parts of Ridiculous Fishing assembled smoothly and it was released March 14 , 2013 for iOS and later that year for Android . It was well received at launch with " near @-@ universal perfect scores " and won both a 2013 Apple Design Award and Apple 's iPhone game of the year . While IGN 's Justin Davis thought the game 's levels could have been more differentiated in theme and art style , he found the " almost cubist design ... absolutely gorgeous " . Welsh of Eurogamer agreed that Wohlwend 's art was " achingly cool " and reflected a " retro and minimalist " indie gaming trend without overpowering the gameplay . 
 = = = Threes ! = = = 
 Wohlwend , Vollmer , and Hinson of Puzzlejuice collaborated again on Threes ! , a game where the player slides numbered tiles on a four @-@ by @-@ four grid to combine addends and multiples of three . Its development began before Ridiculous Fishing 's March 2013 release . Vollmer presented an idea similar to the final product in its simplicity : pair tiles as multiples of three . The first prototype was written in a single night . Vollmer and Wohlwend spent at least half a year of the game 's 14 @-@ month development iterating on this main idea . Early Threes designs had no inclination towards minimalism : the pair felt that the game needed to appear more complex so as to interest players . Wohlwend sent Vollmer designs with themes such as sushi , chess , broccoli and cheese soup , and hydrogen atoms , which confused their test audiences . They received a " wake @-@ up call " from fellow game designer Zach Gage , who encouraged them to return from their foray into complexity . The final game returned to its original theme of numbers . Speaking in retrospect , Wohlwend said the game " always wanted to be simple " . He noted that players " think math " upon seeing the game 's numbers , though the game is more about " spatial relationships " and just happens to have a " number theme " . 
 When returning to the fundamental and original game concept — pairing tiles as multiples of three — the developers felt their experiments informed their final game development decisions . The theme of individual tile personalities extended to the final version , as tiles have faces and express emotions when paired . For example , the 384 tile has a pirate personality with a large tooth and a pirate eyepatch . Of the development process , Wohlwend called it " tough and frustrating and sometimes hard to see if it was worth it " . It was released for iOS on February 6 , 2014 and later ported to Android , with an Xbox One version announced as in development . The game received what video game review score aggregator Metacritic described as " universal acclaim " . Eurogamer and TouchArcade awarded the game perfect scores , with the latter calling Threes " about as close as it gets to a perfect mobile game " . Re / code reported that it " dominated " the chart in the following weeks and became one of the 25 highest grossing apps on the App Store . It later won a 2014 Apple Design Award . 
 = = = TouchTone = = = 
 After Gasketball 's 2012 release , Boxleiter and Wohlwend planned a celebratory road trip to a game jam in Victoria , British Columbia . The game did not fare as expected , so Boxleiter used the two @-@ day jam to create the core mirror reflection mechanics of what would become TouchTone , though it would take two years of sporadic work to finalize the remainder of the game . In TouchTone , the player monitors phone calls as part of a government surveillance program to find public threats . The story is told through a series of reflection puzzles wherein the player swipes the screen to reflect a beam around a room to its intended destination . 
 Mikengreg felt that their first theme of light , prisms , and audio signal too closely mimicked " a hacking minigame from a bigger AAA game like BioShock or System Shock " , but eventually paired the concept with a satirical Edward Snowden theme following the mid @-@ 2013 global surveillance disclosures . Their original efforts were jocular , but their concept became more serious as the story and " political message " grew deeper . Boxleiter wrote most of the script , and together with Wohlwend , would conference after each chapter for coherency . Mikengreg decided against including an option to skip puzzles , which they felt would spoil the game and the player 's capacity to adapt to increasing difficulty . They called this philosophy the " Derek Yu ( of Spelunky ) school of game design " . TouchTone was released on March 19 , 2015 for iOS . Review aggregator Metacritic characterized its reviews as generally favorable . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 As of July 2015 , Wohlwend is collaborating with Benedict Fritz on <unk> , a computer game based on arcade game Ice Cold Beer wherein the player uses four keyboard keys to navigate a seed around holes . The game 's development is part of a Cards Against Humanity game incubation program . <unk> is planned for release in 2015 . 
 = Vincent and the Doctor = 
 " Vincent and the Doctor " is the tenth episode in the fifth series of British science fiction television series Doctor Who , first broadcast on BBC One on 5 June 2010 . It was written by Richard Curtis and directed by Jonny Campbell and featured an uncredited guest appearance from actor Bill Nighy . 
 Intrigued by an ominous figure in one of Vincent van Gogh 's paintings , alien time traveller the Doctor ( Matt Smith ) and his companion Amy Pond ( Karen Gillan ) go back in time to meet Van Gogh ( Tony Curran ) and discover that Provence has been plagued by an invisible monster , known as the Krafayis , which only Van Gogh can see . The Doctor and Amy work with Van Gogh to defeat the Krafayis , but in their attempt to have Van Gogh realise his legacy through bringing him to the future they ultimately realise that not all of time can be rewritten and there are some evils which are out of the Doctor 's reach . 
 Curtis , inspired by the fact that Van Gogh never knew he would be famous , had the idea for an episode centred on him . He left the script open to criticism from the crew and made many revisions as a result . Curtis wanted to portray Van Gogh truthfully , rather than being cruel by writing jokes about his madness . The episode was filmed in Trogir , Croatia and many of the sets were modelled after Van Gogh paintings . The episode was watched by 6 @.@ 76 million viewers on BBC One and BBC HD . Reception to the episode varied , ranging from very positive to mixed to very negative . While the amount of emotion in the episode was debated over , most reviewers agreed that the Krafayis was not a threatening monster while Curran 's performance as Van Gogh was immensely praised . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The Doctor has taken Amy to the Musée d 'Orsay in Paris , where they admire the work of the post @-@ impressionist painter Vincent van Gogh . The Doctor discovers a seemingly alien figure in a window of the painting The Church at Auvers , and decides they must travel back in time to speak to Vincent around when he painted the painting . In 1890 , they find Vincent at a cafe in Arles , a lonely man with a bad reputation . Vincent opens up when he notices Amy , sensing a loss she herself is not aware of . Outside the cafe a young girl is murdered , when the trio go out to see what happened they are stoned by locals who blame Vincent 's insanity for the killing . The Doctor and Amy talk Vincent into letting them stay the night and they return to his home . 
 That evening , Vincent confesses that his works have little value to anyone else . He believes the universe is filled with wonders that he must paint , and that he can " hear the colours " . Amy goes outside and is attacked by a beast that only Vincent is able to see . He sketches it for the Doctor , who identifies it as a Krafayis . Knowing the beast will appear when Vincent paints the nearby church the next evening , the Doctor and Amy plan to join him . The next morning , Vincent becomes distraught after being told that The Doctor and Amy won 't be staying long . Vincent shuts himself in his bedroom , saying that everyone leaves him in the end . The Doctor and Amy set out to capture the beast alone , but Vincent soon joins them eager to help . He confides to Amy that if she can " soldier on , then so can Vincent van Gogh " . 
 Vincent begins creating the painting of the church and soon spots the beast inside . The Doctor demands that Amy stay back as he enters the church alone , but she and Vincent both agree they should help the Doctor . Vincent is able to save the Doctor and Amy , describing the beast 's actions as they hide in the confessionals . The Doctor soon realises from Vincent 's description that the beast is blind , the likely reason it was abandoned on Earth . The beast is impaled on Vincent 's easel when it tries to lunge at the artist . The Doctor attempts to soothe the dying creature while Vincent empathises with its pain . After the creature dies , the three return outside the church and Vincent describes the night sky as he envisions it . 
 The next day , the Doctor and Amy prepare to leave . Vincent asks Amy to return and marry him should she leave the Doctor . The Doctor offers to show him something . The Doctor and Amy take Vincent in the TARDIS to the present and the Van Gogh exhibit at the Musée d 'Orsay . Vincent is stunned at the display and becomes emotionally overwhelmed when he overhears art curator Dr. Black ( Bill Nighy ) say that Van Gogh was " the greatest painter of them all " and " one of the greatest men who ever lived " . They return an emotionally changed Vincent to the past and say their final goodbyes . As the Doctor and Amy return to the present , Amy is confident that there will be hundreds of new paintings by Vincent waiting for them . She is crushed to learn that Vincent still committed suicide weeks after their adventure , at the age of 37 . The Doctor explains that life is a mixture of bad and good , and while their brief encounter with Vincent couldn 't undo all of the bad , they added some good to his life . The evidence is in Vincent 's displayed works : the face no longer appears in The Church , and now Vase with 12 Sunflowers bears the inscription , " For Amy " . 
 = = = Continuity = = = 
 Images of the First and Second Doctors are displayed on the Doctor 's mirror device and printout from the TARDIS ' typewriter . The episode presents these trips as the Doctor 's compensation to Amy for her fiancé Rory Williams ' death in the previous episode , which Amy herself does not remember since Rory was consumed by a crack in the universe and thus erased from time . Van Gogh is able to sense Amy 's sadness at Rory 's death , and the Doctor later accidentally addresses Amy and Vincent as Amy and Rory , respectively . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Writer Richard Curtis was previously executive producer on the Doctor Who spoof The Curse of Fatal Death , a one @-@ off comedy special written for Comic Relief by current show @-@ runner Steven Moffat . Based on this experience , Moffat asked Curtis to write an episode of Doctor Who . Curtis had enjoyed the show 's historical episodes and felt comfortable writing one . He had the idea of a story centred on Van Gogh for " a long while " and was particularly interested in the fact Van Gogh never knew he would be famous , as well as his inspirational story . Curtis was also interested in depression and the price paid for it . He wanted to convey that the Doctor could rewrite time , but Van Gogh 's " demons " were out of his reach . Moffat was " enthusiastic " about the story idea . 
 Curtis asked Moffat to criticise " anything and everything " and later said he was very honest . Executive producer Piers Wenger and director Jonny Campbell also critiqued the script . Moffat told Curtis that it needed to " start quicker " and that the meeting with the Doctor and Vincent was " dull " and needed to be something " cute " like Curtis had done in his films . He also noted that the Doctor did not talk as much as Curtis had written and recommended Curtis watch some episodes to see he was " rather efficient in the way that he talked " . Curtis enjoyed the experience , commenting that it was " fun " to work within boundaries rather than doing it all himself . After seeing a read @-@ through performed by leads Matt Smith and Karen Gillan , Curtis made more changes . He commented that it was easy to write for them as they were " so delightful and modern and relaxed " . Curtis 's original title for the episode was " Eyes that See the Darkness " , but he said this was vetoed . 
 Curtis wanted to write for Doctor Who because he thought it would be " something my kids would like . " When writing " Vincent and the Doctor " , Curtis put up prints of Van Gogh paintings around the house as well as a board with index cards outlining the plot . His children helped him come up with some ideas . Gillan commented that the story had a different style and approach and was more character @-@ driven . Though it was a subject he knew " quite a lot " about , he still read a 200 @-@ page biography of Van Gogh , which was more research than he normally would have done if working on other projects ; he took Van Gogh very seriously . As such , he wanted to be " truthful rather than cruel " and refused to write any jokes about Van Gogh 's ears after he famously cut one of them off . However , he did incorporate other humour as he naturally wanted to " try to make things funny " . 
 = = = Casting and filming = = = 
 Curtis stated that casting an actor to play Van Gogh was done carefully , as he wanted him to feel to the audience as Van Gogh , not " like a bloke they ’ ve seen acting lots of other parts , in an orange wig " . Tony Curran was ultimately cast as the part ; Curtis called him a " wonderful actor " who " really could not look more like " Van Gogh . Curran , Smith and Gillan got to know each other very well , which Gillan hoped would be evident in their chemistry in the episode . Bill Nighy appears uncredited as the Musée d 'Orsay 's expert on Van Gogh . Nighy was rumoured to have been considered for the role of the Ninth Doctor when the show was revived . Campbell stated that they were " very fortunate " to have Nighy in the role , who he believed was someone people paid attention to , and the audience needed to pay attention to his character as he said facts which would become important later in the story . 
 Scenes set in Provence were filmed on location in Trogir , Croatia in the same production block as " The Vampires of Venice " , which sees Trogir depicting 16th @-@ century Venice . Filming took place around November 2009 . The National Museum Cardiff doubled for the interior of the Musée d 'Orsay . Some of the sets were intended to reference paintings , such as Van Gogh 's bedroom . One such set was the café where the Doctor and Amy first meet Van Gogh , which was modelled after the painting Cafe Terrace at Night . This proved challenging for the art department , who extensively looked for a suitable building in Croatia to use . Once they found the one they wanted , they had to redesign it to look like the painting ; this involved putting an awning up , changing the windows , and adding a platform with tables and chairs . The song played during the ending scene is " Chances " by the British rock band Athlete . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Vincent and the Doctor " was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC One and simulcast on BBC HD on 5 June 2010 . Initial overnight ratings showed that the episode was watched by 5 million , the second rated show of the day and the first on BBC One . Final consolidated ratings rose to 6 @.@ 76 million , with 6 @.@ 29 on BBC One and a further 0 @.@ 47 on BBC HD . It was the second most watched programme on BBC One and the highest on BBC HD . It was given an Appreciation Index of 86 , considered " excellent " . 
 After the original broadcast , viewers were offered a helpline if they had been affected by the issues raised in the programme . " Vincent and the Doctor " was released in Region 2 on DVD and Blu @-@ ray on 6 September 2010 with " The Lodger " , " The Pandorica Opens " and " The Big Bang " . It was then re @-@ released as part of the Complete Fifth Series boxset on 8 November 2010 . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Since its broadcast , Vincent and the Doctor has received critical acclaim . Dave Golder of SFX magazine gave the episode five out of five stars , calling it " a genuinely magical episode of Who , high on atmosphere ... and bursting with charm " . John Moore , writing on Den of Geek , also took a positive stance towards the episode , describing it as " life @-@ affirming " as a Doctor Who fan , and , though he did criticise some elements of the plot , likewise wrote positively about the ending , ultimately finding the episode " utterly useless , but absolutely art " . Keith Watson in the Metro was surprised by the " impressive imagining of Van Gogh 's world " , praising Curtis ' humour throughout the episode . He also praised the performance by Curran as Van Gogh , feeling that , with regard to Van Gogh 's depression , the producers " pulled it off " against the odds . Mark Lawson of The Guardian praised it as " exceptionally good " and " thrilling and funny , as well as educational " , noting its " historical rigour " and its " good arty jokes " , while Deborah Orr wrote that it was " hardly original for someone to alight on [ Van Gogh 's ] tale as a tear @-@ jerker , although it is pretty shrewd to think of placing it in a popular time @-@ travel context " and that " the feeling that I 'd been gently <unk> into life @-@ affirming feel @-@ good sobs by Richard Curtis was not new , not in the least " . 
 In the mainstream press , Tom Sutcliffe in The Independent praised the episode as " first ingenious and then decidedly poignant " , though he felt some aspects of plot would have wider implications not addressed in the episode , and remained " coldly unfeeling " towards the death of the Krafayis . Sam Wollaston of The Guardian liked the episode , considering Curtis ' dialogue to be " witty and clever " and , despite feeling that some of the moral sentiments expressed during the episode were " as schmaltzy as sugary <unk> " , described how the emotion of the episode eventually got to him . The A.V. Club 's Keith Phipps gave the episode a B- , explaining that it " didn 't quite work " and suffered from tonal problems . Matt Wales on IGN was also mixed , giving it a 7 @.@ 5 out of 10 rating . He was positive toward Curran and Gillan and that the episode " finally gave us a three @-@ dimensional Amy Pond " , but thought the " usually excellent " Smith " didn 't get much to work with " . He also thought that the Krafayis was " a nice idea " for being a metaphor but was not threatening , and he labelled the emotional ending as " self @-@ indulgently mawkish " . 
 On The Guardian film blog , Peter Bradshaw considered " Vincent and the Doctor " to be a " terrifically clever , funny , likeable wildly surreal episode " . He praised the " <unk> [ sic ] Curtis dialogue " and the " uproariously emotional ending of the sort only Richard Curtis could get away with " . Dan Martin on the same paper 's regular Doctor Who blog was more critical , writing that its " main problem [ was ] that it doesn 't feel much like a Doctor Who story " and would have worked better if " the middle section with the monster had been stripped out " . He also criticised the script for its " lashings of weapons @-@ grade sentimentality " and for " throwing up possibilities that weren 't followed up " and the monster as an " afterthought [ posing ] ... no tangible threat " . However , he did praise Curran 's " great performance " along with the episode 's treatment of depression , concluding like Wollaston that he enjoyed the episode despite his misgivings . 
 One of the most negative reviews came from Gavin Fuller in The Telegraph , who criticised it as a " bland , inconsequential episode that , once it set up what was a decent enough premise ... completely failed to run with it " . He compared it unfavourably with the third series episode " The Shakespeare Code " in being centred round a historical " tormented artist " but wrote that it lacked that episode 's " narrative drive " , with " a serious plot hole " in Van Gogh 's ability to see the creature and that the Krafayis was " the most pointless monsters ever to appear in the series ' long history " . He also criticised Smith 's Doctor and wrote that Van Gogh still committing suicide despite the trip to the Orsay was " nonsensical " . He did , however , praise " the Doctor 's homily about good things and bad things " ( though Sam Wollaston criticised this speech in The Guardian ) and was grateful that Curtis " avoided turning the Doctor into a bumbling Hugh Grant character from his <unk> " , concluding however " he did little else right and a crushing disappointment was the result " . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 " Vincent and the Doctor " was nominated for the Bradbury Award for Outstanding Dramatic Presentation in the 2010 Nebula Awards and the 2011 Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation ( Short Form ) . It lost both of these ; the Bradbury to the film Inception and the Hugo to the series finale " The Pandorica Opens " / " The Big Bang " . In Canada 's Constellation Awards , Curran was nominated ( alongside Smith ) for Best Actor and Curtis for Best Script ; Curran came in sixth with 10 % of the votes and Curtis came in second , losing out to Christopher Nolan 's Inception by one percent of the vote . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Vincent and the Doctor " reviews at The Doctor Who Ratings Guide 
 = Quantum electrodynamics = 
 In particle physics , quantum electrodynamics ( QED ) is the relativistic quantum field theory of electrodynamics . In essence , it describes how light and matter interact and is the first theory where full agreement between quantum mechanics and special relativity is achieved . QED mathematically describes all phenomena involving electrically charged particles interacting by means of exchange of photons and represents the quantum counterpart of classical electromagnetism giving a complete account of matter and light interaction . 
 In technical terms , QED can be described as a perturbation theory of the electromagnetic quantum vacuum . Richard Feynman called it " the jewel of physics " for its extremely accurate predictions of quantities like the anomalous magnetic moment of the electron and the Lamb shift of the energy levels of hydrogen . 
 = = History = = 
 The first formulation of a quantum theory describing radiation and matter interaction is attributed to British scientist Paul Dirac , who ( during the 1920s ) was able to compute the coefficient of spontaneous emission of an atom . 
 Dirac described the quantization of the electromagnetic field as an ensemble of harmonic oscillators with the introduction of the concept of creation and annihilation operators of particles . In the following years , with contributions from Wolfgang Pauli , Eugene Wigner , Pascual Jordan , Werner Heisenberg and an elegant formulation of quantum electrodynamics due to Enrico Fermi , physicists came to believe that , in principle , it would be possible to perform any computation for any physical process involving photons and charged particles . However , further studies by Felix Bloch with Arnold <unk> , and Victor Weisskopf , in 1937 and 1939 , revealed that such computations were reliable only at a first order of perturbation theory , a problem already pointed out by Robert Oppenheimer . At higher orders in the series infinities emerged , making such computations meaningless and casting serious doubts on the internal consistency of the theory itself . With no solution for this problem known at the time , it appeared that a fundamental incompatibility existed between special relativity and quantum mechanics . 
 Difficulties with the theory increased through the end of 1940 . Improvements in microwave technology made it possible to take more precise measurements of the shift of the levels of a hydrogen atom , now known as the Lamb shift and magnetic moment of the electron . These experiments unequivocally exposed discrepancies which the theory was unable to explain . 
 A first indication of a possible way out was given by Hans Bethe . In 1947 , while he was traveling by train to reach Schenectady from New York , after giving a talk at the conference at Shelter Island on the subject , Bethe completed the first non @-@ relativistic computation of the shift of the lines of the hydrogen atom as measured by Lamb and Retherford . Despite the limitations of the computation , agreement was excellent . The idea was simply to attach infinities to corrections of mass and charge that were actually fixed to a finite value by experiments . In this way , the infinities get absorbed in those constants and yield a finite result in good agreement with experiments . This procedure was named renormalization . 
 Based on Bethe 's intuition and fundamental papers on the subject by Sin @-@ Itiro Tomonaga , Julian Schwinger , Richard Feynman and Freeman Dyson , it was finally possible to get fully covariant formulations that were finite at any order in a perturbation series of quantum electrodynamics . Sin @-@ Itiro Tomonaga , Julian Schwinger and Richard Feynman were jointly awarded with a Nobel prize in physics in 1965 for their work in this area . Their contributions , and those of Freeman Dyson , were about covariant and gauge invariant formulations of quantum electrodynamics that allow computations of observables at any order of perturbation theory . Feynman 's mathematical technique , based on his diagrams , initially seemed very different from the field @-@ theoretic , operator @-@ based approach of Schwinger and Tomonaga , but Freeman Dyson later showed that the two approaches were equivalent . <unk> , the need to attach a physical meaning at certain divergences appearing in the theory through integrals , has subsequently become one of the fundamental aspects of quantum field theory and has come to be seen as a criterion for a theory 's general acceptability . Even though renormalization works very well in practice , Feynman was never entirely comfortable with its mathematical validity , even referring to renormalization as a " shell game " and " <unk> <unk> " . 
 QED has served as the model and template for all subsequent quantum field theories . One such subsequent theory is quantum chromodynamics , which began in the early 1960s and attained its present form in the 1975 work by H. David <unk> , Sidney Coleman , David Gross and Frank Wilczek . Building on the pioneering work of Schwinger , Gerald <unk> , Dick Hagen , and Tom Kibble , Peter Higgs , Jeffrey Goldstone , and others , Sheldon Glashow , Steven Weinberg and Abdus Salam independently showed how the weak nuclear force and quantum electrodynamics could be merged into a single electroweak force . 
 = = Feynman 's view of quantum electrodynamics = = 
 = = = Introduction = = = 
 Near the end of his life , Richard P. Feynman gave a series of lectures on QED intended for the lay public . These lectures were transcribed and published as Feynman ( 1985 ) , QED : The strange theory of light and matter , a classic non @-@ mathematical exposition of QED from the point of view articulated below . 
 The key components of Feynman 's presentation of QED are three basic actions . 
 A photon goes from one place and time to another place and time . 
 An electron goes from one place and time to another place and time . 
 An electron emits or absorbs a photon at a certain place and time . 
 These actions are represented in a form of visual shorthand by the three basic elements of Feynman diagrams : a wavy line for the photon , a straight line for the electron and a junction of two straight lines and a wavy one for a vertex representing emission or absorption of a photon by an electron . These can all be seen in the adjacent diagram . 
 It is important not to over @-@ interpret these diagrams . Nothing is implied about how a particle gets from one point to another . The diagrams do not imply that the particles are moving in straight or curved lines . They do not imply that the particles are moving with fixed speeds . The fact that the photon is often represented , by convention , by a wavy line and not a straight one does not imply that it is thought that it is more wavelike than is an electron . The images are just symbols to represent the actions above : photons and electrons do , somehow , move from point to point and electrons , somehow , emit and absorb photons . We do not know how these things happen , but the theory tells us about the probabilities of these things happening . 
 As well as the visual shorthand for the actions Feynman introduces another kind of shorthand for the numerical quantities called probability amplitudes . The probability is the square of the total probability amplitude . If a photon moves from one place and time — in shorthand , A — to another place and time — in shorthand , B — the associated quantity is written in Feynman 's shorthand as P ( A to B ) . The similar quantity for an electron moving from C to D is written E ( C to D ) . The quantity which tells us about the probability amplitude for the emission or absorption of a photon he calls ' j ' . This is related to , but not the same as , the measured electron charge ' e ' . 
 QED is based on the assumption that complex interactions of many electrons and photons can be represented by fitting together a suitable collection of the above three building blocks , and then using the probability amplitudes to calculate the probability of any such complex interaction . It turns out that the basic idea of QED can be communicated while making the assumption that the square of the total of the probability amplitudes mentioned above ( P ( A to B ) , E ( A to B ) and ' j ' ) acts just like our everyday probability . ( A simplification made in Feynman 's book . ) Later on , this will be corrected to include specifically quantum @-@ style mathematics , following Feynman . 
 The basic rules of probability amplitudes that will be used are that a ) if an event can happen in a variety of different ways then its probability amplitude is the sum of the probability amplitudes of the possible ways and b ) if a process involves a number of independent sub @-@ processes then its probability amplitude is the product of the component probability amplitudes . 
 = = = Basic constructions = = = 
 Suppose we start with one electron at a certain place and time ( this place and time being given the arbitrary label A ) and a photon at another place and time ( given the label B ) . A typical question from a physical standpoint is : ' What is the probability of finding an electron at C ( another place and a later time ) and a photon at D ( yet another place and time ) ? ' . The simplest process to achieve this end is for the electron to move from A to C ( an elementary action ) and for the photon to move from B to D ( another elementary action ) . From a knowledge of the probability amplitudes of each of these sub @-@ processes – E ( A to C ) and P ( B to D ) – then we would expect to calculate the probability amplitude of both happening together by multiplying them , using rule b ) above . This gives a simple estimated overall probability amplitude , which is squared to give an estimated probability . 
 But there are other ways in which the end result could come about . The electron might move to a place and time E where it absorbs the photon ; then move on before emitting another photon at F ; then move on to C where it is detected , while the new photon moves on to D. The probability of this complex process can again be calculated by knowing the probability amplitudes of each of the individual actions : three electron actions , two photon actions and two <unk> – one emission and one absorption . We would expect to find the total probability amplitude by multiplying the probability amplitudes of each of the actions , for any chosen positions of E and F. We then , using rule a ) above , have to add up all these probability amplitudes for all the alternatives for E and F. ( This is not elementary in practice , and involves integration . ) But there is another possibility , which is that the electron first moves to G where it emits a photon which goes on to D , while the electron moves on to H , where it absorbs the first photon , before moving on to C. Again we can calculate the probability amplitude of these possibilities ( for all points G and H ) . We then have a better estimation for the total probability amplitude by adding the probability amplitudes of these two possibilities to our original simple estimate . Incidentally the name given to this process of a photon interacting with an electron in this way is Compton scattering . 
 There are an infinite number of other intermediate processes in which more and more photons are absorbed and / or emitted . For each of these possibilities there is a Feynman diagram describing it . This implies a complex computation for the resulting probability amplitudes , but provided it is the case that the more complicated the diagram the less it contributes to the result , it is only a matter of time and effort to find as accurate an answer as one wants to the original question . This is the basic approach of QED . To calculate the probability of any interactive process between electrons and photons it is a matter of first noting , with Feynman diagrams , all the possible ways in which the process can be constructed from the three basic elements . Each diagram involves some calculation involving definite rules to find the associated probability amplitude . 
 That basic scaffolding remains when one moves to a quantum description but some conceptual changes are needed . One is that whereas we might expect in our everyday life that there would be some constraints on the points to which a particle can move , that is not true in full quantum electrodynamics . There is a possibility of an electron at A , or a photon at B , moving as a basic action to any other place and time in the universe . That includes places that could only be reached at speeds greater than that of light and also earlier times . ( An electron moving backwards in time can be viewed as a positron moving forward in time . ) 
 = = = Probability amplitudes = = = 
 Quantum mechanics introduces an important change in the way probabilities are computed . Probabilities are still represented by the usual real numbers we use for probabilities in our everyday world , but probabilities are computed as the square of probability amplitudes . Probability amplitudes are complex numbers . 
 Feynman avoids exposing the reader to the mathematics of complex numbers by using a simple but accurate representation of them as arrows on a piece of paper or screen . ( These must not be confused with the arrows of Feynman diagrams which are actually simplified representations in two dimensions of a relationship between points in three dimensions of space and one of time . ) The amplitude arrows are fundamental to the description of the world given by quantum theory . No satisfactory reason has been given for why they are needed . But pragmatically we have to accept that they are an essential part of our description of all quantum phenomena . They are related to our everyday ideas of probability by the simple rule that the probability of an event is the square of the length of the corresponding amplitude arrow . So , for a given process , if two probability amplitudes , v and w , are involved , the probability of the process will be given either by 
 <formula> 
 or 
 <formula> 
 The rules as regards adding or multiplying , however , are the same as above . But where you would expect to add or multiply probabilities , instead you add or multiply probability amplitudes that now are complex numbers . 
 Addition and multiplication are familiar operations in the theory of complex numbers and are given in the figures . The sum is found as follows . Let the start of the second arrow be at the end of the first . The sum is then a third arrow that goes directly from the start of the first to the end of the second . The product of two arrows is an arrow whose length is the product of the two lengths . The direction of the product is found by adding the angles that each of the two have been turned through relative to a reference direction : that gives the angle that the product is turned relative to the reference direction . 
 That change , from probabilities to probability amplitudes , complicates the mathematics without changing the basic approach . But that change is still not quite enough because it fails to take into account the fact that both photons and electrons can be polarized , which is to say that their orientations in space and time have to be taken into account . Therefore , P ( A to B ) actually consists of 16 complex numbers , or probability amplitude arrows . There are also some minor changes to do with the quantity " j " , which may have to be rotated by a multiple of 90 ° for some polarizations , which is only of interest for the detailed bookkeeping . 
 Associated with the fact that the electron can be polarized is another small necessary detail which is connected with the fact that an electron is a fermion and obeys Fermi – Dirac statistics . The basic rule is that if we have the probability amplitude for a given complex process involving more than one electron , then when we include ( as we always must ) the complementary Feynman diagram in which we just exchange two electron events , the resulting amplitude is the reverse – the negative – of the first . The simplest case would be two electrons starting at A and B ending at C and D. The amplitude would be calculated as the " difference " , E ( A to D ) × E ( B to C ) − E ( A to C ) × E ( B to D ) , where we would expect , from our everyday idea of probabilities , that it would be a sum . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Finally , one has to compute P ( A to B ) and E ( C to D ) corresponding to the probability amplitudes for the photon and the electron respectively . These are essentially the solutions of the Dirac Equation which describes the behavior of the electron 's probability amplitude and the Klein – Gordon equation which describes the behavior of the photon 's probability amplitude . These are called Feynman propagators . The translation to a notation commonly used in the standard literature is as follows : 
 <formula> 
 where a shorthand symbol such as <formula> stands for the four real numbers which give the time and position in three dimensions of the point labeled A. 
 = = = Mass renormalization = = = 
 A problem arose historically which held up progress for twenty years : although we start with the assumption of three basic " simple " actions , the rules of the game say that if we want to calculate the probability amplitude for an electron to get from A to B we must take into account all the possible ways : all possible Feynman diagrams with those end points . Thus there will be a way in which the electron travels to C , emits a photon there and then absorbs it again at D before moving on to B. Or it could do this kind of thing twice , or more . In short we have a fractal @-@ like situation in which if we look closely at a line it breaks up into a collection of " simple " lines , each of which , if looked at closely , are in turn composed of " simple " lines , and so on ad infinitum . This is a very difficult situation to handle . If adding that detail only altered things slightly then it would not have been too bad , but disaster struck when it was found that the simple correction mentioned above led to infinite probability amplitudes . In time this problem was " fixed " by the technique of renormalization . However , Feynman himself remained unhappy about it , calling it a " <unk> process " . 
 = = = Conclusions = = = 
 Within the above framework physicists were then able to calculate to a high degree of accuracy some of the properties of electrons , such as the anomalous magnetic dipole moment . However , as Feynman points out , it fails totally to explain why particles such as the electron have the masses they do . " There is no theory that adequately explains these numbers . We use the numbers in all our theories , but we don 't understand them – what they are , or where they come from . I believe that from a fundamental point of view , this is a very interesting and serious problem . " 
 = = Mathematics = = 
 Mathematically , QED is an abelian gauge theory with the symmetry group U ( 1 ) . The gauge field , which mediates the interaction between the charged spin @-@ 1 / 2 fields , is the electromagnetic field . The QED Lagrangian for a spin @-@ 1 / 2 field interacting with the electromagnetic field is given by the real part of 
 where 
 <formula> are Dirac matrices ; 
 <formula> a <unk> field of spin @-@ 1 / 2 particles ( e.g. electron – positron field ) ; 
 <formula> , called " psi @-@ bar " , is sometimes referred to as the Dirac adjoint ; 
 <formula> is the gauge covariant derivative ; 
 e is the coupling constant , equal to the electric charge of the <unk> field ; 
 m is the mass of the electron or positron ; 
 <formula> is the covariant four @-@ potential of the electromagnetic field generated by the electron itself ; 
 <formula> is the external field imposed by external source ; 
 <formula> is the electromagnetic field tensor . 
 = = = Equations of motion = = = 
 To begin , substituting the definition of D into the Lagrangian gives us 
 <formula> 
 Next , we can substitute this Lagrangian into the Euler – Lagrange equation of motion for a field : 
 to find the field equations for QED . 
 The two terms from this Lagrangian are then 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 Substituting these two back into the Euler – Lagrange equation ( 2 ) results in 
 <formula> 
 with Hermitian conjugate 
 <formula> 
 Bringing the middle term to the right @-@ hand side transforms this second equation into 
 The left @-@ hand side is like the original Dirac equation and the right @-@ hand side is the interaction with the electromagnetic field . 
 One further important equation can be found by substituting the above Lagrangian into another Euler – Lagrange equation , this time for the field <formula> : 
 The two terms this time are 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 and these two terms , when substituted back into ( 3 ) give us 
 Now , if we impose the Lorenz gauge condition , that the divergence of the four potential vanishes 
 <formula> 
 then we get 
 <formula> 
 which is a wave equation for the four potential , the QED version of the classical Maxwell equations in the Lorenz gauge . ( In the above equation , the square represents the D 'Alembert operator . ) 
 = = = Interaction picture = = = 
 This theory can be straightforwardly quantized by treating <unk> and fermionic sectors as free . This permits us to build a set of asymptotic states which can be used to start a computation of the probability amplitudes for different processes . In order to do so , we have to compute an evolution operator that , for a given initial state <formula> , will give a final state <formula> in such a way to have 
 <formula> 
 This technique is also known as the S @-@ matrix . The evolution operator is obtained in the interaction picture where time evolution is given by the interaction Hamiltonian , which is the integral over space of the second term in the Lagrangian density given above : 
 <formula> 
 and so , one has 
 <formula> 
 where T is the time ordering operator . This evolution operator only has meaning as a series , and what we get here is a perturbation series with the fine structure constant as the development parameter . This series is called the Dyson series . 
 = = = Feynman diagrams = = = 
 Despite the conceptual clarity of this Feynman approach to QED , almost no early textbooks follow him in their presentation . When performing calculations it is much easier to work with the Fourier transforms of the propagators . Experimental tests of quantum electrodynamics are typically scattering experiments . In scattering theory , particles ' momenta rather than their positions are considered , and it is convenient to think of particles as being created or annihilated when they interact . Feynman diagrams then look the same , but the lines have different interpretations . The electron line represents an electron with a given energy and momentum , with a similar interpretation of the photon line . A vertex diagram represents the annihilation of one electron and the creation of another together with the absorption or creation of a photon , each having specified energies and momenta . 
 Using Wick theorem on the terms of the Dyson series , all the terms of the S @-@ matrix for quantum electrodynamics can be computed through the technique of Feynman diagrams . In this case rules for drawing are the following 
 To these rules we must add a further one for closed loops that implies an integration on momenta <formula> , since these internal ( " virtual " ) particles are not constrained to any specific energy – momentum – even that usually required by special relativity ( see this article for details ) . From them , computations of probability amplitudes are straightforwardly given . An example is Compton scattering , with an electron and a photon undergoing elastic scattering . Feynman diagrams are in this case 
 and so we are able to get the corresponding amplitude at the first order of a perturbation series for the S @-@ matrix : 
 <formula> 
 from which we are able to compute the cross section for this scattering . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 Higher order terms can be straightforwardly computed for the evolution operator but these terms display diagrams containing the following simpler ones 
 that , being closed loops , imply the presence of diverging integrals having no mathematical meaning . To overcome this difficulty , a technique called renormalization has been devised , producing finite results in very close agreement with experiments . It is important to note that a criterion for theory being meaningful after renormalization is that the number of diverging diagrams is finite . In this case the theory is said to be <unk> . The reason for this is that to get observables <unk> one needs a finite number of constants to maintain the predictive value of the theory untouched . This is exactly the case of quantum electrodynamics displaying just three diverging diagrams . This procedure gives observables in very close agreement with experiment as seen e.g. for electron <unk> ratio . 
 <unk> has become an essential criterion for a quantum field theory to be considered as a viable one . All the theories describing fundamental interactions , except gravitation whose quantum counterpart is presently under very active research , are <unk> theories . 
 = = <unk> of series = = 
 An argument by Freeman Dyson shows that the radius of convergence of the perturbation series in QED is zero . The basic argument goes as follows : if the coupling constant were negative , this would be equivalent to the Coulomb force constant being negative . This would " reverse " the electromagnetic interaction so that like charges would attract and unlike charges would repel . This would render the vacuum unstable against decay into a cluster of electrons on one side of the universe and a cluster of positrons on the other side of the universe . Because the theory is ' sick ' for any negative value of the coupling constant , the series do not converge , but are an asymptotic series . 
 From a modern perspective , we say that QED is not well defined as a quantum field theory to arbitrarily high energy . The coupling constant runs to infinity at finite energy , signalling a Landau pole . The problem is essentially that QED appears to suffer from quantum triviality issues . This is one of the motivations for embedding QED within a Grand Unified Theory . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 De Broglie , Louis ( 1925 ) . Recherches sur la <unk> des quanta [ Research on quantum theory ] . France : Wiley @-@ Interscience . 
 Feynman , Richard Phillips ( 1998 ) . Quantum Electrodynamics ( New ed . ) . Westview Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 201 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 . 
 <unk> , J.M. ; <unk> , F. ( 1980 ) . The Theory of Photons and Electrons . Springer @-@ Verlag . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 387 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 Greiner , Walter ; Bromley , D.A. ; Müller , Berndt ( 2000 ) . Gauge Theory of Weak Interactions . Springer . ISBN 978 @-@ 3 @-@ 540 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . 
 Kane , Gordon , L. ( 1993 ) . Modern Elementary Particle Physics . Westview Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 201 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 Miller , Arthur I. ( 1995 ) . Early Quantum Electrodynamics : A Sourcebook . Cambridge University Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 521 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 <unk> , Peter W. , ( 1994 ) The quantum vacuum - an introduction to quantum electrodynamics . Academic Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 12 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 
 <unk> , Silvan S. ( 1994 ) . QED and the Men Who Made It . Princeton University Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 691 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 Schwinger , Julian ( 1958 ) . Selected Papers on Quantum Electrodynamics . Dover Publications . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 486 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 . 
 <unk> @-@ Cohen , Claude ; Dupont @-@ Roc , Jacques ; <unk> , Gilbert ( 1997 ) . Photons and Atoms : Introduction to Quantum Electrodynamics . Wiley @-@ Interscience . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 471 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 = = = Journals = = = 
 Dudley , J.M. ; Kwan , A.M. ( 1996 ) . " Richard Feynman 's popular lectures on quantum electrodynamics : The 1979 Robb Lectures at Auckland University " . American Journal of Physics 64 ( 6 ) : 694 – 698 . Bibcode : <unk> .. 64 .. <unk> doi : 10 @.@ 1119 / 1 @.@ <unk> . 
 = Asker Line = 
 The Asker Line ( Norwegian : <unk> ) is a 9 @.@ 5 @-@ kilometre ( 5 @.@ 9 mi ) railway line between Asker and Lysaker in Norway . The line runs along the same corridor as the Drammen Line , offering increased capacity , speed and regularity on the rail network west of Oslo . The first part opened in 2005 , and in 2011 an extension opened from Sandvika to Lysaker . An extension to Skøyen in Oslo will perhaps be built after 2020 . Most of the railway is in tunnel and is dimensioned for 160 km / h ( 99 mph ) running . The entire railway is electrified at 15 kV 16 2 ⁄ 3 Hz AC . The first section cost NOK 3 @.@ 7 billion , while the second is budgeted at NOK 2 @.@ 7 billion . 
 The purpose of the new line is to allow regional and express trains to run directly between Asker Station , Sandvika Station and Lysaker Station , without being slowed and delayed by commuter trains that make frequent stops at intermediate stations . The Asker Line will improve regularity , and capacity will increase from 12 to 26 trains per hour in each direction . Travel time from Asker to Skøyen Station will be reduced from 20 to 13 minutes . The line has received criticism for not being a true high @-@ speed line , and for Lysaker Station not being in compliance with accessibility requirements . Similar parallel , high @-@ speed lines have been or will be built northeast and southeast of Oslo . 
 The line is built , owned and maintained by the Norwegian National Rail Administration . At Sandvika , the line connects to the Drammen Line , which runs to Oslo Central Station in the east . At Asker , the line connects to the Spikkestad and Drammen Lines ; the latter connects to the Sørland- and Vestfold Line at Drammen . The line is served by Norwegian State Railways with regional trains to Vestfold , Buskerud and Telemark , and the express trains along the Sørland Line and the Bergen Line ; in addition , the Airport Express Train operates from Asker to Oslo Airport , Gardermoen . During night , freight trains also use the line . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following the construction of the high @-@ speed Gardermoen Line from Oslo , via Oslo Airport , Gardermoen , to Eidsvoll , the Norwegian Ministry of Transport and Communications started planning additional high @-@ speed lines west and southeast of Oslo . The Asker and Follo Lines would allow express and regional trains to travel faster and more reliably to Drammen and Ski , leaving the old tracks for slower freight trains , and commuter trains making frequent stops . Construction of the Follo Line will , at the earliest , be completed in 2015 . 
 The Gardermoen Line had shown that profits could be made by operating passenger trains , but that it would not be possible to debt @-@ finance short @-@ distance tracks in Eastern Norway . Therefore , a conventional financial method for the Asker Line was started . While the railway is entirely financed through allocation through the state budget , the prioritising was secured through a political compromise for investments in Greater Oslo , the Oslo Package 2 . Financing of a diverse range of road and public transport investments — including new motorways , extension of the Oslo Metro and new railways — would be made through a " package " . This involved both state , county and toll funding being collected in one lot , and then redistributing the funds to the agencies responsible for the investments . 
 Prior to the construction , the Western Corridor had a capacity of 12 – 14 trains per hour in each direction west of Skøyen . The first section of the Asker Line , from Asker to Sandvika , increased the capacity with an additional two trains . The opening of Lysaker Station will increase capacity with four more , since all stations along the line between Oslo and Drammen will then have four platforms . When the whole line is completed , total capacity in the Western Corridor will be 26 trains per hour . This is equivalent to 5 @,@ 500 cars per hour , and exceeds the capacity of a four @-@ lane motorway . 
 The Asker Line is also a necessary component to allow a high @-@ speed route to be built along the Vestfold and Ringerike Lines . The former is planned to branch off at Drammen , while the latter would branch of at Sandvika , and become a 60 @-@ kilometre ( 37 mi ) shortening of the Bergen Line . The first sections of the upgraded Vestfold Line opened in 1995 and 2001 , and additional proposals are under planning for the remaining sections . 
 = = Route = = 
 = = = Asker Station = = = 
 Asker Station is the end of the Asker Line , and trains must continue westwards along the Spikkestad Line or the Drammen Line . The latter immediately enters the Lieråsen Tunnel , allowing the same speeds as the Asker Line to Drammen . The Spikkestad Line is only used by the commuter trains to Spikkestad . Along with building the line , Asker Station was upgraded from five to six platforms , and also received a new , artistically decorated underpass between the platforms . The station is located 23 @.@ 16 kilometres ( 14 @.@ 39 mi ) from Oslo Central Station ( Oslo S ) at 104 @.@ 6 metres ( 343 ft ) elevation . 
 = = = Asker – Sandvika = = = 
 Construction of the section between Asker and Sandvika started in 2001 , and was completed in 2005 . It was officially opened by Torild Skogsholm , Minister of Transport from the Liberal Party , on 27 August . This section is dominated by the 3 @,@ 590 @-@ metre ( 2 @.@ 23 mi ) Tanum Tunnel and the 3 @,@ 790 @-@ metre ( 2 @.@ 35 mi ) Skaugum Tunnel , and cost NOK 3 @.@ 7 billion . For the last 1 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 93 mi ) of track west of Sandvika , the Asker and Drammen Line have been built along the same , new , right @-@ of @-@ way . The Drammen Line , leaves <unk> Station , and joins the Asker Line just after the latter leaves the Tanum Tunnel . 
 = = = Sandvika Station = = = 
 Sandvika Station is 14 @.@ 14 km ( 8 @.@ 79 mi ) from Oslo S , at 12 @.@ 0 metres ( 39 @.@ 4 ft ) elevation . The track layout has been criticised by among others Norsk Bane , for not permitting high through speeds . A sharp curve before the station will not permit trains to travel at more than 80 km / h ( 50 mph ) , even if they are not scheduled to stop at the station . This will increase travel time , and hinder the efficiency of the line should it be used later for high @-@ speed lines to Vestfold or Western Norway . The proposed Ringerike Line would <unk> just west of Sandvika Station . 
 = = = Sandvika – Lysaker = = = 
