 = = Future = = 
 There are plans to add a ramp from northbound SR 844 to northbound SR 444 , and to add a ramp from northbound SR 444 to southbound SR 844 . As of October 2013 , the status and funding for this project are unknown . 
 = = Major junctions = = 
 The entire route is in Greene County . 
 = Money in the Bank ( 2011 ) = 
 The 2011 Money in the Bank event was the seventh of thirteen professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view events held by WWE that year , and the second installment in the annual Money in the Bank series of events . It took place on July 17 , 2011 , at the Allstate Arena in Rosemont , Illinois . 
 The event featured six matches , including two Money in the Bank ladder matches . Alberto Del Rio won the match for wrestlers from the Raw brand to earn a WWE Championship match at a time of his choosing within the next year , while Daniel Bryan won the match for wrestlers from the SmackDown brand for the same opportunity for the World Heavyweight Championship . In the World Heavyweight Championship match also held at the event , Christian defeated Randy Orton by disqualification and became the new champion as per the match stipulation . The main event featured CM Punk defeating John Cena to become the new WWE Champion . 
 Money in the Bank was broadcast globally and received acclaim from fans and critics alike , with the main event receiving the most praise . For pay @-@ per @-@ view buys , 195 @,@ 000 customers paid to watch the event compared with 165 @,@ 000 for the previous year . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 WWE 's Money in the Bank pay @-@ per @-@ view events feature their own variant of ladder matches , where multiple wrestlers use ladders to retrieve a briefcase hanging above the ring . Two briefcases were contested at the 2011 event , one each for members of the Raw and SmackDown brands . The respective winners were guaranteed a match for the WWE and World Heavyweight Championships at a time of their choosing within the next year . The 2010 , 2011 , 2012 , and 2014 Money in the Bank events featured a main event involving John Cena , albeit in different storylines . 
 By November 2010 , WWE had announced that the 2011 Money in the Bank event would take place on July 17 , 2011 , at the Allstate Arena in Rosemont , Illinois . Tickets went on sale in May 2011 through Ticketmaster with prices ranging from $ 25 to $ 300 . The event , sponsored by confectionery brand Skittles , was the second annual Money in the Bank pay @-@ per @-@ view ( PPV ) event and the seventh of thirteen in the 2011 WWE PPV schedule . The theme song , " Money in the Bank " , was composed by Jim Johnston . 
 = = = Storylines = = = 
 The professional wrestling matches at Money in the Bank featured professional wrestlers performing as characters in scripted events pre @-@ determined by the hosting promotion , WWE . Storylines between the characters were produced on WWE 's weekly television shows Raw and SmackDown with the Raw and SmackDown brands — storyline divisions in which WWE assigned its employees to different programs . These storylines provided the background to the 2011 event , which continued the storylines from the previous event in WWE 's 2011 pay @-@ per @-@ view schedule , Capitol Punishment . 
 The main event featured John Cena defending the WWE Championship against CM Punk . Punk pinned Cena in a non @-@ title match on the June 13 , 2011 episode of Raw , and then became the number one contender by winning a Triple Threat Falls Count Anywhere match against Alberto Del Rio and Rey Mysterio on the June 20 episode of Raw . After the match , Punk said his WWE contract would expire at midnight on July 17 , immediately after the Money in the Bank PPV ended ; Punk vowed to win the championship and leave the company with it . On the next episode of Raw , Punk delivered a worked shoot promo and said that he , rather than Cena , was " the best in the world " ; he also berated WWE for not promoting him properly . Punk called Cena an " ass @-@ kisser " and insulted WWE management — including chairman Vince McMahon and executive John Laurinaitis . In addition to saying that he was breaking the fourth wall by talking to the camera , Punk proposed that he could defend the WWE Championship by wrestling in other companies such as Ring of Honor and New Japan Pro Wrestling after leaving the company with the title . As a result , Punk was given a storyline suspension and stripped of his championship match . Cena confronted McMahon and threatened to walk out on him and return the WWE Championship if Punk were not reinstated . McMahon relented on the condition that if Cena lost the title , he would be fired . On the following episode of Raw , McMahon tried to sign Punk to a new contract to ensure the WWE Championship would stay in WWE ; McMahon agreed to Punk 's demands and apologized to Punk before Cena interrupted the proceedings . The segment resulted in Cena punching Punk , so Punk tore up the agreed contract . 
 At Money in the Bank 2011 , Randy Orton defended the World Heavyweight Championship against Christian . The storyline started on the May 6 episode of SmackDown when Orton defeated Christian to become the champion less than a week after Christian had won the title . At Capitol Punishment on June 19 , Orton defeated Christian to retain the title despite illegally pinning Christian . On the June 24 episode of SmackDown , Christian demanded another attempt at the title from SmackDown General Manager Theodore Long ; his demand was granted with the proviso that he could defeat Kane . Christian lost the match against Kane by disqualification after interference from Mark Henry . Long then made a tag team match for later that same episode , pitting the team of Christian and Henry against Kane and Orton with a similar stipulation ; Henry pinned Orton in the bout . Afterward , Long offered Henry an attempt at the title if Henry could defeat Orton again . Henry lost the match after Christian engineered a distraction . This set up a match between Orton and Christian for the title at Money in the Bank . On the July 8 episode of SmackDown , Christian 's lawyers in the storyline added a stipulation to the match that if Orton was disqualified or there were poor officiating , he would lose the title to Christian . 
 The Raw Money in the Bank competitors were announced on the June 27 episode of Raw with no qualifying matches ; these were Alberto Del Rio , Alex Riley , Evan Bourne , Jack Swagger , Kofi Kingston , Rey Mysterio , R @-@ Truth , and The Miz . The SmackDown Money in the Bank competitors were announced on the July 1 SmackDown as Cody Rhodes , Daniel Bryan , Heath Slater , Justin Gabriel , Kane , Sheamus , Sin Cara , and Wade Barrett . 
 The feud between Big Show and Mark Henry started on the June 17 episode of SmackDown , when Big Show was forced to face Henry in a match . Big Show knocked out Henry before the bout began , creating a rivalry between the two . Henry interfered in Big Show 's match with Alberto Del Rio at Capitol Punishment and on the June 27 episode of Raw in a cage match . Henry versus Big Show was later announced for Money in the Bank . When Brie Bella lost her Divas Championship to Kelly Kelly on the June 20 Raw , a title rematch was announced for Money in the Bank . Kelly had been feuding with the Bella Twins since May 2011 . 
 = = Event = = 
 = = = Preliminary matches = = = 
 The event , featuring commentary by Michael Cole , Jerry Lawler and Booker T , began with the SmackDown Money in the Bank ladder match . During the bout , Sheamus slammed Sin Cara through a ladder propped between the ring apron and the announcers ' table with a powerbomb throw . The ladder was bent in half and Cara was stretchered away from ringside . Near the end of the match , Barrett , Rhodes and Bryan were the only three in the ring . Bryan put Rhodes in a guillotine choke submission hold on top of the ladder in the middle of the ring while Barrett sneaked up the other side of the ladder . After Bryan knocked Rhodes off the ladder , Barrett got Bryan onto his shoulders and tried to throw him off . Bryan countered with repeated elbow strikes to Barrett 's head . Bryan then kicked Barrett in the head and unhooked the briefcase to win the contest . 
 In the show 's second match , Kelly Kelly defeated Brie Bella to retain the Divas Championship . Kelly won the bout after slamming Brie 's face into the mat with her K2 maneuver . 
 In the show 's third match , Mark Henry defeated Big Show . Henry gained a two @-@ count after slamming Big Show back against the mat with his World 's Strongest Slam move . Henry then performed the move again and two running splashes for the pinfall victory . After the match , Henry jumped on a chair wrapped around Big Show 's ankle , causing an injury to Big Show . 
 The next match was the Raw Money in the Bank match , where all the wrestlers brought ladders . During the match , Evan Bourne performed his signature Air Bourne aerial maneuver , diving from a ladder and landing on the other wrestlers at ringside . Bourne and Miz went for the briefcase but Del Rio toppled their ladder , and Miz was taken backstage with a knee injury . The seven remaining wrestlers simultaneously climbed four ladders in the ring , but fell off one by one . With nobody left in the ring , Miz hopped down to the ring and climbed the ladder with one leg , but Mysterio stopped him by slamming him off the ladder with a sunset flip powerbomb . As Mysterio and Del Rio battled on top of the ladders for the briefcase , Del Rio distracted Mysterio by unmasking him and then pushing him onto another ladder , which tipped over and sent both wrestlers to the mat . Del Rio regrouped and unhooked the briefcase to win the match . 
 In the show 's fifth match , Randy Orton defended his World Heavyweight Championship against Christian , with the condition that Christian would win the title if Orton were disqualified or if there were poor officiating . Christian opened the bout by bringing a steel chair into the ring and trying to goad Orton into getting disqualified . Orton balked and threw the chair to the floor . Christian performed his signature Killswitch , forcing Orton 's face to the mat , but Orton kicked out of the pin at the two count . As Orton was prepared to perform his signature RKO move , Christian spat in his face . An enraged Orton kicked Christian in the groin and was disqualified , so Christian became the new champion . Afterwards , Orton twice slammed Christian 's face into the announcers ' table with his RKO maneuver . 
 = = = Main event match = = = 
 The final match was for the WWE Championship between Champion John Cena and CM Punk . WWE Chairman Vince McMahon had threatened to have Cena fired if Punk won . During the match , two separate signature Attitude Adjustment moves by Cena failed to score the victory . More than 30 minutes into the match , Punk performed his Go to Sleep maneuver , hitting Cena 's ribs and causing Cena to fall out of the ring . As Punk rolled Cena back into the ring , McMahon and John Laurinaitis emerged from backstage and distracted Punk , resulting in Cena placing Punk in the STF submission hold . Punk did not submit , but McMahon signaled the referee to award Cena the match and sent Laurinaitis to ring the bell . This was reminiscent of the Montreal Screwjob in 1997 , where a conspiracy orchestrated by McMahon led to Bret Hart losing his WWF Championship to Shawn Michaels by submission despite Hart never submitting . 
 Not wanting a tainted victory , Cena broke the hold and attacked Laurinaitis . As Cena returned to the ring , Punk hit him in the face with the Go to Sleep maneuver and pinned him to win the WWE Championship . McMahon ordered the winner of the Raw Money in the Bank match , Alberto Del Rio , to cash in his contract on Punk . When Del Rio ran out and tried to cash in his contract for an immediate WWE Championship match , Punk kicked him in the head before he could do so . After blowing a kiss to a distraught McMahon , Punk fled the arena and left as WWE Champion . 
 = = Reception = = 
 During the event , WWE announced that its attendance was 14 @,@ 815 . It was later reported that 12 @,@ 000 attendees had paid , earning WWE $ 750 @,@ 000 . The event drew 195 @,@ 000 pay @-@ per @-@ view purchases , which was an increase of 18 @.@ 2 % from the 165 @,@ 000 of the previous year 's event . This contributed to WWE 's PPV revenue of $ 15 @.@ 8 million for the third quarter of 2011 compared with $ 13 @.@ 6 million for the third quarter of 2010 . The 2012 Money in the Bank event received 188 @,@ 000 purchases , a drop of 3 @.@ 6 % . 
 Money in the Bank has received critical acclaim . Dave Meltzer of the Wrestling Observer Newsletter awarded the Cena – Punk main event five stars out of five , the first WWE match since 1997 to receive such a rating . The Wrestling Observer Newsletter later awarded the event the Best Major Show of 2011 , over other professional wrestling events by companies including Pro Wrestling Guerrilla and New Japan Pro Wrestling , as well as over a kickboxing event by K @-@ 1 and mixed martial arts events by Ultimate Fighting Championship . The main event won the Observer award for Match of the Year . 
 Alex Roberts of the Professional Wrestling Torch Newsletter attended the event . He criticized the ladder matches as " dangerous spectacles " where many wrestlers " took plenty of painful @-@ looking bumps " but often failed to score " a corresponding crowd reaction " . He also stated that the apparent injuries suffered by Sin Cara and the Miz in those matches had unnerved the audience . In contrast , Roberts felt that the two world title matches , which focused on " in @-@ ring psychology and storytelling " , were much more " memorable " or even " legendary " . Regarding the main event , Roberts said , " even a match @-@ ending run @-@ in bypassed the expected convoluted machinations and played perfectly to the narrative at hand " . At the end of 2011 , Nathan <unk> of the Professional Wrestling Torch Newsletter ranked Money in the Bank the best of 34 pay @-@ per @-@ views in 2011 , including those from WWE , Total Nonstop Action Wrestling , Ring of Honor , and Dragon Gate USA . 
 Wade Keller , also from the Professional Wrestling Torch Newsletter , awarded the Cena – Punk bout five stars out of five , and said the " athleticism wasn 't at the A + level , but everything else that equals magic in pro wrestling happened in the last 40 minutes " . Keller awarded the SmackDown Money in the Bank ladder match four stars and said there were " lots of good workers taking a lot of big bumps , but also selling them , during the course of the match " . For the Orton – Christian match , Keller said that it was " paced well , executed well , and the finish played into the personalities and storyline of this feud " . Regarding the outcome of the Henry – Big Show match , Keller commented that it was " interesting to see WWE really truly get behind Henry for the first time after all of this time " . 
 Dave Hillhouse at the Canadian Online Explorer 's said Money in the Bank featured " exactly what a main event is supposed to be . A match that overshadows every other bout on the card , that has you , no matter how good each other contest is , looking forward to an ending just to be one step closer to the final contest . " Hillhouse rated the main event eight out of ten and the overall event six out of ten . When the Canadian Online Explorer polled its readers on the event , 26 % did not watch the event , 5 % thought it was disappointing , 6 % thought it was okay and 63 % thought it was great . 
 Rob McNichol at the United Kingdom 's The Sun rated the event nine and a half out of ten , describing it as a " flawless exercise in the booking , promotion and performance of a wrestling show ... full of excitement , emotion and great wrestling " . McNichol described Bryan 's win in the " very good " opener as memorable and " a great way to inspire the crowd , who would become so important during the night " . He said of the Orton – Christian match , " Christian ’ s character development was excellent " and that while the audience were initially " pro @-@ Christian , who was supposed to be playing the heel " ( a villainous character ) , they eventually cheered Orton 's post @-@ match beatdown of Christian . McNichol described the main event as " professional wrestling at [ its ] finest " and " probably the most gripping angle in wrestling this century " . He said the audience 's " astonishing " reception to the main event was as good as " any major match you have ever seen or cared about in history " , and the match itself " was methodical , played to both wrestlers ' strengths , and was beautifully paced " . 
 In 2013 , WWE released a list of their " 15 best pay @-@ per @-@ views ever " , with 2011 's Money in the Bank ranked the second best . WWE also released " the 50 greatest WWE Championship Matches ever " in 2013 , with the Cena – Punk match from the event ranked fourth . 
 Money in the Bank 2011 was released on DVD by WWE Home Video on August 16 , 2011 ; it included Matt Striker interviewing Daniel Bryan as extra content . Eric Cohen of About.com awarded the DVD five stars out of five , and said the event was one of the greatest PPV events of all time and warranted his highest possible recommendation . DVD Talk gave a " Highly Recommended " rating to the DVD , despite " an average technical presentation ( no Blu @-@ ray option , either ) and no real bonus features " . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After CM Punk left the Allstate Arena with the WWE Championship belt , celebrity website TMZ pictured him showing off his newly won title belt on the streets of Chicago with Colt Cabana and Ace Steel . 
 To crown a new WWE Champion , WWE Chairman Vince McMahon started an eight @-@ man tournament on the July 18 episode of Raw , which included all the participants of the Raw Money in the Bank ladder match except Evan Bourne , whose place was filled by Dolph Ziggler . The Miz and Rey Mysterio made it to the tournament finals , which McMahon postponed so he could fire John Cena as a result of the conditions imposed on the Money in the Bank match . Triple H interrupted and announced that the WWE Board of Directors had removed McMahon from power in a vote of no confidence , and that Triple H was to take over the day @-@ to @-@ day operations of WWE . Triple H refused to fire Cena . 
 On July 21 , Punk gatecrashed the joint WWE – Mattel panel at the San Diego Comic @-@ Con International with title belt in hand . He confronted Triple H and took exception to WWE attempting to crown a new WWE Champion . Two days later , Punk made a surprise appearance at a show hosted by the All American Wrestling company without his title belt to endorse Gregory Iron , a wrestler with cerebral palsy , as an inspiration for overcoming his impediment . 
 On the July 25 episode of Raw , Mysterio won the tournament to become the new WWE Champion , and immediately had to fend off Alberto Del Rio to prevent him from cashing in his Money in the Bank . Triple H , now Chief Operating Officer , decreed that Mysterio was to face ex @-@ champion Cena later that night for the title ; Cena won and again became WWE Champion . After the match , Punk made an unannounced return to WWE with the old WWE Championship belt to confront Cena . Cena and Punk later fought in a match at SummerSlam on August 14 to crown the undisputed WWE Champion , which Punk won . As Punk celebrated , Kevin Nash made his WWE return and assaulted him . Del Rio then cashed in his Money in the Bank contract and pinned Punk to become the new champion after kicking Punk in the head . Punk regained the WWE Championship from Del Rio at Survivor Series in November 2011 ; starting a 434 @-@ day reign until The Rock beat him at the 2013 Royal Rumble event . 
 After losing the World Heavyweight Championship to Christian , Randy Orton was granted a rematch at SummerSlam , where he won a No Holds Barred match to win the title . Meanwhile , in the storyline , Mark Henry went on to crush Kane and Vladimir Kozlov 's ankles with steel chairs . He defeated Orton at Night of Champions in September to become World Heavyweight Champion for the first time . Big Show returned from injury in October 2011 to feud with Henry over his title . Daniel Bryan initially declared that he would only cash in his Money in the Bank contract for a World Heavyweight Championship match at WrestleMania XXVIII . However , on the November 25 episode of SmackDown , Bryan cashed in the briefcase after Henry had been knocked out by Big Show to become the World Heavyweight Champion . The match was voided by General Manager Theodore Long as Henry was not medically cleared to compete , and the briefcase was returned to Bryan . At WWE 's TLC : Tables , Ladders , and Chairs PPV in December 2011 , Henry lost the World Heavyweight Championship to Big Show . After the match , Henry assaulted Big Show which allowed Bryan to cash in his contract and pin Big Show to win the title . Bryan held on to his title long enough to have a World Heavyweight Championship match at WrestleMania XXVIII in April 2012 , where he lost his championship to Sheamus . 
 Kelly Kelly 's next contender for the Divas Championship was Beth Phoenix ; Kelly defeated Phoenix to retain her title at SummerSlam , but Phoenix ultimately beat Kelly for the title at Hell in a Cell in October 2011 . 
 John Laurinaitis continued to appear on television after Money in the Bank . In October 2011 , he was appointed Raw General Manager , replacing Triple H as the on @-@ screen authority figure . During Laurinaitis ' rule , he feuded with CM Punk and later with John Cena , until he was fired in the storyline at No Way Out in June 2012 . 
 In later Money in the Bank events , John Cena , Randy Orton and Sheamus won Money in the Bank ladder matches in 2012 , 2013 and 2015 respectively . Cena cashed in on CM Punk and won via disqualification ; thus Punk retained the WWE Championship . Orton cashed in on Daniel Bryan and captured the WWE Championship . Sheamus cashed in on Roman Reigns and captured the WWE World Heavyweight Championship . 
 In WWE 's documentary CM Punk : Best in the World released in 2012 , it was documented from the out @-@ of @-@ universe perspective that a disenchanted Punk rejected signing a new contract with WWE for more than a year leading up to Money in the Bank . After being persuaded by Joey Mercury and Lars Frederiksen that he could only help wrestlers underappreciated by WWE ( like himself ) if he stayed , Punk signed a new contract with WWE about an hour before capturing the WWE Championship from Cena , while the pay @-@ per @-@ view event was ongoing . 
 = = Results = = 
 = Genetic drift = 
 Genetic drift ( also known as allelic drift or the Sewall Wright effect after biologist Sewall Wright ) is the change in the frequency of a gene variant ( allele ) in a population due to random sampling of organisms . The alleles in the offspring are a sample of those in the parents , and chance has a role in determining whether a given individual survives and reproduces . A population 's allele frequency is the fraction of the copies of one gene that share a particular form . Genetic drift may cause gene variants to disappear completely and thereby reduce genetic variation . 
 When there are few copies of an allele , the effect of genetic drift is larger , and when there are many copies the effect is smaller . In the early 20th century , vigorous debates occurred over the relative importance of natural selection versus neutral processes , including genetic drift . Ronald Fisher , who explained natural selection using Mendelian genetics , held the view that genetic drift plays at the most a minor role in evolution , and this remained the dominant view for several decades . In 1968 , population geneticist Motoo Kimura rekindled the debate with his neutral theory of molecular evolution , which claims that most instances where a genetic change spreads across a population ( although not necessarily changes in phenotypes ) are caused by genetic drift acting on neutral mutations . There is currently a scientific debate about how much of unguided evolution has been caused by natural selection , and how much by genetic drift . 
 = = Analogy with marbles in a jar = = 
 The process of genetic drift can be illustrated using 20 marbles in a jar to represent 20 organisms in a population . Consider this jar of marbles as the starting population . Half of the marbles in the jar are red and half blue , and both colours correspond to two different alleles of one gene in the population . In each new generation the organisms reproduce at random . To represent this reproduction , randomly select a marble from the original jar and deposit a new marble with the same colour as its " offspring " into a new jar . ( The selected marble remains in the original jar . ) Repeat this process until there are 20 new marbles in the second jar . The second jar then contains a second generation of " offspring , " consisting of 20 marbles of various colours . Unless the second jar contains exactly 10 red marbles and 10 blue marbles , a random shift occurred in the allele frequencies . 
 Repeat this process a number of times , randomly reproducing each generation of marbles to form the next . The numbers of red and blue marbles picked each generation fluctuates ; sometimes more red and sometimes more blue . This fluctuation is analogous to genetic drift – a change in the population 's allele frequency resulting from a random variation in the distribution of alleles from one generation to the next . 
 It is even possible that in any one generation no marbles of a particular colour are chosen , meaning they have no offspring . In this example , if no red marbles are selected , the jar representing the new generation contains only blue offspring . If this happens , the red allele has been lost permanently in the population , while the remaining blue allele has become fixed : all future generations are entirely blue . In small populations , fixation can occur in just a few generations . 
 = = Probability and allele frequency = = 
 The mechanisms of genetic drift can be illustrated with a simplified example . Consider a very large colony of bacteria isolated in a drop of solution . The bacteria are genetically identical except for a single gene with two alleles labeled A and B. A and B are neutral alleles meaning that they do not affect the bacteria 's ability to survive and reproduce ; all bacteria in this colony are equally likely to survive and reproduce . Suppose that half the bacteria have allele A and the other half have allele B. Thus A and B each have allele frequency 1 / 2 . 
 The drop of solution then shrinks until it has only enough food to sustain four bacteria . All other bacteria die without reproducing . Among the four who survive , there are sixteen possible combinations for the A and B alleles : 
 ( A @-@ A @-@ A @-@ A ) , ( B @-@ A @-@ A @-@ A ) , ( A @-@ B @-@ A @-@ A ) , ( B @-@ B @-@ A @-@ A ) , 
 ( A @-@ A @-@ B @-@ A ) , ( B @-@ A @-@ B @-@ A ) , ( A @-@ B @-@ B @-@ A ) , ( B @-@ B @-@ B @-@ A ) , 
 ( A @-@ A @-@ A @-@ B ) , ( B @-@ A @-@ A @-@ B ) , ( A @-@ B @-@ A @-@ B ) , ( B @-@ B @-@ A @-@ B ) , 
 ( A @-@ A @-@ B @-@ B ) , ( B @-@ A @-@ B @-@ B ) , ( A @-@ B @-@ B @-@ B ) , ( B @-@ B @-@ B @-@ B ) . 
 Since all bacteria in the original solution are equally likely to survive when the solution shrinks , the four survivors are a random sample from the original colony . The probability that each of the four survivors has a given allele is 1 / 2 , and so the probability that any particular allele combination occurs when the solution shrinks is 
 <formula> 
 ( The original population size is so large that the sampling effectively happens without replacement ) . In other words , each of the sixteen possible allele combinations is equally likely to occur , with probability 1 / 16 . 
 Counting the combinations with the same number of A and B , we get the following table . 
 As shown in the table , the total number of possible combinations to have an equal ( conserved ) number of A and B alleles is six , and its probability is 6 / 16 . The total number of possible alternative combinations is ten , and the probability of unequal number of A and B alleles is 10 / 16 . Thus , although the original colony began with an equal number of A and B alleles , chances are that the number of alleles in the remaining population of four members will not be equal . In the latter case , genetic drift has occurred because the population 's allele frequencies have changed due to random sampling . In this example the population contracted to just four random survivors , a phenomenon known as population bottleneck . 
 The probabilities for the number of copies of allele A ( or B ) that survive ( given in the last column of the above table ) can be calculated directly from the binomial distribution where the " success " probability ( probability of a given allele being present ) is 1 / 2 ( i.e. , the probability that there are k copies of A ( or B ) alleles in the combination ) is given by 
 <formula> 
 where n = 4 is the number of surviving bacteria . 
 = = Mathematical models of genetic drift = = 
 Mathematical models of genetic drift can be designed using either branching processes or a diffusion equation describing changes in allele frequency in an idealised population . 
 = = = Wright – Fisher model = = = 
 Think of a gene with two alleles , A or B. In diploid populations consisting of N individuals there are 2N copies of each gene . An individual can have two copies of the same allele or two different alleles . We can call the frequency of one allele p and the frequency of the other q . The Wright – Fisher model ( named after Sewall Wright and Ronald Fisher ) assumes that generations do not overlap ( for example , annual plants have exactly one generation per year ) and that each copy of the gene found in the new generation is drawn independently at random from all copies of the gene in the old generation . The formula to calculate the probability of obtaining k copies of an allele that had frequency p in the last generation is then 
 <formula> 
 where the symbol " ! " signifies the factorial function . This expression can also be formulated using the binomial coefficient , 
 <formula> 
 = = = Moran model = = = 
 The Moran model assumes overlapping generations . At each time step , one individual is chosen to reproduce and one individual is chosen to die . So in each <unk> , the number of copies of a given allele can go up by one , go down by one , or can stay the same . This means that the transition matrix is <unk> , which means that mathematical solutions are easier for the Moran model than for the Wright – Fisher model . On the other hand , computer simulations are usually easier to perform using the Wright – Fisher model , because fewer time steps need to be calculated . In the Moran model , it takes N timesteps to get through one generation , where N is the effective population size . In the Wright – Fisher model , it takes just one . 
 In practice , the Moran model and Wright – Fisher model give qualitatively similar results , but genetic drift runs twice as fast in the Moran model . 
 = = = Other models of drift = = = 
 If the variance in the number of offspring is much greater than that given by the binomial distribution assumed by the Wright – Fisher model , then given the same overall speed of genetic drift ( the variance effective population size ) , genetic drift is a less powerful force compared to selection . Even for the same variance , if higher moments of the offspring number distribution exceed those of the binomial distribution then again the force of genetic drift is substantially weakened . 
 = = = Random effects other than sampling error = = = 
 Random changes in allele frequencies can also be caused by effects other than sampling error , for example random changes in selection pressure . 
 One important alternative source of <unk> , perhaps more important than genetic drift , is genetic draft . Genetic draft is the effect on a locus by selection on linked loci . The mathematical properties of genetic draft are different from those of genetic drift . The direction of the random change in allele frequency is <unk> across generations . 
 = = Drift and fixation = = 
 The Hardy – Weinberg principle states that within sufficiently large populations , the allele frequencies remain constant from one generation to the next unless the equilibrium is disturbed by migration , genetic mutations , or selection . 
 However , in finite populations , no new alleles are gained from the random sampling of alleles passed to the next generation , but the sampling can cause an existing allele to disappear . Because random sampling can remove , but not replace , an allele , and because random declines or increases in allele frequency influence expected allele distributions for the next generation , genetic drift drives a population towards genetic uniformity over time . When an allele reaches a frequency of 1 ( 100 % ) it is said to be " fixed " in the population and when an allele reaches a frequency of 0 ( 0 % ) it is lost . Smaller populations achieve fixation faster , whereas in the limit of an infinite population , fixation is not achieved . Once an allele becomes fixed , genetic drift comes to a halt , and the allele frequency cannot change unless a new allele is introduced in the population via mutation or gene flow . Thus even while genetic drift is a random , directionless process , it acts to eliminate genetic variation over time . 
 = = = Rate of allele frequency change due to drift = = = 
 Assuming genetic drift is the only evolutionary force acting on an allele , after t generations in many replicated populations , starting with allele frequencies of p and q , the variance in allele frequency across those populations is 
 <formula> 
 = = = Time to fixation or loss = = = 
 Assuming genetic drift is the only evolutionary force acting on an allele , at any given time the probability that an allele will eventually become fixed in the population is simply its frequency in the population at that time . For example , if the frequency p for allele A is 75 % and the frequency q for allele B is 25 % , then given unlimited time the probability A will ultimately become fixed in the population is 75 % and the probability that B will become fixed is 25 % . 
 The expected number of generations for fixation to occur is proportional to the population size , such that fixation is predicted to occur much more rapidly in smaller populations . Normally the effective population size , which is smaller than the total population , is used to determine these probabilities . The effective population ( Ne ) takes into account factors such as the level of inbreeding , the stage of the lifecycle in which the population is the smallest , and the fact that some neutral genes are genetically linked to others that are under selection . The effective population size may not be the same for every gene in the same population . 
 One forward @-@ looking formula used for approximating the expected time before a neutral allele becomes fixed through genetic drift , according to the Wright – Fisher model , is 
 <formula> 
 where T is the number of generations , Ne is the effective population size , and p is the initial frequency for the given allele . The result is the number of generations expected to pass before fixation occurs for a given allele in a population with given size ( Ne ) and allele frequency ( p ) . 
 The expected time for the neutral allele to be lost through genetic drift can be calculated as 
 <formula> 
 When a mutation appears only once in a population large enough for the initial frequency to be negligible , the formulas can be simplified to 
 <formula> 
 for average number of generations expected before fixation of a neutral mutation , and 
 <formula> 
 for the average number of generations expected before the loss of a neutral mutation . 
 = = = Time to loss with both drift and mutation = = = 
 The formulae above apply to an allele that is already present in a population , and which is subject to neither mutation nor natural selection . If an allele is lost by mutation much more often than it is gained by mutation , then mutation , as well as drift , may influence the time to loss . If the allele prone to <unk> loss begins as fixed in the population , and is lost by mutation at rate m per replication , then the expected time in generations until its loss in a haploid population is given by 
 <formula> 
 where <formula> is equal to Euler 's constant . The first approximation represents the waiting time until the first mutant destined for loss , with loss then occurring relatively rapidly by genetic drift , taking time Ne < < 1 / m . The second approximation represents the time needed for deterministic loss by mutation accumulation . In both cases , the time to fixation is dominated by mutation via the term 1 / m , and is less affected by the effective population size . 
 = = Genetic drift versus natural selection = = 
 The law of large numbers predicts that when the population is large , the effect of genetic drift is much milder . When the reproductive population is small , however , the effects of sampling error can alter the allele frequencies significantly . Genetic drift is therefore considered to be a consequential mechanism of evolutionary change primarily within small , isolated populations . 
 Although both processes affect evolution , genetic drift operates randomly while natural selection functions non @-@ randomly . While natural selection has a direction , guiding evolution towards heritable adaptations to the current environment , genetic drift has no direction and is guided only by the mathematics of chance . As a result , drift acts upon the genotypic frequencies within a population without regard to their phenotypic effects . In contrast , selection favors the spread of alleles whose phenotypic effects increase survival and / or reproduction of their carriers , lowers the frequencies of alleles that cause unfavorable traits , and ignores those that are neutral . 
 In natural populations , genetic drift and natural selection do not act in isolation ; both forces are always at play , together with mutation and migration . However , the magnitude of drift on allele frequencies per generation is larger when the absolute number of copies of the allele is small ( e.g. , in small populations ) . The magnitude of drift is large enough to overwhelm selection when the selection coefficient is less than 1 divided by the effective population size . 
 The mathematics of genetic drift depend on the effective population size , but it is not clear how this is related to the actual number of individuals in a population . Genetic linkage to other genes that are under selection can reduce the effective population size experienced by a neutral allele . With a higher recombination rate , linkage decreases and with it this local effect on effective population size . This effect is visible in molecular data as a correlation between local recombination rate and genetic diversity , and negative correlation between gene density and diversity at noncoding DNA regions . <unk> associated with linkage to other genes that are under selection is not the same as sampling error , and is sometimes known as genetic draft in order to distinguish it from genetic drift . 
 When the allele frequency is very small , drift can also overpower selection even in large populations . For example , while disadvantageous mutations are usually eliminated quickly in large populations , new advantageous mutations are almost as vulnerable to loss through genetic drift as are neutral mutations . Not until the allele frequency for the advantageous mutation reaches a certain threshold will genetic drift have no effect . 
 In general , " global " solutions to many adaptive challenges at once can evolve at a smaller effective population size than " local " solutions that must evolve separately to each adaptive challenge . 
 = = Population bottleneck = = 
 A population bottleneck is when a population contracts to a significantly smaller size over a short period of time due to some random environmental event . In a true population bottleneck , the odds for survival of any member of the population are purely random , and are not improved by any particular inherent genetic advantage . The bottleneck can result in radical changes in allele frequencies , completely independent of selection . 
 The impact of a population bottleneck can be sustained , even when the bottleneck is caused by a one @-@ time event such as a natural catastrophe . An interesting example of a bottleneck causing unusual genetic distribution is the relatively high proportion of individuals with total rod cell color blindness ( <unk> ) on <unk> atoll in Micronesia . After a bottleneck , inbreeding increases . This increases the damage done by recessive deleterious mutations , in a process known as inbreeding depression . The worst of these mutations are selected against , leading to the loss of other alleles that are genetically linked to them , in a process of background selection . For recessive harmful mutations , this selection can be enhanced as a consequence of the bottleneck , due to genetic <unk> leads to a further loss of genetic diversity . In addition , a sustained reduction in population size increases the likelihood of further allele fluctuations from drift in generations to come . 
 A population 's genetic variation can be greatly reduced by a bottleneck , and even beneficial adaptations may be permanently eliminated . The loss of variation leaves the surviving population vulnerable to any new selection pressures such as disease , climate change or shift in the available food source , because adapting in response to environmental changes requires sufficient genetic variation in the population for natural selection to take place . 
 There have been many known cases of population bottleneck in the recent past . Prior to the arrival of Europeans , North American prairies were habitat for millions of greater prairie chickens . In Illinois alone , their numbers plummeted from about 100 million birds in 1900 to about 50 birds in the 1990s . The declines in population resulted from hunting and habitat destruction , but the random consequence has been a loss of most of the species ' genetic diversity . DNA analysis comparing birds from the mid century to birds in the 1990s documents a steep decline in the genetic variation in just in the latter few decades . Currently the greater prairie chicken is experiencing low reproductive success . However , bottleneck and genetic drift can lead to a genetic loss that increases fitness as seen in Ehrlichia . 
 Over @-@ hunting also caused a severe population bottleneck in the northern elephant seal in the 19th century . Their resulting decline in genetic variation can be deduced by comparing it to that of the southern elephant seal , which were not so aggressively hunted . 
 = = = Founder effect = = = 
 The founder effect is a special case of a population bottleneck , occurring when a small group in a population splinters off from the original population and forms a new one . The random sample of alleles in the just formed new colony is expected to grossly misrepresent the original population in at least some respects . It is even possible that the number of alleles for some genes in the original population is larger than the number of gene copies in the founders , making complete representation impossible . When a newly formed colony is small , its founders can strongly affect the population 's genetic make @-@ up far into the future . 
 A well @-@ documented example is found in the Amish migration to Pennsylvania in 1744 . Two members of the new colony shared the recessive allele for Ellis – van Creveld syndrome . Members of the colony and their descendants tend to be religious isolates and remain relatively insular . As a result of many generations of inbreeding , Ellis @-@ van Creveld syndrome is now much more prevalent among the Amish than in the general population . 
 The difference in gene frequencies between the original population and colony may also trigger the two groups to diverge significantly over the course of many generations . As the difference , or genetic distance , increases , the two separated populations may become distinct , both genetically and <unk> , although not only genetic drift but also natural selection , gene flow , and mutation contribute to this divergence . This potential for relatively rapid changes in the colony 's gene frequency led most scientists to consider the founder effect ( and by extension , genetic drift ) a significant driving force in the evolution of new species . Sewall Wright was the first to attach this significance to random drift and small , newly isolated populations with his shifting balance theory of speciation . Following after Wright , Ernst Mayr created many persuasive models to show that the decline in genetic variation and small population size following the founder effect were critically important for new species to develop . However , there is much less support for this view today since the hypothesis has been tested repeatedly through experimental research and the results have been equivocal at best . 
 Founder effect was first well @-@ investigated in the USSR by Soviet scientists <unk> V.V. , Kuznetsov M.A. and Nikolay <unk> . 
 = = History of the concept = = 
 The concept of genetic drift was first introduced by one of the founders in the field of population genetics , Sewall Wright . His first use of the term " drift " was in 1929 , though at the time he was using it in the sense of a directed process of change , or natural selection . Random drift by means of sampling error came to be known as the " Sewall – Wright effect , " though he was never entirely comfortable to see his name given to it . Wright referred to all changes in allele frequency as either " steady drift " ( e.g. , selection ) or " random drift " ( e.g. , sampling error ) . " Drift " came to be adopted as a technical term in the stochastic sense exclusively . Today it is usually defined still more narrowly , in terms of sampling error , although this narrow definition is not universal . Wright wrote that the " restriction of " random drift " or even " drift " to only one component , the effects of accidents of sampling , tends to lead to confusion . " Sewall Wright considered the process of random genetic drift by means of sampling error equivalent to that by means of inbreeding , but later work has shown them to be distinct . 
 In the early days of the modern evolutionary synthesis , scientists were just beginning to blend the new science of population genetics with Charles Darwin 's theory of natural selection . Working within this new framework , Wright focused on the effects of inbreeding on small relatively isolated populations . He introduced the concept of an adaptive landscape in which phenomena such as cross breeding and genetic drift in small populations could push them away from adaptive peaks , which in turn allow natural selection to push them towards new adaptive peaks . Wright thought smaller populations were more suited for natural selection because " inbreeding was sufficiently intense to create new interaction systems through random drift but not intense enough to cause random nonadaptive fixation of genes . " 
 Wright 's views on the role of genetic drift in the evolutionary scheme were controversial almost from the very beginning . One of the most vociferous and influential critics was colleague Ronald Fisher . Fisher conceded genetic drift played some role in evolution , but an insignificant one . Fisher has been accused of misunderstanding Wright 's views because in his criticisms Fisher seemed to argue Wright had rejected selection almost entirely . To Fisher , viewing the process of evolution as a long , steady , adaptive progression was the only way to explain the ever @-@ increasing complexity from simpler forms . But the debates have continued between the " <unk> " and those who lean more toward the Wright model of evolution where selection and drift together play an important role . 
 In 1968 , Motoo Kimura rekindled the debate with his neutral theory of molecular evolution , which claims that most of the genetic changes are caused by genetic drift acting on neutral mutations . 
 The role of genetic drift by means of sampling error in evolution has been criticized by John H. Gillespie and William B. <unk> , who argue that selection on linked sites is a more important stochastic force . 
 = The Demands of Liberal Education = 
 The Demands of Liberal Education is a 1999 political philosophy book by Meira Levinson that establishes a liberal political theory of children 's education that fits the mutual needs of the state and its diverse citizenry . She writes that the intent of a liberal education — an education that follows from a liberal society 's values — is to maximize the autonomy of individual children through increasing their capacity for liberty . Levinson argues autonomy as a right to children . The book , published by Oxford University Press , aims to address a lacuna between educational policy and liberal political theory . 
 Levinson advocates for a weak perfectionist state that can promote thick autonomy while accepting citizens who do not agree . She argues for public schools " common " to all citizens and " detached " from individual citizen or community values , and argues for a constitutional mandate to this end . 
 Reviewers recommended the book for public educators as an important contribution to liberal theory . Their common criticism was based around practical applications and the imposition of autonomy as a value , e.g. , her contemporary examples of national civics education , how citizens who disagreed with the focus on autonomy could be accommodated , and how a weak perfectionist state could defend marginalized group interests in a public school setting . 
 = = Overview = = 
 In The Demands of Liberal Education , Meira Levinson sets out to write a " coherent liberal political theory of children 's education " that establishes how education can mutually satisfy the conflicting interests of the state and its diverse citizenry . " Liberal education " is defined as the type of education that follows from a liberal society 's values . Levinson writes that the intent of liberal education is to maximize individual autonomy in successive generations , particularly by " cultivating the ' capacity ' to exercise liberty " . Autonomy and its cultivation is the primary moral aim of liberal education . Levinson argues from a liberal political philosophy rather than from a philosophy of education , and contends that a broad liberal education best equips for individual autonomy and thus creates the best republic . 
 Meira Levinson published The Demands of Liberal Education in 1999 with Oxford University Press . She was a secondary schoolteacher at the time , having completed her D. Phil at the University of Oxford in 1997 . Her thesis is titled " Autonomy , Schooling , and the Reconstruction of the Liberal Educational Ideal " . The book was published in paperback in April 2002 . The work aimed to address a lack of literature between educational policy and liberal political theory , with the intent to serve both constituencies . 
 = = Summary = = 
 The first chapter assumes the importance of liberalism . Levinson writes about the foundations of liberalism and asserts that the political liberalism of John Rawls is untenable for its lack of interest in values of autonomy . She concludes that liberal states must adopt a " weakly perfectionist stance towards autonomy " , or a stance that promotes thick autonomy while accepting citizens who do not share that value . Levinson acknowledges the influence of non @-@ formal education but focuses on public schools as the ideal institution for training citizens . She advocates for public schools that are " common " to all members of a community and " detached " from the internal values of the community ( or parents ) . 
 Levinson proposes that citizenship education can provide the " cultural coherence " that may be missing from a " detached " school — which would be a diverse community that prioritizes " critical thinking , tolerance , and reflectiveness " . She argues for a constitutional mandate to establish the " autonomy @-@ promoting aim of education " regardless of public support , and asks for a " culture change " . Levinson distinguishes between parental and child rights , as laws exist for parents who do not act in their children 's best interests . She adds that children are limited by the restricted scope of their parents ' knowledge , and that the state should intervene to combat this small @-@ mindedness in the interests of children . Specifically , she cites Christian criticism of curricular neutrality as a tactic to justify the imposition of their own " limited and restrictive " worldview , and that external knowledge increases the odds of their children not adopting their worldview . Her argument is that the limited worldviews resulting from " excessive paternalism " consequently stunt children 's ability to develop adult autonomy or make rational decisions . Thus , state and parental paternalism should be limited where it will hurt individual " capacity for autonomy " . 
 Towards her " weak perfectionist " liberalism , Levinson requires three traits of a liberal society : ( 1 ) an agreeable , transparent , and equally accessible " legitimation process " for government , ( 2 ) pluralism , and ( 3 ) " substantive liberal institutions " such as " individual liberties and ... governmental duties " . She pairs this view of liberalism with thick autonomy as " the only defensible interpretation of liberalism " . Levinson develops an idea of autonomy that would be agreeable to most citizens while sufficient to guarantee liberalism 's " substantive liberal institutions " , and defines it as " higher @-@ order preference formation " that minds one 's personal values while allowing for openness to criticism and a developed personality . She argues that capacity for autonomy is a right to children , that the state is obligated to facilitate it , and that children are obligated to receive it . In this way , Levinson 's stance is that the state must make education compulsory . Children require paternalistic decisions of some sort , and the state is best suited to promote consent and operate in the best interests of children . The state has a right to override lack of child and parental interest in such an autonomy @-@ promoting education , since such an override lets children decide their values later in life , as adults , as opposed to never having that opportunity . Levinson contends that parents , on the other hand , must provide for the well @-@ being , identity development , and " cultural coherence " sense of their children . 
 Another chapter compares how the American , English , and French educational systems foster private and public identities . She writes that the French public school system is best for its neutral secularity and disregard of " <unk> inspired discriminations " , which are not allowed to influence the common nature of the school . This is contrasted with the American public school system 's trends of increased privatization and non @-@ neutrality . American school voucher programs use public school money towards private schools , departing from the mission of the common public school and further compounding school inequality and ethnic segregation . Levinson concludes that parental choice limits capacity for autonomy and , consequently , individual liberty . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In his Philosophical Books review , Graham Haydon wrote that the book was part of a trend of political philosopher interest in how education works within liberal @-@ democratic societies . He noted issues of compatibility between a society 's self @-@ described " liberal " values and the values of their educational practice , or between a society 's educational practice and the wishes of its citizens . Haydon wrote critics of the common and detached public school would ask how the students would be raised without " some cultural coherence " . Writing in 2001 , he said that her criticism of England 's civics education already appeared outdated in view of England 's then @-@ new National Curriculum citizenship curriculum , which he felt Levinson would find the " best model ... consistent with her own argument " . He added that the " radical pluralist " societies used as examples do not accommodate citizens that hold other values over " autonomy " , and do not answer how citizens can be convinced to believe in " autonomy @-@ promoting " schools . Haydon considered her book " an important contribution " to liberal theory and wrote that " it would be a loss to political philosophy " if she continued her work as a schoolteacher in lieu of an academic career . 
 Kern Alexander of the Journal of Education Finance compared Levinson 's view of parental and child rights to Michael Walzer 's 1984 Spheres of Justice , where he writes that children confined to parental teachings alone when without compulsory public schools . Alexander linked Walzer and Levinson 's views on parental school choice as more about " choosing ' schoolmates than schoolbooks ' " , to the detriment of " cultural cohesion " and for reasons unrelated to educational quality . Alexander recommended the book for " all public educators " for its thoughts on the role of school privatization , homeschooling , and voucher programs . 
 Writing for Studies in Philosophy and Education , Doret de Ruyter approved of Levinson 's emphasis on autonomy and concurred that Levinson 's definition of autonomy would be agreeable to citizens of Western liberal countries . De Ruyter was unsure about edge cases of autonomy , such as whether being closed @-@ minded to the prospect of a pierced belly button would make her a less autonomous person in Levinson 's view . She also disagreed with Levinson 's position of parental " privilege " ( rather than right ) over their children , and invoked Wesley Newcomb <unk> to argue that parents instead have the opposite of a privilege , a " duty " , to their children 's interests and require the liberty to fulfill it , including through education . To defend this parental duty to children and freedom from society in fulfillment of the duty , de Ruyter cited John <unk> 's parental duty @-@ right to educate children : a positive right to educate as they see fit and a negative right that prevents others from impeding . She concluded that the state 's duty conflicts with the duty of parents and thus the state 's duty is " primarily ... against children " . 
 De Ruyter also disagreed that " detached " schools were the only means of inculcating capacity for autonomy , and argued for " autonomy enhancing education " over " autonomy imposing education " . In her criticism , de Ruyter wrote that Levinson lacked critical distance from her idea of a " detached " school , which were presented in " utopian character " , with no concrete examples of such a school in existence , and as inexplicably immune from " capitalist @-@ dominated education " . She added that " detachment " was vague in definition , that more important was detachment from absolutist or divisive stances of " the good life " , and that curriculum and school management were better correlative factors towards liberal schools . De Ruyter concluded that " autonomy imposing schools " would be more harmful than respectful and " autonomy @-@ friendly ... reduced plural environments " , as a child would be better off in an imperfect pluralist than a homogenous fundamentalist classroom . Levinson responded to de Ruyter 's points in a later issue of the journal . 
 In Educational Researcher , Luis <unk> and Pradeep Dhillon wrote that theorists of education and liberal political philosophy could not " afford to ignore " the book . They wrote that the state would have to be " benign " and " hermetically sealed " from external influence for her theory to hold — that such a state would be weak against the interests of illiberal parties . They added that her evaluation of public education across several countries did not account for supranational influence and that she did not engage the potential issues endemic to integrating <unk> <unk> . Additionally , they felt that the book lacked in its practical proposals for public school civics education , particularly in how a weak perfectionist , " activist " state can intervene on behalf of marginalized group interests in a public school setting . 
 The book was discussed in a group session at the American Philosophical Association 's 2002 annual meeting . The panel , led by James Dwyer , included William Galston , Fran Schrag , Yuli Tamir , and a response from the author . 
 = Marjorie Cameron = 
 Marjorie Cameron Parsons Kimmel ( April 23 , 1922 – June 24 , 1995 ) , who professionally used the mononym Cameron , was an American artist , poet , actress , and occultist . A follower of Thelema , the new religious movement established by the English occultist Aleister Crowley , she was also the wife of rocket pioneer and fellow Thelemite Jack Parsons . 
 Born in Belle Plaine , Iowa , Cameron volunteered for services in the United States ' Navy during the Second World War , after which she settled in Pasadena , California , where she met Parsons , who believed her to be the " Elemental woman " that he had invoked in the early stages of a series of sex magic rituals called the Babalon Working . They entered a relationship and were married in 1946 . Their relationship was often strained , although Parsons sparked her involvement in Thelema and occultism . After Parsons ' death in an explosion at their home in 1952 , Cameron came to suspect that her husband had been assassinated and began rituals to communicate with his spirit . Moving to Beaumont , she established a multi @-@ racial occult group called The Children , which dedicated itself to sex magical rituals with the intent of producing mixed @-@ race " moon children " who would be devoted to the god Horus . The group soon dissolved , with many of its members concerned by Cameron 's increasingly apocalyptic predictions . 
 Returning to Los Angeles , Cameron befriended the socialite Samson De Brier and established herself as a figure within the city 's avant @-@ garde artistic community . Among her friends were the filmmakers Curtis Harrington and Kenneth Anger . She appeared in two of Harrington 's films , The Wormwood Star and Night Tide , as well as in Anger 's film Inauguration of the Pleasure Dome , and in later years she would also make appearances in art @-@ house films created by John Chamberlain and Chick Strand . Rarely remaining in one place for long , during the 1950s and 1960s she lived for periods in Joshua Tree , San Francisco , and Santa Fe . Over the course of this period she had relationships with various men , bearing one of them a daughter . Although health problems at times prevented her from working , she produced enough art and poetry to result in several exhibitions . From the late 1970s through to her death from cancer in 1995 , Cameron lived in a bungalow in West Hollywood , there raising her daughter and grandchildren , continuing to pursue her interests in esotericism , and producing further artworks and poetry . 
 Cameron 's recognition as an artist increased after her death , when her paintings made appearances in exhibitions across the U.S. As a result of increased attention on Parsons , Cameron 's life also gained greater coverage in the early 2000s , while in 2011 a biography of Cameron authored by Spencer Kansa was published . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life : 1922 – 1945 = = = 
 Cameron was born in Belle Plaine , Iowa , on April 23 , 1922 . Her father , the railway worker Hill Leslie Cameron , was the adopted child of a Scots @-@ Irish family , while her mother , Carrie Cameron ( née Ridenour ) was of Dutch ancestry . She was their first child , followed by three further siblings : James ( b . 1923 ) , Mary ( b . 1927 ) , and Robert ( b . 1929 ) . They lived on the wealthier north side of town , although life was nevertheless hard due to the Great Depression . Attending Whittier Elementary School and then Belle Plaine High School , where she did well at art , English , and drama but failed algebra , Latin , and civic lessons , she also joined the athletics , glee club , and chorus . Relating that one of her childhood friends had committed suicide , she characterized herself as a rebellious child , claiming that " I became the town pariah ... Nobody would let their kid near me " . She enjoyed going to the cinema , and had sexual relationships with various men ; falling pregnant , her mother performed an illegal home abortion . In 1940 , the Cameron family relocated to Davenport in order for Hill to work at the Rock Islands Arsenal munitions factory . Cameron completed her final year of high school education at Davenport High School , there having romantic relations with both a man and a woman . Leaving school , she worked as a display artist in a local department store . 
 Following the entry of the United States into the Second World War , in February 1943 she signed up for the Women Accepted for Volunteer Emergency Service , a part of the U.S. Navy . Initially sent to a training camp at Iowa State Teachers College in Cedar Falls , she was then posted to Washington D.C. , where she served as a cartographer for the Joint Chief of Staff , in the course of his duties meeting U.K. Prime Minister Winston Churchill in May 1943 . She was reassigned to the Naval Photographic Unit in Anacostia , where she worked as wardrobe mistress for propaganda documentaries , in the course of which she met various Hollywood stars . When her brother James returned to the U.S. injured from service overseas , she went AWOL and returned to Iowa to see him , as a result of which she was court martialed and confined to barracks for the rest of the war . For reasons unknown to her , she received an honorable discharge from the military in 1945 , traveling to Pasadena , California , where her family had relocated , with both her father and brothers securing work at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory ( JPL ) there . 
 = = = Jack Parsons : 1946 – 1952 = = = 
 In Pasadena , Cameron ran into a former colleague , who invited her to visit the large American Craftsman @-@ style house where he was currently lodging , 1003 Orange Grove Avenue , also known as " The Parsonage . " The house was so @-@ called because its lease was owned by Jack Parsons , a rocket scientist who had been a founding member of the JPL and who was also a devout follower of the new religious movement founded by English occultist Aleister Crowley in 1904 , Thelema . Parsons was the head of the Agape Lodge , a branch of the Thelemite Ordo Templi Orientis ( OTO ) . Unbeknownst to Cameron , Parsons had just finished a series of rituals utilizing Enochian magic with his friend and lodger L. Ron Hubbard , all with the intent of attracting an " Elemental " woman to be his lover . Upon encountering Cameron , with her distinctive red hair and blue eyes , he considered her to be the individual whom he had invoked . After they met at the Parsonage on 18 January 1946 , they were instantly attracted to each other , and spent the next two weeks in Parsons ' bedroom together . Although Cameron was unaware of it , Parsons saw this as a form of sex magic that constituted part of the Babalon Working , a rite to invoke the birth of Thelemite goddess Babalon onto Earth in human form . 
 Cameron briefly traveled to New York City to see a friend , there discovering that she was pregnant , and again decided to terminate the pregnancy . Parsons meanwhile had founded a company with Hubbard and his girlfriend Sara Northrup , Allied Enterprises , into which he invested his life savings . It nevertheless became apparent that Hubbard was a confidence trickster , who tried to flee with Parsons ' money , resulting in the termination of their friendship . Returning to Pasadena , Cameron consoled Parsons , painting a picture of Sara with her legs severed below the knee . Parsons decided to sell 1003 , which was then demolished , and the couple instead moved to Manhattan Beach . It was there , on 19 October 1946 , that he and Cameron married at San Juan Capistrano courthouse in Orange County , in a service witnessed by his best friend Edward Forman . Having an aversion to all religion , Cameron initially took no interest in Parsons ' Thelemite beliefs and occult practices , although he maintained that she had an important destiny , giving her the magical name of " Candida " , often shortened to " Candy " , which became her nickname . 
 Cameron decided to travel to Paris , France , with the intention of studying art at the Académie de la Grande Chaumière , hoping that they would admit her with a letter of recommendation from Pasadena 's Art Centre School . She also hoped to use the trip to visit England and meet with Crowley , to explain to him Parsons ' Babalon Working . Traveling via New York aboard the SS America , upon arrival she learned that Crowley had died , and that she was unable to join the college . She found post @-@ war Paris " extreme and bleak " , although befriended Juliette Greco before spending three weeks in Switzerland and then returning home . When Cameron developed catalepsy , Parsons suggested that she read Sylvan Muldoon 's books on astral projection , also encouraging her to read James Frazer 's The Golden Bough , Heinrich Zimmer 's The King and the Corpse , and Joseph Campbell 's The Hero with a Thousand Faces . Although she still did not accept Thelema , she began to be increasingly interested in the occult , and in particular the use of the tarot . 
 Parsons and Cameron 's relationship was deteriorating and they contemplated divorce . While Cameron visited the artistic commune at San Miguel de Allende in Mexico , there befriending the artist Renate Druks , Parsons moved into a house on Redondo Beach , having a brief relationship with an Irishwoman named Gladis Gohan before Cameron returned . Parsons and Cameron then moved to the coach house at 1071 South Orange Grove , while he began work at the Bermite Powder Company constructing explosives for the film industry . They began holding parties once more that were attended largely by bohemians and members of the beat generation , with Cameron attending the jazz clubs of Central Avenue with her friend , the sculptor Julie Macdonald . Earning some of her own money , Cameron produced illustrations for fashion magazines and sold some of her paintings , with a number being purchased by her friend , the artist <unk> <unk> . Parsons and Cameron had decided to travel to Mexico for a few months . On the day before they planned to leave , June 17 , 1952 , he received a rush order of explosives for a film set , and began work on the order at his house . In the midst of this project , an explosion destroyed the building , fatally wounding Parsons ; he was rushed to hospital , but there declared dead . Cameron did not want to see the body , instead retreating to San Miguel , asking her friend George Frey to oversee the cremation . 
 = = = The Children , Kenneth Anger , and Curtis Harrington : 1952 – 68 = = = 
 In the hope of communicating with Parsons ' spirit , while in Mexico Cameron began performing blood rituals in which she cut her own wrist . As part of these rituals , she claimed to have received a new magical identity , Hilarion . When she learned that an unidentified flying object had been seen over Washington D.C. ' s Capitol Building she considered it a response to Parsons ' death . After two months , she returned to California , there attempting suicide . Increasingly interested in occultism , she read through her husband 's papers , coming to understand the purpose of his Babalon Working and furthermore believing that the spirit of Babalon had been incarnated into herself . She came to believe that Parsons had been murdered by the police or anti @-@ <unk> , and continued her attempts at astral projection to commune with his spirit . Her mental stability was deteriorating , and she became convinced that a nuclear test on Eniwetok Atoll would result in the destruction of the California coast . Though unproven , there is evidence that she was institutionalized in a psychiatric ward during this period , before having a brief affair with African @-@ American jazz player Leroy Booth , a relationship that would have been illegal at the time . At some point in this period she stayed with the Thelemite Wilfred Talbot Smith and his wife , although he thought that she had " bats in the belfry " and ignored what he described as her " Mad Mental <unk> " . 
 In December 1952 Cameron moved to a derelict ranch in Beaumont . With the aid of Druks and Paul Mathison , she gathered a loose clique of magical practitioners around herself which she called " The Children " . Intentionally comprising members from various different races , she oversaw a range of sex magic rituals with the intent of creating a breed of mixed @-@ race " <unk> " who would be devoted to Horus . She fell pregnant as a result of these rites , terming her forthcoming child " the Wormwood Star " , although the pregnancy ended in miscarriage . Over time , many of Cameron 's associates within The Children distanced themselves from her , in particular because of her increasingly apocalyptic pronouncements ; she claimed that Mexico was about to conquer the U.S. , that a race war was about to break out in the Old World , and that a comet would hit the Earth , with she and her followers being rescued by a flying saucer that would take them to Mars . During her magical rituals she was using a range of drugs , including marijuana , peyote , and magic mushrooms , and in June 1953 visited Los Angeles to attend a Gerald Heard lecture on the mind @-@ expanding usages of hallucinogens . Perhaps related to her drug use , Cameron was suffering from auditory hallucinations , frequent bouts of depression , and dramatic mood swings . During this period , she was in correspondence with the Thelemite Jane Wolfe , although other Thelemites and Crowley associates such as Karl Germer and Gerald Yorke deemed her insane . 
 At the advice of the I Ching , Cameron returned to Los Angeles , moving in with Booth until the duo were arrested for illegal drug possession . Released on bail , she moved into Druks ' Malibu home , and through her joined the avant @-@ garde artistic circle surrounding the socialite Samson De Brier . It was through this circle that Cameron met the Thelemite film maker Kenneth Anger , and after a party titled " Come As Your Madness " which was organised by Mathison and Druks , he decided to produce a film featuring Cameron and others in the group . The resulting film was Inauguration of the Pleasure Dome . After seeing the film , the English Thelemite Kenneth Grant wrote to Cameron hoping that she might move to England and join his New Isis Lodge , however Cameron never responded . 
 Through common friends Cameron met Sheridan " Sherry " Kimmel , and the two entered a relationship . A veteran of the Second World War from Florida , Kimmel suffered from posttraumatic stress disorder , often causing him severe mood swings . He developed an interest in occultism and became intensely jealous of Parsons ' continuing influence over Cameron , destroying Parsons ' notes on the Babalon Working that she had kept . Cameron again became pregnant , although was unsure who the father was ; she gave birth to a daughter , Crystal Eve Kimmel , on Christmas Eve 1955 . She allowed her daughter to behave how she pleased , believing that that was the best way for to learn . With her friend , the film @-@ maker Curtis Harrington , Cameron then produced a short film , The Wormwood Star , which was filmed at the home of multi @-@ millionaire art collector Edward James ; the film features images of Cameron 's paintings , and recitations of her own poems . In autumn 1956 Cameron 's first exhibition was held , at Walter Hopp 's studio in Brentwood , however a number of paintings were destroyed when the gallery caught fire . Around this time , Cameron was introduced to the actor Dean Stockwell at a public recital of her poetry ; he then introduced her to his friend and fellow actor Dennis Hopper . 
 In late 1957 , Cameron moved to San Francisco with her friends Norman Rose and David <unk> . There she mingled within the same bohemian social circles as many of the Beat Generation of artists and writers , and was a regular at avant @-@ garde poetry readings . She began a relationship with the artist Burt <unk> , and with him moved into a ranch outside of Joshua Tree . Together they began exploring the subject of <unk> , and became friends with the <unk> George Van Tassel . However , after Kimmel was released from a psychiatric ward , Cameron re @-@ established her relationship with him , and in 1959 they were married in a civil ceremony at Santa Monica City Hall ; their relationship was strained and they separated soon after . 
 In 1960 , she then appeared alongside Hopper in Harrington 's first full @-@ length film , Night Tide . The film was a critical success and , despite not receiving a wide distribution , it became a cult classic . She was also invited to appear in Harrington 's next film , Games , although ultimately never did so . Having based herself in the Los Angeles area of Venice , it was here that an exhibit of her artwork was held at a local arts shop in August 1961 . On his return to the U.S. from Europe , Anger moved in with Cameron for a time , although in early 1964 she then left Venice and moved in with Anger in his flat in Silverlake Boulevard until he departed for New York City . According to Anger biographer Bill Landis , Cameron had become " a rather formidable maternal figure " in Anger 's life . In October 1964 , the Cinema Theatre in Los Angeles held an event known as The Transcendental Art of Cameron , which displayed her art and poetry and screened some of her films ; however , Anger arrived and disrupted the event by objecting to the screening of Inauguration of the Pleasure Dome without his permission . He proceeded to launch a poster campaign against his former friend , The Cameron File , in which he labelled Cameron " Typhoid Mary of the Occult World " . She later reconciled with Anger , visiting him in San Francisco , where he introduced her to Anton LaVey , the founder of the Church of Satan . LaVey was delighted to meet her , having been a fan of Night Tide . 
 = = = Later life : 1969 – 1995 = = = 
 In the latter part of the 1960s , Cameron and her daughter moved to the pueblos of Santa Fe , New Mexico , where she developed a friendship with the sculptor John Chamberlain and appeared in his art movie , Thumb Suck , which was never released . It was also while in New Mexico that she suffered a collapsed lung and required hospitalization . Her wider health was poor , as she suffered from chronic bronchitis and emphysema – which were exacerbated by her chain smoking – while hand tremors resulted in her being unable to paint for four years . Returning to California , by 1969 she was living in the <unk> sector of Joshua Tree . From there she and her daughter moved to a small bungalow on North <unk> Avenue in the West Hollywood area of Los Angeles , which at the time had become impoverished and associated with crime , sex stores , and adult movie theatres ; she remained there for the rest of her life . 
 By the mid @-@ 1980s Cameron was focusing to a greater extent on her family life , particularly in looking after her grandchildren , who were known to go joyriding in her jeep . Neighbors recall her playing a Celtic harp in her garden and slowly walking her dog around the block while smoking a joint of marijuana . At one point she was arrested for cultivating cannabis in her home . During that decade , Cameron became a regular practitioner of Tai chi , taking part in group sessions in Bronson Park under the tutelage of Marshall Ho 'o and gaining a teaching certificate in the subject . She also came to be very interested in Jose Arguelles ' The Mayan Factor and Charles <unk> ' The Lion Path , undertaking the Neo @-@ shamanic practices endorsed in the latter . The claims regarding a prehistoric matriarchal society devoted to a Goddess which were made in the writings of archaeologist Marija <unk> also interested and influenced her . Cameron was also very interested in A. S. Raleigh 's Woman and Superwoman , taping her own reading of it and sending copies to her friends and getting it played on local public radio . Throughout all of these disparate spiritual interests , she nevertheless retained faith in the Thelemic ideas of Crowley . 
 As well as entertaining old friends who came to visit her in her home , Cameron also met with younger occultists , such as the Thelemite William Breeze and the industrial musician Genesis P @-@ Orridge . Cameron aided Breeze in co @-@ editing a collection of Parsons ' occult and libertarian writings , which were published as Freedom is a Two @-@ Edged Sword in 1989 . Cameron was also acquainted with the experimental film @-@ maker Chick Strand and appeared in the latter 's 1979 project Loose Ends , during which she narrated the story of an exorcism . In 1989 an exhibition of her work , titled The Pearl of Reprisal , was held at the Los Angeles Municipal Art Gallery . It included a selection of her paintings and a screening of Inauguration of the Pleasure Dome and The Wormwood Star , while Cameron attended to provide a candle @-@ it reading of her poetry . In the mid @-@ 1990s , Cameron was diagnosed with a brain tumor and underwent radiotherapy treatment , which she supplemented with alternative medicines . However , the tumor was cancerous and metastasized to her lungs . She died at the age of 73 in the VA Medical Centre on July 24 , 1995 , having undergone the Thelemic last rites , carried out by a high priestess of the Ordo Templi Orientis . Her body was cremated and its ashes scattered in the Mojave Desert . A memorial event was then held at the Venice 's Beyond Baroque Literary Arts Center in August . 
 = = Personality = = 
 According to historian of Thelema Martin P. Starr , Cameron 's " very dominating personality could not brook rivals of any kind " . Stockwell described Cameron as " a very , very intense personality , but very fascinating " . Considering her to be " an out and out witch " , Hopper described her as having an " infectious personality " through her presence ; she was someone " that you knew [ was ] different and [ she ] had a magnetic quality that you wanted to be closer to . " Charles Brittin , who knew Cameron on Los Angeles ' artistic circuit , called her " a sweet person with a great personality , not the way some of her friends wanted to picture her to be " . Her friend Shirley Berman described her as having " many different crowds of friends , and I think she was a different personality with each crowd ... She wasn 't an even personality at all , but she was always a very gracious person . " 
 = = Artistic style = = 
 Cameron 's occult beliefs closely impacted her artworks . According to The Huffington Post , Cameron 's artwork merges " Crowley 's occult with the surrealism and symbolism of French poets , yielding dark yet whimsical depictions buzzing with otherworldly power " . The art curator Philippe Vergne described her work as being situated on " the edge of surrealism and psychedelia " , embodying " an aspect of modernity that deeply doubts and defies cartesian logic at a moment in history when these values have shown their own limitations " . 
 Cameron 's biographer Spencer Kansa was of the opinion that Cameron exhibited parallels with the Australian artist and occultist Rosaleen Norton , both in terms of her physical appearance and the similarities between their artistic styles . Harrington also saw similarities in the work of Cameron and the artists Leonora Carrington and Leonor Fini . On the website of the Cameron Parsons Foundation , Michael Duncan expressed the view that Cameron 's work rivals that of " fellow surrealists " like Carrington , Fini , Remedios Varo , and <unk> Colquhoun , while also appearing " fascinatingly prescient " of the works by later artists Kiki Smith , Amy Cutler , Karen <unk> , and Hernan Bas . In later years , Cameron would often be erroneously labelled a Beat artist because she inhabited many of the same social circles as prominent Beat poets and writers . Rejecting this label , Kansa instead described Cameron as " a pre @-@ Beat bohemian , whose heart lay in Romanticism " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Cameron 's reputation as an artist grew posthumously . In 2006 her friend Scott Hobbs established the Cameron @-@ Parsons Foundation to serve as an archive storing and promoting her work . In 1995 , her painting Peyote Vision was included as part of an exhibition on " Beat Culture and the New American " which was held at the Whitney Museum of American Art in New York City . A number of her artworks were then exhibited alongside those of Crowley and other Thelemites for the 2001 exhibition " Reflections of a New Aeon " , held at the Eleven Seven Gallery in California 's Long Beach . In 2007 a retrospective of Cameron 's work was held at the Nicole <unk> Gallery in New York City 's Chelsea district , while that same year some of her works appeared in the traveling exhibition " <unk> Culture " , which was devoted to all of the artists who contributed to Wallace Berman 's journal . In 2014 , a retrospective of her word , titled " Cameron : Songs for the Witch Woman , " was held at the Museum of Contemporary Art , Los Angeles . That year , the U.K.-based publisher <unk> <unk> released a book featuring images of Cameron 's artworks and Parsons ' poems . In 2015 , a retrospective of her work titled " Cameron : Cinderella of the Wastelands " was held at the Deitch Projects gallery in Soho , New York City , which included an evening in which friends of Cameron 's assembled to publicly discuss her legacy . 
 Cameron 's life was brought to wider attention through the publication of two biographies about Parsons , John Carter 's Sex and Rockets and then George Pendle 's Strange Angel . On the basis of this , a dramatization of Parsons ' life appeared as the play Moonchild , performed at The Access Theatre on Broadway in 2004 ; for the show , Cameron was portrayed by Heather Tom . In 2011 , Wormwood Star , a biography of Cameron authored by the Briton Spencer Kansa , was published , a work that was not authorized by the Cameron @-@ Parsons Foundation . He had spent almost three years in the U.S. researching the book , interviewing many of those who knew her , a number of whom died shortly after . Kansa stated that most of those whom he interviewed " were immensely generous with their time and recollections " but that " one of Cameron 's <unk> friends " had begun making claims that Kansa was not a biographer but was really an agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation . Writing in the Los Angeles Review of Books , Steffie Nelson noted that Kansa did " his due diligence tracking down [ Cameron 's ] childhood acquaintances and friends " but at the same time was critical of the lack of sources of footnotes . 
 = SPARS = 
 For the various meanings of " spar " , see Spar ( disambiguation ) . 
 The United States Coast Guard ( USCG ) Women 's Reserve , better known by the acronym SPARS , was the World War II women 's branch of the USCG Reserve . It was established by the U.S. Congress and signed into law by the President Franklin D. Roosevelt on 23 November 1942 . This authorized the acceptance of women into the reserve as commissioned officers and at the enlisted level , effective for the duration of the war plus six months . The purpose of the law was to release officers and men for sea duty and to replace them with women at shore stations . Dorothy C. Stratton was appointed director of the Women 's Reserve ( SPARS ) , with the rank of lieutenant commander and was later promoted to captain . She had been the Dean of Women on leave from Purdue University , and an officer in The United States Naval Reserve ( Women 's Reserve ) , better known under the acronym WAVES for Women Accepted for Volunteer Emergency Service . Stratton is credited with creating the nautical name of SPARS . 
 The age for officer candidates was between 20 and 50 ; they had to have a college degree , or two years of college and two years of professional or business experience . The enlisted age requirements were between 20 and 36 ; candidates had to have completed at least two years of high school . For the most part , SPARS were white , but five African @-@ Americans did eventually serve . The agreement between the U.S. Navy and the USCG required that officer candidates receive their indoctrination training at Smith College , Northampton , Massachusetts . But in June 1943 , the USCG withdrew from the agreement , and the indoctrination of SPAR officer candidates was transferred to the USCG Academy at New London , Connecticut . Most SPAR officers were general duty officers , but some officers received specialized training . 
 At first , according to agreement , the SPARS enlisted personnel received their indoctrination training on college campuses operated for such by the U.S. Navy . In March 1943 , the USCG decided to establish its own training center for the indoctrination of enlisted recruits . The site selected was the Palm Beach Biltmore Hotel , Palm Beach , Florida . Beginning in late June , all enlisted personnel received their indoctrination and specialized training there . Some 70 percent of the enlisted women who received recruit training also received some specialized training . Yeoman and storekeepers represented the largest share , but many SPARS were given the opportunity to train in other fields . In January 1945 , the training of enlisted personnel was transferred from Palm Beach to Manhattan Beach , Brooklyn , New York . 
 The SPARS were assigned to every USCG district except Puerto Rico , and served in Hawaii and Alaska as well . Most officers held general duty billets , which included administrative and supervisory assignments . Others served as communication officers , supply officers , barracks , and recruiting officers . The bulk of the enlisted women performed clerical and stenographic duties . In smaller numbers , the enlisted personnel were found in practically every other billet , from baking pies to rigging parachutes and driving jeeps . A select group of SPAR officers and enlisted personnel were also assigned to work with the Long Range Aid to Navigation at monitoring stations in the Continental United States . Better known under the acronym LORAN , it was a top @-@ secret radio navigation system developed for ships at sea and long @-@ range aircraft . The first monitoring station staffed by SPARS was at Chatham , Massachusetts . Chatham is believed to have been ( at the time ) the only all female @-@ staffed station of its kind in the world . The SPARS peak strength was approximately 11 @,@ 000 officers and enlisted <unk> J. A. Hirschfield , USCG , said the SPARS volunteered for duty when their country needed them , and they did their jobs with enthusiasm , efficiency , and with a minimum of fanfare . To honor the SPARS , two USCG cutters were given their name . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The U.S. Coast Guard ( USCG ) Women 's Reserve act was passed by the 77th Congress as Public Law 773 , and signed into law by the president on 23 November 1942 . It amended the USCG Auxiliary and Reserve Act of 1941 , providing for the releasing of officers and enlisted men for duty at sea to be replaced by women at shore stations . It was established as a branch of the USCG Reserve , with authority to enlist and appoint women to serve during World War II and for six months thereafter . The reservists were to be trained and qualified for duty at the continental shore stations of the USCG . They were not to be used to replace civil service personnel . The act was similar to that of the Navy 's Women Accepted for Volunteer Emergency Service or WAVES . Initially , the SPARS were only stationed in the United States , but in 1944 they were allowed to deploy to Hawaii and Alaska . The USCG was the smallest of the military branches and was under the wing of the United States Department of the Navy , although , just prior to World War II , it had been under the supervision of the United States Department of the Treasury . 
 Dorothy C. Stratton was appointed director of the Women 's Reserve ( SPARS ) with the rank of lieutenant commander and was later promoted to captain . She had been the Dean of Women on leave from Purdue University and a lieutenant in the WAVES . Stratton is credited with creating the nautical name of SPARS . The name was fashioned by taking the first letters of the USCG 's Latin motto , Semper <unk> , and the first letters of its English translation , " Always Ready " . Stratton held a master 's degree from the University of Chicago and a doctorate from Columbia University . ( She died in 2006 at age 107 . ) 
 = = = Recruiting = = = 
 At the outset , the U.S. Navy , U.S. Marine Corps , and USCG agreed to recruit and to train the members of their respective women 's reserves together , using existing Navy facilities . For recruiting purposes , the SPARS would utilize the Offices of the Naval Officer Procurement . Their first recruiting efforts got underway in December 1942 , but they were hampered somewhat by the absence of SPAR recruiting personnel . Their absence resulted from the agreement between the Navy and the USCG , whereby the SPARS would receive its first personnel by transfer from the WAVES . A total of 15 WAVE officers and 153 WAVE enlisted women requested and were discharged from the WAVES to become the first SPARS . Eventually , SPAR officers were assigned to most of the Naval Officer Procurement offices . The recruiting information about SPARS was disseminated with WAVES publicity materials and it was also done separately . But it became apparent that the job of selling the SPARS included selling the USCG as well . 
 By June 1943 , it was clear to the USCG that the recruiting process in place did not favor the SPARS , so it withdrew from the joint agreement effective 1 July 1943 . Hence , all women applicants for SPARS would be interviewed and enlisted at USCG district recruiting stations . The change was met with increased enthusiasm by the recruiters and it proved positive overall . Still , the competition remained keen with the other , better known , women services . Some recruiters referred to themselves as peddlers of patriotism , but their lot was not an easy one . In their book , Three Years Behind the Mast , the authors Mary Lyne and Kay Arthur , both officers in SPARS , described the realities of recruiting in this way : 
 During the day , we made speeches distributed posters , decorated windows , led parades , manned information booths , interviewed applicants , appeared on radio programs , and gave aptitude tests . By night , we made more speeches ; prayed women would be drafted , and went to bed dreaming about our quotas . 
 The main recruiting effort had ended . During the 25 @-@ month recruitment period , about 11 @,@ 000 women signed enlistment contracts to serve in the SPARS . Yeoman Third Class Dorothy Tuttle was the first woman to enlist in the SPARS at a recruiting station on 7 December 1942 . 
 In late 1942 , recruiting requirements were such that both enlisted and officer candidates had to be American citizens ; have no children under 18 years of age ; present three character references ; pass a physical examination ; and submit a record of occupation after leaving school . Enlisted applicants were also required to have completed at least two years of high school and be between the ages of 20 and 36 years . Officer candidates were expected to be college graduates , or to have completed two years of college , and have at least two years of acceptable business or professional experience , and be between the ages of 20 and 50 years . Certain regulations with respect to marriage applied to both enlisted and officer candidates . Married women could enlist provided their husbands were not in the USCG . Unmarried women had to agree not to marry until they had finished their training period . After training , they could marry a civilian or service man who was not in the USCG . 
 In August 1943 , recruiting policies were changed to permit SPARS to marry men of the USCG without having to resign . The USCG would continue to accept applicants who were married to men in the Army , Navy , or Marine Corps , but would not accept a woman who was already married to an enlisted man or an officer serving in the USCG . However , women could join the SPARS if their husbands were enrolled as temporary members of the reserve . In November 1943 , the marriage policy with respect to recruits was changed further to permit women who were wives of cadets , warrant officers , or enlisted men of the USCG to enlist or be commissioned in the <unk> . The ban remained on women whose husbands were commissioned officers in the USCG with the rank of ensign or above . 
 Although the USCG officially opened its doors to African @-@ American women in October 1944 , it was not until March 1945 that the first five women were accepted ; they were the only African @-@ American women to serve in the SPARS . Although the Women 's Army Corps ( WAC ) accepted African @-@ American women from its inception , the U.S. Navy 's Women Accepted for Volunteer Emergency Service ( WAVES ) only began accepting African @-@ American women in October 1944 , with fewer than 100 of them serving in the WAVES , and the U.S. Marine Corps Women 's Reserve never opened its ranks to African @-@ American women . The five African @-@ American women who served in the SPARS were : Olivia Hooker , D. Winifred Byrd , Julia Mosley , Yvonne Cumberbatch , and Aileen Cooke . 
 = = = Officer training = = = 
 The agreement between the Navy and the USCG ( noted earlier ) , required the initial classes of SPAR officer candidates to receive their indoctrination training at Smith College , Northampton , Massachusetts ; officially known as the United States Naval Reserve ( WR ) Midshipmen 's School . But in June 1943 , the USCG withdrew from the agreement , and the indoctrination of SPAR officer candidates was transferred to the USCG Academy at New London , Connecticut . It was the only U.S. military service that trained women officer candidates at its own academy . 
 Initially , the training period was for six weeks ; later it was changed to eight weeks . General in scope , the program was designed to give cadets an overall view of the USCG . Academic study included : administration , correspondence , communications , history , organization , personnel , public speaking , ships , and special lectures and visual aids . The regimental part of the training was designed to help cadets adjust to military life , and to acquaint them with their responsibilities as officers . The cadets ranged in age from 20 to 40 , with diverse civilian backgrounds from teachers and journalists to lawyers and technicians . 
 During the two @-@ year life of the officer indoctrination program , about 930 women completed the training and were commissioned as SPAR officers . In late 1944 , the USCG determined that this complement was sufficient for its needs and discontinued the program . However , to replace the officers who had gone overseas , and those separated from the SPARS , the officer candidate school was later reopened for one last class . The candidates were all former enlisted personnel , who received their indoctrination at the USCG training station , Manhattan Beach , Brooklyn , New York . The USCG strived to recruit officer candidates who already had some civilian training or work experience of the type that could be used without further training . As result , only about one third of the officers received any specialized training . However , the specialized training programs produced 203 communications officers , and 106 pay and supply officers , prior to its discontinuance in November and December 1944 . 
 = = = Enlisted training = = = 
 At first , the SPARS enlisted personnel received their indoctrination training on college campuses operated for such by the U.S. Navy . A few SPARS received their recruit training at Oklahoma A & M University , Stillwater , Oklahoma , another 150 of them received their training at Iowa State Teachers College , Cedar Falls , Iowa , and about 1 @,@ 900 SPARS received their recruit training at Hunter College in the Bronx , New York . In March 1943 , the USCG decided that there was a need to establish its own training center for the indoctrination of recruits and to provide specialized training programs . The site selected was the Palm Beach Biltmore Hotel , Palm Beach , Florida ; it was leased , and then commissioned as a training station , on 23 May 1943 . Beginning in late June , all enlisted personnel received their indoctrination and specialized training at this station . 
 The recruits ' indoctrination period at Palm Beach was six weeks . It covered instruction on subjects such as : activities , organization , personnel , current events , and social hygiene . The physical education aspects consisted of : body mechanics , swimming , games , and drill . Another important part of recruit training was the testing , classification , and selection process . This was designed to make the most of the recruit 's abilities , background and interests . The results of the testing were usually the basis for general assignments or the opportunity for specialized training . 
 From the first class of 14 June 1943 , until the final class of 16 December 1944 , more than 7 @,@ 000 recruits were indoctrinated at the Palm Beach station . Approximately , 70 percent of the enlisted women who received recruit training also received some specialized training . Yeoman and storekeepers represented the largest share , but many SPARS were given the opportunity for training in other fields . Some attended other Navy schools and were trained as motion picture sound technicians , link trainer operators , parachute riggers , and air control operators . Others attended USCG schools and learned to be : cooks , bakers , radioman , pharmacist mates , radio technicians , and motor vehicle drivers . In January 1945 , the training of enlisted personnel was transferred from Palm Beach to Manhattan Beach , Brooklyn , New York , the largest USCG training station for men . 
 = = = Assignments = = = 
 The SPARS were assigned to every USCG district except Puerto Rico . In some districts , they worked in the district offices and in the small field units as well . Most officers held general duty billets , which included administrative and supervisory assignments . Others served as communication officers , supply officers , and barracks and recruiting officers . The bulk of the enlisted women had clerical and stenographic civilian backgrounds and the USCG wanted them for this reason . Exciting jobs were few and far between , yet not all assigned to paperwork found it boring . Some saw how their contribution fit into the big picture . In smaller numbers , the enlisted personnel were found in practically every other billet , from baking pies , to rigging parachutes , and driving jeeps . 
 Initially , SPARS were prohibited from serving in USCG districts outside the country . But in late 1944 , Congress amended the law allowing SPARS to serve overseas . For the SPARS , this meant Hawaii and Alaska . However , only those with good records , good physical health , a year 's service , and training and experience in the types of duty requested were selected . About 200 women served in Hawaii , doing roughly the same kind of work , and holding the same ratings , that they would have held in the United States . About an equal number of women served in Alaska as well . A select group of SPAR officers and enlisted personnel were assigned to work with the Long Range Aid to Navigation at monitoring stations in the Continental United States . Better known under the acronym LORAN , it was a top @-@ secret radio navigation system developed for ships at sea , and long @-@ range aircraft . The first monitoring station staffed by SPARS was at Chatham , Massachusetts , after they had received two months of instructions at M.I.T. on the operation and maintenance of LORAN . The unit at Chatham is believed to have been ( at the time ) the only all @-@ female staffed one of its kind in the world . 
 The SPARS enjoyed success in the work place , but they also suffered a degree of intolerance at times . On more than one occasion , male guardsmen would make the point that the USCG had struggled along without women for over 150 years . Attitudes toward them ranged from enthusiasm and amusement to open hostility . But not all the objections were personal or petty . Many of the men simply failed to see the need for women in the service , while others felt it was an unnecessary expense . However , if the women were equal to the job the men were willing to give them their due . Many men , regulars and reservists , supported them , taught them the ropes , and gave them encouragement . 
 = = = Women of the SPARS = = = 
 The average SPAR officer was 29 years old , single , a college graduate , and had worked seven years in a professional or managerial position ( in education or government ) before entering the service . The average enlisted SPAR was 24 years old , single , a high school graduate , and had worked for over three years in a clerical or sales job before joining the service . The likelihood was that she came from the state of Massachusetts , New York , Pennsylvania , Illinois , Ohio , or California . The reasons for becoming a SPAR differed , but most likely it was patriotism , self @-@ advancement , desire for travel and adventure , or the loss of a loved one in the war . 
 In their off @-@ duty hours , SPARS contributed time and effort to many community and wartime causes . Some became active nurse 's aides , some rolled bandages for the Red Cross , others donated blood to blood banks , some visited service men in convalescent hospitals , and others collected gifts for the men overseas . Many of them were also involved in the March of Dimes campaigns , and war chest and war bond drives . Both officers and enlisted were awarded ribbons and medals based on their service , and some were acknowledged for their outstanding contributions to the SPARS and the country . In general , SPARS looked upon their service favorably , and many of them found a form of kinship in having been a part of the nation 's military forces during wartime . With the surrender of Japan in August 1945 , the USCG demobilization effort began , and the SPARS were gradually discharged . They were separated from the service on a point system , and on the basis of their jobs . However , many SPARS were reassigned to the personnel separation centers to help with demobilization ( women and men reservists ) and they were not separated until it was completed . The Women 's Reserve of the USCG ( SPARS ) was inactivated on 25 July 1947 . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 In his foreword to Three Years Behind the Mast , Commodore J. A. Hirschfield , USCG , observed that the SPARS asked no favors and no privileges . They did their jobs with enthusiasm , with efficiency , and a minimum of fanfare . The USCG was fortunate in having the help of the SPARS who volunteered for duty when their country needed them , and carried the job through to a successful finish . The USCG named two cutters in honor of the SPARS : USCGC Spar ( WLB @-@ 403 ) was a 180 @-@ foot ( 55 m ) sea going buoy tender commissioned in June 1944 and decommissioned in 1997 , and USCGC Spar ( WLB @-@ 206 ) , a 225 @-@ foot ( 69 m ) seagoing buoy tender that was commissioned in 2001 . 
 Although the SPARS no longer exist as a separate organization , the term is sometimes informally used for a female Coast Guardsman ; however , it is not an officially sanctioned term . 
 = = Uniforms = = 
 The uniforms worn by the SPARS were the same design and style as those worn by the WAVES , except for the service insignias ; created for them by the New York fashion house of Mainbocher . The decision made regarding the type and style of the uniforms was largely that of the U.S. Navy Uniform Board . The standard uniform was a navy blue suit , consisting of a jacket and a six @-@ gored skirt . Included were black oxfords and plain black pumps ; a brimmed hat ; black gloves ; black leather purse , and rain and winter coats . The summer uniform was of the same design as the standard uniform , worn in white Palm Beach cloth , tropical worsted , or other light fabrics . Shoes were oxfords or pumps of white leather . The summer work wear was a grey and white striped <unk> dress with jacket . 
 = Wellington Mounted Rifles Regiment = 
 The Wellington Mounted Rifles Regiment was a mounted infantry regiment from New Zealand , raised for service during the First World War . It was assigned to the New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade , part of the New Zealand Expeditionary Force . 
 The regiment , with an establishment of twenty @-@ six officers , 523 other ranks and 600 horses , was formed from three squadrons belonging to pre war Territorial Force regiments ; the Queen Alexandra 's 2nd ( Wellington West Coast ) Mounted Rifles , the 6th ( Manawatu ) Mounted Rifles and the 9th ( Wellington East Coast ) Mounted Rifles . It also included a small headquarters and , until 1916 , a Maxim machine @-@ gun section . The Maxim guns were withdrawn but the regiment 's fire @-@ power increased during the war , by the end of which each squadron had four Hotchkiss machine @-@ guns , one per troop . 
 As mounted infantry , the regiment rode into battle on their horses , but were expected to dismount for battle , and then fight on foot . The regiment fought predominantly against the forces of the Ottoman Turkish Empire . In the Gallipoli Campaign between May and December 1915 , they participated in the largest battle of that theatre at Chunuk Bair , and also in the fighting for Hill 60 . Evacuated to Egypt , they then took part in the Sinai and Palestine Campaign from 1916 to 1918 . The early battles there included those at Romani , Gaza and Beersheba . Later in the war they were part of the force that occupied the Jordan Valley , and took part in the raid on Amman and the raid on Es Salt . Their final war time operation was in connection with the capture of the Turkish Fourth Army . During the four years of war the regiment had 369 dead and 453 wounded , several of those wounded more than once . After the war , the regiment played a minor role in the Egyptian Revolution of 1919 , before being disbanded in June 1919 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation = = = 
 Raised on 8 August 1914 at the start of the First World War , the Wellington Mounted Rifles Regiment came from the region around Wellington on the North Island of New Zealand . It was commanded by Lieutenant @-@ Colonel William Meldrum , and comprised a headquarters , a machine @-@ gun section , and three squadrons formed from Territorial Force regiments . The New Zealand Territorial Force included a compulsory training system , and the four Military Districts were each required to supply a mounted regiment for the New Zealand Expeditionary Force . To meet that obligation the Territorial Force regiments each provided a squadron , which kept their own regimental badges and traditions . The regiment 's squadrons came from the Queen Alexandra 's 2nd ( Wellington West Coast ) Mounted Rifles ( 2nd Squadron ) , the 6th ( Manawatu ) Mounted Rifles ( 6th Squadron ) and the 9th ( Wellington East Coast ) Mounted Rifles ( 9th Squadron ) . The establishment was fixed at twenty @-@ six officers and 523 other ranks , who used 528 riding horses , seventy @-@ four draught horses and six pack horses . Each squadron , of 158 men , had a field headquarters and four troops . The Machine @-@ Gun Section , with two Maxim Guns , had one officer , twenty @-@ six other ranks , twenty riding horses and sixteen draught horses . Although the regiment used horses , they were not cavalry but mounted infantry , and expected to ride to the battlefield , dismount and then fight as traditional infantry . Attached to , but not part of , the regiment were medical and veterinary officers , an artificer , three more other ranks and another eighteen horses . The regiment was assigned to the New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade , serving alongside two other regiments , the Auckland Mounted Rifles and the Canterbury Mounted Rifles . 
 = = = Embarkation = = = 
 The regiment conducted training until 24 September , when they received embarkation orders . Due to the fear of German warships being in the area , the wait for suitable escort ships delayed their departure until 15 October . With a short stop at Hobart , on 28 October they arrived at Albany , and anchored waiting to be joined by the Australian contingent . The combined convoy sailed on 1 November and reached Colombo on 15 November . Two days later it sailed into the Red Sea and the Suez Canal . They docked at Port Said on 2 December and Alexandria the next day . The regiment disembarked on 4 December and boarded a train for their camp in the Cairo suburb of Zeitoun . There they started a training programme , using the desert for manoeuvres , during both day and night . 
 In April 1915 the New Zealand and Australian forces , except the mounted troops , were sent to serve in the Gallipoli Campaign . Heavy casualties during the landings provided a need for reinforcements , so the regiment and other mounted troops , without their horses , were ordered to Gallipoli . 
 = = Gallipoli = = 
 On 8 May 1915 , the regiment , reduced to twenty @-@ five officers and 453 other ranks ( some men had to stay behind to look after the horses ) , with the remainder of the brigade , sailed for Gallipoli and landed three days later , under small arms fire , at ANZAC Cove , as part of the Australian and New Zealand Army Corps ( ANZAC ) . 
 They relieved elements of the Royal Naval Brigade , with the regiment taking over from the Nelson and Deal Battalions , on the right flank . One squadron occupied the front line , one squadron the support trench , and the third was the reserve . The regiment was on the left , the Auckland Mounted Rifles in the centre , and the Canterbury Mounted Rifles on the right . They spent the next few days improving the fire trenches , constructing communications trenches , and enlarging tracks so men and guns could move forward quickly . This was done under Turkish machine @-@ gun and rifle fire . 
 = = = First combat = = = 
 At midnight on 18 May the Turkish troops opened fire on the regiment until 03 : 30 , then left their trenches and charged the mounted brigade , concentrating on the Auckland Mounted Rifles . The Turkish attackers were engaged by the regiment 's machine @-@ guns with enfilade fire and the attack petered out at dawn , leaving hundreds of Turkish dead . Both sides continued shooting at each other with artillery and small arms fire . At 13 : 25 General Alexander Godley , commanding that section of the beach @-@ head , ordered the regiment to counter @-@ attack the Turkish trenches at " The Nek " . Their first trench was one hundred yards ( 91 m ) across no man 's land with no cover at all . The regiment prepared to obey the order , but arranged it so that no one squadron would be wiped out . The men were selected in equal proportion from all three squadrons and Captain William Hardham VC was chosen to command them . Brigadier @-@ General Andrew Russell , commanding the brigade , contacted Godley to advise him of the circumstances of such an attack and Russell was told to " use his own judgement " so promptly called it off . 
 The morning of 20 May started the same way , with Turkish artillery and small arms fire being directed at the regiment 's trenches . This lasted until 16 : 30 when the firing ceased and white flags appeared above the Turkish trenches . The Turkish commander asked for an armistice , so that they could collect their dead and wounded lying in the open . But as it appeared they were using the time to bring forward reinforcements , repair defences and collect arms and ammunition from the dead , the armistice was turned down . Negotiations continued and a truce was agreed for 24 May between 07 : 30 and 17 : 00 . The regiment sent out men to collect and bury Allied dead . The next day the 3rd Light Horse Brigade relieved the regiment , and they moved to a safer area in the rear . Even when " resting " in the rear , they were not safe as it was constantly shelled , and work details had to be provided to move supplies and construct better defences . 
 = = = Defence of No.3 Post = = = 
 On 28 May the regiment had to man a position just captured by the Canterbury Mounted Rifles , called No.3 Post . The 6th Squadron was chosen and started improving the trenches on arrival . Daylight was at 03 : 30 and although having worked all night , they had made no real impression on the position and were exposed to Turkish fire all day . However , instead of abandoning the post , at 21 : 00 they were relieved by the 9th Squadron . An hour later Major Selwyn Chambers , commanding the 9th Squadron reported they were surrounded by about one thousand Turkish troops . At 23 : 35 communications with the 9th Squadron failed . The squadron were fighting off attacks , but could not stop Turkish troops reaching the edge of their trench and throwing hand grenades into their positions . A troop from the 2nd Squadron , sent as reinforcements , were unable to break through . So at midnight the remainder of the 2nd Squadron attempted to reach them , but instead had to dig in to defend themselves . Even though outnumbered , both squadrons managed to hold out , providing covering fire for each other . At 03 : 30 another Turkish attempt to capture their trenches began , this time from the south . When Turkish troops got into the left side of the 2nd Squadron trench , Major James Elmslie led a troop in a counter @-@ attack , clearing them out . At 06 : 30 , by using signal flags , communications with regimental headquarters were re @-@ established . Casualties were mounting and supplies of ammunition dwindling , and the defence was becoming untenable . The 6th Squadron managed to reach the 2nd Squadron 's position , but in the face of heavy Turkish fire , were unable to advance any further . Around 12 : 00 Turkish troops got into the 9th Squadrons trenches , forcing one troop to withdraw . After Captain Spragg of 9th Squadron located an abandoned supply of British ammunition , the New Zealanders were able to return fire at will without having to conserve ammunition . Nevertheless , the Turkish force , now numbering about three thousand men , continued their attacks all day . 
 At 19 : 00 Turkish troops captured the northern section of the 9th Squadron trench . With no chance of any relief during daylight , the commanding officer was informed that two squadrons from the Canterbury Mounted Rifles would try to relieve the 9th Squadron after 20 : 00 . By this time the 6th Squadron had fought their way round the southern slopes of the hill and got within one hundred yards ( 91 m ) of the 9th Squadron 's trench , but could make no further progress . As darkness approached Turkish fire reduced , and at 22 : 30 the Canterbury Mounted Rifles reached 9th Squadron and took over from them at 23 : 00 . The 9th Squadron moved to the rear followed an hour later by the 2nd and 6th Squadrons . During the battle the squadrons were outnumbered and fighting at close quarters , but their casualties were rather light at nineteen dead and fifty @-@ two wounded . 
 = = = Walker 's Ridge = = = 
 The regiment returned to the front on 7 June , relieving the 8th Light Horse Regiment on Walkers Ridge . The 2nd and 9th Squadrons manned the front trench , with the 6th Squadron in reserve . Trench warfare , shelling and sniping continued all month but there was no major attack . The regiment spent their time rotating through the front and resting at the rear . On 1 July reinforcements of four officers and ninety @-@ seven other ranks arrived . On 18 July the regiment returned to the front , relieving the Canterbury Mounted Rifles , each squadron with two troops forward and the other two in reserve . They remained there until 31 July when they were relieved by the 10th Light Horse Regiment . Returning to the rear , the regiment only had twenty @-@ four officers and 338 other ranks , almost 200 men short of full establishment . 
 = = = Chunuk Bair = = = 
 In August Godley planned a new offensive . The brigade was designated as the " Right Covering Force " , and allocated several objectives including " No.3 Post " , " Big Table Top " and " Destroyer Ridge " . The regiment , supported by a Maori pioneer battalion , were given " Destroyer Ridge " and " Big Table Top " to capture . On 5 August the regiment moved to their starting position at " No.1 Post " , the attack being planned for the following day . Two troops from 6th Squadron were to capture " Destroyer Ridge " , and then clear the route to " Big Table Top " , which the remainder of the regiment was to assault at 22 : 00 . 
 At 21 : 30 6 August the attack began ; after covering around two hundred yards ( 180 m ) the leading troops were discovered by a Turkish sentry . The 6th Squadron charged the trenches , killing the occupants , but it cost them two men dead and one wounded including the squadron commander . The rest of the squadron continued clearing the route for the regiment . Thick impenetrable bush , forced the regiment to move further east to continue . Scaling the north @-@ eastern face of the hill , they reached the summit at 22 : 55 , and attacked the Turks from the rear . The regiment worked to secure the position from attack by the Turkish forces . Their total casualties for the operation were eight dead and nine wounded , but they had captured 158 prisoners , without firing a shot . The next morning , 7 August , the 6th Squadron and Maoris rejoined the regiment , just as they came under heavy machine @-@ gun and rifle fire . The next day the regiment , along with the Auckland Mounted Rifles , the New Zealand Infantry Brigade and two British battalions , were combined as No.1 Column commanded by Brigadier @-@ General Francis Johnston . The Column were to hold the ground already occupied and extend their lines to the south and east . Leaving the 9th Squadron defending " Big Table Top " , the rest of the regiment , 173 all ranks , reported to Johnstone at " <unk> Dere " , where they ordered to hold the position " to the last man " alongside the Otago Infantry Battalion . The regiment spent the night improving the crescent shaped position , on the rear slope of the hill . All during the following day , the attacking Turks , sky @-@ lining themselves at the crest of the hill , became easy targets for the regiment , and were engaged with enfilade fire , from the left and right of the regiment 's lines . 
 At 16 : 00 the regiment was attacked in force , but the Turks withdrew after suffering heavy casualties . But the British attack elsewhere had failed , and some units had been forced to retire , leaving the regiment exposed . They fought off attacks throughout the night , until 05 : 00 the next morning . Then for two hours they were harassed with sniper fire and hand grenades . Meldrum asked the brigade for reinforcements and more ammunition . There were no reserves of ammunition available and the only reinforcements were forty men from the 6th Battalion Loyal Regiment ( North Lancashire ) who were sent to assist , but did not arrive until noon . At 14 : 00 Meldrum reported he could now hold out until nightfall and at 22 : 30 they were relieved by the rest of the Loyal Regiment and the 5th Battalion Wiltshire Regiment . In the day 's fighting the regiment , from a total of 173 all ranks , had lost forty @-@ three dead and seventy @-@ four wounded . 
 Early on 10 August the survivors , less the 9th Squadron , moved into a camp at " No.1 Post " . The 9th Squadron , now one hundred men strong , remained at the front defending " Table Top " and " Old No.3 Post " . The next day at 19 : 30 the brigade moved back to man the inner defence line . The regiment , still without the 9th Squadron , occupied the " Camel 's Hump " with twelve men , and " Destroyer Ridge " with twenty @-@ five men , the remainder being held in reserve . They remained at the front until relieved on 23 August . 
 = = = Hill 60 = = = 
 On 21 August the regiment moved back to " Big Table Top " for the pending assault on Hill 60 . The attack , at 15 : 30 , succeeded in capturing around two hundred yards ( 180 m ) of Turkish trenches . Two days later , at 17 : 15 , the regiment was relieved and rejoined the brigade at <unk> <unk> , but at 19 : 30 , five officers and 125 other ranks had to return to the front to defend the western slopes of Hill 60 . The same day , three officers and seventy @-@ seven other ranks arrived as reinforcements for the regiment . On 25 August those men still at the front were relieved by the Canterbury Mounted Rifles and Otago Mounted Rifles , in preparation for a night assault on Hill 60 by the brigade . The assault was postponed for two days to rest the men . Although the brigade was responsible for the centre objective during the assault , it could only provide three hundred men , with another one hundred men coming from the Australian 18th Battalion . The regiment 's contribution was five officers and 125 other ranks . The battle commenced with an hour @-@ long artillery bombardment . The Auckland and Canterbury Mounted Rifles formed the first line of attack , the Wellington regiment and the Otago Mounted Rifles the second , and the Australians made up the third line . At 17 : 00 the attack began , and despite taking heavy casualties crossing no man 's land , the first Turkish line was captured . The Wellington regiment and Otago Mounted Rifles continued on , took out a machine @-@ gun post and captured the second Turkish trench , but sustained heavy casualties . On the other flanks the supporting assaults had failed , leaving the regiment and the Otago Mounted Rifles isolated on a narrow front . The brigade therefore consolidated the ground already captured and moved forward their machine @-@ guns to support the defence ; the forward defensive line was only forty men . The regiment 's casualties during the battle were fifty dead and fifty @-@ nine wounded . That night the remainder of the regiment moved into the front line . They fought off several counter @-@ attacks , losing another man killed and eleven wounded . On 29 August the regiment was relieved by the 163rd ( Norfolk & Suffolk ) Brigade , but remained in the reserve trenches for the next three days . Even there the number of casualties continued to increase , so that by 2 September there were only six officers and ninety @-@ nine men left in the regiment . Despite this , they still had to supply five officers and thirty @-@ nine other ranks to occupy a trench on " Cheshire Ridge " . 
 = = = Evacuation = = = 
 By 13 September the regiment 's strength was four officers and eighty other ranks . All of them except fourteen machine @-@ gunners were evacuated to the island of Lemnos . Of the original contingent who had landed in May only twenty @-@ four men were still with the regiment . On 10 November reinforcements increased the regiment 's total to nine officers and 363 other ranks , and they returned to Gallipoli , reaching the front line at Hill 60 on 27 November . Lack of manpower meant they could not fully man their trenches , so a system was adopted where six men manned a post , with only two on duty during the day . At night all men were awake and also patrolled between posts and into no man 's land . 
 On 17 December , orders for the complete evacuation of the peninsula were issued . The regiment started leaving the next day , when six officers and 155 other ranks left for Lemnos before dawn . Those left behind had to make it appear that the trenches were fully occupied . At 21 : 30 two thirds of the remainder were evacuated . Other smaller parties left the trenches between 01 : 40 and 02 : 05 , when the last officer and eleven other ranks moved down to the beach and were evacuated . The surviving 375 men of the regiment camped on Lemnos until transport was available to take them back to Egypt . Their involvement in the Gallipoli Campaign had cost the regiment a total of 640 casualties . 
 = = Sinai = = 
 = = = Katia = = = 
 On 22 December the regiment left Lemnos ; they disembarked at Alexandria four days later . On 27 December they arrived back at Zeitoun camp . There they were reunited with their horses , and reinforcements arrived to bring the regiment back up to full establishment , plus another ten percent . At the same time the Machine @-@ Gun Section was doubled from two to four guns . On 23 January 1916 the regiment were deployed in defence of the Suez Canal , reaching Serapeum on 29 January and Ferry Post Rail Head on 5 March where they took over from two infantry brigades . Later that month the brigade was assigned to the newly formed ANZAC Mounted Division , alongside three Australian light horse brigades and a British Royal Horse Artillery ( RHA ) brigade . 
 The regiment mixed defending the canal with further training , each man getting used to their arms and equipment . They carried 240 rounds of ammunition in two <unk> , one around the horse 's neck . The horses also carried saddle wallets containing clothing and a blanket or great coat , water , rations , cooking utensils , empty sandbags , and a rope for tethering the horse . On 23 April they were ordered to move into the Sinai Desert to assist the 5th Mounted Brigade who were under attack . Travelling thirty miles ( 48 km ) overnight they reached Kantara at dawn and crossed the canal . However the Turkish force had withdrawn , so the brigade established a chain of observation posts in the desert . The Wellingtons were near Hill 70 , in the No.3 Section of the canal 's defence zone . 
 The regiment remained at Hill 70 until 12 May , when they moved twenty @-@ six miles ( 42 km ) north @-@ east to Maler . On arrival they established a line of observation posts and sent reconnaissance patrols further east into the desert . Four days later the 2nd Squadron sent a troop on a reconnaissance to <unk> El Bardawil . On 18 May the regiment occupied the Katia Oasis , and the next day sent a patrol to Ard sixteen miles ( 26 km ) to the east . They gained their first sight of Turkish forces in the region , but they were too distant to engage . On 29 May the regiment , along with the rest of the brigade , travelled thirty miles overnight to Salmana , and early next morning surprised the Turkish garrison . The main part of the assault was carried out by the Auckland Mounted Rifles . The water supply at Salmana was insufficient for a complete mounted brigade , so they had to return to Maler that night . Between 21 – 23 June the regiment provided flank protection for the 1st Light Horse Brigade on a reconnaissance of Katia . Then , on their return to Maler , they were attached to the 2nd Light Horse Brigade , who gave them the nickname " Well and <unk> " . In July the regiment lost its machine @-@ gun section , which was transferred to the newly formed brigade Machine @-@ Gun Squadron . The Maxim guns were replaced by three Lewis guns , one per squadron . The loss of the section also reduced the regiment 's establishment to twenty @-@ four officers and 499 other ranks . 
 = = = Romani = = = 
 On 19 July , reconnaissance aircraft located a Turkish force in the desert moving west . The regiment and the 2nd Light Horse Brigade were ordered to establish a line of observation posts in their path . They were to send out patrols to locate them , but withdraw if attacked . If possible , they were to retire towards Romani , enticing the Turks to follow them . At dawn on 20 July the regiment located the Turks digging trenches near Ogratina . Rifle fire was exchanged and some prisoners were captured . The prisoners revealed that the force comprised twelve battalions with artillery support , planning to attack Romani . 
 Two days later , on 22 July , the regiment again encountered Turkish troops , this time at <unk> . Over the following days they were employed checking the Turkish positions and shadowing their line of march . On 28 July , the 2nd Squadron located a strong Turkish force at Umm Ugba two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) north of Katia . Covered by artillery and machine @-@ guns , two of the regiment 's squadrons carried out a bayonet charge and captured the position . They lost two men dead and three wounded during the battle . 
 On 3 August , still with the 2nd Light Horse Brigade , the regiment returned to Katia . Forming the vanguard , they came under Turkish fire on their approach , and as Katia appeared to be held in strength by the Turks , the brigade set up a line of observation posts to monitor them until nightfall . They then retired to Maler , unknowingly being followed by the Turks . At 23 : 30 the 1st Light Horse Brigade reported movement to their front , and thirty minutes later shots were exchanged at Mount Meredith and Hod El Enna . The regiment had just settled down for the night and were ordered to stand to . At 02 : 15 4 August , fighting broke out along the front line and two hours later the 1st Light Horse Brigade carried out a fighting withdrawal . At dawn the regiment was the brigade reserve behind the 6th and 7th Light Horse Regiments . By 05 : 00 the Turkish force was outflanking both their defences and the ANZAC Mounted Division headquarters , which was co @-@ located at the regiment 's position . Two hours later they were ordered to gallop to the front line . Riding through rifle and machine @-@ gun fire , they moved to the left and rear of the 6th and 7th Light Horse Regiments . Once the regiment 's position was established , the Australian regiments pulled back to form a line with them . As the Turks advanced and occupied the ridge line previously held by the light horse , they brought artillery and machine @-@ gun fire down onto the division 's rear areas . The situation appeared serious , and the regiment 's clerks were ordered to burn all their papers . Just before 10 : 00 reinforcements , consisting of a yeomanry regiment , two Scottish infantry companies and the New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade , arrived and began attacking the Turkish left . By 18 : 00 they had captured the position . The regiment 's casualties during the day were twenty @-@ four wounded . 
 Orders were given for a counter @-@ attack the next morning . The assault started at 04 : 00 on 5 August , and the regiment charged forward on foot with bayonets fixed . Ignoring the machine @-@ gun and rifle fire they broke through the Turkish lines , capturing several hundred prisoners . Meldrum ordered their horses forward and they continued the attack on horseback . They stopped when they came under heavy artillery and machine @-@ gun fire approaching Katia . In the face of such fire they were unable to continue without more support , so dismounted and observed the Turkish positions . Gradually the rest of the division arrived and strengthened the regiment 's line . At 09 : 00 Meldrum was asked by the artillery for assistance . Two batteries following behind the advance were being attacked by Turkish infantry . So Meldrum sent two of his squadrons to help , but the Turkish attackers vanished before they arrived . At 10 : 00 Meldrum had to take over as temporary commander of the 2nd Light Horse brigade , and Major Spragg became the temporary regimental commanding officer . The next attack was timed for 14 : 30 ; the regiment would be part of the force assaulting Katia , on the front left , alongside the 6th Light Horse Regiment . Advancing through artillery and machine @-@ gun fire until they were five hundred yards ( 460 m ) from the Turkish lines , they halted and returned fire . At one stage the regiment had to bend their line , when the unit to their left gave ground and the Turkish forces moved forward trying to outflank them . Heavy fire from the regiment broke that attack , and the counter @-@ attacking Turks withdrew . By nightfall no further move forward was possible , and as the horses needed watering , the attack was called off . The regiment had fought all day , but their casualties were rather light ; one officer and nine other ranks wounded , some mortally . They had captured one thousand prisoners . 
 = = = Abd = = = 
 Having not slept for the last three days , the Wellingtons and the 1st and 2nd Light Horse Brigades were rested . Meanwhile , the remainder of the division continued the counter @-@ attack against the Turkish rearguard . On 8 August the Turks were at Abd , and the 1st and 2nd Light Horse Brigades were ordered forward . Reaching Katia later that day , they were ordered to march through the night to take part in the assault at dawn the next morning . Setting out at 23 : 00 , they were in position north @-@ west of Ard by 05 : 00 on 9 August . Half an hour later the Wellington regiment , in the vanguard , led the 2nd Light Horse Brigade on foot to capture a ridge of high ground half a mile ( .8 km ) from the Turkish main defence line . Once in position there , they came under constant artillery fire . Later the regiment again led the brigade to capture another ridge four hundred yards ( 370 m ) to their left , with the 2nd Squadron advancing on the left and the 9th Squadron on the right , supported by the 6th Squadron in reserve . The attack , which was covered by the 7th Light Horse Regiment , advanced through machine @-@ gun and rifle fire until the ridge was captured , but the New Zealanders then came under an intense artillery bombardment . At 13 : 30 the Turks counter @-@ attacked , reaching the 1st Light Horse Brigade who were alongside the Wellingtons , and the 3rd Light Horse Brigade on the other flank who were forced to retire . At 16 : 30 the division 's situation appeared untenable ; orders were issued to evacuate the wounded and for the whole line to retire , while remaining in contact with the Turks . By nightfall the regiment had returned to Oghratina . Their casualties were three dead and twenty @-@ nine wounded . The next day the regiment rested as the Turkish force withdrew . On 11 August they moved forward across the battleground ; the only Turkish troops they encountered were engaged in burying their dead . The next day the Turkish force had withdrawn to Salmana . On 27 August Meldrum resumed command of the regiment , which then moved back to Kantara , with a strength of twenty @-@ two officers and 407 other ranks . 
 = = = El Arish = = = 
 While at Kantara leave was granted for all ranks in Port Said and Sidi Bishr during September . On 10 October , once more part of the New Zealand brigade , the regiment moved forward to Maler , and reached <unk> , twenty @-@ five miles ( 40 km ) further east , on 24 October . The next phase of the campaign was an advance of fifty miles ( 80 km ) across the desert to El Arish . The regiment continued moving east , reaching <unk> on 27 October , and a troop from the 9th Squadron located a good water supply at <unk> only fifteen miles ( 24 km ) from El Arish . On 11 November , the regiment advanced another fourteen miles ( 23 km ) east to <unk> , establishing outposts at <unk> and <unk> . Overnight 15 / 16 November the post at <unk> was attacked by Turkish camel troops , which withdrew before dawn . The Allied attack on El Arish began on 20 December , the New Zealand and 3rd Light Horse Brigades being chosen to carry out the final assault from the south , while the rest of the division cut off any retreat . By dawn the brigade was in sight of its objective , and the town was surrounded . They then discovered that the Turkish forces , aware of the advance , had evacuated the town three days earlier . 
 = = = Magdhaba = = = 
 That night , 22 / 23 December , the advance continued towards Magdhaba . This village was surrounded on three sides by a wadi , and defended by several redoubts which were covered by artillery and machine @-@ guns . At 05 : 00 the regiment dismounted four miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) to the north @-@ east of the village . The attack started just before 10 : 00 . The regiment , positioned on the brigade 's right , headed towards their objective , Redoubt <unk> They galloped across the open ground , through artillery and machine @-@ gun fire , until they were 1 @,@ 600 yards ( 1 @,@ 500 m ) from the Turkish lines , at which point they dismounted and continued on foot . Their Lewis Guns , supported by a section from the Machine @-@ Gun Squadron , pinned down the Turkish defenders , while the assault continued . By 11 : 00 the 6th and 9th Squadrons were only five hundred yards ( 460 m ) from the objective when Harry Chauvel , who was in command of the ANZAC Mounted Division , asked the Desert Mounted Corps commander , Philip Chetwode , for permission to withdraw because he believed that no progress had been made . Chetwode instead ordered an all out assault . In the meantime , the regiment continued the advance anyway , and at 15 : 55 they fixed bayonets and charged the redoubt , capturing some of the Turkish defenders . At 16 : 40 the 10th Light Horse Regiment carried out a mounted charge into the middle of the position , and all resistance ceased . The battle had cost the regiment five dead . 
 = = Palestine = = 
 = = = Rafa = = = 
 On 9 January 1917 , around 01 : 00 , the regiment crossed the Egyptian – Palestine border , and continued northwards undetected until about 15 : 30 , when Turkish observation posts set off flares to alert their troops of the Allied approach . At 08 : 00 orders for the attack on Rafa were issued ; the brigade was to form the right flank . At 09 : 35 the whole brigade galloped forward to a position two miles east @-@ north @-@ east of their objective . The Auckland and Canterbury Mounted Rifles were to attack " C " Redoubt , while the Wellington Regiment was placed in reserve with a secondary task of providing protection against any attack on the brigade from the area of Khan Yunis . Already low on ammunition , once the assault began the regiment had to be resupplied with 24 @,@ 000 rounds of machine @-@ gun ammunition . At 13 : 00 two of the regiment 's troops went forward to occupy a gap in the line between the New Zealand brigade 's position and that of the Australian 1st Light Horse Brigade . Just before 14 : 00 one of the regiment 's flank patrols , two miles north @-@ east of Rafa , captured a Turkish officer and three Germans who , during questioning , claimed that the Rafa garrison consisted of 2 @,@ 000 men , with four mountain artillery guns , and that the 160th Regiment was en route to reinforce the defenders . Another patrol reported that two infantry battalions were heading to Rafa from Abu <unk> , while a third patrol reported that around 2 @,@ 000 men , about four miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) away , were coming from Khan Younis . Then another Turkish force was seen approaching , about five miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) away , but too far away to make out any details . At 15 : 45 the brigade was ordered to attack again , and fifteen minutes later another of the regiment 's patrols reported 500 Turkish troops approaching from the east . 
 The approaching Turkish forces convinced Chetwode to call off the attack . But at 16 : 30 , as the other brigades were retiring , the New Zealanders charged and captured their objective . This allowed them to bring enfilade fire onto the rest of the position . The rest of the division then resumed the attack and captured the village . By now the Turkish relief force was about two miles away to the north @-@ east . By 17 : 15 all the wounded had been evacuated and the covering patrols recalled . As there were no water supplies at Rafa , at 18 : 30 the brigade was ordered to withdraw back to Sheikh Zowaiid . Although not as heavily involved in the battle as other units , the regiment still had twelve men dead and eighteen wounded . 
 = = = Gaza = = = 
 At 02 @.@ 30 on 26 March , the regiment set out in thick fog for the assault on the town of Gaza . By 08 : 00 they had crossed the Wadi Ghuzze and reached Sheikh Abbas , confronted only by enemy aircraft and some Turkish camel patrols . Two hours later they were about three miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) to the east of Gaza , providing a guard force against any reinforcements that might approach from Hareira . The British assault did not go according to plan , and at 14 : 00 the ANZAC Mounted Division was ordered to attack the town from the north . The regiment galloped forward together with the rest of the New Zealand brigade , and occupied <unk> Ridge north @-@ east of Gaza at 16 : 00 . Dismounting , the regiment moved into Gaza , with the 6th Squadron leading , followed by the 2nd Squadron , and the 9th Squadron bringing up the rear . At 16 : 25 they captured a Turkish field ambulance ; four officers , 125 other ranks and twenty vehicles . Continuing the assault through artillery and small arms fire , the 2nd and 9th Squadrons reached a cactus hedge . Cutting through it with their bayonets , they engaged the Turkish defenders behind it in hand @-@ to @-@ hand fighting . Two troops then charged across a lagoon , about 18 inches ( 460 mm ) deep , to capture a Turkish trench . To their right they sighted a Turkish artillery emplacement , and Meldrum ordered the position taken without delay . Two troops from the 2nd and one from the 9th Squadron carried out a bayonet charge and captured the guns intact . Back in the regiment 's centre they were held up by a strong Turkish defensive position at a cemetery . Instead of trying to attack the position , they held their line while the captured guns were recovered . The regiment was now some distance in front of the 2nd Light Horse Brigade to their left , and in danger of a flanking counter @-@ attack . To assist the defence of their position , they turned one of the captured guns onto the Turkish strong points , the inexperienced gun crew sighting by peering down the barrel until they could see their target . 
 At 18 : 35 , although Meldrum believed they could at least hold where they were , the regiment was ordered by Chetwode to withdraw . At 19 : 00 horse teams arrived to recover the guns , and at 19 : 45 they slowly retired back to the suburbs of Gaza . At 21 : 40 they rejoined the brigade and left the town . The next morning at 08 : 30 they arrived at Deir El Belah , where the division was now located . Casualties during the battle had again been rather light , at one dead and nineteen wounded . They had captured 197 prisoners , as well as the guns and field hospital . 
 The regiment 's involvement in the second attempt to capture Gaza began at 18 : 30 on 16 April . The brigade left Deir El Belah , marched through the night and at 04 : 30 the next morning were at a ford on the Wadi Ghuzze at Shellal . A Turkish machine @-@ gun post covering the crossing was taken out , and soon after the regiment formed the vanguard on the advance to the Rafa – Beersheba road . By midday , despite being attacked by hostile aircraft , they had established a line of observation posts beside Im Siri . Turkish cavalry patrols were observed in the distance , but they did not attempt an attack on the regiment . By nightfall the brigade was recalled to Shellal , where they camped for the night . The next day was similar , again setting up posts observing Turkish movements , then returning to Shellal after dark . The main assault on Gaza was floundering , and the next day the ANZAC Mounted Division was ordered to assist the Imperial Mounted Division in attacking the Atawineh Redoubt , six miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) to the south @-@ east of Gaza . To get into position for the attack , the brigade marched through the night . Initially held in reserve , the Wellingtons were sent to assist the 5th Mounted Brigade in an attack on " Sausage Ridge " , south of the Atawineh Redoubt . Getting into position at 11 : 30 , Meldrum ordered the 6th Squadron to assault along the length of the ridge , with the help of fire support from the 9th Squadron and the Inverness Battery Royal Horse Artillery . The attack was also supported by the 3rd Squadron Auckland Mounted Rifles on the right of the 6th Squadron . At 12 : 30 the attack had progressed around half way up the ridge , at which point the Leicestershire and half of the <unk> Battery Royal Horse Artillery arrived to support the assault . They could not , however , prevent around six hundred Turkish reinforcements reaching the redoubt . 
 Doubtful of their ability to capture the redoubt alone , at 13 : 15 Meldrum asked for reinforcements ; he was informed there were no more available . The Canterbury Mounted Rifles , advanced into a gap between the Wellingtons and the 5th Mounted Brigade , which eased the pressure . By 15 : 00 the superior Turkish numbers and their strong defences , forced Meldrum to commit his reserve , the 2nd Squadron and a section of the Machine @-@ Gun Squadron . At the same time , the horses were moved further to the rear so that they would be out of artillery range . At 15 : 15 the regiment 's right was counter @-@ attacked by three or four hundred Turkish troops . Fifteen minutes later Meldrum again asked for reinforcements ; he was again refused . Supported by their artillery , the regiment held out until 17 : 00 , when the Turks retired , having suffered heavy losses . An hour later the regiment was ordered to withdraw at nightfall . The 2nd Squadron reported that they had gained a position which allowed them to assault the redoubt . Meldrum , aware that the redoubt would have to be abandoned even if they were successful , refused to allow the assault . At 18 : 30 the Royal Horse Artillery withdrew . Then , confusingly , the regiment was ordered to remain where they were , until the yeomanry to their left had moved back . So it was not until 20 : 15 that the regiment left the front line . At 01 : 00 20 April the regiment reached the night camp at El <unk> . Their casualties during the battle amounted to one dead and twenty @-@ three wounded . The same night , this second attempt to capture Gaza was called off . 
 = = = Wadi Ghuzee line = = = 
 On 27 April Meldrum was promoted to brigadier @-@ general and given command of the New Zealand brigade , although he was temporarily replaced as commanding officer by Major Charles Dick . On 30 April the Wellington regiment returned to the front , manning a line of observation posts in the <unk> Sheikh <unk> defence system . They were at the right of the British line , which stretched along the Wadi Ghuzze to the Mediterranean Sea , south of Gaza . As well as manning the trenches , they carried out mounted patrols into no man 's land . On 8 June it was their turn to return to the rear rest area at Marakeb , and Lieutenant @-@ Colonel James Whyte assumed command of the regiment . On 8 July the 9th Squadron captured a Turkish outpost four miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) to the west of Beersheba , from which they could clearly see the village 's defences . Ten days later the regiment assaulted what they believed was a strong Turkish position at Khalassa , but discovered the defenders had withdrawn before their approach . On 19 July a Turkish force attacked across the Wadi <unk> towards Karm . The regiment moved forward to occupy a line of observation posts the next day , but again discovered that the Turks had withdrawn . Over the next weeks the regiment carried out numerous patrols around Beersheba , checking on the Turkish defences and dispositions . On 18 August they were sent to Marakeb to rest . Four weeks later , on 18 September , they returned to the front line at <unk> . 
 = = = Beersheba = = = 
 For the attack on Beersheba the New Zealand brigade was to move around the open Turkish left flank and assault the village from the east @-@ north @-@ east . They moved to Esani , fifteen miles ( 24 km ) to the south @-@ east , on 24 October , then on the next day the Wellingtons established a seven miles ( 11 km ) long observation line between two and three miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) south @-@ west of Beersheba . On 28 October the regiment moved another eight miles ( 13 km ) south @-@ east to Khalassa , then the next day to Asluj , sixteen miles ( 26 km ) to the south of Beersheba . 
 Over the night of 30 / 31 October the attack on Beersheba began ; the regiment formed part of the vanguard with the 6th Light Horse Regiment . At 00 : 45 , the 9th Squadron lead and the 2nd Squadron provided flank and rear protection as the Wellingtons left the main column to capture a Turkish position at Goz El Shegeib , eight miles ( 13 km ) south @-@ east of Beersheba . At 03 : 00 the position was secured - it was unoccupied - and the regiment remained there for instructions . Three hours later the 9th Squadron was attacked , from the north , by a squadron of Turkish cavalry . Supported by the 6th Squadron , they counter @-@ attacked and forced the Turks to withdraw towards Beersheba . The regiment then moved to rejoin the brigade , which was now five miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) to the south @-@ east of Beersheba . Continuing to move forward , at 08 : 00 they captured Salem Irgeig . The regiment now became the brigade reserve ; the brigade assaulted the Saba Redoubt and captured it at 14 : 40 . The 2nd Squadron was sent to reinforce the Auckland Mounted Rifles for their attack on Tel el Saba , which they captured at 15 : 00 . The rest of the regiment were not involved in the battle , and Beersheba was eventually captured with a mounted charge by the 4th Light Horse Brigade . The Wellingtons casualties during the battle amounted to one dead and five wounded . 
 Holding their position overnight , at 07 : 00 the next morning the regiment advanced towards the crossing at El <unk> , seven miles ( 11 km ) to the north of Beersheba . Two hours later , just short of the crossing , the 6th Squadron , leading the regiment , were engaged by around 100 Turkish cavalry and two machine @-@ guns . The squadron , supported by the 9th Squadron , immediately counter @-@ attacked , and captured the position . They then continued on to their objective , where they met up with the Imperial Camel Corps Brigade ( ICCB ) and held the crossing until nightfall , when they were relieved so that they could return and camp at the Saba Redoubt . A shortage of water had affected all the division 's operations , so on 2 November the brigade were moved eleven miles ( 18 km ) east to Bir Imshash . 
 = = = Ras El Nagb = = = 
 While the brigade was searching for water , the advance was running into problems . On 4 November the brigade was ordered to relieve the 5th Mounted Brigade at Ras El Nagb , thirteen miles ( 21 km ) north @-@ east of Beersheba . At 17 : 30 the Canterbury Mounted Rifles arrived , followed by the 6th Squadron of the Wellington Mounted <unk> , who lined up to the left of the Canterbury regiment , facing towards <unk> . Their opposition was estimated to be around two thousand men and three artillery batteries . At 03 : 00 on 3 November the Turks began their attack ; five hours later the 9th Squadron relieved the 6th Squadron in the front line . Only two hours later the 6th had to move back into the line , to the west of Ras El Nagb , where they stopped a Turkish attack trying to outflank the position . At 13 : 30 the 2nd Squadron came under a heavy artillery bombardment and suffered several casualties . After this the Turks carried out a bayonet charge , getting to within two hundred yards ( 180 m ) of the regiment 's lines before , under heavy fire , they were forced to withdraw . The regiment managed to hold their position , by the weight of their fire power , until nightfall . The next morning the regiment was relieved by the ICCB . The battle had cost them nine men wounded . Gaza was captured on 7 November , but the regiment remained around Ras El Nagb until the night of 9 November . 
 = = = Ayun Kara = = = 
 On 10 November the regiment returned to Beersheba , and the New Zealand brigade were ordered to move sixty miles ( 97 km ) across the British front to the opposite flank . Four days later , just after 11 : 00 , the 6th Squadron assisted the Canterbury Mounted Rifles in capturing a Turkish post defending the Wadi <unk> . But they could then see Turkish troops gathering in a nearby orange grove , and more Turkish troops to the north . When the rest of the brigade arrived Meldrum ordered an immediate attack . The regiment was to advance along the main road , with the Auckland Mounted Rifles on their left . The Somerset Battery Royal Horse Artillery and the Machine @-@ Gun Squadron would provide fire support . The Canterbury Mounted Rifles would be the reserve . At 13 : 30 , covered by artillery fire , the 9th Squadron started the assault . Their first target was a trench system at the top of the hill . Supported by covering fire from a 6th Squadron troop , they charged and captured the position , also capturing a Lewis Gun and a Turkish machine @-@ gun . As the 2nd Squadron secured the position , the 9th Squadron continued forward for their secondary objective , which they charged and captured ; here they captured two more machine @-@ guns . At 14 : 15 the Auckland Mounted Rifles sighted a strong Turkish force preparing for a counter @-@ attack , which began fifteen minutes later . Part of the assault came up against the left of the 9th Squadron , who fought off the attack with the support of five machine @-@ guns . On the other flank the Auckland Mounted Rifles were under severe pressure and the regiment was ordered to assist them . Two troops from the 2nd Squadron mounted and galloped forward around 200 yards ( 180 m ) across open ground . They then dismounted and charged a machine @-@ gun post on the top of a knoll . Engaging the defenders in hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat , they captured the post and another machine @-@ gun . From the knoll they were able to enfilade the Turkish troops attacking the Aucklanders , and forced them to retire . It was now 16 : 00 and the 9th Squadron , taking advantage of the Turkish withdrawal , charged and occupied the Turkish position in front of them . The 6th Squadron , on the right , also moved forward to support them . This prompted a general Turkish retirement , and by dusk they had left the battlefield . The Allies evacuated their wounded and , expecting another attack at dawn , prepared their defences . At 23 : 00 an Australian squadron and a camel squadron arrived to support the brigade . The regiment 's casualties during the battle were eleven dead and forty @-@ six wounded . Against that they had captured thirty @-@ four prisoners as well as seven machine @-@ guns and other military supplies . 
 = = = River Auja = = = 
 The next day , 15 November , the Turkish force had completely withdrawn . The brigade continued the advance north , stopping just beyond Richon @-@ le @-@ Zion . The next day , at 09 : 30 , patrols from the regiment entered the port of Jaffa . The town 's only inhabitants were the civilian population , the Turkish troops having evacuated the town beforehand . At 11 : 00 the regiment 's commander , Whyte , took formal possession of the Government buildings , posting guards at the German and Austrian Consulates and the post office . 
 Two days later , on 18 November , the regiment moved into a line of observation posts along the River Auja . The next day a troop from the 2nd Squadron were sent to locate crossing points across the river . They located a dam and a bridge to the north @-@ east . Dismounting and approaching on foot , they had one man wounded , who was later taken prisoner . The following day the regiment was relieved by the other rest of the brigade , and moved to the rear , returning to the front line on 21 November . 
 The brigade was ordered to mount an assault across the river at 13 : 00 on 24 November ; the regiment 's objective being Khirbet Hadrah . First across were the Canterbury Mounted Rifles who crossed by a ford at the rivers mouth . Behind them the 6th and 9th Squadrons crossed and moved along the river bank to the bridge at <unk> , which they captured at 15 : 30 , taking twenty @-@ two prisoners . With the bridge secure , the regimental headquarters and the 2nd Squadron moved across to reinforce the attack , which then captured Khirbet Hadrah , capturing twenty @-@ five prisoners and two machine @-@ guns . 
 With the crossing secured , the 161st ( Essex ) Brigade moved across the river to reinforce the defence . The Wellingtons established observation posts further to the north . The next morning the 2nd Squadron sent a patrol on a reconnaissance , which located a strong Turkish force approaching . By 05 : 30 this Turkish force were attacking the 2nd Squadron 's posts . At 07 : 00 the rest of the regiment , still south of the river , moved to support the defenders at <unk> Hadrah , where they came under an artillery bombardment . At the same time the 2nd Squadron was ordered to fall back to support the infantry at Sheikh Muannis . The Turks continued their assault , and at 08 : 15 had forced the infantry to withdraw south of the river . Holding out until 09 : 30 , the last unit to cross back over the river was the 2nd Squadron . In an attempt to keep possession of a crossing , the 6th and 9th Squadrons moved to cover the ford at the river mouth where they managed to stop the Turkish advance four hundred yards ( 370 m ) short of the ford . That night the 161st Brigade took over all the defences , but the New Zealanders remained close by to support them . The regiment had twelve men wounded during the fighting . They remained in the area until 4 December , when the brigade left for Ibn <unk> , to the south @-@ east of Jaffa , relieving the ICCB in the front line . On 11 December the regiment was attached to the 54th ( East Anglian ) Division at Beit Dejan as the army tactical reserve . Ten days later they were back with the New Zealand brigade , which was now north of the River Auja . The regiment encountered the Turkish rearguard at <unk> , but after locating the Turks ' positions , the regiment was ordered back to Beit Dejan . Then they were ordered to move back to Sukereir , arriving on Christmas Day 1917 . 
 = = Jordan Valley = = 
 = = = Jericho = = = 
 On 9 February the regiment started thirty @-@ five miles ( 56 km ) across country to Bethlehem , and by 17 February they were camped north @-@ east of Bethlehem around the Mar Elias Monastery and Ibn Obeid . The same day , Whyte was injured in an aeroplane crash and Major Spragg became the temporary commanding officer . The next day , orders were issued for the capture of Jericho . The regiment were attached to the 60th ( London ) Division and had to move that night to be in position to begin the advance at 06 : 00 the next morning . They were tasked to be ready to intercept any retreating Turkish forces from El Muntar , which would be attacked by the infantry division . 
 That evening , 18 February , the regiment moved out , but before long the width of the track forced them to dismount and lead their horses by hand in single file . At 22 : 30 the head of the column came under fire from Turkish cavalry . They forced the Turks to withdraw , and later surrounded and captured several prisoners , one being Ali Salem a well @-@ known Turkish spy . Continuing at 06 : 00 they captured their first objective two miles to the east of Mar Saba . Spreading out to capture any retreating Turkish forces , they advanced north , under fire , and at 10 : 40 joined up with the 60th Division . Mounted patrols were then sent out , one of which located a strong Turkish position . Located on the " Ancient Road " to Hill 306 and on to Hill 288 , the Turkish positions were supported by five artillery pieces at <unk> Musa . 
 At 17 : 00 the regiment was released from their attachment to the 60th Division , and returned to the command of the New Zealand brigade , which was advancing along the Jordan Valley , joining them an hour later . Problems crossing the mountainous terrain postponed any attack until daylight . At 03 : 00 the brigade moved out again with the Wellingtons on the right , advancing towards Hill 306 , the Canterbury Mounted Rifles on the left towards Hill 288 and the Auckland Mounted Rifles forming the reserve . The 6th Squadron attacked Hill 306 from the south and the 2nd Squadron from the south @-@ west . At dawn they came up against a large group of Turks " in a fortress @-@ like position on the top of a steep hill @-@ face , bristling with machine guns , commanding the surrounding country " . With no artillery available , the squadrons were unable to advance with any speed , using only their small arms to support the assault . A gap appeared in the line between the regiment and the Canterbury Mounted Rifles , who had moved further north then had been intended . So the Auckland Mounted Rifles moved forward to assault Hill 288 instead . These galloped forward and captured Hill 288 , forcing the Turks to withdraw , and the Wellingtons occupied Hill 306 . Turkish artillery bombarded the hill , while their troops retired to the east . Holding an observation line overnight , at 06 : 00 the next morning the brigade advanced towards Jericho leaving the 9th Squadron to capture <unk> El Bahr , including its stores and boats , on the Dead Sea . Jericho was captured the same day by the Australian 1st Light Horse Brigade . As a whole , the operation cost the Wellingtons one killed and four wounded . On 22 February the regiment returned to Bethlehem along the Jericho – Jerusalem road , eventually returning to the Mar Elias Monastery . They met their commanding officer , Whyte , who had now recovered from his injuries . Three days later the brigade crossed back to the west , returning to Richon . 
 = = = Amman = = = 
 A raid on Amman was the next operation for the regiment . The ANZAC Mounted Division , the 60th ( London ) Division and the ICCB would all take part . On 13 March the regiment started back to the Jordan Valley , through heavy rain . Orders for the raid were issued ; the brigade would advance on mountain tracks via the village of Ain Es Sir , then to Amman . The rains continued postponing the raid and it was not until 01 : 30 on 24 March that the brigade crossed the River Jordan , by pontoon bridge at Hajlah . At 09 : 30 the regiment , the Canterbury Mounted Rifles and the 181st ( 2 / 6th London ) Brigade started clearing the area between the river and the foothills . At 11 : 25 they charged and captured three artillery pieces . The brigade advance continued at 15 : 00 , without the 6th Squadron which remained behind to assist the 181st Brigade in their assault on Es Salt . Still negotiating the mountain track , it started to rain again at 18 : 00 and the brigade camped for the night ; starting again next morning they reached Ain Es Sir just after midday . There they were forced to stop and wait for their supplies to catch up with them . 
 Early on 26 March the rest of the ANZAC Mounted Division arrived , and the ICCB that evening . To cut off Amman from reinforcements , one of the regiment 's troops set out that night and destroyed a section of the Hedjaz rail line to the south of the town . They returned the next morning without loss . Orders were issued for the attack on the town ; the brigade would assault from the south . The 2nd Squadron was to provide flank protection , located in the area four miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) south @-@ east of Es Sir . The rest of the regiment , including the headquarters , the 9th Squadron , and half a section of the Machine @-@ Gun Squadron , escorted a demolition party to destroy the railway station at <unk> , just under six miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) to the south of Amman . En route the 9th Squadron located a train carrying around three hundred Turkish troops , stopped in a cutting . When they opened fire the train pulled out towards <unk> , where it ran into a squadron from the Auckland Mounted Rifles and one of the 9th Squadron 's troops . Some of the Turks left the train to fight on foot , while the train continued on to Amman , leaving them behind . The regiment 's men left the demolition party to be escorted by troops from the ICCB , and returned to the brigade outside Amman . 
 On 28 March the brigade , reinforced by the 4th ( ANZAC ) Battalion ICCB , tried to capture Hill 3039 south @-@ west of Amman . The attack failed and further attempts were postponed until after nightfall . The night assault began at 02 : 00 ; two troops of the 9th Squadron were involved in the second line to protect the left flank . The attack was successful and the brigade commenced improvements to the defences in order to withstand any counter @-@ attack . The Wellingtons dug in at the centre of the position , with the Aucklands on their right and the Canterburys on the left . The expected counter @-@ attack started at 05 : 00 with an artillery bombardment . As the Turkish troop approached the brigade lines , at 09 : 20 an order to withdraw was given . As the regiment , the Canterburys and the <unk> started to retire , it allowed the Turks to reach the crest of Hill 3039 . It was then realised the order was mistaken , and the brigade officers rallied their man and charged back , forcing the Turks back down the hill . Further Turkish counter @-@ attacks continued throughout the day , and at 16 : 00 a troop from the 9th Squadron on the right flank , when the Turkish got close to their lines , had to do a counter @-@ attack of their own . By now it was appreciated that the division could not achieve their objectives , and a withdrawal back towards the Jordan river was ordered . By 22 : 30 the wounded had been evacuated and the regiment pulled back unopposed , reaching Ain Es Sir at 04 : 00 the next day . Turkish troops then closed on their position , but that evening the 6th Squadron rejoined the regiment . A line of observation posts were then established to monitor the approaching Turks . The regiment made plans to hold them off until the division passed through the village , and then withdraw back across the river . At 03 : 45 on 1 April , the 2nd Squadron formed a skirmish line to the north of Ain Es Sir , the 9th Squadron another line to the south @-@ east , while the 6th Squadron were the reserve . By 07 : 00 the brigade , bringing up the rear , reached the village . Once they had passed them the 6th Squadron joined the end of the line . At 07 : 45 the 2nd Squadron opened fire on Turkish troops coming from the north , while the 9th Squadron withdrew , followed soon after by the 2nd Squadron . As they entered the village , enemy troops in the hills opened fire on them . The squadron immediately counter @-@ attacked , supported by two troops from the 9th Squadron . The remainder of the regiment stopped three miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) to the south , forming a defensive line . The Turkish troops in the hills were soon dealt with by the 2nd Squadron , and as they withdrew , the regiment was able to provide covering fire . Finally , just after 20 : 00 , they arrived back at Shunet Nimrin , and camped for the night . Their casualties during the raid were fourteen dead and eight wounded . The brigade recrossed the River Jordan at the Ghoraniyeh pontoon bridge on 2 April . 
 = = = Ghoraniyeh = = = 
 As the ANZAC Mounted Division pulled back to the west bank of the Jordan , the Wellingtons remained behind strengthening the defences at the Ghoraniyeh bridge @-@ head . On 18 April , the regiment , less the 6th Squadron , were part of a brigade force that advanced on the village of Shunet Nimrin . The operation was a deception to convince the Turks that further raids on Amman were imminent . The next day patrols from the regiment located a large Turkish force in the foothills around the village . The brigade positioned as if to attack them , then when they reinforced their position , the brigade withdrew . That night they crossed back over the river and camped outside Jericho . The regiment moved again on 23 April , to camp in the foothills to the south of Jericho . 
 On 30 April the second raid across the Jordan began , their objective this time to capture Es Salt . This time a much larger force was involved , under command of the Desert Mounted Corps . The Wellingtons and the rest of the New Zealand brigade were part of the force assigned to attack the village of Shunet Nimrin . At 03 : 30 when the brigade crossed over the Ghoraniyeh pontoon , the regiment came under command of the 180th ( 2 / 5th London ) Brigade , providing protection for their right flank as they advanced on the village . The difficult terrain and the strength of the Turkish defences hindered progress , and by dusk they were still some distance away from their objective . The next day the advance continued , but in the face of growing Turkish resistance , and with the arrival of Turkish reinforcements , they were in danger of being cut off and surrounded . So on 4 May the whole force withdrew back across the River Jordan , leaving the Wellingtons behind to protect the bridge @-@ head . 
 Many men were infected with malaria , and the regiment was periodically rotated away from the valley bottom to the western hills . Their first move back west was on the 16 May , when they moved to the brigade camp site near Talaat Ed Dumm , remaining there for the next thirteen days . On 30 May they moved to Solomon 's Pools , to the south of Bethlehem . On 14 June the regiment returned to the front line at Ain Ed Duk , two miles north of Jericho . There they established observation posts to monitor Turkish activity , remaining until they were relieved on 30 June . 
 = = = Abu Tellul = = = 
 On 9 July Major Charles Dick assumed temporary command of the regiment , while Whyte was on leave and the regiment was in the front line near Abu Tellul . On 13 July the neighbouring sector of the line , a salient defended by the Australian 1st Light Horse Brigade , came under a heavy artillery bombardment . Some rounds landed on the regiment 's positions , causing casualties . At dawn on 14 July German soldiers attacked the light horse brigade . By 07 : 00 they had broken the Australian lines in the east , and the Wellingtons came under command of the light horse brigade to support their defence . Thirty minutes later the 9th Squadron advanced , on foot , along the Wadi Aujah , and occupied a position on the west of the salient just before the Germans ' Turkish allies attacked . The 9th Squadron managed to hold their line , but because they were engaging a far larger force , the 6th Squadron moved forward on their left to support them . The two squadrons ' lines were able to mutually support each other and engage the attacking Turks with a " withering fire " . Then the two squadrons and the light horse counter @-@ attacked , forcing back their opposition and capturing 400 prisoners , sixty @-@ one of them taken by the Wellingtons , along with a machine gun and a Bergman automatic rifle . The Turks continued to hold a position in the north until forced to withdraw by the New Zealanders . The regiment 's casualties during the battle were four dead and nine wounded . They remained at the front until 19 July when they rotated back to Talaat Ed Dumm . 
 = = = Chaytor 's Force = = = 
 In August the brigade formed the divisional reserve located around Jericho . In September they moved forward to form the left ( northern ) flank of the Jordan Valley defences . At the same time , the brigade took command of the 1st and 2nd Battalions British West Indies Regiment and the 38th and 39th Battalions Royal Fusiliers , which were part of a larger deception force commanded by the divisional commander , Chaytor . They were tasked with convincing the Turks that the next British attack would be from the Jordan Valley , while the forces were actually being realigned to attack in the west . The regiment was heavily involved in the deception , carrying out offensive patrolling , constructing dummy camps , and moving back and forwards behind the lines to give the impression of a much larger force than was actually present . 
 The British attack in the west began on 19 September ; the next day the New Zealand brigade started increasing pressure on the Turkish positions opposite them . The first breakthrough was made on 21 September , by the Auckland Mounted Rifles . At 18 : 30 the brigade was ordered to advance on <unk> Fusail , with the objective of securing a position at Damieh . By midnight the brigade had reached <unk> Fusail , and the Wellingtons were ordered to seize El Makhruk and at the same time occupy the roads leading north and west . The 9th Squadron lead the regiment , and moved along the Wadi Farah towards El Makhruk . As they closed on the village they could hear vehicles moving along the road . Pressing forward they captured four hundred prisoners , including the commander and staff of the Turkish 53rd Division , seventy transport vehicles and a large quantity of supplies . Moving on , at 04 : 30 they reached and occupied the village . The 2nd and 9th Squadrons remained at El <unk> , while the 6th Squadron continued north @-@ west for another two thousand yards ( 1 @,@ 800 m ) to occupy the neighbouring village of Tel El Mazar where they captured even more Turkish supplies and equipment . On 23 September it was apparent that the Turkish Fourth Army was trying to withdraw north . The brigade was ordered to try and intercept them . The 6th Squadron , with a West Indies battalion , were left to guard the Damieh bridge , while the remainder of the brigade moved towards Es Salt , which they occupied at 16 : 20 the same day . 
 The next day , 24 September , the brigade continued its advance by heading towards Suweileh , with the Wellingtons protecting the open flank . The next day the ANZAC mounted division was ordered to capture Amman . The Wellingtons provided the vanguard , and at 07 : 45 , two miles north @-@ west of Amman , the 9th Squadron , in the lead , was engaged by machine @-@ gun and rifle fire and could see Turkish cavalry in the distance . At 08 : 10 the 2nd Squadron moved forward to support the 9th , but came under fire from two redoubts . They took cover and were able to bring enfilade fire onto the redoubts and also onto a force of Turkish reinforcements preparing a counter @-@ attack . At 10 : 00 the 9th Squadron were relieved by the 2nd Australian Light Horse Brigade . Manoeuvring enabled the division to press forward , forcing the Turkish defenders to retire . At 11 : 30 the regiment , with the Canterbury Mounted Rifles , were ordered to assault Amman . Leaving the 2nd Squadron to deal with concealed machine @-@ gun posts , the rest continued the attack . By 14 : 40 they had closed on Amman and the 9th Squadron had captured a hill in front of Stone Tower . At 15 : 00 the Canterbury Mounted Rifles galloped into the town and all resistance there ceased . The regiment pressed forward along the Wadi Amman and captured three artillery pieces . By 16 : 30 all Turkish positions had been taken , along with hundreds of prisoners . That was the last battle of the campaign fought by the New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade . The regiment camped beside the town until 29 September , when they left for Ziza to assist the 2nd Light Horse Brigade , who had captured five thousand prisoners . On 1 October they set out to return to the Jordan Valley . 
 = = Post war = = 
 The regiment 's part in the war was now effectively over . On 4 October they camped to the north @-@ west of Jericho for the next four days . They then moved back to their old camp at the Mar Elias monastery , and eventually reached Richon le Zion on 14 October . 
 By January 1919 , the regiment were still waiting to return home , and had begun education courses , continuation training and playing sports . This occupied them until March when a revolt broke out in Egypt , and the regiment drew its equipment back out of storage and headed for the Nile Delta . Posted to <unk> , all of the regiment 's squadrons , except the 9th which went to Cairo , began policing the riots and trying to stop looting . Once the rioting had been quelled , the regiment once again waited to return home . Their return finally began on 30 June 1919 , when the majority of the brigade left the Suez Canal for New Zealand and the Wellington Mounted Rifles Regiment ceased to be a unit . 
 = = = Casualties = = = 
 During its service 369 of the regiment 's men died from all causes , either killed in action , died of wounds or of disease . Another 453 men were wounded , some more than once . More than half of the dead , 207 men , were killed during the seven months they fought in the static trench warfare of the Gallipoli Campaign ; another 129 men were killed during their two years of more mobile warfare in the Sinai and Palestine Campaign . Gallipoli also accounted for more than half of the wounded , a total of 258 men compared to 195 men who were wounded in Sinai and Palestine . 
 Many of the Gallipoli dead have no known grave . The Commonwealth War Graves Commission Chunuk Bair Cemetery , constructed on the site where the Turks buried Allied war dead after the evacuation , has 632 graves of which only ten men have been identified . Similarly , the nearby Hill 60 Cemetery has another 788 graves , of which only seventy @-@ six were identified . 
 = = = Honours = = = 
 Several men of the regiment were recognised for their service by the British Empire awards system . The regiment 's first commanding officer , Meldrum , was invested as a Companion of the Order of the Bath , a Companion of the Order of St Michael and St George and awarded the Distinguished Service Order ( DSO ) . His successor , Whyte , was also invested with a DSO , as well as a Bar as a second award . Another four officers were also invested with a DSO , while seven officers were awarded a Military Cross , one was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire , and another a Member of the Order of the British Empire . The regiment 's other ranks were awarded five Distinguished Conduct Medals and twenty Military Medals , and there were fifty @-@ nine Mentions in Despatches amongst all ranks , some men being mentioned more than once . 
 = Pusztai affair = 
 The Pusztai affair is a controversy that began in 1998 . Protein scientist Árpád Pusztai went public with unpublished research he was conducting at the Rowett Institute with genetically modified potatoes . He claimed that the GM potatoes had stunted growth and repressed the subjects ' immune systems , while thickening their gut mucosa . He was severely criticized for making the announcement before the experiment was complete , much less peer @-@ reviewed , and for the experiment 's design , methodology and analysis . The study was eventually published , triggering further controversy . Pusztai was suspended and misconduct procedures were used to seize his data and ban him from speaking publicly . The Institute did not renew his annual contract . 
 = = Background = = 
 Before 1995 , no peer @-@ reviewed studies had been published investigating the safety of genetically modified food using human or animal feeding trials . In 1995 the Scottish Agriculture Environment and Fisheries Department commissioned a £ 1 @.@ 6 million three @-@ year research study to assess the safety of genetically engineered Desiree Red potatoes . The potatoes had been developed by biochemist John Gatehouse at Cambridge Agricultural Genetics ( later renamed Axis Genetics ) and had recently completed two years of field trials at Rothamsted Experimental Station . The GNA gene from the Galanthus ( snowdrop ) plant was inserted into the potato , allowing the GNA lectin protein to be synthesised . This lectin has been shown to be toxic to some insects . 
 Twenty @-@ eight studies were proposed , of which eight were selected for peer review by the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council . From these eight the Rowett Research Institute 's proposal was chosen and a combined team of academics from the Scottish Crop Research Institute , the Durham University Department of Biology and the Rowett Institute was assembled , and coordinated by Pusztai . 
 Although the tested potatoes were not a commercial variety and not intended for human consumption a contract was signed with Cambridge Agricultural Genetics , which included a profit @-@ sharing agreement , if potatoes developed using this technology were approved and released commercially . In earlier ten @-@ day feeding trials on GNA @-@ fed rats , Pusztai concluded that they did not significantly affect growth , despite some hypertrophy of the small intestine and a slight decrease of gut enzyme activity . 
 = = Experiment = = 
 The experimental potatoes had been transformed with the Galanthus nivalis agglutinin ( GNA ) gene from the Galanthus ( snowdrop ) plant , allowing the GNA lectin protein to be synthesised . This lectin is toxic to some insects . Rats were fed raw and cooked genetically modified potatoes , using unmodified Desiree Red potatoes as controls . One control group ate an unmodified Desiree Red potato spiked with the GNA snowdrop lectin . Twelve feeding experiments were conducted , ten short @-@ term ( 10 days ) and two long @-@ term ( 110 days ) . Before the experiment Pusztai and his team said they expected no differences between the rats fed modified potatoes and rats fed the non @-@ modified ones . 
 The potatoes were chosen because they were deemed substantially equivalent to non @-@ GM Desiree Red potatoes . The study used two transgenic lines of potato , both with the GNA gene inserted . They were grown in the same conditions as the non @-@ GM parent plant . According to Pusztai , the potatoes were not substantially equivalent , as one of the transgenic lines contained 20 percent less protein than the other , and the starch and sugar contents varied by up to 20 percent among the three lines . Pusztai claimed that these differences were reason enough to discontinue further experimentation . 
 Their experiment showed a statistically significant difference in the thickness of the stomach mucosa . The mucosa of rats fed raw or cooked potato modified with the GNA gene was thicker than that of rats fed the unmodified potato . The crypt length in the jejunum was greater on rats fed the raw modified potato , although there was no statistical difference observed in the rats fed the cooked potato . As these effects were not observed in rats fed the control potatoes spiked with GNA , Pusztai concluded that the differences were a result of the transformation procedure , rather than the presence of GNA . Pusztai 's collaborator Stanley Ewen said that the cauliflower mosaic virus used as a promoter could likely be the cause of the observed changes . 
 = = Announcement = = 
 On June 22 , 1998 Pusztai revealed his research findings during an interview on Granada Television 's current affairs programme World in Action titled " Eat up your genes " . He was given permission to do the interview by Rowett Institute Director Philip James . Rowett 's press officer was present at the start of filming . During the interview Pusztai said he had " concerns that some of the testing techniques are not up to what we thought it was necessary to do , and therefore we should have more testing . " When asked why he felt concerned , he said " it was because we had done some experiments which made us feel concerned " and discussed his results in general terms . 
 Pusztai later said that at the time of the interview he was not sure if he should reveal results from experiments that had not been completed and did not think the programme would be hostile toward genetically modified food . He estimated that the experiments were 99 percent complete when the interview was conducted . He said that the rats in his experiments suffered stunted growth and had suppressed immune systems and that more safety research was required . He also said , " If you gave me the choice now , I wouldn 't eat it " and it was " very , very unfair to use our fellow citizens as guinea pigs " . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 World in Action issued a press release the day before the broadcast , stimulating numerous phone calls to Pusztai and the Institute from government , industrial , non @-@ governmental and media organisations . James says he was dismayed that unpublished data had been released and withdrew Pusztai from any further media commitments that morning . He eventually suspended Pusztai , used misconduct procedures to seize his data , banned him from speaking publicly and did not renew his annual contract . 
 Confusion reigned over just what experiments had been conducted . Pusztai had mentioned two lines of genetically modified potatoes , meaning the two GNA lines , and this was reported by the media . The Rowett institute mistakenly assumed the media was talking about a second line transformed with concanavalin A ( ConA ) , a Jack Bean lectin that is toxic to mammals . Transgenic ConA Potatoes had been developed , but had never been tested . Two press releases issued by the Rowett Institute on the 10th and 11th praised Pusztai 's research and supported increased safety tests on genetically modified food . The press releases also said that the potatoes were modified with ConA , adding to the confusion . Pusztai claimed that he had not seen the press releases before they went out and had no opportunity to correct the mistake . James says that he drafted it and Pusztai rewrote one section , but did not see the final copy . The mistaken belief that the ConA gene was inserted into the potato led scientist Sir Robert May and Agricultural Minister Jack Cunningham to release statements to the media saying that the findings were not surprising , as a known poison had been added to the potato . Some scientists still dismiss Pusztai 's work over this error . 
 = = = Audit = = = 
 The Rowett Institute audited Pusztai 's work on 22 October 1998 . It concluded that his data did not support his conclusions . In February 1999 , 22 scientists from 13 countries , organised by Friends of the Earth , published a memo responding to the audit . It stated that their independent examination supported Pusztai 's conclusions and that he should have been concerned by his findings . 
 = = = Royal Society peer review = = = 
 On 19 February the Royal Society publicly announced that a committee would review his work . World in Action reporters Laurie Flynn and Michael Sean Gillard claimed that this was an unusual step , as the Royal Society did not normally conduct peer reviews . The data were sent to six anonymous reviewers and the resulting review was published in June 1999 . It stated that Pusztai 's experiments were poorly designed , contained uncertainties in the composition of diets , tested too few rats , used incorrect statistical methods and lacked consistency within experiments . Pusztai responded by saying the reviewers had reviewed only internal Rowett reports , which did not include the design or methodology of the experiments . 
 = = = Lancet response = = = 
 The editors of The Lancet published an editorial in May 1999 in which they denounced all parties involved , criticizing Pusztai for " unwisely " announcing his results on television and stating that scientists should publish " results in the scientific press , not through the popular media " ; the editorial also denounced the Royal Society 's review as " breathtaking impertinence " . 
 = = Publication = = 
 The data were published as a letter in the The Lancet in October 1999 , co @-@ authored by Ewen . It reported significant differences in the thickness of the gut epithelium of rats fed genetically modified potatoes ( compared to those fed the control diet ) , but no differences in growth or immune system function were suggested . 
 The letter was reviewed by six reviewers – three times the Lancet 's usual number . Four reviewers found it acceptable after revisions . A fifth thought it was flawed , but wanted it published " to avoid suspicions of a conspiracy against Pusztai and to give colleagues a chance to see the data for themselves " . The sixth , John Pickett of the Institute of Arable Crops Research , also said it was flawed . After consulting with the Royal Society , Pickett publicly criticised The Lancet for agreeing to publish the study . The study , which used data held by Ewen , who was not subject to the veto of Pusztai 's work , reported significant differences in thickness of the gut epithelium between control and test subjects , but did not mention growth or immunity problems . 
 The published work was criticised on the grounds that the unmodified potatoes were not a fair control diet and that any rats fed only potatoes would suffer from protein deficiency . Pusztai responded to these criticisms by saying that all the experimental diets had the same protein and energy content , and that the food intake of all rats was the same . In an interview , Pickett later said that Lancet editor Richard Horton must have had a political motive for publishing the paper because the referees had rejected it . According to Pusztai this claim was repeated by academic critics who assumed that Pickett 's use of the plural suggested that the study had failed peer review . 
 Horton claimed that he had received a " very aggressive " phone call calling him " immoral " and threatening that if he published the paper it would " have implications for his personal position " as editor . Peter Lachmann , the former vice @-@ president and biological secretary of the Royal Society and president of the Academy of Medical Sciences , acknowledged making the call but denies that he threatened Horton and says the call was to " discuss his error of judgment " in publishing the letter and to discuss the " moral difficulties about publishing bad science " . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Ewen retired following publication , claiming that his career options had been " blocked at a very high level " . 
 A survey by the European Food Safety Authority GMO Panel Working Group on Animal Feeding Trials concluded : " Results obtained from testing GM food and feed in rodents indicate that large ( at least 100 @-@ fold ) ' safety ' margins exist between animal exposure levels without observed adverse effects and estimated human daily intake . The studies did not show any biologically relevant differences in the parameters tested between control and test animals . " 
 In 2005 Pusztai was given a whistleblower award from the Federation of German Scientists . 
 = Whatever It Takes ( Leona Lewis song ) = 
 " Whatever It Takes " is a song by British singer @-@ songwriter Leona Lewis from her debut studio album , Spirit ( 2007 ) . Lewis co @-@ wrote it with Tony Reyes and Novel ; the latter also co @-@ produced it with Dallas Austin . It was the first song to be written for Spirit and one of only two songs on the album to involve Lewis in the writing process . It is a gospel @-@ pop @-@ influenced track . The song garnered a mixed response from music critics ; it was praised for its upbeat instrumentation but criticised for lacking any " kick " . Upon the release of Spirit , the song debuted at number 61 on the UK Singles Chart due to strong digital download sales . Lewis has performed the song at the 2010 Rock in Rio and on her debut concert tour , The Labyrinth . It was later included on the subsequent DVD release called The Labyrinth Tour : Live from the O2 . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 Co @-@ written by Lewis with Novel and Tony Reyes , " Whatever It Takes " was recorded at DARP Studios and Doppler Studios , both located in Atlanta , Georgia and at Battery Studios in New York City , by Carlton Lynn . Lynn was assisted in the recording process by Lloyd Cooper ( at Doppler Studios ) and Tim Sturges ( at Battery Studios ) . It was also mixed by Lynn at DARP Studios ; Josh Houghkirk served as the assistant mixer . The song was produced by Novel and Dallas Austin . A variety of instrumentalists were enlisted for the production of " Whatever It Takes " : Eddie Horst was the string arranger , while Kenn Wagner , Olga <unk> , Amy Chang and William Pu performed violins , Karen Freer and Daniel <unk> provided cello and co @-@ writer Reyes played the guitar . Stephen Lowman and Stephen Ferrera performed drums , while Novel played the keyboard . " Whatever It Takes " makes use of a choir , which consists of <unk> Agee , <unk> Thomas , Cindy Mizelle , Michelle Cobbs , Robin Clark , " Bibi " <unk> , Tammy Lucas , Billy Porter , Bennie Diggs and <unk> Thornton ; Thornton was enlisted as the vocal contractor . Lewis provides background vocals on the track , and the production process was overseen by Kimberly L. Smith . As she introduced the track before performing it on her debut concert tour The Labyrinth ( 2010 ) , Lewis revealed that " Whatever It Takes " was the first song to be written for Spirit . 
 = = Composition and critical reception = = 
 " Whatever It Takes " is an upbeat , midtempo gospel @-@ pop song which lasts for a duration of 3 : 27 . The song was composed in the key of Eb major using common time at 96 beats per minute . Lewis ' vocal range spans over two octaves from low note of Bb3 to the high note of Bb5 . The song garnered a mixed response from music critics . Nate Chinen for The New York Times was complimentary of " Whatever It Takes " , writing that it is an " upbeat anthem . " A reviewer for The Sun also described the song as a " soaring anthem . " Sarah @-@ Louise James for the Daily Star wrote that although the element of gospel music was has a nice outro , it " lacks real kick " . Nick Levine was for Digital Spy wrote " ' Whatever It Takes ' is anchored by a rhythm track that wouldn 't shame a boy @-@ racer cruising through Harlem in his pimped @-@ up ride . " However , he noted that " Whatever It Takes " and " Best You Never Had " were Spirit 's only uptempo moments , and that Lewis tries to emulate her contemporaries too closely . Kitty Empire for The Guardian was critical of the song , writing that " Not even Dallas Austin - who has worked with Sugababes - can make ' Whatever It Takes ' any fun . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Lewis performed " Whatever It Takes " at the Rock in Rio festival held in Lisbon on 22 May 2010 . It was also included as the fourth song on the set list of The Labyrinth . It was later included on the DVD release of the tour , called The Labyrinth Tour : Live from the O2 . Lewis performed the song in the first section of the set list , along with " Brave " as the opener , " Don 't Let Me Down " , " Better in Time " and " Take a Bow " . The set was decorated in the style of a castle ; acrobats performed as they were hanging from the ceiling on large pieces of fabric while Lewis wore a gold sequined dress and thigh @-@ high boots . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Spirit standard / deluxe edition 
 " Whatever It Takes " – 3 : 27 
 Spirit United States standard / deluxe version 
 " Whatever It Takes " – 3 : 27 
 The Labyrinth Tour : Live from the O2 
 " Whatever It Takes " ( Live from the 02 ) – 3 : 26 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Recorded at DARP Studios , Atlanta , GA ; Doppler Studios , Atlanta , GA ; Battery Studios , NYC . 
 Mixed at DARP Studios , Atlanta , GA . 
 Personnel 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Spirit . 
 = = Charts = = 
 Upon the release of Spirit , " Whatever It Takes " debuted at number 61 on the strength of digital download sales in the chart issue released on 24 November 2007 . 
 = Japanese battleship Kirishima = 
 Kirishima ( <unk> ) was a warship of the Imperial Japanese Navy during World War I and World War II . Designed by British naval engineer George Thurston , she was the third launched of the four Kongō @-@ class battlecruisers . Laid down in 1912 at the Mitsubishi Shipyards in Nagasaki , Kirishima was formally commissioned in 1915 on the same day as her sister ship , Haruna . Kirishima patrolled on occasion off the Chinese coast during World War I , and helped with rescue efforts following the 1923 Great Kantō earthquake . 
 Starting in 1927 , Kirishima 's first reconstruction rebuilt her as a battleship , strengthening her armor and improving her speed . From 1934 , a second reconstruction completely rebuilt her superstructure , upgraded her engine plant , and equipped her with launch catapults for floatplanes . Now fast enough to accompany Japan 's growing carrier fleet , she was reclassified as a fast battleship . During the Second Sino @-@ Japanese War , Kirishima acted primarily as a support vessel and troop transport , moving army troops to mainland China . On the eve of World War II , she sailed as part of Vice @-@ Admiral Chuichi Nagumo 's Kido Butai as an escort for the six carriers that attacked Pearl Harbor on 7 December 1941 . 
 As part of the Third Battleship Division , Kirishima participated in many of the Imperial Japanese Navy 's early actions in 1942 , providing support for the invasion of the Dutch East Indies ( now Indonesia ) and in the Indian Ocean raid of April 1942 . During the Battle of Midway , she provided escort to Nagumo 's four carriers , before redeploying to the Solomon Islands during the Battle of Guadalcanal . She escorted Japanese carrier fleets during the battles of the Eastern Solomons and Santa Cruz Islands , before sailing as part of a bombardment force under Admiral Nobutake Kondō during the Naval Battle of Guadalcanal . On the evening of 13 November 1942 , Kirishima engaged American cruisers and destroyers alongside her sister ship Hiei . On the night of 14 / 15 November , in one of only two battleship duels of the Pacific War , Kirishima heavily damaged USS South Dakota before being crippled in turn by the battleship USS Washington . Kirishima capsized and sank in the early morning on 15 November 1942 in Ironbottom Sound . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 Kirishima was the third of the Imperial Japanese Navy 's Kongō @-@ class battlecruisers , a group of capital ships designed by the British naval engineer George Thurston . The class was ordered in 1910 in the Japanese Emergency Naval Expansion Bill after the commissioning of HMS Invincible in 1908 . The four battlecruisers of the Kongō class were designed to match the naval capabilities of the other major powers at the time ; they have been called the battlecruiser version of the British ( formerly Turkish ) battleship HMS Erin . With their heavy armament and armor protection ( which took up 23 @.@ 3 % of their approximately 30 @,@ 000 ton displacement ) , Kirishima and her sister ships were vastly superior to any other Japanese capital ship afloat at the time . 
 The keel of Kirishima was laid down at the Nagasaki shipyards of Mitsubishi Heavy Industries on 17 March 1912 , with most of the parts used in her construction manufactured in Japan . Due to a shortage of available slipways , Kirishima and her sister ship Haruna were the first two capital ships of the Imperial Japanese Navy to be built in private Japanese shipyards . After her launch on 1 December 1913 , Kirishima 's fitting @-@ out began later that month . On 15 December 1914 , Captain <unk> <unk> was assigned as her chief equipping officer , and she was completed on 19 April 1915 . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Kirishima 's main battery consisted of eight 14 @-@ inch ( 36 cm ) heavy @-@ caliber main guns in four twin turrets ( two forward , two aft ) . The turrets were noted by the US Office of Naval Intelligence to be " similar to the British 15 @-@ inch turrets " , with improvements made in flash @-@ tightness . Each of her main guns could fire high @-@ explosive or armor @-@ piercing shells a maximum distance of 38 @,@ 770 yards ( 19 @.@ 14 nmi ; 35 @.@ 45 km ) at a firing rate of two shells per minute . The ship 's magazines could accommodate ninety rounds of ammunition for each of the main guns , which had an approximate barrel life of 250 – 280 shots . In 1941 , dyes were introduced for the armor @-@ piercing shells of the four Kongō @-@ class battleships , with Kirishima 's shells using blue dye . 
 Her secondary battery was originally sixteen 6 @-@ inch ( 15 cm ) 50 @-@ caliber medium guns in single casemates ( all located amidships ) , eight 3 @-@ inch ( 7 @.@ 6 cm ) anti @-@ aircraft guns , and eight submerged 21 @-@ inch ( 53 cm ) torpedo tubes . The sixteen 6 @-@ inch / 50 caliber guns were capable of firing 5 – 6 rounds per minute , with a barrel life of 500 rounds . The 6 @-@ inch / 50 caliber gun was capable of firing both antiaircraft and antiship shells , though the positioning of the guns on Kirishima made antiaircraft firing impractical . During her second reconstruction , the 3 @-@ inch guns were removed and replaced with eight 5 @-@ inch ( 13 cm ) guns . These guns could fire between 8 and 14 rounds per minute , with a barrel life of 800 – 1500 rounds . Designed to fire antiaircraft , antiship , and illumination shells , the 5 @-@ inch / 40 caliber had the widest variety of shot type of Kirishima 's guns . During her second reconstruction , Kirishima was also fitted with a small number of 1 @-@ inch ( 2 @.@ 5 cm ) Type 96 antiaircraft autocannons . 
 = = Service = = 
 = = = 1914 – 1927 : Battlecruiser = = = 
 Kirishima was formally commissioned on 19 April 1915 , and along with Haruna was assigned to the 1st Battleship Division of the First Fleet . After seven months of trials , she was reassigned to the 3rd Battleship Division of the Second Fleet , with Captain Shima Takeshi in overall command of the ship . In April 1916 , Kirishima and Haruna departed Sasebo Naval Base to patrol the East China Sea for ten days . She remained in Sasebo until April 1917 , when she again deployed to the Chinese coast with her sister ships Haruna and Kongō . Her last patrol operation of World War I was off the Chinese and Korean coast in April 1918 . In July 1918 , Kirishima acted as the transport of Prince Arthur of Connaught for his extended cruise to Canada , before returning to Japan . 
 Following the end of World War I , the Japanese Empire gained control of former German possessions in the central Pacific per the terms of the Treaty of Versailles . Due to Japan 's warm relations with the British Empire and the United States at the time , Kirishima and other Japanese warships became significantly less active than during the war . On 1 December 1920 , she was reassigned to the Third Division of the Second Fleet . Other than a patrol alongside Kongō and Nagato off the Chinese coast in August 1921 , Kirishima remained in Sasebo . On 10 September 1922 , she collided with the destroyer Fuji during fleet maneuvers , with both ships sustaining minor damage . Following the Great Kantō earthquake of September 1923 , the capital ships of the Imperial Japanese Navy assisted in rescue work until the end of the month . She was placed in reserve in December 1923 . 
 With the conclusion of World War I and the signing of the Washington Naval Treaty , the size of the Imperial Japanese Navy was significantly lessened , with a ratio of 5 : 5 : 3 required between the capital ships of the United Kingdom , the United States , and Japan . The treaty also banned Japan from building any new capital ships until 1931 , with no capital ship permitted to exceed 35 @,@ 000 tons . Provided that new additions did not exceed 3 @,@ 000 tons , existing capital ships were allowed to be upgraded with improved torpedo bulges and deck armor . By the time the Washington Treaty had been fully implemented in Japan , only three classes of World War I @-@ era capital ships — the Fusō and Ise @-@ class battleships , and the Kongō @-@ class battlecruisers — remained active . 
 = = = 1927 – 1934 : Battleship = = = 
 Stripped of the ability to construct new capital ships , the Imperial Japanese Navy instead opted to significantly upgrade and reconfigure their existing battleships and battlecruisers . Kirishima was placed in Third Reserve in December 1926 , before beginning her first reconstruction in early 1927 . Horizontal armor over the ammunition magazines was strengthened , and she was also fitted with anti @-@ torpedo bulges , as permitted by the Washington Treaty . To upgrade Kirishima 's speed , the 36 coal @-@ fired Yarrow boilers were removed and replaced with ten new mixed @-@ firing Kampon boilers . To allow for more equipment to be installed on board , her forward superstructure was reconstructed in the Pagoda mast style , facilitating the removal of one of her three funnels . The reconstruction of the Kongō @-@ class battlecruisers added an additional 4 @,@ 000 tons of armor to the ships , directly violating the terms of the Washington Treaty . On 16 April 1930 , the reconstruction was declared complete . 
 Six days after Kirishima 's reconstruction was completed , Japan pledged to scrap several battleships and signed the London Naval Treaty , which placed further bans on capital ship construction until 1937 . From August to October 1930 , she was outfitted with the equipment necessary to equip reconnaissance seaplanes . Kirishima patrolled the coast of China near Shanghai in April 1932 , before she was again placed in the Third Reserve . 
 In September 1931 , Japan invaded Manchuria . On 25 February 1933 , based on a report by the Lytton Commission , the League of Nations agreed that Japan had violated Chinese sovereignty in its invasion of Manchuria . Refusing to accept the organization 's judgment , Japan withdrew from the League of Nations the same day . Immediately following , Japan also withdrew from the Washington and London Naval Treaties , thus removing all restrictions on the number and size of her capital ships . 
 = = = 1934 – 1941 : Fast battleship = = = 
 On 18 November 1934 , Kirishima was drydocked in Sasebo Naval Arsenal in preparation for her second reconstruction , which would enable her to function alongside Japan 's growing fleet of fast carriers . Her stern was lengthened by 26 feet ( 7 @.@ 9 m ) , while her superstructure was rebuilt to allow for new fire @-@ control mechanisms . Her boilers were removed and replaced with eight new oil @-@ fired Kampon Boilers , and she received newer geared turbines . The elevation of her main and secondary battery was increased , and she was equipped with two Nakajima E8N " Dave " and Kawanishi E7K " Alf " reconnaissance floatplanes . To this end , aircraft catapults and launch @-@ rails were also refitted . Her older 3 @-@ inch guns were removed and replaced with eight 5 @-@ inch dual @-@ purpose guns . She was also outfitted with twenty Type 96 25 mm antiaircraft guns in twin turrets , while two of her 6 inch guns and her remaining torpedo tubes were removed . 
 Kirishima 's armor was also extensively upgraded . Her main belt was strengthened to a uniform thickness of 8 inches ( as opposed to varying thicknesses of 6 – 8 inches before the upgrades ) , while diagonal bulkheads of a depth ranging from 5 to 8 inches ( 127 to 203 mm ) reinforced the main armored belt . The turret armor was strengthened to 10 inches ( 254 mm ) , while 4 inches ( 102 mm ) were added to portions of the deck armor . The armor around her ammunition magazines was also strengthened over the course of the refit . The reconstruction was declared complete on 8 June 1936 . Capable of speeds of up to 30 @.@ 5 knots ( 56 @.@ 5 km / h ; 35 @.@ 1 mph ) , Kirishima was reclassified as a fast battleship . 
 In August 1936 , Kirishima departed Sasebo alongside Fuso to patrol the Chinese coast off Amoy . From March 1937 to April 1939 , she was frequently deployed as a support vessel and troop transport during the Second Sino @-@ Japanese War . In November 1938 , Kirishima was designated the command vessel of the Third Battleship Division , and was under the command of Rear Admiral Chuichi Nagumo . In November 1939 , she was placed in reserve and fitted with additional armor on the front faces of her turrets and barbettes . 
 On 11 November 1941 , after a series of transfers between Japanese naval bases , Kirishima was outfitted in preparation for coming hostilities and assigned — alongside her sister ships — to the Third Battleship Division . On 26 November , Kirishima departed Hitokappu Bay , Kurile Islands in the company of Hiei and six Japanese fast carriers of the First Air Fleet Striking Force ( Akagi , Kaga , Sōryū , Hiryū , Shōkaku , and Zuikaku ) . On 7 December 1941 , aircraft from these six carriers attacked the United States Pacific Fleet at their home base of Pearl Harbor , sinking four U.S. Navy battleships and numerous other vessels . Following the attack and the declaration of war by the United States , Kirishima returned to Japan . 
 = = = 1942 : Combat and loss = = = 
 On 8 January 1942 , Kirishima departed Japan for Truk Naval Base in the Caroline Islands alongside the Carrier Strike Force . She provided escort during the invasion of New Britain on 17 January before returning to Truk . She sortied again in response to American carrier raids in the Marshall and Gilbert Islands . In March 1942 , while supporting fleet operations off of Java in the Dutch East Indies , one of Kirishima 's floatplanes bombed an enemy merchant vessel . South of Java , the Japanese fleet was surprised by the appearance of the destroyer USS Edsall . Hiei and Chikuma initially opened fire on the ship but failed to score any hits . After dive @-@ bombers from three of Admiral Nagumo 's carriers immobilized the destroyer , Kirishima and the other two ships resumed firing on Edsall until she sank . 
 In April 1942 , Kirishima and the Third Battleship division joined five fleet carriers and two cruisers in an attack against British naval bases in the Indian Ocean . On 5 April — Easter Sunday — the Japanese fleet attacked the harbor at Colombo in Ceylon , while seaplanes from the Tone spotted two fleeing British cruisers , both of which were later sunk by aerial attack . A floatplane from Kirishima also strafed a withdrawing oil tanker . On 8 April , Japanese carrier aircraft attacked the Royal Navy base at Trincomalee in Ceylon , only to find that all of Admiral James Somerville 's remaining warships had withdrawn the previous night . Returning from the attack , a floatplane from Kirishima 's sister ship Haruna spotted the aircraft carrier HMS Hermes and escorting destroyer HMAS Vampire , which was quickly sunk by a massive aerial attack . Upon returning to Japan , Kirishima was drydocked and her secondary armament configuration modified with the addition of 25 mm antiaircraft guns in twin mounts . 
 In June 1942 , Kirishima sailed as part of the Carrier Strike Force during the Battle of Midway , providing escort for Admiral Nagumo 's four fast carriers alongside Haruna . Following the disastrous battle , during which all four Japanese carriers were lost , she took on survivors from the four <unk> before returning to Japan . In August 1942 , she departed Japan for the Solomon Islands in the company of Hiei , three carriers , three cruisers and eleven destroyers , in response to the American invasion of Guadalcanal . She escorted Japanese carriers during the Battle of the Eastern Solomons , during which the light carrier Ryūjō was sunk . Following the battle , the fleet returned to Truk Naval Base . During the Battle of the Santa Cruz Islands , Kirishima was part of Rear Admiral Hiroaki Abe 's Vanguard Force , which provided distant cover to Nagumo 's carrier groups . She was attacked by American dive @-@ bombers on 26 October , yet remained undamaged . 
 On 10 November 1942 , Kirishima departed Truk alongside Hiei and eleven destroyers in preparation to shell American positions on Guadalcanal in advance of a major transport convoy of Japanese troops . U.S. Navy reconnaissance aircraft spotted the Japanese fleet several days in advance , and deployed a force of two heavy cruisers , three light cruisers and eight destroyers under the command of Rear Admiral Daniel J. Callaghan in Ironbottom Sound to meet them . At 01 : 24 on 13 November , the Japanese force was detected 28 @,@ 000 yards ( 26 km ) out by the light cruiser USS Helena . In the ensuing First Naval Battle of Guadalcanal , the American task force concentrated the majority of their firepower on the battleship Hiei . This enabled Kirishima to score multiple hits on the heavy cruiser USS San Francisco and Helena , while Hiei crippled the light cruiser USS Atlanta , killing Rear Admiral Norman Scott . Both Hiei and Kirishima then raked San Francisco with shellfire , killing Rear Admiral Callaghan . However , Hiei was in turn crippled by San Francisco and several American destroyers . With Hiei effectively out of the battle , Kirishima and the surviving destroyers withdrew to the north . On the morning of 13 November , she was ordered to tow Hiei to safety . However , the heavily damaged battleship came under air attack , and was eventually abandoned and scuttled . 
 On the evening of 13 November , Kirishima and her escorting destroyers were joined by the Fourth Cruiser Division and prepared to reenter Ironbottom Sound under the command of Admiral Nobutake Kondō . In the early morning of 14 November , three Japanese heavy cruisers bombarded Guadalcanal before withdrawing . Aware of the damage suffered by his ships the previous night , Admiral William Halsey reinforced the American naval units with the new battleships USS South Dakota and USS Washington . The two fleets made contact on 14 November at 23 : 01 . They exchanged gunfire and torpedoes , with four American destroyers disabled ( three would later sink ) , while the destroyer Ayanami was crippled by Washington and South Dakota . 
 At 23 : 40 , South Dakota suffered a series of electrical failures , crippling her radar , radios and gun batteries . Kirishima and the heavy cruiser Atago illuminated the battleship with searchlights , and almost all of Kondō 's force opened fire . Kirishima achieved hits on South Dakota with at least three 14 @-@ inch salvos and several salvos from her secondary battery , which knocked out the battleship 's fire control systems and communications but failed to penetrate her armor . Washington , undetected , managed to evade the Japanese fleet , and at midnight fired on Kirishima from 5 @,@ 800 yards ( 5 @,@ 300 m ) , point blank range for Washington 's 16 @-@ inch / 45 @-@ caliber guns , which were easily capable of penetrating Kirishima 's armor at their maximum range . Kirishima was hit by at least nine primary and seventeen secondary battery projectiles , destroying her bow 14 @-@ inch turrets , jamming her rear 14 @-@ inch turrets and steering , setting her superstructure afire , and causing the battleship to list 18 degrees to starboard . Initially , the light cruiser Nagara attempted to tow her out of Ironbottom Sound . When it became clear she could not be salvaged , the surviving Japanese destroyers evacuated Admiral Kondō and the remaining survivors . Kirishima capsized at 03 : 25 on the morning of 15 November 1942 , with 212 crewmen lost . 
 = Delaware Route 3 = 
 Delaware Route 3 ( DE 3 ) is a state highway northeast of Wilmington in New Castle County , Delaware . The route runs from an interchange at Interstate 495 ( I @-@ 495 ) in Edgemoor north to DE 92 in Brandywine Hundred . The route passes through the suburban areas of Brandywine Hundred , Bellefonte , and Arden . It intersects U.S. Route 13 ( US 13 ) in Edgemoor , US 13 Business ( US 13 Bus . ) in Bellefonte , and I @-@ 95 near Bellevue State Park . DE 3 was built as a state highway during the 1920s and 1930s . By 1968 , the route was designated between US 13 ( now US 13 Bus . ) north to DE 92 on Marsh Road . The route was moved to its current alignment and terminus by 1984 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 DE 3 begins at an intersection with Hay Road at an interchange with I @-@ 495 in an industrial section of Edgemoor , heading northwest on four @-@ lane divided Edgemoor Road . After the I @-@ 495 interchange , the road passes over Amtrak 's Northeast Corridor and intersects US 13 in areas of businesses . Past this intersection , DE 3 enters a more residential area as a three @-@ lane undivided road with two southbound lanes and one northbound lane . The route narrows to two lanes and turns west and north , coming to an intersection with US 13 Bus . At this point , DE 3 turns northeast to form a concurrency with that route on four @-@ lane undivided Philadelphia Pike , running through residential and commercial areas . DE 3 splits from US 13 Bus. in Bellefonte by turning northwest onto Washington Street Extension , a four @-@ lane divided highway . The route passes to the southwest of Mount Pleasant High School and turns north onto Marsh Road , a four @-@ lane undivided road that forms the western boundary of Bellevue State Park . The road becomes a divided highway as it comes to an interchange with I @-@ 95 . 
 Immediately after this interchange , DE 3 crosses under CSX 's Philadelphia Subdivision and narrows into a two @-@ lane undivided road that heads into Brandywine Hundred , passing residential neighborhoods and a few businesses . The route gains a second southbound lane between Wilson Road / <unk> Road and Silverside Road . The road turns northeast and forms the western border of Arden . DE 3 turns north again and runs between neighborhoods to the west and woodland to the east , ending at an intersection with DE 92 . Marsh Road continues north past this intersection as an unnumbered road toward the Pennsylvania border . 
 DE 3 has an annual average daily traffic count ranging from a high of 13 @,@ 893 vehicles at the Carr Road intersection to a low of 5 @,@ 021 vehicles on Washington Street Extension . None of DE 3 is part of the National Highway System . 
 = = History = = 
 What is now DE 3 existed as a county road by 1920 . Four years later , the road was upgraded to a state highway between Philadelphia Pike and Harvey Road . The state highway was extended north to Naamans Road by 1931 . By 1968 , DE 3 was designated to run from US 13 ( now US 13 Business ) north to DE 92 along Marsh Road . DE 4 was extended onto the Washington Street Extension portion of present @-@ day DE 3 three years later . DE 4 was removed from Washington Street Extension by 1981 . Three years later , DE 3 was extended to I @-@ 495 in Edgemoor . At this time , DE 3 was realigned to follow Washington Street Extension from Marsh Road to a concurrency with US 13 Business , heading southwest along that route before heading southeast along Edgemoor Road . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in New Castle County . 
 = Farleigh Hungerford Castle = 
 Farleigh Hungerford Castle , sometimes called Farleigh Castle or Farley Castle , is a medieval castle in Farleigh Hungerford , Somerset , England . The castle was built in two phases : the inner court was constructed between 1377 and 1383 by Sir Thomas Hungerford , who made his fortune working as a steward to John of Gaunt . The castle was built to a quadrangular design , already slightly old @-@ fashioned , on the site of an existing manor house overlooking the River Frome . A park was attached to the castle , requiring the destruction of a local village . His son , Sir Walter Hungerford , a successful knight and courtier to Henry V , became rich during the Hundred Years War with France and extended the castle with an additional , outer court , enclosing the parish church in the process . By Walter 's death in 1449 , the substantial castle was richly appointed and its chapel decorated with murals . 
 The castle largely remained in the hands of the Hungerford family over the next two centuries , despite periods during the War of the Roses in which it was held by the Crown following the attainder and execution of members of the family . At the outbreak of the English Civil War in 1642 , the castle , modernized to the latest Tudor and Stuart fashions , was held by Sir Edward Hungerford . Edward declared his support for Parliament , becoming a leader of the Roundheads in Wiltshire . Farleigh Hungerford was seized by Royalist forces in 1643 , but recaptured by Parliament without a fight near the end of the conflict in 1645 . As a result , it escaped slighting following the war , unlike many other castles in the south @-@ west of England . 
 The last member of the Hungerford family to hold the castle , Sir Edward Hungerford , inherited it in 1657 , but his gambling and expensive living forced him to sell the property in 1686 . By the 18th century the castle was no longer lived in by its owners and fell into disrepair ; in 1730 it was bought by the Houlton family , when much of it was broken up for salvage . Antiquarian and tourist interest in the now ruined castle increased through the 18th and 19th centuries . The castle chapel was repaired in 1779 and became a museum of curiosities , complete with the murals rediscovered on its walls in 1844 and a number of rare lead anthropomorphic coffins from the mid @-@ 17th century . In the 1915 Farleigh Hungerford Castle was sold to the Office of Works and a controversial restoration programme began . It is now owned by English Heritage , who operate it as a tourist attraction , and the castle is a Grade I listed building and a Scheduled Ancient Monument . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 11th - 14th centuries = = = 
 After the Norman Conquest of England , the manor of <unk> in Somerset was granted by William the Conqueror to Roger de Courcelles . <unk> evolved from the Anglo @-@ Saxon name <unk> @-@ <unk> , meaning " the <unk> pasture " , and itself later evolved into Farleigh . William Rufus gave the manor to Hugh de Montfort , who renamed it Farleigh Montfort . The manor passed from the Montfort family to Bartholomew de <unk> in the early years of the reign of Edward III . 
 Sir Thomas Hungerford bought the property from the <unk> family in 1369 for £ 733 . By 1385 the manor was known as Farley Hungerford , after its new owner . Sir Thomas Hungerford was a knight and courtier , who became rich as the Chief Steward to the powerful John of Gaunt and then the first recorded Speaker of the House of Commons . Thomas decided to make Farleigh Hungerford his principal home and , between 1377 and 1383 , built a castle on the site ; unfortunately he did not acquire the appropriate licence to crenellate from the king before commencing building , and Thomas had to acquire a royal pardon in 1383 . 
 Thomas 's new castle adapted the existing manor complex overlooking the head of the River Frome . Although the castle sat on a low spur it was overlooked by higher ground from the west and the north and was not ideally placed from a purely defensive perspective . Contemporary castle designs included the construction of huge , palatial tower keeps and apartments for the most powerful nobles , such as Kenilworth , expanded by Thomas 's patron , John of Gaunt ; or the construction of smaller , French influenced castles such as that seen at nearby Nunney Castle , built by one of Thomas 's fellow nouveau riche landowners . By contrast , Farleigh Hungerford drew on the tradition of quadrangular castles that had begun in France during the early 13th century , in which the traditional buildings of an unfortified manor were enclosed by a four @-@ sided outer wall and protected with corner towers . The style was well established by the late 14th century , even slightly old fashioned . 
 The castle was formed around a court , later called the inner court , enclosed by a curtain wall with a circular tower on each corner and a gatehouse at the front ; the north @-@ east tower was larger than the others , perhaps to provide additional defences . Over time the towers acquired their own names : the north @-@ west tower was called the <unk> Tower ; the north @-@ east the <unk> Tower and the south @-@ west the Lady Tower . The ground fell away sharply on most sides of the castle , but its south and west sides were protected with a wet moat , using a dam fed from a nearby spring using a pipe . The gatehouse had twin towers and a drawbridge . 
 Opposite the entrance , and running across the middle of the court , was the great hall of the castle , with a grand porch and steps leading up to the first floor , where prestigious guests would have been entertained amongst carved wall @-@ panels and murals . The design of the hall may have emulated Gaunt 's hall at Kenilworth ; at the very least , it was a powerful symbol of Thomas 's authority and status . The west side of the inner court included the castle kitchen , bakery , well and other service facilities ; on the east side was the lord 's great chamber and a range of other accommodation for other guests . Behind the great hall was a smaller courtyard or garden . Thomas appears to have built up his new castle in stages , with the curtain wall being built first , with the corner towers added afterwards . 
 A park was established next to the castle ; a park was highly prestigious and it enabled Thomas to engage in hunting , provided the castle with a supply of venison as well as generating income . Most of the village of Wittenham had to be destroyed to make way for the park and the site eventually became a deserted village . A new parish church , St Leonard 's Chapel , was built by Thomas just outside the castle , after he had demolished the earlier , simpler 12th @-@ century church during the construction of the inner court . Thomas died in 1397 and was buried in the newly built St Anne 's Chapel , forming the north transept of St Leonard 's Chapel . 
 = = = 15th century = = = 
 Sir Walter Hungerford inherited Farleigh Hungerford castle upon the death of his mother , Joan , in 1412 . Walter 's first political patron was John of Gaunt 's son , Henry IV , and later he became a close companion of Henry 's own son , Henry V ; Henry V made Walter , like his father before him , the Speaker of the Commons in 1414 . Walter prospered : he became known as an expert jouster , in 1415 fought at the battle of Agincourt during the Hundred Years War , was made Steward of the Royal Household and was a major figure in government during the 1420s , serving as the Treasurer of England and as one of the legal guardians of the young Henry VI . Despite having to pay a ransom of £ 3 @,@ 000 to the French after his son was captured in 1429 , Walter , by now created Baron Hungerford , amassed considerable wealth from his various sources of income , which included the right to one hundred marks ( £ 66 ) per year from the town of Marlborough , the wool taxes from Wells , and the ransoms gained from the taking of French prisoners . As a result , he was able to buy more land , acquiring around 110 new manors and estates over the course of his life . 
 Between 1430 and 1445 Walter expanded the castle considerably . An outer court was built to the south side of the original castle , with its own towers and an additional gatehouse which formed the new entrance to the castle . These new defences were less strong than those of the original inner court , and indeed the eastern gatehouse was not crenellated at the time . A barbican was built , extending the older gatehouse to the inner court . The new court enclosed the parish church , which became the castle chapel , with a replacement church being built by Walter in the village . Walter had the chapel decorated with a number of murals , depicting scenes from the story of Saint George and the Dragon ; Saint George was a favoured saint of Henry V , and associated with the prestigious Order of the Garter , of which Walter was a proud member . A house was built next to the chapel for the use of the chantry priest . Walter also legally combined the two parishes of Farleigh in Somerset and Wittenham in Wiltshire , which formed part of his castle 's park , altering the county boundaries of Somerset and Wiltshire in the process . As a village , Wittenham disappeared completely . 
 Walter left the castle to his son , Robert Hungerford . Records of the castle at the time show considerable luxuries , including valuable tapestries up to 60 feet ( 18 @.@ 3 m ) long , silk bedclothes , rich furs and silver bowls and utensils . Unfortunately , Robert 's eldest son , the later Lord Moleyns , was captured by the French at the battle of Castillon , which was fought at the end of the Hundred Years War in 1453 . The huge ransom of over £ 10 @,@ 000 required to ensure his release financially crippled the family , and Lord Moleyns did not return to England until 1459 . By this time England had entered the period of civil conflict between the Houses of York and Lancaster known as the Wars of the Roses . Moleyns was a Lancastrian supporter and fought against the Yorkists in 1460 and 1461 , leading to first his exile and then his attainder , under which Farleigh Hungerford Castle was seized by the Crown . Moleyns was captured and executed in 1464 , and his eldest son , Thomas , met the same fate in 1469 . 
 The Yorkist Edward IV gave Farleigh Hungerford Castle to his brother Richard , then Duke of Gloucester , in 1462 . Edward and Richard 's brother George Plantagenet may have taken up residence at the castle ; his daughter Margaret was certainly born there . Richard became king in 1483 and gave the castle to John Howard , the Duke of Norfolk . Meanwhile , the late Robert 's youngest son , Sir Walter , had become a close supporter of Edward IV ; nonetheless , he joined the failed revolt of 1483 against Richard and ended up detained in the Tower of London . When Henry Tudor invaded England in 1485 , Walter escaped custody and joined the invading Lancastrian army , fighting alongside Henry at the Battle of Bosworth . Victorious , the newly crowned Henry VII returned Farleigh Hungerford to Walter in 1486 . 
 = = = 16th century = = = 
 Sir Walter Hungerford died in 1516 , leaving Farleigh Hungerford Castle to his son , Sir Edward . Edward was a successful member of Henry VIII 's court and died in 1522 , leaving the castle to his second wife , Agnes . After Edward 's death , however , it emerged that Agnes had been responsible for the murder of her former , first husband , John <unk> : two of her servants had strangled him at Farleigh Hungerford Castle , before burning his body in the castle oven to destroy any evidence . Agnes appears to have been motivated by a desire for the wealth that would follow her second marriage to Sir Edward , but in 1523 Agnes and the two servants were hung for murder in London . 
 Due to this execution , Edward 's son , another Walter , inherited the castle instead of Agnes . Walter became a political client of Thomas Cromwell , the powerful chief minister of Henry VIII , and operated on his behalf in the local region . Walter became dissatisfied with his third wife , Elizabeth , after her father became a political liability to him , and Walter detained her in one of the castle towers for several years . Elizabeth complained that while she was imprisoned she was starved in an attempt to kill her , and subjected to several poisoning attempts . She was probably kept in the north @-@ west tower , although the south @-@ west " Lady Tower " is named after her . When Cromwell fell from power in 1540 , so did Walter , who was executed for treason , witchcraft and homosexuality : Elizabeth was allowed to remarry , but the castle reverted to the Crown . 
 Walter 's son , also called Walter , bought back the castle from the Crown in 1554 for £ 5 @,@ 000 . Farleigh Hungerford Castle and the surrounding park remained in good condition — indeed , unusually for the time , the visiting antiquarian John Leland was able to praise its " <unk> " ( pretty ) and " stately " condition — but Walter continued to update the property , including adding more fashionable , Elizabethan style windows and improving the east range of the inner court , which became the main living area for the family . Walter 's second wife , Jane , was a Roman Catholic and during the turbulent religious politics of the later Tudor period , their marriage collapsed , with Jane going into exile . Walter and Jane 's only son died young and , after the Walter 's death in 1596 , the castle passed to his brother , Sir Edward . 
 = = = 17th century = = = 
 Sir Edward Hungerford died in 1607 , leaving Farleigh Hungerford to his great @-@ nephew , another Sir Edward Hungerford . Edward continued to develop the castle , installing new windows in the medieval buildings of the inner court . In 1642 , however , the Civil War broke out in England between the supporters of King Charles and those of Parliament . As a reformist Member of Parliament and a Puritan , Edward was an active supporter of Parliament and volunteered himself as the leader of its forces in the neighbouring county of Wiltshire ; unfortunately this put him at odds with Sir Edward Bayntun , a Wiltshire gentleman with similar ambitions . The resulting feud between the two men turned violent before Parliament finally settled the issue by appointing Hungerford as its commander in Wiltshire at the start of 1643 . His military record during the conflict was unexceptional : he abandoned several towns to advancing Royalist armies and fought on the losing side at the battle of Roundway Down , although he did successfully seize Wardour Castle in 1643 . 
 Farleigh Hungerford Castle was captured by a Royalist unit in 1643 , following a successful campaign by the King 's forces across the south @-@ west . The castle was taken without a fight by Colonel John Hungerford , a half @-@ brother of Edward , who installed a garrison that then supported itself by pillaging the surrounding countryside . Several Parliamentary raids against Farleigh Hungerford were undertaken during 1644 , but they failed to take back the castle . By 1645 , however , the Royalist cause was close to military collapse ; Parliamentary forces began to mop up the remaining Royalist garrisons in the south @-@ west , and on 15 September they reached the castle . Colonel Hungerford immediately surrendered on good terms , and Sir Edward Hungerford peacefully reinstalled himself in the undamaged castle . As a result of this process , the castle escaped being slighted , or deliberately destroyed , by Parliament , unlike many other castles in the region , such as Nunney . 
 On Edward 's death in 1648 , Anthony Hungerford , his half @-@ brother , inherited the castle . The north chapel was extensively renovated during this period by Edward 's widow , Margaret Hungerford , who covered the walls with pictures of saints , cherubs , clouds , ribbons , crowns and heraldry , as part of an elaborate tomb for her and Edward which cost £ 1 @,@ 100 ( £ 136 @,@ 000 in 2009 terms ) . The renovation effectively blocked most of the access into the north chapel , making the new tomb the focus of attention for any visitor or religious activity . A number of lead , anthropomorphic coffins , some with moulded faces or death masks , were laid down in the crypt in the mid- to late @-@ 17th century . Four men , two women and two children were embalmed in the castle in this way , probably including Edward and Margaret , as well as the final Sir Edward Hungerford , his wife , son and daughter @-@ in @-@ law . Such lead coffins were extremely expensive during the period and reserved for the wealthiest in society . Originally the lead coffins would have been encased in wood , but this outer casing has since been lost . 
 Anthony passed on both the castle and a considerable fortune to his son , yet another Sir Edward Hungerford , in 1657 . After his marriage , Edward enjoyed an income of around £ 8 @,@ 000 ( £ 1 @,@ 110 @,@ 000 ) a year , making him a very wealthy man . Edward lived a lavish lifestyle , however , including giving a huge gift of money to the exiled Charles II shortly before his restoration to the throne , and later entertaining the royal court at Farleigh Hungerford Castle in 1673 . Edward later fell out with the king over the proposal that the Roman Catholic James II should succeed to the throne on Charles 's death , and after the discovery of the Rye House Plot in 1683 the castle was searched by royal officials looking for stocks of weapons that might be used in a possible revolt . 
 Meanwhile , Edward had been living a truly extravagant lifestyle , including extensive gambling , resulting in his running up debts of some £ 40 @,@ 000 , which in 1683 forced him to sell many of his estates in Wiltshire . Over the next two years , Edward incurred further debts of around £ 38 @,@ 000 ( £ 5 @,@ 270 @,@ 000 ) and in 1686 was finally forced to sell his remaining lands in the south @-@ west , including Farleigh Hungerford Castle , to Sir Henry Bayntun , who purchased them for £ 56 @,@ 000 ( £ 7 @,@ 750 @,@ 000 ) . Bayntun lived in the castle for a few years , until his death in 1691 . 
 = = = 18th - 20th centuries = = = 
 From the 18th century onwards , Farleigh Hungerford Castle slipped into decline . In 1702 , the castle was sold on to Hector Cooper , who lived in Trowbridge ; in 1730 it was passed in turn to the Houlton family , who had purchased the estates surrounding the castle . The Houlton family broke up castle 's stone walls and the internal contents for salvage . Some of the parts , such as the marble floors , were reused at Longleat or in the Houlton 's new house , Farleigh House , built nearby in the 1730s ; other elements were reused by local villagers . By the end of the 1730s the castle was ruinous and , although the castle chapel was repaired and brought back into use in 1779 , the north @-@ west and north @-@ east towers had both collapsed by the end of 1797 . The outer court became a farm yard , with the priest 's house becoming the farm house . The castle 's park was reassigned to serve Farleigh House instead . 
 Antiquarian curiosity in the castle had begun as early as 1700 , when Peter Le Neve visited and recorded some of the architectural details , but interest increased in the 19th century . This was partially due to the work of the local curate , the Reverend J. Jackson , who undertook the first archaeological excavations at the site during the 1840s , uncovering many of the foundations of the inner court . 17th and 18th century stained glass windows from the continent were installed in the chapel , where the 15th century wall paintings were rediscovered in 1844 . The then owner , Colonel John Houlton , turned the chapel into a museum of curiosities , where for a small fee visitors could see sets of armour , what was said to be a pair of Oliver Cromwell 's boots and other English Civil War artefacts , including letters from Cromwell written to the Hungerfords . 
 The foundations that Jackson discovered during the excavations were left exposed for the benefit of visitors and larger numbers of tourists began to come to the castle to see the ruins , including Louis @-@ Napoléon Bonaparte in 1846 . The lead coffins in the chapel crypt were popular with tourists , although the coffins were extensively damaged by those visitors keen to see the contents inside . The south @-@ west tower , completely covered by thick ivy , collapsed in 1842 , after local children accidentally set fire to the vegetation that was , by then , holding the tower together . Battlements were added to the east gatehouse during this period , transforming the appearance of its original gabled roof . 
 In 1891 , most of Farleigh Hungerford Castle was sold by the Houlton family to Lord Donington , whose heir in turn sold it onto Lord Cairns in 1907 . Cairns passed the castle to the Office of Works in 1915 , by which time it was almost all heavily overgrown with ivy . The Office of Works began a process of controversial restoration work , removing the ivy and repairing the stone work ; the result was critiqued by H. <unk> Tipping at the time as " giving the whole castle the effect of a new concrete building " . Further excavations took place in 1924 as part of the project , which retained the castle as a tourist attraction . The last inhabitants of the farmhouse left in 1959 , when the last parts of the outer court were sold to the government and restored . Attempts were made to preserve the wall paintings in the chapel during 1931 and 1955 , but the treatments , which involved the use of red wax , stained the paintings and caused considerable damage : the wax was removed in the 1970s . Further excavations followed around the chapel and the priest 's house in 1962 and 1968 . English Heritage took over responsibility for running the castle in 1983 . 
 = = = 21st century = = = 
 Today , most of Farleigh Hungerford Castle is ruined . In the inner court only the exposed foundations remain of most of the castle buildings , along with the shells of the south @-@ west and south @-@ east towers . Unusually for English castles , the outer court has survived better than the inner . The restored eastern gatehouse is carved with the badge of the Hungerfords and the initials of the first Sir Edward Hungerford , who had them carved there between 1516 and 1522 . The priest 's house remains intact , measuring 39 feet ( 11 @.@ 9 m ) by 22 feet ( 6 @.@ 7 m ) with two rooms on the ground floor and four rooms above . 
 In Saint Leonard 's Chapel , the outlines of many of the medieval murals can still be made out , with the painting of Saint George and Dragon still in particularly good condition — historian Simon <unk> describes this work , one of only four such surviving works in England , as " remarkable " . The late 17th century tombs of the Hungerfords remain intact in the north transept chapel dedicated to Saint Anne . The surviving lead anthropomorphic coffins in the crypt are archaeologically significant : although numerous in the late 16th and 17th centuries , few lead coffins survive today and Farleigh Hungerford Castle has what historian Charles Kightly considers " the best collection " in the country . 
 The castle site is run by English Heritage as a tourist attraction . It is a Scheduled Monument and a Grade I listed building . 
 = Animal coloration = 
 Animal coloration is the general appearance of an animal resulting from the reflection or emission of light from its surfaces . Some animals are brightly coloured , while others are hard to see . In some species , such as the peacock , the male has strong patterns , conspicuous colours and is iridescent , while the female is far less visible . 
 There are several separate reasons why animals have evolved colours . Camouflage enables an animal to remain hidden from view . Signalling enables an animal to communicate information such as warning of its ability to defend itself ( aposematism ) . Animals also use colour in advertising , signalling services such as cleaning to animals of other species ; to signal sexual status to other members of the same species ; and in mimicry , taking advantage of another species ' warning coloration . Some animals use colour to divert attacks by startle ( deimatic behaviour ) , surprising a predator e.g. with eyespots or other flashes of colour , and possibly by motion dazzle , confusing a predator 's attack by moving a bold pattern ( such as zebra stripes ) rapidly . Some animals are coloured for physical protection , such as having pigments in the skin to protect against sunburn , while some frogs can lighten or darken their skin for temperature regulation . Finally , animals can be coloured incidentally . For example , blood is red because the haem pigment needed to carry oxygen is red . Animals coloured in these ways can have striking natural patterns . 
 Animals produce colour in different ways . Pigments are particles of coloured material . <unk> are cells containing pigment , which can change their size to make their colour more or less visible . Some animals , including many butterflies and birds , have microscopic structures in scales , bristles or feathers which give them brilliant iridescent colours . Other animals including squid and some deep @-@ sea fish can produce light , sometimes of different colours . Animals often use two or more of these mechanisms together to produce the colours and effects they need . 
 = = History = = 
 Animal coloration has been a topic of interest and research in biology for centuries . 
 In his 1665 book Micrographia , Robert Hooke describes the " fantastical " ( structural , not pigment ) colours of the Peacock 's feathers : 
 The parts of the Feathers of this glorious Bird appear , through the Microscope , no less gaudy then do the whole Feathers ; for , as to the naked eye ' tis evident that the stem or quill of each Feather in the tail sends out multitudes of Lateral branches , ... so each of those threads in the Microscope appears a large long body , consisting of a multitude of bright reflecting parts . 
 ... their upper sides seem to me to consist of a multitude of thin plated bodies , which are exceeding thin , and lie very close together , and thereby , like mother of Pearl shells , do not onely reflect a very brisk light , but tinge that light in a most curious manner ; and by means of various positions , in respect of the light , they reflect back now one colour , and then another , and those most vividly . Now , that these colours are onely fantastical ones , that is , such as arise immediately from the refractions of the light , I found by this , that water wetting these colour 'd parts , destroy 'd their colours , which seem 'd to proceed from the alteration of the reflection and refraction . 
 According to Charles Darwin 's 1859 theory of natural selection , features such as coloration evolved by providing individual animals with a reproductive advantage . For example , individuals with slightly better camouflage than others of the same species would , on average , leave more offspring . In his Origin of Species , Darwin wrote : 
 When we see leaf @-@ eating insects green , and bark @-@ feeders mottled @-@ grey ; the alpine ptarmigan white in winter , the red @-@ grouse the colour of heather , and the black @-@ grouse that of peaty earth , we must believe that these tints are of service to these birds and insects in preserving them from danger . Grouse , if not destroyed at some period of their lives , would increase in countless numbers ; they are known to suffer largely from birds of prey ; and hawks are guided by eyesight to their prey , so much so , that on parts of the Continent persons are warned not to keep white pigeons , as being the most liable to destruction . Hence I can see no reason to doubt that natural selection might be most effective in giving the proper colour to each kind of grouse , and in keeping that colour , when once acquired , true and constant . 
 Henry Walter Bates 's 1863 book The Naturalist on the River Amazons describes his extensive studies of the insects in the Amazon basin , and especially the butterflies . He discovered that apparently similar butterflies often belonged to different families , with a harmless species mimicking a poisonous or bitter @-@ tasting species to reduce its chance of being attacked by a predator , in the process now called after him , Batesian mimicry . 
 Edward Bagnall Poulton 's strongly Darwinian 1890 book The Colours of Animals , their meaning and use , especially considered in the case of insects argued the case for three aspects of animal coloration that are broadly accepted today but were controversial or wholly new at the time . It strongly supported Darwin 's theory of sexual selection , arguing that the obvious differences between male and female birds such as the Argus pheasant were selected by the females , pointing out that bright male plumage was found only in species " which court by day " . The book introduced the concept of frequency @-@ dependent selection , as when edible mimics are less frequent than the distasteful models whose colours and patterns they copy . In the book , Poulton also coined the term aposematism for warning coloration , which he identified in widely differing animal groups including mammals ( such as the skunk ) , bees and wasps , beetles , and butterflies . 
 Frank Evers Beddard 's 1892 book , Animal Coloration , acknowledged that natural selection existed but examined its application to camouflage , mimicry and sexual selection very critically . The book was in turn roundly criticised by Poulton . 
 Abbott Handerson Thayer 's 1909 book Concealing @-@ Coloration in the Animal Kingdom , completed by his son Gerald H. Thayer , argued correctly for the widespread use of crypsis among animals , and in particular described and explained countershading for the first time . However , the Thayers spoilt their case by arguing that camouflage was the sole purpose of animal coloration , which led them to claim that even the brilliant pink plumage of the flamingo or the roseate spoonbill was cryptic — against the momentarily pink sky at dawn or dusk . As a result , the book was mocked by critics including Theodore Roosevelt as having " pushed [ the " doctrine " of concealing coloration ] to such a fantastic extreme and to include such wild absurdities as to call for the application of common sense thereto . " 
 Hugh Bamford Cott 's 500 @-@ page book Adaptive Coloration in Animals , published in wartime 1940 , systematically described the principles of camouflage and mimicry . The book contains hundreds of examples , over a hundred photographs and Cott 's own accurate and artistic drawings , and 27 pages of references . Cott focussed especially on " maximum disruptive contrast " , the kind of patterning used in military camouflage such as disruptive pattern material . Indeed , Cott describes such applications : 
 the effect of a disruptive pattern is to break up what is really a continuous surface into what appears to be a number of discontinuous surfaces ... which contradict the shape of the body on which they are superimposed . 
 = = Evolutionary reasons for animal coloration = = 
 = = = Camouflage = = = 
 One of the pioneers of research into animal coloration , Edward Bagnall Poulton classified the forms of protective coloration , in a way which is still helpful . He described : protective resemblance ; aggressive resemblance ; adventitious protection ; and variable protective resemblance . These are covered in turn below . 
 Protective resemblance is used by prey to avoid predation . It includes special protective resemblance , now called mimesis , where the whole animal looks like some other object , for example when a caterpillar resembles a twig or a bird dropping . In general protective resemblance , now called crypsis , the animal 's texture blends with the background , for example when a moth 's colour and pattern blend in with tree bark . 
 Aggressive resemblance is used by predators or parasites . In special aggressive resemblance , the animal looks like something else , luring the prey or host to approach , for example when a flower mantis resembles a particular kind of flower , such as an orchid . In general aggressive resemblance , the predator or parasite blends in with the background , for example when a leopard is hard to see in long grass . 
 For adventitious protection , an animal uses materials such as twigs , sand , or pieces of shell to conceal its outline , for example when a caddis fly larva builds a decorated case , or when a decorator crab decorates its back with seaweed , sponges and stones . 
 In variable protective resemblance , an animal such as a chameleon , flatfish , squid or octopus changes its skin pattern and colour using special chromatophore cells to resemble whatever background it is currently resting on ( as well as for signalling ) . 
 The main mechanisms to create the resemblances described by Poulton – whether in nature or in military applications – are crypsis , blending into the background so as to become hard to see ( this covers both special and general resemblance ) ; disruptive patterning , using colour and pattern to break up the animal 's outline , which relates mainly to general resemblance ; mimesis , resembling other objects of no special interest to the observer , which relates to special resemblance ; countershading , using graded colour to create the illusion of flatness , which relates mainly to general resemblance ; and counterillumination , producing light to match the background , notably in some species of squid . 
 Countershading was first described by the American artist Abbott Handerson Thayer , a pioneer in the theory of animal coloration . Thayer observed that whereas a painter takes a flat canvas and uses coloured paint to create the illusion of solidity by painting in shadows , animals such as deer are often darkest on their backs , becoming lighter towards the belly , creating ( as zoologist Hugh Cott observed ) the illusion of flatness , and against a matching background , of invisibility . Thayer 's observation " Animals are painted by Nature , darkest on those parts which tend to be most lighted by the sky 's light , and vice versa " is called Thayer 's Law . 
 = = = Signalling = = = 
 Colour is widely used for signalling in animals as diverse as birds and shrimps . Signalling encompasses at least three purposes : 
 advertising , to signal a capability or service to other animals , whether within a species or not 
 sexual selection , where members of one sex choose to mate with suitably coloured members of the other sex , thus driving the development of such colours 
 warning , to signal that an animal is harmful , for example can sting , is poisonous or is bitter @-@ tasting . Warning signals may be mimicked truthfully or untruthfully . 
 = = = = Advertising = = = = 
 Advertising coloration signals an animal 's capability to other animals . These may be of the same species , as in sexual selection , or of different species , as in cleaning symbiosis . Signals , which often combine colour and movement , may be understood by many different species ; for example , the cleaning stations of the banded coral shrimp <unk> hispidus are visited by different species of fish , and even by reptiles such as hawksbill sea turtles . 
 = = = = Sexual selection = = = = 
 Darwin observed that the males of some species , such as birds of paradise , were very different from the females . 
 Darwin explained such male @-@ female differences in his theory of sexual selection in his book The Descent of Man . Once the females begin to select males according to any particular characteristic , such as a long tail or a coloured crest , that characteristic is emphasized more and more in the males . Eventually all the males will have the characteristics that the females are sexually selecting for , as only those males can reproduce . This mechanism is powerful enough to create features that are strongly disadvantageous to the males in other ways . For example , some male birds of paradise have wing or tail streamers that are so long that they impede flight , while their brilliant colours may make the males more vulnerable to predators . In the extreme , sexual selection may drive species to extinction , as has been argued for the enormous horns of the male Irish elk , which may have made it difficult for mature males to move and feed . 
 Different forms of sexual selection are possible , including rivalry among males , and selection of females by males . 
 = = = = Warning = = = = 
 Warning coloration ( aposematism ) is effectively the " opposite " of camouflage , and a special case of advertising . Its function is to make the animal , for example a wasp or a coral snake , highly conspicuous to potential predators , so that it is noticed , remembered , and then avoided . As Peter Forbes observes , " Human warning signs employ the same colours - red , yellow , black , and white - that nature uses to advertise dangerous creatures . " Warning colours work by being associated by potential predators with something that makes the warning coloured animal unpleasant or dangerous . This can be achieved in several ways , by being any combination of : 
 distasteful , for example caterpillars , pupae and adults of the cinnabar moth , the monarch butterfly and the Variable <unk> butterfly have bitter @-@ tasting chemicals in their blood . One monarch contains more than enough digitalis @-@ like toxin to kill a cat , while a monarch extract makes starlings vomit . 
 foul @-@ smelling , for example the skunk can eject a liquid with a long @-@ lasting and powerful odour 
 aggressive and able to defend itself , for example honey badgers . 
 venomous , for example a wasp can deliver a painful sting , while snakes like the viper or coral snake can deliver a fatal bite . 
 Warning coloration can succeed either through inborn behaviour ( instinct ) on the part of potential predators , or through a learned avoidance . Either can lead to various forms of mimicry . Experiments show that avoidance is learned in birds , mammals , lizards , and amphibians , but that some birds such as great tits have inborn avoidance of certain colours and patterns such as black and yellow stripes . 
 = = = Mimicry = = = 
 Mimicry means that one species of animal resembles another species closely enough to deceive predators . To evolve , the mimicked species must have warning coloration , because appearing to be bitter @-@ tasting or dangerous gives natural selection something to work on . Once a species has a slight , chance , resemblance to a warning coloured species , natural selection can drive its colours and patterns towards more perfect mimicry . There are numerous possible mechanisms , of which by far the best known are : 
 Batesian mimicry , where an edible species resembles a distasteful or dangerous species . This is most common in insects such as butterflies . A familiar example is the resemblance of harmless hoverflies ( which have no sting ) to bees . 
 Müllerian mimicry , where two or more distasteful or dangerous animal species resemble each other . This is most common among insects such as wasps and bees ( hymenoptera ) . 
 Batesian mimicry was first described by pioneering naturalist Henry W. Bates . When an edible prey animal comes to resemble , even slightly , a distasteful animal , natural selection favours those individuals that even very slightly better resemble the distasteful species . This is because even a small degree of protection reduces predation and increases the chance that an individual mimic will survive and reproduce . For example , many species of hoverfly are coloured black and yellow like bees , and are in consequence avoided by birds ( and people ) . 
 Müllerian mimicry was first described by pioneering naturalist Fritz Müller . When a distasteful animal comes to resemble a more common distasteful animal , natural selection favours individuals that even very slightly better resemble the target . For example , many species of stinging wasp and bee are similarly coloured black and yellow . Müller 's explanation of the mechanism for this was one of the first uses of mathematics in biology . He argued that a predator , such as a young bird , must attack at least one insect , say a wasp , to learn that the black and yellow colours mean a stinging insect . If bees were differently coloured , the young bird would have to attack one of them also . But when bees and wasps resemble each other , the young bird need only attack one from the whole group to learn to avoid all of them . So , fewer bees are attacked if they mimic wasps ; the same applies to wasps that mimic bees . The result is mutual resemblance for mutual protection . 
 = = = Distraction = = = 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 Some animals such as many moths , mantises and grasshoppers , have a repertory of threatening or startling behaviour , such as suddenly displaying conspicuous eyespots or patches of bright and contrasting colours , so as to scare off or momentarily distract a predator . This gives the prey animal an opportunity to escape . The behaviour is deimatic ( startling ) rather than aposematic as these insects are palatable to predators , so the warning colours are a bluff , not an honest signal . 
 = = = = Motion dazzle = = = = 
 Some prey animals such as zebra are marked with high @-@ contrast patterns which possibly help to confuse their predators , such as lions , during a chase . The bold stripes of a herd of running Zebra have been claimed make it difficult for predators to estimate the prey 's speed and direction accurately , or to identify individual animals , giving the prey an improved chance of escape . Since dazzle patterns ( such as the Zebra 's stripes ) make animals harder to catch when moving , but easier to detect when stationary , there is an evolutionary trade @-@ off between dazzle and camouflage . Another theory is that the zebra 's stripes could provide some protection from flies and biting insects . 
 = = = Physical protection = = = 
 Many animals have dark pigments such as melanin in their skin , eyes and fur to protect themselves against sunburn ( damage to living tissues caused by ultraviolet light ) . 
 = = = Temperature regulation = = = 
 Some frogs such as <unk> alvarengai , which basks in sunlight , lighten their skin colour when hot ( and darkens when cold ) , making their skin reflect more heat and so avoid overheating . 
 = = = Incidental coloration = = = 
 Some animals are coloured purely incidentally because their blood contains pigments . For example , amphibians like the olm that live in caves may be largely colourless as colour has no function in that environment , but they show some red because of the haem pigment in their red blood cells , needed to carry oxygen . They also have a little orange coloured riboflavin in their skin . Human albinos and people with fair skin have a similar colour for the same reason . 
 = = Mechanisms of colour production in animals = = 
 Animal coloration may be the result of any combination of pigments , chromatophores , structural coloration and bioluminescence . 
 = = = Coloration by pigments = = = 
 Pigments are coloured chemicals ( such as melanin ) in animal tissues . For example , the Arctic fox has a white coat in winter ( containing little pigment ) , and a brown coat in summer ( containing more pigment ) . Many animals , including mammals , birds , and amphibians , are unable to synthesize most of the pigments that colour their fur or feathers , other than the brown or black melanins that give many mammals their earth tones . For example , the bright yellow of an American goldfinch , the startling orange of a juvenile red @-@ spotted newt , the deep red of a cardinal and the pink of a flamingo are all produced by carotenoid pigments synthesized by plants . In the case of the flamingo , the bird eats pink shrimps , which are themselves unable to synthesize carotenoids . The shrimps derive their body colour from microscopic red algae , which like most plants are able to create their own pigments , including both carotenoids and ( green ) chlorophyll . Animals that eat green plants do not become green , however , as chlorophyll does not survive digestion . 
 = = = Variable coloration by chromatophores = = = 
 <unk> are special pigment @-@ containing cells that can change their size , thus varying the colour and pattern of the animal . The voluntary control of chromatophores is known as metachrosis . For example , cuttlefish and chameleons can rapidly change their appearance , both for camouflage and for signalling , as Aristotle first noted over 2000 years ago : 
 The octopus ... seeks its prey by so changing its colour as to render it like the colour of the stones adjacent to it ; it does so also when alarmed . 
 When cephalopod molluscs like squid and cuttlefish find themselves against a light background , they contract many of their chromatophores , concentrating the pigment into a smaller area , resulting in a pattern of tiny , dense , but widely spaced dots , appearing light . When they enter a darker environment , they allow their chromatophores to expand , creating a pattern of larger dark spots , and making their bodies appear dark . Amphibians such as frogs have three kinds of star @-@ shaped chromatophore cells in separate layers of their skin . The top layer contains ' xanthophores ' with orange , red , or yellow pigments ; the middle layer contains ' iridophores ' with a silvery light @-@ reflecting pigment ; while the bottom layer contains ' melanophores ' with dark melanin . 
 = = = Structural coloration = = = 
 While many animals are unable to synthesize carotenoid pigments to create red and yellow surfaces , the green and blue colours of bird feathers and insect carapaces are usually not produced by pigments at all , but by structural coloration . Structural coloration means the production of colour by microscopically @-@ structured surfaces fine enough to interfere with visible light , sometimes in combination with pigments : for example , peacock tail feathers are pigmented brown , but their structure makes them appear blue , turquoise and green . Structural coloration can produce the most brilliant colours , often iridescent . For example , the blue / green gloss on the plumage of birds such as ducks , and the purple / blue / green / red colours of many beetles and butterflies are created by structural coloration . Animals use several methods to produce structural colour , as described in the table . 
 = = = Bioluminescence = = = 
 Bioluminescence is the production of light , such as by the photophores of marine animals , and the tails of glow @-@ worms and fireflies . Bioluminescence , like other forms of metabolism , releases energy derived from the chemical energy of food . A pigment , luciferin is catalysed by the enzyme luciferase to react with oxygen , releasing light . Comb jellies such as Euplokamis are bioluminescent , creating blue and green light , especially when stressed ; when disturbed , they secrete an ink which <unk> in the same colours . Since comb jellies are not very sensitive to light , their bioluminescence is unlikely to be used to signal to other members of the same species ( e.g. to attract mates or repel rivals ) ; more likely , the light helps to distract predators or parasites . Some species of squid have light @-@ producing organs ( photophores ) scattered all over their undersides that create a sparkling glow . This provides counter @-@ illumination camouflage , preventing the animal from appearing as a dark shape when seen from below . Some angler fish of the deep sea , where it is too dark to hunt by sight , contain symbiotic bacteria in the ' bait ' on their ' fishing rods ' . These emit light to attract prey . 
 = Ciao Italia : Live from Italy = 
 Ciao Italia : Live from Italy ( credited as Madonna : Ciao , Italia ! Live from Italy in the video sequence ) is a video album by American singer @-@ songwriter Madonna and was released by Warner Reprise Video and Sire Records on May 24 , 1988 . It contained footage from a previous TV special of the Who 's That Girl World Tour , Madonna in Concerto , broadcast in Europe in 1987 , filmed at the Stadio Comunale in Turin , Italy . The video release also contained footage from shows recorded in Florence , Italy and Tokyo , Japan , the latter having previously been released as a Japanese TV special and home video release , Who 's That Girl : Live in Japan . The decision to release Ciao Italia was spurred by the fact that this previous release became a commercial success in Japan . A re @-@ release of the video took place in 1999 , when it was released in DVD format , with a stereo soundtrack containing the songs only . 
 The video received positive reviews from critics , who noted Madonna 's showmanship and her skills as a performer . They also complimented the camera work in the video , for enhancing the visual aspects of the tour . Ciao Italia topped the Music Video sales chart of Billboard , and became the second best @-@ selling music video cassette of 1988 . It was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipment of 100 @,@ 000 copies . 
 = = Background = = 
 Madonna 's 1987 Who 's That Girl World Tour was a critical and commercial success , earning US $ 25 million and playing in front of an audience of 1 @.@ 5 million . When the time came for the video release of the tour , Warner Bros. decided to release it only in Japan , where Madonna 's previous video albums had not been released . This decision was also backed by the profit that the Who 's That Girl World Tour had achieved from its Japanese leg . Named as Who 's That Girl : Live in Japan , the video contained a live date from the tour , filmed at Korakuen Stadium in Tokyo , Japan on June 22 , 1987 . It was also aired as a television special in Japan only and was the first television broadcast there , using Dolby Surround sound . The release was a commercial success , prompting Warner to release a different version of the tour video , for the rest of the world . Although the Japanese concert was released on VHS and LaserDisc , Warner Music Japan has never officially made it available on DVD . 
 The video was released on May 24 , 1988 , and contained video compilation of two different dates from the tour , Turin and from Florence , as well as clips from her concert in Tokyo , Japan . The video had an introduction , where Madonna was shown practicing with her troupe on the stage , rehearsing the songs and the dance moves . Madonna , who had gone through rigorous exercises and aerobics to prepare herself for the tour , demanded from director Egbert van <unk> that the shape of her body be given prominence in the footage to be used for the video . She believed that her new shape and figure would make her appear highly attractive . In 1999 , Warner Bros. re @-@ released the video in DVD format , along with some of Madonna 's other video albums . The music video appears in an aspect ratio of 1 @.@ 33 : 1 ( 4 : 3 ) on the single @-@ sided , single @-@ layered DVD . The concert relied heavily on magenta tones ; from the lighting to Madonna ’ s outfits . A stereo soundtrack accompanied the DVD release , where the songs were mixed without having a surround sound effect . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Andrew <unk> from Anchorage Daily News complimented the video , saying " If you have a secret fondness for pop singer Madonna , you would want to check out her Ciao Italia , the singer 's concert film from Italy . You can be pleasantly surprised at how amazing she is . " Heather Phares from Allmusic said : " Madonna 's Ciao Italia : Live From Italy captures a performance from her 1988 world tour and features hits like ' Lucky Star ' , ' True Blue ' , ' La Isla Bonita ' , ' Like a Virgin ' , and ' Material Girl ' . A much simpler , less choreographed performance than her later extravaganzas like The Girlie Show World Tour , Ciao Italia is still entertaining in its own right , and will definitely please fans nostalgic for some old @-@ school Madonna hits . " Dennis Hunt from Los Angeles Times gave a positive review , saying " A festive Italian stadium show featuring the Material Girl , who 's turned into a first @-@ rate entertainer , strutting and singing in flashy production @-@ number renditions of her recent most Billboard topping songs , is indeed a delight . The video captures the enormity of Madonna as a performer , and her theatrics , oomph and chutzpah . " Tom Shales from The Washington Post said that " Ciao Italia works wonderful because it makes Madonna look like she 's at home , with her Italian family all around her . [ ... ] A Turin soccer stadium became the sexual center of the universe last year when Madonna , one of our naughtiest superstars , taped this concert there before 75 @,@ 000 gyrating Italians . Ebullient and insouciant , Madonna sings her hits @-@ including the darkly beautiful ' Live to Tell ' — in cavernous stereo ; dances engagingly with 14 @-@ year @-@ old Chris Finch , the quintessential Lucky Little Boy ; and crowns herself queen of teases , bending over to reveal ' Kiss ' printed on her underpants [ ... ] Sheer showmanship is present in her performances as well as the camera work of this video . " Jim Farber from Rolling Stone said that " this version of Madonna 's Who 's That Girl Tour returns the star to the medium where she excels best . On videocassette , however , Madonna makes manipulation seem like an exciting message indeed . " Colin Jacobson from the DVD Movie Guide however , gave a negative review of the album , saying " Possibly the biggest problem with Ciao Italia regarded the sloppy manner in which the program was assembled . I can ’ t recall if Italia appeared as a TV special that aired live or if it was taped and edited specifically for future broadcast screenings , but it certainly looked like something that was created on the fly . Sloppy camerawork and editing abound , as those two factors don ’ t flow together terribly well . It felt as though they tried their best to get appropriate material at the time but that they failed to massage it after the fact . " 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 The release debuted at number 17 on Billboard 's Top Music Video chart , on June 4 , 1988 and reached a peak of eight , the next week . The video started a steady climb on the chart , and on the issue dated August 20 , 1988 , it reached number three on the chart , being kept from the top spot by Callan Pinckney 's <unk> and Jane Fonda 's Start Up With Jane Fonda workout videos . Ciao Italia ultimately reached the top of the chart , remaining there for eight weeks . It was the 27th top selling music videocassette for 1988 . The video was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipment of 100 @,@ 000 copies . Ciao Italia debuted and peaked at number three on the Canadian RPM Top 10 Video chart on June 9 , 1990 . It was present for a total of eight weeks on the chart . It also charted at number three on the Finnish DVD chart in 2009 . Ciao Italia was also certified platinum by the Argentine Chamber of Phonograms and Videograms Producers ( CAPIF ) for shipment of 15 @,@ 000 copies in DVD units . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = = Formats = = = 
 It was released on VHS , Laserdisc and later DVD , in an aspect ratio of 1 @.@ 33 : 1 on the single @-@ sided , single @-@ layered DVD . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits and personnel adapted from Ciao Italia : Live from Italy video liner notes . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = Ontario Highway 12 = 
 King 's Highway 12 , commonly referred to as Highway 12 and historically known as the Whitby and Sturgeon Bay Road , is a provincially maintained highway in the Canadian province of Ontario . The highway connects the eastern end of the Greater Toronto Area ( GTA ) with Kawartha Lakes ( via Highway 7 ) , Orillia and Midland before ending at Highway 93 . It forms a part of the Trans @-@ Canada Highway system from north of Sunderland to Coldwater . Highway 12 connects several small towns along its 146 km ( 91 mi ) route , and bypasses a short distance from many others . It is signed as a north – south route between Whitby and Orillia , and as an east – west route from there to Midland . The rural portions of the highway feature a posted speed limit of 80 km / h ( 50 mph ) , often dropping to 50 km / h ( 31 mph ) through built @-@ up areas . The entire route is patrolled by the Ontario Provincial Police . 
 Highway 12 was first established in early 1922 between Highway 2 in Whitby and Lindsay . The section running east from Sunderland became part of Highway 7 before route numbering was introduced in 1925 . Highway 12 was then routed through Beaverton and around the eastern and northern shores of Lake Simcoe to Orillia and later to Midland ; Beaverton was bypassed during the 1960s . The section south of Highway 7 in Brooklin was transferred to the Regional Municipality of Durham in mid @-@ 1997 and redesignated as Durham Regional Highway 12 . A majority of Highway 12 follows the historic Whitby and Sturgeon Bay Road , constructed in the mid @-@ 1800s to connect Whitby and Penetanguishene , both important naval ports of the time . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The highway begins at the hydro easement ( the future location of Highway 407 ) just south of the community of Brooklin in the town of Whitby . It travels north and joins with Highway 7 on the southern edge of Brooklin . Highway 7 travels west to Markham , and is signed concurrently with Highway 12 for 39 @.@ 1 km ( 24 @.@ 3 mi ) north of this point to Sunderland . North of Sunderland , Highway 7 separates and travels east to Lindsay ; Highway 12 thereafter is designated as the Central Ontario Route of the Trans @-@ Canada Highway . 
 The highway continues north , following the eastern and northern shores of Lake Simcoe and bypassing Beaverton while curving to the northwest towards Orillia . It bypasses south of Orillia , and shares a routing with Highway 11 northwards for approximately two kilometres between interchanges 131 and 133 . At the latter interchange , Highway 12 branches northwest towards Coldwater , where it joins Highway 400 between interchanges 141 and 147 ; this concurrency is not signed . 
 At Waubaushene , the Trans @-@ Canada Highway designation continues north along Highway 400 towards Parry Sound and Sudbury , while Highway 12 continues west towards Victoria Harbour , Port McNicoll , and the Martyrs ' Shrine . The highway ends at a junction with Highway 93 at the western town limits of Midland . 
 = = History = = 
 The oldest portion of Highway 12 was originally known as the Coldwater Portage and later the Coldwater Road , connecting the modern sites of Orillia and Coldwater by a 14 mi ( 23 km ) trail . Upper Canada Governor John Colborne surveyed the portage in 1830 and ordered it to be widened for wagon use . As the area was settled and an increasing need for land connection with the south arose , a new road was proposed from Whitby to Sturgeon Bay ( near Waubaushene ) . In February 1843 , the residents formally petitioned the government to construct the route . The Sturgeon Bay Road , from Coldwater to Sturgeon Bay , was opened as a rough wagon road in 1844 . The <unk> Narrows , separating Lake Simcoe from Lake <unk> , were surveyed in the early 1840s and the first causeway and bridge constructed in the years that followed . The portion of the route between Whitby and Orillia , however , was still under construction during the second half of the decade . 
 Highway 12 was first introduced into the provincial highway system on January 22 , 1922 , The highway , initially known as the Whitby – Lindsay Road , was not numbered until the summer of 1925 . The route followed the present – day Highway – 12 from Whitby to Sunderland , then travelled east to Lindsay . 
 Highway assumptions carried out on June 22 and July 2 , 1927 , extended Highway 7 east from Brampton to Peterborough . In doing so , it became concurrent with Highway 12 between Whitby and Sunderland . The route of Highway 12 between Sunderland and Lindsay was renumbered as part of Highway 7 at this time . Highway 12 was later extended north to Orillia , via Beaverton . This was accomplished through two <unk> on August 17 , the majority of the route through Brock , <unk> and Mara Townships was assumed . Several more miles were assumed on December 28 , 1927 , extending Highway 12 as far as Orillia . On August 5 , 1931 , Highway 12 was extended from Orillia to Midland . The majority of the route paralleled an existing railway that was constructed over a native portage . 
 Highway 12 remained unaltered for several decades , until the mid @-@ 1960s , when the Beaverton Bypass was constructed . On November 4 , 1966 , the 10 @.@ 3 km ( 6 @.@ 4 mi ) bypass opened , routing Highway 12 to the east . Portions of the former route of Highway 12 were renumbered as Highway <unk> . The highway again remained unchanged for several decades , until a short portion of the southern end of the highway was decommissioned in the late 1990s . On April 1 , 1997 , the portions of Highway 12 south of Brooklin were transferred to the Regional Municipality of Durham , which subsequently redesignated the road as Durham Regional Highway 12 . 
 Prior to the highway <unk> of 1997 and 1998 , Highway 12 was also not routed along Highway 400 between Coldwater and Waubaushene , but instead followed a separate route , parallel to the 400 , along what is now Simcoe County Road 16 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The following table lists the major junctions along Highway 12 , as noted by the Ministry of Transportation of Ontario . 
 = St John 's Church , Manchester = 
 St John 's Church , Manchester , also known as St John 's , Deansgate , was an Anglican parish church in Manchester , England , established in 1769 and demolished in 1931 . Its site is now that of St John 's Gardens , situated between Lower Byrom Street , Byrom Street and Quay Street . 
 St John 's Church was built in 1769 by Edward Byrom , a co @-@ founder of the first bank in Manchester . Its parish encompassed a large and important section of the city of Manchester . The first rector , John Clowes , held the office for 62 years until his death in 1831 . Clowes preached the first Sunday school sermon in the Manchester area , introduced Swedenborgianism there and was prominent in championing Whit Walks . Clowes was succeeded by William Huntington , who had held the post of curate since 1826 and continued as rector until his death in 1874 . Huntington established the Sunday school , for which he laid the foundation stone in 1827 . In 1906 , around 250 children attended the Sunday school and the church had numerous affiliated groups , such as a Penny Bank and a Choral Society . By the early 1900s , the graveyard was overshadowed on its northern side by a warehouse built on the Quay Street site of the Byrom family residence , and with a declining congregation and some redundancy of provision given the nearby St Matthew 's Church , the Manchester diocese decided to merge the parish of St John 's with St Matthew 's in 1927 . As a result , the church was demolished in 1931 . 
 The church has been described as the first significant building in Manchester to be constructed in the Gothic Revival style of architecture . Construction of the tower , which contained a peal of eight bells manufactured by Lester and Pack , was completed in May 1770 . The first restoration took place in 1821 , including a re @-@ roofing paid for by a daughter of Byrom . Between 1874 and 1878 work was done at a cost of £ 1600 and in 1898 the lighting was converted from gas to electric . The church bells , which were described as " among the best peal of bells in Manchester " , were rehung in 1832 and again around 1883 . The roof collapsed in 1924 and was rebuilt by 1926 . Among people who were commemorated in the church windows were John Owens , and Sir Thomas Bazley . 
 Today the graveyard of the church is commemorated by a stone cross and a plaque states that more than 22 @,@ 000 bodies lie buried in the vicinity . Among those buried in the churchyard are John Owens , the founder of Owens College , and William Marsden , who founded the concept of a half @-@ day holiday on Saturdays . 
 = = Origins = = 
 The rapid population growth of Manchester during the mid @-@ 18th century saw a rising demand for more churches . St John 's Church was built in 1769 by Edward Byrom ( 13 June 1724 – 24 April 1773 ) , a co @-@ founder of the first bank in Manchester and the oldest surviving son of John Byrom , whose affluent family was well known in the area . According to William Shaw , a local historian and fellow of Owens College , the church was " intended for the ' genteel ' residents who were migrating to the south side of the town " . 
 Byrom obtained permission from Edmund Keene , the Bishop of Chester , and was supported by many prominent local people . Its parish , which was not formalised until at least 1839 , encompassed an area described by the Manchester Courier in 1900 as 
 Between Quay @-@ street and <unk> @-@ street on the north , and the Central Station and Bridgewater @-@ street on the south . Its eastern boundary is the Town Hall ( which is within the parish ) , Cooper @-@ street , and Lower Mosley @-@ street ; and its western limit the River Irwell , forming the boundary of Manchester and Salford . [ Thus it covered ] a large and important section of the city of Manchester . 
 J. M. W. Turner sketched the tower of St John 's and two nearby church spires in 1831 . The sketch is in the Tate 's collection . 
 = = Structure = = 
 Although contemporary sources such as the Manchester Mercury name Byrom as the sponsor of the building , they do not identify his architect . The church was described by the English author and historian Clare Hartwell as being the first significant building in Manchester to be constructed in the Gothic Revival style of architecture . It had galleries supported by slender cast @-@ iron columns . The foundation stone was laid by Edward Byrom on 28 April 1768 and Keene performed the consecration on 7 July 1769 , when the sermon was given by John Byrom 's friend , John Clayton . Construction of the tower , which contained a peal of eight bells manufactured by Lester and Pack , was completed in May 1770 . 
 The first restoration took place in 1821 , including a re @-@ roofing paid for by a daughter of Byrom . Between 1874 and 1878 work was done at a cost of £ 1600 and in 1898 the lighting was converted from gas to electric , substantial internal modifications were carried out and repairs made to the clock tower which cost around £ 2200 . The church bells , which were described by a local journalist for the Manchester Courier and Lancashire General Advertiser as " among the best peal of bells in Manchester " , were rehung in 1832 and again around 1883 . The tower had clock dials on all four sides . A minute hand was added to the clock in 1833 and its mechanism was replaced around 1906 . The graveyard was paved with tombstones . 
 In 1906 , the church was looking to raise funds to acquire and convert the nearby St John 's Hospital of Manchester and Salford for the Ear for use as a rectory . 
 The roof collapsed in 1924 and was rebuilt by 1926 . Among people who were commemorated in the church windows were John Owens , and Sir Thomas Bazley . Another window was of some antiquity , originating from a convent in Rouen , France , and presented to the church by a grateful French refugee priest . This Entry to Jerusalem window were moved in 1929 to the Church of St Mary the Virgin , Eccles and windows depicting St John , St Peter and St Matthew , dating from 1760 by William <unk> , were at some time moved to St Ann 's Church in the city . 
 = = Functions = = 
 The church held the right to conduct the marriages of people throughout Manchester , not only from within its parish , until 1874 . Despite this , there were no such services for the first 35 years of its existence , perhaps because of the continued popularity of the Collegiate Church as a venue for weddings but probably because the latter insisted on collecting its own fees for marriages held in other local churches , which effectively doubled the cost of being married at St John 's rather than at the Collegiate Church . Later , after the rights of the Collegiate Church were curtailed , some weeks saw more than 100 marriage services at St John 's in the years just before 1874 . Burials ceased completely in 1900 but there had been very few for some years previously because the available space had been exhausted and most graves were full . 
 In 1827 , the church erected a building dedicated as a Sunday school . This was also used as a day school from 1838 . In 1906 , around 250 children attended the Sunday school and the church had numerous affiliated groups , such as a Penny Bank and a Choral Society . The day school accommodation was at that time condemned by the Board of Education as unfit for purpose and it was operating under a stay issued by the board . In the same year , Hannah Mitchell , a suffragette , was arrested at the day school for protesting during an election campaign speech by Winston Churchill . The building was closed in 1908 and a new school building opened on Gartside Street in 1910 at a cost of £ 4000 . This new facility was used only as Sunday school because , said the local clergy , the Board of Education put too many administrative obstacles and demands in their way , such as stipulating such a small attendance roll as to render any day school uneconomic and insisting on a dedicated playground despite there being a large open space next door that was traditionally used for that purpose . According to the foundation stone of the new school building , the church had operated the first Sunday school in Manchester , although Shaw attributes that distinction to a Mr Fildes , a Methodist whose establishment began operating from a Travis Street cellar in 1782 . Shaw says that several other schools preceded that of St John 's . 
 Around 1781 , the church had been the base for one of Manchester 's eight fire engines . 
 = = Clergy = = 
 A condition imposed by Byrom was that he had the right to present the living . The first rector , John Clowes , held the office for 62 years until his death in 1831 . He was commemorated by two stone tablets in the church , one by either Richard Westmacott or his son , erected after his death and one , the only example of the work of John Flaxman in Manchester , to celebrate his 50th anniversary as rector . Clowes preached the first Sunday school sermon in the Manchester area , introduced Swedenborgianism there and was prominent in championing Whit Walks . 
 Clowes was succeeded by William Huntington , who had held the post of curate since 1826 and continued as rector until his death in 1874 . Huntington established the Sunday school . Huntington 's successor as rector was John Henn , who held office for 14 years before moving to Heaton Chapel . The next rector , G. R. Youngman , was in office from 1888 until his death in 1890 . His position was taken by E. F. Leach . The last rector was Herbert Edmonds . 
 William <unk> , a Swedenborgian proponent of teetotalism and vegetarianism , was a curate in the late 1700s , before leaving to establish the Bible Christian Church in Salford . 
 = = Demise = = 
 By the early 1900s , the graveyard was overshadowed on its northern side by a warehouse built on the Quay Street site of the Byrom family residence . The area had been residential — Richard Cobden was among those who lived nearby and attended the church — but changed in character during the 19th century , as many homes once occupied by affluent families became lodging houses and the locale became increasingly a place of business . Those who did live there , or were patients in the nearby hospitals , were poor and unable to contribute significantly to the funds of the church and its schools . Fundraising bazaars were held in the 1890s and 1900s at the Free Trade Hall , in a nearby area that was more salubrious . 
 Falling attendances due to the commercial nature of the district , and also a sense that there was some redundancy of provision given the nearby St Matthew 's Church , caused the Manchester diocese to review the status of St John 's and its parish in the 1920s . Following an internal review and a public consultation , in 1927 it was formally proposed that the two parishes should be merged as St Matthew 's parish . The diocese preferred to retain St Matthew 's and demolish St John 's , at least in part because the former was a more recent construction . This was a reversal of a proposal made in 1919 , when the predominantly transient Roman Catholic population of the St Matthew 's parish was given as a reason to merge it into St John 's . 
 The Ecclesiastical Commissioners proposed to hand over the church site to Manchester Corporation in 1929 , with the hope that the city would convert it into an open space similar to Parsonage Gardens . The Manchester Guardian had reported a similar proposal to convert the " bleak expanse " of the graveyard into a " open , cultivated space " in 1914 . 
 The church was demolished in 1931 . It is commemorated by a stone cross and a plaque states that more than 22 @,@ 000 bodies lie buried in the vicinity . Among those buried in the churchyard are John Owens , founder of Owens College , the forerunner of Manchester University and William Marsden , who pioneered the concept of a half @-@ day holiday on Saturdays . 
 = Brazilian monitor Pará = 
 The Brazilian monitor Pará was the lead ship of the Pará @-@ class river monitors built for the Brazilian Navy during the Paraguayan War in the late 1860s . Pará participated in the Passagem de Humaitá in February 1868 and provided fire support for the army for the rest of the war . The ship was assigned to the Mato Grosso Flotilla after the war . Pará was disarmed and discarded in 1884 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The Pará @-@ class monitors were designed to meet the need of the Brazilian Navy for small , shallow @-@ draft armored ships capable of withstanding heavy fire . The monitor configuration was chosen as a turreted design did not have the same problems engaging enemy ships and fortifications as did the casemate ironclads already in Brazilian service . The oblong gun turret sat on a circular platform that had a central pivot . It was rotated by four men via a system of gears ; 2 @.@ 25 minutes were required for a full 360 ° rotation . A bronze ram was fitted to these ships as well . The hull was sheathed with Muntz metal to reduce biofouling . 
 The ships measured 39 meters ( 127 ft 11 in ) long overall , with a beam of 8 @.@ 54 meters ( 28 ft 0 in ) . They had a draft between of 1 @.@ 51 – 1 @.@ 54 meters ( 4 ft 11 in – 5 ft 1 in ) and displaced 500 metric tons ( 490 long tons ) . With only 0 @.@ 3 meters ( 1 ft 0 in ) of freeboard they had to be towed between Rio de Janeiro and their area of operations . Their crew numbered 43 officers and men . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 The Pará @-@ class ships had two direct @-@ acting steam engines , each driving a single 1 @.@ 3 @-@ meter ( 4 ft 3 in ) propeller . Their engines were powered by two tubular boilers at a working pressure of 59 psi ( 407 kPa ; 4 kgf / cm2 ) . The engines produced a total of 180 indicated horsepower ( 130 kW ) which gave the monitors a maximum speed of 8 knots ( 15 km / h ; 9 @.@ 2 mph ) in calm waters . The ships carried enough coal for one day 's steaming . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Pará carried a single 70 @-@ pounder Whitworth rifled muzzle loader ( RML ) in her gun turret . The 70 @-@ pounder gun had a maximum elevation of 15 ° . It had a maximum range of 5 @,@ 540 meters ( 6 @,@ 060 yd ) . The 70 @-@ pounder gun weighed 8 @,@ 582 pounds ( 3 @,@ 892 @.@ 7 kg ) and fired a 5 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 140 mm ) shell that weighed 81 pounds ( 36 @.@ 7 kg ) . Most unusually the gun 's Brazilian @-@ designed iron carriage was designed to pivot vertically at the muzzle ; this was done to minimize the size of the gunport through which splinters and shells could enter . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 The hull of the Pará @-@ class ships was made from three layers of wood that alternated in orientation . It was 457 millimeters ( 18 @.@ 0 in ) thick and was capped with a 102 @-@ millimeter ( 4 in ) layer of peroba hardwood . The ships had a complete wrought iron waterline belt , 0 @.@ 91 meters ( 3 @.@ 0 ft ) high . It had a maximum thickness of 102 millimeters amidships , decreasing to 76 millimeters ( 3 in ) and 51 millimeters ( 2 in ) at the ship 's ends . The curved deck was armored with 12 @.@ 7 millimeters ( 0 @.@ 5 in ) of wrought iron . 
 The gun turret was shaped like a rectangle with rounded corners . It was built much like the hull , but the front of the turret was protected by 152 millimeters ( 6 in ) of armor , the sides by 102 millimeters and the rear by 76 millimeters . Its roof and the exposed portions of the platform it rested upon were protected by 12 @.@ 7 millimeters of armor . The armored pilothouse was positioned ahead of the turret . 
 = = Service = = 
 Pará was laid down at the Arsenal de Marinha da Côrte in Rio de Janeiro on 8 December 1866 , during the Paraguayan War , which saw Argentina and Brazil allied against Paraguay . She was launched on 21 May 1867 and commissioned on 15 June 1867 . She was towed to the Río de la Plata on 20 June 1867 and steamed up the Paraná River , although her passage further north was barred by the Paraguayan fortifications at Humaitá . On 19 February 1868 six Brazilian ironclads , including Pará , sailed past Humaitá at night . Pará and her two sister ships , Alagoas and Rio Grande , were lashed to the larger ironclads in case any engines were disabled by the Paraguayan guns . Barroso led with Rio Grande , followed by Bahia with Alagoas and Tamandaré with Pará . The monitor had to be beached after passing the fortress to prevent her from sinking . Pará was repaired by 27 February when she joined a squadron dispatched to capture the town of <unk> . On 15 October she bombarded Angostura Fort in company with Brasil , Silvado , Rio Grande and her sister Ceará . On 17 May 1869 she joined a blockading squadron on the <unk> and <unk> Rivers . After the war Pará was assigned to the newly formed Mato Grosso Flotilla . She was disarmed and discarded on 10 December 1884 at Ladário . 
 = London Necropolis railway station = 
 London Necropolis railway station was the Waterloo , London terminus of the London Necropolis Railway . The London Necropolis Railway was opened in 1854 as a reaction to severe overcrowding in London 's existing graveyards and cemeteries . It aimed to use the recently developed technology of the railway to move as many burials as possible to the newly built Brookwood Cemetery in Brookwood , Surrey . This location was within easy travelling distance of London , but distant enough for the dead not to pose any risk to public hygiene . There were two locations for the station ; the first was in operation from 1854 to 1902 , the second from 1902 to 1941 . 
 Although it had its own branch line into Brookwood Cemetery , most of the route of the London Necropolis Railway ran on the existing London and South Western Railway ( LSWR ) . Consequently , a site was selected in Waterloo , near the LSWR 's recently opened London terminus at Waterloo Bridge station ( now London Waterloo ) . The building was specifically designed for the use of mourners . It had many private waiting rooms , which could also be used to hold funeral services , and a hydraulic lift to raise coffins to platform level . Existing railway arches were used for the storage of bodies . 
 In 1899 the location of the terminus was blocking the expansion of Waterloo station . After much negotiation , the LSWR reached agreement with the London Necropolis Company , the owners of the cemetery and the railway : in return for the existing site , the LSWR re @-@ equipped the London Necropolis Railway and supplied it with a new station on Westminster Bridge Road . This new building was designed to contrast with other funeral directors ' premises by being as attractive as possible . In 1902 the railway moved into the new building , and the earlier station was demolished . 
 On 16 April 1941 , during World War II the station was heavily damaged in an air raid . Much of the building was destroyed and the tracks to the station were rendered unusable . Although some funeral trains continued to run from nearby Waterloo station , the London terminus was never used again . Following the end of the war the London Necropolis Company decided that reopening the London Necropolis Railway was not financially worthwhile , and the surviving part of the station building was sold as office space . This remnant remains intact , and relatively unaltered since its opening . 
 = = Background = = 
 In the first half of the 19th century the population of London more than doubled , from a little under a million people in 1801 to almost two and a half million in 1851 . The city 's dead had been buried in and around the local churches . With a limited amount of space for burials , the oldest graves were regularly exhumed to free space for new burials . Despite the rapid growth in population , the amount of land set aside for use as graveyards remained unchanged at approximately 300 acres ( 0 @.@ 5 sq mi ; 1 @.@ 2 km2 ) , spread across around 200 small sites . Even relatively fresh graves had to be exhumed to free up space for new burials , their contents being unearthed and scattered . Decaying corpses contaminated the water supply , and the city suffered regular epidemics of cholera , smallpox , measles and typhoid . A Royal Commission established in 1842 to investigate the problem concluded that London 's burial grounds had become so overcrowded that it was impossible to dig a new grave without cutting through an existing one . In 1848 – 49 a cholera epidemic killed 14 @,@ 601 people in London and overwhelmed the burial system completely . 
 In the wake of public concerns following the cholera epidemics and the findings of a Royal Commission , the Act to Amend the Laws Concerning the Burial of the Dead in the Metropolis ( Burials Act ) was passed in 1851 . Under the Burials Act , new burials were prohibited in what were then the built @-@ up areas of London . 
 = = = London Necropolis Company = = = 
 Sir Richard Broun and Richard Sprye proposed to use the emerging technology of mechanised land transport to solve the problem of London 's dead . Broun and Sprye envisaged buying a single very large tract of land around 23 miles ( 37 km ) from London in Brookwood near Woking , Surrey , to be called Brookwood Cemetery or the London Necropolis . At this distance , the land would be far beyond the maximum anticipated size of the city 's growth , greatly reducing any potential hazards . The London and South Western Railway ( LSWR ) – which had connected London to Woking in 1838 – would enable bodies and mourners to be shipped from London to the site easily and cheaply . Although the Brookwood site was a long distance from London , Broun and Sprye argued that the speed of the railway made it both quicker and cheaper to reach than the seven existing cemeteries , all of which required a slow and expensive horse @-@ drawn hearse to carry the body and mourners from London to the burial site . 
 On 30 June 1852 the promoters of the Brookwood scheme were given Parliamentary consent to proceed , and the London Necropolis and National Mausoleum Company ( LNC ) was formed . The former Woking Common , owned by the Earl of Onslow at Brookwood was chosen as the site for the new cemetery . To prevent the LSWR from exploiting its monopoly on access to the cemetery , the private Act of Parliament authorising the scheme bound the LSWR to carry corpses and mourners to the cemetery in perpetuity and set a maximum tariff which could be levied on funeral traffic , but did not specify detail of how the funeral trains were to operate . 
 On 7 November 1854 the new cemetery opened and the southern Anglican section was consecrated by Charles Sumner , Bishop of Winchester . On 13 November the first scheduled London Necropolis Railway train left the new London Necropolis railway station for the cemetery , and the first burial ( that of the stillborn twins of a Mr and Mrs Hore of Ewer Street , Southwark Borough ) took place . 
 = = First station ( 1854 – 1902 ) = = 
 A site for the London terminus near Waterloo had been suggested by Sir Richard Broun . Its proximity to the River Thames meant that bodies could be cheaply transported to the terminus by water from much of London , while being situated near three major Thames bridges meant that the area was easily accessed from both north and south of the river by road . The arches of the huge brick viaduct carrying the LSWR into Waterloo Bridge station ( now London Waterloo station ) were easily converted into mortuaries . Broun also felt that the journey out of London from Waterloo Bridge would be less distressing for mourners : while most of the rail routes out of London ran through tunnels and deep cuttings , or through densely populated areas , at this time the urban development of what is now south London had not taken place and the LSWR route ran almost entirely through parkland and countryside . The LNC also contemplated taking over the LSWR 's former terminus at Nine Elms railway station ( which following the 1848 opening of the much more convenient Waterloo Bridge station was used only for goods traffic , chartered trains taking migrants to North America , and the private trains of the royal family ) as either the main or a secondary terminus . Despite objections from local residents concerned about the effects of potentially large numbers of dead bodies being stored in a largely residential area , in March 1854 the LNC settled on a single terminus in Waterloo and purchased a plot of land between Westminster Bridge Road and York Street ( now Leake Street ) for the site . 
 Architect William Tite and engineer William Cubitt drew up a design for a station , which was approved in June 1854 . The station was completed in October 1854 , at a total construction cost of £ 23 @,@ 231 14s 4d ( about £ 1 @.@ 97 million in terms of 2016 spending power ) . On 13 November 1854 the first train left London for the new London Necropolis . 
 Tite and Cubitt 's design was based around a three @-@ storey main building , separated from the LSWR 's main viaduct by a private access road beneath the LNC 's twin rail lines . The private access road was intended to allow mourners to arrive and leave discreetly , and to avoid the need for hearses to stop in the public road . The ground floor contained a grand entrance hall and staircase for mourners attending first and second class funerals , a smaller entrance hall and staircase for those attending lower classes of funeral , and two mortuaries which occupied the majority of the floor . A large room adjacent to the mortuary held a reserve stock of around 300 coffins . Most mourners would have commissioned their own coffins , or used coffins bought by the deceased during their lifetime but , explained an official of the LNC ( in 1898 ) the reserve of coffins was kept so that " should a guest die in a hotel , and the landlord wished to keep it quiet , we are notified , and in the middle of the night we come for the corpse , and take it away in one of our ready @-@ made wooden overcoats " . The first floor held the LNC 's boardroom , the LNC 's funerary workshops , a series of separate waiting rooms for those attending second and third class funerals , and the building 's main toilets . The second floor , level with the LSWR railway line , held the train shed covering the two private rail lines and the single platform at which the trains stopped , eight or nine waiting rooms for first class mourners , and further toilets for their use . A steam @-@ powered lift carried coffins from the lower floors to the platform level . A glass roof was positioned in order that no shadow be cast on the hearse carriage waiting at the platform at the time the trains were scheduled to depart , and the western wall was windowless to avoid passengers using the LSWR station being able to see into the Necropolis station . Glass panels inset between the two rail lines allowed sunlight through to the private access road below . Unlike most railway stations of the period , the designs of the first , second and third class waiting rooms were largely identical with only superficial differences . 
 Although the original terminus did not have its own chapel , on some occasions mourners would not be able or willing to make the journey to a ceremony at Brookwood but for personal or religious reasons were unable to hold the funeral service in a London church . On these occasions one of the waiting rooms would be used as a makeshift funeral chapel . One of the more notable funerals to be held at the terminus was that of Friedrich Engels , co @-@ creator ( with Karl Marx ) of modern communism , who died in London on 5 August 1895 . Engels had expressed a wish to be cremated and his ashes scattered at sea , but there was no crematorium near London . The LNC had an arrangement with Woking Crematorium , by which Necropolis Railway stations and trains could be used by mourners attending cremations at Woking . For Engels 's funeral on 10 August 1895 around 150 people attended a morning service in a waiting room at the LNC terminus . Although the cremation was scheduled for 1 : 15 pm formalities with the death certificate delayed the departure , and the special train did not arrive at the cemetery 's North station ( the station serving the part of the cemetery reserved for non @-@ Anglicans ) until after 4 : 00 pm . The majority of the mourners remained at North station in the cemetery , and only 12 mourners accompanied the coffin to Woking ; as the service had already been held in London , on arrival at Woking , Engels 's body was transferred straight from the hearse to the furnace . Engels 's ashes ( cremated remains ) were recovered from the furnace and transferred to an unrecorded location in Brookwood Cemetery , and 17 days later removed from the cemetery and scattered from Beachy Head ( in East Sussex ) . Karl Marx 's daughter Eleanor Marx died in 1898 and was also cremated at Woking following a service at the LNC 's London terminus ( probably in the same room in which Engels 's service had been held three years previously ) and carriage to North station by the Necropolis Railway . Woking Crematorium , first used for human cremation in 1885 , cooperated closely with the LNC , as they hoped to prevent the LNC building their own crematorium at Brookwood . The LNC never built their own crematorium , although a columbarium ( building for the storage of cremation ashes ) was added to Brookwood Cemetery in 1910 . 
 For extremely large funerals such as those of major public figures , the LSWR would provide additional trains from Waterloo to Brookwood station on the main line to meet the demand . Charles Bradlaugh , Member of Parliament for Northampton , was a vocal advocate of Indian self @-@ government and a popular figure among the Indian community in London , many of whom attended his funeral on 3 February 1891 . Over 5 @,@ 000 mourners , including 21 @-@ year @-@ old Mohandas Gandhi , were carried on three long special LSWR trains , one of which was 17 carriages long . 
 In 1874 , with Waterloo Bridge station becoming extremely busy , the LSWR attempted to take over one of the LNC 's two rail lines . An 1875 agreement between the LSWR and LNC permitted the LSWR to take over the westernmost track ( that not served by the platform ) , in return for improved terms on the lease of the land currently leased by the LNC from the LSWR , and the LSWR taking over the maintenance of the structure supporting the LNC lines . In 1876 and 1877 the roof and western wall of the LNC train shed were demolished and replaced with a cantilevered awning over the single platform ; the platform was extended to compensate for the loss of the second line . 
 = = = Waterloo expansion proposal = = = 
 In 1889 Waterloo Station ( renamed from Waterloo Bridge station in 1886 ) was equipped with new signals , which required a gantry spanning all the lines into the station . In return for the LSWR cladding the LNC 's entrance on Westminster Bridge Road with white glazed brick , the LNC gave consent for the stanchion supporting the gantry to rest on the LNC 's platform , while reserving the right to demand the gantry be removed . At this time the LSWR also leased a small plot of land west of the Westminster Bridge Road entrance to serve as the site of new offices for the LNC , designed by Cyril <unk> Tubbs . 
 As the site of the Necropolis station had been intentionally chosen to abut the arches of the LSWR 's viaduct , it acted as an obstacle to any increase in the number of lines serving Waterloo station . Urban growth in the area of what is now south west London , through which trains from Waterloo ran , led to congestion at the station , only slightly alleviated by the LSWR 's 1877 takeover of the western LNC track . In the 1890s the situation became untenable , and the LSWR began to investigate the possibility of repositioning the LNC station to permit the expansion of the main line terminus . 
 In 1896 the LSWR formally presented the LNC with a proposal to provide the LNC with a new station in return for the existing station . The LNC agreed to the proposals , but with a number of conditions attached . The LSWR was to allow the LNC control of the design of the new station , lease the new station to the LNC for a token rent in perpetuity , provide new rolling stock , remove any limit on the number of passengers using the Necropolis service , and provide the free carriage of machinery and equipment to be used in the cemetery . The LNC had an extremely strong negotiating position as their existing site was crucial to any expansion of Waterloo station , and in addition they had the legal right to demand the removal of the stanchion supporting Waterloo 's signal gantry . Although the LSWR was extremely unhappy at what they considered excessive demands , they had no choice but to comply . In May 1899 the companies signed an agreement , in which the LSWR gave in to every LNC demand . In addition the LSWR paid £ 12 @,@ 000 compensation ( about £ 1 @.@ 22 million in terms of 2016 consumer spending power ) for the inconvenience of relocating the LNC station and offices , and agreed that mourners returning from the cemetery could travel on any LSWR train to Waterloo , Vauxhall or Clapham Junction . 
 = = Second station ( 1902 – 1941 ) = = 
 The site for the replacement terminus was identified in 1896 , and bought by the LSWR in 1899 for £ 5 @,@ 500 ( about £ 444 @,@ 000 in terms of 2016 consumer spending power ) . South of the existing station and on the opposite side of Westminster Bridge Road , its main entrance was at 188 Westminster Bridge Road . The site was roughly S @-@ shaped : the entrance from Westminster Bridge Road led to a strip of land at a right angle to the entrance and running behind existing buildings on Westminster Bridge Road . This in turn led to the location identified for the two new rail lines , at a right angle to the central strip ( i.e. parallel to the entrance ) . Work on the new station began in the summer of 1900 , and was completed on 8 February 1902 at a total construction cost to the LSWR of £ 43 @,@ 494 ( about £ 4 @.@ 26 million in terms of 2016 consumer spending power ) excluding the cost of the land . 
 While construction was underway the original terminus remained in use , although the LSWR was granted running rights through the station . On 23 February Major J. W. Pringle of the Board of Trade inspected the new building and expressed concerns over the safety of the arrangements for trains entering the station from the main line , which entailed crossing the LSWR 's multiple tracks . He was also unhappy about the newly installed passenger lifts and the unfinished nature of the passenger terminus , but nonetheless approved the limited use of the new station for funeral trains . Soon after the transfer of LNC services to the new building the LSWR viaduct was widened to serve a greatly enlarged Waterloo station , destroying all traces of the original LNC terminus . 
 The new building , also designed by Cyril <unk> Tubbs , was designed for attractiveness and modernity to contrast with the traditional gloomy decor associated with the funeral industry . A narrow four @-@ storey office building stood at 188 Westminster Bridge Road . The ground floor was taken up by a large arch leading to a waiting room , an office for general enquiries , and the long driveway leading to the station itself ; above this were the LNC 's offices and boardrooms . 
 First class mourners entered through the driveway under the office building which turned sharply left to run beneath a glass canopy parallel to Westminster Bridge Road ; this stretch was faced with glazed white brick and lined with palm and bay trees . The driveway ran past mortuaries and storerooms to the lifts and stairs to the platforms , and also to a secondary entrance on Newnham Terrace ( off Hercules Road ) . Above the mortuaries and storerooms were the LNC 's workshops . Lifts and an elaborate wrought @-@ iron staircase led from the lower two floors to platform level on the second floor . This upper level housed a sumptuous oak @-@ panelled Chapelle Ardente , intended for mourners unable to make the journey to Brookwood to pay their respects to the deceased . A short and wide pathway led to the first class platform , lined with waiting rooms and a ticket office ; the first class platform was equipped with five separate waiting rooms to keep mourners from different funeral parties separate . 
 A glass screen separated the first class platform and circulating area from the platform and circulating area for third class passengers . The third class section was entered from the secondary entrance in Newnham Terrace , and was more sparsely furnished and not equipped with lifts . From the Newnham Terrace entrance a staircase led to a single communal waiting room on the first floor , and to the third class platform on the second floor , much shorter than the first class platform . 
 There was still an ability to transport large parties on occasions . The funeral of Indian businessman Sir <unk> <unk> on 25 July 1938 saw 155 mourners travelling first class on a dedicated LNC train . 
 = = Operations = = 
 The London Necropolis Company offered three classes of funerals . A first class funeral allowed the person buying the funeral to select the grave site of their choice anywhere in the cemetery ; at the time of opening , first class prices began at £ 2 10s ( about £ 212 in 2016 terms ) for a basic 9 @-@ by @-@ 4 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 7 m × 1 @.@ 2 m ) plot with no special coffin specifications . It was expected by the LNC that those using first class graves would erect a permanent memorial of some kind in due course following the funeral . Second class funerals cost £ 1 ( about £ 85 in 2016 terms ) and allowed some control over the burial location . The right to erect a permanent memorial cost an additional 10 shillings ( about £ 42 in 2016 terms ) ; if a permanent memorial was not erected the LNC reserved the right to re @-@ use the grave in future . Third class funerals were reserved for pauper funerals ; those buried at parish expense in the section of the cemetery designated for that parish . Although the LNC was forbidden from using mass graves ( other than the burial of next of kin in the same grave ) and thus even the lowest class of funeral provided a separate grave for the deceased , third class funerals were not granted the right to erect a permanent memorial on the site . ( The families of those buried could pay afterwards to upgrade a third class grave to a higher class if they later wanted to erect a memorial , but this practice was rare . ) Despite this , Brookwood 's pauper graves granted more dignity to the deceased than did other graveyards and cemeteries of the period , all of which other than Brookwood continued the practice of mass graves for the poor . Brookwood was one of the few cemeteries to permit burials on Sundays , which made it a popular choice with the poor as it allowed people to attend funerals without the need to take a day off work . As theatrical performances were banned on Sundays at this time , it also made Brookwood a popular choice for the burial of actors for the same reason , to the extent that actors were provided with a dedicated section of the cemetery near the station entrance . 
 For those third class funerals paid for by the parish , two third class tickets would be provided at the parish 's expense ( one ticket in the case of a child 's death ) . Further mourners for third class funerals were obliged to pay for their own tickets to the Necropolis . 
 On arrival at the terminus the mourners would be led either to one of the dedicated first class waiting rooms ( for first and second class funerals ) or to the communal third class waiting room . The coffin would be discreetly unloaded from the hearse and sent to the platform level by lift . Those attending first and second class funerals would be permitted to watch the coffins being loaded onto the train if they so wished . ( After the relocation to the new London terminus in 1902 , some funeral services would be held in the Chapelle Ardente at platform level , for those cases where mourners were unable to make the journey to Brookwood . ) Each door of the waiting train would be labelled with the name of the deceased , to ensure all passengers travelled with the correct funeral party ; the names of the deceased being carried on the train would be called in turn , and that person 's mourners would board the train . 
 At the time the service was inaugurated , the LNC 's trains were divided both by class and by religion , with separate Anglican and Nonconformist sections of the train . This distinction applied to both living and dead passengers . Intended to prevent persons from different social background from mixing and potentially distressing mourners and to prevent bodies of persons from different social classes being carried in the same compartment rather than to provide different facilities , the carriages intended for all classes and religions were very similar in design , and the primary difference was different ornamentation on the compartment doors . 
 At 11 @.@ 35 am ( 11 @.@ 20 am on Sundays ) the train would leave London for Brookwood , arriving at Necropolis Junction ( where the branch line into the cemetery left the main LSWR line ) at 12 @.@ 25 pm ( 12 @.@ 20 pm on Sundays ) . 
 The train only ran if there was a coffin or passengers at the London terminus waiting to use it , and both the journey from London to Brookwood and the later return would be cancelled if nobody was due to leave London that morning . It would not run if there was only a single third or second class coffin to be carried , and in these cases the coffin and funeral party would be held until the next service . Generally the trains ran direct from London to the cemetery , other than occasional stops to take on water . Between 1890 and 1910 the trains also sometimes stopped at Vauxhall and Clapham Junction for the benefit of mourners from south west London who did not want to travel via the Waterloo terminus , but these intermediate stops were discontinued and never reinstated . After 1 October 1900 the Sunday trains were discontinued , and from 1902 the daily train service was ended and trains ran only as required . 
