 = = Destruction = = 
 During the Second World War Waterloo station and the nearby Thames bridges were a significant target for Axis bombing , and there were several near @-@ misses on the Necropolis station during the London Blitz of 1940 – 41 . Although there were several interruptions to the Necropolis train service owing to enemy action elsewhere on the line , the Necropolis station was undamaged during the early stages of the bombing campaign , and services generally continued as normal . 
 During the night of 16 – 17 April 1941 , in one of the last major air raids on London , bombs repeatedly fell on the Waterloo area , and the LNC 's good fortune in avoiding damage to their facilities finally ran out . In the early stages of the air raid the rolling stock stored in the Necropolis siding was burned , and the railway arch connecting the main line to the Necropolis terminus was damaged , although the terminal building itself remained unscathed . 
 At 10 @.@ 30 pm multiple incendiary devices and high explosive bombs struck the central section of the terminus building . While the office building and platforms survived , the workshops , driveway and Chapelle Ardente were destroyed , along with the third class waiting room . The Divisional Engineer of the Southern Railway ( SR , which had absorbed the LSWR in the 1923 restructuring of Britain 's railways ) inspected the damage at 2 @.@ 00 pm on 17 April , and his report read simply " Necropolis and buildings demolished " . 
 On 11 May 1941 the station was officially declared closed . The last recorded funeral carried on the London Necropolis Railway was that of Chelsea Pensioner Edward Irish ( 1868 – 1941 ) , buried on 11 April 1941 . The SR offered the LNC the temporary use of platform 11 or 12 of Waterloo station to allow the service to be continued , but refused to allow the LNC to continue to sell cheap tickets to visitors travelling to and from the cemetery stations other than those involved in a funeral that day , meaning those visiting the cemetery had little reason to choose the LNC 's irregular and infrequent trains over the SR 's fast and frequent services to their own Brookwood railway station . The LNC attempted to negotiate a deal by which bona fide mourners could still travel cheaply to the cemetery on the 11 @.@ 57 am service to Brookwood ( the SR service closest to the LNC 's traditional departure time ) , but the SR management ( themselves under severe financial pressure owing to wartime constraints and damage ) refused to entertain any compromise . 
 = = Closure = = 
 In September 1945 , following the end of hostilities , the directors of the LNC met to consider whether to rebuild the terminus and reopen the London Necropolis Railway . Although the main line from Waterloo to Brookwood had remained in use throughout the war and was in good condition , the branch line from Brookwood into the cemetery had been almost unused since the destruction of the London terminus . With the soil of the cemetery causing the branch to deteriorate even when it had been in use and regularly maintained , the branch line was in extremely poor condition . 
 Although the original promoters of the scheme had envisaged Brookwood Cemetery becoming London 's main or only cemetery , the scheme had never been as popular as they had hoped . In the original proposal , Sir Richard Broun had calculated that over its first century of operations the cemetery would have seen around five million burials at a rate of 50 @,@ 000 per year , the great majority of which would have utilised the railway . In reality at the time the last train ran on 11 April 1941 , almost 87 years after opening , only 203 @,@ 041 people had been buried in the cemetery . Before the outbreak of hostilities increased use of motorised road transport had damaged the profitability of the railway for both the LNC and the SR . Faced with the costs of rebuilding the cemetery branch line , building a new London terminus and replacing the rolling stock damaged or destroyed in the air raid , the directors concluded that " past experience and present changed conditions made the running of the Necropolis private train obsolete " . In mid @-@ 1946 the LNC formally informed the SR that the Westminster Bridge Road terminus would not be reopened . 
 The decision prompted complicated negotiations with the SR over the future of the LNC facilities in London . In December 1946 the directors of the two companies finally reached agreement . The railway @-@ related portions of the LNC site ( the waiting rooms , the caretaker 's flat and the platforms themselves ) would pass into the direct ownership of the SR , while the remaining surviving portions of the site ( the office block on Westminster Bridge Road , the driveway and the ruined central portion of the site ) would pass to the LNC to use or dispose of as they saw fit . The LNC sold the site to the British Humane Association in May 1947 for £ 21 @,@ 000 ( about £ 741 @,@ 000 in terms of 2016 consumer spending power ) , and the offices of the LNC were transferred to the Superintendent 's Office at Brookwood . The SR continued to use the surviving sections of the track as occasional sidings into the 1950s , before clearing what remained of their section of the site . 
 With most of the LNC 's business being operated by road , an agreement on 13 May 1946 allowed the LNC to make use of SR services from Waterloo to Brookwood station for funerals , subject to the condition that should the service be heavily used the SR ( British Railways after 1948 ) reserved the right to restrict the number of funeral parties on any given train . Although one of the LNC 's hearse carriages had survived the bombing it is unlikely that this was ever used , and coffins were carried in the luggage space of the SR 's coaches . Coffins would either be shipped to Brookwood ahead of the funeral party and transported by road to one of the mortuaries at the disused cemetery stations , or travel on the same SR train as the funeral party to Brookwood and be transported from Brookwood station to the burial site or chapel by road . 
 = = = The site today = = = 
 The site of the first terminus was cleared during the expansion of the viaduct into Waterloo in the early 20th century , and no trace of it remains . Most of the site of the second station was sold by the LNC and built over with new office developments in the years following the end of the Second World War , but the office building on Westminster Bridge Road , over the former entrance to the station driveway , remains relatively unaltered externally although the words " London Necropolis " carved into the stone above the driveway have been covered . Refurbishments and cleaning in the 1980s restored the façade of the building to an appearance similar to that of the time of its building . Other than iron columns in Newnham Terrace which once supported the Necropolis Railway tracks , and a surviving section of the internal driveway used as a car park , the Westminster Bridge Road building is the only surviving part of the London Necropolis Railway in London . 
 = Church of the Holy Mother of God , Donja Kamenica = 
 The Church of the Holy Mother of God ( Serbian : <unk> <unk> <unk> , Crkva <unk> <unk> ; Bulgarian : <unk> „ Света <unk> “ , <unk> „ Sveta <unk> “ ) is a medieval Eastern Orthodox church in the village of Donja Kamenica in <unk> municipality , Zaječar District , eastern Serbia . The church is generally considered to have been built in the 14th century , when this area was part of the Second Bulgarian Empire 's Vidin appanage , though alternative datings have been proposed . 
 While small , the Church of the Holy Mother of God is notable for its unusual architectural style , in particular for its high narthex flanked by two sharp @-@ pointed towers . These features , which hint at Hungarian or Transylvanian influences , are highly atypical for medieval Bulgarian church architecture . The church is richly decorated on the inside , with as many as eleven frescoes of historical figures . One of these portraits , captioned as a despot , is variously identified as an eponymous son of Bulgarian tsar Michael Shishman or as an undocumented son of co @-@ tsar Michael Asen IV ; earlier speculation that the image depicted Serbian noble Mihailo Anđelović or Michael Shishman himself have since fallen out of favor with art historians . In addition to these early portraits , the interior walls of the church were painted with canonical murals , which can stylistically be assigned to the 14th – 15th century . The church was reconstructed in 1958 and has been under Serbian state protection since 1982 . 
 = = History and architecture = = 
 The Church of the Holy Mother of God lies in the eastern Serbian village of Donja Kamenica , some 10 to 15 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 2 to 9 @.@ 3 mi ) southeast of <unk> , northeast of Niš and not far from the Bulgarian border . The church is located at the square in the centre of the village , by the left bank of the <unk> Timok river and along an old military road from Pirot to Vidin . The church acquired its name due to its abundance of frescoes featuring Mary , the mother of Jesus . 
 The prevalent opinion is that the church was constructed and painted in the early 14th century , which coincides with the lifetimes of the individuals most widely accepted as represented by the figures depicted in the church 's frescoes . At the time , the village of Donja Kamenica , along with much of the <unk> Krajina region , belonged to the Vidin appanage of the Second Bulgarian Empire . However , alternative theories place the construction of the church in the mid @-@ 14th century , the mid @-@ 15th century or even the 16th century . The church and its frescoes were restored in 1958 . The church was declared a Monument of Culture of Great Importance in 1982 , and it is protected by the Republic of Serbia . 
 In terms of architecture , the church features a round dome and a single apse . The naos or cella has the shape of a cross , in line with the popular Byzantine cross @-@ in @-@ square design . Of particular interest is the formerly two @-@ storey narthex , which is notable for its unusual verticality and the towers on either side of the entrance . Judging by the models depicted in the donor 's portraits inside the church , it is clear that the towers were originally further apart and the west facade with the narthex included much woodwork . The towers are topped off by sharp @-@ pointed pyramidal elements , with additional sharp @-@ pointed details in each of the pyramids ' four corners . The towers and their design are entirely unusual and unprecedented in medieval Bulgarian church architecture . Art historian Nikola Mavrodinov believes these resemble Gothic architecture , though a more modern researcher , Bistra Nikolova , dismisses his assessment and considers these an influence from Hungary or Transylvania . 
 Despite its monumental appearance , the church is rather small in size . It measures 7 @.@ 80 by 6 @.@ 50 metres ( 25 @.@ 6 ft × 21 @.@ 3 ft ) ( according to Nikolova ) or 7 @.@ 70 by 6 @.@ 20 metres ( 25 @.@ 3 ft × 20 @.@ 3 ft ) ( per <unk> ) . The materials employed in the church 's construction were chiefly chiseled stones welded together using mortar masonry . Several rows of bricks were added in order to even out the structure and to serve as decoration , particularly in the dome , which features more elaborate brickwork . 
 = = Decoration = = 
 The frescoes inside the church are commonly dated to the 14th – 15th century , though they follow a standard compositional model which had been established in Bulgarian church decoration since the 13th century . Unusually , most of the captions which accompany the images are in Byzantine Greek , though a few are in Old Church Slavonic . In terms of style , the murals have much in common with churches from the southwestern Bulgarian lands . 
 Biblical scenes and figures depicted in the Church of the Holy Mother of God include the worshiping of the Christ child as the eucharistic victim ( the <unk> ) in the lower part of the apse , the raising of Lazarus , the Annunciation , Jesus ' triumphal entry into Jerusalem , Judas Iscariot 's betrayal of Jesus , the Passion of the Christ in the upper part of the cella , the Descent from the Cross , the mourning of Jesus , and the Dormition of the Theotokos on the west wall . The north and south walls of the cella , as well as the wall piers , bear frescoes of saints , including rare images of military saints on horseback . Murals of Saint Petka and Saint Nicholas were painted in the upper reaches of the narthex , in the south and the north tower respectively . 
 Besides religious imagery , the frescoes of the Donja Kamenica church also include eleven portraits of contemporary historical figures , separated into four compositions . Three of the compositions are <unk> , making the identification of the people practically impossible . The first composition is located in the cella and depicts two men preserved from the waist up , of which one holds a model of the church , and a child , of which only the head is visible today . The second composition was painted on the upper west wall of the narthex and portrays a man , a woman , a boy and a girl , with the man also holding a model of the church , a common symbol of <unk> . Art historian <unk> <unk> believes that the images of men holding models in both compositions depict the same person , the main donor . The third composition is in the cella and depicts two men : a monk and a priest . 
 = = = Despot and despotissa 's portraits = = = 
 Of greatest interest is the fourth composition of historical figures , a young man and a woman , which was painted on the lowest west wall of the narthex and includes inscriptions in Old Church Slavonic . The figures are painted facing the viewer . The man 's red clothing is covered in pearls and double @-@ headed eagles , and he wears an archaic @-@ looking despot 's crown on his head . In his right hand , the man holds a sceptre with a cross . He extends his hand to a woman , clad in a despotissa 's attire and wearing a fitting crown . 
 The inscription next to the figure of the man has been deciphered either as “ Michael despot , in Christ [ our ] God ... faithful ” or “ Michael despot , in Christ [ our ] God faithful , son of Tsar Michael ” . Either reading presents significant challenges as to the proper identification of the portrayed person , who was clearly a despot , bore the name Michael , and , if the latter reading is correct , was the son of an eponymous tsar . As a result , various theories have been proposed by Bulgarian and Serbian researchers alike . 
 Early Bulgarian historian Petar <unk> suggested that despot Michael of the Donja Kamenica church is identical with Bulgarian tsar Michael Shishman ( r . 1323 – 1330 ) who , before his accession to the throne , was despot of Vidin . However , Michael Shishman 's father was named Shishman , not Michael , and was usually titled despot rather than tsar . In turn , Mavrodinov proposed the theory that despot Michael is an otherwise unknown son of Michael Shishman , who was installed as despot of Vidin by his father after his coronation in 1323 . In any case , this unknown son of Michael Shishman was probably dead by 1331 because Belaur is mentioned as the ruler of Vidin shortly thereafter . The latter theory is the most established identification of despot Michael in Bulgarian historiography . 
 A third theory , supported by both Serbian and Bulgarian researchers , is that despot Michael is an unknown son of Michael Asen IV , the first @-@ born son of Bulgarian tsar Ivan Alexander ( r . 1331 – 1371 ) , who was proclaimed co @-@ tsar shortly after his father 's accession and died in a battle against the Ottomans before 1354 – 1355 . Against this identification is the account of Nikephoros Gregoras , who mentions that Michael Asen 's widow returned childless to Constantinople after his death . Another issue with this theory is that no source mentions Michael Asen as a despot . 
 Another theory , which was put forward by early Serbian historians and has subsequently lost support in Serbian scholarship , is that despot Michael is to be identified with mid @-@ 15th @-@ century Serbian noble Mihailo Anđelović , a brother of Ottoman statesman Mahmud Pasha Angelović . However , in @-@ depth research of the <unk> has concluded that they cannot be ascribed to the 1450s , as the artistic style , the clothing and hairstyles in the portraits are uncommon for this period . Furthermore , the church seems to bear little architectural similarity to churches of the Morava school , which dominated 15th @-@ century Serbian architecture . It has also been revealed that in 1454 – 1455 , Donja Kamenica was controlled by the Ottomans and in possession of a certain Yusuf , rather than part of the Serbian Despotate , and Mihailo Anđelović was never titled despot . 
 The identity of the woman has also been a matter of debate . The inscription which accompanies her image clearly includes her title , despotissa , as well as the word “ daughter ” . Based on a possible reading of her name as Anna , she has been identified as Anna Neda , the Serbian wife of Michael Shishman , which is in line with the first identification of the despot . Nikolova believes that it is possible that the woman is Anna Neda even if the despot is her son rather than her husband . She theorises that Anna Neda settled in Vidin after Michael Shishman 's second marriage and owned a personal domain which included Donja Kamenica . Another reading of the inscription deciphers the name of the despotissa as Elena . 
 = Ice hockey at the Olympic Games = 
 Ice hockey tournaments have been staged at the Olympic Games since 1920 . The men 's tournament was introduced at the 1920 Summer Olympics and was transferred permanently to the Winter Olympic Games program in 1924 , in France . The women 's tournament was first held at the 1998 Winter Olympics . The Olympic Games were originally intended for amateur athletes until 1988 , and the National Hockey League ( NHL ) did not allow its players to compete until 1998 . From 1924 to 1988 , the tournament started with a round @-@ robin series of games and ended with the medal round . Medals were awarded based on points accumulated during that round . The games of the tournament follow the rules of the International Ice Hockey Federation ( IIHF ) , which differ slightly from the rules used in the NHL . The tournament follows the World Anti @-@ Doping Agency 's ( WADA ) rules on performance @-@ enhancing drugs and the IIHF maintains a Registered Testing Pool , a list of top players who are subjected to random in @-@ competition and out @-@ of @-@ competition drug tests . Several players have tested positive for banned substances since the 1972 Winter Olympics . 
 In the men 's tournament , Canada was the most successful team of the first three decades , winning six of seven gold medals . Czechoslovakia , Sweden and the United States were also competitive during this period and won multiple medals . Between 1920 and 1968 , the Olympic hockey tournament was also counted as the Ice Hockey World Championship for that year . The Soviet Union first participated in 1956 and overtook Canada as the dominant international team , winning seven of the nine tournaments in which they participated . The United States won gold medals in 1960 and in 1980 , which included their " Miracle on Ice " upset of the Soviet Union . Canada went 50 years without a gold medal , before winning one in 2002 , and following it with back @-@ to @-@ back wins in 2010 and 2014 . Other nations to win gold include Great Britain in 1936 , the Unified Team in 1992 , Sweden in 1994 and 2006 and the Czech Republic in 1998 . Other medal @-@ winning nations include Switzerland , Germany , Finland and Russia . 
 In 1986 , the International Olympic Committee ( IOC ) voted to allow all athletes to compete in Olympic Games starting in 1988 . The NHL was initially reluctant to allow its players to compete because the Olympics are held in the middle of the NHL season , and the league would have to halt play if many of its players participated . However , NHL players were allowed to compete starting in 1998 . The format of the tournament was adjusted to accommodate the NHL schedule ; a preliminary round was played without NHL players or the top six teams — Canada , the Czech Republic , Finland , Russia , Sweden and the United States — followed by a final round which included them . The tournament format was changed again in 2006 ; every team played five preliminary games with the full use of NHL players . 
 In July 1992 , the IOC voted to approve women 's hockey as an Olympic event ; it was first held at the 1998 Winter Olympics in Nagano . The Nagano Organizing Committee was hesitant to include the event because of the additional costs of staging the tournament , but an agreement was reached that limited the field to six teams , and ensured that no additional facilities would be built . The Canadian and American teams have dominated the event , typically losing only to each other . The United States won the first tournament in 1998 , while Canada won in 2002 , 2006 , 2010 and 2014 . 
 = = Inception as an Olympic sport = = 
 The first Olympic ice hockey tournament took place at the 1920 Summer Olympics in Antwerp , Belgium . At the time , organised international ice hockey was still relatively new . The International Ice Hockey Federation ( IIHF ) , the sport 's governing body , was created on May 15 , 1908 , under the name Ligue Internationale de Hockey sur Glace . At the 1914 Olympic Congress in Paris , ice hockey was added to the list of optional sports that Olympics organisers could include . The decision to include ice hockey for the 1920 Summer Olympics was made in January , three months before the start of the Games . Several occurrences led to the sport 's inclusion in the programme . Five European nations had committed to participating in the tournament and the managers of Antwerp 's Palais de Glace stadium refused to allow the building to be used for figure skating unless ice hockey was included . The IIHF considers the 1920 tournament to be the first Ice Hockey World Championship . From then on , the two events occurred concurrently , and every Olympic tournament until 1968 is counted as the World Championship . The Olympic Games were originally intended for amateur athletes , so the players of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) and other professional leagues were not allowed to play . 
 The first Winter Olympic Games were held in 1924 in Chamonix , France . Chapter 1 , article 6 , of the 2007 edition of the Olympic Charter defines winter sports as " sports which are practised on snow or ice " . Ice hockey and figure skating were permanently integrated in the Winter Olympics programme . The IOC made the Winter Games a permanent fixture and they were held the same year as the Summer Games until 1992 . Following that , further Winter Games have been held on the third year of each Olympiad . 
 = = Events = = 
 = = = Men 's tournament = = = 
 = = = = 1920 Summer Olympics = = = = 
 The men 's tournament held at the 1920 Summer Olympics was organised by a committee that included future IIHF president Paul <unk> . The tournament used the Bergvall System , in which three rounds were played . The first round was an elimination tournament that determined the gold medal winner . The second round consisted of the teams that were defeated by the gold medal winner ; the winner of that round was awarded the silver medal . The final round was played between teams that had lost to the gold or silver medal winners ; the winner of that round received the bronze medal . 
 The tournament was played from April 23 to April 29 and seven teams participated : Canada , Czechoslovakia , the United States , Switzerland , Sweden , France and Belgium . Canada chose to send the Allan Cup @-@ winning Winnipeg Falcons . The Americans began a tournament to determine their representative team but abandoned it , deciding instead to send an all @-@ star team that included four Canadian @-@ born players . The Swedish team consisted of mostly bandy players , many of whom had only started playing hockey in preparation for the tournament . Canada won all three of the team 's games in the first round and won the gold medal , defeating Sweden in the final and outscoring opponents 27 – 1 . In the two subsequent rounds , the United States and Czechoslovakia won the silver and bronze medals respectively . The Bergvall System was criticised , especially in Sweden , because the Swedish team had to play six games ( winning three ) while the bronze medal winning Czech team only had to play three ( winning one ) . Erik Bergvall , the creator of the system , stated that it was used incorrectly and that a tournament of all of the losing teams from the first round should have been played for the silver medal . Because of these criticisms , the Bergvall System was not used again for ice hockey . 
 = = = = 1924 – 1952 = = = = 
 In 1924 , the tournament was played in a round @-@ robin format , consisting of a preliminary round and a medal round . The medals were awarded based on win – loss records during the medal round . This format was used until 1988 , although the number of teams and games played varied slightly . The Toronto <unk> , representing Canada , became one of the dominant hockey teams in Olympic history , outscoring opponents 110 – 3 , led by Harry Watson , who scored 36 goals . The United States won silver and Great Britain won bronze . Watson 's 36 goals remains the tournament record for career goals . He also set the record for career points with 36 ( assists were not counted at the time ) , which stood until 2010 . 
 Eleven teams participated in the 1928 Winter Olympics in St. Moritz , Switzerland . The Canadian team was given a bye to the medal round and won all of its games by a combined score of 38 – 0 . The Swedish and Swiss teams won their first medals — silver and bronze respectively — and a German team participated for the first time , finishing ninth . At the 1932 Winter Olympics , Canada won gold in a tournament that consisted of four teams that played each other twice . Germany won bronze , the nation 's first medal in the sport . 
 Two days before the 1936 Winter Olympics in Garmisch @-@ Partenkirchen , Germany , Canadian officials protested that two players on the British team — James Foster and Alex Archer — had played in Canada but transferred without permission to play for clubs in the English National League . The IIHF agreed with Canada , but Great Britain threatened to withdraw the team if the two were barred from competing . To avoid a conflict , Canada withdrew the protest shortly before the Games began . The tournament consisted of four groups and fifteen teams . Great Britain became the first non @-@ Canadian team to win gold ; Canada won silver and the United States bronze . World War II forced the cancellation of the 1940 and 1944 Winter Olympics . 
 During the run @-@ up to the 1948 Winter Olympics in St. Moritz , Switzerland , a conflict broke out between two American ice hockey bodies , the American Hockey Association ( AHA ) and the Amateur Athletic Union ( AAU ) . The AAU , which had run amateur hockey in the United States since 1930 , was expelled by the IIHF in 1947 when it refused to support a team composed of players from the AHA . The AAU stated that the AHA players were " openly paid salaries " ; at the time , the Olympics were strictly for amateur players . The Swiss Olympic Organizing Committee ( <unk> ) had accepted the AHA 's application , but Avery Brundage of the United States Olympic Committee ( USOC ) threatened to withdraw the entire American team if the AHA participated in the Olympics . The IIHF countered by threatening to withdraw hockey from the Games if the AHA were banned . The IOC suggested that both American teams be banned but the <unk> rejected this proposal . The IOC decided to switch hockey to an unofficial event but relented when a compromise was reached . The AHA team was allowed to compete but would not be considered an official participant or allowed to win a medal . The AHA team finished fourth in the standings . Both Czechoslovakia and Canada won seven games and tied when they played each other . The gold medal winner was determined by goal difference : Canada won the gold because it had an average of 13 @.@ 8 goals per game compared to Czechoslovakia 's average of 4 @.@ 3 . Czechoslovakia 's team was quickly improving ; it won the 1947 and 1949 World Championships . 
 At the 1952 Winter Olympics in Oslo , Norway , the gold medal was won by Canada 's team for the second consecutive Games . It would be the last time that a Canadian team would win a gold medal in hockey for 50 years . The United States won silver and Sweden won bronze . A team from Finland competed for the first time . 
 = = = = 1956 – 1976 = = = = 
 The Soviet Union competed in its first World Championship in 1954 , defeating Canada and winning the gold medal . At the 1956 Winter Olympics in Cortina d 'Ampezzo , Italy , the Soviet team went undefeated and won its first gold medal . Canada 's team lost to the Soviets and the United States in the medal round , winning the bronze . The 1960 Winter Olympics , in Squaw Valley , United States , saw the first , and to date only , team from Australia compete in the tournament . Canada , the Soviet Union , Czechoslovakia and Sweden were the top four teams heading into the Games , but were all defeated by the American team , which won all seven games en route to its first Olympic gold medal . Canada won the silver medal and the Soviet Union won the bronze . 
 At the 1964 Winter Olympics in Innsbruck , Austria , the Soviet team won all seven of its games , earning the gold medal . Canada finished the tournament with five wins and two losses , putting the team in a three @-@ way tie for second place with Sweden and Czechoslovakia . Before 1964 , the tie @-@ breaking procedure was based on goal difference in games against teams in the medal round ; under that system , Canada would have placed third ahead of the Czechoslovakian team . During the tournament the procedure was changed to take all games into consideration , which meant that the Canadians finished fourth . At the time , the Olympics counted as the World Championships ; under their ( unchanged ) rules , Canada should have received bronze for the World Championships . 
 Soviet domination continued at the 1968 Winter Olympics held in Grenoble , France , as the team won its third gold medal . Czechoslovakia and Canada won the silver and bronze medals . It was the last time that the Olympics were counted as the World Championships . In 1970 , Canada withdrew from international ice hockey competition following a dispute over the use of professional players , and the team did not participate in the 1972 or 1976 Winter Olympics . Led by goaltender Vladislav Tretiak and forwards Valeri Kharlamov , Alexander Yakushev , Vladimir Petrov and Boris Mikhailov , the Soviet team won gold at both the 1972 Games in Sapporo , Japan and 1976 Winter Olympics in Innsbruck , Austria . In 1971 , the United States finished last at the World Championships and was relegated to Pool B. The team qualified for the 1972 Olympics and won silver , making it the first Pool B team to win an Olympic medal . Czechoslovakia won the bronze medal in 1972 . In 1976 , Czechoslovakia won the silver and West Germany won bronze . Along with Canada , the Swedish team did not participate in the 1976 tournament in protest at their inability to use professional players . 
 = = = = 1980 : The " Miracle on Ice " = = = = 
 The Winter Olympics returned to Lake Placid , New York in 1980 . Twelve teams participated in the tournament , including Canada for the first time since 1968 . The Soviet Union entered the tournament as favourites and were considered natural rivals with the American team due to the Cold War . The Americans , coached by Herb Brooks and consisting mainly of college students , tied Sweden and scored an upset win over Czechoslovakia in the preliminary round . They advanced to the medal round along with Sweden , Finland and the Soviet Union . 
 The February 22 medal @-@ round game between the Soviet Union and the United States became famously known as the " Miracle on Ice . " The Soviets took a 2 – 1 lead , but the Americans tied the game with one second left in the first period . In the second period , Soviet goaltender Vladislav Tretiak was replaced by Vladimir <unk> . The Soviets regained the lead early in the second period . However , the Americans kept the game close due to the goaltending of Jim Craig . In the third period , the Americans scored two goals , including the game winner by captain Mike <unk> with exactly 10 minutes left to give the Americans a 4 – 3 lead . Craig withstood another series of Soviet shots to preserve the win . In the final seconds of the game , American Broadcasting Company sportscaster Al Michaels delivered his famous line : " Do you believe in miracles ? Yes ! " 
 The final rankings were based on points accumulated in matches against the other teams in the medal round . Despite the common misconception that the Americans won gold the night they beat the Soviets , this did not occur until February 24 when they defeated Finland 4 – 2 and finished the tournament undefeated . The Soviets finished with silver ; Sweden won the bronze . In 2008 , the IIHF picked the Miracle on Ice as the top international hockey story of the past 100 years . 
 = = = = 1984 – 1994 = = = = 
 At the 1984 Winter Olympics in Sarajevo , Yugoslavia , the Soviet Union won its sixth gold medal . Czechoslovakia and Sweden won the silver and bronze medals . The 1988 Winter Olympics were held in Calgary , Alberta , Canada , where the Soviet team captured its seventh and final gold medal . The Soviets ' last Olympic game was a loss to Finland . The Finnish team was not considered a serious medal contender — it had competed in the World Championships since 1939 and had not won a single medal . However , Finland upset the Soviets 2 – 1 and won silver . The IIHF decided to change the tournament format because in several cases , the gold medal winner had been decided before the final day of play . During a congress in 1990 , the IIHF introduced a playoff system . The new system was used at the 1992 Winter Olympics in Albertville , France . Preliminary round @-@ robin games were held and followed by an eight @-@ team cup @-@ system style medal round that culminated in a gold medal game . 
 Before 1989 , players who lived in the Soviet Union , Czechoslovakia , and other nations behind the Iron Curtain were not allowed to leave and play in the NHL . Soviet officials agreed to allow players to leave following the 1989 World Championships . Many of the Soviet Union 's top players left to play in the NHL , including the entire " Green Unit " — Igor Larionov , Viacheslav Fetisov , Vladimir Krutov , Sergei Makarov and Alexei Kasatonov . The Soviet Union dissolved in December 1991 . Nine former Soviet states became part of the IIHF and started competing internationally , including Belarus , Kazakhstan , Latvia and Ukraine . At the 1992 Olympics , Armenia , Belarus , Kazakhstan , Russia , Ukraine and Uzbekistan competed as one entity , known as the Unified Team . In the final , the Unified Team defeated Canada to win gold while Czechoslovakia won the bronze . 
 Czechoslovakia split into the Czech Republic and Slovakia in January 1993 . The IIHF recognized the Czech Republic as the successor to Czechoslovakia , allowing the team to retain its position in the top World Championship division , while Slovakia started in the lowest division ( Pool C ) in 1994 and was forced to work its way up . Both nations competed in the tournament at the 1994 Winter Olympics , as did Russia . Slovakia and Finland both finished the preliminary round undefeated . Slovakia lost their medal round quarter @-@ final game to Russia , who later lost to Finland in the bronze medal game . In the gold medal game between Sweden and Canada , both teams finished regulation and overtime play with a 2 – 2 tie . In the resulting shootout , the first in Olympic competition , both nations scored two goals , which resulted in a sudden death shootout . Peter Forsberg of Sweden scored one of the most famous goals in Olympic history by faking a forehand shot , then sliding a one @-@ handed backhand shot past goaltender Corey Hirsch . Canada 's final shooter Paul Kariya 's shot was saved by Tommy Salo and Sweden won the game and its first gold medal . 
 = = = = 1998 – 2014 = = = = 
 In 1995 , an agreement to allow NHL players to participate in Olympics was reached between the IOC , IIHF , NHL , and National Hockey League Players ' Association ( NHLPA ) . The format of the 1998 tournament was adjusted to accommodate the NHL 's schedule . On February 7 , a preliminary round without NHL players or the " Big Six " teams ( Canada , the Czech Republic , Finland , Russia , Sweden and the United States ) began . The NHL had games on that day , but then halted play for the next 17 days to allow participating players to fly to Japan and recover from fatigue . The tournament format drew criticism for not allowing all teams the full use of their NHL players during the entire event . The top six teams were given a bye to the final round and began play on February 13 . Canada , considered a pre @-@ tournament favourite , was upset in the semi @-@ final round by the Czech Republic and then lost the bronze medal game to Finland . Led by goaltender Dominik Hašek , the Czech team defeated Russia , who defeated them previously in the round robin , winning its first gold medal in the sport . During the tournament , Pavel Bure set an Olympic Record for Goals in a Game with 5 against Finland in the Semifinals . Swedish player Ulf Samuelsson was discovered to have applied for American citizenship . Under Swedish law at the time , when one acquires a foreign passport , their citizenship is annulled . Samuelsson was ejected after having played the first game against Belarus , although Sweden kept their points from the win . The Czech National Olympic Committee felt that Sweden should lose the points and filed a protest with the Court of Arbitration for Sport , which was rejected . Following the tournament , NHL commissioner Gary Bettman commented that it " was what we had predicted and hoped for from a pure hockey perspective , [ it was ] a wonderful tournament " . 
 The same tournament format was used at the 2002 Winter Olympics in Salt Lake City , United States . The NHL 's Olympic break did not start until the second week of the Games . Because the Olympics were in the United States , where the majority of NHL teams are located , teams participating in the preliminary tournament were allowed to use NHL players who were not obligated to play with their NHL club . Slovakia was particularly affected by the inability to use all of its NHL players , and the team failed to advance to the final round . Three months later , Slovakia won gold at the 2002 World Championships . Finnish centre Raimo <unk> became the first ice hockey player to compete in six tournaments . In the quarter @-@ finals , Belarus defeated Sweden in one of the biggest upsets since the Miracle on Ice . The team advanced to the bronze medal game , but lost to Russia . The Canadian team rebounded from a disappointing first round and defeated the American team in the gold medal game , winning their first gold medal in 50 years . 
 The tournament format was adjusted for 2006 . The NHL went on hiatus for the duration of the games , allowing all players to compete . The number of teams was lowered to 12 ; the top six teams did not get a bye and played five preliminary round games . Sweden won the gold medal over Finland and the Czech Republic won the bronze medal . Three months later , Sweden won the 2006 World Championships and became the first team to win the Olympic and World Championship gold in the same year . 
 The 2010 Winter Olympics were held in Vancouver , Canada , the first time since NHL players were allowed to compete that the Olympics were held in a city with an NHL team . For the first time , Olympic games were played on a narrower NHL @-@ sized ice rink , measuring 61 metres × 26 metres ( 200 ft × 85 ft ) , instead of the international size of 61 m × 30 @.@ 5 m ( 200 ft × 100 ft ) . This change saved an expected $ 10 million ( CAD ) in construction costs and allowed more spectators to attend games . Games were played at the UBC Winter Sports Centre and Rogers Arena ( then GM Place at the time ) , which was renamed Canada Hockey Place during the event because corporate sponsorship is not allowed for an Olympic venue . Twelve teams qualified for the men 's event and were split into three groups of four teams . At the NHL 's request , the number of preliminary games was lowered to three . Following the completion of the preliminary round , all teams were ranked 1 through 12 based on points . The top four ranked teams received byes to the quarter @-@ finals , and the other eight teams played for the remaining four positions . Following that , the final eight teams competed in a playoff . 
 Teemu Selänne of Finland scored his 37th point , breaking the record of 36 first set by Canadian Harry Watson in 1924 and later tied by Vlastimil <unk> of Czechoslovakia , and Valeri Kharlamov of the Soviet Union . Slovakia made the final four for the first time , but lost the bronze medal game to Finland . In the gold medal game , Canada and the United States ended regulation play with a 2 – 2 tie , making it only the second Olympic gold medal match to go into overtime . Canadian player Sidney Crosby scored the winning goal 7 : 40 into overtime play to give Canada its eighth gold medal in men 's hockey . 
 The 2014 Winter Olympics were held in Sochi , Russia , and retained the same game format used in Vancouver 2010 , while returning to the larger international @-@ sized ice rinks . Slovenia participated for the first time , upsetting Slovakia in the round robin before losing to Sweden in the quarterfinals , for its best finish in any international tournament . Latvia upset Switzerland in the qualification playoffs , also making it to the Olympic quarterfinals for the first time , where they were narrowly defeated by Canada . Host nation Russia , considered a pre @-@ tournament favourite , lost 3 – 1 in the quarterfinals to Finland and finished 5th . Entering the semi @-@ finals undefeated after outscoring opponents 20 – 6 , the United States lost to Canada 1 – 0 , then lost the bronze medal game against Finland 5 – 0 . Teemu Selänne scored six more points in the tournament , was named tournament MVP and boosted his modern @-@ era Olympic career record for points to 43 ( 24 goals , 19 assists ) . At the age of 43 , he also set records as both the oldest Olympic goal @-@ scorer and oldest Olympic ice hockey medal winner . Canada defeated Sweden 3 – 0 to win its ninth Olympic gold medal . The team did not trail at any point over the course of the tournament , and became the first back @-@ to @-@ back gold medal winner since the start of NHL participation in 1998 , as well as the first team to go undefeated since 1984 . 
 = = = Women 's tournament = = = 
 = = = = Addition to the programme = = = = 
 At the 99th IOC Session in July 1992 , the IOC voted to approve women 's hockey as an Olympic event beginning with the 1998 Winter Olympics as part of their effort to increase the number of female athletes at the Olympics . Women 's hockey had not been in the programme when Nagano , Japan had won the right to host the Olympics , and the decision required approval by the Nagano Winter Olympic Organizing Committee ( NAOOC ) . The NAOOC was initially hesitant to include the event because of the additional costs of staging the tournament and because they felt their team , which had failed to qualify for that year 's World Championships , could not be competitive . According to Glynis Peters , the Canadian Amateur Hockey Association 's ( CAHA ) head of female hockey , " the Japanese would have to finance an entirely new sports operation to bring their team up to Olympic standards in six years , which they were also really reluctant to do . " In November 1992 , the <unk> and IOC Coordination Committee reached an agreement to include a women 's ice hockey tournament in the programme . Part of the agreement was that the tournament would be limited to six teams , and no additional facilities would be built . The CAHA also agreed to help build and train the Japanese team so that it could be more competitive . The IOC had agreed that if the NAOOC had not approved the event , it would be held at the 2002 Winter Olympics . The format of the first tournament was similar to the men 's : preliminary round @-@ robin games followed by a medal round playoff . 
 = = = = 1998 – 2014 = = = = 
 Before 1998 , women 's hockey had been dominated by Canada . Canadian teams had won every World Championship up to that point ; however , by 1997 , the American team had improved and was evenly matched with Canada . In thirteen games played between the two teams in 1997 , Canada won seven and the United States won six . The 1998 Olympic tournament also included teams from Finland , Sweden , China and host Japan . Canada and the United States dominated the round @-@ robin portion . In their head @-@ to @-@ head match , the United States overcame a 4 – 1 deficit to win 7 – 4 . The two teams met in the final , which the United States won 3 – 1 to become the third ice hockey team to win Olympic gold . 
 For the 2002 Winter Olympics , the number of teams was increased to eight and Russia , Germany and Kazakhstan qualified for the first time . The Canadian and American teams went undefeated in the first round and semi @-@ finals , setting up a gold medal rematch that the Canadian team won 3 – 2 . Following the game , members of the Canadian team accused the Americans of stomping on a Canadian flag in their dressing room , although an investigation later proved the rumour false . The Swedish team won the bronze medal over Finland , the nation 's first in women 's ice hockey . 
 In 2006 , Italy and Switzerland participated for the first time . The Italian team , at the time ranked 17th in the world , had qualified because Italy was the host nation . They were outscored 32 – 1 in three games and IIHF president René Fasel declared his intention to make future tournaments more competitive and not allow host nations to automatically qualify . The Canadian team started the tournament by outscoring opponents 36 – 1 over three games . American defenceman Angela Ruggiero accused the team of running up the score and warned that the event 's Olympic status could be called into question due to a perceived lack of competitive teams . In response , René Fasel stated that other women 's teams were improving and that there was similar dominance in the early years of the men 's tournament but the sport continued to grow . He added , " I promise you that it won 't take the [ Swedish ] women 64 years to win " — in reference to the Swedish men 's team inability to defeat Canada in Olympic play until 1984 ( the Swedish women 's team defeated Canada for the first time at the 2008 4 Nations Cup ) . 
 In its semi @-@ final game , the American team was upset by Sweden , marking the first time that it had lost to an opponent other than Canada . The upset drew comparisons to the Miracle on Ice from 1980 . In the medal games , Canada defeated Sweden to claim its second consecutive gold medal , while the Americans beat Finland to win the bronze . 
 In 2010 , eight teams participated , including Slovakia for the first time . The Canadian and American teams outscored opponents in the preliminary round by 41 – 2 and 31 – 1 margins , respectively . This brought on more criticism about uneven competition . IOC president Jacques Rogge said , " There is a discrepancy there , everyone agrees with that . This is maybe the investment period in women 's ice hockey . I would personally give them more time to grow but there must be a period of improvement . We cannot continue without improvement . " Swedish team coach Peter <unk> said it is hard for other nations to compete because of a lack of funding and a smaller pool of players to choose from . He said , " The finances for all teams have to be the same . ... If you want to have a close tournament in Sochi ( for the 2014 Olympics ) , have ( comparable ) national programs in all countries . " Some critics suggested that a mercy rule be implemented to prevent such lopsided scores . René Fasel said the IIHF would consider adding one . Chinese team coach Hannu <unk> , whose team was defeated 12 – 1 by the Americans , and American coach Mark Johnson , did not favor the idea . 
 In the gold medal game , Canada defeated the United States 2 – 0 to win their third consecutive gold . The Finnish team won the bronze medal , their first since 1998 . 
 At the 2014 Winter Olympics , Canada defeated the United States 3 @-@ 2 , as Marie @-@ Philip Poulin scored at 8 : 10 of overtime to win their fourth consecutive gold , rebounding from a two @-@ goal deficit . With the win , Canadians Hayley Wickenheiser , Jayna <unk> and Caroline Ouellette became the first athletes to win four ice hockey gold medals . They also joined Soviet biathlete Alexander Tikhonov and German speedskater Claudia Pechstein as the only athletes to win gold medals in four straight Winter Olympics . In the bronze medal game Switzerland beat Sweden 4 – 3 to win their first women 's medal . 
 = = Rules = = 
 = = = Qualification = = = 
 Since 1976 , 12 teams have participated in the men 's tournament , except in 1998 and 2002 , when the number was raised to 14 . The number of teams has ranged from 4 ( in 1932 ) to 16 ( in 1964 ) . After the NHL allowed its players to compete at the 1998 Winter Olympics , the " Big Six " teams ( Canada , the Czech Republic , Finland , Russia , Sweden and the United States ) were given automatic qualification and byes to the final round . The number of teams was increased to 14 so that a preliminary round @-@ robin tournament consisting of eight teams could be held . The top two teams from the preliminary round ( Belarus and Kazakhstan ) joined the " Big Six " in the finals . A similar system was used in 2002 . For the following tournament , the number of teams was lowered to 12 so that all teams played fewer games . Qualification for the men 's tournament at the 2010 Winter Olympics was structured around the 2008 IIHF World Ranking . Twelve spots were made available for teams . The top nine teams in the World Ranking after the 2008 Men 's World Ice Hockey Championships received automatic berths . Teams ranked 19th through 30th played in a first qualification round in November 2008 . The top three teams from the round advanced to the second qualification round , joined by teams ranked 10th through 18th . The top three teams from this round advanced to the Olympic tournament . 
 The women 's tournament uses a similar qualification format . The top six teams in the IIHF Women 's World Ranking after the 2008 Women 's World Ice Hockey Championships received automatic berths . Teams ranked 13th and below were divided into two groups for a first qualification round in September 2008 . The two group winners advanced to the second qualification round , where the teams ranked seventh through twelfth joined them . 
 = = = Players = = = 
 = = = = Eligibility = = = = 
 The IIHF lists the following requirements for a player to be eligible to play in international tournaments : 
 " Each player must be under the jurisdiction of an IIHF member national association . " 
 " Each player must be a citizen of the country he / she represents . " 
 If a player who has never played in an IIHF competition changes their citizenship , they must participate in national competitions in their new country for at least two consecutive years and have an international transfer card ( ITC ) . If a player who has previously played in an IIHF tournament wishes to change their national team , they must have played in their new country for four years . A player can only do this once . The original IOC rules stated that an athlete that had already played for one nation could not later change nations under any circumstances . 
 = = = = Use of professional players = = = = 
 Pierre de Coubertin , founder of the IOC , was influenced by the ethos of the aristocracy as exemplified in the English public schools . The public schools subscribed to the belief that sport formed an important part of education and there was a prevailing concept of fairness in which practicing or training was considered cheating . As class structure evolved through the 20th century , the definition of the amateur athlete as an aristocratic gentleman became outdated . The advent of the state @-@ sponsored " full @-@ time amateur athlete " of the Eastern Bloc countries further eroded the ideology of the pure amateur , as it put the self @-@ financed amateurs of the Western countries at a disadvantage . The Soviet Union entered teams of athletes who were all nominally students , soldiers , or working in a profession , but many of whom were in reality paid by the state to train on a full @-@ time basis . Nevertheless , the IOC held to the traditional rules regarding amateurism . 
 Near the end of the 1960s , the Canadian Amateur Hockey Association ( CAHA ) felt their amateur players could no longer be competitive against the Soviet team 's full @-@ time athletes and the other constantly improving European teams . They pushed for the ability to use players from professional leagues but met opposition from the IIHF and IOC . Avery Brundage , president of the IOC from 1952 to 1972 , was opposed to the idea of amateur and professional players competing together . At the IIHF Congress in 1969 , the IIHF decided to allow Canada to use nine non @-@ NHL professional hockey players at the 1970 World Championships in Montreal and Winnipeg , Canada . The decision was reversed in January 1970 after Brundage said that ice hockey 's status as an Olympic sport would be in jeopardy if the change was made . In response , Canada withdrew from international ice hockey competition and officials stated that they would not return until " open competition " was instituted . Günther Sabetzki became president of the IIHF in 1975 and helped to resolve the dispute with the CAHA . In 1976 , the IIHF agreed to allow " open competition " between all players in the World Championships . However , NHL players were still not allowed to play in the Olympics , because of the unwillingness of the NHL to take a break mid @-@ season and the IOC 's amateur @-@ only policy . 
 Before the 1984 Winter Olympics , a dispute formed over what made a player a professional . The IOC had adopted a rule that made any player who had signed an NHL contract but played less than ten games in the league eligible . However , the United States Olympic Committee maintained that any player contracted with an NHL team was a professional and therefore not eligible to play . The IOC held an emergency meeting that ruled NHL @-@ contracted players were eligible , as long as they had not played in any NHL games . This made five players on Olympic rosters — one Austrian , two Italians and two Canadians — ineligible . Players who had played in other professional leagues — such as the World Hockey Association — were allowed to play . Canadian hockey official Alan Eagleson stated that the rule was only applied to the NHL and that professionally contracted players in European leagues were still considered amateurs . Murray Costello of the CAHA suggested that a Canadian withdrawal was possible . In 1986 , the IOC voted to allow all athletes to compete in Olympic Games starting in 1988 , but let the individual sport federations decide if they wanted to allow professionals . 
 = = = = NHL participation = = = = 
 The NHL decided not to allow all players to participate in 1988 , 1992 or 1994 because the Winter Olympics typically occur in February , during the league 's regular season . To allow participation , the NHL would have been forced to take a break in its schedule . 
 In 1992 , National Basketball Association ( NBA ) players participated in the 1992 Summer Olympics . The American " Dream Team " dominated the tournament , and NHL commissioner Gary Bettman ( an NBA executive in 1992 ) commented that the " [ NBA ] ' s worldwide awareness grew dramatically " . He hoped that NHL participation would " get exposure like the world has never seen for hockey " . The typical NBA season is held in the winter and spring , so the Summer Olympics do not conflict with the regular season schedule . Bettman " floated a concept of moving hockey to the Summer Games " , but this was rejected because of the Olympic Charter . In March 1995 , Bettman , René Fasel , IOC president Juan Antonio Samaranch and NHLPA executive director Bob Goodenow met in Geneva , Switzerland . They reached an agreement that allowed NHL players to participate in the Olympics , starting with the 1998 Games in Nagano , Japan . The deal was officially announced by the NHL on October 2 , 1995 . Bettman said : " We 're doing this to build the game of hockey , pure and simple , we think whatever benefits are recouped , it will end up making this game bigger , stronger and healthier . " 
 The 2004 – 05 NHL season was locked out and eventually cancelled because of a labour dispute between the league and its players . In January 2005 , Bettman commented that he was hesitant to allow league participation in the Olympics because he did not like the idea of stopping play mid @-@ season after the cancellation of the previous season . The lockout was resolved in July 2005 and the newly negotiated NHL Collective Bargaining Agreement allowed league participation in the 2006 and 2010 Winter Olympics . Some NHL team owners were against their players participating in the tournament because of concerns about injury or exhaustion . Philadelphia Flyers owner Ed Snider commented that " I 'm a believer in the Olympics and I think it 's good for the NHL to participate , having said that , the people who participate should be the ones who are absolutely healthy . " Some NHL players used the break as an opportunity to rest and did not participate in the tournament , and several players were injured during the Olympics and were forced to miss NHL games . Bettman said that several format changes were being discussed so that the tournament would be " a little easier for everybody " . 
 It was originally thought that for NHL participating in the 2014 Winter Olympics a deal would have to be negotiated between the NHL and NHLPA in the Collective Bargaining Agreement . In January 2013 , the NHL and NHLPA agreed on a new Collective Bargaining Agreement . However , the decision on NHL participation at the Olympics was later announced on 19 July 2013 . As part of the deal , the NHL will go on break for 17 days during the Olympics and will send 13 on @-@ ice officials to help with the Games . NHL management was hesitant to commit to the tournament ; Bettman argued the Olympic break is a " strain on the players , on the schedule and on fans " , adding that " the benefits we get tend to be greater when the Olympics are in North America than when they 're in distant time zones . " According to Bettman , most of the NHL team owners agree with his position , and feel that the league does not receive enough benefits to justify the schedule break and risk of player injuries . René Fasel wants NHL participation and vowed that he would " work day and night to have NHL players in Sochi " . At an October 2008 press conference , then @-@ NHLPA executive director Paul Kelly stated that the players want to return to the Olympics and would try to include the ability in the next agreement . Russian NHL players Alexander Ovechkin and Evgeni Malkin stated that they want to participate in the tournament and would do so without the permission of the NHL , if necessary . Paul Kelly also believes that the NHL 's strained relationship with the Ice Hockey Federation of Russia and the Kontinental Hockey League ( KHL ) could affect participation . In a 2009 interview , KHL president Alexander Medvedev claimed that the unwillingness of NHL officials to immediately commit to the Sochi Games was " an instrument of pressure " to force a transfer agreement between the two leagues . As part of the agreement for the 2014 Games , the International Olympic Committee had to pay around $ 8 million to insure NHLers playing in Sochi , a price tag that was a major sticking point during negotiations with the NHL , NHLPA , and IIHF , making this a one @-@ time deal that may make participating in the 2018 Games unlikely . 
 = = = Game rules = = = 
 At the first tournament in 1920 , there were many differences from the modern game : games were played outdoors on natural ice , forward passes were not allowed , the rink ( which had been intended to be used only for figure skating ) was 56 m × 18 m ( 165 ft × 58 @.@ 5 ft ) and two 20 @-@ minute periods were played . Each team had seven players on the ice , the extra position being the rover . Following the tournament , the IIHF held a congress and decided to adopt the Canadian rules — six men per side and three periods of play . 
 The tournaments follow the rules used by the IIHF . At the 1969 IIHF Congress , officials voted to allow body @-@ checking in all three zones in a rink similar to the NHL . Before that , body @-@ checking was only allowed in the defending zone in international hockey . Several other rule changes were implemented in the early 1970s : players were required to wear helmets starting in 1970 , and goaltender masks became mandatory in 1972 . In 1992 , the IIHF switched to using a playoff system to determine medalists and decided that tie games in the medal round would be decided in a shootout . In 1998 , the IIHF passed a rule that allowed two @-@ line passes . Before then , the neutral zone trap had slowed the game down and reduced scoring . 
 The current IIHF rules differ slightly from the rules used in the NHL . One difference between NHL and IIHF rules is standard rink dimensions : the NHL rink is narrower , measuring 61 m × 26 m ( 200 ft × 85 ft ) , instead of the international size of 61 m × 30 @.@ 5 m ( 200 ft × 100 ft ) The larger international size allows for a faster and less physical style of play . Another rule difference between the NHL and the IIHF rules concerns how icing is called . In the NHL , a linesman stops play due to icing if a defending player ( other than the goaltender ) is not behind an attacking player in the race to the end @-@ zone faceoff dots in his defensive zone , in contrast to the IIHF rules in which play is stopped the moment the puck crosses the goal line . The NHL and IIHF also differ in penalty rules . The NHL calls five @-@ minute major penalties for more dangerous infractions of the rules , such as fighting , in addition to the minor and double minor penalties called in IIHF games . This is in contrast to the IIHF rule , by which players who fight are ejected from the game . Beginning with the 2005 – 06 season , the NHL instituted several new rules . Some were already used by the IIHF , such as the shootout and the two @-@ line pass . Others were not picked up by the IIHF , such as those requiring smaller goaltender equipment and the addition of the goaltender trapezoid to the rink . However , the IIHF did agree to follow the NHL 's zero @-@ tolerance policy on obstruction and required referees to call more hooking , holding , and interference penalties . 
 Each team is allowed to have between 15 and 20 skaters ( forwards and defencemen ) and two or three goaltenders , all of whom must be citizens of the nation they play for . 
 One of the conditions of the NHL 's participation in the Olympics is to include regular NHL referees and linesmen in the tournament , despite the fact that they are American or Canadian , and thus gives the perception of American or Canadian bias in the officiating . 
 = = = Banned substances = = = 
 The IIHF follows the World Anti @-@ Doping Agency 's ( WADA ) regulations on performance @-@ enhancing drugs . The IIHF maintains a Registered Testing Pool , a list of top players who are subjected to random in @-@ competition and out @-@ of @-@ competition drug tests . According to the WADA , a positive in @-@ competition test results in disqualification of the player and a suspension that varies based on the number of offences . When a player tests positive , the rest of their team is subjected to testing ; another positive test can result in a disqualification of the entire team . In 2001 , the United States Olympic Committee ( USOC ) pushed for American NHL players who were potential Olympians to be subject to random drug tests . The USOC requires all Olympic @-@ bound athletes to be randomly tested by the United States Anti @-@ Doping Agency , but had exempted NHL players in 1998 . The NHL preferred a more uniform method , in which all players would undergo the same number of tests from the WADA . An agreement was reached that the WADA would start testing players after the NHL playoffs were finished . 
 In late 2005 , two NHL players who had been listed as potential Olympians failed drug tests administered by the WADA . American Bryan Berard , who had competed in the 1998 Winter Olympics , tested positive for 19 @-@ <unk> . Canadian José Théodore failed a drug test because he was taking <unk> , a hair loss medication that contains the non @-@ performance @-@ enhancing drug Finasteride . Both players received two @-@ year bans from international competition , although neither had made their team 's final roster . 
 = = Statistics = = 
 = = = Participating nations = = = 
 Key 
 Men 
 Women 
 = = = Medal winners = = = 
 Men 
 Women 
 = = = Medal table = = = 
 = Mellor hill fort = 
 Mellor hill fort is a prehistoric site in North West England , that dates from the British Iron Age — about 800 BC to 100 AD . Situated on a hill in Mellor , Greater Manchester , on the western edge of the Peak District , the hill fort overlooks the Cheshire Plain . Although the settlement was founded during the Iron Age , evidence exists of activity on the site as far back as 8 @,@ 000 BC ; during the Bronze Age the hill may have been an area where funerary practices were performed . Artefacts such as a Bronze Age amber necklace indicate the site was high status and that its residents took part in long @-@ distance trade . The settlement was occupied into the Roman period . After the site was abandoned , probably in the 4th century , it was forgotten until its rediscovery in the 1990s . 
 = = Location = = 
 Mellor lies on the western edge of the Peak District in the Metropolitan Borough of Stockport . At grid reference <unk> , the known site of the Iron Age settlement in Mellor is partially under St Thomas Church and extends into the gardens of several nearby houses . It is on a spur about 220 metres ( 720 ft ) above sea level , between two valleys which drop steeply away and run west where the two small streams in the valleys meet the River Goyt , approximately 100 metres ( 330 ft ) above sea level . The site commands views of the Cheshire Plain and Alderley Edge to the south and the range of hills to the north . Although there are higher points locally , the site has access to a water supply and the river valleys , and there is flat land to the west which could have been used agriculturally . 
 = = Background = = 
 Until the 19th century little was known about hill forts ; none had been excavated and their original purpose had long been forgotten . In the medieval period their origin was ascribed to various iconic figures such as Julius Caesar , King Arthur , King Alfred , the Danes , and even giants . By the 18th century it was thought that hill forts were Roman in origin . Opinion changed again in the 19th century following a large scale investigation by Augustus Pitt @-@ Rivers , who concluded that hill forts were built during the Iron Age . 
 The study of hill forts was popular in the 19th century , with a revival in the 20th century due to excavations at Danebury . However it was not until the 1990s that the settlement at Mellor was discovered ; the site had a lack of tell @-@ tale earthworks , such as a circular ditch ( which would indicate ancient activity ) . Excavations began in 1998 where unusual marks had been noted in 1995 during a drought . Instead of the medieval ditch the marks were thought to denote , the ditch of an Iron Age hill fort was revealed . As of 2009 the excavations are ongoing . Before these excavations began , relatively little was known about the prehistory of the Stockport area before about 1 @,@ 200 BC . It was generally thought that the areas of Marple and Mellor had been mostly untouched by prehistoric human activity , including during the Romano @-@ British period . Little is known about Iron Age activity in North West England as pottery is rare on the sites excavated in the region , and there is a dearth of settlement sites . Of the more than 1 @,@ 300 hill forts found in England relatively few are in the northwest . The paucity of known sites led archaeologist Colin <unk> to describe the region as a " black hole " for the Iron Age . Mellor is the only hill fort in Greater Manchester , and one of four known Iron Age settlement sites in the county . 
 = = History = = 
 There is evidence of human activity on the site pre @-@ dating the Iron Age , as far back as 8 @,@ 000 – 6 @,@ 000 BC . During this period Mellor may have been a <unk> site where flint tools were produced , and also may have been a seasonal camp . Over 200 lithics have been recovered and range from the early to the late Mesolithic . A high proportion of the flints are bladed tools , indicating that the people who produced them were hunter gatherers . Bronze Age artefacts are rare on the site , and there is no definitive indication of habitation in this period . Despite this , it is likely that the long @-@ term habitation of the site had its roots in the late Bronze Age . 
 A flint dagger was discovered on the site . This type of artefact is rare in Greater Manchester ; the nearest comparable site is in Saddleworth . Its presence has been taken as an indication that during the Bronze Age the site was used for funerary practices . Many of the hills near Mellor are surmounted by Bronze Age funerary monuments such as Brown Low , Shaw Cairn , and Werneth Low , supporting the possibility that Mellor was also a funerary site . Also dating from the Bronze Age and found on the site was a rare high @-@ status amber necklace . Amber does not occur naturally in Britain – the nearest source is the Baltic . It would have been traded over long distances . The necklace was discovered as part of a 4 @,@ 000 ‑ year ‑ old burial . 
 The hill fort was built in and used throughout the Iron Age , as demonstrated by finds from the site which span the period . Occupants lived in roundhouses , and habitation of the site was spread over a long period . In common with many other hill forts , the site was probably divided into separate areas for habitation , industry , and agricultural activities such as storage , although the layout of these areas changed over time . Excavations indicate that the area enclosed by the inner ditch was used mainly for habitation , while the area between the inner and outer ditches was agricultural . The separation was not necessarily fixed as some of the outer area shows signs that it was used as a living space . The Roman fort of <unk> is nearby . 
 Fragments of glass , possibly Roman in origin , and shards of pottery which date to the 1st and 2nd centuries AD , indicate the site was used in the Romano @-@ British period . However no Roman structures have been discovered , and the nature of Roman activity at the site is a source of speculation . The position of the hilltop indicate that it was easily defended ; however , local finds indicate it was a high @-@ status settlement rather than a military outpost unless a similar feature was located nearby . One reason that Roman structures have not been identified is that the Romano @-@ British inhabitants may have used roundhouses rather than buildings of a typically rectilinear Roman style . This would make them more difficult to differentiate from Iron Age roundhouses and would imply a continuation of local culture rather than an imposition of Roman style . It is also possible that Romans simply influenced the area , rather than actively occupying the site . The site was later abandoned and forgotten until its rediscovery in the 1990s . 
 = = Investigation = = 
 With sites such as Danebury where there is no modern habitation or built environment , extensive excavations can be undertaken to establish the general layout . The modern settlement of Mellor extends over the Iron Age hill fort , which restricts archaeological investigation . A geophysical survey was performed to establish the extent of the settlement ; methods such as magnetometry and ground @-@ penetrating radar were successful in identifying the eastern and northern sections of the ditch encircling the site . Excavations have been concentrated around the Old Vicarage . By 2004 there were 43 trenches , 14 trial trenches , and 17 test pits . The investigation of the site has revealed two ditches . While the external ditch encloses a larger area , it has smaller dimensions than the internal ditch . 
 The chronological relation between the two ditches is uncertain . The internal ditch has been cut into the sandstone bedrock and is 4 m ( 13 ft ) wide and 2 @.@ 1 m ( 6 ft 11 in ) deep ; there was a palisade 3 @.@ 25 m ( 11 ft ) beyond the inner edge of the ditch . At some point , part of the ditch was refilled and a <unk> inserted into it , possibly relating to a gateway . Artefacts recovered from the ditch indicate that the inhabitants of the site had links with salt @-@ producing communities in lowland Cheshire . The Very Coarse Pottery ( VCP ) which was used to contain the salt at Mellor is similar to fragments recovered from the Iron Age site at Beeston Castle . A layer of charcoal has been radiocarbon dated to 830 – 190 BC . The latest deposits in the ditch include hundreds of fragments of Roman pottery dating from the 1st to 4th centuries , bronze Roman brooches , and Roman nails . 
 The outer ditch is 1 @.@ 5 m ( 4 ft 11 in ) wide and 1 @.@ 4 m ( 4 ft 7 in ) deep , and like the inner ditch was cut in the local bedrock . A rare Iron Age pot was recovered from the outer ditch , with 125 shards found . The material used to make the pot originated about 15 to 20 km ( 9 to 12 mi ) away in Castleton , Derbyshire . The pot was found in one of the earliest contexts in the ditch , and dates to the Iron Age . It was probably deliberately placed at the bottom of the ditch as part of a ritual after a significant event such as digging the ditch . While the inner ditch did have a palisade , neither ditch had a bank associated with it . 
 The archaeological excavations that have been undertaken since 1998 are funded by Stockport Metropolitan Borough Council and grants from the Heritage Lottery Fund , and have received news coverage . The site is used as a training excavation for students and a community dig to introduce people to ancient history , with the participation of Mellor Archaeological Trust . In 2002 , students from Ridge Danyers Sixth Form College built a replica roundhouse that is still standing on the site . Many of the artefacts discovered at Mellor during the excavations are on permanent display at Stockport Museum . The site is open to the public annually , in the first week of September , so that people can view the work done over the past season of digging . 
 = Alan Pastrana = 
 Charles Alan Pastrana ( born November 20 , 1944 ) is a former American football quarterback . He played college football for the University of Maryland from 1965 to 1968 . In 1966 , he set the Atlantic Coast Conference record for single @-@ season passing touchdowns with 17 . At Maryland , Pastrana also played on the lacrosse team and was named a first @-@ team All @-@ American defenseman in 1966 . The Denver Broncos of the National Football League selected Pastrana in the 11th round of the 1969 NFL Draft . He played for Denver for two seasons , including three games as the starting quarterback . After his playing career , Pastrana coached football and lacrosse at Anne Arundel Community College , where he taught as an associate professor , and coached football at the Severn School . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Pastrana was born on November 20 , 1944 , in Annapolis , Maryland , to a family of Puerto Rican descent . He attended Annapolis High School , where he served as the captain of the football , lacrosse , and wrestling teams . After he graduated from Annapolis High in 1964 , Pastrana attended the college preparatory Severn School . 
 = = College career = = 
 Pastrana enrolled at the University of Maryland , where he earned three letters on the football team in 1965 , 1966 , and 1968 , and two on the lacrosse team in 1966 and 1967 . He played lacrosse as a defenseman under head coach John Howard . After the 1966 season , the United States Intercollegiate Lacrosse Association named him a first @-@ team All @-@ American . 
 In 1965 , he played football on defense as a linebacker . The following season , Lou Saban took over as head coach from Tom Nugent , and held open quarterback try @-@ outs , which included everyone who had played the position in high school . Early in the season , Saban dismissed several players " not good enough to play for Maryland " , including former starting quarterback Phil Petry , and the job went to Pastrana . Saban employed a pro @-@ style offense . 
 After losses to Penn State and Syracuse , Pastrana led the underdog Maryland team to a surprising three @-@ game winning streak over Duke , West Virginia , and South Carolina , which improbably placed the Terrapins atop the Atlantic Coast Conference and into the bowl game picture . Maryland , however , lost its final four games of the season to finish 4 – 6 and 3 – 3 in the ACC . In the penultimate game against Virginia , Pastrana broke the ACC record with his 13th and 14th touchdown passes of the season . Florida State routed Maryland in the season finale , 45 – 21 , where Pastrana 's passing accounted for all three Terrapin scores in a failed second @-@ half comeback bid . He finished the year with 102 completions on 195 attempts for 1 @,@ 499 yards and 17 touchdowns . After the season , Saban left to become head coach for the Denver Broncos and he was replaced by former Maryland All @-@ American guard Bob Ward . 
 In April 1967 , Pastrana suffered a serious injury when he tore his medial collateral ligament and cartilage in his knee during a spring football practice . The injury required surgery , and he was lost for the 1967 season . Pastrana returned for his final year of eligibility in 1968 , but had " only a mediocre season " , although he " kept the team spirits high with his never @-@ say @-@ die attitude . " Maryland finished with a 2 – 8 record . Pastrana recorded 81 completions on 172 attempts for 1 @,@ 053 yards and six touchdowns . 
 During his collegiate career , Pastrana set the school record for season efficiency rating at 131 @.@ 29 in 1966 , which was broken by Bob <unk> in 1974 . Pastrana also set school records with 23 career passing touchdowns and 17 single @-@ season passing touchdowns , both of which were later broken by Boomer Esiason . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Denver Broncos = = = 
 The Denver Broncos selected Pastrana in the eleventh round of the 1969 NFL Draft with the 270th overall pick . In 1969 , he saw action in two games and did not attempt a pass , but did have one reception for 15 yards . The following season , he played in five games , including three as starter in relief of Steve <unk> , who had suffered a shoulder injury . Against the San Diego Chargers , Pastrana drove the team to the opposing 35 @-@ yard line and within field goal range , but he was knocked unconscious and could not call a crucial timeout . As the offensive captain , he was the only person authorized to do so under the rules at the time , and the clock expired to result in a 17 – 17 stalemate . The rules regarding timeouts were changed after the season . In 1970 , Pastrana completed 29 of 75 pass attempts for 420 yards and one touchdown , rushed 14 times for 89 yards and one touchdown , threw nine interceptions , and was sacked eight times . Five of his interceptions came against the Kansas City Chiefs . Pastrana suffered a severe concussion that effectively ended his career near the end of the 1970 season and also heavily altered his personality . In the 1971 offseason , head coach Lou Saban held try @-@ outs with seven quarterbacks . By the end of August , Pastrana made the cut to the final three , alongside Don Horn and Steve Ramsey , and was the only quarterback remaining on the team from the prior season . Pastrana , however , was cut in early September . 
 = = = After the NFL = = = 
 Pastrana became an assistant football coach at Anne Arundel Community College in 1973 . From 1980 to 1989 , he served as the head coach and directed a multiple @-@ I and pro @-@ set offense until the school discontinued the program . He also served as a co @-@ head coach of the Anne Arundel Community College men 's lacrosse team alongside former Maryland coach Bud Beardmore . 
 In 1993 , the Severn School hired Pastrana as its football coach , but he resigned after just three games amid complaints from parents and players over his laid @-@ back coaching style . Some were concerned that Pastrana visited with friends in the stands during the halftime of two losses . In 2001 , Pastrana was an associate professor of health and education at Anne Arundel Community College , where he was still teaching as of 2006 . Pastrana has been inducted into the Anne Arundel County Sports Hall of Fame . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Pastrana and his wife have an adult daughter . He is the uncle of stuntman and motorsports competitor Travis Pastrana . Another nephew , Greg Powell , played football at Maryland as a walk @-@ on in 2005 and 2006 . His nephew , Darren Pastrana , entered the United States Naval Academy in 2008 , where he played on the lacrosse team . His niece , Kim Pastrana , played women 's lacrosse at Duke University from 2005 to 2007 . 
 = The Computer Wore Menace Shoes = 
 “ The Computer Wore Menace Shoes ” is the sixth episode of The Simpsons ' twelfth season . It first aired on the Fox network in the United States on December 3 , 2000 . In the episode , Homer buys a computer and creates his own website to spread gossip . However , when Homer starts writing conspiracy theories about flu shots , he gets sent to an island where people who know too much are imprisoned . 
 " The Computer Wore Menace Shoes " was written by John Swartzwelder and directed by Mark Kirkland . The current title of the episode is a reference to the 1969 film The Computer Wore Tennis Shoes , but the episode is not related to the film in any other way . The episode 's third act features many references to the 1967 science fiction series The Prisoner . 
 The episode features Patrick McGoohan as Number Six , the main character from The Prisoner . In its original broadcast , the episode was seen by approximately 9 @.@ 1 million viewers , finishing in 28th place in the ratings the week it aired . Following its broadcast , the episode received mixed reviews from critics ; commentators were divided over the episode 's third act . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After finding out that all of the nuclear plant 's staff members had been informed of the plant 's maintenance via e @-@ mail , Homer decides to buy a computer . After he gives up on learning how to use it , Lisa sets up the computer . Homer eventually catches on and starts his own webpage , which contains copyrighted material from other pages . To avoid getting sued , Homer calls himself " Mister X " . Late at night , unable to sleep until someone visits his page , Homer hears a rumor from Bart started by either Nelson Muntz or Jimbo Jones that Mayor Quimby spent the street repair fund on a secret swimming pool . He posts this rumor on his page , which is seen by several of Springfield 's citizens . 
 Mayor Quimby is the subject of a city @-@ wide scandal when a barrage of reporters find a luxurious pool along with many scantily dressed women in Quimby 's office . Homer keeps his anonymity while posting more rumors and finds out Mr. Burns plans to sell plutonium to terrorists and is later arrested by the CIA . Eventually , Mr. X wins the Pulitzer Prize for his journalistic achievements , despite nobody knowing who he is . When he hears that the prize money will be given to starving children , Homer reveals that he is Mr. X. 
 However , this ends up alienating Homer from the rest of the town , as nobody feels comfortable confessing their secrets now that they know Homer 's Mr. X , and his fame soon plummets . To boost his popularity , Homer begins posting outrageous stories on his webpage . His fame back , Homer celebrates by going to a fake Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart , and ends up getting kidnapped . 
 Homer wakes up on the " Island " , a place where the inhabitants are people who have been exiled from society for harboring dangerous secrets . Homer learns from the organization 's leader , Number Two , that a story he wrote about flu vaccinations containing mind @-@ control serum was true . The mind control drug is calibrated to drive people into a frenzy of shopping , which is why flu shots are administered shortly before Christmas . While Homer is trapped on the Island , he is replaced by a doppelgänger who looks identical to him but speaks with a thick German accent . 
 Number Six , who is trapped on the Island for inventing the bottomless peanut bag , tells Homer about a makeshift boat he spent thirty @-@ three years making , which Homer steals and escapes the Island with , popping the Rover that emerged from the water to trap him . When he gets home , Homer tries to send out a message to the police through his computer , but is stopped by Number Two taking over the computer and is caught by his doppelgänger . 
 Homer fights his double and defeats him by kicking him in the crotch . His family is happy the real Homer is back , but then a fake Santa 's Little Helper spouts a gas that drugs the entire family . The episode ends with everyone in the family enjoying their strange , new life on the " Island " ( with Marge even saying that after getting used to the <unk> , the Island itself is actually a " pretty nice place " ) . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Computer Wore Menace Shoes " was written by John Swartzwelder and directed by Mark Kirkland . It was first broadcast on the Fox network in the United States on December 3 , 2000 . Originally , the episode was about Homer becoming Matt Drudge , the creator and an editor of the news aggregation website the Drudge Report , which Swarzwelder is a fan of . At that point , the episode was called " Homer the Drudge " . The chalkboard gag was written by staff writer Don Payne , and the couch gag was conceived by producer Laurie <unk> . 
 Because it was accidentally commissioned without his approval , the animators had to apologize to Scully . When he looked at the couch gag however , he was pleased with it and ordered the animators to " go with it " . At one point in the episode , Homer wins a Pulitzer Prize for his achievements in journalism . According to Kirkland , none of the animators knew what the prize looked like and had to do some research in order to make it accurate . 
 The third act of " The Computer Wore Menace Shoes " is a pastiche of the 1967 science fiction television series The Prisoner . In order to " get the feel " of The Prisoner , the writers watched its opening sequence , which summarizes the story of the series . Kirkland , who had seen a couple of episodes as a child , watched several episodes of the series with The Simpsons ' animators in order to make " The Computer Wore Menace Shoes " resemble it . They were also influenced by 1960 's modernism and furniture designs from the 1971 science fiction film A Clockwork Orange . 
 The episode features American @-@ born actor Patrick McGoohan as Number Six , the central character in The Prisoner , which McGoohan played . " The Computer Wore Menace Shoes " was the only time McGoohan reprised his role as Number Six . In the DVD commentary for the episode , Payne said that McGoohan was " very funny " , and that all the writers wanted to meet him when he came to record his dialogue for the episode . 
 McGoohan was reportedly very pleased with his role in the episode ; when his wife Joan McGoohan , who is a real estate broker , helped staff writer Max Pross buy a house , she told him that Patrick McGoohan was as proud of the episode as anything in his career . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 " The Computer Wore Menace Shoes " makes fun of use of the Internet , which was rapidly growing in popularity at the time . " [ ... ] The Internet was just starting to turn into a serious waste of time around this point in history " , staff writer Matt Selman said in the episode 's DVD commentary . The news website that Homer creates is based on the Drudge Report , a news aggregator created by journalist Matt Drudge . The episode was also written at a time when several The Simpsons producers invested in an animated web series ' company called <unk> , which was co @-@ created by two former The Simpsons writers . 
 Although the title of the episode is a reference to the 1969 Disney film The Computer Wore Tennis Shoes , the episode itself has " essentially nothing " to do with the film , according to M. Keith Booker in his book Drawn to Television : Prime @-@ Time Animation from The Flintstones to Family Guy . In the episode , the slogan of Homer 's webpage is " All the muck that 's fit to rake " . This is a reference to the American newspaper The New York Times , whose slogan is " All the News That 's Fit to Print " . The word " muck " refers to <unk> , a term closely associated with reform @-@ oriented journalists who wrote largely for popular magazines after 1900 . 
 The episode 's third act , which serves as a parody of The Prisoner , features several references to the series . When the secret organization finds out about Homer 's discovery , he is taken to a secret location called the " Island " . The " Island " is modeled after the " Village " , where Number Six is taken in The Prisoner . 
 While he is in the " Island " , Homer is repeatedly gassed by unexpected objects , a reference to the way Number Six would often be gassed in The Prisoner . " George [ Meyer ] and I used to laugh a lot about how often [ Number Six ] would be gassed by unexpected devices in the show " , Scully said in the episode 's DVD commentary . " And we wanted to cram as many in as we could . " While escaping the " Island " , Homer is chased by a " big balloon " . The balloon is a reference to Rover , a floating white ball in The Prisoner that was created to keep inhabitants in the " Village " , which was also featured in the season 9 episode The Joy of Sect . The music heard in the scene is based on The Prisoner 's theme music . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast on December 3 , 2000 , " The Computer Wore Menace Shoes " received a 9 @.@ 0 rating , according to Nielsen Media Research , translating to approximately 9 @.@ 1 million viewers . The episode finished in 28th place in the ratings for the week of November 27 @-@ December 3 , 2000 , tying with an episode of the news magazine Dateline NBC and the CBS sitcom The King of Queens . After the episode was released , The Simpsons ' writers created a website called <unk> , which was made to resemble Homer 's website in the episode . 
 This was at a time when many television shows created websites to promote episodes ; earlier that year , Fox created a website called <unk> in conjunction with the season premiere , in which badgers played an important role . On August 18 , 2009 , the episode was released as part of a DVD set called The Simpsons : The Complete Twelfth Season . Mike Scully , Ian Maxtone @-@ Graham , Don Payne , John Frink , Matt Selman , Tom Gammill , Max Pross , Mark Kirkland and Joel H. Cohen participated in the audio commentary for the episode . 
 Following its broadcast , " The Computer Wore Menace Shoes " received mixed reviews from critics . Giving it a positive review , DVD Talk 's Jason Bailey described the episode as a " smart piece of social satire " . He especially enjoyed Homer 's part in the episode , and found that his incompetence at handling computers is " comedic gold " . Casey Burchby , another reviewer for DVD Talk , also enjoyed the social satire in the episode , and although he found the parody of The Prisoner " bizarre " , he maintained that it was " bold " . 
 Writing for DVD Verdict , Mac MacEntire argued that the episode is " hilarious " , provided one has seen The Prisoner . DNA Smith described the episode as " memorable " . The episode is also often considered to be a fan favorite , according to Matt Haigh of Den of Geek . On the other hand , DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson was less impressed with the episode . 
 In his review of The Simpsons : The Complete Twelfth Season , Jacobson wrote that he enjoyed the episode 's take on " Internet idiocy " . He wrote , " Some parts of it feel dated , but the web features even more ill @-@ informed opinions today than it did nine years ago , so much of it remains timeless and on target . " However , he was critical of the episode 's third act . " The side of the show feels like it was intended to amuse a few fans and it doesn ’ t show a lot of real cleverness or wit " , he wrote . He summarized the episode as being decent , but inconsistent . 
 = 12 Years a Slave ( film ) = 
 12 Years a Slave is a 2013 period drama film and an adaptation of the 1853 slave narrative memoir Twelve Years a Slave by Solomon Northup , a New York State @-@ born free African @-@ American man who was kidnapped in Washington , D.C. , in 1841 and sold into slavery . Northup worked on plantations in the state of Louisiana for 12 years before his release . The first scholarly edition of Northup 's memoir , co @-@ edited in 1968 by Sue Eakin and Joseph Logsdon , carefully retraced and validated the account and concluded it to be accurate . Other characters in the film were also real people , including Edwin and Mary Epps , and <unk> . 
 The film was directed by Steve McQueen . The screenplay was written by John Ridley . Chiwetel Ejiofor stars as Solomon Northup . Michael Fassbender , Benedict Cumberbatch , Paul Dano , Paul Giamatti , Lupita Nyong 'o , Sarah Paulson , Brad Pitt , and Alfre Woodard are all featured in supporting roles . Principal photography took place in New Orleans , Louisiana , from June 27 to August 13 , 2012 . The locations used were four historic antebellum plantations : Felicity , Bocage , <unk> , and Magnolia . Of the four , Magnolia is nearest to the actual plantation where Northup was held . 
 12 Years a Slave received widespread critical acclaim , and was named the best film of 2013 by several media outlets . It proved to be a box office success , earning over $ 187 million on a production budget of $ 22 million . The film won three Academy Awards : Best Picture , Best Supporting Actress for Nyong 'o , and Best Adapted Screenplay for Ridley . The Best Picture win made McQueen the first black producer ever to have received the award and the first black director to have directed a Best Picture winner . The film was awarded the Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture – Drama , and the British Academy of Film and Television Arts recognized it with the Best Film and the Best Actor award for Ejiofor . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 1841 , Solomon Northup is a free African @-@ American man working as a violinist , living with his wife and two children in Saratoga Springs , New York . Two white men , Brown and Hamilton , offer him short @-@ term employment as a musician if he will travel with them to Washington , D.C. However , once they arrive , the duo drug Northup and conspire to deliver him to a slave pen . Northup is later shipped to New Orleans along with others who have been detained against their will . A slave trader named Freeman gives Northup the identity of " Platt " , a runaway slave from Georgia , and sells him and another slave Eliza to plantation owner William Ford . Due to tension between Northup and another plantation worker , Ford sells him to another slave owner named Edwin Epps . In the process , Northup attempts to explain that he is actually a free man , but to no avail . 
 Some time later , an outbreak of cotton worm befalls Epps ' plantation . Unable to work his fields , Epps leases his slaves to a neighboring plantation for the season . While there , Northup gains the favor of the plantation 's owner , Judge Turner , who allows him to play the fiddle at a neighbor 's wedding anniversary celebration , and to keep his earnings . When Northup returns to Epps , he attempts to use the money to pay a white field hand and former overseer , Armsby , to mail a letter to his friends in New York state . Armsby agrees to deliver the letter , and accepts Northup 's saved money in return , but later betrays him to Epps . Northup is narrowly able to convince Epps that Armsby is lying and avoids punishment . 
 Northup begins working on the construction of a gazebo with a Canadian laborer named Samuel Bass . Bass is unsettled by the brutal way that Epps treats his slaves and expresses his opposition to slavery , earning Epps 's enmity . Patsy sneaks off to Mistress Shaw 's house to get some soap to clean herself . Epps calls her a liar and ties her to post to prepare her for a whipping . Epps hands the whip to Northup and forces him to whip Patsy . Northup reluctantly begins to whip her but Epps rips the whip out of Northup 's hands and unleashes a brutal whipping on Patsy . Her back is shredded and her flesh is torn apart . Later Northup confides his kidnapping to Bass . Once again , Northup asks for help in getting a letter to Saratoga Springs . Bass , risking his life , agrees to send it . One day , Northup is called over by the local sheriff , who arrives in a carriage with another man . The sheriff asks Northup a series of questions to confirm his answers match the facts of his life in New York . Northup recognizes the sheriff 's companion as Mr. Parker , a shopkeeper he knew in Saratoga . Parker has come to free him , and the two embrace , though an enraged Epps furiously protests the circumstances and tries to prevent him from leaving . 
 After being enslaved for 12 years , Northup is restored to freedom and returned to his family . As he walks into his home , he sees his wife with their son and daughter and her husband , who present him with his grandson and namesake , Solomon Northup Staunton . The film 's epilogue displays a series of graphics recounting Northup 's unsuccessful suits against Brown , Hamilton and Burch , the 1853 publication of Northup 's slave narrative memoir , Twelve Years a Slave , his role in the abolitionist movement , and the mystery surrounding details of his death and burial . 
 = = Cast = = 
 <unk> Wallis and Dwight Henry have small roles as Margaret Northup and Uncle Abram , respectively . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 After meeting screenwriter John Ridley at a Creative Artists Agency screening of Hunger in 2008 , director Steve McQueen got in touch with Ridley about his interest in making a film about " the slave era in America " with " a character that was not obvious in terms of their trade in slavery . " Developing the idea back and forth , the two did not strike a chord until McQueen 's partner , Bianca <unk> , found Solomon Northup 's 1853 memoir Twelve Years a Slave . McQueen later told an interviewer : 
 I read this book , and I was totally stunned . At the same time I was pretty upset with myself that I didn 't know this book . I live in Amsterdam where Anne Frank is a national hero , and for me this book read like Anne Frank 's diary but written 97 years before – a firsthand account of slavery . I basically made it my passion to make this book into a film . 
 After a lengthy development process , during which Brad Pitt 's production company Plan B Entertainment backed the project , which eventually helped get some financing from various film studios , the film was officially announced in August 2011 with McQueen to direct and Chiwetel Ejiofor to star as Solomon Northup , a free African @-@ American who was kidnapped and sold into slavery in the Deep South . McQueen compared Ejiofor 's conduct " of class and dignity " to that of Sidney Poitier and Harry Belafonte . In October 2011 , Michael Fassbender ( who starred in McQueen 's previous films Hunger and Shame ) joined the cast . In early 2012 , the rest of the roles were cast , and filming was scheduled to begin at the end of June 2012 . 
 To capture the language and dialects of the era and regions in which the film takes place , dialect coach Michael Buster assisted the cast in altering their speech . The language has a literary quality related to the style of writing of the day and the strong influence of the King James Bible . Buster explained : 
 We don 't know what slaves sounded like in the 1840s , so I just used rural samples from Mississippi and Louisiana [ for actors Ejiofor and Fassbender ] . Then for Benedict [ Cumberbatch ] , I found some real upper @-@ class New Orleanians from the ' 30s . And then I also worked with Lupita Nyong 'o , who is Kenyan but she did her training at Yale . So she really shifted her speech so she could do American speech . 
 After both won Oscars at the 86th Academy Awards , it was reported that McQueen and Ridley had been in an ongoing feud over screenplay credit . McQueen reportedly had asked Ridley for shared credit , which he declined . McQueen appealed to Fox Searchlight , which sided with Ridley . Neither thanked the other during their respective acceptance speeches at the event . Since the event , Ridley has noted his regret for not mentioning McQueen and denied the feud . He spoke favorably of working with McQueen , and explained that his sole screenplay credit was due to the rules of the Writers Guild of America . McQueen has not commented on the alleged feud . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 With a production budget of $ 22 million , principal photography began in New Orleans , Louisiana , on June 27 , 2012 . After seven weeks , filming concluded on August 13 , 2012 . As a way to keep down production costs , a bulk of the filming took place around the greater New Orleans area – mostly south of the Red River country in the north of the state , where the historic Northup was enslaved . Among locations used were four historic antebellum plantations : Felicity , Bocage , <unk> , and Magnolia . Magnolia , a plantation in Schriever , Louisiana , is just a few miles from one of the historic sites where Northup was held . " To know that we were right there in the place where these things occurred was so powerful and emotional , " said actor Chiwetel Ejiofor . " That feeling of dancing with ghosts – it 's palpable . " Filming also took place at the Columns Hotel and Madame John 's Legacy in the French Quarter of New Orleans . 
 Cinematographer Sean Bobbitt , the film 's primary camera operator , shot 12 Years a Slave on 35 mm film with a 2 @.@ 35 : 1 widescreen aspect ratio using both an Arricam LT and ST . " Particularly for a period piece , film gives the audience a definite sense of period and quality , " said Bobbitt . " And because of the story 's epic nature , widescreen clearly made the most sense . Widescreen means a big film , an epic tale – in this case an epic tale of human endurance . " 
 The filmmakers avoided the desaturated visual style that is typical of a more gritty documentary aesthetic . Deliberately drawing visual comparisons in the filming to the works of Spanish painter Francisco Goya , McQueen explained : 
 When you think about Goya , who painted the most horrendous pictures of violence and torture and so forth , and they 're amazing , exquisite paintings , one of the reasons they 're such wonderful paintings is because what he 's saying is , ' Look – look at this . ' So if you paint it badly or put it in the sort of wrong perspective , you draw more attention to what 's wrong with the image rather than looking at the image . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 To accurately depict the time period of the film , the filmmakers conducted extensive research that included studying artwork from the era . With eight weeks to create the wardrobe , costume designer Patricia Norris collaborated with Western Costume to compile costumes that would illustrate the passage of time while also being historically accurate . Using an earth tone color palette , Norris created nearly 1 @,@ 000 costumes for the film . " She [ Norris ] took earth samples from all three of the plantations to match the clothes , " McQueen said , " and she had the conversation with Sean [ Bobbitt ] to deal with the character temperature on each plantation , there was a lot of that minute detail . " The filmmakers also used some pieces of clothing discovered on set that were worn by slaves . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The musical score to 12 Years a Slave was composed by Hans Zimmer , with original on @-@ screen violin music written and arranged by Nicholas <unk> and performed by Tim Fain . The film also features a few pieces of western classical and American folk music such as Franz Schubert 's " Trio in B @-@ flat , <unk> " and John and Alan Lomax 's arrangement of " Run , Nigger , Run " . A soundtrack album , Music from and Inspired by 12 Years a Slave , was released digitally on November 5 and received a physical format release on November 11 , 2013 by Columbia Records . In addition to Zimmer 's score , the album features music inspired by the film by artists such as John Legend , Laura Mvula , Alicia Keys , Chris Cornell , and Alabama Shakes . Legend 's cover of " Roll , Jordan , Roll " debuted online three weeks prior to the soundtrack 's release . 
 = = Historical accuracy = = 
 African @-@ American history and culture scholar Henry Louis Gates Jr. was a consultant on the film , and researcher David Fiske , co @-@ author of Solomon Northup : The Complete Story of the Author of Twelve Years a Slave , provided some material used to market the film . Nevertheless , news and magazine articles around the time of the film 's release described a scholar alleging some license that Northup could have taken with his book , and liberties that McQueen definitely took with Northup 's original , for dramatic , modernizing , or other reasons . 
 Scott Feinberg wrote in the The Hollywood Reporter about a September 22 New York Times article that " dredged up and highlighted a 1985 essay by another scholar , James Olney , that questioned the ' literal truth ' of specific incidents in Northup 's account and suggested that David Wilson , the white amanuensis to whom Northup had dictated his story , had taken the liberty of <unk> it up to make it even more effective at rallying public opinion against slavery . " According to Olney , when abolitionists invited an ex @-@ slave to share his experience in slavery at an antislavery convention , and when they subsequently funded the appearance of that story in print , " they had certain clear expectations , well understood by themselves and well understood by the ex @-@ slave , too . " 
 Noah Berlatsky wrote in the The Atlantic about a scene in McQueen 's adaptation . Shortly after Northup 's kidnapping , he is sent on a slave ship . One of the sailors attempts to rape a female slave , but is stopped by a male slave . " The sailor unhesitatingly stabs and kills [ the male slave ] , " he wrote , stating that " this seems unlikely on its face — slaves are valuable , and the sailor is not the owner . And , sure enough , the scene is not in the book . " 
 Forrest Wickman of Slate wrote of Northup 's book giving a more favorable account of the author 's onetime master , William Ford , than the McQueen film . In Northup 's own words , " There never was a more kind , noble , candid , Christian man than William Ford , " adding that Ford 's circumstances " blinded [ Ford ] to the inherent wrong at the bottom of the system of Slavery . " The movie , however , according to Wickham , " frequently undermines Ford . " McQueen undercuts Christianity itself as well , in an effort to update the ethical lessons from Northup 's story for the 21st century , by holding the institutions of Christianity up to the light for their ability to justify slavery at the time . Northup was a Christian of his time , writing of his former master being " blinded " by " circumstances " that in retrospect meant a racist acceptance of slavery despite being a Christian , a position untenable to some Christians now and to Christian abolitionists of the 19th century but not contradictory to Northup himself . Valerie <unk> Dixon in The Washington Post characterized the Christianity depicted in the movie as " broken " . 
 Emily West , an associate professor of history at the University of Reading who specializes in the history of slavery in the U.S. , said she had " never seen a film represent slavery so accurately " . Reviewing the film for History Extra , the website of BBC History Magazine , she said : " The film starkly and powerfully unveiled the sights and sounds of enslavement – from slaves picking cotton as they sang in the fields , to the crack of the lash down people ’ s backs . We also heard a lot about the ideology behind enslavement . Masters such as William Ford and Edwin Epps , although very different characters , both used an interpretation of Christianity to justify their ownership of slaves . They believed the Bible sanctioned slavery , and that it was their ‘ Christian duty ’ to preach the scriptures to their slaves . " 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Initial screenings = = = 
 12 Years a Slave premiered at the Telluride Film Festival on August 30 , 2013 ; it was later screened at the 2013 Toronto International Film Festival on September 6 , the New York Film Festival on October 8 , the New Orleans Film Festival on October 10 , and the Philadelphia Film Festival on October 19 . On November 15 , 2011 , Summit Entertainment announced it had secured a deal to distribute 12 Years a Slave to international markets . In April 2012 , a few weeks before principal photography , New Regency Productions agreed to co @-@ finance the film . Because of a distribution pact between 20th Century Fox and New Regency , Fox Searchlight Pictures acquired the film 's United States distribution rights . However , instead of paying for the distribution rights , Fox Searchlight made a deal in which it would share box @-@ office proceeds with the financiers of the independently financed film . 12 Years a Slave was commercially released on October 18 , 2013 in the United States for a limited release of 19 theaters , with a wide release in subsequent weeks . The film was initially scheduled to be released in late December 2013 , but " some exuberant test screenings " led to the decision to move up the release date . The film was distributed by Entertainment One in the United Kingdom . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 Due to both the film 's explicit nature and award contender status , 12 Years a Slave 's financial success was being watched closely . Many analysts compared the film 's content to other drama films of a similar vein such as Schindler 's List ( 1993 ) and The Passion of the Christ ( 2004 ) , which became box office successes despite their respective subject matters . " It may be a tough subject matter , but when handled well ... films that are tough to sit through can still be commercially successful , " said Phil <unk> of Boxoffice Magazine . Despite its content , the film 's critical success has assisted its domestic distribution by Fox Searchlight that began with a limited released aimed primarily towards art house and African @-@ American patrons . The film 's release was gradually widened in subsequent weeks , similarly to how the studio had successfully done in years prior with films such as Black Swan and The Descendants . International release dates for 12 Years a Slave were largely delayed to early 2014 in order to take advantage of the attention created by awards seasons . 
 During its marketing campaign , 12 Years a Slave received unpaid endorsements by celebrities such as Kanye West and Sean Combs . In a video posted by Revolt , Combs urged viewers to see 12 Years a Slave by stating : " This movie is very painful but very honest , and is a part of the healing process . I beg all of you to take your kids , everybody to see it . ... You have to see this so you can understand , so you can just start to understand . " 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Following its cinematic release in theaters , the Region 1 Code widescreen edition of the film was released on DVD in the United States on March 4 , 2014 . Special features for the DVD include ; a Closed <unk> option , The Team - Meet the creative minds assembled by Director Steve McQueen and bring Solomon Northup 's journey to life bonus selection , and The Score - Follow film Composer Hans Zimmer creating his dramatic score feature . In supplemental fashion , a widescreen hi @-@ definition Blu @-@ ray Disc version of the film was also released on the same day . Special features include ; a historical portrait from Director Steve McQueen 's documentary feature , cast and crew interviews , The Team special feature , and The Score selection . An additional viewing option for the film in the media format of Video on demand has been made available as well . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 12 Years a Slave earned $ 187 @.@ 7 million , including $ 56 @.@ 7 million in the United States . During its opening limited release in the United States , 12 Years a Slave debuted with a weekend total of $ 923 @,@ 715 on 19 screens for a $ 48 @,@ 617 per @-@ screen average . The following weekend , the film entered the top ten after expanding to 123 theatres and grossing an additional $ 2 @.@ 1 million . It continued to improve into its third weekend , grossing $ 4 @.@ 6 million at 410 locations . The film release was expanded to over 1 @,@ 100 locations on November 8 , 2013 . In 2014 , 12 Years a Slave was the 10th most @-@ illegally downloaded movie , with 23 @.@ 653 million such downloads , according to Variety . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 12 Years a Slave received near @-@ universal acclaim by critics and audiences , for its acting ( particularly Ejiofor , Fassbender and Nyong 'o ) , Steve McQueen 's direction , John Ridley 's screenplay , its production values , and its faithfulness to Solomon Northup 's account . Film review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reports that 96 % of critics gave the film a " Certified Fresh " rating , based on 304 reviews with an average score of 9 / 10 , with the site 's consensus stating , " It 's far from comfortable viewing , but 12 Years a Slave 's unflinchingly brutal look at American slavery is also brilliant — and quite possibly essential — cinema . " Metacritic , another review aggregator , assigned the film a weighted average score of 97 ( out of 100 ) based on 48 reviews from mainstream critics , considered to be " universal acclaim " . It is currently one of the site 's highest @-@ rated films as well as the best reviewed film of 2013 . CinemaScore reported that audiences gave the film an " A " grade . 
 Richard Corliss of TIME heralded the film and its director , Steve McQueen , by stating : " Indeed , McQueen 's film is closer in its storytelling particulars to such 1970s exploitation @-@ exposés of slavery as Mandingo and Goodbye , Uncle Tom . Except that McQueen is not a <unk> sensationalist but a remorseless artist . " Corliss draws parallels with Nazi Germany , saying , " McQueen shows that racism , aside from its barbarous inhumanity , is insanely inefficient . It can be argued that Nazi Germany lost the war both because it diverted so much manpower to the killing of Jews and because it did not exploit the brilliance of Jewish scientists in building smarter weapons . So the slave owners dilute the energy of their slaves by whipping them for sadistic sport and , as Epps does , waking them at night to dance for his wife 's cruel pleasure . " Gregory Ellwood of HitFix gave the film an " A- " rating , stating , " 12 Years is a powerful drama driven by McQueen 's bold direction and the finest performance of Chiwetel Ejiofor 's career . " He continued by praising the performances of Fassbender and Nyong 'o , citing Nyong 'o as " the film 's breakthrough performance [ that ] may find Nyong 'o making her way to the Dolby Theater next March . " He also admired the film 's " gorgeous " cinematography and the musical score , as " one of Hans Zimmer 's more moving scores in some time . " Paul MacInnes of The Guardian scored the film five out of five stars , writing , " Stark , visceral and unrelenting , 12 Years a Slave is not just a great film but a necessary one . " 
 Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly praised it as " a new movie landmark of cruelty and transcendence " and as " a movie about a life that gets taken away , and that 's why it lets us touch what life is . " He also commented very positively about Ejiofor 's performance , while further stating , " 12 Years a Slave lets us stare at the primal sin of America with open eyes , and at moments it is hard to watch , yet it 's a movie of such humanity and grace that at every moment , you feel you 're seeing something essential . It is Chiwetel Ejiofor 's extraordinary performance that holds the movie together , and that allows us to watch it without blinking . He plays Solomon with a powerful inner strength , yet he never soft @-@ pedals the silent nightmare that is Solomon 's daily existence . " Peter Travers of Rolling Stone , gave the film a four @-@ star rating and said : " you won 't be able to tuck this powder keg in the corner of your mind and forget it . What we have here is a blistering , brilliant , straight @-@ up classic . " He later named the film the best movie of 2013 . 
 Manohla Dargis wrote , in her review for The New York Times , " the genius of 12 Years a Slave is its insistence on banal evil , and on terror , that seeped into souls , bound bodies and reaped an enduring , terrible price . " The Daily Telegraph 's Tim Robey granted the film a maximum score of five stars , stating that " it 's the nobility of this remarkable film that pierces the soul , " while praising Ejiofor and Nyong <unk> performances . Tina <unk> of Slant Magazine said that " using his signature visual composition and deafening sound design , Steve McQueen portrays the harrowing realism of Northup 's experience and the complicated relationships between master and slave , master and master , slave and slave , and so on . " David Simon , the creator of the TV series The Wire , highly praised the movie , commenting that " it marks the first time in history that our entertainment industry , albeit with international creative input , has managed to stare directly at slavery and maintain that gaze " . 
 The film , however , was not without its criticisms . Stephanie Zacharek of The Village Voice was more critical of the film . While praising Ejiofor 's work , she stated : " It 's a picture that stays more than a few safe steps away from anything so dangerous as raw feeling . Even when it depicts inhuman cruelty , as it often does , it never compromises its aesthetic purity . " Peter Malamud Smith of Slate criticized the story , saying , " 12 Years a Slave is constructed as a story of a man trying to return to his family , offering every viewer a way into empathizing with its protagonist . Maybe we need a story framed on that individual scale in order to understand it . But it has a distorting effect all the same . We 're more invested in one hero than in millions of victims ; if we 're forced to imagine ourselves enslaved , we want to imagine ourselves as Northup , a special person who miraculously escaped the system that attempted to crush him . " Describing this as " the hero problem " , Malamud Smith concluded his review explaining , " We can handle 12 Years a Slave . But don 't expect 60 Years a Slave any time soon . And 200 Years , Millions of Slaves ? Forget about it . " Ignatiy Vishnevetsky of The A.V. Club opined that McQueen is " essentially tone @-@ deaf when it comes to performance , and skirts by on casting . " The film " lacks a necessary emotional continuity . I don ’ t think it ’ s something the movie is denying in the way it intentionally denies so many other conventions ; it ’ s still structured around an ending that ’ s supposed to function as a release , but because it can ’ t organize that sense of catharsis it so badly needs , it just feels as though McQueen is scurrying for an exit . Also : The cast is wildly uneven . " At The Guardian , black Canadian author Orville Lloyd Douglas said he would not be seeing 12 Years a Slave , explaining : " I 'm convinced these black race films are created for a white , liberal film audience to engender white guilt and make them feel bad about themselves . Regardless of your race , these films are unlikely to teach you anything you don 't already know . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 12 Years a Slave has received numerous awards and nominations . It earned three Academy Awards , including Best Picture . It won the Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture – Drama . The film also won the BAFTA Award for Best Film , while Ejiofor received the Best Actor award . In addition , the motion picture has been named as one of the best films of 2013 by various ongoing critics , appearing on 100 critics ' top @-@ ten lists in which 25 had the film in their number @-@ one spot . This is both the most of any film released in its production year . 
 = The Job ( The Office ) = 
 " The Job " is the third season finale of the U.S. version of The Office , and the show 's 52nd and 53rd episodes overall . In this episode , Michael prepares for his interview for the corporate job and names Dwight as his successor , whose managing methods are unpopular . Jan arrives at the office to see Michael and everyone is shocked when it appears she has undergone breast augmentation . Jim and Karen also interview for the corporate position , and Pam deals with the consequences of her earlier outburst . 
 The episode was written by Paul Lieberstein and Michael Schur , and was directed by Ken Kwapis . It was cut down from an hour and twelve minutes to forty @-@ two minutes , making it the season 's second hour @-@ long episode after " A Benihana Christmas " . Kwapis carefully shot Jim 's reaction shots , as he did not want to reveal Jim 's choice of Karen or Pam to the audience . The cast were unaware how the season would end , as multiple endings were shot by the crew . Filming wrapped up in April 2007 . 
 The finale first aired in the United States on May 17 , 2007 on NBC . An estimated 7 @.@ 9 million viewers watched the episode ; it earned a 3 @.@ 9 / 12 ratings share among adults 18 @-@ 49 , making it rank first for the night . Television critics gave positive reviews to the finale . It won the Writers Guild of America Award for Best Screenplay – Episodic Comedy and the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Single @-@ Camera Picture Editing for a Comedy Series . In addition , Jenna Fischer received a nomination for Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Comedy Series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Confident that he will get the corporate job in New York City , Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) sells his condo and names Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) his successor as Regional Manager . Pam Beesly ( Jenna Fischer ) cheerfully withstands her colleagues ' teasing over her speech from " Beach Games , " and tells Karen Filippelli ( Rashida Jones ) that she is not sorry about what she said but regrets putting Karen in an awkward position . Meanwhile , Kevin Malone ( Brian Baumgartner ) asks Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) whom he finds more attractive between Karen and Pam . Though Jim initially refuses to answer , he becomes intrigued when Kevin starts to compare the two women . He tells Kevin to keep thinking about it in a joking way , but appears to be very interested in the results . 
 Jan Levinson ( Melora Hardin ) arrives at the office to win Michael back . In a panic , Michael consults the women of the office . Pam tells him not to reconcile with Jan. Michael attempts to reject Jan , but reverses himself immediately when he sees that she has had a breast augmentation . Jim and Karen drive to New York City together and spend the night before their interviews . Karen tells Jim that if either of them gets the job , both should move to New York . She promises to do so , but is met with awkward silence when she asks Jim to reciprocate . Meanwhile , Dwight begins his new regime , assigning Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) the role of his number two and asking Pam to be his secret " Assistant to the Regional Manager . " Dwight 's new motivational style is not popular , and so he and Andy repaint the walls of Dwight 's new office black in order to instill fear . 
 During his interview at Corporate , Michael learns from CFO David Wallace ( Andy Buckley ) that he is interviewing for the job currently held by Jan , who will be fired . Michael goes to Jan 's office after the interview and quickly <unk> into revealing her impending termination . Jan storms into Wallace 's office , interrupting Karen 's interview , and refuses to leave . After Jan is escorted out by security , Michael learns that he will not be getting the position . On the drive home , Jan tells Michael that she will make their relationship her " full @-@ time job " . Upon hearing that , Michael becomes visibly uncomfortable . 
 Jim 's interview with David goes well until he discovers an encouraging note from Pam along with a yogurt lid medal ( reminiscent of an earlier episode ) . Jim recalls a conversation with Pam after her confession on the beach . He discreetly admits that he left Scranton because of her rejection and that he feels that he has " never really come back , " meaning that he has been actively fighting his feelings for her . Pam tells him that she wishes that he would come back . 
 Just as Pam is telling the cameras that she does not think that it would work out between her and Jim , he bursts into the room and asks her out to dinner . Stunned , she agrees , and Jim says , " Alright . Then , it 's a date . " After Jim exits the room , Pam becomes visibly joyous and forgets what she was talking about . 
 During a phone call , David Wallace offers the job to Ryan Howard ( B. J. Novak ) , who accepts and immediately breaks up with Kelly Kapoor ( Mindy Kaling ) . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Job " was written by Paul Lieberstein and Michael Schur . It was directed by Ken Kwapis , who had , around the same time , directed The Office actor John Krasinski in the 2007 film License to Wed . Script reading for the episode took place on a beach during the filming of the season 's twenty @-@ third episode , " Beach Games " . Actress Kate Flannery remarked that " we were so excited that we almost had another hot dog eating contest . Not . It 's a great script . Lots of questions answered . Lots . The Office fans have been anxiously awaiting a one @-@ hour episode , and guess what ? You got it . " The original cut of the episode was an hour and twelve minutes long , and had to be edited down to forty @-@ two minutes of screentime . It was the second Office episode to fill the entire hour timeslot ; the first was the third season episode " A Benihana Christmas " . 
 Krasinski received a haircut due to production on another film , which he thought " ended up working perfectly " for the season finale . Co @-@ creator Greg Daniels had wanted Jim to get a haircut for a while , as he thought it would " change [ him ] up a little bit . " Krasinski thought it was " really smart " to make it seem like Karen 's idea . Kwapis was careful with Jim 's reaction shots in the episode , as he did not want to " tip anything " to the audience about Jim 's choice of Karen or Pam . Kwapis explained , " That to me was actually one of the big challenges of the episode is how to keep you on your toes in terms of not knowing where the story was going . " Jim 's flashback scene with Pam on the beach was initially intended to be the cold open of the episode before Michael Schur suggested it be moved . Kwapis shot multiple endings , and the cast was unaware how the season would end . 
 Jenna Fischer enjoyed doing her individual scenes with Rainn Wilson because their characters rarely interacted one @-@ on @-@ one . The filming of these scenes took place on the last days of production for the season , and not many people were still on set . The episode finished shooting in April 2007 . Two weeks before the finale , actor Oscar Nunez gave brief allusions in an interview with Entertainment Weekly , " There will be some movement . Major things moving . Major shifts that affect the entire office . So there 's some good stuff coming up . That 's all I can say . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 The episode first aired in the United States on May 17 , 2007 , several days after NBC announced a fourth season . " The Job " attracted 7 @.@ 9 million viewers and earned a 3 @.@ 9 / 12 ratings share among adults 18 to 49 . It ranked first for the night in that demographic , and was NBC 's highest among adults and total viewers in its timeslot since the broadcast of " Cocktails " . Among total viewers , The Office ranked third in its timeslot ( behind a CBS tribute to the retiring Bob Barker and ABC 's first season finale of Ugly Betty ) . 
 The season finale received generally positive reviews from television critics . Entertainment Weekly columnist Abby West wrote that it " was hands down one of the most satisfying hours of television I have ever had the pleasure of watching , " explaining that it created " entirely new dynamics " for the fourth season , hit " all major beats , " and had " real story progression " and heart . Give Me My Remote writer Kath Skerry declared that the episode was " brilliantly written , acted , and well paced . It was filled with twists and turns that I didn ’ t see coming . And I know that it sounds cliche , and I know saying it sounds cliche , sounds cliche . Maybe I ’ m being cliche but I don ’ t care . I am what I am – a full fledged Office addict who got exactly what she wanted , and in fact needed from the finale . " James Poniewozik of Time magazine voiced similar sentiments , believing the finale to be a " good if not great season @-@ ender , and if the conclusion didn ’ t have the holy @-@ crap factor of The Kiss last year , Pam ’ s closeup reaction to Jim ’ s return during her interview was – like everything Jenna Fischer does on this show – winning and sweet . " Poniewozik disliked how the season left Karen , calling it " an uncharacteristic way to end this love triangle , which was distinguished by the writers ’ refusal to make anyone the bad guy . " 
 IGN 's Travis Fickett rated " The Job " 8 @.@ 2 / 10 . He believed that the episode " pulled off some rather brilliant turns " with the storylines concerning Jan and Jim , Karen , and Pam . Fickett opined however that the episode was at its weakest during the Dwight 's take @-@ over scenes in Scranton , as he knew Michael would be returning . He concluded his review on a more positive note by commenting that Ryan 's selection " makes for some interesting scenarios for next season . All in all this was a funny episode that wrapped up some key story lines while still leaving open some questions to be answered next season . It wasn 't a home run finale , but it certainly has us eagerly await the fall premiere . " AOL TV contributor Jay Black highlighted scenes he found humorous , including Dwight 's preferred choice of an assistant and Michael 's reaction to Jan 's implants . He gave the episode " 7 Shrute Bucks out of 7 . " Various cast members were also lauded for their performances , including Jenna Fischer , John Krasinski , and Melora Hardin . 
 In an article written after the episode 's broadcast , actress Kate Flannery observed that " lots of questions " were answered and that it was " like a movie . " Referring to the agreed @-@ to date between Jim and Pam , Flannery said , " The point is that the elephant in the room has not only been addressed but asked to dinner . Makes Season 4 seem filled with possibilities – like an empty glass in front of a full bar . " In an article written around the time of actor Steve Carell 's last performance on The Office in 2011 , IGN 's Cindy White listed Michael 's quote about Jan 's " breast enhancement " as among the best of the series . Dan Philipps , another writer for IGN , ranked Jim 's date proposal among the best moments for the couple , stating that " after toying with fans ' expectations for two whole seasons , the series ' writers finally allowed fans to breathe a sigh of relief . For many , the moment was well worth the wait . " 
 For their writing of " The Job " , Paul Lieberstein and Michael Schur won the Writers Guild of America Award for Best Screenplay – Episodic Comedy , beating The Office episodes " Local Ad " and " Phyllis 's Wedding " as well as episodes of 30 Rock , Flight of the Conchords , and Pushing Daisies . At the 59th Creative Arts Emmy Awards , editors David Rogers and Dean Holland won for Outstanding Single @-@ Camera Picture Editing for a Comedy Series . For her work in " The Job " , Jenna Fischer received a nomination for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Comedy Series , but lost to Jaime Pressly for her performance in My Name is Earl . 
 = Coropuna = 
 Coropuna is a dormant volcano in the southern Peruvian Andes and belonging to the Central Volcanic Zone ; its summit reaches an altitude of 6 @,@ 377 metres ( 20 @,@ 922 feet ) above sea level . The volcano , located 155 kilometres ( 96 miles ) from Arequipa , is mostly made of lava flows on a basement formed by Miocene ignimbrites . Coropuna has been active for at least five million years , with the bulk of the current cone having formed during the Pliocene – Pleistocene . 
 The volcano is covered by a thick ice cap , the second largest in the tropics , that has existed since at least the Pliocene and has undergone several phases of expansion and reduction . As of 2016 , the ice cap is in retreat ; one estimate predicts that it will disappear by 2045 . The retreat of the Coropuna glaciers threatens the water supply of tens of thousands of people , and interaction between volcanic activity and glacial effects has generated mudflows that could be a hazard to surrounding populations if the mountain returns to volcanic activity . 
 The mountain was considered sacred by the Inca , and a number of archaeological sites have been discovered there . The Inca built the highest irrigation system in the world on Coropuna . 
 = = Geography and geology = = 
 Part of the Cordillera Ampato , it is Peru 's largest and highest volcano . Coropuna is located south of the <unk> basin in the Peruvian Andes and 110 kilometres ( 68 mi ) away from the Pacific coast . Neighbouring volcanoes are the 5 @,@ 498 @-@ metre ( 18 @,@ 038 ft ) <unk> ( 15 ° 14 ′ S 72 ° 48 ′ W ) and the 6 @,@ 093 @-@ metre ( 19 @,@ 990 ft ) Solimana ( 15 ° 24 ′ S 72 ° 52 ′ W ) . <unk> is a structure with two dome shaped summits , while Solimana features a caldera and a high , glacially affected topography . Another volcano , Ampato , lies 85 kilometres ( 53 mi ) southeast . 
 Ten summits , including four main ones , separated by broad saddles , form the Coropuna massif , which covers an area of 20 × 12 kilometres ( 12 @.@ 4 × 7 @.@ 5 mi ) at 5 @,@ 000 metres ( 16 @,@ 000 ft ) altitude . Another description counts six main summits arranged in an ellipse . Mapping of the volcano is made difficult by the ice cap . The main summits are found in the western part of the massif , and two are aligned in a north – south direction with heights of 6 @,@ 377 metres ( 20 @,@ 922 ft ) and 6 @,@ 350 metres ( 20 @,@ 830 ft ) . The eastern part features two summits : a central one has an ice @-@ filled crater at 6 @,@ 234 metres ( 20 @,@ 453 ft ) , and the eastern one , at 6 @,@ 305 metres ( 20 @,@ 686 ft ) , is the summit that has generated the most recent lava flows . Cerro <unk> forms a spur on Coropuna 's eastern flank . All of these summits have a mostly smooth appearance . The volcano developed in two phases : Coropuna I , at 4 @,@ 200 – 5 @,@ 000 metres ( 13 @,@ 800 – 16 @,@ 400 ft ) , has a conical shape ; other summits , including Coropuna II , have grown above it . The terrain of Coropuna has moderate slopes rising from a basement of 4 @,@ 600 metres ( 15 @,@ 100 ft ) . Erosion has incised deep gorges around Coropuna . The total volume of Coropuna is about 283 cubic kilometres ( 68 cu mi ) . 
 Volcanism in the Andes originates in the collision of the Pacific Ocean floor with the South American Plate . This collision generates tectonic forces which lift up blocks of the Central Andes and create fissures through which magma reaches the surface . Coropuna is part of the northern Central Volcanic Zone ( CVZ ) and , along with Ampato – Sabancaya – <unk> <unk> , <unk> , and El Misti , forms part of the main volcanic arc . Coropuna , Sara Sara , and Solimana are close to the northern border of the CVZ , where the Benioff zone becomes shallower . In this area , the Andes mountains are still growing , and erosion has cut deep valleys into them . The area also features numerous fault zones , best visible south and southwest of Coropuna where shifts of 10 metres ( 33 ft ) and more have occurred . Coropuna lies on a line of volcanoes that runs from Solimana to Sabancaya . 
 The bulk of the volcano was formed in the Quaternary , with activity commencing in the Miocene . Five million years ago , the first <unk> were erupted . The minor eruptive centres of <unk> and <unk> are K @-@ Ar dated at 1 @.@ 3 ± 0 @.@ 11 and 1 @.@ 02 ± 0 @.@ 11 million years old . Much of the volcano was constructed by lava flows . 
 = = = Volcanic history and future threat = = = 
 Coropuna is constructed on Tertiary ignimbrites that form the Puna ( one of which is dated 14 million years ) ; these are completely buried around the volcano . The dates of these ignimbrites are not entirely clear . The Barroso group beneath Coropuna is dated 5 @.@ 3 million years by K @-@ Ar . Beginning in the mid @-@ Pliocene , the Coropuna I and Coropuna II volcanoes were constructed by large lava flows . Of the former there remain only <unk> , sectors that were once part of the volcano but are now separated by gaps created through erosion . Evidence found in the Majes river valley indicates that volcanic activity frequently resulted in lahars when parts of the ice cap melted under the influence of volcanic activity . Some explosive activity has thrown lava bombs up to 7 kilometres ( 4 @.@ 3 mi ) away . 
 The bulk of the volcano was formed during the Pliocene and Pleistocene , one tephra deposit being carbon @-@ 14 dated to 27 @,@ 200 – 37 @,@ 370 BP . In the early Holocene , andesite lava flows overran late moraines . Strong glacial and other erosion effects can be seen on Coropuna . Chlorine @-@ 36 exposure dating has found ages of 6 @,@ 000 years ago for the western lava flow and 2 @,@ 000 years ago and less for the eastern lava flows . These flows are tens of meters thick and 5 – 9 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 – 5 @.@ 6 mi ) long and are only weakly eroded , conserving most of their breccia cover . Each of these lava emissions is associated with the formation of mudflows from lava – ice interaction . The youngest date reported for one of these lava flows is 1 @,@ 100 ± 100 years ago . 
 Present @-@ day activity includes a chain of warm springs associated with the volcano . An earthquake swarm and associated ground deformation were observed near Coropuna and Sabancaya in 2001 , and the 2001 southern Peru earthquake caused seismic swarms at Coropuna . Interaction between the ice cap and future eruptive activity is considered to be a hazard at Coropuna , especially in light of the extreme altitude differences that are found in the territory . The consequent sudden melting of the glaciers could endanger towns in the valleys . Likewise , earthquakes could result in the collapse of part of the ice cap . There is a hazard of lahars which is further augmented by the extreme relief around the volcano , with a difference in height of 4 @,@ 000 metres ( 13 @,@ 000 ft ) within a horizontal space of 15 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) . Several towns are located downstream of Coropuna , including <unk> , <unk> , Salamanca , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and Punta Colorada . The town of <unk> at the mouth of the Majes has 20 @,@ 000 inhabitants . 
 = = = Petrology = = = 
 <unk> , dark @-@ coloured andesites form the bulk of the lavas , while ignimbrites are rhyodacitic . The andesites contain plagioclase and quartz as well as smaller amounts of amphibole and biotite . <unk> and <unk> are also found . The groundmass of Coropuna rocks contains plagioclase and pyroxene embedded in brown glass , the whole having a <unk> ( glassy ) appearance . The magmas originated at a depth of 8 – 12 kilometres ( 5 @.@ 0 – 7 @.@ 5 mi ) . Earlier andesites are more basic than later ones . 
 Based on chemical and petrographic data , the lavas formed from water @-@ poor source material at depth . <unk> formed at depths of less than 35 kilometres ( 22 mi ) . Temperatures of Coropuna 's eruption products are estimated at 700 – 1 @,@ 200 ° C ( 1 @,@ 292 – 2 @,@ 192 ° F ) . The magmas , during their whole journey to the surface , moved over vertical distances of 70 – 120 kilometres ( 43 – 75 mi ) . During this ascent , secondary magmas were formed that generated intermediate and felsic rocks . Post @-@ eruption , meltwater derived from the ice cap has caused hydrothermal alteration of the volcano . 
 = = Ice cap = = 
 The Coropuna glacier is located 155 kilometres ( 96 mi ) northwest of Arequipa . <unk> in size solely by the Quelccaya ice cap , it is the second @-@ largest tropical ice cap in the world . The highest point of the Coropuna ice cap is measured at 6 @,@ 446 metres ( 21 @,@ 148 ft ) altitude . A 2010 study showed the average thickness was 80 @.@ 8 ± 16 @.@ 5 metres ( 265 ± 54 ft ) , with a total volume of 4 @.@ 62 ± 0 @.@ 94 cubic kilometres ( 1 @.@ 11 ± 0 @.@ 23 cu mi ) . In 1962 at least 17 glaciers combined to form this ice cap . Present @-@ day outlet glaciers reach down to 5 @,@ 500 metres ( 18 @,@ 000 ft ) and 5 @,@ 100 metres ( 16 @,@ 700 ft ) on the southern and northern side , respectively . The northeastern glaciers are smaller than the southeastern ones . Beneath the glacier above 4 @,@ 500 metres ( 14 @,@ 800 ft ) altitude , <unk> and other periglacial features form the terrain . No significant valley glaciers are present on Coropuna . 
 There is evidence of glaciation during the Coropuna I stage of volcanic activity ; the mountain was glaciated at least since the Pliocene . During the Last Glacial Maximum , Coropuna 's longest glacier was the 12 @-@ kilometre ( 7 @.@ 5 mi ) -long Quebrada Ullulo glacier , and the ice cap covered a surface area of at least 365 square kilometres ( 141 sq mi ) . Outlet glaciers descended to 4 @,@ 540 feet ( 1 @,@ 380 m ) and 3 @,@ 780 metres ( 12 @,@ 400 ft ) altitude on the northern and southern flank , respectively . Equilibrium line altitudes ranged from 5 @,@ 120 – 5 @,@ 230 metres ( 16 @,@ 800 – 17 @,@ 160 ft ) on the northern side to 4 @,@ 700 – 4 @,@ 800 metres ( 15 @,@ 400 – 15 @,@ 700 ft ) on the southern side . Aside from a north – south gradient , a possibly wind sublimation @-@ driven east – west gradient in equilibrium line altitudes is visible . In addition to Ullulo on the northern flank , other outlet glaciers were <unk> and <unk> on the southern flank , <unk> on the western flank , and <unk> on the eastern flank . Based on chlorine @-@ 36 accumulation data on moraines , it has been determined that the volcano underwent a major expansion between 20 @,@ 000 and 16 @,@ 000 years ago , a minor expansion 12 @,@ 000 to 11 @,@ 000 years ago , and another minor expansion 9 @,@ 000 years ago . On the southern flank , a major expansion took place 14 @,@ 000 years ago and a minor one 10 @,@ 000 – 9 @,@ 000 years ago . Evidence has been found of a later minor expansion 6 @,@ 000 years ago . It has been determined that in the late Holocene , the snowline was located at 5 @,@ 200 – 5 @,@ 775 metres ( 17 @,@ 060 – 18 @,@ 947 ft ) of elevation . 
 Coropuna 's largest moraines were formed during the Last Glacial Maximum ( LGM ) , about 25 @,@ 000 – 20 @,@ 000 years ago . The Ullulo moraine on the northern flank is the largest , with a relief of 100 metres ( 330 ft ) . Gravel and boulders form the bulk of the LGM moraines . There are several stages of moraines between these LGM moraines and the present @-@ day ones , some linked to the late 19th @-@ century advance and other more extensive ones to late glacial advances . All of these moraines are crisp and have been well preserved by the arid conditions . The moraines within 0 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 31 mi ) of the present @-@ day ice margin are steep @-@ sided . The current retreat has left small and poorly developed terminal moraines . 
 In 1970 Coropuna 's glaciers formed 4 % of Peru 's total glacier surface . The Coropuna ice cap has shrunk between 1955 and 2008 , from 122 @.@ 7 square kilometres ( 47 @.@ 4 sq mi ) to 48 @.@ 1 square kilometres ( 18 @.@ 6 sq mi ) surface area . Much of the surface loss happened in the 1980s and 1990s . This shrinkage of 1 @.@ 4 square kilometres ( 0 @.@ 54 sq mi ) per year may result in the disappearance of the ice cap by 2045 . The surface area of the ice cap as measured by satellite images decreased from 105 ± 16 square kilometres ( 40 @.@ 5 ± 6 @.@ 2 sq mi ) in 1975 to 96 ± 15 square kilometres ( 37 @.@ 1 ± 5 @.@ 8 sq mi ) in 1986 , 64 ± 8 square kilometres ( 24 @.@ 7 ± 3 @.@ 1 sq mi ) 
 in 1996 , 56 ± 6 square kilometres ( 21 @.@ 6 ± 2 @.@ 3 sq mi ) in 2003 , and to 47 square kilometres ( 18 sq mi ) in 2007 . It is likely that some ice masses will disappear soon , while others will persist for decades . Further , the snowline has risen much higher than the glacier termini . This retreat mirrors the retreat of most glaciers in the world since the end of the Little Ice Age . 
 Coropuna is drained by deep gorges , with water eventually reaching the Arma and Majes rivers , both of which empty into the Pacific Ocean . During the dry season , Coropuna 's glaciers are a major source of water for the region , and concern has been raised that their disappearance may result in water shortages at a time when population growth has increased water consumption and begun to create conflict over water distribution . 30 @,@ 000 people depend on the Coropuna glacier in one way or the other , 8 @,@ 000 of them just for their water supply . 
 A major ice core was drilled in 2003 on Coropuna , covering more than 16 @,@ 000 years . Ice cores indicate that the Coropuna glacier receives mostly continental dust , and that 4 @,@ 200 years ago there was a severe drought , while 5 @,@ 200 years ago a wet and cold period occurred . More recent data show a severe drought from 1790 to 1796 . Fossil remains of rock glaciers have been found on the southeastern flank at altitudes of 4 @,@ 500 – 5 @,@ 250 metres ( 14 @,@ 760 – 17 @,@ 220 ft ) . 
 = = Climate and vegetation = = 
 Close to the ice , diurnal temperature variation dominates seasonal effects . The temperature has generally increased in the area ( 0 @.@ 1 ° C ( 0 @.@ 2 ° F ) per decade since 1939 ) , with El Niño events possibly playing a role . Analysis of plankton in Lake Titicaca indicates that a glacial climate prevailed until 10 @,@ 000 – 9 @,@ 000 years ago . 
 Because of the rain shadow of the Andes and the temperature inversion over the Pacific , the climate is arid , with precipitation of 390 millimetres ( 15 in ) per year at 6 @,@ 080 metres ( 19 @,@ 950 ft ) altitude . Water cannot reach Coropuna from the Pacific Ocean . Most precipitation ( 70 – 90 % ) falls during summer ( December – March ) . A sharp reduction in precipitation was found during the El Niño years of 1982 – 1983 and 1992 . These events were also accompanied by lower cloud cover , higher temperatures , and lower wind speed , increasing the glacier surface loss . However , the El Niño of 1997 – 1998 was accompanied by high precipitation . Precipitation mostly originates from the Atlantic Ocean via the Amazon basin . Pollen data tend to be dominated by local species during dry spells . Occasionally , strong southern cold outbreaks reach Coropuna 's latitudes . As evidenced by the <unk> ( 25 @,@ 000 – 19 @,@ 000 years ago ) , Tauca ( 18 @,@ 000 – 14 @,@ 000 years ago ) , and <unk> ( 13 @,@ 000 – 11 @,@ 000 years ago ) lake <unk> , ice age humidity was much higher in the Altiplano . 
 Based on mapping , in 1955 the equilibrium line altitude had a mean elevation of 5 @,@ 687 ± 49 metres ( 18 @,@ 658 ± 161 ft ) but has since then risen by 80 – 90 metres ( 260 – 300 ft ) . As is the case farther south in Chile , the snowline altitude is chiefly governed by precipitation and not by temperature . Winds in the Coropuna area are chiefly from the east . 
 Coropuna rises over the Puna , a grassland at an altitude of 4 @,@ 000 – 4 @,@ 800 metres ( 13 @,@ 100 – 15 @,@ 700 ft ) that contains Asteraceae shrubs . Local plant families and genera attested by pollen data are <unk> , Poaceae , and Polylepis . Vegetation ends at 5 @,@ 000 metres ( 16 @,@ 000 ft ) altitude . Beneath this line it is composed of <unk> compacta and <unk> grass . Cushion plants are also frequent around 5 @,@ 000 metres ( 16 @,@ 000 ft ) . The arid climate means that the flora is highly <unk> . Marsh vegetation and a distinct peat bog are found in wetter parts of Coropuna 's slopes . Polylepis woodlands are found on the southern slope . 
 = = Religious and archaeological importance = = 
 In Inca mythology , Coropuna was identified as an Apu , a sacred mountain . An Inca path leading up the mountain has been found , with bones and pottery fragments up to 6 @,@ 200 metres ( 20 @,@ 300 ft ) . Over thirty archaeological sites , many of them predating the Incas , have been found around Coropuna . The Inca sites are the highest ones , though some occur next to bogs such as the one next to the village <unk> <unk> . The influence of human habitation on the environment is noticeable from 2 @,@ 200 BP onward . 
 The Inca used the waters of Coropuna , building an irrigation system that drew water from the glaciers at 5 @,@ 600 metres ( 18 @,@ 400 ft ) altitude , the highest irrigation system in the world . 
 = = Books = = 
 Biggar , John ( 2005 ) . The Andes : A Guide for Climbers ( 3rd ed . ) . Andes Publishing ( Scotland ) . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 @-@ 7 . 304 pp . 
 González @-@ <unk> , Oscar ( 1995 ) . <unk> de Chile ( in Spanish ) . Santiago , Chile : Instituto <unk> Militar . ISBN 956 @-@ 202 @-@ 054 @-@ 1 . 640 pp . ( also includes volcanoes of Argentina , Bolivia , and Peru ) 
 De Silva , <unk> L. ; Francis , Peter ( 1991 ) . Volcanoes of the Central Andes . Springer @-@ Verlag . ISBN 3 @-@ 540 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 216 pp . 
 " Coropuna " . Global Volcanism Program . Smithsonian Institution . 
 Reinhard , Johan ( 1999 ) . " Coropuna : Lost Mountain Temple of the Incas . " South American Explorers Journal 58 : 5 , 26 – 30 . 
 Reinhard , Johan ( 2005 ) . The Ice Maiden : Inca Mummies , Mountain Gods , and Sacred Sites in the Andes . Washington , D.C. : National Geographic Society . ISBN 0 @-@ 7922 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . 
 <unk> , Mariusz ( 2008 ) . " Coropuna y Solimana : Los <unk> de <unk> . " In <unk> y <unk> en le Mundo Andino Antiguo , <unk> , Marco and Mariusz <unk> ( eds . ) , pp. 121 – 159 . Fundo Editorial de la <unk> Universidad Católica del Perú , Lima . 
 = Max Boot = 
 Max Boot ( born September 12 , 1969 ) is an American author , consultant , editorialist , lecturer , and military historian . He has been a prominent advocate of American values in foreign policy . He once described his ideas as " American might to promote American ideals . " He identifies as a conservative , once joking that " I grew up in the 1980s , when conservatism was cool " . Boot worked as a writer and editor for Christian Science Monitor and then for The Wall Street Journal in the 1990s . He is now Jeane J. Kirkpatrick Senior Fellow in National Security Studies at the Council on Foreign Relations . He has written for numerous publications such as The Weekly Standard , The Los Angeles Times , and The New York Times , and he has also authored well @-@ reviewed and best @-@ selling books of military history . Boot 's most recent book , titled Invisible Armies , came out in 2013 , and it details the history of guerrilla warfare . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Boot was born in Moscow . His parents , both Russian Jews , later emigrated from the Soviet Union to Los Angeles , where he was raised . Max Boot was educated at the University of California , Berkeley ( BA , History , 1991 ) and Yale University ( MA , Diplomatic History , 1992 ) . He started his journalistic career writing columns for the Berkeley student newspaper The Daily Californian . He later stated that he believes he is the only conservative writer in that paper 's history . Boot and his family currently live in the New York area . 
 = = Career = = 
 Boot is the Jeane J. Kirkpatrick Senior Fellow in National Security Studies at the Council on Foreign Relations , a contributing editor to The Weekly Standard and the Los Angeles Times , and a regular contributor to other publications such as The Wall Street Journal , The Washington Post and The New York Times . He blogs for Commentary Magazine on its page <unk> . He serves as a consultant to the U.S. military and as a regular lecturer at U.S. military institutions such as the Army War College and the Command and General Staff College . 
 Boot worked as a writer and as an editor for The Christian Science Monitor from 1992 to 1994 . He moved to The Wall Street Journal for the next eight years . He wrote an investigative column called ' Rule of Law ' about legal issues . After a short , four @-@ year career with the column , he rose to the position of editor of the Op @-@ Ed page . 
 Boot left the Journal in 2002 , and he then joined the Council on Foreign Relations . He became a ' Jeane J. Kirkpatrick Senior Fellow ' with the group . His writings with the Council appeared in several publications such as The New York Post , The Times , Financial Times , and International Herald Tribune in 2002 . 
 Boot wrote Savage Wars of Peace , a study of small wars in American history , with Basic Books in 2002 . The title came from Kipling 's poem ' White Man 's Burden ' . James A. Russell in Journal of Cold War Studies criticized the book , saying that " Boot did none of the critical research , and thus the inferences he draws from his uncritical rendition of history are essentially meaningless . " Benjamin Schwarz argued in The New York Times that Boot asked the U.S. military to do a " nearly impossible task " , and he criticized the book as " unrevealing " . Victor Davis Hanson in History News Network gave a positive review , saying that " Boot 's well @-@ written narrative is not only fascinating reading , but didactic as well " . Robert M. Cassidy in Military Review labeled it " extraordinary " . Boot 's book also won the 2003 General Wallace M. Greene Jr . Award from the Marine Corps Heritage Foundation as the best non @-@ fiction book recently published pertaining to Marine Corps history . 
 Boot wrote numerous articles with the Council in 2003 and 2004 . The World Affairs Councils of America named Boot one of " the 500 most influential people in the United States in the field of foreign policy " in 2004 . He also worked as member of the Project for the New American Century ( <unk> ) in 2004 . 
 He published the work War Made New , an analysis of revolutions in military technology since 1500 , in 2006 . The book 's central thesis is that a military succeeds when it has the dynamic , forward @-@ looking structures and administration in place to exploit new technologies . It concludes that the U.S. military may lose its edge if it does not become flatter , less bureaucratic , and more decentralized . The book received praise from Josiah Bunting III in The New York Times , who called it " unusual and magisterial " , and criticism from Martin <unk> in The American Conservative , who called it " remarkably superficial " . 
 Boot wrote many more articles with the Council in 2007 , and he received the Eric <unk> Award for Excellence in Opinion Journalism that year . In an April 2007 episode of Think Tank with Ben Wattenberg , Boot stated that he " used to be a journalist " and that he currently views himself purely as a military historian . Boot served as a foreign policy adviser to Senator John McCain in his 2008 United States presidential election bid . He stated in an editorial in World Affairs Journal that he saw strong parallels between Theodore Roosevelt and McCain . Boot continued to write for the Council in several publications in 2008 and 2009 . 
 Boot wrote for the Council through 2010 and 2011 for various publications such as Newsweek , The Boston Globe , The New York Times , and The Weekly Standard among others . He particularly argued that President Obama 's health care plans made maintaining the U.S. ' superpower status harder , that withdrawal of U.S. troops from Iraq occurred prematurely while making another war there more likely , and that the initial U.S. victory in Afghanistan had been undone by government complacency though forces could still pull off a victory . He also wrote op @-@ eds criticizing planned budget austerity measures in both the U.S. and the U.K. as hurting their national security interests . 
 In September 2012 , Boot co @-@ wrote with Brookings Institution senior fellow Michael Doran a New York Times op @-@ ed titled " 5 Reasons to <unk> in Syria Now " , advocating U.S military force to create a countrywide no @-@ fly zone reminiscent of NATO 's role in the Kosovo War . He stated first and second that " American intervention would diminish Iran 's influence in the Arab world " and that " a more muscular American policy could keep the conflict from spreading " with " sectarian strife in Lebanon and Iraq " . Third , Boot argued that " training and equipping reliable partners within Syria 's internal opposition " could help " create a bulwark against extremist groups like Al Qaeda " . He concluded that " American leadership on Syria could improve relations with key allies like Turkey and Qatar " as well as " end a terrible human @-@ rights disaster " . 
 Boot 's most recent book , titled Invisible Armies , came out in 2013 , and it details the history of guerrilla warfare going through various cases of successful and unsuccessful insurgent efforts such as the fighting during the American war of independence , the Vietnam War , the current Syrian Civil War . He additionally states that traditional , conventional army tactics as employed by the American military under the administrations of President Bush and President Obama against guerrilla organizations have produced big strategic failures . Boot has discussed his book in various programs such as the Hoover Institution 's Uncommon Knowledge series. appearing on it in January 2014 . 
 = = Beliefs = = 
 In general , Boot considers himself to be a " natural contrarian " . He is in favor of limited government at home and American leadership abroad . He strongly opposed Donald Trump 's presidential candidacy in 2016 . 
 = W. G. Grace in the 1878 English cricket season = 
 W. G. Grace is believed to have considered retirement from cricket before the 1878 season after he was seriously injured in a shooting accident the previous autumn which nearly cost him the sight of an eye . Having recovered , he reconsidered and in 1878 played in 33 matches , 24 of which are generally recognised as first @-@ class . His main roles in the season were captain of Gloucestershire County Cricket Club and both match organiser and captain of the United South of England Eleven ( USEE ) . In addition , he represented Marylebone Cricket Club ( MCC ) , the Gentlemen in the Gentlemen v Players fixture and the South in the North v South series . 1878 was a cold , wet summer and not one of Grace 's better seasons as a batsman , but he was very effective in such conditions as a right arm medium pace roundarm bowler and completed a sixth successive " double " by scoring 1 @,@ 151 runs and taking 152 wickets in the recognised first @-@ class matches . 
 Grace was always notorious for gamesmanship and moneymaking during his cricket career and he cut an especially controversial figure in 1878 . After the season ended , he and his brother E. M. Grace were called to account by the Gloucestershire membership and a special enquiry was ordered to investigate their blatant " shamateurism " . As amateur players , they should only have been claiming reasonable expenses for travel and accommodation but they were accused of claiming inflated expenses and appearance fees . The matter came to a head after Surrey County Cricket Club refused to meet their expense claims when Gloucestershire played at The Oval in June . Prior to the same match , Grace was accused of " kidnapping " the Australian player Billy Midwinter when he insisted that Midwinter was contractually bound to play for Gloucestershire and not the Australian touring team . A furious altercation between Grace and members of the Australian party took place in front of bystanders outside The Oval , but Grace got his way and Midwinter played for Gloucestershire . 
 The season was notable for the MCC v Australians match at Lord 's in May . Grace played for MCC in the match that , completed in a single day , is considered a milestone in cricket history . In July , Gloucestershire made their first visit to Old Trafford to play Lancashire and the match was immortalised by Francis Thompson in his idyllic poem " At Lord 's " . 
 On a personal level , Grace was still unqualified as a doctor and had a growing family to support , his daughter Bessie being born in May . When not playing cricket , he had to study a backlog of medical theory . He did not qualify as a doctor until the end of the following year . He then needed a practice and this was effectively purchased for him by MCC in 1878 after they launched a National Testimonial on his behalf , though the underlying and hopeful purpose of the appeal was to terminate Grace 's embarrassing mercenary activity . 
 = = Background = = 
 It is believed that Grace contemplated retirement from cricket in the winter of 1877 – 78 . He had been seriously injured in a shooting accident in September 1877 , which nearly cost him the sight of one eye , and this may have caused him to review his life . Still unqualified as a doctor and with a growing family to support , Grace had doubts about his long @-@ term security even though he was making considerable profit from cricket by way of " grossly inflated " expense claims and appearance fees . Unexpectedly , Marylebone Cricket Club ( MCC ) solved his financial problems by voting him a National Testimonial with a view to purchasing a medical practice out of the proceeds . It was hoped that a regular income would " end the embarrassment of his blatant shamateurism " . One of Grace 's biographers , Bernard Darwin , who knew him personally , wrote that the arrival of the first Australian touring team " tipped the beam in favour of cricket " but it was also the case that no one , especially Grace , took the Australian players too seriously . It is more likely that A. J. Webbe was right when he said : " W. G. never could have given up cricket " . 
 Grace was living in Gloucestershire in 1878 . He and his wife Agnes had moved to London in February 1875 when he was assigned to St Bartholomew 's Hospital to further his medical education . They lived in an Earl 's Court apartment until autumn 1877 when they returned to Gloucestershire and lived with Grace 's elder brother Henry , who was a general practitioner ( GP ) at Kingswood , near Bristol . The Graces already had two sons and their third child Bessie was born in May 1878 . When not playing cricket , Grace had to study a backlog of medical theory and , after the season ended , he was assigned to Westminster Hospital for his final year of medical practice ; the family moved back to London and lived at Acton until he finally qualified in November 1879 . 
 By the time Grace celebrated his 30th birthday in July 1878 , he was arguably the most famous man in England ; but he was also one of the most controversial on account of his gamesmanship and moneymaking . Both of these aspects were subject to serious challenge in the light of events in 1878 . 
 = = May : the season begins = = 
 1878 was a " chilly and wet summer " in which the bad wickets reduced " all ( batsmen ) to comparative impotence " but enabled bowlers to dominate and cause " havoc " . This summed up Grace 's season too , for he was outstanding in the field but he struggled with the bat , as his statistics plainly show . 
 The season began in cold , wet conditions and Grace did not start well . He was conscious of his domestic and medical distractions , the most pressing of which was the birth of his daughter just before the famous match at Lord 's between MCC and the Australians . 
 Grace 's first match was for the United South of England Eleven ( USEE ) against Twenty of Rochdale from Thursday , 2 May to Saturday , 4 May at Butcher 's Meadow in Rochdale . The match was drawn after USEE had been behind on first innings . Although they saved the game , largely because Grace scored 57 in the second innings , it was not an auspicious performance by a team that included W. G. and Fred Grace along with five players who had taken part in the inaugural Test series in Australia the previous year : Henry Charlwood , Harry Jupp , James Lillywhite , Billy Midwinter and James Southerton . From Rochdale , Grace travelled by train to London for his next fixture on Monday , 6 May and Tuesday , 7 May which was for MCC at Lord 's against a team called the Colts of England . It was another odds match with 11 against 22 and another draw . Grace made scores of 15 and 9 . His team included A. N. Hornby , Alfred Shaw and Fred Morley . 
 On Thursday , 9 May , Grace was in Cambridge and played for an England XI against Cambridge University at Fenner 's . This was a three @-@ day match culminating on Saturday , 11 May and was the opening first @-@ class fixture of the season . Cambridge had one of its strongest @-@ ever teams in 1878 and won by 79 runs after having to follow on . Grace scored 45 and 11 , and he was the outstanding bowler in the match with 10 wickets . 
 Grace returned to London and played in his next match , starting on Monday , 13 May , for MCC against an England XI at Lord 's . This was another first @-@ class fixture , scheduled for three days but completed in two , the mostly professional England XI winning by 3 wickets . MCC won the toss , batted first and totalled 93 , half of which were scored by Grace himself with 47 . England reached 75 – 6 at the close and were all out for 115 on Tuesday morning , but MCC were then dismissed for only 58 , Grace having been first out for 1 . Nevertheless , England struggled to complete their victory and lost 7 wickets in scoring the necessary 37 runs . In cold , damp conditions it was therefore a bowlers ' match . Grace was dismissed in both innings by Tom Emmett , who was well supported by Billy Midwinter and Alex Watson . The MCC attack was led by Alfred Shaw , who took 10 wickets . Grace bowled in the first innings only and returned figures of 3 – 43 . Grace 's 47 in the first innings was the top score in the game , the second highest being 30 by Arthur Shrewsbury for England . Grace sustained a thumb injury during the match which prevented him taking part in the England second innings . 
 Grace was inactive for over a week after that match , partly because of his injury but also as his daughter was born in London , and his next appearance was in Ireland where he played for the USEE against 15 past and present players of the University of Dublin at its College Park venue . This match was played over three days , starting on Thursday , 23 May . A guest player in the USEE team was the Australian batsman Charles Bannerman . However , Grace and Bannerman scored just 11 and 1 respectively in the USEE first innings , while Fred Grace and Bannerman 's fellow Australian Midwinter scored 46 and 64 . The match was ruined by the weather and ended in a draw . 
 On Sunday , 26 May , the USEE team caught the ferry back to England and Grace continued by train to London , probably in the company of Bannerman and Midwinter , as all three were due to take part in another match at Lord 's the following day . They could not have guessed that the match would be remembered as , to quote Grace 's biographer Simon Rae , " arguably the most momentous six hours in cricket history " . 
 = = Monday , 27 May 1878 – MCC v Australians at Lord 's = = 
 CricketArchive states without elaboration that : " the match was scheduled for three days but completed in one " . Having won the toss , MCC were dismissed for 33 and then they bowled out the Australians for 41 . MCC hoped for a better total in the afternoon but were skittled for a mere 19 . The Australians needed 12 to win and were by no means sure of getting them , but they did , and won a sensational match by 9 wickets . With a match aggregate of 105 runs , it remains the lowest scoring first @-@ class match on record . In his ghost @-@ written Reminiscences ( 1899 ) , Grace recalled that there had been " only four and a half hours of actual cricket " net of the lunch interval and breaks between innings . 
 With James Lillywhite acting as their agent , the first official Australian team to tour England was managed by John Conway and captained by Dave Gregory . As Billy Midwinter was already in England , he joined his compatriots ahead of their opening game . The other ten players in the party were Charles Bannerman , his brother Alec , future Test captain Billy Murdoch , wicket @-@ keeper Jack Blackham , Frank Allan , George Bailey , Harry Boyle , Tom Garrett , Tom Horan and the original " Demon Bowler " , Fred Spofforth . 
 Play started at three minutes past twelve on a " sticky wicket " , a wet pitch drying out as the sun began to shine . Only a small crowd was present and it all began well enough for Grace as he hit the opening ball of the match from Allan for four . But another firm shot off his legs sent the second ball straight to Midwinter and Grace was " easily caught at square leg " . Another wicket fell to Boyle in the next over and MCC were 5 – 2 but , with Hornby and Arthur Ridley seemingly settling in , they pushed the total on to 27 . Then there was a change of bowling and Spofforth came on instead of Allan . Spofforth 's first spell at Lord 's was " truly demonic " . Within another 11 overs , MCC were all out , Spofforth taking 6 – 4 in just 5 @.@ 3 overs including a hat @-@ trick with the wickets of George Hearne , Alfred Shaw and George Vernon . Shaw and Morley took five wickets apiece as they dismissed the Australians for 41 but Gregory decided to open his second innings attack with Spofforth and Boyle . The decisive moment was Spofforth 's second ball to Grace , which clean bowled him for 0 . The MCC innings lasted just 50 minutes , Boyle taking 6 – 3 and Spofforth 4 – 16 . As news of the proceedings spread , the crowd grew in the afternoon sunshine and they " mobbed the Australians as they left the field in a spirit of non @-@ partisan enthusiasm " . Around 500 had been present at the start but the number grew to 4 @,@ 742 by the end ; the receipts of £ 119 7s were given to the Australians and MCC paid the expenses . 
 So ended a " memorable day of cold and puddles and calamity " . Afterwards , the match was seized upon by the media and widely reported by the press . The news " spread like wildfire and created a sensation in London and throughout England " . The satirical magazine Punch responded to the event by publishing a parody of Byron 's poem The Destruction of Sennacherib including a wry commentary on Grace 's contribution : 
 The Australians came down like a wolf on the fold , 
 The Mary <unk> Cracks for a trifle were bowled ; Our Grace before dinner was very soon done , 
 And Grace after dinner did not get a run . 
 No one in England had taken the Australians very seriously at first , even though they had beaten Lillywhite 's team in the inaugural Test match , and no one was too surprised when they lost their tour opener by an innings to the strong Nottinghamshire attack of Shaw and Morley on a rain @-@ affected wicket . This perception of Australian cricketers was immediately and permanently revised such that " henceforth a match between Australia and any representative English team would overshadow any of the ' great matches ' " . Although the match did not mark the birth of international cricket , it was the point in time at which the English sporting public wholeheartedly embraced the concept . As Lord Hawke put it : 
 ( 27 May 1878 ) this marked the commencement of the modern era of cricket . 
 As for William Gilbert Grace , his whole approach to cricket was about what was needed to win the game in hand and he never took kindly to defeat . But , two decades later in his Reminiscences , he gave the Australians due credit for their " glorious victory " . 
 = = June : MCC v Derbyshire = = 
 A whole week passed before Grace reappeared , again at Lord 's , on Monday , 3 June . He played seven matches in June , all first @-@ class , starting with MCC v Derbyshire . This was a three @-@ day match completed on the Tuesday with MCC winning by 5 wickets . Derbyshire won the toss , elected to bat and Grace proceeded to bowl them out for a mere 36 . His figures were 8 – 23 . Derbyshire then bowled MCC out for 74 , Grace scoring 7 . Grace took 2 more wickets in Derbyshire 's second innings of 118 to give him his second 10 @-@ wicket match of the season . He scored 37 in the second innings as MCC made 81 – 5 to take the match . 
 Despite Grace 's presence , this match attracted few spectators as it coincided with the Surrey v Australians match at The Oval , which drew very large crowds . Wisden Cricketers ' Almanack commented that " the Australians were attracting monster gatherings at The Oval on the days that this match was played , consequently very few visitors were at Lord 's " . 
 = = June : North v South = = 
 There were three North v South fixtures in June . The first two were played at Prince 's Cricket Ground and Lord 's with the South as the " home " team ; the third took place at the end of the month at Trent Bridge as a home game for the North . 
 The match at Prince 's began on Thursday , 6 June and was played over three days , ending in a draw after being impacted by the weather . The North won the toss and batted first , scoring 156 all out and 196 – 5 . In their only innings , the South scored 197 all out . Grace opened the bowling for the South and took 4 – 73 and 2 – 59 . Once more he failed with the bat and was caught and bowled for 4 , again losing his wicket to the irrepressible Tom Emmett . The match raised about £ 100 for the Cricketers ' Fund Friendly Society . 
 The match at Lord 's was the following Monday , 10 June , and this time a full match could take place over three days . The North won by 3 wickets after scoring 180 and 226 – 7 in reply to the South 's 202 and 203 . Although his team lost , Grace could take consolation from his best batting performance of the season so far , and his first half @-@ century , as he scored 45 and 77 . He had 9 wickets in the match with 5 – 60 and 4 – 89 . The match was played for the benefit of the Marylebone Professional Cricketers ' Fund and drew an attendance of 10 @,@ 858 on the first day , which was Whit Monday . 
 Grace was directly involved in a controversial incident in this match when Dick Barlow was given out hit the ball twice . Barlow did something that is commonplace by knocking the ball away with his bat after he had " dead @-@ batted " it ( i.e. , played a defensive stroke to stop the ball at his feet ) . The problem was that Barlow then " dashed a couple of yards down the pitch and back again " to tease the fielders and amuse the spectators . The joke backfired when Grace , fielding nearby , appealed on the grounds that Barlow had hit the ball twice and then " attempted a run " . Barlow never had any intention of attempting a run but the Laws of cricket had to be observed and he was given out . It was just one in a catalogue of incidents that highlighted Grace 's determination to " win at all costs " . 
 The third match in the series began on Thursday , 27 June at Trent Bridge and the South won by 10 wickets after forcing the North to follow on . The South won the toss and decided to bat , scoring 204 with Grace contributing 12 before again being dismissed by Emmett . Grace took 9 wickets ( 6 – 46 and 3 – 64 ) as the North were bowled out for 116 and 136 to leave the South needing 49 to win . Grace did not bat in the second innings , allowing his elder brother E. M. Grace and Richard Humphrey to secure the 10 wicket victory . The match was played for the benefit of George Parr , who received about £ 250 . 
 There was a fourth North v South match at The Oval in September but Grace did not play and the North won by an innings and 123 runs . In between the second and third North v South games , Grace played for the Gentlemen of England against the Australians at Prince 's and then twice for Gloucestershire in away matches at The Oval against Surrey and Hove against Sussex . 
 = = June : Gentlemen v Australians and first Gloucestershire matches = = 
 Grace and his amateur colleagues took a measure of revenge at Prince 's as they defeated the Australians by an innings and 1 run . The match began on Monday , 17 June and was completed within two days . The Australians won the toss and decided to bat , but were bowled out for only 75 with Grace and Allan Steel taking 4 wickets apiece . The Gentlemen scored 139 ( Grace 25 ) and then dismissed the tourists for 63 , Grace taking 2 wickets in support of Steel 's 7 – 35 . 
 The County Championship was a semi @-@ official competition in 1878 as it was not formally structured until December 1890 , but the age @-@ old ad hoc claims on behalf of a " Champion County " had been regulated somewhat by the introduction of residential criteria for players in 1873 . Gloucestershire , who had been recognised as the champions in 1877 , were expected to be in contention for the title again as the county fixtures began in 1878 . 
 The first match began under a cloud of Grace @-@ inspired controversy on Thursday , 20 June at The Oval , where Gloucestershire were beaten by 16 runs . Surrey made 150 ( Grace 4 – 43 ) and 136 ( Grace 6 – 70 ) , but Gloucestershire 's response was 111 ( Grace 40 ) and 159 ( Grace 31 ) . This was a fine all @-@ round performance by Grace , though he would not have been happy with two more innings under 50 , and it serves to illustrate just how much Gloucestershire depended on him . The next match at Hove began the following Monday , 24 June , and Gloucestershire won by an innings and 67 runs after losing the toss and being asked to field . Sussex were all out for 93 ( Grace 0 – 21 ) and 71 ( Grace 4 – 13 ) ; in between , Gloucestershire made 231 despite Grace scoring a duck . His brothers did the batting in this one , Fred scoring 71 and E. M. 53 . 
 = = June : the Midwinter incident = = 
 Gloucestershire arrived shorthanded at The Oval on 20 June . Their regular players present were the three Grace brothers , their cousin Walter Gilbert , wicket @-@ keeper James Bush and batsmen James Cranston and Thomas Matthews . They also had the inexperienced William Woof , Carleton Haynes and Edward Wright , all of whom made their first @-@ class debuts against Surrey . That was ten , so another player had to be found and Grace decided to take action . 
 The Australian Billy Midwinter had played for Gloucestershire in 1877 and , as luck or the fixture list would have it , he was at Lord 's on 20 June to represent the Australians against Middlesex . Midwinter was at net practice when he saw W. G. and E. M. Grace , accompanied by James Bush , approaching . They argued that he was under contractual obligation to play for Gloucestershire if required and Grace demanded that he accompany them to The Oval at once . One source says that Midwinter was still under a contractual obligation to Gloucestershire and that the Australian press had reported this before the team embarked . Midwinter 's reaction to Grace 's demand is unknown but Tom Horan later wrote that Midwinter " did not seem to know his own mind for two minutes together " . Whether he was in agreement or not , Midwinter did go to The Oval with the Graces . They were pursued by Conway , Gregory and Boyle who caught them at The Oval gates where a furious altercation ensued in front of bystanders . In another account , the incident is dismissed as " an amusing little quarrel " . The argument was serious enough and was fuelled by a long @-@ standing " antagonism " between Grace and Conway which dated back to Grace 's 1873 visit to Australia . At one point , Grace called the Australians " a damned lot of sneaks " , though he later apologised in a letter to Gregory . In the end , Grace got his way and Midwinter stayed with Gloucestershire for the rest of the season , although he did not play for the county against the Australians in September , due to a hand injury . 
 Grace may have felt pleased that he had got his man but he did not get his expenses , for Surrey refused to pay them . There was a subscript the following winter when Grace and his brother E. M. were called to account by the Gloucestershire membership and a special enquiry was ordered . 
 = = July : Gentlemen v Players = = 
 There were two Gentlemen v Players matches in 1878 and they took place consecutively in early July . The first was played at The Oval , starting on Thursday , 4 July , and the second at Lord 's , starting on Monday , 8 July . A.N. Hornby captained the Gentlemen at The Oval and Grace at Lord 's . The Gentlemen won both matches : by 55 runs at The Oval ; and by 206 runs at Lord 's . 
 Grace 's bad wicket batting skills were fully tested in the first innings at The Oval and he scored 40 in a total of only 76 , Alfred Shaw and Fred Morley taking five wickets each for the Players . The Players replied with 122 to take a first innings lead of 46 . Grace took 2 – 37 in support of Allan Steel who claimed 6 – 60 . The Gentlemen produced a much better batting performance on the Friday and scored 202 , Grace again top @-@ scoring with 63 . He then took 3 – 30 as the Players were bowled out for 101 , the match ending on Friday afternoon . 
 Under Grace 's leadership at Lord 's , the Gentlemen batted very well and totalled 310 on the first day before reducing the Players to 39 – 4 at the close . Grace scored 90 , his highest score of the season so far , and was well supported by Alfred and Edward Lyttelton . The Players recovered on Tuesday morning , thanks to a seventh wicket century stand by John Selby and Tom Emmett , to reach 231 all out which left the Gentlemen with a first innings lead of 79 . Grace took 2 – 31 . In the second innings , Grace was bowled by Shaw for 2 with the score at 6 – 1 but his opening partner A. P. Lucas steadied the innings with 91 and was well supported by Ridley , Edward Lyttelton and Steel . The Gentlemen finally amassed 326 to leave the Players needing 406 to win . They were never in the hunt and , although Selby was defiant with another half @-@ century , Grace took 4 – 55 to lead the Gentlemen to victory . 
 = = July : USEE tour = = 
 Most of July was taken up with USEE matches which were Grace 's " bread and butter " at the time . The team travelled to Melton Mowbray , Holbeck ( near Leeds ) , Newcastle upon Tyne , Bolton and Birmingham to play odds games against local opposition . 
 Grace took 21 wickets in the match against the 22 men of Melton Mowbray in a three @-@ day match starting on Monday , 1 July . He scored 42 and 57 not out in his two innings , the match ending in a draw . Grace caught the evening train to be in London ready for the first Gentlemen v Players match at The Oval , starting on Thursday , 4 July . 
 The next USEE match at Leeds Holbeck followed the second Gentlemen v Players fixture and began on Thursday , 11 July . The opposition had 18 players and included the Yorkshire batsman Louis Hall , the lay preacher who was famously the sole teetotaller in the Yorkshire team at that time . Besides Grace himself , other noted players in the USEE team were Fred Grace , Billy Midwinter , Henry Charlwood and James Southerton . Grace took 20 wickets in the match and , batting at number six ( he was habitually an opening batsman despite his status as an all @-@ rounder ) , scored 22 and 73 . The USEE won by 193 runs . The railways served Grace well in July and he was immediately away north to Newcastle upon Tyne for the next engagement against Eighteen of Newcastle upon Tyne , starting on Monday 15 July . The Newcastle team included Dick Barlow , Alex Watson and Arnold Fothergill so Grace may have bitten off more than he could chew . Fothergill dismissed him for 5 in the first innings after Newcastle had made a sizeable 251 ( Barlow 42 ) . The USEE were humiliatingly bowled out for 66 and had to follow on . Grace could only score 14 in a second innings total of 116 and Newcastle won the match in two days by an innings and 69 runs . 
 The USEE had a scare against Eighteen of Bolton in the three @-@ day match starting on Thursday , 18 July . They won by just 21 runs having been slightly behind on first innings . Grace and Southerton bowled the Bolton team out but the difference was a second innings of 63 by Charlwood in a total of just 120 . Grace scored 51 and 22 and took 20 wickets . The USEE won the final match of this tour , starting on Monday , 22 July , against Twenty @-@ two of Birmingham by 5 wickets , having been 23 behind on first innings . The USEE had a strong Gloucestershire flavour in this match with all three Grace brothers , Midwinter , Gilbert and Cranston involved . Birmingham scored 128 and 119 , Grace taking 21 wickets . USEE scored 105 and 144 – 5 , Grace making 7 and 59 . He needed the support of his brother E. M. , who scored 52 not out , to secure the five wicket victory . 
 = = July / August : Gloucestershire 's northern tour = = 
 Gloucestershire made their first visit to Old Trafford Cricket Ground on Thursday , 25 July , to play Lancashire and this was the match immortalised by Francis Thompson in his idyllic poem At Lord 's : 
 It is little I repair to the matches of the Southron folk , 
 Though my own red roses there may blow ; 
 It is little I repair to the matches of the Southron folk , 
 Though the red roses crest the caps , I know . 
 For the field is full of shades as I near a shadowy coast , And a ghostly batsman plays to the bowling of a ghost , And I look through my tears on a soundless @-@ clapping host 
 As the run stealers flicker to and fro , 
 To and fro : 
 O my Hornby and my Barlow long ago ! 
 It 's Glo <unk> coming North , the irresistible , 
 The Shire of the Graces , long ago ! 
 It 's Gloucestershire up North , the irresistible , 
 And new @-@ risen Lancashire the foe ! 
 A Shire so young that has scarce impressed its traces , Ah , how shall it stand before all @-@ <unk> Graces ? O , little red rose , their bats are as maces 
 To beat thee down , this summer long ago ! 
 This day of seventy @-@ eight they are come up north against thee 
 This day of seventy @-@ eight long ago ! 
 The champion of the centuries , he cometh up against thee , 
 With his brethren , every one a famous foe ! 
 The long @-@ whiskered Doctor , that <unk> the rules to scorn , While the bowler , pitched against him , bans the day he was born ; And G.F. with his science makes the fairest length forlorn ; 
 They are come from the West to work thee woe ! 
 It is little I repair to the matches of the Southron folk , 
 Though my own red roses there may blow ; 
 It is little I repair to the matches of the Southron folk , 
 Though the red roses crest the caps , I know . 
 For the field is full of shades as I near a shadowy coast , And a ghostly batsman plays to the bowling of a ghost , And I look through my tears on a soundless @-@ clapping host 
 As the run stealers flicker to and fro , 
 To and fro : 
 O my Hornby and my Barlow long ago ! 
 Grace was not " the long @-@ whiskered Doctor " for he was still unqualified in 1878 : it was his elder brother E. M. ( a coroner ) " that <unk> the rules to scorn " . Grace was of course " the champion of the centuries " , although he had still not scored one in 1878 . The opening ( and closing ) verse of the poem is the most famous stanza ever written about cricket and it eulogised two Lancashire players who were widely known as " Monkey " ( AN Hornby ) and " <unk> " ( Dick Barlow ) . 
 The match was played over three days and culminated in a draw on Saturday , 27 July . Lancashire won the toss and decided to bat , but were dismissed for only 89 after rain shortened the first day 's play . Grace took 3 – 44 and the left arm spinner Robert Miles took 7 – 38 . Gloucestershire responded with 116 , Grace making the top score of 32 . At close of play on the second day , Lancashire had made 90 – 0 with Hornby on 68 and Barlow on 15 ; and the legend of the run stealers was born in the mind of the watching Francis Thompson . Hornby and Barlow put on 108 for the first wicket and then Barlow was out for 26 . Hornby went on to score exactly 100 and Lancashire 's total was 262 ( Grace 1 – 65 ) . Gloucestershire scored 125 – 5 in the last innings with Grace , batting at six , on 58 not out at the close . 
 Gloucestershire went over the Pennines to Sheffield and began the next game against Yorkshire at Bramall Lane on Monday , 29 July . Gloucestershire were soundly beaten by 244 runs , a big margin at the time . Yorkshire scored 158 and 360 ; Gloucestershire scored 201 to claim a good first innings lead but were then bowled out for 73 and crashed to a heavy defeat . Grace batted quite well , scoring 62 and 35 . With the ball , he took 2 – 48 and 4 – 128 . They were undone by the bowling of Billy Bates who took 11 wickets in the match , including 7 – 38 in the second innings ; while George Ulyett and Ephraim Lockwood both scored centuries in Yorkshire 's second innings . The match was played for the benefit of Tom Emmett , who received £ 616 13s 1d . 
 The final leg of Gloucestershire 's northern tour was at Trent Bridge where they played Nottinghamshire from Thursday , 1 August , to Saturday , 3 August . This match was drawn after rain intervened . Gloucestershire scored 165 ( Grace 9 ) and 253 ( Grace 116 ) . Nottinghamshire scored 258 ( Grace 2 – 91 ) and 10 for 1 ( Grace ( 1 – 2 ) . So Grace finally made his first ( and only ) century of the 1878 season , surprisingly against arguably the strongest bowling attack in the country . 
 = = August : Canterbury Cricket Week = = 
 The 1878 Canterbury Festival consisted of two first @-@ class matches played between Monday , 5 August and Friday , 9 August. at the St Lawrence Ground in Canterbury . The first match , between Thirteen of Kent and an England XI , finished early on the Wednesday . The second match , between Twelve of Kent and Twelve of MCC , began later the same afternoon and finished on Friday afternoon . Grace played in both games , representing England and MCC . The Kent XIII won the match against England by 8 wickets . Grace scored 21 and 14 ; with the ball , he took 5 – 72 and 1 – 21 . Kent defeated MCC in the twelves game by 9 wickets after Grace was out for 0 and 1 . He took 4 – 82 in Kent 's first innings total of 216 but did not bowl in the second innings when Kent needed just 20 to win . 
 = = August / September : Gloucestershire at home = = 
 From Monday , 12 August to Friday , 6 September , Grace was entirely involved with Gloucestershire who played seven matches in less than four weeks . Six of these were at home and one , against an England XI , was at The Oval . Gloucestershire played its home games at the College Ground , Cheltenham and at the Clifton College Close Ground . 
 Gloucestershire 's return game against Nottinghamshire began on Monday , 12 August , at Clifton College . Gloucestershire won a low @-@ scoring match by 109 runs after batting first . They totalled 127 ( Grace 26 ) and 137 ( Grace 6 ) which were modest scores , but Nottinghamshire 's replies amounted only to 84 and 71 . Grace produced another fine bowling performance with figures of 5 – 29 and 6 – 35 against one of the strongest batting sides in England . Alfred Shaw was unable to play for Nottinghamshire . 
 In a three @-@ day match starting on Thursday , 15 August , the England XI defeated Gloucestershire at The Oval by 6 wickets after Grace had won the toss for his county and decided to bat . They scored 118 ( Grace 25 ) and England replied with 163 ( Grace 3 – 67 ) . Rain prevented play for most of the Friday and Gloucestershire in their second innings had reached 27 – 1 at the end of the day . On the Saturday , England bowled them out for 118 ( Grace 29 ) with Tom Emmett taking 8 – 51 ( 12 – 93 in the match ) . Grace took 3 – 39 in England 's second innings as they made 7 – 44 to win by six wickets . Midwinter suffered a hand injury in the field when he attempted to stop a powerful drive played by George Ulyett ; he was unable to play again in 1878 . 
 The Cheltenham Festival took place the following week with two matches on the College Ground : against Sussex starting on Monday , 19 August ; and a return against Yorkshire starting on Thursday , 22 August . Gloucestershire made short work of Sussex , winning by an innings and 24 runs in less than two days . Grace made only 2 of Gloucestershire 's total of 198 but he was again outstanding with the ball and took 13 wickets in the match ( 6 – 18 and 7 – 88 ) . The Yorkshire match was drawn after being ruined by the weather . Yorkshire had claimed a first innings lead after Grace was yet again dismissed by Tom Emmett , this time for 10 , but he compensated by having taken 6 – 77 to restrict the Yorkshire lead to 39 . He captured a further two wickets in the second innings before the match was washed out . 
 On Monday , 26 August , Gloucestershire met Lancashire again at the Clifton College Close Ground and , despite another good innings by Hornby , Gloucestershire this time were victorious by 8 wickets . Grace had won the toss and put Lancashire in to bat first . Grace the bowler was once more the star performer as he took 7 – 77 and 5 – 32 , but this time he did well with the bat and made a good 49 in difficult conditions . His brother Fred scored 73 not out and this was crucial to the Gloucestershire success . Grace scored 20 not out in the second innings as Gloucestershire made 32 – 2 to win . 
 A return match against Surrey began on Thursday , 29 August , at Clifton College Close Ground and Gloucestershire were fortunate to get a draw after being forced to follow on . For once this season , Grace struggled to take wickets and could manage only 1 – 86 in Surrey 's total of 232 which was made over two days because of rain . Gloucestershire struggled to 84 – 9 at the close on Friday , Grace out for 3 , and were immediately dismissed for 84 on Saturday . Grace was out for 25 in the second innings but Fred again came to the rescue with 63 as Gloucestershire held on for the draw , scoring 161 – 4 . An oft @-@ recounted incident involving Grace occurred in this match . While he was batting , he had run three when a fielder 's throw caused the ball to lodge in his shirt and he seized the opportunity to complete several runs before the fielders forced him to stop . He disingenuously claimed that he would have been out handled the ball if he had removed it and , following a discussion , the umpires agreed that only the initial three runs should be awarded as the ball was dead ( out of play ) when it went into his shirt . 
 = = County Championship = = 
 Gloucestershire played 10 matches against the other first @-@ class county clubs and ended with a record of 4 wins , 4 draws and 2 defeats . This was not good enough for them to retain the title they had claimed in 1877 , when they had won 7 and drew 1 of 8 matches played . The main claimant was unbeaten Middlesex but they had only played 6 matches and Roy Webber , deploying a " rationalisation " method based on a points system used by the official competition in the 20th century , argued that Nottinghamshire was the champion county in 1878 . 
 = = September : Gloucestershire v Australians = = 
 On Thursday , 5 September , the Australians arrived at Clifton for what promised to be an explosive encounter . Midwinter did not play for Gloucestershire due to his hand injury but his absence probably counted for little as the Australians took due revenge on the Graces and beat Gloucestershire soundly by 10 wickets inside two days . Spofforth had 12 wickets in the match , taking 7 – 49 and 5 – 41 as Gloucestershire struggled to 112 and 85 , Grace making 22 and 5 . As it happened , Spofforth did not get his wicket , though he caught Grace off Boyle in the first innings . In the second , Grace was lbw to Garrett . Grace could take only 1 – 90 in the Australian first innings of 183 , in which Spofforth , who really did have a score to settle , top @-@ scored with 44 . To completely make his point , Spofforth then opened the Australian second innings in which he and Bailey scored the necessary 17 without loss . It was the first time Gloucestershire , formed in 1870 , had been beaten in a home match . 
 = = September : Essex v USEE = = 
 Grace 's final appearance in 1878 was for the USEE against Twenty of Essex in a two @-@ day match at Witham , starting on Friday , 13 September . The game was played for the benefit of the Essex and USEE stalwart Frank <unk> . Essex at this time was not a first @-@ class club but capable of providing the USEE with a stern test , especially with odds in their favour , and they had by far the best of a drawn game . Essex scored 175 and 235 ; USEE replied with 134 and 65 – 5 , so Essex would almost certainly have won with more time . Grace starred with the ball and took a total of 26 wickets . But his indifferent form with the bat haunted him right to the end of the season and he could only score 10 and 4 . 
 = = The expenses inquiry = = 
 It was in November 1878 that MCC defined amateur status . Their dictum was that " a gentleman ought not to make any profit from playing cricket " . This was carefully worded so that an amateur was allowed to claim reasonable expenses , but controversy persisted about what were " reasonable expenses " and what were actually " fees " . Fred Grace fell foul of this by claiming a fee for representing the USEE and was subsequently banned from representing the Gentlemen in matches at Lord 's . W. G. Grace got around his USEE fee by having it classed as a salary for his work in organising the matches . 
 The controversy rumbled on and there was a long debate in the press through the winter of 1878 – 79 about the various payments received by the " amateurs " of Gloucestershire . The enquiry at Gloucestershire CCC took place in January 1879 . W. G. and E. M. Grace were forced to answer charges that they had claimed " exorbitant expenses " , one of the few times that their money @-@ making activity was seriously challenged . The claim had been submitted to Surrey re the controversial 1878 match in which Billy Midwinter was brought in as a late replacement , but Surrey refused to pay it and this provoked the enquiry . The Graces managed to survive " a protracted and stormy meeting " with E. M. retaining his key post as club secretary , although he was forced to liaise in future with a new finance committee and abide by stricter rules . The incident served to highlight an ongoing issue about the nominal amateur status of the Grace brothers . Like all amateur players , they claimed expenses for travel and accommodation to and from cricket matches , but there is plenty of evidence that the Graces made rather more money by playing than their basic expenses would allow and W. G. in particular " made more than any professional " . 
 The national testimonial voted for Grace by MCC was realised six months later in the form of a presentation to him by Lord Fitzhardinge at Lord 's on 22 July 1879 in the form of a marble clock , two bronze ornaments and a cheque for £ 1 @,@ 458 . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 Despite his troubles in 1878 , it was another good season for Grace on the field as he completed a sixth successive double with 1 @,@ 151 runs and 153 wickets . He made 24 first @-@ class appearances , scoring 1 @,@ 151 runs with a highest score of 116 at an average of 28 @.@ 77 . He completed one century and five half @-@ centuries . In the field , he held 42 catches and took 153 wickets with a best analysis of 8 – 23 . His bowling average was 14 @.@ 43 ; he took five wickets in an innings 13 times and ten wickets in a match six times . 
 Grace was seventh in the overall national batting averages and third among those batsmen who completed 10 innings . The two above him were John Selby ( 31 @.@ 26 ) and Edward Lyttelton ( 29 @.@ 96 ) . In terms of runs scored , Grace was one of only two players to complete 1 @,@ 000 . The other was George Ulyett who made 1 @,@ 270 at an average of 27 @.@ 02 . Due to generally damp conditions , 1878 was not a good season for batsmen with only 14 centuries being scored ; only one player , A. J. Webbe , scored two . 
 Grace 's bowling average of 14 @.@ 50 left him eighth among bowlers who took 100 wickets , the best of whom was Allan Steel with 164 wickets at 9 @.@ 43 . Grace 's 153 wickets was the fourth highest tally behind Alfred Shaw ( 201 ) , Fred Morley ( 197 ) and Allan Steel ( 164 ) . 
 Grace had an outstanding season as a fielder , holding 42 catches in just 24 appearances . His tally was higher than anyone else including wicket @-@ keepers . The second highest was Alfred Shaw with 32 catches in 30 appearances . The best performance by a wicket @-@ keeper was Ted Pooley of Surrey who held 25 catches and completed 31 stumpings . 
 = = Footnote = = 
 = Duffless = 
 " Duffless " is the sixteenth episode of The Simpsons ' fourth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on February 18 , 1993 . After getting arrested for drunk driving , Homer tries to remain sober , at Marge 's request . Meanwhile , Lisa attempts to prove that Bart is less intelligent than a hamster after he ruins her first science fair project . It was written by David M. Stern , and directed by Jim Reardon . The episode received a positive reception . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Bart has a dream that he is at the school science fair presenting a Go @-@ Go Ray . He zaps all the teachers , resulting in their dancing uncontrollably . Principal Skinner declares him the winner , but Bart wakes up realizing it was Lisa messing with him . 
 At breakfast , Lisa shows the family her science fair project , a steroid @-@ enhanced tomato that she hopes will cure world hunger . Bart 's project is to study the effects of cigarette smoking on dogs ; his " volunteer " is Santa 's Little Helper . 
 At the Springfield Nuclear Power Plant , Homer ducks out of work early and accompanies Barney on a tour of the Duff brewery . After the tour , Homer refuses to let the exceptionally drunk Barney drive home and forces him to hand over his keys . On their way out of the parking lot , their car is pulled over by Police Chief Wiggum , along with Eddie and Lou . They administer a breathalyzer test to Homer , which he fails . He is arrested , his license is revoked , and he must attend traffic school and Alcoholics Anonymous meetings . 
 At school , three days before the science fair , Lisa leaves her super tomato under Bart 's care for a moment and he takes the opportunity to hurl it at Skinner while he is bent over tying his shoe . When Lisa sees what Bart has done with her project , she is furious . Lisa appeals to Marge for help , who suggests she run a hamster through a maze . Lisa takes the idea to heart , but instead of just testing the intelligence of a rodent , she pits a hamster against an unknowing Bart to find out who is smarter . After two simple tests , the hamster leads two to zero . 
 In bed , Marge gives Homer a magazine quiz about his drinking . Hearing his answers , she asks him to give up beer for a month , to which he agrees . Homer tries not to think about beer while he rides Lisa 's bike to work . After a series of severe temptations , Homer crashes the bike as hundreds of bottles of Duff parachuted down on him from a blimp . 
 Bart later discovers Lisa 's plans to humiliate him at the science fair and preempts them with a project of his own , " Can hamsters fly planes ? " . Lisa tries to reason that his project has no scientific merit , but everyone ignores her . A cute hamster sitting in the cockpit of a miniature plane wins over Skinner and he hands Bart the winning ribbon , much to Lisa 's dismay . 
 At Homer 's Alcoholics Anonymous meeting , he is kicked out by Reverend Lovejoy after confessing that his desperation for the taste of beer led him to " sneak into the football stadium and eat the dirt underneath the bleachers " . But he exhibits more positive changes such as losing weight , saving over $ 100 and no longer sweating while he eats . After thirty days of sobriety , Homer rushes back to Moe 's , despite Marge asking him to stay home . However , after seeing how alcohol has ruined the lives of Barney and the other barflies , he turns around and goes home . Homer and Marge ride a bike into the sunset . 
 = = Production = = 
 Bart 's go @-@ go ray idea was " stolen " from the opening credits of Johnny Quest . Mike Reiss said they did not want to show the hamster getting shocked but had to for plot purposes . The first line Richard Nixon says , during the Duff commercial , was taken verbatim from the Kennedy @-@ Nixon Debate during the 1960 Presidential Campaign . Adolf Hitler 's head , among other things , can be seen going by in bottles of Duff when the quality control man is not paying attention . 
 The episode contains the first appearance of Sarah Wiggum . 
 The episode contains a two @-@ second snippet of footage from " Bart the Daredevil " : a close @-@ up of Homer making a disappointed face and saying " D 'oh ! " when he gets arrested . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 When Bart reaches for the cupcakes and collapses , it is a parody of a scene in A Clockwork Orange , where the main character Alex reaches for a woman 's breasts . The Duff clock is a parody of the " It 's a Small World " clock . In the Duff TV advertisement , a group of women were leading an anti @-@ sexism protest in front of the McMahon and Tate building , a reference to the advertising agency from Bewitched . The scene toward the end where Moe points toward individual customers declaring they will " be back " before pointing toward and addressing the viewer ( later revealed to be Barney via a cutaway ) is a parody of the end of the film Reefer Madness . The final scene , where Homer and Marge cycle into the distance while " Raindrops Keep Fallin ' on My Head " plays is a reference to the film Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid . Homer 's song " It was a Very Good Beer " is sung to the tune of the 1961 song " It Was a Very Good Year " ; one of its lyrics is Homer stating he stayed up and listened to the music of the British band Queen . Bart sitting in the chair , stroking the hamster is a reference to James Bond character Ernst Stavro Blofeld , who strokes a cat in his chair . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Duffless " aired during February sweeps and finished 19th in the weekly ratings for the week of February 15 – 21 , 1993 with a Nielsen rating of 15 @.@ 2 and was viewed in 14 @.@ 2 million homes . It was the highest rated show from the Fox Network that week . 
 The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood said , " A superb episode with a sincere message . Homer is excellent throughout , but it is the cameos by Principal Skinner and Edna Krabappel that steal the show , especially the latter 's reaction to Milhouse 's Slinky . " Entertainment Weekly ranked the episode as number eleven on their list of the top twenty @-@ five The Simpsons episodes . 
 = Women in early modern Scotland = 
 Women in early modern Scotland , between the Renaissance of the early sixteenth century and the beginnings of industrialisation in the mid @-@ eighteenth century , were part of a patriarchal society , though the enforcement of this social order was not absolute in all aspects . Women retained their family surnames at marriage and did not join their husband 's kin groups . In higher social ranks , marriages were often political in nature and the subject of complex negotiations in which women as matchmakers or mothers could play a major part . Women were a major part of the workforce , with many unmarried women acting as farm servants and married women playing a part in all the major agricultural tasks , particularly during harvest . Widows could be found keeping schools , brewing ale and trading , but many at the bottom of society lived a marginal existence . 
 Women had limited access to formal education and girls benefited less than boys from the expansion of the parish school system . Some women were taught reading , domestic tasks , but often not writing . In noble households some received a private education and some female literary figures emerged from the seventeenth century . Religion may have been particularly important as a means of expression for women and from the seventeenth century women may have had greater opportunities for religious participation in movements out side of the established kirk . Women had very little legal status at the beginning of the period , unable to act as witnesses or legally responsible for their own actions . From the mid @-@ sixteenth century they were increasingly criminalised , with statutes allowing them to be prosecuted for infanticide and as witches . Seventy @-@ five per cent of an estimated 6 @,@ 000 individuals prosecuted for witchcraft between 1563 and 1736 were women and perhaps 1 @,@ 500 were executed . As a result , some historians have seen this period as characterised by increasing concern with women and attempts to control and constrain them . 
 = = Status = = 
 Early modern Scotland was a patriarchal society , in which men had total authority over women . From the 1560s the post @-@ Reformation marriage service underlined this by stating that a wife " is in subjection and under governance of her husband , so long as they both continue alive " . As was common in Western Europe , Scottish society stressed a daughter 's duties to her father , a wife 's duties to her husband and the virtues of chastity and obedience . Given very high mortality rates , women could inherit important responsibilities from their fathers and from their husbands as widows . Evidence from towns indicates that around one in five households were headed by women , often continuing an existing business interest . In noble society , widowhood created some very wealthy and powerful women , including Catherine Campbell , who became the richest widow in the kingdom when her husband , the ninth earl of Crawford , died in 1558 and the twice @-@ widowed Margaret Ker , dowager lady Yester , described in 1635 as having " the greatest conjunct fie [ fiefdom ] that any lady hes in Scotland " . 
 In politics the theory of patriarchy was complicated by regencies led by Margaret Tudor and Mary of Guise and by the advent of a regnant queen in Mary , Queen of Scots from 1561 . Concerns over this threat to male authority were exemplified by John Knox 's The First Blast of the Trumpet Against the <unk> Regiment of Women ( 1558 ) , which advocated the deposition of all reigning queens . Most of the political nation took a pragmatic view of the situation , accepting Mary as queen , but the strains that this paradox created may have played a part in the later difficulties of the reign . How exactly patriarchy worked in practice is difficult to discern . Scottish women in this period had something of a reputation among foreign observers for being forthright individuals , with the Spanish ambassador to the court of James IV noting that they were " absolute mistresses of their houses and even their husbands " . 
 = = Family and marriage = = 
 Unlike in England , where kinship was predominately cognatic ( derived through both males and females ) , in Scotland kinship was agnatic , with members of a group sharing a ( sometimes fictional ) common ancestor . Women retained their original surname at marriage , symbolising that they did not join their husband 's kin , and marriages were intended to create friendship between kin groups , rather than a new bond of kinship . Women could marry from the age of 12 ( while for boys it was from 14 ) and , while many girls from the social elite married in their teens , most in the Lowlands only married after a period of life @-@ cycle service , in their twenties , by which they accrued resources , status and skills that would allow them to establish a household . Normally marriage followed <unk> , a period of betrothal , which in the Highlands may have effectively been a period of trial marriage , in which sexual activity may have been accepted as legitimate . Highland women , based on the higher birth rate of the Highlands , might have married earlier than their Lowland counterparts . 
 Marriages , particularly higher in society , were often political in nature and the subject of complex negotiations over the tocher ( dowry ) . Some mothers took a leading role in negotiating marriages , as Lady Glenorchy did for her children in the 1560s and 1570s , or as matchmakers , finding suitable and compatible partners for others . Before the Reformation , the extensive marriage bars for kinship meant that most noble marriages necessitated a papal dispensation , which could later be used as grounds for annulment if the marriage proved politically or personally inconvenient , although there was no divorce as such . Separation from bed and board was allowed in exceptional circumstances , usually adultery . Under the reformed Kirk , divorce was allowed on grounds of adultery , or of desertion . Scotland was one of the first countries to allow desertion as legal grounds for divorce and , unlike England , divorce cases were initiated relatively far down the social scale . 
 = = Work = = 
 Women acted as an important part of the workforce . In addition to the domestic tasks carried out by wives and female servants , many unmarried women worked away from their families as farm servants and married women worked with their husbands around the farm , taking part in all the major agricultural tasks . They had a particular role as shearers in the harvest , forming most of the reaping team of the bandwin . Women also played an important part in the expanding textile industries , spinning and setting up warps for men to weave . In the Highlands they may have been even more significant as there is evidence that many men considered agricultural work to be beneath their status and in places they may have formed the majority of the rural workforce . There were roles that were the preserve of women alone , including as midwives and wet @-@ nurses . There is evidence of single women engaging in independent economic activity , particularly for widows , who can be found keeping schools , brewing ale and trading . Some were highly successful , like Janet Flockhart , an Edinburgh <unk> or moneylender , who had been left a widow with seven children after her third husband 's suicide , and who managed her business affairs so successfully that she had amassed a moveable estate of £ 22 @,@ 000 by her death in the late sixteenth century . Lower down the social scale the rolls of poor relief indicate that large numbers of widows with children endured a marginal existence and were particularly vulnerable in times of economic hardship . " <unk> women " , who had no responsible fathers or husbands may have made up as much as 18 per cent of all households and particularly worried authorities who gave instructions to take particular notice of them . 
 = = Education and writing = = 
 By the end of the fifteenth century , Edinburgh had schools for girls , sometimes described as " sewing schools " , and probably taught by lay women or nuns . There was also the development of private tuition in the families of lords and wealthy burghers , which may have extended to women . From the mid @-@ seventeenth century there were boarding schools for girls , particularly in Edinburgh or London . These were often family @-@ sized institutions headed by women . Initially these were aimed at the girls of noble households , but by the eighteenth century there were complaints that the daughters of traders and craftsmen were following their social superiors into these institutions . By the eighteenth century many poorer girls were being taught in dame schools , informally set up by a widow or spinster to teach reading , sewing and cooking . 
 The widespread belief in the limited intellectual and moral capacity of women , vied with a desire , intensified after the Reformation , for women to take personal moral responsibility , particularly as wives and mothers . In Protestantism this necessitated an ability to learn and understand the catechism and even to be able to independently read the Bible , but most commentators , even those that tended to encourage the education of girls , thought they should not receive the same academic education as boys . In the lower ranks of society , they benefited from the expansion of the parish schools system that took place after the Reformation , but were usually outnumbered by boys , often taught separately , for a shorter time and to a lower level . They were frequently taught reading , sewing and knitting , but not writing . Female illiteracy rates based on signatures among female servants were around 90 per cent , from the late seventeenth to the early eighteenth centuries and perhaps 85 per cent for women of all ranks by 1750 , compared with 35 per cent for men . 
 Among the nobility there were many educated and cultured women , of which Queen Mary is the most obvious example . By the early eighteenth century their education was expected to include basic literacy and numeracy , musical instruments ( including lute , viol and keyboard ) , needlework , cookery and household management , while polite accomplishments and piety were also emphasised . From the seventeenth century they were some notable aristocratic female writers . The first book written by a woman and published in Scotland was Elizabeth Melville 's Ane Godlie <unk> in 1603 . Later major figures included Lady Elizabeth Wardlaw ( 1627 – 1727 ) and Lady Grizel Baillie ( 1645 – 1746 ) . There are 50 autobiographies extant from the late seventeenth to the early eighteenth century , of which 16 were written by women , all of which are largely religious in content . 
 = = Religion = = 
 Historian Katharine Glover argues that women had less means of public participation than men and that as a result piety and an active religious life may have been more important for women from the social elite . Church going played an important part in the lives of many women . Women were largely excluded from the administration of the kirk , but when heads of households voted on the appointment of a new minister some parishes allowed women in that position to participate . 
 The upheavals of the seventeenth century saw women autonomously participating in radical religion . The most prominent examples were the women who threw their <unk> @-@ stools at the dean who was reading the new " English " service book in St. Giles Cathedral in 1637 , precipitating the Bishop 's Wars ( 1639 – 40 ) , between the Presbyterian Covenanters and the king , who favoured an episcopalian structure in the church , similar to that in England . They were later said to have been led by Edinburgh woman Jenny Geddes . According to R. A. Houston , women probably had more freedom of expression and control over their spiritual destiny in groups outside the established church such the Quakers , who had a presence in the country from the mid @-@ seventeenth century . The principle of male authority could be challenged when women chose different religious leaders from their husbands and fathers . Among the Cameronians , who broke away from the kirk when episcopalianism was re @-@ established at the Restoration in 1660 , several reports indicate that women could preach and excommunicate , but not baptise . Several women are known to have been executed for their part in the movement . 
 = = Crime and the law = = 
 At the beginning of the period , women had a very limited legal status . A married woman had few property rights and could not make a will without her husband 's permission , although jurists expected this to be given . Men had considerable latitude in disciplining the women under their authority and although a handful of cases turn up in higher courts , and the kirk session did intervene to protect women from domestic abuse , it was usually only when the abuse began to disturb public order . The criminal courts refused to recognise women as witnesses , or as independent criminals , and responsibly for their actions was assumed to lie with their husbands , fathers and kin . As a result , a married woman could not sell property , sue in court or make contracts without her husband 's permission . 
 In the post @-@ Reformation period there was a criminalisation of women . Women were disciplined in kirk sessions and civil courts for stereotypical offenses including scolding and prostitution , which were seen as deviant , rather than criminal . Through the 1640s there were independent commissions set up to try women for child murder and , after pressure from the kirk , a law of 1690 placed the presumption of guilt on a woman who concealed a pregnancy and birth and whose child later died . In the aftermath of the initial Reformation settlement , Parliament passed the Witchcraft Act 1563 , similar to that passed in England one year earlier , which made the practice of witchcraft itself and consulting with witches capital crimes . Between the passing of the act and its repeal in 1736 , an estimated 6 @,@ 000 persons were tried for witchcraft in Scotland . Most of the accused , some 75 per cent , were women , with over 1 @,@ 500 executed , and the witch hunt in Scotland has been seen as a means of controlling women . Various reasons for the Scottish witch @-@ hunt , and its more intense nature than that in England , have been advanced by historians . Many of the major periods of prosecution coincided with periods of intense economic distress and some accusations may have followed the withdrawal of charity from marginal figures , particularly the single women that made up many of the accused . Changing attitudes to women , particularly in the reformed kirk , which may have perceived women as more of a moral threat , have also been noted . The proliferation of partial explanations for the witch hunt has led some historians to proffer the concept of " associated circumstances " , rather than one single significant cause . 
 = Positive Black Soul = 
 Positive Black Soul ( also known as PBS ) is a hip hop group based in Dakar , Senegal , one of the first such collectives in the country . Founded in 1989 , the group is composed of Didier Sourou Awadi ( alias DJ Awadi ) and Amadou Barry ( alias Doug E. Tee or <unk> @-@ Tee ) , both of whom had previously been in other hip hop groups . They perform in the English , French , and Wolof languages and use traditional Senegalese instruments as part of their songs . Political and social activism have played important roles in the group since it was founded . 
 = = History = = 
 The two members of Positive Black Soul were both born in the city of Dakar , Senegal . As teenagers , Awadi and Barry were involved in the Dakar hip hop scene — Awadi leading his own group , Didier Awadi 's Syndicate , a breakdancer as well as a rapper ; and Barry performing with the King MCs . Originally Awadi and Barry were rivals , competing with each other in performances and coming from separate neighborhoods of Dakar . During a birthday party held by Awadi to which Barry was invited , however , the two performed together and realized their similarities , founding Positive Black Soul very soon after . Activism and politics are central parts of the group 's philosophy — its shortened name ( PBS ) was a play on the Parti Démocratique <unk> initialism " PDS " . 
 In 1992 , the group performed at a music festival held by the Dakar French Cultural Center , where the French rapper MC <unk> heard their performance and invited the group to open for him when he debuted in Dakar in October of that year . The rapper was impressed with Positive Black Soul , inviting them to continue performing with him in France . Two years later the group put out its first release , a cassette entitled Boul <unk> . The album was followed by more touring in France , as well as in England and Switzerland . In the same year , the Senegalese musician <unk> Maal offered PBS the opportunity to be on his album <unk> ' in <unk> . Maal was signed to Mango Records and because of this recording with him , Positive Black Soul were signed as well . They released their album debut Salaam on Mango Records . After achieving success in Senegal and some abroad , the group continued touring , including 130 performances in 1997 . They also began organizing concerts in Dakar and promoting new groups including Daara J and Pee <unk> . 
 Positive Black Soul 's first international release , New York Paris @-@ Dakar , had been previously released as a cassette in Senegal . However it was only in 1997 , six years after its initial appearance , that it was sold outside of the country . The American rapper KRS @-@ One , one of the group 's collaborators on the album , shared a similar philosophy and interest in Pan @-@ Africanism with Awadi and Barry . 
 In 2002 , the group appeared on the Red Hot Organization 's tribute album to Fela Kuti , Red Hot and Riot . They contributed to a track titled " No Agreement " alongside Res , Tony Allen , Ray Lema , <unk> Maal , and Archie Shepp . 
 Since about 2002 , the group 's members have been pursuing solo projects . On August 14 , 2009 , PBS performed in Dakar for their 20th anniversary effectively ending speculations about whether they have disbanded . Guests at the concert included powerful Senegal music stars such as Youssou <unk> and Ismael Lo . 
 = = Activism = = 
 Positive Black Soul has promoted political activity and activism in other areas . The group urged Senegalese people to participate in the country 's government and vote in elections . PBS also decries images of Africa in the media , which they view as one @-@ sided . They state : " We want to show the positivity in the black soul . That 's our fight . Africa is not only a land of suffering , misery , war and disease . We 're proud to live there and we are not suffering . " They view their chosen medium of rap as an accessible way to talk about issues such as corruption and politics . AIDS has also been featured in their music : one song , " <unk> Fils " ( " Listen Son " ) , is written about the disease and cautions listeners about its dangers . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Boul <unk> ( 1994 ) 
 Salaam ( 1995 ) 
 Daw <unk> ( 1996 ) 
 <unk> <unk> ( 1996 ) 
 New York @-@ Paris @-@ Dakar ( 1997 ) 
 Revolution ( 2000 ) 
 Run Cool ( 2001 ) 
 = Flag of Portugal = 
 The Flag of Portugal ( Portuguese : <unk> de Portugal ) is the national flag of the Portuguese Republic . It is a rectangular bicolour with a field unevenly divided into green on the hoist , and red on the fly . The lesser version of the national coat of arms ( i.e. armillary sphere and Portuguese shield ) is centred over the colour boundary at equal distance from the upper and lower edges . On June 30 , 1911 , less than a year after the downfall of the constitutional monarchy , this design was officially adopted for the new national flag , after selection by a special commission whose members included <unk> Bordalo Pinheiro , João Chagas and Abel Botelho . 
 The conjugation of the new field colours , especially the use of green , was not traditional in the Portuguese national flag 's composition and represented a radical republican @-@ inspired change that broke the bond with the former monarchical flag . Since a failed republican insurrection on January 31 , 1891 , red and green had been established as the colours of the Portuguese Republican Party and its associated movements , whose political prominence kept growing until it reached a culmination period following the Republican revolution of October 5 , 1910 . In the ensuing decades , these colours were popularly propagandized as representing the hope of the nation ( green ) and the blood ( red ) of those who died defending it , as a means to endow them with a more patriotic and dignified , therefore less political , sentiment . Although the flag flown from the Oporto city hall in the morning of January 31 , 1891 , symbol of the republican uprising was red and green . Totally red with a green circle in the center , to which were added the inscriptions referring to the republican center to whom it belonged - the Centro Democrático Federal 15 de <unk> 
 The current flag design represents a dramatic change in the evolution of the Portuguese standard , which had always been closely associated with the royal arms , blue and white . Since the country 's foundation , the national flag developed from the blue cross @-@ on @-@ white armorial square banner of King Afonso I to the liberal monarchy 's arms over a blue @-@ and @-@ white rectangle . In between , major changes associated with determinant political events contributed to its evolution into the current design . 
 = = Design = = 
 The decree that legally replaced the flag used under the constitutional monarchy with the new design was approved by the Constituent Assembly and published in government journal no . 141 ( Portuguese : <unk> do <unk> ) , on June 19 , 1911 . On June 30 , this decree had its regulations officially published in government diary no . 150 . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 The flag 's length is equal to 1 1 ⁄ 2 times its width , which translates into an aspect ratio of 2 : 3 . The background is vertically divided into two colours : dark green on the hoist side , and scarlet red on the fly . The colour division is made in a way that green spans 2 ⁄ 5 of the length and the remaining 3 ⁄ 5 are filled by red ( ratio 2 @-@ 3 ) . The lesser version of the national coat of arms ( without the laurel wreaths ) — a white @-@ rimmed national shield on top of a black @-@ highlighted yellow armillary sphere — is positioned over the border between both colours . 
 The armillary sphere has a diameter equal to 1 ⁄ 2 width and is equidistant from the upper and lower edges of the flag . The sphere , drawn in perspective , possesses six edge @-@ embossed arcs , four of which are great circles and two are small circles . The great circles represent the ecliptic ( wider oblique arc ) , the equator , and two meridians . These last three are positioned so that the intersections between each two arcs make a right angle ; one meridian lies on the flag 's plane while the other is perpendicular to it . The small circles consist of two parallels ( the tropics ) , each tangent to one of the ecliptic @-@ meridian intersections . 
 Vertically centred over the sphere is the national shield , a white @-@ rimmed curved bottom red shield charged with a white inescutcheon . Its height and width are equal to 7 ⁄ 10 and 6 ⁄ 10 of the sphere 's diameter , respectively . The shield is positioned in a way that its limits intersect the sphere : 
 at the inflection points of the distal edges of the Tropic of Cancer 's anterior half ( top ) and Tropic of Capricorn 's posterior half ( bottom ) ; 
 at the intersection of the lower edges of the ecliptic 's posterior half and of the equator 's anterior half ( dexter or viewer 's left side ) ; and 
 at the intersection of the upper edge of the ecliptic 's anterior half with the lower edge of the equator 's posterior half ( sinister or viewer 's right side ) . 
 A curious aspect of the official design is the absence of a segment of the Tropic of Capricorn , between the national shield and the ecliptic arc . 
 The white inescutcheon is itself charged with five smaller blue shields ( <unk> ) arranged like a Greek cross ( 1 + 3 + 1 ) . Each smaller shield holds five white bezants displayed in the form of a saltire ( 2 + 1 + 2 ) . The red bordure is charged with seven yellow castles : three on the chief portion ( one in each corner and one in the middle ) , two in the middle points of each quadrant of the curved base ( rotated 45 degrees ) , and two more on each side of the bordure , over the flag 's horizontal middle line . Each castle is composed by a base building , showing a closed ( yellow ) gate , on top of which stand three battlemented towers . In heraldic terminology , the shield 's blazon is described as Argent , five escutcheons in cross azure each charged with five plates in saltire , on a bordure gules seven towers triple @-@ turreted Or , three in <unk> 
 The colour tones of the flag are not accurately specified in any legal document . Approximate tones are listed below : 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The Republican revolution of October 5 , 1910 , brought a need to replace the symbols of the overthrown monarchy , represented in the first instance by the old national flag and anthem . The choice of the new flag was not one without conflict , especially over the colours , as partisans of the republican red @-@ and @-@ green faced opposition from supporters of the traditional royal blue @-@ and @-@ white . Blue also carried a strong religious meaning as it was the colour of Our Lady of the Conception ( Portuguese : Nossa Senhora da Conceição ) , who was crowned Queen and Patroness of Portugal by King John IV , so its removal or replacement from the future flag was justified by Republicans as one of the many measures needed to <unk> the state . 
 After the presentation and discussion of the many proposals , a governmental commission was set up on October 15 , 1910 . It included <unk> Bordalo Pinheiro ( painter ) , João Chagas ( journalist ) , Abel Botelho ( writer ) and two military leaders of 1910 : <unk> Pereira and Afonso Palla . This commission ultimately chose the red @-@ and @-@ green of the Portuguese Republican Party , delivering an explanation based on patriotic reasons , which disguised the political significance behind the choice , as these had been the colours present on the banners of the rebellious during the republican insurrection of January 31 , 1891 , in Porto , and during the monarchy @-@ overthrowing revolution , in Lisbon . 
 The commission considered that red should " ( ... ) be present as one of the main colours , because it is the battling , warm , virile colour , par excellence . It is the colour of conquest and laughter . A singing , burning , joyful colour ( ... ) <unk> the idea of blood and urges to achieve victory " . An explanation for the inclusion of the green was harder to come up with , given that it was not a traditional colour of the Portuguese flag 's history . Eventually , it was justified on the grounds that , during the 1891 insurrection , this was the colour present on the revolutionary flag that " sparked the redeeming lightning " of republicanism . Finally , white ( on the shield ) represented " a beautiful and fraternal colour , into which all other colours merge themselves , colour of simplicity , of harmony and peace " , adding that " ( ... ) it is this same colour that , charged with enthusiasm and faith by the red cross of Christ , marks the Discoveries epic cycle " . 
 The Manueline armillary sphere , which had been present on the national flag under the reign of John VI , was revived because it consecrated the " Portuguese epic maritime history ( ... ) the ultimate challenge , essential to our collective life . " . The Portuguese shield was kept , being positioned over the armillary sphere . Its presence would immortalize the " human miracle of positive bravery , tenacity , diplomacy , and audacity , that managed to bind the first links of the Portuguese nation 's social and political affirmation " , since it is one of the " most vigorous symbols of the national identity and integrity " . 
 The new flag was produced in large numbers at the <unk> Nacional ( English : National Rope House ) and was officially presented nationwide on December 1 , 1910 , on occasion of the 270 years of the Restoration of Independence . This day had already been declared by the government as the " Flag Day " ( currently not celebrated ) . In the capital , it was paraded from the city hall to the <unk> ( English : Restorers ) Monument , where it was hoisted . This festive presentation did not mask , however , the turmoil caused by a design chosen single @-@ handedly without prior popular consultation , and that represented more of a political regime than a whole nation . To encourage a greater acceptance of the new flag , the government issued all teaching establishments with one exemplar , whose symbols were to be explained to the students ; textbooks were changed to intensively display these symbols . Also , December 1 ( " Flag Day " ) , January 31 and October 5 were declared national holidays . 
 = = Symbolism = = 
 The Portuguese flag displays three important symbols : the field colours , and the armillary sphere and national shield , which make up the coat of arms . 
 = = = Colours = = = 
 The explanation for the green and red colours that make up the background field arose during the Estado Novo period , the nationalist authoritarian regime that held power from 1933 to 1974 . It claims that the green represented the hope of the Portuguese people , while the red represented the blood of those who died serving the nation . Sources believe these noble meanings are far from the truth and are nothing more than propaganda , to provide an honourable justification to their choice . 
 Despite the fact that these colours never constituted a major part of the national flag until 1910 , they were present in several historical banners during important periods . King John I included a green Aviz cross on the red bordure of his banner . The red cross of the Order of Christ was used over a white field as a naval pennon during the Discoveries and frequently on ship sails . A green background version was a popular standard of the rebellious during the 1640 revolution that restored Portugal 's independence from Spain . There are no registered sources to confirm that this was the origin of the republican colours . Another explanation gives full credit to the flag that was hoisted on the balcony of Porto 's city hall during the 1891 insurrection . It consisted of a red field bearing a green disc and the inscription Centro Democrático Federal « 15 de <unk> » ( English : Federal Democratic Centre « 15 of November » ) , representing one of many masonry @-@ inspired republican clubs . Over the following 20 years , the red @-@ and @-@ green was present on every republican item in Portugal . The 1891 flag @-@ inherited red stands for the colour of the republican @-@ inspired masonry @-@ backed revolutionaries , whereas green was the colour Auguste Comte had destined to be present in the flags of positivist nations , an ideal incorporated into the republican political matrix . 
 = = = Armillary sphere = = = 
 The armillary sphere was an important astronomical and navigational instrument for the Portuguese sailors who ventured into unknown seas during the Age of Discoveries . It was introduced by the Knights Templar , whose knowledge was essential to the Portuguese Discoveries — Henry , the Navigator , the person mainly responsible for the development of Age of Discovery was actually the Grand Master of the Order of Christ . It thus became the symbol of the most important period of the nation — the Portuguese discoveries . In light of this , King Manuel I , who ruled during this period , incorporated the armillary sphere into his personal banner . It was simultaneously used as the ensign of ships plying the route between the metropolis and Brazil , thus becoming a colonial symbol and a <unk> element of the flags of the future Brazilian kingdom and empire . 
 Adding to the sphere 's significance was its common use on every Manueline @-@ influenced architectural work , where it is one of the major stylistic elements , as seen on the <unk> Monastery and Belém Tower . 
 = = = Portuguese shield = = = 
 The Portuguese shield rests over the armillary sphere . Except during the reign of Afonso I , it is present in every single historical flag , in one form or another . It is the prime Portuguese symbol as well as one of the oldest , with the first elements of today 's shield appearing during the reign of Sancho I. The evolution of the Portuguese flag is inherently associated with the evolution of the shield . 
 Within the white inescutcheon , the five small blue shields with their five white bezants representing the five wounds of Christ ( Portuguese : Cinco Chagas ) when crucified and are popularly associated with the " Miracle of Ourique " . The story associated with this miracle tells that before the Battle of Ourique ( July 25 , 1139 ) , an old hermit appeared before Count Afonso Henriques ( future Afonso I ) as a divine messenger . He foretold Afonso 's victory and assured him that God was watching over him and his peers . The messenger advised him to walk away from his camp , alone , if he heard a nearby chapel bell tolling , in the following night . In doing so , he witnessed an apparition of Jesus on the cross . Ecstatic , Afonso heard Jesus promising victories for the coming battles , as well as God 's wish to act through Afonso , and his descendants , in order to create an empire which would carry his name to unknown lands , thus choosing the Portuguese to perform great tasks . 
 Boosted by this spiritual experience , Afonso won the battle against an outnumbering enemy . Legend has it that Afonso killed the five Moorish kings of the Seville , Badajoz , Elvas , <unk> and Beja taifas , before decimating the enemy troops . Hence , in gratitude to Jesus , he incorporated five shields arranged in a cross — representing his divine @-@ led victory over the five enemy kings — with each one carrying Christ 's five wounds in the form of silver bezants . The sum of all bezants ( doubling the ones in the central shield ) would give thirty , symbolizing Judas Iscariot 's thirty pieces of silver . 
 However , evidence pointing out that the number of bezants on each shield was greater than five during long periods following Afonso I 's reign , as well as the fact that only in the 15th century was this legend registered on a chronicle by Fernão Lopes ( 1419 ) , support this explanation as one of pure myth and highly charged with patriotic feeling in the sense that Portugal was created by divine intervention and was destined for great things . 
 The seven castles are traditionally considered a symbol of the Portuguese victories over their Moorish enemies , under Afonso III , who supposedly captured seven enemy fortresses in the course of his conquest of the Algarve , concluded in 1249 . However , this explanation is weakly founded since this king did not have seven castles on his banner , but an unspecified number . Some reconstructions display about sixteen castles ; this number changed to twelve , in 1385 , and was only fixed at seven in 1485 . An hypothesis about the origin of the castles on a red bordure lies in the family ties of Afonso III with Castile ( both his mother and second wife were Castilian ) , whose arms consisted of a golden castle on a red field . 
 = = Evolution = = 
 Since the foundation of Portugal , the national flag was always linked to the royal arms and , up until 1640 , there was no official distinction between both . It evolved in a way that gradually incorporated most of the symbols present on the current coat of arms . 
 = = = 1095 – 1248 = = = 
 The first heraldic symbol that can be associated with what would become the Portuguese nation was on the shield used by Henry of Burgundy , Count of Portugal since 1095 , during his battles with the Moors . This shield consisted of a blue cross over a white field . Nevertheless , this design has no reliable sources since it is a reconstruction that became popular and widely accepted thanks to the nationalistic purposes of the Estado Novo regime . 
 Henry 's son Afonso Henriques succeeded him in the county and took on the same shield . In 1139 , despite being outnumbered , he defeated an army of Almoravid Moors at the Battle of Ourique and proclaimed himself Afonso I , King of Portugal , in front of his troops . Following the official recognition by the neighbouring León , Afonso changed his shield in order to reflect his new political status . Sources state he charged the cross with five sets of an unspecified number of silver bezants ( most likely large @-@ headed silver nails ) , one set on the centre and one on each arm , symbolizing Afonso 's newly gained right to issue currency . 
 During the time of Afonso I , it was typical not to repair battle damage inflicted on the shield , so changes such as the breaking off of pieces , colour shifting or stains were very common . When Sancho I succeeded his father Afonso I , in 1185 , he inherited a very worn off shield : the blue @-@ stained leather that made the cross had been lost except where the bezants ( nails ) held it in place . This involuntary degradation was the basis for the next step on the evolution of the national coat of arms , where a plain blue cross transformed into a compound cross of five blue <unk> @-@ charged escutcheons — the <unk> ( Portuguese word meaning “ group of five ” ) were thus born . Sancho 's personal shield ( called " Portugal ancien " ) consisted of a white field with a compound cross of five shields ( each one charged with eleven silver bezants ) with the bottom edges of the lateral ones facing towards the centre . Both Sancho 's son Afonso II and grandson Sancho II used these arms , as it was usual with direct succession lines ( cadency system ) . A new modification of the royal arms was made when Sancho II 's younger brother became king , in 1248 . 
 = = = 1248 – 1495 = = = 
 Afonso III of Portugal was not the eldest son , therefore heraldic practices stated he should not take his father 's arms without adding a personal variation . Before becoming king , Afonso was married to Matilda II of Boulogne but her inability to provide him with a royal heir led Afonso to divorce her , in 1253 . He then married Beatrice of Castile , an illegitimate daughter of Alfonso X of Castile . It is more likely that it was this family connection with Castile ( his mother was also Castilian ) that justified the new heraldic addition to the royal arms — a red bordure charged with an undetermined number of yellow castles — rather than the definitive conquest of the Algarve and its Moorish fortresses , considering that the number of castles was only fixed in the late 16th century . 
 The inner portion contained the arms of Sancho I , although the number of bezants varied between seven , eleven and sixteen ( the latter number was used on Afonso 's personal standard while he was still Count of Boulogne ) . This same design was used by the Portuguese kings until the end of the first dynasty , in 1383 ; a succession crisis put the country at war with Castile and left it without a ruler for two years . 
 In 1385 , in the wake of the Battle of <unk> , a second dynasty was founded when John , Master of the Order of Aviz and illegitimate son of King Peter I , acceded to the throne as John I. To his personal banner , John I added his Order 's fleur @-@ de @-@ lys cross , displayed as green flowery points on the red bordure ; this inclusion reduced the number of castles to twelve ( three around each corner ) . The number of bezants in each escutcheon was reduced from eleven to seven . This banner lasted a hundred years until John I 's great @-@ grandson John II restyled it , in 1485 , introducing important changes : the removal of the Aviz cross , a downward arrangement and edge @-@ smoothing of the shields , and the definitive fixing of five saltire @-@ arranged bezants in each shield ( summing up six quinas , i.e. , six “ groups of five ” : one <unk> of shields and five quinas of bezants ) and seven castles on the bordure ( as it is currently ) . John II 's banner was the last armorial square banner used as the " national " flag or standard . Following his death , in 1495 , radical changes were made by his successor . 
 = = = 1495 – 1667 = = = 
 John II was succeeded by his first cousin Manuel I , in 1495 . This king was the first to convert the traditional square armorial banner into a rectangular ( 2 : 3 ) field with the coat of arms on its centre . Specifically , the flag was now a white rectangle centrally charged with the coat of arms ( bearing eleven castles ) on an ogival or heater @-@ shaped shield and surmounted by an open royal crown . This flag was used exclusively as the kingdom 's banner since Manuel I possessed a personal standard which included the armillary sphere for the first time . 
 In 1578 , during the reign of Sebastian and on the eve of the fatal Battle of <unk> <unk> , the flag was again modified . The number of castles was permanently fixed at seven and the royal crown was converted into a closed three @-@ arched crown , which symbolized a stronger royal authority . With Sebastião 's death and the short @-@ lived reign of his great @-@ uncle Cardinal Henry , in 1580 , a dynastic crisis was solved with the Spanish king Philip II acceding to the Portuguese throne as Philip I , installing a Spanish dynasty . The accession was made on the condition that Portugal was ruled as a separate , autonomous state , not as a province . This was fulfilled as Portugal and Spain formed a personal union under Philip I and his successors . A consequence of this administrative situation was the maintenance of the flag created under Sebastian 's reign as the Portuguese national flag , while Spain had its own . As the ruling house in Portugal , the Habsburg banner also included the Portuguese arms . 
 The country regained its independence from Spain , in 1640 , in a coup d 'état that placed on the throne John , Duke of Bragança , as King John IV . Under his rule , the national flag was slightly changed as the ogival shield became rounded . It was from this reign forward that the royal arms and the kingdom 's arms became separate banners . 
 = = = 1667 – 1830 = = = 
 When Afonso VI 's younger brother Peter II replaced him on the throne , in 1667 , he adapted the flag 's crown to fit the contemporary trends by transforming it into a five @-@ arched crown . The new flag did not remain unchanged for too long , as it was refurbished by Peter 's son John V , after he took the throne , in 1707 . Heavily influenced by the luxurious and ostentatious court of the French king Louis XIV , and by France 's political and cultural impact in Europe , John V wanted to transpose such style into the country 's coat of arms . A red beret was then added under the crown . Besides the change of the crown , the shields started to be represented , on the flags , not only in the traditional round bottom shape ( " Iberian type " ) , but also in other formats like the <unk> ( " French type " ) , the <unk> ( " Italian type " ) or the oval ( " cartouche " ) shapes . <unk> by an absolute monarch like John V , this flag endured through almost the entire absolutist period in Portugal — John V ( 1707 – 1750 ) , Joseph I ( 1750 – 1777 ) and Maria I ( 1777 – 1816 ) . 
 During the second half of the 17th century , the maritime use of the white flag with the Royal coat of arms of Portugal was increasingly restricted to the war ships . An ordinance of 1692 expressly banned the use of this flag by the Portuguese merchant ships , restricting its use to ships with 20 or more cannons and with a complement of 40 or more men . The Portuguese merchant ships flew instead green and white striped flags , which were the national colours of Portugal at that time . The colours green and white were also used in other Portuguese flags , like the naval commissioning pennants . 
 With the invasion of Portugal by Napoleon 's imperial army in 1807 , the Portuguese Royal Court fled to Brazil , establishing the capital of the Portuguese Monarchy and Empire in Rio de Janeiro . In 1815 , the Portuguese state of Brazil was elevated to a kingdom , thus receiving the same status as the Kingdom of Portugal and the Algarves . The whole of the Portuguese Monarchy became then the United Kingdom of Portugal , Brazil and the Algarves . To reflect the change of the status of the Portuguese Monarchy , the Prince Regent John ( future King John VI , at that time still reigning in name of his mother , Queen Mary I ) established a new Royal coat of arms , where the Portuguese shield ( representing Portugal and the Algarves ) charged a blue @-@ filled yellow armillary sphere ( representing Brazil ) surmounted by the same beret @-@ bearing five @-@ arched crown . The new coat of arms replaced the previous one in the Portuguese flags . 
 Despite the United Kingdom of Portugal , Brazil and the Algarves ceased to exist in 1822 , when Brazil became independent , its coat of arms continued to be used , inclusive in flags , until the death of John VI in 1826 . From then on , the previous coat of arms , without the armillary sphere , became in use again . 
 = = = 1830 – 1910 = = = 
 John VI died in Lisbon in 1826 . His elder son Peter , who had declared the independence of Brazil in 1822 , becoming Emperor Peter I , succeeded to the Portuguese throne as Peter IV . Because the new Brazilian constitution did not allow further personal unions of Portugal and Brazil , Peter abdicated the Portuguese crown in favour of his elder daughter Maria da <unk> , who became Maria II of Portugal . She was only seven years old , so Peter stated she would marry his brother Miguel who would act as regent . However , in 1828 , Miguel deposed Maria and proclaimed himself king , abolishing the 1822 liberal constitution and ruling as an absolute monarch . This started the period of the Liberal Wars . 
 The liberals formed a separate government exiled on the Azorean island of Terceira . This government issued two decrees establishing modifications to the national flag . While supporters of usurper King Miguel I still upheld the flag established by John VI , the liberal supporters imposed important changes on it . The background was equally divided along its length into blue ( hoist ) and white ( fly ) ; the armillary sphere ( associated with Brazil ) was removed and the coat of arms was centred over the colour boundary ; and the shield reverted to the " French type " shape of John V. This new flag configuration was decreed solely for terrestrial use , but a variation of it was used as the national ensign . This ensign differed in the way the colours occupied the background ( blue 1 ⁄ 3 , white 2 ⁄ 3 ) with a consequent positional shift of the arms . 
 With the defeat and exile of Miguel in 1834 , Queen Maria II returned to the throne and the standard of the victorious side was hoisted in Lisbon as the new national flag . It would survive for 80 years , witnessing the last period of the Portuguese monarchy until its abolition , in 1910 . Currently this flag is used by Portuguese monarchists . 
 = = Flag protocol = = 
 = = = Use = = = 
 The Portuguese legislation concerning the use of the National Flag is mostly limited to the Decree @-@ law 150 / 87 , issued in 30 March 1987 , which replaced the previous scarce legislation dated back to the beginning of the 20th century . 
 The Decree @-@ law 150 / 87 states that the flag is to be hoisted from 9 : 00 a.m. to sunset ( during the night , it must be properly lit ) , on Sundays and national holidays , throughout the entire national territory . It can also be displayed on days where official ceremonies or other solemn public sessions are held ; in this case , the flag is hoisted on @-@ site . The flag can be hoisted in other days if it is considered appropriate by the central government , or by other regional or local governing bodies , or by heads of private institutions . It must follow the official design standard and be preserved in good condition . 
 On the headquarters buildings of the bodies of sovereignty , the flag can stay hoisted on a daily basis . It can also be hoisted on civilian and military national monuments ; on public buildings associated with the central , regional or local administration ; and on headquarters of public corporations and institutions . Citizens and private institutions can also display it , on the condition that they respect the relevant legal procedures . In the facilities of nationally @-@ based international organizations or in the case of international meetings , the flag is hoisted according to the protocol used on those situations . 
 If national mourning is declared , the flag will be flown at half @-@ staff during the fixed amount of days ; any flag hoisted along with it will be flown in the same manner . 
 When unfurled in the presence of other flags , the national flag must not have smaller dimensions and must be situated in a prominent , honourable place , according to the relevant protocol . 
 If there are more than one flagpole , the National Flag should be flown : 
 Two flagpoles – in the right pole viewed by a person facing the exterior ; 
 Three flagpoles – in the central pole ; 
 More than three flagpoles : 
 Within a building – if odd number of poles , in the central pole ; if even number , in the first pole on the right of the central point ; 
 Outside a building – always in the rightmost pole ; 
 If the flagpoles have not the same height , the flag must be flown in the highest pole . The poles should be placed in honourable locations of the ground , building façades and roofs . On public acts where the flag is not hoisted , it can be suspended from a distinct spot , but never used as decoration , covering or for any purpose that can diminish its dignity . 
 = = = Penalties = = = 
 An early decree , from December 28 , 1910 , established that " any person who , through speech , published writings or any other public act , shows lack of respect to the national flag , which is the motherland 's symbol , will be sentenced to a three to twelve @-@ month prison term with corresponding fine and , in case of relapse , will be sentenced to exile , as stated in the 62nd article of the Penal Code " . In its 332nd article , the current penal code punishes infractions with a prison sentence of up to two years . If the sentence is shorter than 240 days , there is a formula for converting it into a fine . If the offense is directed towards regional symbols , the penalties are halved . 
 = = = Folding = = = 
 During formal occasions , four people are required to properly fold the flag , where each person holds one of the sides . A correctly folded flag must be a square limiting the national shield . However , the order by which the different folding steps are performed to achieve this result is not legislated . 
 The procedure begins with the flag fully extended and held in a horizontal plane with the obverse facing down . One of the possible folding sequences is demonstrated below : 
 = = Military flags = = 
 The National Flag of Portugal also serves as war flag and ensign , so being flown on military facilities and naval ships . There are however specific national military flags for specific uses , namely the military colors , the naval jack and the naval pennant . The military colors are occasionally referred as war flag , however they are not to be flown on military facilities but are only to be carried by the military units on parades . 
 = = = National colours = = = 
 The national colours constitute the variants of the National Flag for use on parades by the military units . Originally , the colours were referred as " regimental flags " or " military units flags " , but now they are referred as " national standards " ( <unk> <unk> ) . The colours are always carried in parade by a junior officer , escorted by a colour guard . 
 The standard model of the colours - also adopted in 1911 - is a rectangular flag measuring 1 @.@ 20 metres ( 3 @.@ 94 ft ) in width and 1 @.@ 30 metres ( 4 @.@ 26 ft ) in length ( ratio 12 : 13 ) . Green and red are positioned at the hoist and fly , respectively , but occupy the field in an equal manner ( 1 – 1 ) . Centred over the colour boundary lie the armillary sphere and Portuguese shield , surrounded by two yellow laurel branches intersecting at their stems . These are bound by a white stripe bearing the verse by Luís de Camões " Esta é a <unk> <unk> minha <unk> " ( English : " This is my beloved fortunate motherland " ) as the motto . This differs from the version of coat of arms employed as emblem , where the laurel shoots are tied by a green and red stripe without the verse . The sphere 's outer diameter is ⅓ of the width and lies 35 centimetres ( 14 in ) from the upper edge and 45 centimetres ( 18 in ) from the lower edge . 
 Although the 1911 regulation is , theoretically , still in force , the various branches of the Armed Forces made specific changes to it and so , several types of colours are used by the different military units . For example , the colours adopted by the Portuguese Army , in 1979 , measures just 0 @.@ 80 m ( 4 @.@ 26 ft ) by 0 @.@ 80 m . 
 = = = Naval jack = = = 
 The Portuguese naval jack ( <unk> or <unk> ) is only hoisted at the prow of docked or anchored Navy ships , from sunrise to sunset . The national flag is permanently hoisted at the stern , when sailing , and from sunrise to sunset , when docked . It is a square flag ( ratio 1 : 1 ) bearing a green @-@ bordered red field with the minor coat of arms on the centre . The width of the green border and the diameter of the armillary sphere are equal to 1 / 8 and 3 / 7 of the side 's dimension , respectively . 
 = = = Commissioning pennant = = = 
 The Portuguese commissioning pennant ( <unk> ) is a long triangular flag , green on the hoist and red on the fly . It is to be flown on the main mast of the naval ships commanded by officers . 
 = = Government flags = = 
 Highly ranked state and governmental offices are also represented by their own flag . The President of the Republic ( Portuguese : Presidente da República ) uses a flag largely similar to the national flag , except for having dark green as the only background colour . It is usually hoisted at the President 's official residence , the Palace of Belém , as well as on the presidential car , as small @-@ sized flags . The flag of the Prime @-@ Minister is a white rectangle ( ratio 2 : 3 ) with a dark green saltire , holding the lesser coat of arms on its centre , and a red bordure charged with a pattern of yellow laurel leaves . Other ministerial flags do not possess the red bordure . The flag of the Assembly of the Republic ( Portuguese : Assembleia da República ) , the national parliament , is also a white rectangle ( ratio 2 : 3 ) with the lesser coat of arms in the centre and a dark green bordure . 
 = Family structure in the United States = 
 The traditional family structure in the United States is considered a family support system involving two married individuals providing care and stability for their biological offspring . However , this two @-@ parent , nuclear family has become less prevalent , and alternative family forms have become more common . The family is created at birth and establishes ties across generations . Those generations , the extended family of aunts , uncles , grandparents , and cousins , can hold significant emotional and economic roles for the nuclear family . 
 Over time , the traditional structure has had to adapt to very influential changes , including divorce and the introduction of single @-@ parent families , teenage pregnancy and unwed mothers , and same @-@ sex marriage , and increased interest in adoption . Social movements such as the feminist movement and the stay @-@ at @-@ home dad have contributed to the creation of alternative family forms , generating new versions of the American family . 
 = = At a glance = = 
 = = = Nuclear family = = = 
 The nuclear family has been considered the " traditional " family since the communist scare in the cold war of the 1950s . The nuclear family consists of a mother , father , and the children . The two @-@ parent nuclear family has become less prevalent , and pre @-@ American and European family forms have become more common . 
 These include same @-@ sex relationships , single @-@ parent households , adopting individuals , and extended family systems living together . The nuclear family is also choosing to have fewer children than in the past . The percentage of married @-@ couple households with children under 18 has declined to 23 @.@ 5 % of all households in 2000 from 25 @.@ 6 % in 1990 , and from 45 % in 1960 . 
 = = = Single parent = = = 
 A single parent ( also termed lone parent or sole parent ) is a parent who cares for one or more children without the assistance of the other biological parent . Historically , single @-@ parent families often resulted from death of a spouse , for instance in childbirth . Single @-@ parent homes are increasing as married couples divorce , or as unmarried couples have children . Although widely believed to be detrimental to the mental and physical well being of a child , this type of household is tolerated . 
 The percentage of single @-@ parent households has doubled in the last three decades , but that percentage tripled between 1900 and 1950 . The sense of marriage as a " permanent " institution has been weakened , allowing individuals to consider leaving marriages more readily than they may have in the past . Increasingly single parent families are due to out of wedlock births , especially those due to unintended pregnancy . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 <unk> are becoming more familiar in America . Divorce rates are rising and the remarriage rate is rising as well , therefore , bringing two families together making step families . Statistics show that there are 1 @,@ 300 new <unk> forming every day . Over half of American families are remarried , that is 75 % of marriages ending in divorce , remarry . 
 = = = Extended family = = = 
 The extended family consists of grandparents , aunts , uncles , and cousins . In some circumstances , the extended family comes to live either with or in place of a member of the nuclear family . An example includes elderly parents who move in with their children due to old age . This places large demands on the caregivers , particularly the female relatives who choose to perform these duties for their extended family . 
 Historically , among certain Asian and Native American cultures the family structure consisted of a grandmother and her children , especially daughters , who raised their own children together and shared child care responsibilities . Uncles , brothers , and other male relatives sometimes helped out . Romantic relationships between men and women were formed and dissolved with little impact on the children who remained in the mother 's extended family . 
 = = Roles and relationships = = 
 = = = Married partners = = = 
 A married couple was defined as a " husband and wife enumerated as members of the same household " by the U.S. Census Bureau , but they will be categorizing same @-@ sex couples as married couples if they are married . Same @-@ sex couples who were married were previously recognized by the Census Bureau as unmarried partners . Same @-@ sex marriage is legally permitted across the country since June 26 , 2015 , when the Supreme Court issued its decision in Obergefell v. Hodges . Polygamy is illegal throughout the U.S. 
 Although Cousin marriages are illegal in most states , they are legal in many states , the District of Columbia and some territories . Some states have some restrictions or exceptions for cousin marriages and / or recognize such marriages performed out @-@ of @-@ state . Since the 1940s , the United States marriage rate has decreased , whereas rates of divorce have increased . 
 = = = Unwed partners = = = 
 Living as unwed partners is also known as cohabitation . The number of heterosexual unmarried couples in the United States has increased tenfold , from about 400 @,@ 000 in 1960 to more than five million in 2005 . This number would increase by at least another 594 @,@ 000 if same @-@ sex partners were included . Of all unmarried couples , about 1 in 9 ( 11 @.@ 1 % of all unmarried @-@ partner households ) are homosexual . 
 The cohabitation lifestyle is becoming more popular in today 's generation . It is more convenient for couples not to get married because it can be cheaper and simpler . As divorce rates rise in society , the desire to get married is less attractive for couples uncertain of their long @-@ term plans . 
 = = = Parents = = = 
 Parents can be either the biological mother or biological father , or the legal guardian for adopted children . Traditionally , mothers were responsible for raising the kids while the father was out providing financially for the family . The age group for parents ranges from teenage parents to grandparents who have decided to raise their grandchildren , with teenage pregnancies fluctuating based on race and culture . Older parents are financially established and generally have fewer problems raising children compared to their teenage counterparts . 
 = = = Housewives = = = 
 A housewife is a married woman who does not work outside of the home for income but stays and takes care of the home and children . This includes doing the cooking , washing , cleaning , etc . The roles of women working within the house has changed drastically as more women start to pursue careers . The amount of time women spend doing housework declined from 27 hours per week in 1965 to less than 16 hours in 1995 , but it is still substantially more housework than their male partners . 
 = = = " <unk> " = = = 
 A breadwinner is the main financial provider in the family . Historically the husband has been the breadwinner ; that trend is changing as wives start to take advantage of the women 's movement to gain financial independence for themselves . According to the New York Times , " In 2001 , wives earned more than their spouses in almost a third of married households where the wife worked . " Yet , even within nuclear families in which both spouses are employed outside of the home , many men are still responsible for a substantially smaller share of household duties . 
 = = = Stay @-@ at @-@ home dads = = = 
 Stay @-@ at @-@ home dads are fathers that do not participate in the labor market and raise their children — the male equivalent to housewives . Stay @-@ at @-@ home dads are not as popular in American society . According to the U.S. Census Bureau , " There are an estimated 105 @,@ 000 ' stay @-@ at @-@ home ' dads . These are married fathers with children under 15 who are not in the labor force primarily so they can care for family members while their wives work outside the home . Stay @-@ at @-@ home dads care for 189 @,@ 000 children . " 
 = = Children = = 
 = = = Only child families = = = 
 An only child ( single child ) is one without any biological or adopted brothers or sisters . Single children are stereotypically portrayed as spoiled , self @-@ centered , and selfish . Single children often excel more in school and in their careers than children with siblings . 
 = = = <unk> and <unk> = = = 
 <unk> couples chose to not have children . These include young couples , who intend to have children later , as well as those who do not plan to have any children . 
 Involuntary childlessness may be caused by infertility , medical problems , death of a child , or other factors . 
 = = = Adopted children = = = 
 Adopted children are children that were given up at birth , abandoned or were unable to be cared for by their biological parents . They may have been put into foster care before finding their permanent residence . It is particularly hard for adopted children to get adopted from foster care : only 50 @,@ 000 children were adopted in 2001 . The average age of these children was 7 years old , which shows that fewer older children were adopted . 
 = = Modern family models = = 
 = = = Same @-@ sex marriage , adoption , and child rearing = = = 
 Same @-@ sex parents are gay or lesbian couples that choose to raise children . Nationally , 66 % of female same @-@ sex couples and 44 % of male same @-@ sex couples live with children under 18 years old . In the 2000 census , there were 594 @,@ 000 households that claimed to be headed by same @-@ sex couples , with 72 % of those having children . In July 2004 , the American Psychological Association concluded that " Overall results of research suggests that the development , adjustment , and well @-@ being of children with lesbian and gay parents do not differ markedly from that of children with heterosexual parents . " 
 = = = Single @-@ parent households = = = 
 Single @-@ parent homes in America are starting to become more common in today 's society . With more children being born to unmarried couples and to couples whose marriages subsequently dissolve , children increasingly live with only one parent . The proportion of children living with a never @-@ married parent has also grown , from 4 % in 1960 to 42 % in 2001 . Of all one parent families , 83 % are mother – child families . 
 = = = Adoption requirements = = = 
 The adoption requirements and policies for adopting children have made it harder for foster families and potential adoptive families to adopt kids . Before a family can adopt they must go through state , county , and agency criteria . Adoption agencies ' criteria express the importance of age of the adoptive parents , as well as the agency 's desire for married couples over single adopters . Adoptive parents also have to deal with criteria that are given by the birth parents of the adoptive child . The different criteria for adopting children makes it harder for couples to adopt children in need , but the strict requirements can help protect the foster children from unqualified couples . 
 Currently 1 @.@ 5 million ( 2 % ) of all U.S children are adopted . There are different types of adoption ; embryo adoption when a couple is having trouble conceiving a child and instead choose to have their sperm and egg conjoined outside the womb , international adoption where couples adopt children that come from foreign countries , and private adoption which is the most common form of adoption . In private adoption , families can adopt children via licensed agencies or with by directly contacting the child 's biological parents . 
 = = = Male / female role pressures = = = 
 The traditional " father " and " mother " roles of the nuclear family have become blurred over time . Because of the women 's movement 's push for women to engage in traditionally masculine pursuits in society , as women choose to sacrifice their child @-@ bearing years to establish their careers , and as fathers feel increasing pressure to be involved with tending to children , the traditional roles of fathers as the " breadwinners " and mothers as the " caretakers " have come into question . 
 = = African @-@ American family structure = = 
 The family structure of African @-@ Americans has long been a matter of national public policy interest . The 1965 report by Daniel Patrick Moynihan , known as The Moynihan Report , examined the link between black poverty and family structure . It hypothesized that the destruction of the black nuclear family structure would hinder further progress toward economic and political equality . 
 When Moynihan wrote in 1965 on the coming destruction of the black family , the out @-@ of @-@ wedlock birthrate was 25 percent among blacks . In 1991 , 68 percent of black children were born outside of marriage . In 2011 , 72 % of black babies were born to unwed mothers . 
 = = Television portrayals = = 
 The television industry initially helped create a stereotype of the American nuclear family . During the era of the baby boomers , families became a popular social topic , especially on television . Family shows such as Roseanne , All in the Family , Leave It to Beaver , The Cosby Show , Married ... with Children , The Jeffersons , and Good Times , Everybody Loves Raymond have portrayed different social classes of families growing up in America . Those " perfect " nuclear families have changed as the years passed and have become more inclusive , showing single @-@ parent and divorced families , as well as older singles . Television shows that show single @-@ parent families include Half & Half , One on One , Murphy Brown , and Gilmore Girls . 
 While it did not become a common occurrence the iconic image of the American family was started in the early 1930s . It was not until WWII that families generally had the economical income in which to successfully propagate this lifestyle . 
 = Arabian horse = 
 The Arabian or Arab horse ( Arabic : <unk> <unk> [ <unk> <unk> ] , DMG <unk> <unk> ) is a breed of horse that originated on the Arabian Peninsula . With a distinctive head shape and high tail carriage , the Arabian is one of the most easily recognizable horse breeds in the world . It is also one of the oldest breeds , with archaeological evidence of horses in the Middle East that resemble modern Arabians dating back 4 @,@ 500 years . Throughout history , Arabian horses have spread around the world by both war and trade , used to improve other breeds by adding speed , refinement , endurance , and strong bone . Today , Arabian bloodlines are found in almost every modern breed of riding horse . 
 The Arabian developed in a desert climate and was prized by the nomadic Bedouin people , often being brought inside the family tent for shelter and protection from theft . Selective breeding for traits including an ability to form a cooperative relationship with humans created a horse breed that is good @-@ natured , quick to learn , and willing to please . The Arabian also developed the high spirit and alertness needed in a horse used for raiding and war . This combination of willingness and sensitivity requires modern Arabian horse owners to handle their horses with competence and respect . 
 The Arabian is a versatile breed . Arabians dominate the discipline of endurance riding , and compete today in many other fields of equestrian sport . They are one of the top ten most popular horse breeds in the world . They are now found worldwide , including the United States and Canada , United Kingdom , Australia , continental Europe , South America ( especially Brazil ) , and their land of origin , the Middle East . 
 = = Breed characteristics = = 
 Arabian horses have refined , wedge @-@ shaped heads , a broad forehead , large eyes , large nostrils , and small muzzles . Most display a distinctive concave , or " dished " profile . Many Arabians also have a slight forehead bulge between their eyes , called the <unk> by the Bedouin , that adds additional sinus capacity , believed to have helped the Arabian horse in its native dry desert climate . Another breed characteristic is an arched neck with a large , well @-@ set windpipe set on a refined , clean throatlatch . This structure of the poll and throatlatch was called the <unk> or <unk> by the Bedouin . In the ideal Arabian it is long , allowing flexibility in the bridle and room for the windpipe . 
 Other distinctive features are a relatively long , level croup , or top of the hindquarters , and naturally high tail carriage . The USEF breed standard requires Arabians have solid bone and standard correct equine conformation . Well @-@ bred Arabians have a deep , well @-@ angled hip and well laid @-@ back shoulder . Within the breed , there are variations . Some individuals have wider , more powerfully muscled hindquarters suitable for intense bursts of activity in events such as reining , while others have longer , leaner muscling better suited for long stretches of flat work such as endurance riding or horse racing . Most have a compact body with a short back . Arabians usually have dense , strong bone , and good hoof walls . They are especially noted for their endurance , and the superiority of the breed in Endurance riding competition demonstrates that well @-@ bred Arabians are strong , sound horses with superior stamina . At international FEI @-@ sponsored endurance events , Arabians and half @-@ Arabians are the dominant performers in distance competition . 
 = = = Skeletal analysis = = = 
 Some Arabians , though not all , have 5 lumbar vertebrae instead of the usual 6 , and 17 pairs of ribs rather than 18 . A quality Arabian has both a relatively horizontal croup and a properly angled pelvis as well as good croup length and depth to the hip ( determined by the length of the pelvis ) , that allows agility and <unk> . A misconception confuses the topline of the croup with the angle of the " hip " ( the pelvis or ilium ) , leading some to assert that Arabians have a flat pelvis angle and cannot use their hindquarters properly . However , the croup is formed by the sacral vertebrae . The hip angle is determined by the attachment of the ilium to the spine , the structure and length of the femur , and other aspects of hindquarter anatomy , which is not correlated to the topline of the sacrum . Thus , the Arabian has conformation typical of other horse breeds built for speed and distance , such as the Thoroughbred , where the angle of the ilium is more oblique than that of the croup . Thus , the hip angle is not necessarily correlated to the topline of the croup . Horses bred to gallop need a good length of croup and good length of hip for proper attachment of muscles , and so unlike angle , length of hip and croup do go together as a rule . 
 = = = Size = = = 
 The breed standard stated by the United States Equestrian Federation , describes Arabians as standing between 14 @.@ 1 to 15 @.@ 1 hands ( 57 to 61 inches , 145 to 155 cm ) tall , " with the occasional individual over or under . " Thus , all Arabians , regardless of height , are classified as " horses " , even though 14 @.@ 2 hands ( 58 inches , 147 cm ) is the traditional cutoff height between a horse and a pony . A common myth is that Arabians are not strong because they are relatively small and refined . However , the Arabian horse is noted for a greater density of bone than other breeds , short cannons , sound feet , and a broad , short back , all of which give the breed physical strength comparable to many taller animals . Thus , even a smaller Arabian can carry a heavy rider . For tasks where the sheer weight of the horse matters , such as farm work done by a draft horse , any lighter @-@ weight horse is at a disadvantage . However , for most purposes , the Arabian is a strong and hardy light horse breed able to carry any type of rider in most equestrian pursuits . 
 = = = Temperament = = = 
 For centuries , Arabian horses lived in the desert in close association with humans . For shelter and protection from theft , prized war mares were sometimes kept in their owner 's tent , close to children and everyday family life . Only horses with a naturally good disposition were allowed to reproduce , with the result that Arabians today have a good temperament that , among other examples , makes them one of the few breeds where the United States Equestrian Federation rules allow children to exhibit stallions in nearly all show ring classes , including those limited to riders under 18 . 
 On the other hand , the Arabian is also classified as a " hot @-@ blooded " breed , a category that includes other refined , spirited horses bred for speed , such as the Akhal @-@ Teke , the Barb and the Thoroughbred . Like other hot @-@ bloods , Arabians ' sensitivity and intelligence enable quick learning and greater communication with their riders ; however , their intelligence also allows them to learn bad habits as quickly as good ones , and they do not tolerate inept or abusive training practices . Some sources claim that it is more difficult to train a " hot @-@ blooded " horse . Though most Arabians have a natural tendency to cooperate with humans , when treated badly , like any horse , they can become excessively nervous or anxious , but seldom become vicious unless seriously spoiled or subjected to extreme abuse . At the other end of the spectrum , romantic myths are sometimes told about Arabian horses that give them near @-@ divine characteristics . 
 = = = Colors = = = 
 The Arabian Horse Association registers purebred horses with the coat colors bay , gray , chestnut , black , and roan . Bay , gray and chestnut are the most common ; black is less common . The classic roan gene does not appear to exist in Arabians ; rather , Arabians registered by breeders as " roan " are usually expressing rabicano or , sometimes , sabino patterns with roan features . All Arabians , no matter their coat color , have black skin , except under white markings . Black skin provided protection from the intense desert sun . 
 = = = = Gray and white = = = = 
