 Critics gave the film an overwhelmingly positive response , in particular the ensemble cast 's performance and credibility . Although The Indian Express spoke positively of the cinematography and the film 's story , it noted that " the message that the film carries with it tends to get diluted towards the climax . Praising the film 's cast for their performance and the cinematography of <unk> Pradhan , Taran <unk> wrote that the film would be successful with the urban audiences . The Hindustan Times summarized the film as being a " well @-@ scripted , skilfully crafted [ and ] thought @-@ provoking entertainer " . <unk> <unk> of Rediff.com wrote that films like Rang De Basanti can easily get into " preachiness " , but believed Mehra got his message across while avoiding this , also appreciating the music , cinematography , dialogues and art direction . The Hindu credited Kamlesh Pandey for writing a story that would have been a difficult film to make , but it added by saying that the transformation of the youngsters into heroes seemed poetic . Although the screenplay , direction and the cast were also well @-@ appreciated , the reviewer felt that Rahman 's soundtrack lacked pace . 
 The film also received positive reviews from critics outside India . The review from the BBC gave it the highest possible five star rating and added that it was " an entertaining mix of romance , history and social commentary " . The Bloomberg website wrote positively about " the raw energy of a young cast and A. R. Rahman 's splendidly rousing soundtrack " . 
 Sight & Sound magazine conducts a poll every ten years of the world 's finest film directors to find out the Ten Greatest Films of All Time . This poll has been going since 1992 , and has become the most recognised poll of its kind in the world . In 2012 Cyrus Frisch voted for " Rang De Basanti " . Frisch commented : " Corruption became the subject of fierce debate in India after the major success of this film among youngsters . " 
 = = = 2007 Academy Awards Best Foreign Film submission = = = 
 Since the film " reflected contemporary Indian reality and had cinematic excellence " , it was chosen as India 's official entry for the 79th Academy Awards despite stiff competition from films such as Krrish , Lage Raho Munna Bhai , Omkara and Kabhi Alvida Naa Kehna . While discussing if the selection committee 's choice was correct , critics felt that the Academy members could have better related with Omkara , an adaptation of Shakespeare 's play Othello . Despite these qualms and Mehra 's belief that his film did not stand a chance at the Oscars , the efforts to publicize the film in the United States began earnestly . Music composer A. R. Rahman performed several concerts across the East Coast to promote the film . Besides his efforts , producer Screwvala planned to use resources and expertise from his partners in 20th Century Fox and Walt Disney Pictures for organizing its publicity efforts . When the nominations in the foreign film category did not feature this film , it sparked off debates on whether the film should have been India 's entry for the Oscars . In one such debate on a television channel that involved Screwvala , the selection committee was questioned about its knowledge of the requisite artistic criteria for such award ceremonies . While one outcome of the debate was on how Omkara would have been a better choice , the other discussed the West @-@ centric sensibilities of the Academy members . However , results from a simultaneously conducted SMS poll indicated that 62 percent felt that the film was the right choice for the Oscars . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 Rang De Basanti received the National Film Award for Best Popular Film Providing Wholesome Entertainment in addition to awards at a number of other ceremonies . It won several awards at the annual India @-@ based Filmfare Awards including Best Film , Best Director , Best Music Director , Critics Best Performance - Male ( Aamir Khan ) , Best Editing ( P. S. Bharathi ) , Best Cinematography and RD Burman Award for New Music ( Naresh Iyer ) categories . It also won the 2007 International Indian Film Academy awards for Best Movie , Best Supporting Actress ( Soha Ali Khan ) , Best Screenplay ( Rensil D 'Silva and Rakeysh Mehra ) and Best Music Director among other technical awards . Apart from these , the film won eight awards apiece at the 2006 Global Indian Film Awards and 2007 Star Screen Awards , and six at the 2007 Zee Cine Awards . 
 The film was also nominated for the Best Film not in English language at the 2007 British Academy of Film and Television Arts awards . 
 = = Social influence = = 
 Rang De Basanti had a noticeable impact on Indian society . A study of bloggers behavioral patterns during the first month of the film 's release revealed a significant increase in public ire towards government and politicians for constantly being mired in corruption and bureaucracy and their inefficiency in providing basic amenities . Intense political discussions spurred on by the film 's influence were observed in these patterns . While commenting on this , writer D 'Silva said that the film " has struck a chord somewhere " . Besides instigating political thought and discussions , it evoked social awakening for many . Some discussions rallied on how citizens should support and contribute to non @-@ governmental organizations and exercising simple citizen duties of paying taxes and voting , while the others contemplated on how to become more responsible towards the country . Unlike other Indian films with jingoistic overtones , many young Indians could relate well to the characters of this film . 
 While such reactions were observed on the Internet , youth activism took to streets to protest on public interest issues . A direct impact was on the 1999 Jessica <unk> Murder Case , one of the high @-@ profile murder cases in India . A month after the film 's release , a court acquitted the main accused because of inefficient prosecution and hostile witnesses . This sparked intense civil protests and media campaigns that sought his re @-@ arrest . Taking cue from the scene in which the protagonists hold a silent , candlelight vigil at New Delhi 's India Gate , one such group of demonstrators carried out a similar rally to voice their protest . Shortly thereafter , a survey was conducted to assess reasons for the sudden upsurge in people 's social involvements . Eighteen percent of the respondents felt that movies like Rang De Basanti were the main reason behind it . Another such massive youth activism was seen in the <unk> Mattoo rape and murder case where similar rallies were organized in India , United States and around the world . Following the release of the film , another social outcry was against the introduction of reservations for socially backward classes in educational institutions . Young doctors and engineers joined hands in peaceful rallies in major cities across India . Though the film was not released in the neighbouring Pakistan , it evoked similar reactions there . Inspired by the film , Pakistan 's national newspaper , Jang , launched a television channel that was to focus on citizens ' issues and support public awakening . Reacting to these strong social reactions , actor Kunal Kapoor thought that the film was just a catalyst that presented " patriotism in a package that the youngsters understood and empathised with " . 
 In the Indian media , frequent referencing of the film was evident , with many brands using pictorials from the movie . In addition , the media also uses the terms " RDB " ( abbreviated title of the movie ) and " RDB effect " while referring to instances of public activism on matters of public interest . When the 2007 University of Delhi Student Elections focused more on the important issues facing the students than in the previous years , one student referred to this as the " RDB Syndrome " . On similar lines , Kamal <unk> wrote a play titled Under the Influence which focuses on a young Indian expatriate whose life changes after watching this film . 
 = Konnan = 
 Charles Ashenoff ( born January 6 , 1964 ) also known as Carlos Santiago Espada Moises and better known by his ring name , Konnan , is a Cuban professional wrestler and rapper . Konnan is well known in Mexico due to his appearances on Mexican television , particularly with Asistencia Asesoría y Administración ( AAA ) , and has in the past been described as " the Mexican Hulk Hogan " , reflecting his mainstream popularity . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Born in Santiago , Cuba of Puerto Rican and Cuban descent , Konnan 's family relocated to Miami , Florida while he was a child . He had a troubled childhood , during which he was expelled from one other high school before graduating from Southwest Miami Senior High School in 1982 . Ashenoff served time in prison after joining a street gang . After his incarceration was over , Ashenoff fled Miami due to conflicts with other drug dealers . He was given a choice of either going to jail or entering the military . He decided to join the United States Navy and served for four years . While in the Navy , he trained as a boxer , becoming the Californian Middleweight Amateur Boxing Champion in 1982 and 1983 . He also represented the United States in fights around the world . 
 = = Professional wrestling career = = 
 = = = Universal Wrestling Association ( 1988 ) = = = 
 During his residence in San Diego , Ashenoff became a bodybuilder then later a wrestler , following a meeting with wrestling promoter John Roberts , who introduced him to Rey Mysterio , Sr. Comparing the masked and caped wrestlers he met to " superheroes " , Ashenoff was impressed by the colorful Mexican wrestling culture . He subsequently traveled to Tijuana , Mexico where , alongside Psicosis , Rey Mysterio , Jr . , Halloween and Damián 666 , he trained under the tutelage of various veteran <unk> . Wearing a mask and billed as El <unk> ( " The Centurion " ) , Ashenoff debuted for the Universal Wrestling Association ( UWA ) on January 6 , 1988 . He competed in an eight @-@ man tag team match for the sum of $ 200 <unk> ( $ 19 @.@ 13 USD / € 16 @.@ 03 EUR ) . 
 = = = World Championship Wrestling ( 1990 ) = = = 
 Konnan 's first appearance with World Championship Wrestling ( WCW ) was at Starrcade on December 16 , 1990 . Teaming with his trainer and mentor , Rey Mysterio , Sr. , Konnan entered the Pat O 'Connor Memorial International Cup Tag Team Tournament held at the event . They defeated Norman Smiley and Chris Adams in the quarter @-@ finals , but lost to eventual winners , the Steiner Brothers ( Rick and Scott ) in the semi @-@ finals . 
 = = = World Wrestling Federation ( 1991 ) - Max Moon = = = 
 While still part of WCW , Konnan was contacted by talent scout Pat Patterson on New Year 's Eve 1990 , which led to a meeting with Vince McMahon , where the initial idea for what became Max Moon was discussed . According to Konnan , " When I was wrestling in Japan , I saw this Japanese anime cartoon robot on TV that shot confetti and fire . [ Vince ] asked if I knew anybody that could design it . " Konnan was given an outfit ( purchased by the WWF at the cost of $ 13 @,@ 000 ) bedecked with circuitry and a pyrotechnic gun that shot sparkles into the crowd . Konnan recollected later that the costs associated with the costume led to problems between himself and the promotion right from the start . 
 Days later he received a tryout on January 7 , 1991 at a WWF Superstars taping in Amarillo , Texas defeating Ultraman . He returned again on March 26 in Las Vegas , Nevada , defeating Louie Spicolli in a WWF Superstars dark match . He would defeat Spicolli again one night later at a Wrestling Challenge taping in Reno . Konnan returned again on January 7 , 1992 at a WWE Superstars taping in Daytona , Beach FL . Wrestling this time as The Latin Fury , he defeated The Heartbreaker . The next day he defeated The <unk> in a dark match at a Wrestling Challenge taping in Fort Myers , Florida . Konnan would wrestle twice more as The Latin Fury , the final time at a house show in Hyannis , Massachusetts on July 19 , 1992 when he defeated Pete Dougherty . 
 The next day , when he appeared at a WWF Superstars taping in Worcester , Massachusetts against Luis Mendieta , he was renamed Relampago . He wrestled again as Relampago the following night against Johnny Rodriquez . A little over a month later he received the gimmick that he would become known for , Max Moon ( although he was originally called The Comet Kid for a handful of appearances ) . The Moon character , created by Konnan , was that of a cyborg from " The Future " or " Outer Space " . 
 Konnan was still working in Mexico while under contract to WWE , and was also simultaneously appearing in a Mexican telenovela aimed at children called El <unk> y yo " . As he was becoming more popular in Mexico , he was not as focused on making it in America . Konnan recollected , " Wrestling was so hot in Mexico , because they had lifted this 30 @-@ year ban on wrestling on TV in Mexico City . I was able to capitalize on that wrestling boom . I was wrestling three times in one day on many weekends . The amount of work was incredible . It was like when Raw and Nitro were going head @-@ to @-@ head and there was work for everybody . " 
 There was also some locker room tension over the costs associated with the costume , Konnan 's perceived attitude , and Konnan also was missing tapings because he was more successful in Mexico and was not focusing on WWF . In the end , the Max Moon character was given to Paul Diamond , who appeared as the character on the first episode of Monday Night Raw on January 11 , 1993 . 
 = = = Empresa Mexicana de la Lucha Libre ( 1991 @-@ 1992 ) = = = 
 Konnan joined Empresa Mexicana de la Lucha Libre ( EMLL ) , where he was pushed into the main event . In the EMLL , Ashenoff adopted the ring name Konnan El Barbaro ( " The Barbarian " ) . He lost his mask to Perro Aguayo in a Lucha de Apuesta mask versus hair match . After the match , a young boy — introduced as Konnan 's brother — entered the ring crying and handed Konnan his mask back , generating considerable bonhomie towards Konnan from the sympathetic crowd ( in lucha libre , losing one 's mask can be a major , career shaping event ) . Konnan went on to become the first ever CMLL World Heavyweight Champion by winning a tournament in Mexico City on June 9 , 1991 . He , however , lost the title to Cien Caras in his first title defense on August 18 , 1991 . 
 = = = Asistencia Asesoría y Administración ( 1992 – 1996 ) = = = 
 In 1992 , Konnan , along with several other EMLL wrestlers , joined Asistencia Asesoría y Administración ( AAA ) . <unk> his ring name to simply " Konnan " , he feuded with Cien Caras . Following interference from Jake Roberts , Konnan lost a two out of three falls retirement match by count @-@ out to Caras at Triplemanía I on April 30 , 1993 in front of 48 @,@ 000 fans in Mexico City , setting the all @-@ time attendance record for a Mexican wrestling event . Konnan did not comply with the stipulations of the match and returned to defeat Roberts in a hair versus hair match at Triplemanía II on May 27 , 1994 in Tijuana . 
 Later in 1994 , Konnan began a storyline where he betrayed his tag team partner , Perro Aguayo , and formed a heel alliance known as Los Gringos Locos with Eddie Guerrero , Art Barr and Madonna 's Boyfriend . Aguayo gained his revenge on Konnan by defeating him in the only AAA pay @-@ per @-@ view , " When Worlds Collide " , in a steel cage match . He eventually became the AAA booker . Konnan defeated Killer on February 2 , 1996 in Querétaro to become the first ever AAA Heavyweight Champion . He vacated the title after leaving AAA in October 1996 to form his own promotion , Promo Azteca , and the title remained inactive until 2004 . Konnan 's Mexican wrestling career was hampered in the late @-@ 1990s by his American wrestling commitments , and Promo Azteca closed in 1998 . He made a return to the Mexican wrestling circuit in the 2000s after a six @-@ year absence , selling out arenas in Mexico City and Guadalajara . 
 = = = World Wrestling Federation ( 1992 – 1993 ) = = = 
 Debuting in the WWF on September 1 , 1992 in Hershey , Pennsylvania under the name the Comet Kid , he pinned Duane Gill . After three televised matches , Konnan abruptly left the WWF following a disagreement with WWF owner Vince McMahon in 1992 . Konnan was not showing up for WWF events due to his rising fame in Mexico , and his supposed " bad attitude " and heat from fellow WWF workers lead to a very strained relationship with McMahon , who had invested heavily in the Max Moon character , both financially and creatively , up until that point . The Max Moon gimmick was subsequently given to Paul Diamond for a brief run , before being abandoned . 
 = = = Extreme Championship Wrestling ( 1995 ) = = = 
 Konnan once again attempted to expand his activities out of Mexico in the mid @-@ 1990s . After meeting Extreme Championship Wrestling ( ECW ) booker Paul Heyman while on a wrestling tour of Singapore , Konnan joined ECW in 1995 and feuded with The Sandman . He appeared at ECW November to Remember on November 18 , 1995 , squashing Jason Knight . He also wrestled at an event co @-@ promoted by ECW and the AAA in Chicago , Illinois . 
 = = = World Championship Wrestling ( 1996 @-@ 2001 ) = = = 
 = = = = U.S. Champion ; Dungeon of Doom ( 1996 – 1997 ) = = = = 
 Feeling that he had accomplished all that he could in Mexico and desiring to expand his popularity north of the border , Konnan returned to WCW on a full @-@ time basis on the January 22 , 1996 edition of Nitro . Promising , in a promo at the start of the show , to defend his " Mexican Heavyweight Championship " against Psicosis the next week . As a WCW employee , he was largely responsible for the hiring of several prominent Mexican wrestlers by WCW , including Rey Mysterio Jr . , Psicosis , Juventud Guerrera and La Parka . Konnan defeated The One Man Gang for the WCW United States Heavyweight Championship on January 29 , 1996 . During his reign , he continued to defend his IWAS and AAA Heavyweight Championships in Mexico ( these championships were billed as a " Mexican Heavyweight Title " wherever Konnan wore one or the other to a WCW ring ) . He lost the United States Title to Ric Flair on July 7 , 1996 at Bash at the Beach following interference from Flair 's valets , Miss Elizabeth and Woman . Several months after losing the United States Championship , Konnan became a villain and joined the Dungeon of Doom . 
 = = = = nWo ( 1997 – 1999 ) = = = = 
 Konnan joined the New World Order ( nWo ) on July 14 , 1997 . Konnan developed an increasingly hip @-@ hop based gimmick and was nicknamed " K @-@ Dogg . " During his first stint in the nWo , Konnan feuded with the Luchadores whom he had brought to WCW . During this storyline , he wrestled in a Mexican Death match at Road Wild against Rey Mysterio , Jr. and a match against Juventud Guerrera at Uncensored in March 1998 . When the nWo divided into two rival factions on the May 4 , 1998 episode of Nitro , Konnan sided with the nWo Wolfpac , led by Kevin Nash . The Wolfpac feuded with nWo Hollywood , led by Hollywood Hogan and became <unk> . On the November 30 , 1998 episode of Nitro , Konnan defeated Chris Jericho for the WCW World Television Championship . His reign lasted until December 28 , 1998 , when he lost to nWo Hollywood member Scott Steiner on Nitro following interference from Buff Bagwell . When the two halves of the nWo reunited in January 1999 , Konnan was thrown out of the nWo for standing up for Rey Misterio , Jr and was attacked by Lex Luger . As a result , he became a fan favorite and teamed with Misterio to fight the nWo . After feuding with nWo member Lex Luger , Konnan and Mysterio , Jr. were defeated by The Outsiders at SuperBrawl IX , with The Outsiders removing Mysterio 's mask in the process . Konnan later criticized WCW for not respecting Mexican wrestling culture by writing storylines that saw several Mexican wrestlers unceremoniously unmasked ( Juventud Guerrera , Psicosis , and Mysterio unmasked in WCW ) . He compared asking a luchador to remove their mask to " going to Japan and telling the Japanese they have to eat with a fork instead of chopsticks " . 
 = = = = No Limit Soldiers ; Filthy Animals ( 1999 – 2001 ) = = = = 
 Konnan spent several months feuding with Disco Inferno , and then he began a rivalry with Stevie Ray . He and Mysterio formed an alliance with Master P and his No Limit Soldiers and fought with The West Texas Rednecks . After Master P left WCW , Konnan formed a stable known as The Filthy Animals . He and Mysterio , representing the Filthy Animals , defeated Harlem Heat ( Booker T and Stevie Ray ) for the WCW World Tag Team Championship on October 18 , 1999 . They were scheduled to defend the titles against Harlem Heat in the MGM Grand Garden Arena on October 24 , 1999 at Halloween Havoc , but on the night of the event Mysterio was announced as being injured . The title was then contested in a three way tag match pitting Konnan and Billy Kidman , representing the Filthy Animals , against Harlem Heat and the First Family ( Hugh Morrus and Brian Knobs ) . Harlem Heat regained the title after Stevie Ray pinned Morrus . Konnan and Kidman defeated Harlem Heat for the title the next night on Nitro , but lost to Creative Control ( Patrick and Gerald ) on November 22 , 1999 . 
 Konnan was inactive throughout early 2000 , as he was suspended for three months by Bill Busch after requesting his release from WCW , unhappy with the way he was being used . Shortly after returning from suspension and reforming the Filthy Animals , Konnan was sidelined once again , this time with a legitimately torn triceps muscle , damaged when Van Hammer threw Juventud Guerrera at him during a match and Guerrera 's elbow connected with Konnan 's upper arm as he attempted to catch him . Throughout 2000 , the Filthy Animals feuded with other stables , including The Misfits In Action , The Natural Born Thrillers and Team Canada . At Greed on March 18 , 2001 , Lance Storm and Mike Awesome ( representing Team Canada ) defeated Hugh Morrus and Konnan in one of his last appearances with the promotion before it was sold to the WWF in March 2001 . 
 Following the sale of WCW , Konnan toured Australia and Europe throughout 2001 with the newly formed World Wrestling All @-@ Stars promotion . Konnan would also compete in Xtreme Pro Wrestling ( <unk> ) where he led a group of <unk> including Halloween , Psicosis , and Juventud Guerrera through 2001 into 2002 . In addition to wrestling , Konnan acted as a color commentator . He also studied criminology during a period in which he briefly considered working alongside his father as a private investigator . 
 = = = World Wrestling Council = = = 
 Konnan worked in Puerto Rico 's World Wrestling Council as a friend of the Colón Family until he turned heel during an angle that turned in to a very intense situation in Humacao , Puerto Rico when Konnan came to the ring with some <unk> to play a Serenata for Stacy Colón Carlos Colon 's daughter . Moments later Konnan blasted Stacy Colón with a guitar on top of her head and attacked Carlos Colón as well . The entire face locker room including brothers Carly and Eddie Colón came to their sister 's rescue . That incident started a riot with the fans inside and outside the arena . Konnan had to be escorted by police out of the arena . 
 = = = Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( 2002 @-@ 2007 ) = = = 
 Konnan appeared on the inaugural Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( TNA ) pay @-@ per @-@ view on June 19 , 2002 in the Von Braun Center in Huntsville , Alabama . He entered the Gauntlet for the Gold match for the vacant NWA World Heavyweight Championship , but he was chokeslammed and subsequently eliminated by Malice . He returned to TNA on February 12 , 2003 and formed a villainous alliance , the Authentic Luchadores , with fellow Hispanic wrestlers Juventud Guerrera , Super Crazy and the Spanish Announce Team . The stable feuded with Jerry Lynn until April 2 , 2003 , when Lynn claimed that he had been heavily influenced by lucha libre and that he respected his Mexican opponents , thus earning the friendship of Konnan . 
 = = = = The 3Live Kru ( 2003 – 2005 ) = = = = 
 In May and June 2003 , Konnan began teaming with B.G. James and Ron Killings , and in July 2003 the trio formed a heroic alliance known as the 3Live Kru . The Kru first wrestled as a unit on August 13 , 2003 , defeating The New Church ( Sinn , Vampire Warrior and Tempest ) . On November 26 , the Kru defeated Simon Diamond , Johnny Swinger and Glenn Gilberti in a six @-@ man tag team match with the vacant NWA World Tag Team Championships on the line . The championship was held by all three members of the Kru , until January 28 , 2004 , when they were defeated by Kevin <unk> and Legend in Nashville . After several abortive attempts to regain the tag title , the Kru began supporting Ron Killings 's bid to become NWA World Heavyweight Champion . The Kru later feuded with Jarrett 's mercenaries , The Elite Guard ( Chad Collyer , <unk> Hernandez and Onyx ) . On July 14 , 2004 , the 3Live Kru , Dusty Rhodes and Larry Zbyszko defeated Jarrett , Ken Shamrock and the Elite Guard in a ten @-@ man tag team match . The Kru began feuding with Team Canada in August 2004 , and at the inaugural three @-@ hour TNA pay @-@ per @-@ view , Victory Road on November 7 , 2004 , Konnan and James defeated Team Canada members Bobby Roode and " Showtime " Eric Young for the NWA World Tag Team Championship . Their reign lasted one month , with Team Canada regaining the title on December 5 , 2004 at Turning Point with the help of the injured Johnny Devine . 
 Throughout early @-@ 2005 , the Kru feuded with Michael Shane and Kazarian , Team Canada and The Naturals . Dissension arose after James 's former tag team partner from the WWF , Billy Gunn , joined TNA as " The New Age Outlaw " and began trying to convince James to reform their highly successful tag team , the New Age Outlaws . Konnan and Killings feuded with The Outlaw and " The Alpha Male " Monty Brown , with James 's loyalties divided . Brown and The Outlaw , who had by now renamed himself " Kip James " , defeated Konnan and Killings at No Surrender on July 17 , 2005 , with James declining to help either team . Konnan and Killings became increasingly frustrated , at one point referring to themselves as the " <unk> Kru " . The two teams faced one another in a No Surrender rematch on August 14 , 2005 at Sacrifice , with James appointed guest referee by Director of Authority Larry Zbyszko , and James reaffirmed his loyalty to the Kru by attacking Kip , enabling Konnan to pin him and win the match . The Kru , apparently undivided , celebrated together following the match . 
 Over the following weeks , Kip James began assisting the 3Live Kru , and on October 23 , 2005 at Bound for Glory , he saved Konnan from a beating at the hands of Team Canada . On the November 26 episode of Impact ! , B.G. James brought Kip James and the 3Live Kru to ringside , then asked Killings and Konnan whether James could join the stable . Following a heated argument between the still skeptical Konnan and B.G. , both Killings and Konnan gave their assent , and the " ' 4Live Kru " was born . At Turning Point the 4Live Kru faced Team Canada in an eight @-@ man tag match . In the course of the match , Konnan attacked both B.G. and Kip James . 
 = = = = The Latin American Xchange ( 2005 – 2007 ) = = = = 
 On the December 31 , 2005 , episode of Impact ! , Konnan told B.G. ' s father , Bob Armstrong , that he was a " hothead " and invited Armstrong to accompany him backstage for an apology . Instead of apologizing , Konnan turned heel by leading Armstrong into an ambush at the hands of Apolo and the debuting Homicide . The trio , later identified as The Latin American Xchange ( LAX ) , then instructed an unconscious Armstrong to tell B.G. and Kip to " take care of their own business " . At Final Resolution on January 15 , 2006 , Konnan and Homicide defeated The Naturals . After Apolo was released by TNA , he was replaced by Machete , who was in turn evicted from LAX by Konnan and Homicide . In subsequent weeks , Konnan began feuding with Bob Armstrong . On the April 8 , 2006 episode of Impact ! , Konnan faced Armstrong in a " Arm Wrestling Challenge " ; the contest ended in a no @-@ contest after LAX member Hernandez attacked Armstrong . At Lockdown on April 23 , 2006 , Konnan was defeated by Armstrong in an arm wrestling contest held within the confines of a steel cage ; following the bout , each member of the LAX received ten lashes from the James Gang . 
 In May 2006 , Konnan became the Impact ! Spanish color commentator . In the same month , he and the LAX began a storyline that saw them refuse to wrestle ( as well as himself and Moody Jack refusing to commentate ) , claiming that Latinos were discriminated against within TNA . After LAX were forced to resume wrestling by Jim Cornette , they began feuding with A.J. Styles and Christopher Daniels , with whom Homicide and Hernandez traded the NWA World Tag Team Championship back and forth . LAX then feuded with America 's Most Wanted and Team 3D , losing the NWA World Tag Team Championship to Team 3D at Lockdown . 
 In early 2007 , Konnan underwent hip replacement surgery , and his appearances in TNA from then on saw him frequently using a wheelchair . In June , Konnan left TNA for AAA in Mexico . He successfully underwent kidney transplant surgery in July 2007 . In March 2008 , Konnan sued TNA for racism and discrimination , alleging that while the company said that they would help pay for his hip replacement surgery , they did not . To add leverage to the suit , Konnan claimed that TNA helped pay for Scott Steiner 's operation , but did not pay for Ron Killings 's surgery from around the same time . 
 = = = Return to AAA ( 2004 – 2016 ) = = = 
 After leaving TNA , Konnan later returned to Asistencia Asesoría y Administración , where Juventud Guerrera claimed in 2009 that Konnan is the " real boss " of the promotion . In AAA he is the leader of the company 's top rudo stable La Legión Extranjera ( Foreign Legion ) . Konnan remained in the role until February 3 , 2013 , when he was in storyline fired from the promotion . He returned to the promotion on April 15 , announcing that he was once again becoming an in @-@ ring performer . In February 2016 , Konnan stated that he had lost his creative position in AAA and was now merely a consultant for the promotion . 
 On March 20 , 2015 , Konnan was ringside at a show organized by the independent promotion , The Crash , in Tijuana , Mexico , when fellow wrestler El Hijo del Perro Aguayo died in a freak accident . 
 = = = Lucha Underground ( 2014 – 2015 ) = = = 
 In August 2014 , Konnan was announced as one of the AAA wrestlers to star in the El Rey network 's new television series Lucha Underground . In the premiere episode , he appeared as the manager of Prince Puma ; subsequently , he announced his responsibility for bringing Fénix , Pentagón Jr. and Drago into the promotion . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Finishing moves 
 187 / Montezuma 's Revenge ( Cradle DDT ) – 1996 – 1997 ; used as a signature move thereafter 
 Tequila Sunrise ( Arm trap single leg Boston crab ) 
 Signature moves 
 DDT 
 Face Jam / K @-@ Factor ( Sitout facebuster , often preceded by a mule kick ) 
 Rolling thunder clothesline 
 Splash Mountain ( Crucifix powerbomb , sometimes from the second rope ) 
 Zip Lock ( Arm trap cloverleaf ) 
 Managers 
 Jimmy Hart 
 Kevin Sullivan 
 Vincent 
 Torrie Wilson 
 <unk> 
 Wrestlers managed 
 Prince Puma 
 Nicknames 
 " K @-@ Dawg " 
 Entrance themes 
 " Eye of the Tiger " by Survivor ( AAA ; 1992 – present ) 
 " In Yer Face " by Howard Pfeifer ( WCW ; 1996 ) 
 " Dead Man 's Trousers " ( production theme ) ( WCW ; 1996 ) 
 " Dungeon of Doom Theme " by Jimmy Hart ( WCW ; 1996 – 1997 ) 
 " Tear It Up " by Jimmy Hart and H. Helm ( WCW ; Used while a part of the New World Order ; 1997 – 1998 ) 
 " <unk> " by Jimmy Hart and H. Helm ( WCW ; Used while a part of the New World Order ; 1997 – 1998 ) 
 " Wolfpac Theme " ( WCW ; Used while a part of the nWo Wolfpac ; 1998 – 1999 ) 
 " Psycho " ( WCW ; 1999 ) 
 " Bow Wow Wow " by Konnan featuring Madd One ( WCW ; 1999 ) 
 " Filthy " ( WCW ; 1999 , 2000 ) 
 " Reason " ( WCW ; 2000 – 2001 ) 
 " 3 Live K " by 3 Live Kru ( TNA ; while a part of 3 Live Kru with Ron Killings and B. G. James ) 
 " Beware " by 3 Live Kru ( TNA ; while a part of 3 Live Kru ) 
 " <unk> " by Konnan ( TNA ; Used while a part of the Latin American Xchange ) 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 Asistencia Asesoría y Administración 
 AAA Americas Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 AAA Parejas Increibles Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Cibernético 
 IWC World Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Championship Wrestling USA Northwest 
 Championship Wrestling USA Northwest Tag Championship ( 1 time ) – with Beetlejuice 
 Consejo Mundial de Lucha Libre 
 CMLL World Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 International Wrestling All @-@ Stars 
 IWAS World Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 IWAS World Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Rey Mysterio , Jr . 
 Latin American Wrestling Association 
 <unk> Heavyweight Championship ( 2 times ) 
 Global Championship Wrestling 
 <unk> Heavyweight Champion ( 1 time ) 
 Pro Wrestling Illustrated 
 PWI ranked him # 131 of the top 500 singles wrestlers of the " PWI Years " in 2003 
 Total Nonstop Action Wrestling 
 NWA World Tag Team Championship ( 2 times ) – with B.G. James and Ron Killings 
 World Championship Wrestling 
 WCW United States Championship ( 1 time ) 
 WCW World Tag Team Championship ( 2 times ) – with Rey Mysterio , Jr . ( 1 ) and Billy Kidman ( 1 ) 
 WCW World Television Championship ( 1 time ) 
 World Wrestling Council 
 WWC Universal Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 WWC World Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Carly Colón 
 Wrestling Observer Newsletter Awards 
 Wrestling Observer Newsletter Hall of Fame ( Class of 2009 ) 
 = = = Luchas de Apuestas record = = = 
 = Mladen Lorković = 
 Mladen Lorković ( 1 March 1909 – April 1945 ) was a Croatian politician and lawyer who became a senior member of the Ustaše and served as the Foreign Minister and Minister of Interior of the Independent State of Croatia ( NDH ) during World War II . Lorković led the Lorković @-@ Vokić plot , an attempt to establish a coalition government between the Ustaše and the Croatian Peasant Party and align the Independent State of Croatia with the Allies . 
 As a student , he joined the Croatian Party of Rights but , viewed as a dissident in the Kingdom of Yugoslavia , he fled the country to avoid arrest and eventually settled in Germany where he obtained a doctorate in law at the University of Berlin . In 1934 , he joined the Ustaše and became a close associate of Ante Pavelić . Although he was initially commander of all Ustaše in Germany , where he sought support in creating and protecting a Croatian state , he later became leader of all Ustaše outside Italy . Soon after the establishment of the NDH , he was appointed as Foreign Minister and strongly opposed Italian influence on the state . After his cabinet chief , Ivo <unk> , was executed in 1943 for smuggling gold , Lorković was removed from office but later named Minister of Interior . As Minister of Interior , he negotiated with the Croatian Peasant Party ( HSS ) in the hopes of establishing a coalition government . He also held secret negotiations with HSS representatives to propose having the NDH join the Allies against Germany . Although he apparently had the support of Pavelić , he and his cohorts were soon arrested as conspirators against the state and after a period in detention was executed at the end of April 1945 alongside Ante Vokić . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Lorković was born in Zagreb on 1 March 1909 , the son of prominent politician Ivan Lorković . He attended gymnasium in Zagreb where he became a supporter of the Croatian Party of Rights and later joined the Croatian Youth Movement . He began law studies at the University of Zagreb , but completed them in Innsbruck , Austria , following his escape . He later earned a Ph.D on the subject of the " Establishment of the State of Slovenes , Croats and Serbs " under Max Hildebert Boehm at the University of Berlin . Lorković and Branimir Jelić spoke about the state of Croatian university students at the International Students Federation congress in Brussels in 1930 for which they were arrested and held at the Palace of Justice before being taken to the German border . During his time in Berlin he met and later married Wally <unk> . He later divorced <unk> , and on 19 August 1944 he remarried to the Countess Nada von <unk> . 
 = = Activities with the Ustaše = = 
 On 6 January 1929 , King Alexander dissolved the government and introduced a royal dictatorship over the newly created Kingdom of Yugoslavia . Because he was viewed as a dissident , Lorković was placed under constant police surveillance . On 15 November 1929 , a warrant for his arrest was issued , but he succeeded in escaping to Austria and later to Germany . 
 Lorković was a keen advocate for the amalgamation of all Croatian parties into a ' super @-@ party ' to secede from the Kingdom of Yugoslavia and on 4 October 1934 swore his Ustaše oath . He became commander of all Ustaše units in Germany and later , after the assassination of King Alexander , commander of all Ustaše outside Italy . The assassination of King Alexander led to him being briefly detained in Germany , but was released in mid @-@ 1935 after a German court rejected a Yugoslav request for his extradition . 
 In 1937 , Lorković was arrested following a hearing conducted by the Gestapo . He subsequently left Germany and moved to Hungary and in 1939 returned to Yugoslavia , where he became an associate editor of the Hrvatski <unk> ( Croatian Folk ) journal and the editor of the underground journal Hrvatska <unk> ( The Croatian Post ) . Matica hrvatska published his book , The Croatian People and Their Lands , in 1939 in which he stated that all Bosnian Muslims were Croats by nationality . After the Banovina of Croatia proclamation , he was arrested in 1940 and detained at Lepoglava prison and later in <unk> , near Vitez . Lorković was a signatory to a declaration , made on 31 March 1941 and signed on 5 May 1941 , in which the Ustaše requested the declaration of a Croatian state . The document also sought German support , protection and recognition among Axis nations . 
 = = Independent State of Croatia = = 
 Lorković was one of the most pro @-@ German members of the pre @-@ war Ustaše movement having cultivated political and academic ties in Germany during his time there . After the establishment of the NDH , Lorković became a member of the temporary government of Slavko Kvaternik known as the Croatian State Leadership . On 16 April 1941 , Lorković was named Secretary of the Foreign Ministry in the first government formed by Ante Pavelić , who also served as Foreign Minister . Up to April 1943 , he also served as the chief contact between Edmund Glaise von Horstenau , the Plenipotentiary General in the Independent State of Croatia , and the Pavelić cabinet . 
 Lorković succeeded Pavelić as Foreign Minister on 9 June 1941 . Shortly after taking office , he inquired with the French authorities about the fate of three Ustaše implicated in the 1934 assassination of King Alexander in Marseilles and sentenced to life imprisonment . The actual assassin was a Bulgarian mercenary , Vlado <unk> , who was killed after the deed by French security forces . Two of the men died in prison , but the third , Milan <unk> , was returned to the NDH in early 1942 through the intervention of the German occupation forces in France , where he was later killed allegedly on Pavelić 's orders . 
 On 27 July 1941 , in a speech designed to inflame Croats against the Serbs living in the NDH , Lorković lied that Serbs had beaten , mutilated and massacred tens of thousands of Croatian peasants during the inter @-@ war period . In August , he strongly opposed an Italian request to implement civil administration in the demilitarized zone of the NDH . The Italians countered the following spring by accusing Lorković of being a communist to discredit him for his pro @-@ German views . Lorković was cleared of all charges after a police investigation . However , a German police attaché in Zagreb did claim that Lorković had been in contact with some communists in the early 1930s and had helped some Croatian communists in 1941 and 1942 . In May 1942 , Lorković was appointed honorary member of the German Institute for Border and Foreign Studies . Lorković , along with Vladimir <unk> and <unk> Perić , strongly opposed Italian influence over the Independent State of Croatia and towards the end of 1942 , wrote a note ( " <unk> " ) in which he described the cooperative efforts of Italy 's 2nd Army with the Chetniks . This note was officially submitted on 26 January 1943 to the Italian Foreign Minister Galeazzo Ciano . In response , the Italian diplomat Raffaele <unk> tried to have Lorković removed from office . 
 Heinrich Himmler , leader of the German Schutzstaffel ( SS ) , wanted to form a Croatian Muslim SS division . He sent Phleps as his representative to Zagreb to begin formal negotiations with the Croatian government on 18 February 1943 . He met with German foreign ministry envoy Siegfried Kasche and Mladen Lorković who represented Pavelić . Pavelić had already agreed to raise the division but the Waffen SS and Croatian government disagreed on how the division would be recruited and controlled . Lorković suggested that it be named " SS Ustaša Division " , a Croatian unit raised with SS assistance , with familiar regimental titles such as Bosna , Krajina and Una . Pavelić and Kasche were concerned that an exclusively Muslim division might aid a Muslim bid for independence . As a compromise , the word " Croatian " was included in its official title and some Croatian Catholic officers were recruited . Himmler and Phleps largely prevailed and created the division as they saw fit causing grave dissatisfaction among the NDH leadership , particularly regarding its ethnic composition . 
 On 23 April 1943 Lorković was removed from office after Lorković 's cabinet chief , Ivo <unk> , was found guilty of gold smuggling and executed . Following his removal , Lorković was named a Minister in Government 's Presidency , where he was responsible for relations with the German Army , and become a close associate of General Edmund Glaise von Horstenau . During the summer of 1943 , he advocated cooperation with the Croatian Peasant Party ( HSS ) and represented the Ustaše in negotiations with the vice president of the HSS , August <unk> , about forming a coalition government . Lorković advocated a stronger government and greater independence in its activity . He initiated a new government to be led by himself as a prime minister and not the Poglavnik , but Pavelić named Nikola Mandić as prime minister on 2 September 1942 . Lorković and some of his associates submitted their resignations , which were not accepted . Despite this setback , Lorković , along with Mandić , continued negotiations with HSS throughout September finalising them at the end of the month . 
 After the capitulation of Italy on 20 September 1943 , Lorković , with Kasche and other high @-@ ranking German officers , discussed the return of territory lost after the Treaty of Rome in April 1941 . Ultimately , Hitler gave permission for the Independent State of Croatia to annex the territory by " guaranteeing unlimited independence of Croatia , including this Croatian Adriatic coast . " 
 On 11 October 1943 , Lorković was named Minister of Interior , where he advocated stricter policing , and a second term as Foreign Minister from 29 April until 5 May 1944 , after his friend Perić was removed from office . It was agreed that Lorković would remain Foreign Minister and Minister of Interior simultaneously , but was soon replaced by Mehmed <unk> as Foreign Minister . After realising that Germany would lose the war and the NDH would cease to exist , he advocated radical changes in state policy . In February 1944 , he wrote a detailed memorandum in German which summarized the history , current situation and the fundamental problems of the NDH and its Armed Forces , as well as problems with the German Army . 
 = = = Lorković @-@ Vokić plot and death = = = 
 In May 1944 , he secretly met with the president of Knin County , David Sinčić , with whom he discussed the poor state of the German war @-@ effort and that the Allies may invade the Balkans via Taranto . That month , he launched an initiative to renew negotiations with the HSS , which he conducted in his apartment . There , he secretly met with Sinčić , August <unk> and <unk> Farolfi . Lorković also sought foreign contacts and through Switzerland made contact with British and American officials , but was rebuffed . He proposed that the NDH end its relations with Germany and join the Allies , a proposal supported by the Minister of the Armed Forces , Ante Vokić , as well as many high @-@ ranking Croatian Home Guard officers and politicians . Lorković also <unk> with the HSS about switching sides with Pavelić 's knowledge and consent . 
 At a special session of government held on 30 August 1944 in Pavelić 's villa , guarded by armed men , Lorković and Vokić were accused of conspiracy against the Poglavnik and Croatia 's German ally . Vice President of the Government , <unk> Kulenović , and many others defended them but to no avail . Lorković was kept under house arrest until he was tried before the Poglavnik 's Bodyguard Division ( PTS ) where it was decided that he would be stripped of his rank and expelled from the PTS . After the trial , he was transferred to Koprivnica and later in Lepoglava , alongside Vokić , Farolfi , Ljudevit <unk> and others , although <unk> later escaped . Lorković was executed at the end of April 1945 . 
 = = Publishing activities = = 
 Lorković 's publications during the time of the NDH were closely tied with his political activity and state obligations . He cooperated with a number of magazines , such as Croatia , which was published by <unk> in German and French for the Foreign Ministry . 
 In 1939 , Matica hrvatska published his book , The Croatian People and Their Lands ( <unk> i <unk> Hrvata ) , in which Lorković focused on the issue of Croatian boundaries . In 1942 , he participated in the Croatian Parliament ( Sabor ) . Two of his speeches were independently published : The International Political Position of Croatia ( <unk> <unk> <unk> Hrvatske ; 1942 ) and The Croatian Struggle Against Bolshevism ( Hrvatska u <unk> <unk> <unk> ; 1944 ) . The latter was published in German in 1944 . 
 = The Amazing Spider @-@ Man 2 = 
 The Amazing Spider @-@ Man 2 ( also released as The Amazing Spider @-@ Man 2 : Rise of Electro in some markets ) is a 2014 American superhero film featuring the Marvel Comics character Spider @-@ Man , directed by Marc Webb and released by Columbia Pictures . It is the fifth theatrical Spider @-@ Man film produced by Columbia Pictures and Marvel Entertainment , and is a sequel to The Amazing Spider @-@ Man ( 2012 ) . The studio hired James Vanderbilt to write the screenplay and Alex Kurtzman , and Roberto Orci to rewrite it . The film stars Andrew Garfield as Peter Parker / Spider @-@ Man , Emma Stone as Gwen Stacy , Dane DeHaan as Green Goblin / Harry Osborn , Campbell Scott and Embeth Davidtz as Peter 's parents , and Sally Field as Aunt May , with the addition of a new cast including Paul Giamatti as Rhino / Aleksei Sytsevich and Jamie Foxx as Electro / Max Dillon . 
 Development of The Amazing Spider @-@ Man 2 began after the success of The Amazing Spider @-@ Man . DeHaan , Giamatti , Jones , and Cooper were cast between December 2012 and February 2013 . Filming took place in New York City from February to June 2013 . The film was released in 2D , 3D , and IMAX 3D on May 2 , 2014 , in the United States with two international premieres being held between March 31 & April 10 , 2014 . The film received mixed reviews , and although it grossed $ 709 million worldwide and became the ninth @-@ highest @-@ grossing film of 2014 , it was the lowest @-@ grossing film in the series . However , the film was declared a " hit " in the overseas markets with high openings and a wide cinematic release . The film subsequently won awards for its music composition and acting , notably one Nickelodeon Kids ' Choice Award and two ASCAP Awards . 
 The Amazing Spider @-@ Man 2 was originally envisioned as the beginning of a shared fictional universe , which would have continued with two sequels and several spin @-@ off films . Due to it performing below expectations , all subsequent installments were cancelled and a new iteration of the character , portrayed by Tom Holland appears in the Marvel Cinematic Universe , beginning with the 2016 film Captain America : Civil War , before he is scheduled to appear in his own film Spider @-@ Man : Homecoming in 2017 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 OsCorp scientist Richard Parker records a video message to explain his disappearance . Later , he and his wife , Mary , are aboard a private jet hijacked by a man sent to assassinate Richard . The plane crashes , killing both Richard and Mary , after he uploads the video . 
 In the present , Richard 's son Peter continues to fight crime as Spider @-@ Man . He pursues and apprehends Aleksei Sytsevich . Later , Peter meets with Gwen at their high school graduation ceremony and , insisting he keep his vow to her father , ends their relationship . Peter 's childhood friend , Harry Osborn , returns to Manhattan to see his terminally @-@ ill father , Norman , CEO of OsCorp . Norman explains his illness is genetic , and Harry is at the age where it first develops . Norman gives Harry a small device he claims contains his life 's work . The next day , Norman dies and Harry is appointed the new OsCorp CEO . 
 While working in an OsCorp laboratory , electrical engineer Max Dillon shocks himself by accident and falls into a tank of genetically @-@ engineered electric eels . They attack him , and he mutates into a living electric generator . Meanwhile , Peter attempts to maintain a friendship with Gwen , but she reveals that she may move to England for schooling . Before they can discuss it , Dillon wanders into Times Square , accidentally causing a blackout , and is stopped by Spider @-@ Man after a battle . Dillon is taken to Ravencroft Institute , where he is studied by German scientist Dr. Kafka . Meanwhile , the first symptoms of Harry 's illness are showing , and he uses the device Norman gave him to deduce that Spider @-@ Man 's blood could help save him . He asks Peter , who has been selling photos of Spider @-@ Man to the Daily Bugle , to aid him in finding Spider @-@ Man . Peter refuses , unsure of what effects the transfusion would have . Although he later comes to Harry as Spider @-@ Man , he still refuses , and Harry develops an intense hatred towards Spider @-@ Man . The OsCorp board @-@ members , in particular the vice @-@ president , Donald Menken , frame Harry for covering up Dillon 's accident , and remove him as CEO . Harry 's assistant , Felicia Hardy , informs him of equipment that could help him , so he makes a deal with Dillon , who now calls himself " Electro , " to get him back inside the OsCorp building . There he finds a suit of armour and other equipment made by Norman , as well as venom from the now @-@ destroyed genetically @-@ altered spiders . The venom accelerates Harry 's illness and transforms him into a goblin @-@ like creature , but the suit 's built @-@ in emergency protocol restores his health and cures his disease . 
 Peter uses information left by his father to locate the video message in an abandoned subway station 's hidden lab . Richard explains he had to leave because he refused to cooperate with Norman 's <unk> <unk> plans . Peter then hears a voicemail from Gwen , telling him she was offered the British scholarship and is heading to the airport earlier than expected . He manages to catch her and professes his love for her , and , vowing to go wherever she goes , they agree to go to England together . Electro causes another blackout , and Peter heads off to fight him as Spider @-@ Man . Gwen follows , and together they restore power and overload Electro 's body , killing him . Afterward , the transformed Harry , who now calls himself " Green Goblin , " arrives equipped with Norman 's armor and weaponry ; upon seeing Gwen , Green Goblin deduces Spider @-@ Man 's secret identity and , swearing revenge for being refused the blood transfusion , kidnaps her . He fights Spider @-@ Man at the top of a clock tower but is knocked unconscious and defeated . Despite Spider @-@ Man 's attempts to save Gwen , she falls to her death after webbing breaks in the clock tower . Distraught , Peter ends his career as Spider @-@ Man . 
 Five months later , Harry is coping with the aftereffects of his transformation while incarcerated at Ravencroft . His associate , Gustav Fiers , visits Harry and the pair discuss forming their own team in order carry out their own ends . Harry orders Fiers to start with Sytsevich , and Fiers breaks Sytsevich out of prison . Equipped with electromechanical suit armor , Sytsevich calls himself the Rhino and rampages through the streets . Peter , inspired by Gwen 's graduation speech , resumes his career as Spider @-@ Man and confronts him . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Andrew Garfield as Peter Parker / Spider @-@ Man : An orphaned teenage boy who received spider @-@ powers after being bitten by a genetically altered spider . Peter first uses his powers to try to hunt down the killer of his uncle in The Amazing Spider @-@ Man but soon decides to use his powers to fight crime as the vigilante known as Spider @-@ Man . Garfield explained that the suit that he would wear in the film would undergo a new design . Garfield hoped to bring back the theme of him being an orphan stating , " I wanna keep exploring that theme of being fatherless , being motherless , searching for purpose and finding a purpose within himself " . He felt that it was his responsibility to take on the role and that he does not take it <unk> Charles also reprises his role as Young Peter Parker . 
 Emma Stone as Gwendolyn " Gwen " Stacy : A high school student and Peter 's love interest . When asked about Peter and Gwen 's relationship in the sequel , Stone said , " She saves him more than he saves her . She 's incredibly helpful to Spider @-@ Man ... He 's the muscle , she 's the brains . " 
 Jamie Foxx as Max Dillon / Electro : An electrical engineer who works for Oscorp Industries and later transforms into a powerful , <unk> creature following an accident , then taking the alias of " Electro " . Foxx described the character as " a nobody " who initially idolizes Spider @-@ Man . He develops an obsession with Spider @-@ Man after being saved by him and obtains his powers through an accident at Oscorp involving electric eels . Foxx revealed that the character would be redesigned to be more grounded , and that the villain 's classic yellow and green suit would be omitted in favor of a modern look like black as depicted in the film . 
 Dane DeHaan as Harry Osborn / Green Goblin : Peter 's longtime friend for 10 years and son of Norman Osborn . He was sent away to boarding school around the same time Peter 's parents disappeared , and meets him for the first time . He eventually assumes the role of the Green Goblin after injecting a special serum of spider @-@ venom into his body , initially injected to provide a cure , which instead turns him into a hideous , psychotic , goblin @-@ like creature . As the Green Goblin , Harry dons a technological suit capable of healing him and can fly with the use of a large glider . 
 Colm Feore as Donald Menken : Oscorp 's Vice President and Head of the Board . He is often in dispute with Harry over his capabilities of being a CEO to Oscorp , claiming that because Harry is a boy , he is incapable of leading the company . 
 Felicity Jones as Felicia Hardy : Norman 's assistant at Oscorp , and later Harry 's . Jones was only credited as Felicia in the final film , her surname was revealed as " Hardy " in a marketing video for the film releasing on digital HD formats . 
 Paul Giamatti as Aleksei Sytsevich / Rhino : a Russian hired killer for the Russian Mafia , who allies with Harry and receives a massive , well @-@ armored , robotic , rhino @-@ like suit from him , deciding to call himself " the Rhino " . Giamatti said of his character , " He 's a Russian mobster . Russians are always good villains . I have an ability to just destroy things " , he said . " My accent is pretty hammy . I loved doing it . It seemed to me like an opportunity to be as over @-@ the @-@ top hammy as possible . It was really fun . " 
 Sally Field as Aunt May : Peter 's aunt . 
 Campbell Scott as Richard Parker : Peter 's father . 
 Embeth Davidtz as Mary Parker : Peter 's mother . 
 Marton Csokas as Dr. Kafka : The head of Ravencroft Institute . 
 Chris Cooper portrays Norman Osborn , the late founder of Oscorp and Harry Osborn 's father , while B. J. Novak portrays Alistair Smythe . Denis Leary reprises his role as George Stacy from the first film , where he appears as a ghost in Peter 's visions , while Kari Coleman , Charlie <unk> , Skyler Gisondo and Jacob Rodier reprise their roles as Helen Stacy , Philip Stacy , Howard Stacy and Simon Stacy respectively . Spider @-@ Man co @-@ creator , Stan Lee , has a cameo appearance as a guest at Peter and Gwen 's graduation ceremony . Michael Massee reprises his role as the " Man in the Shadows " from the first film , with the character now credited as " Gustav Fiers ( The Gentleman ) " . Aidy Bryant appears as a woman dressed as the Statue of Liberty . J.D. Walsh appears as an online instructor demonstrating how batteries work and an uncredited actor portrays the Oscorp hired assassin who was sent to kill Richard and Mary . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The sequel 's villain was teased in the 2012 film . Webb stated that the origin story would further unfold in the second installment . In June 2012 , Webb said he was unsure whether he would return , though it was confirmed on September 28 , 2012 , that he would return to direct the sequel . He stated that he " wanted to create a universe that not only can withstand but anticipate future storylines " while also " working in and of itself for one movie . " Andrew Garfield had also expressed hope to reprise his role , and in September 2012 , it was confirmed that he would do so . Emma Stone was later confirmed to be reprising her role as Gwen Stacy , having signed a contract for two Amazing Spider @-@ Man sequels . The original costume and mask from The Amazing Spider @-@ Man was altered and has lens in the mask , making the eyes bigger . The web shooters were also modified . 
 Actor J. K. Simmons expressed interest in reprising his role as J. Jonah Jameson from Sam Raimi 's Spider @-@ Man trilogy should the studio offer it to him . In October 2012 , Electro was rumored as the next villain . Jamie Foxx was given the role . That December , Foxx confirmed that he was cast as the character , and during an interview with MTV , explained that the redesign of the character would be more grounded as well as details of his depiction . On December 3 , 2012 , Marc Webb revealed that Dane DeHaan was chosen to play Harry Osborn . Paul Giamatti was confirmed as a cast member in February 2013 . Felicity Jones confirmed her involvement with the film under an undisclosed role . Giamatti also indicated in an October 2013 interview that he would return in The Amazing Spider @-@ Man 3 as well . On February 27 , 2013 , Chris Cooper was cast as Norman Osborn . 
 By October 10 , 2012 , Shailene Woodley was in talks for the role of Mary Jane Watson . By March 14 , 2013 , Woodley had concluded filming her small role . Garfield recalled , " I think all of [ those scenes ] were in our backyards . We had two or three scenes with me talking over the fence , and there was one with us riding together on a motorcycle that we never got to shoot . " By mid @-@ June , Mary Jane was cut from the film , with director Webb explaining it as " a creative decision to streamline the story and focus on Peter and Gwen and their relationship . " 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 On February 4 , 2013 , Marc Webb posted on Twitter that principal photography had begun and that the sequel was being shot on 35 mm film in the anamorphic format , instead of being filmed digitally as the preceding film was . Sony revealed this would be the first Spider @-@ Man film to be filmed entirely in New York State , including a car @-@ chase scene that was filmed in Rochester because the speed laws are less restrictive in upstate New York . It became the largest film production ever in New York State . The decision to film in Williamsburg , Brooklyn near the Passover holiday caused some controversy , as critics believed that this was culturally insensitive , and would cause problems with parking . The filming company decided to work with the community and then agreed to adjust its production activities for Passover . The producers had assembled a 200 @-@ person crew for the 10 @-@ day shoot in Rochester , with a total number of 250 local crew members and 150 local extras . The prominent scenes were shot mostly on Main Street of Rochester and were digitally remastered to look like New York City . 
 On June 25 , Webb posted on Twitter that filming was completed . Soundstage work was done at Grumman Studios and Gold Coast Studios , both in Bethpage , New York , and at the Marcy Armory in Brooklyn . 
 = = = = Special effects = = = = 
 Sony Pictures Imageworks designed the special effects for the film . The digital composition of the film , including the scene where the battle of Spider @-@ Man and Electro in Times Square , took one year to complete . The sets of Times Square were built in Gold Coast Studios with the green screens and most of the scenes were digitally re @-@ designed by computer . The photography and VFX team took over 36 @,@ 000 photos of the Times Square in order to re @-@ create the location digitally . In addition , the animation team captured over 100 billboards during the photography process . 
 The film was post @-@ converted from 2D to 3D , in part because the production team wanted to shoot 35 mm film . Dan Mindel used Kodak Vision3 500T <unk> and <unk> <unk> , while the second unit shot day exteriors on Kodak Vision3 50D <unk> . During the production , 20 layers of lightning CGI effects were applied to depict Electro . Jamie Foxx was photographed as Electro by KNB EFX team and the skin colors used to show the moods of the character . A total number of 1600 , visual effects shots of the film was originally filmed in 2K resolution and then converted into 4K resolution with the help of color grading . To give the visual effects a realistic look , sound designers Addison Teague and Eric Norris and re @-@ recording mixers Paul Massey and David <unk> mixed the background music using Auro 11 @.@ 1 cinema sound technology and the film 's soundtrack was remixed using Dolby Atmos , Auro and Dolby 5 @.@ 1 . 
 = = = Post @-@ production = = = 
 The film was mixed in Auro 11 @.@ 1 and Dolby Atmos in the converted William Holden Theater . The mix for both was completed by Paul Massey and David <unk> . 
 A mid @-@ credit teaser scene from X @-@ Men : Days of Future Past was added to the film after its London premiere , due to an existing deal between Webb and 20th Century Fox , in which Fox allowed Webb to direct the film if Sony would promote the X @-@ Men film for free . The scene , set during the Vietnam War , shows Mystique ( Jennifer Lawrence ) , a rogue mutant , trying to infiltrate a military camp led by William Stryker ( Josh Helman ) in an attempt to recruit fellow mutants Havok ( Lucas Till ) and Toad ( Evan <unk> ) . The scene 's inclusion sparked confusion among some viewers in the United Kingdom , who thought it meant an X @-@ Men – Spider @-@ Man crossover film was being planned , based on how Marvel Studios and Disney use codas within the Marvel Cinematic Universe to promote future films . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 On July 20 , 2013 , Webb announced that Hans Zimmer would be composing the music for the film , replacing James Horner , the composer of the first film . On October 25 , 2013 , Pharrell Williams revealed to Billboard that he would co @-@ compose the score with Zimmer . Webb and Zimmer formed a supergroup with Williams , Johnny Marr , Mike Einziger and former Eurythmic , David A. Stewart to create the music for the sequel . Eventually , Stewart did not participate in the film 's music , and the supergroup , credited as The Magnificent Six ( a reference to the Sinister Six ) was composed of Williams , Marr , Einziger , Junkie XL , Steve <unk> and Andrew Kawczynski assisting Zimmer . The soundtrack for the film was released on April 22 , 2014 by Columbia Records and Madison Gate Records . Hans Zimmer described his work for this film <unk> from previous works by him , thus revealing one of the themes for the film , which was first heard on the website . 
 On March 31 , 2014 , a track called " It 's On Again " was uploaded to Soundcloud . It features vocals by Kendrick Lamar and Alicia Keys . Keys announced the song on Twitter and credited Zimmer and Williams , along with Lamar and herself for the song , indicating the song as a part of the film 's soundtrack . Webb described the song as “ upbeat and exciting ” . 
 = = Marketing = = 
 The release of the film in the United Kingdom was postponed to April 16 , 2014 , two days ahead of its original April 18 date . Deadline reported that , in addition to the production budget , the film 's marketing budget was $ 180 – 190 million . 
 On July 17 , 2013 , Sony released a clip from the film with the first released footage of Jamie Foxx as Electro to encourage attendance at the panel , at the San Diego Comic @-@ Con International . At the panel they premiered a four @-@ minute trailer , which was not publicly released but eventually leaked on the internet . Viral marketing for the film included a version of the Daily Bugle on the blogging service Tumblr , which included references to Kate Cushing , Detective Stan Carter , the " Big Man " , Izzy Bunsen , Joy Mercado , Donald Menken , the Vulture , Hydro @-@ Man , Spencer Smythe , Ned Leeds , Anne Weying , J. Jonah Jameson , Shocker , Alistair Smythe , Doctor Octopus , Eddie Brock , The Enforcers and Puma . Marc Webb posted a photo on Twitter with a message written in Dwarven language revealing that the first trailer would debut prior to 3D screenings of The Hobbit : The Desolation of Smaug . 
 On December 8 , 2013 , it was announced that new footage from the film would be presented during New Year 's Eve festivities at New York City 's Times Square . The film was further promoted during the World Wide Fund for Nature ( WWF ) " Earth Hour " campaign . The cast was present at the launch of the 2014 event in Singapore . Disney Consumer Products announced a merchandise product line for the film at the American International Toy Fair on February 17 , 2014 . 
 In March 2014 , Gameloft and Marvel announced the launch of a mobile game of the same name for smartphones and tablets . It was released on consoles afterward . Kellogg 's released an application featuring the film . Evian served as a promotional partner of the film . On April 1 , 2014 , the brand released an advertisement " The Amazing Baby & Me 2 " featuring Spider @-@ Man and a baby version of him , as a follow @-@ up to their original " Baby & Me " campaign . The film partnered with NBCUniversal for advertising . Spots for the film appeared on Bravo , E ! , USA , Syfy , Telemundo , and mun2 . A customized page was created on Fandango . In May 2014 , Marvel announced that Spider @-@ Man 's costume from the film would be shown within Marvel : Avengers Alliance . 
 = = Home media = = 
 Fans who saw the film started petitions on several petition websites to include a " Director 's Cut " in the home video release for cutting out scenes from the film 's marketing , including scenes featuring Martin Sheen reprising his role as Uncle Ben and Chris Zylka reprising his role as Flash Thompson , along with Shailene Woodley and Electro 's deleted scenes and a post @-@ credits scene . The film has an alternate ending where Peter Parker 's father meets Peter at Gwen 's resting place . Creative agency <unk> Digital was hired to produce several animated GIFs ahead of the DVD / Blu @-@ ray release as part of a sponsored ad campaign on Tumblr . The Amazing Spider @-@ Man 2 was released by Sony Pictures Home Entertainment for digital download on August 5 , 2014 and was released on Blu @-@ ray , Blu @-@ ray 3D and DVD on August 19 , 2014 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The Amazing Spider @-@ Man 2 received mixed reviews from film critics and audiences . The Los Angeles Times said , " [ The film is ] overstuffed with plot lines , set pieces and villains , although stars Andrew Garfield and Emma Stone do their best to give the movie heart . " Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a 53 % approval rating from critics , with an average score of 5 @.@ 8 / 10 based on 267 reviews . The site 's consensus states : " While the cast is outstanding and the special effects are top @-@ notch , the latest installment of the Spidey saga suffers from an unfocused narrative and an overabundance of characters . " On Metacritic the film also has a score of 53 out of 100 , based on 49 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " . CinemaScore polls conducted during the opening weekend revealed the average grade cinemagoers gave the film was B + on an A + to F scale . 
 The main criticisms of the film were the underdeveloped characters , overlong running time , and crowded script . However , the special effects , chemistry between Stone and Garfield , Dane DeHaan 's performance , the action scenes , and Hans Zimmer 's musical score were met with high praise . Foxx 's portrayal of Max Dillon / Electro was met with mixed reviews . 
 Tim Robey of The Telegraph said , " Marc Webb 's Spider @-@ Man sequel is overstuffed with high @-@ voltage villains , but the sparks between Andrew Garfield and Emma Stone save the day " . Simon Reynolds of Digital Spy said , " Peter 's past , present and future all intertwine in a sequel that offers bang for your buck . That said you can 't help [ but ] feel the franchise bean counters at work here thanks to all the ominous foreshadowing and unresolved character arcs . Too many cooks and all that ... " . Kim Newman of Empire scored the film three out of five stars , saying : " A few too @-@ broad gags aside — and even these are in the funky spirit of ' 60s Marvel — this is a satisfying second issue with thrills , heartbreak , gasps , and a perfectly judged slingshot ending . " Leslie Felperin of The Hollywood Reporter said , " The eponymous hero hits his super @-@ heroic stride here , as does Andrew Garfield in the role , especially when Spider @-@ Man 's alter ego Peter Parker learns there 's always some fine print in a contract with this many benefits . The plot gets itself tangled up in multiple villain strands , but in the main , this installment is emotionally weightier and more satisfying than its predecessor . " Guy Lodge of Variety said , " Redundancy remains a problem , but this overlong superhero sequel gets by on sound , fury and star chemistry . " Richard Roeper gave the film a B + , stating that " It 's about 20 minutes too long and it 's overstuffed with too many characters and too many subplots , but there 's enough good stuff in The Amazing Spider @-@ Man 2 to warrant optimism about the next chapter of the franchise . " A negative review came from Peter Travers of Rolling Stone , giving the film two stars out of four , he said : " Things go wrong quickly with Amazing 2 . Am I the only one who hates the word Amazing to describe a movie that isn 't ? Just asking . " 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The Amazing Spider @-@ Man 2 grossed $ 8 @.@ 7 million on its early Thursday night showings . It finished its opening weekend in first place with $ 91 @.@ 6 million , almost $ 30 million more than the opening weekend gross of the first film . The film grossed $ 202 @,@ 853 @,@ 933 in North America and $ 506 @,@ 128 @,@ 390 in other countries , for a total gross of $ 708 @,@ 982 @,@ 323 . 
 Outside North America , The Amazing Spider @-@ Man 2 opened on April 16 , 2014 to $ 2 @.@ 73 million in the UK and to $ 190 @,@ 000 in Belgium , while opening to $ 1 @.@ 44 million in Australia and $ 1 @.@ 11 million in Germany . The film 's release in India was the biggest opening weekend for an American film at that point . In China , the film played on 11 @,@ 002 screens , which is the biggest release of any film in history . On its opening day in Hong Kong , the film earned $ 1 @.@ 23 million , the highest opening gross in the territory . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = = Canceled franchise and reboot = = 
 Sony had originally intended the film to launch an expansive film universe around Spider Man to compete with the Marvel Cinematic Universe . In 2013 , Sony announced a third Amazing Spider @-@ Man film with a release date of June 10 , 2016 , which Alex Kurtzman , Roberto Orci and Jeff Pinkner would return to write , and a fourth film with a release date of May 4 , 2018 . Additionally , the series was to include spin @-@ off films featuring the Sinister Six and Venom , with Drew Goddard writing and directing Sinister Six and Kurtzman directing a Venom script co @-@ written by himself , Orci , and Ed Solomon . Sinister Six had been planned for a November 11 , 2016 release . Additionally , by August 2014 , Sony had hired Lisa Joy Nolan to write the script for a 2017 film starring a Marvel superheroine . 
 However , between December 2013 and the release of The Amazing Spider @-@ Man 2 in May 2014 , Garfield and Webb revealed that while they would both return for the third film , neither was certain of their involvement in the fourth , with Webb adding he would certainly not be directing . Following the mixed critical reviews and franchise @-@ low box office performance of The Amazing Spider @-@ Man 2 , the future of the franchise was unclear . By July 2014 , Orci had left the third film to work on Star Trek Beyond , The Amazing Spider @-@ Man 3 , which would have included Chris Cooper returning as Norman Osborn and focused on Peter 's recovering from Gwen 's death , was delayed to an unspecified date in 2018 , and The Amazing Spider @-@ Man 4 was moved to a later , unknown date . 
 Following the 2014 Sony Pictures Entertainment hack , Sony was revealed to have been in talks to have Sam Raimi return to the franchise to direct a new trilogy for the character and was in discussion with Marvel Studios about including Spider @-@ Man in the Marvel Cinematic Universe film Captain America : Civil War . Marvel reportedly was unhappy with some of the terms of the proposed arrangement , including the film rights staying with Sony , and both talks allegedly ceased . However , in February 2015 , Sony and Marvel Studios announced that a new iteration of Spider @-@ Man will appear in the MCU , with the character appearing in Captain America : Civil War before Sony releases a standalone film titled Spider @-@ Man : Homecoming produced by Kevin Feige and Amy Pascal on July 7 , 2017 . Following this announcement , The Amazing Spider @-@ Man 3 was canceled . Sony Pictures will continue to finance , distribute , own and have final creative control of the Spider @-@ Man films . Marvel Studios and Sony will explore opportunities to integrate other characters of the MCU into future Spider @-@ Man films . Tom Holland stars as the new Spider @-@ Man . In March 2016 , The Hollywood Reporter has reported that Sony are moving forward with the standalone Venom film with Dante Harper writing the script while Avi Arad and Matt Tolmach will be producing and supervising the project ; it will not be related to the Amazing Spider @-@ Man film franchise and the MCU 's Spider @-@ Man . 
 = Dance for You = 
 " Dance for You " is a song by American singer Beyoncé for the deluxe edition of her fourth studio album , 4 ( 2011 ) . It was written by Beyoncé , Terius " The @-@ Dream " Nash and Christopher " Tricky " Stewart , while production was handled by the former two . " Dance for You " is a midtempo R & B and synthpop song , in which Beyoncé adopts sensual vocals . The instrumental elements used on it include echoing drum patterns and clapping synthesizers . In " Dance for You " , Beyoncé , as the female protagonist , speaks of the love she has for her man and about all the things she will do to show him her appreciation . 
 " Dance for You " was well received by contemporary music critics , who noted its similarity to songs by Janet Jackson ; they also praised its production and Beyoncé 's vocals . Following the release of 4 , " Dance for You " charted at number 200 on the South Korean International Singles Chart , and at number 147 on the UK Singles Chart . Though the song was never released as a single , it appeared on several charts in the United States based on radio support . " Dance for You " reached number 78 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart , and number six on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . 
 Its music video was directed by Beyoncé and Alan Ferguson . The clip debuted on November 25 , 2011 and was placed on the concert DVD Live at Roseland : Elements of 4 ( 2011 ) . Inspired by 1940 's film noir , the video is shot in black @-@ and @-@ white and captures Beyoncé dancing and flipping her hair in a detective 's office to seduce him . Critics wrote that the video contains some of Beyoncé 's best and most sensual moves , called her a femme fatale , and commented that its concept effectively matched the song 's lyrics . The song was part of Beyoncé 's set list during her residency show Revel Presents : Beyoncé Live ( 2012 ) and The Mrs. Carter Show World Tour ( 2013 ) . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " Dance for You " was written by Beyoncé , Terius " The @-@ Dream " Nash and Christopher " Tricky " Stewart , with production by Beyoncé and Nash . The song was recorded at MSR Studios in New York City and Real World Studios at Box , Wiltshire . It was made available on the deluxe edition of 4 , which was available for purchase at Target Corporation until January 2012 . The deluxe edition was released to iTunes Stores on January 2 , 2012 . It includes two additional tracks , " Schoolin ' Life " and " Lay Up Under Me " , and three remixes of " Run the World ( Girls ) " ( 2011 ) . " Dance for You " is a midtempo R & B and synthpop song with a sensual vibe . In the song , Beyoncé <unk> her vocals and sings over echoing drum patterns , an electric guitar , a bluesy guitar , church organs , and clapping synthesizers . " Dance for You " bears resemblance to Janet Jackson 's work . Thematically , the song is similar to Beyoncé 's " Speechless " ( 2003 ) and Destiny 's Child 's " Cater 2 U " ( 2005 ) ; it is about showing appreciation and gratitude . 
 In " Dance for You " , Beyoncé , as the female protagonist , expresses her feelings to her man and tells him how devoted she is to him . Jocelyn Vena of MTV News wrote that the song is " about keeping things hot with her man " . Echoing Vena 's sentiments , Marc Hogan of Spin magazine described the lyrics as detailing a " triumphantly monogamous relationship " . In the first verse , Beyoncé sings about how understanding , loyal , and patient her man is . She further states that she really cares about his heart , she has a lot of valuable things to say , and that for all these reasons , she is going to dance for him . 
 After telling her love interest to " sit back and watch " , Beyoncé sings the chorus , where she states the things she will do to show her appreciation to her love interest , " Tonight I 'm gonna dance for you / Tonight I 'm gonna dance for you / Tonight I 'm gonna put my body on your body / Boy , I like it when you watch me / Tonight it 's going down . " In the second verse , she sings : " You 'll never need two , because I will be your number one / Them other chicks are superficial / But I know you know I 'm the one / That 's why I 'm all into you / Cuz I can recognize that you know that / That 's why I ’ m <unk> ' this thing back / Pop poppin ' this thing back " . Before the song ends , Beyoncé repeatedly chants " yes " in the background as the electric guitar crescendos into a piercing subliminal sound . 
 On October 20 , 2012 , a remix of the song featuring a rap verse from American rapper T.I. was released online . His rap appears at the three and a half minute mark of the song as he sings about " how he loves it when his lady gives it to him dirty when no one is around " and " lives out his fantasy with candlelight ( for a little ambiance ) , lingerie and Louis Vuitton " . He later adds , " I just want to watch the moon glisten off your body ... I really just want to peel you out dem clothes and show you how excited I am to lay you down right now . " The remix was well received by music critics . A writer of Vibe magazine commented that it " is sultry and will steam up any club , bedroom or wherever you like to get dirty " . A writer of Rap @-@ Up magazine described the remix as " amazing " , adding that " [ t ] he bedroom will be banging to this remix " . Similarly , X. Alexander of the website Idolator praised the remix , writing that T.I. ' s vocals make the " smooth , bedroom @-@ ready R & B track that much sexier " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Idolator 's staff members wrote that " Dance for You " is a " dangerously slick slow @-@ jam " . Similarly , Carrie <unk> of Pitchfork Media commented that the song is an " impeccable slow jam " . Describing the song as " saucy " , Pip Ellwood of Entertainment Focus wrote that " Dance for You " is the best of the three deluxe tracks . Natalie Finn of E ! Online described the song as a " come @-@ hither love letter to the man in her life , set to a sultry beat " . By contrast , Joshua <unk> of The Daily Collegian found the song to be too lengthy , adding , " Well I hope she hurries up and shows him how much she loves him before the eternity @-@ long track is done . " He further noted that " Dance For You " immediately reminded him of Ciara 's " Promise " ( 2006 ) . Marc Hogan of Spin magazine found " Dance for You " to be " a sort of strip @-@ club jam set , as with the rest of the album " . He added that the song would fit squarely on a track by The Weeknd , owing to " the bluesy guitar and smoky organ " . However , he concluded that " it 's not exactly worth plunking down another 32 bucks for " . Danielle Cheesman of MSN Music showed high favoritism for " Dance for You " , writing : 
 <unk> for You ' puts [ Beyoncé ] in the bedroom . Clocking in at over 6 minutes , the song of seduction plays as if it was being undressed , much like [ Beyoncé ] is , piece by piece , lyric for lyric . As with <unk> ' and ' Cater 2 U ' , [ she ] often forgoes the independent woman anthems and beautiful power ballads to remind us that she is a real sexual being rather than a formulated sex symbol . It is breathy , but not boring . It does not chronicle innocent lovemaking with sugarcoated terms , but the grittier things that really go down when you are completely comfortable ( and overly confident ) with , as she puts it , the person ' you 'd like to thank , in case you don 't thank them enough ' . 
 At the 2013 ASCAP Rhythm & Soul Awards " Dance for You " was one of the songs to win in the category for Award @-@ Winning R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 For the week ending July 30 , 2011 , " Dance for You " debuted at number 200 on the South Korean International Singles Chart , selling 3 @,@ 142 digital downloads . For the week ending March 29 , 2012 , the song became the sixth song from 4 to chart on the US Billboard Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs as it debuted at number 76 . " Dance for You " entered the top ten of the chart issue dated September 29 , 2012 at number 10 . It became Beyoncé 's nineteenth top 10 as a soloist and extended her lead for the most top 10s among female artists since 2000 . " Dance for You " marked the third time Beyoncé had claimed a quartet of top 10s from a single album . " Dance for You " continued its ascension on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart until it reached its peak position at number 6 . On the US Mainstream R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Airplay chart , the song marked Beyoncé 's fifth top 10 - the first time she has claimed five top 10s on that tally from one album . For the week ending September 22 , 2012 , " Dance for You " debuted at number 100 on the US Billboard Hot 100 . It later reached a peak at number 78 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background and concept = = = 
 An accompanying music video for " Dance for You " was co @-@ directed by Beyoncé and Alan Ferguson . It was filmed in a vintage New York @-@ styled office before Beyoncé 's baby bump started showing . Two previews of the video were posted online on November 21 , 2011 . In the first preview , Beyoncé wears pants , garters and a wrap dress as she performs a sexy dance routine on a desk while a man watches her dance . In the second preview , she wears the same outfit and dances seductively in front of a chair in an office as the camera cuts to the man , who is watching her . Beyoncé pays homage to German @-@ American actress and singer Marlene Dietrich in the video as she channels a 1920s @-@ inspired look and stars as a screen siren . In the behind @-@ of the @-@ scene of the video , Beyoncé said : 
 I wanted the video to have the same rawness that both the melody and the lyrics of the song have because " Dance for You " is one of my most intimate songs . I wanted the video to have a classic feel ; to be seductive but still keep the sense of mystery . When I write , when I perform , and when I make music videos , I don ’ t hold anything back . ' Dance for You ' is about that same passion ; to be free and unrestrained . 
 Many critics , including Jocelyn Vena of MTV News and Erika Ramirez of Billboard magazine , noted that that the clip was inspired by 1940 's film noir . Similarly , The Improper Bostonian wrote that the setting looks like a Humphrey Bogart movie , further calling it " a clear take @-@ off " on mid @-@ 20th Century film noir due to its utilization of sharp camera angles and deep shadows . Although initially planned to debut on November 27 , 2011 , the release of the video was changed to November 25 , 2011 . However , it premiered online before its official release on E ! Online . " Dance For You " is the seventh video from 4 . It was included on the deluxe edition of Live at Roseland : Elements of 4 ( 2011 ) , which was released on November 29 , 2011 . The video was digitally released to iTunes Stores on November 27 , 2011 . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The video is shot in black @-@ and @-@ white and is set in a dimly lit and smoky office , where Beyoncé puts on a private show for a detective ( played by actor Brett G. Smith ) . As the clip begins , the detective is gazing out the window . Beyoncé then arrives and stands in an open doorway while rain pours outside . With wavy hair and winged eyeliner , Beyoncé is dressed in a thigh @-@ length leather trench coat and high stockings . After walking inside the office , she immediately strips off her coat . This reveals a satin dress over black panties and thigh @-@ high pantyhose held up by garters . When the music starts , Beyoncé sits on a desk and plays with her hair , her back facing the face of the detective . The latter leans against his desk while watching Beyoncé , who starts to dance sensually on the desk and flips her hair to seduce him . As Beyoncé dances around the armchair , she exposes her vintage @-@ style underwear . 
 The man is now standing , his arms crossed , and watches with pleasure as Beyoncé continues the private dance . After several minutes of teasing , Beyoncé approaches the detective , who is now smiling , and knocks a stack of papers off of his desk so she can rub against him . She then pulls open the blinds to let light in . At the same time , several other women are seen to be present in the room . They were apparently there all along , hidden in the darkness . Together , they give a choreographed teaser dance in front of their own respective antique fans while their hair is blowing . The women move about to continue the dance elsewhere in the room , executing some hip @-@ shaking moves . They later perform a chair @-@ dancing routine with Beyoncé , and whip their hair back and forth . The video ends with a fade to black as Beyoncé approaches the man at his desk . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Many reviewers have commented on the sexiness displayed in the video . Erika Ramirez of Billboard magazine commented that the video was " sexy " and that " Beyoncé pops it back for a mysterious detective . " Lewis Corner of Digital Spy wrote that Beyoncé dances " seductively " in the office . Andrew Martin of Prefix Magazine wrote : " To anyone who finds Beyoncé attractive or has ever wanted her to dance for them , we bring you her latest video . The visuals for ' Dance for You ' are more or less a chance for her to show off why so many of you think her husband , Jay @-@ Z , is the luckiest man alive . " Leah Collins of Canadian magazine Dose wrote , " It 's all very sultry and intimate to a point — that point being the moment she unveils a line @-@ up of back @-@ up dancers . " Similarly , a writer of the website Idolator commented , " ' Dance for You ' doesn 't compare to the spectacle of say , the ' Run the World ( Girls ) ' clip , but it is effective . [ ... ] It 's a mostly private dance — until all those other ladies show up . " The writer also called Beyoncé a femme fatale in the video . Likewise , Sarah Anne Hughes of The Washington Post wrote that Beyoncé " goes full on femme fatale " and concluded that the concept of the video " is about as straightforward as can be " . Marc Hogan of Spin magazine noted , " The video follows pretty literally from the song 's theme , with Mrs. Jay @-@ Z grinding sensuously . " A writer of Vibe magazine noted that Beyoncé was " keeping things sexy " with the video for the song . 
 Michael O 'Connell of The Hollywood Reporter noted that the video contains Beyoncé 's " trademark moves " . Likewise , Ben Kaye of the website Consequence of Sound wrote , " [ In the clip ] , we witness the always mesmerizing songstress seducing a private detective with a sultry version of the twisting and twerking she 's famous for . Essentially , it 's just what you 'd expect from the track 's lyrics , and that 's in no way a bad thing . " Contessa Gayles of The Boombox wrote that " Beyoncé rocks the racy shoot in satin hot pants , garters and a slinky wrap dress " , further describing her look and the set as " sexy " . Matt Donnelly of Los Angeles Times described the video as " sultry " and further found " a Jessica Rabbit vibe " . Donnelly also wrote , " The video carries the standard Bey DNA — wind machines , plunging necklines and lots of hair . Not that we 're complaining . " Derek Johnson of Long Island Press commented that the video is " heating up the Internet and we 're pretty sure we know why " , referring to Beyoncé 's figure . He further commended Beyoncé for taking viewers back to the days of black and white television and " into the office of a lonely detective on a rainy day . We 've all seen that show before , but not like this . " Natalie Finn of E ! Online compared the video with the one for " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " ( 2008 ) , adding that it " sticks with the power of black and white " , and describing the set as " naughty " . Katie Hasty of the website HitFix praised Beyoncé 's look in the video but commented , " If you 're a hetero sexual lady detective , however , this is sort of boring . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Beyoncé performed the song for the first time as a part of her residency show Revel Presents : Beyoncé Live in Atlantic City , New Jersey , United States ' entertainment resort , hotel , casino and spa , Revel . The performance featured Beyoncé leading a group of ten dancers to perform a choreographed bump and grind dance . While performing the choreography , Beyoncé did not sing the song live , but was accompanied vocally by her three backup vocalists , the Mamas . The performance of " Dance for You " was later included on the live album Live in Atlantic City ( 2013 ) which was filmed during the revue . " Dance for You " was also performed during the opening shows of the first leg of Beyoncé 's Mrs. Carter Show World Tour . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Meher Baba = 
 Meher Baba ( born Merwan Sheriar Irani ; 25 February 1894 – 31 January 1969 ) was an Indian spiritual master who said he was the Avatar , God in human form . 
 Merwan Sheriar Irani was born in 1894 in Pune , India to Irani Zoroastrian parents . At the age of 19 , he began a seven @-@ year spiritual transformation . During this time he contacted five spiritual masters before beginning his own mission and gathering his own disciples in early 1922 , at the age of 27 . 
 From 10 July 1925 to the end of his life , Meher Baba maintained silence , communicating by means of an alphabet board or by unique hand gestures . With his mandali ( circle of disciples ) , he spent long periods in seclusion , during which time he often fasted . He also traveled widely , held public gatherings and engaged in works of charity with lepers , the poor and the mentally ill . 
 In 1931 , Meher Baba made the first of many visits to the West , where he attracted followers . Throughout most of the 1940s , Meher Baba worked with a category of spiritual aspirants called masts , who he said are entranced or spellbound by internal spiritual experiences . Starting in 1949 , along with selected mandali , he traveled incognito about India in an enigmatic and still largely unexplained period he called the " New Life " . 
 After being injured as a passenger in two serious automobile accidents , one in the United States in 1952 and one in India in 1956 , his ability to walk became severely limited . In 1962 , he invited his Western followers to India for a mass darshan called " The East @-@ West Gathering " . Concerned by an increasing use of LSD and other psychedelic drugs , in 1966 Baba stated that they did not convey real benefits . Despite deteriorating health , he continued what he called his " Universal Work " , which included fasting and seclusion , until his death on 31 January 1969 . His samadhi ( shrine / tomb ) in Meherabad , India , has become a place of international pilgrimage . 
 Meher Baba gave numerous teachings on the cause and purpose of life , including teaching reincarnation and that the phenomenal world is an illusion . He taught that the Universe is imagination , that God is what really exists , and that each soul is really God passing through imagination to realize individually His own divinity . In addition he gave practical advice for the aspirant who wishes to attain Self @-@ realization and thereby escape the wheel of births and deaths . He also taught about the concept of Perfect Masters , the Avatar , and those on the various stages of the spiritual path that he called involution . His teachings are most importantly recorded in his principal books Discourses and God Speaks . 
 His legacy includes the Avatar Meher Baba Charitable Trust he established in India , a handful of centers for information and pilgrimage , as well as an influence on pop @-@ culture artists and the introduction of common expressions such as " Don 't Worry , Be Happy . " Meher Baba 's silence has remained a mysterious issue as much among his followers as with the rest of the world . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Meher Baba was an Irani born in Pune , India to a Zoroastrian family . His given name was Merwan Sheriar Irani . He was the second son of Sheriar Irani , a Persian Zoroastrian who had spent years wandering in search of spiritual experience before settling in Poona ( now Pune ) , and <unk> Irani . 
 As a boy he formed " The Cosmopolitan Club " , which was dedicated to remaining informed in world affairs and giving money to charity . He was a multi @-@ instrumentalist and poet . Fluent in several languages , he was especially fond of the poetry of Hafez , Shakespeare , and Shelley . 
 In his youth , he had no mystical inclinations or experiences , and was " [ u ] <unk> as yet by a sense of his own destiny ... " He was more interested in sports and was co @-@ captain of his high school cricket team . At the age of 19 , during his second year at Deccan College in Pune , he met a very old Muslim woman who was locally revered as a saint , named Hazrat Babajan , who kissed him on the forehead . The event affected him profoundly , leaving him visibly dazed , and he gave up his normal activities . After that he contacted other spiritual figures , who , along with Babajan , he later said were the five " Perfect Masters " of the age : Tajuddin Baba , Narayan Maharaj , Sai Baba of Shirdi , and Upasni Maharaj . 
 Upasni Maharaj , he later said , helped him to integrate his mystical experiences with normal consciousness , thus enabling him to function in the world without diminishing his experience of God @-@ realization . In late 1921 , at the age of 27 , after living for seven years with Upasni , Merwan started to attract a following of his own . His early followers gave him the name " Meher Baba " , meaning " Compassionate Father " . 
 In 1922 , Meher Baba and his followers established " Manzil @-@ e @-@ Meem " ( House of the Master ) in Bombay ( now Mumbai ) . There Baba began his practice of demanding strict discipline and obedience from his disciples . A year later , Baba and his mandali moved to an area a few miles outside Ahmednagar that he named " Meherabad " ( Meher flourishing ) . This ashram would become the center for his work . During the 1920s , Meher Baba opened a school , hospital and dispensary at Meherabad . All three were free and open to all castes and faiths . 
 In July 1925 , Meher Baba began a life @-@ long period of self @-@ imposed silence , communicating first by use of chalk and slate , then by an alphabet board and later by self @-@ styled hand gestures . In January 1927 he gave up writing with pen or pencil also . 
 = = = 1930s – First contacts with the West = = = 
 In the 1930s , Meher Baba began a period of extensive world travel , with several trips to Europe and the United States . It was during this period that he established contact with his first close group of Western disciples . He traveled on a Persian passport because he had given up writing as well as speaking and would not sign the forms required by the British government of India . 
 On his first trip to England in 1931 he traveled on the SS Rajputana , the same ship that was carrying Mahatma Gandhi , who was sailing to the second Round Table Conference in London . Baba and Gandhi had three meetings onboard , including one that lasted for three hours . The British press highlighted these meetings , but an aide to Gandhi said , " You may say emphatically that Gandhi never asked Meher Baba for help or for spiritual or other advice . " 
 On 20 May 1932 Baba arrived in New York and provided the press with a 1000 @-@ word written statement , which was described by devotee Quentin Tod as his " Message to America " . In the statement Baba proclaimed himself " one with the infinite source of everything " and declared his intention to break his silence : " When I speak , my original message will be delivered to the world and it will have to be accepted . " When asked about the Indo @-@ British political situation he had no comment , but his followers explained that he had told Gandhi to abandon politics . 
 In the West , Meher Baba met with a number of celebrities and artists , including Hollywood notables Gary Cooper , Charles Laughton , Tallulah Bankhead , Boris Karloff , Tom Mix , Maurice Chevalier , Ernst Lubitsch and others . On 1 June 1932 Mary Pickford and Douglas Fairbanks , Jr. held a reception for Baba at Pickfair where he delivered a message to Hollywood . As a result , Meher Baba emerged as " one of the enthusiasms of the ' 30s " . 
 In 1934 , after announcing that he would break his self @-@ imposed silence in the Hollywood Bowl , Baba suddenly changed his plans and boarded the RMS Empress of Canada and sailed to Hong Kong without explanation . The Associated Press reported that " Baba had decided to postpone the word @-@ fast breaking until next February because ' conditions are not yet ripe ' . " He returned to England in 1936 but did not return to the United States again until the early 1950s . 
 In the late 1930s , Meher Baba invited a group of Western women to join him in India , where he arranged a series of trips throughout India and Ceylon ( now Sri Lanka ) that became known as the Blue Bus Tours . When they returned home , many newspapers treated their journey as an occasion for scandal . Time Magazine 's 1936 review of God is my Adventure describes the US 's fascination with the " long @-@ haired , silky @-@ mustached <unk> named Shri <unk> [ sic ] Meher Baba " four years earlier . 
 = = = 1940s – Masts and the New Life = = = 
 In the 1930s and 1940s , Meher Baba did extensive work with a category of people he termed " masts " , who are persons " intoxicated with God " . According to Baba these individuals are essentially disabled by their enchanting experience of the higher spiritual planes . Although outwardly masts may appear irrational or even insane , Baba claimed that their spiritual status was actually quite elevated , and that by meeting with them he helped them to move forward spiritually while enlisting their aid in his spiritual work . One of the best known of these masts , known as Mohammed Mast , lived at Meher Baba 's encampment at Meherabad until his death in 2003 . 
 In 1949 Baba began an enigmatic period that he called the " New Life " . Following a series of questions on their readiness to obey even the most difficult of his requests , Baba selected twenty companions to join him in a life of complete " hopelessness and helplessness " . 
 He made provisions for those dependent on him , after which he and his companions otherwise gave up almost all property and financial responsibilities . They then traveled about India incognito while begging for food and carrying out Baba 's instructions in accordance with a strict set of " conditions of the New Life " . These included absolute acceptance of any circumstance and consistent good cheer in the face of any difficulty . Companions who failed to comply were sent away . 
 About the New Life Meher Baba wrote : 
 This New Life is endless , and even after my physical death it will be kept alive by those who live the life of complete renunciation of falsehood , lies , hatred , anger , greed and lust ; and who , to accomplish all this , do no lustful actions , do no harm to anyone , do no backbiting , do not seek material possessions or power , who accept no homage , neither covet honor nor shun disgrace , and fear no one and nothing ; by those who rely wholly and solely on God , and who love God purely for the sake of loving ; who believe in the lovers of God and in the reality of Manifestation , and yet do not expect any spiritual or material reward ; who do not let go the hand of Truth , and who , without being upset by calamities , bravely and wholeheartedly face all hardships with one hundred percent cheerfulness , and give no importance to caste , creed and religious ceremonies . This New Life will live by itself eternally , even if there is no one to live it . 
 Meher Baba ended the New Life in February 1952 and once again began a round of public appearances throughout India and the West . 
 = = = 1950s – God Speaks and automobile accidents = = = 
 In the 1950s Baba established two centers outside of India : the Meher Spiritual Center in Myrtle Beach , South Carolina in the United States and Avatar 's Abode near Brisbane , Australia . He inaugurated the Meher Spiritual Center in April 1952 . On 24 May 1952 , en route from the Spiritual Center to Meher Mount in Ojai , California , the car in which he was a passenger was struck head @-@ on near Prague , Oklahoma . He and his companions were thrown from the vehicle and suffered many injuries . Baba 's leg was severely broken and he sustained facial injuries , including a broken nose . The injured were treated at Duke Hospital in Durham , North Carolina , after which they returned to Myrtle Beach to recuperate . While recuperating at <unk> Dunes , a home owned by Elizabeth Patterson , in Myrtle Beach , he worked on the charter for a group of Sufis , which he named Sufism <unk> . 
 Meher Baba began dictating his major book , God Speaks , The Theme of Creation and Its Purpose , in Dehradun , August 1953 . In September of 1954 , Meher Baba gave a men @-@ only <unk> at Meherabad that later became known as the " Three Incredible Weeks " . During this time Baba issued a declaration , " Meher Baba 's Call " , wherein he once again affirmed his <unk> " irrespective of the doubts and convictions " of others . At the end of this <unk> Meher Baba gave the completed manuscript of his book God Speaks to two members of Sufism <unk> , Ludwig H. <unk> and Don E. Stevens , for editing and publication in America . The book was subsequently published by Dodd , Mead and Company the following year . 
 On 30 September 1954 Meher Baba gave his " Final Declaration " message , in which he made various enigmatic predictions . 
 In October 1954 , Meher Baba discarded his alphabet board and began using a unique set of hand gestures to communicate , which he used for the remainder of his life . 
 On 2 December 1956 , outside Satara , India , the car in which Baba was being driven went out of control and a second serious automobile accident occurred . Baba suffered a fractured pelvis and other severe injuries . Dr. <unk> , one of Baba 's mandali , was killed . This collision seriously incapacitated Baba . Despite his physicians ' predictions to the contrary , after great effort Baba managed to walk again , but from that point on he was in constant pain and was severely limited in his ability to move . In fact , during his trip to the West in 1958 he often needed to be carried from venue to venue . 
 In 1956 , during his fifth visit to the US , Baba stayed at New York 's Hotel Delmonico before traveling to the Meher Center at Myrtle Beach , South Carolina . In July he traveled to Washington , D.C. and received friends and disciples at the home of Mrs. James Terry ( Ivy ) Duce , wife of the vice @-@ president of the Arabian American Oil Co . He then traveled to Meher Mount at Ojai , California before continuing on to Australia . His final visits to the United States and Australia were made in 1958 . 
 = = = 1960s – Later years and message on drugs = = = 
 In 1962 , Baba gave one of his last public functions , a series of meetings he called The East @-@ West Gathering . At these meetings , in which his western followers were invited to meet his Indian disciples , Baba gave darshan to many thousands of people despite the physical strain this caused him . 
 In the mid @-@ 1960s Baba became concerned with the increasingly prevalent drug culture in the West and began a correspondence with several Western academics , including Timothy Leary and Richard Alpert , in which he strongly discouraged the use of all hallucinogenic drugs for spiritual purposes . In 1966 Baba 's responses to questions on drugs were published in a pamphlet titled God in a Pill ? Meher Baba stated that drug use was spiritually damaging and that if enlightenment were possible through drugs then " God is not worthy of being God " . Meher Baba instructed some of his young Western disciples to spread this message ; in doing so , they increased awareness of Meher Baba 's teachings among the young during this period . In an interview with Frederick Chapman , a Harvard graduate and Fulbright scholar who met Baba during a year of study in India , Baba stated that LSD is " harmful physically , mentally and spiritually " , and warned that " the continued use of LSD leads to madness or death " . 
 On this basis , an anti @-@ drug campaign was initiated by Baba lovers in the United States , Europe and Australia . Although the campaign was largely unsuccessful , it created a wave of new followers , and some of Baba 's views found their way into academic debate on the merits and dangers of hallucinogens . 
 From the East @-@ West Gathering of 1962 onward , Baba 's health steadily deteriorated . Despite the physical toll it took on his body , he continued to undergo long periods of seclusion and fasting . In late July 1968 , Baba completed a particularly taxing period of seclusion and stated that by then his work was " completed 100 % to my satisfaction " . At this point he was using a wheelchair . Within a few months his condition had worsened and he was by then bedridden . His body was wracked by intense muscular spasms that had no clear medical origin . Despite the care of several doctors the spasms grew progressively worse . 
 On 31 January 1969 , Meher Baba died at his home in <unk> , conveying by his last gestures , " Do not forget that I am God . " In time his devotees called the anniversary of his death <unk> ( deathless day ) . Meher Baba 's body lay in state at his samadhi at Meherabad . Covered with roses , and cooled by ice , his body was kept available to the public for one week before its final burial . Before his death , Meher Baba had made extensive preparations for a public darshan program to be held in Poona . His mandali decided to proceed with the arrangements despite the physical absence of the host . Several thousand attended this " Last Darshan " , including many hundreds of people from the United States , Europe , and Australia . 
 = = Silence = = 
 From 10 July 1925 , until his death in 1969 , Meher Baba was silent . He communicated first by using an alphabet board and later by unique hand gestures which were interpreted and spoken out by one of his mandali , usually by his disciple <unk> <unk> . Meher Baba said that his silence was not undertaken as a spiritual exercise but solely in connection with his universal work . 
 Man 's inability to live God 's words makes the Avatar 's teaching a mockery . Instead of practicing the compassion he taught , man has waged wars in his name . Instead of living the humility , purity , and truth of his words , man has given way to hatred , greed , and violence . Because man has been deaf to the principles and precepts laid down by God in the past , in this present Avataric form , I observe silence . 
 Meher Baba often signaled the moment " that he would ' break ' his silence by speaking the ' Word ' in every heart , thereby giving a spiritual push forward to all living things " . 
 When I break My Silence , the impact of My Love will be universal and all life in creation will know , feel and receive of it . It will help every individual to break himself free from his own bondage in his own way . I am the Divine Beloved who loves you more than you can ever love yourself . The breaking of My Silence will help you to help yourself in knowing your real Self . 
 Meher Baba said that the breaking of his silence would be a defining event in the spiritual evolution of the world . 
 When I speak that Word , I shall lay the foundation for that which is to take place during the next seven hundred years . 
 On many occasions Meher Baba promised to break his silence with an audible word before he died , often stating a specific time and place when this would occur , but according to all contemporary accounts , Meher Baba remained silent until his death . His failure to break his silence disappointed some of his followers , while others regarded these broken promises as a test of their faith . Some followers speculate that " the Word " will yet be " spoken " , or that Meher Baba did break his silence but in a spiritual rather than a physical way . 
 For many years , Baba asked his followers to undertake austerities on 10 July , the anniversary of the day his silence began , such as keeping silence , fasting and praying . In his final Silence Day request to his followers in 1968 , he asked only that they keep silent . Many of Baba 's followers continue to celebrate Silence Day by keeping silence in his honor . 
 = = Teachings = = 
 Meher Baba 's teachings can roughly be divided into two main categories : his metaphysics on the nature of the soul and the Universe , and practical advice for the spiritual aspirant . The two are interrelated . His metaphysics is mostly found in his principal book on the subject , God Speaks . It contains detailed statements on his cosmology and the purpose of life as well as the progression of the soul , while his <unk> on the practical spiritual life are mostly contained in Discourses , although it also covers many metaphysical areas mirroring or amplifying God Speaks . 
 = = = God Speaks = = = 
 In God Speaks , Meher Baba describes the journey of the soul from its original state of unconscious divinity to the ultimate attainment of conscious divinity . The whole journey is a journey of imagination , where the original indivisible state of God imagines becoming countless individualized souls which he likens to bubbles within an infinite ocean . Each soul , powered by the desire to become conscious , starts its journey in the most rudimentary form of consciousness . This limitation brings the need of a more developed form to advance it towards an increasingly conscious state . Consciousness grows in relation to the impressions each form is capable of gathering . 
 According to Baba , each soul pursues conscious divinity by evolving : that is , experiencing itself in a succession of imagined forms through seven " kingdoms " : stone / metal , vegetable , worm , fish , bird , animal , and human . The soul identifies itself with each successive form , becoming thus tied to illusion . During this evolution of forms thinking also increases , until in human form thinking becomes infinite . Although in human form the soul is capable of conscious divinity , all the impressions that it has gathered during evolution are illusory ones , creating a barrier for the soul to know itself . For this barrier to be overcome , further births in human form are needed in a process named reincarnation . 
 Eventually the soul reaches a stage where its previously gathered impressions grow thin or weak enough that it enters a final stage called involution . This stage also requires a series of human births , during which the soul begins an inner journey , by which it realizes its true identity as God . Baba breaks this inner journey of Realization into seven stages he calls " planes . " The whole process culminates at the seventh plane with God @-@ realization , where the goal of life for the individual soul is reached . 
 = = = Discourses = = = 
 The Discourses are a collection of explanations and <unk> that Meher Baba has given on many topics that concern the advancement of the spiritual aspirant . Some of the most important topics treated are : <unk> ( mental impressions ) , Maya ( the principle of illusion ) , the nature of the ego , reincarnation , karma , violence and non @-@ violence , meditation , love , discipleship , and God @-@ realization . His explanations often include stories from the lore of India and the Sufi culture . One such story , the wise man and the ghost , shows the power that superstitious beliefs can have on a person , while another , <unk> and Layla , show how selfless love , even in human relations , can lead one to discipleship . 
 Thus Meher Baba offers many suggestions that keep one moving towards God @-@ realization . These suggestions include putting theory into practice , the internal renunciation of desires , offering selfless service to humanity or the master , spontaneity , while avoiding actions that bind one to illusion . But rather than lay out moral rules , Baba offers an understanding as to why some actions bind the individual whereas some others help towards his emancipation . Many chapters offer a better understanding of the mechanisms by which consciousness gets caught up between the opposites of experience , such as pleasure and pain , good and evil , and point to a way of transcending them . 
 = = = Perfect Masters and the Avatar = = = 
 Baba said that at all times on Earth there are fifty @-@ six incarnate God @-@ realized souls and that of these souls there are always five who constitute the " five Perfect Masters " of their era . When one of the five Perfect Masters dies , Baba said that another God @-@ realized soul among the fifty @-@ six immediately replaces him or her by taking up that office . 
 The Avatar , according to Baba , is a special Perfect Master , the first soul to achieve God @-@ realization . This soul , the original Perfect Master , or the " Ancient One " , never ceases to incarnate . Baba indicated that this particular soul personifies the state of God which in Hinduism is named Vishnu and in Sufism is named <unk> , i.e. the sustainer or preserver state of God . According to Meher Baba the Avatar appears on Earth every 700 – 1400 years and is ' brought down ' into human form by the five Perfect Masters of the time to aid in the process of moving creation in its never @-@ ending journey toward Godhood . Baba asserted that in other ages this role was fulfilled by Zoroaster , Rama , Krishna , Buddha , Jesus , and Muhammad . 
 Baba described the Avatar as " a gauge against which man can measure what he is and what he may become . He <unk> the standard of human values by interpreting them in terms of divinely human life . " 
 Most of Meher Baba 's followers accept his claim of <unk> and he is said to be " revered by millions around the world as the Avatar of the age and a God @-@ realized being " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Baba 's travels and teachings left a legacy of followers and devotees worldwide . 
 The Avatar Meher Baba Charitable Trust , established by Meher Baba in 1959 , maintains his tomb and pilgrimage facilities , as well as a free school and dispensary , a cataract clinic , and a veterinary clinic . The Trust follows the charter left for it by Meher Baba in his lifetime , but does not act as spiritual authority over groups . Likewise , the Trust does not engage in propaganda , promote creeds or dogmas , or seek converts . Baba discouraged evangelizing , stating , " I need no propaganda or publicity . " Rather , he encouraged his followers to " let your life itself be my message of love and truth to others " and to " spread my message of Love and Truth as far and wide as possible " . Followers of Meher Baba have no established rituals . Many do , however , perform practices of choice such as pujas , aartis , prayers , music , plays , viewing films of Baba and so forth , but the choice is personal . The primary focus for followers is living a life Meher Baba would approve of , for example , refraining from the use of psychedelic drugs , including marijuana , and trying to remember God with love . 
 Gatherings of Baba followers are generally informal . Special effort is made to gather together on <unk> , the anniversary of Baba 's death , and on his birthday . Many Baba followers keep silent on 10 July ( Silence Day ) , observing the request Baba frequently made of his followers during his lifetime . Aarti is performed morning and evening at Baba 's samadhi in India . Also at Meherabad , his followers maintain Baba 's practice of lighting a <unk> fire on the 12th of each month . 
 Although Baba had initially begun gaining public attention in the West as early as 1932 as the result of contacts with some celebrities of the time and from the rather disillusioned account of Paul Brunton ( A Search in Secret India , 1934 ) , he received further attention after his death through various mentions in western pop @-@ culture . 
 Pete Townshend of The Who , who became a follower of Baba , dedicated his 1969 rock @-@ opera Tommy to Meher Baba in the record 's gatefold . The Who 's 1971 song " Baba O 'Riley " was named in part after Meher Baba , and Townshend recorded several Meher Baba tribute albums including Happy Birthday , I Am , Who Came First , and With Love . In 1970 Melanie <unk> mentioned Baba in her song " Lay Down ( Candles in the Rain ) " with the lyrics " Meher Baba lives again " . Bobby McFerrin 's 1988 Grammy Award @-@ winning song " Don 't Worry , Be Happy " was inspired by a popular quote of Baba seen in numerous Baba posters and inspirational cards . Concepts of Meher Baba 's philosophy , as well as a character based on Baba but unnamed , have also frequently appeared in works of comic book writer J. M. DeMatteis , including Doctor Fate and Seekers Into The Mystery . 
 In 2012 , the feature film Nema Aviona za Zagreb premiered in the Netherlands with an exclusive interview with Meher Baba filmed in 1967 . In the interview Baba explains the difference between God @-@ realization and drug @-@ induced hallucinations and the scene plays a pivotal role in the documentary 's narrative . 
 = Mycena lanuginosa = 
 Mycena lanuginosa is a species of mushroom in the Mycenaceae family . First collected in 2000 and reported as a new species in 2007 , it is known only from lowland oak @-@ dominated forests in central Honshu in Japan . The small mushroom is characterized by its grooved , grayish @-@ brown to violet @-@ brown cap up to 11 mm ( 0 @.@ 43 in ) in diameter , and the slender grayish @-@ brown to reddish @-@ brown stem covered with minute , fine , soft hairs . The mushroom produces amyloid spores ( spores that stain when treated with Melzer 's reagent ) . Microscopic distinguishing features include the smooth , spindle @-@ shaped cheilocystidia and pleurocystidia ( cystidia on the gill edge and face , respectively ) and the diverticulate elements in the outer layer of the cap and the stem . 
 = = Taxonomy , naming , and classification = = 
 Mycena lanuginosa was first collected by Haruki Takahashi in 2000 , and published as a new species in 2007 , along with seven other Japanese Mycena species . The specific epithet is derived from the Latin word lanuginosa , meaning " <unk> " , referring to the hairy stem . The Japanese name for the mushroom is <unk> @-@ <unk> ( <unk> ) . 
 The fungus is classified in the section Fragilipedes ( Fr . ) Quél . , as defined by Dutch Mycena specialist Maas Geesteranus . This section is the largest in the genus Mycena . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap is 7 to 11 mm ( 0 @.@ 28 to 0 @.@ 43 in ) in diameter , conical to convex to bell @-@ shaped , and has distinct radial grooves that extend almost to the center . It is dry , and somewhat hygrophanous ( changing color as it loses or absorbs water ) . The surface is initially pruinose ( covered with what appears to be a fine white powder ) , but soon becomes smooth . The cap is dark brown at the center , and gradually changes to reddish @-@ brown and finally to nearly white at the margin . The white flesh is up to 0 @.@ 5 mm thick , and does not have any distinctive taste or odor . The slender stem is 30 to 60 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 to 2 @.@ 4 in ) long by 0 @.@ 8 to 1 @.@ 3 mm ( 0 @.@ 031 to 0 @.@ 051 in ) thick , cylindrical , attached to the center of the cap , hollow , and dry . The top portion of the stem is pruinose , while near the base the surface is covered with soft , fine hairs . The stem color is grayish @-@ brown to reddish @-@ brown near the top , changing to reddish @-@ brown near the bottom . The stem base is covered with long , fairly coarse , whitish fibrils . The gills are narrowly attached to the stem , distantly spaced ( 12 – 18 gills reach the stem ) , up to 1 @.@ 5 mm broad , thin , and whitish , with the gill edges the same color as the gill faces . 
 = = = Microscopic characteristics = = = 
 The spores are roughly ellipsoid , smooth , thin @-@ walled , colorless , and measure 10 – 12 by 5 @.@ 5 – 6 @.@ 5 µm . They are amyloid , meaning they will stain blue to black when treated with Melzer 's reagent . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are 35 – 42 by 7 – 9 µm , club @-@ shaped , four @-@ spored , and have clamps at their bases . The abundant cheilocystidia ( cystidia on the gill edge ) are thin @-@ walled , and measure 40 – 80 by 5 – 15 µm . The smooth , colorless , and thin @-@ walled spindle @-@ shaped cells sometimes come to an abruptly tapering point ; they form a sterile gill edge . Like the cheilocystidia , the pleurocystidia ( cystidia on the gill face ) are also spindle @-@ shaped , abundant , smooth and thin @-@ walled ; they measure 63 – 102 by 8 – 15 µm . The hymenophoral tissue ( tissue of the hymenium @-@ bearing structure ) is made of smooth , thin @-@ walled element hyphae that are 3 – 25 µm wide , roughly cylindrical ( often inflated ) , hyaline ( translucent ) , and dextrinoid ( turning reddish to reddish @-@ brown in Melzer 's reagent ) . The cap cuticle is made of parallel , bent @-@ over hyphae that are 2 – 6 µm wide , and cylindrical . They can be either smooth , or covered with scattered , warty or finger @-@ like thin @-@ walled brownish diverticulae . The underlying hyphae have a parallel arrangement , and are hyaline or brownish , dextrinoid , with short and inflated cells that are up to 35 µm wide . The stem cuticle is made of parallel , bent @-@ over hyphae measuring 3 – 6 µm wide . These hyphae , as well as the terminal cells ( caulocystidia ) , have characteristics similar to the hyphae of the cap cuticle . The flesh of the stem is composed of longitudinally arranged , cylindrical hyphae that are 6 – 20 µm wide , smooth , hyaline , and dextrinoid . Clamp connections are present in the cortical layer of cap and stem , and at the basal septa of the basidia . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 M. lanuginosa closely resembles M. pilosella , a species originally described from Netherlands by Maas Geesteranus , and the European species M. <unk> ; both are in the section Fragilipedes . Mycena pilosella differs in several microscopic characteristics : it has densely diverticulate elements of the cap cuticle ; long , cylindrical caulocystidia that diverge at a right angle ; and it does not have pleurocystidia . Mycena <unk> is distinct in forming a whitish cap , a stem that is initially minutely <unk> but later becomes smooth , radish @-@ like odor , ellipsoid to cylindrical spores , and cheilocystidia with branches near the tip . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Mycena lanuginosa is known only from Kanagawa , in Honshu , Japan . Fruit bodies are found solitary or scattered , on dead leaves and twigs in lowland forests dominated by the oak species Quercus myrsinifolia and Q. serrata . Fruiting occurs from March to November . 
 = Voices of a Distant Star = 
 Voices of a Distant Star ( Japanese : <unk> , Hepburn : Hoshi no Koe , lit . " Voices of a Star " ) is a Japanese original video animation ( OVA ) directed , written and co @-@ produced by Makoto Shinkai . The OVA premièred in Japan in February 2002 in an advanced screening . It was followed by two DVD releases on April 19 and October 6 , 2002 . It chronicles a long @-@ distance relationship between two close friends , one a soldier , who attempt to communicate with one @-@ another over the course of an interstellar war by utilizing text messages that take years to reach their recipient . ADV Films licensed the OVA for release in North American and the United Kingdom , Madman Entertainment licensed it for Australasia and Anime Limited , for the United Kingdom . 
 The OVA was adapted into a drama CD by Pioneer LDC and a novel was written by <unk> <unk> , illustrated by Makoto Shinkai and Kou Yaginuma , and published by Media Factory 's imprint MF Bunko J. Makoto Shinkai adapted a manga from the OVA , illustrated by Mizu Sahara ; Kodansha serialized it in its manga magazine , Afternoon , from April 2004 , and released the manga as a one @-@ shot on February 23 , 2005 . The manga was licensed for a North American release by Tokyopop , which published it on August 1 , 2006 . 
 In 2002 , the OVA won the Animation Kobe award for packaged work . It also won the 2003 Seiun Award for best media . Reviews of the series have been generally positive , with reviewers praising the series and applauding the art , plot and music ; however there was criticism of the English dubbing . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A schoolgirl named Mikako <unk> ( Mika Shinohara ( original Japanese ) , Sumi Mutoh ( Japanese ) Cynthia Martinez ( English ) ) is recruited into the UN Space Army to fight in a war against a group of aliens called the Tarsians — named after the Tharsis region of Mars where they were first encountered . As a Special Agent , Mikako pilots a giant robotic mecha called a Tracer as part of a fighting squadron attached to the spacecraft carrier Lysithea . When the Lysithea leaves Earth to search for the Tarsians , Mikako 's friend Noboru <unk> ( Makoto Shinkai ( original Japanese ) , Chihiro Suzuki ( Japanese ) Adam Colon ( English ) ) remains on Earth . The two continue to communicate across space using the e @-@ mail facilities on their mobile telephones . As the Lysithea travels deeper into space , messages take increasingly longer to reach Noboru on Earth , and the time @-@ lag of their correspondence eventually spans years . 
 The narrative begins in 2047 . Mikako is apparently alone in a hauntingly empty city , trying to contact people through her mobile telephone . She wakes up in her Tracer orbiting an extrasolar planet . She then goes to <unk> , the fictional fourth planet of the Sirius System . Mikako sends an e @-@ mail to Noboru ( which shows the date 2047 @-@ 09 @-@ 16 ) , with the subject " I am here " , which would reach him eight years later . Some flashes of imagery , perhaps indicative of memory , a hallucination , or even a mystical encounter , are then shown . The room shown at the beginning of the animation is presented again ; Mikako is squatting in the corner , sobbing and pleading with her doppelganger to let her see Noboru again so she can tell him she loves him . 
 The ship 's alarm warns Mikako that the Tarsians are surrounding her , but she does not understand . A climactic battle ensues . On Earth , Noboru receives the message almost nine years later . At <unk> , three of the four carriers equipped with the warp engines which brought the expeditionary force to Sirius have been destroyed . The Lysithea is still intact after Mikako joins the fight and stops its destruction . After winning the battle , Mikako lets her damaged Tracer drift in space . 
 In the manga , at 16 years old , Mikako sends a message to 25 years old Noboru , telling him that she loves him . By this time , Noboru has joined the UN , which has launched a rescue mission for the Lysithea . When Mikako hears that the UN is sending help for their rescue , she consults a list of people on the mission , and finds that Noboru is among them . The manga ends with Mikako saying that they will definitely meet again . 
 = = Production = = 
 Voices of a Distant Star was written , directed and produced by Makoto Shinkai on his Power Mac G4 using LightWave , Adobe Photoshop 5 @.@ 0 , Adobe After Effects 4 @.@ 1 and Commotion 3 @.@ 1 DV software . Around June 2000 , Shinkai drew the first picture for Voices — of a girl holding a mobile telephone in a cockpit . 
 Shinkai said the OVA was inspired by Dracula and Laputa . He stated that production took seven months to complete . He said another inspiration was his frequent sending of text messaging to his wife when he was working . Shinkai cited the availability of digital hardware and software tools for image production at his workplace , Falcom , and friends ' view that individual film production could occur because of the introduction of PlayStation 2 and DVDs . 
 Makoto and his then girlfriend , Mika Shinohara , provided the voice acting for the working dub . A second Japanese dub was later created for the DVD release with professional voice actors . Makoto 's friend Tenmon , who had worked with Makoto 's video game company , provided the soundtrack . The song and film were created together in sync during storyboarding . Sometimes , the timing of the animation had to be changed to match the music . 
 I think it 's because of the theme of the story - communication between people . I used cell phones in the story because that is what is commonly used in Japan to communicate , but there are many countries where people don 't use cell phones . Communication from the heart is ever @-@ lastingly important wherever you are , so I assume that is why it appealed to so many people . The other thing that is appealing is that I created this animation by myself . The mass media reported on the man who created anime by himself . I 'm looking forward to more people doing things this way and seeing an emergence of independent animators , whether it 's individuals or small groups . 
 The ending theme to the OVA , " Through the Years and Far Away " ( Hello , Little Star ) , was composed by Tenmon , with lyrics written by K. Juno and sung by Low . 
 = = Media = = 
 = = = OVA = = = 
 The Voices of a Distant Star OVA was directed , written and produced by Makoto Shinkai . Shinkai and his fiance , Mika Shinohara , provided the voices of the characters for the original video . The OVA was released for an advanced screening in February 2002 . Yoshihiro Hagiwara produced the DVD release , and the voice actors were Chihiro Suzuki and Sumi Mutoh . CoMix Wave Inc. released it on DVD on April 19 , 2002 . A DVD Book version of the story was released by Tokuma Shoten on October 6 , 2002 . 
 In July 2002 , ADV Films announced it had licensed Voices of a Distant Star for a North American release . Steven Foster , director of ADV Films , directed the dubbing of the film into English , with voices provided by Adam Colon and Cynthia Martinez . ADV Films released the North American DVD on June 10 , 2003 . On June 30 , 2003 , ADV recalled the North American DVDs because they failed to include the original Japanese tracks made by Shinkai and Shinohara . ADV Films UK released the DVD in the United Kingdom on November 17 , 2003 . ADV Films UK also released a Shinkai Collection DVD set , containing Voices of a Distant Star and The Place Promised in Our Early Days , on September 3 , 2007 . Anime Limited has since taken over ADV Film 's license for the film and has announced DVD and Blu @-@ ray twin @-@ pack releases of Voices of a Distant Star and The Place Promised in Our Early Days in the UK . The film was licensed in Australasia by Madman Entertainment , which released the DVD on October 15 , 2003 . 
 The film was licensed in France by Kazé , in Italy by D / visual , in Russia by <unk> Media , in Taiwan by <unk> Multimedia International . Crunchyroll streamed Voices for free for 48 hours beginning on March 5 , 2010 to celebrate Shinkai as director . 
 = = = Other = = = 
 A drama CD was released by Pioneer LDC on June 25 , 2002 . A novel was adapted from the OVA by <unk> <unk> and illustrated by Makoto Shinkai and Kou Yaginuma . The novel was published by Media Factory 's imprint MF Bunko J on July 25 , 2002 . 
 The OVA was adapted into a manga by Makoto Shinkai and illustrated by Mizu Sahara . It was serialized in Kodansha 's manga magazine , Afternoon from April 2004 . Kodansha released the manga as a one @-@ shot on February 23 , 2005 . The manga was licensed for a North American release by Tokyopop , which published the manga on August 1 , 2006 . The manga was also licensed in Italy by D / visual , in Germany by Egmont Manga & Anime and in Portugal by Panini Comics . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Voices of A Distant Star film was listed 100th on DVD Verdict 's Top 100 DVD Films list . It has also won the Animation Kobe for packaged work in 2002 and the 2003 Seiun Award for best media . 
 Anime News Network 's Jonathan Mays criticized Steven Foster 's dubbing of the film . He said , " Foster carelessly omits critical details , completely rewrites some scenes , misinterprets emotions , and even adds new dialogue where the original track had silence " . In an Anime News Network interview , Foster said he " made some changes to make the jokes more accessible " . Mays also said , " The animation is breathtaking . Shinkai 's backgrounds have very few equals . The character designs look uninspired , but paired with the animator 's beautifully realized worlds , the generic appearance fades into the magnificence of the scene . " He said Shinkai 's use of lighting is " masterful " , " incredibly realistic " and conveys the characters ' moods well . He called the characters " unoriginal " . DVD Verdict 's Rob Lineberger commended the music , saying " the simple score infuses the animation with meaning . Solitary piano notes are sluggish , as though the pianist lacked the enthusiasm needed to pick up his fingers . When the action kicks in , it arrives with a sonic punch from 5 @.@ 1 speakers . Rockets scream around you , birds move overhead , engines thrum quietly in your wake . The soundtrack does what it is supposed to do : transport you to another world " . 
 THEM Anime Review 's Carlos Ross said , " The voice @-@ acting is remarkable , the directing is solid , and music is quite competent . But the real kicker here is the animation quality , which actually equals ( and sometimes exceeds ) that of excellent television series like <unk> and Full Metal Panic ... there is a remarkable amount of storyline ; the plot is well @-@ written and executed , and never gets a chance to be too drawn out . And Shinkai gives equal time to the slick action sequences and the well @-@ handled , genuinely touching romance " . IGN 's A.E. Sparrow said , " While [ the film ] was visually one of the best pieces of eye @-@ candy I have seen in a year or so , it 's ultimately a voice track over a sequence of pretty pictures . Don 't get me wrong , it was absolutely beautiful , but it left me wanting more " . Mania 's Chris Beveridge commended ADV Films for obtaining the original computer files that were used to create it . He said , " the transfer here is simply gorgeous . Colors are amazingly lush and deep , saturated without bleeding . Cross coloration is non @-@ existent and only a few very minor areas of aliasing occur . The only real ' flaw ' that I could see with this transfer is during some of the panning sequences up and down , there ’ s a slight stutter that ’ s simply inherent in the materials " . DVDs Worth Watching 's Johanna Draper Carlson said , " the character designs are familiar and uninspired , and the cross @-@ cutting choppy " . 
 IGN 's A.E. Sparrow said that compared with the film , the manga has " a healthy amount of additional storylines , characters and dialogue ... " He also said , " Mizu Sahara 's artwork brings a bit of clarity to scenes that might have come off as muddled in the anime " . Anime News Network 's Theron Martin said the manga has " strong storytelling which carries good emotional appeal , fleshes out the original anime " but said it " unnecessarily adds on to the ending " , and that " character designs were not Shinkai 's strong point , and Sahara 's are only a slight improvement " . 
 Manga Worth Reading 's Johanna Draper Carlson said , " the art is denser than in many manga , with toned backgrounds anchoring the drawn world . Faces are often in shadow , suggesting separation and loss . " Pop Culture Shock 's Melinda <unk> wrote , " the manga is absolutely beautiful . The art is nicely detailed and very expressive , and the panel layouts , including the placement and style of dialogue and narrative text , make the story visually interesting and easy to follow " . She also said , " Sahara also spends more time exploring both Mikako ’ s and Noboru ’ s feelings about Mikako ’ s appointment to the Lysithea , which is very revealing for both characters " . Mania.com 's Sakura Eries said , stating " there 's not a lot of detail in the backgrounds , the mecha designs are dull , and the warp scenes , which were so spectacular in the anime , don 't make much of an impact " . 
 = The Possum = 
 " The Possum " is the 18th episode of the second season of the American comedy television series Parks and Recreation , and the 24th overall episode of the series . It originally aired on NBC in the United States on March 11 , 2010 . In the episode , Leslie forms a task force to capture an possum that bit the mayor 's dog , but she begins to fear she has caught the wrong animal . 
 The episode was written by Mike Scully and directed by Tristram Shapeero . " The Possum " featured a guest appearance by Alison Becker , who reprised her previous guest role as reporter Shauna Malwae @-@ Tweep . Supporting character Ron Swanson is revealed to have a large woodshop in " The Possum " , which was inspired by actor Nick Offerman 's real @-@ life carpentry skills . 
 According to Nielsen Media Research , " The Possum " was seen by 4 @.@ 6 million viewers . Its rating among viewers between ages 18 and 49 constituted a nine percent drop from the previous week 's episode , " Woman of the Year " . " The Possum " received generally positive reviews . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After the infamous possum " Fairway Frank " bites Mayor Gunderson 's dog at a golf course , mayoral representative Evelyn ( Judith Moreland ) asks Leslie ( Amy Poehler ) to form a task force to capture it . Leslie , Tom ( Aziz Ansari ) , Andy ( Chris Pratt ) and two incompetent animal control workers , Harris ( Harris Wittels ) and Brett ( Colton Dunn ) go to the golf course and quickly find the animal . The animal control workers are useless and Tom immediately runs away , but Andy dives toward the animal and captures it . Evelyn is impressed with Leslie and promises her a special favor from the mayor 's office . However , Leslie sees a second opossum and fears they have captured the wrong animal . She later finds out that the mayor doesn 't care about catching Fairway Frank , but rather about securing a trophy animal for his bathroom . 
 Back at the department office , reporter Shauna Malwae @-@ Tweep ( Alison Becker ) interviews Andy for a newspaper article . After he brags about the capture , the reporter suggests his heroics might win him back the affections of Ann ( Rashida Jones ) , his ex @-@ girlfriend , much to Andy 's excitement . April ( Aubrey Plaza ) , who has romantic feelings for Andy , overhears this and leaves jealously . Evelyn demands delivery of Fairway Frank . Leslie responds that there is uncertainty about the identity of Fairway Frank . She refuses to hand over the captured opossum and creates a ketchup @-@ blood diversion so that April can escape with the caged animal . 
 Leslie and April take the opossum to Ann 's home , where April has been paid $ 50 to <unk> . April lets the opossum out of its cage , and it causes havoc and minor damage . While hiding from the animal , April reveals her feelings about Andy to Leslie for the first time . When Leslie refuses to hand over the opossum , Evelyn angrily takes back her promise of a favor from the mayor 's office . Andy , still oblivious to the reasons behind April 's jealousy , delivers coffee to April , as well as the day 's newspaper , containing a story which credits April for providing moral support to Andy . It is later revealed that Leslie has donated the opossum to the Pawnee zoo . 
 Meanwhile , Ron ( Nick Offerman ) plans a woodshop expansion in his home and seeks the approval of city planner Mark ( Paul Schneider ) . Mark informs Ron that an inspection is needed to ensure that the facility meets all current zoning code standards , and an obviously lying Ron claims it does , clearly underscoring his vexation with governmental regulations . During the inspection , Mark finds numerous code violations , including oily rags placed above a wood @-@ burning fireplace and a long @-@ outdated fire extinguisher . Later , Mark takes a half @-@ day off so that he can help his friend 's woodshop meet city code . Ron thanks Mark by building a wooden canoe and leaving it in his office . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Possum " was written by Mike Scully and directed by Tristram Shapeero . Despite the title , the animal featured in the episode is an opossum , a marsupial species native to the Americas which is commonly called a possum , though that name refers to animals native to the Eastern Hemisphere . Some commentators said the main plotline involving the opossum served as an allegory for capital punishment . The episode featured actress and comedian Alison Becker in a guest appearance as Pawnee Journal reporter Shauna Malwae @-@ Tweep . The actress and character first appeared in the first season episode " The Reporter " , in which she had sex with Mark , which Andy bluntly recollects upon first seeing Shauna in " The Possum " . Rashida Jones appears only in the opening and closing scenes of " The Possum " because she was filming scenes for David Fincher 's film The Social Network . 
 In " The Possum " , Ron is revealed to have a very large woodshop . This element of Ron 's character was inspired by actor Nick Offerman , who in addition to comedy runs an independent carpentry business called Offerman Woodshop . This was also referenced in the previous second season episode " Sweetums " , in which Ron builds a harp from scratch to prove to Leslie he is not intoxicated . During one scene , Leslie shows a list of the Pawnee Parks Department 's Most Wanted Pests , which includes several raccoons . This is a reference to a running gag , established from the series , that Pawnee has a terrible raccoon infestation problem . Shortly after " The Possum " originally aired , a downloadable PDF file was made available on NBC 's " City of Pawnee " website of the most wanted pests list , which included images of the 10 most animals including raccoons , the opossum , a bat , a feral cat and a crow . The site also included a PDF file of the front page of the fictional newspaper 's The Pawnee Journal , which included the newspaper article referenced in the episode about Andy 's capture of the opossum . A printed copy of the newspaper article can be seen taped to the wall of Andy 's shoeshine stand in the subsequent episode , " Park Safety " . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 While visiting a golf course , Tom said he used to love golf pro Tiger Woods , until his extramarital affairs scandal was revealed , and then he considered him a god . One of the raccoons featured on a list of Pawnee 's Most Wanted Pests List was named Zorro , a reference to the sword @-@ wielding title character of several books , films and television programs . Another pest is named " Jangle Bo <unk> " , a reference to the pop song " Mr. Bojangles " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American NBC broadcast on March 11 , 2010 , " The Possum " was seen by 4 @.@ 6 million viewers , according to Nielsen Media Research . Although it was the same amount of viewers as last week 's episode , " Woman of the Year " , " The Possum " had a 2 @.@ 1 rating / 6 share among viewers between ages 18 and 49 , a nine percent drop from the previous episode . In the 9 p.m. timeslot on March 11 , Parks and Recreation was outperformed by American Idol on Fox , which drew 20 @.@ 46 million viewers , and Survivor : Heroes vs. Villains on CBS , which drew 12 @.@ 17 million viewers . " The Possum " outperformed a repeat of Grey 's Anatomy on ABC , which drew 4 @.@ 5 million viewers , and The Vampire Diaries on The CW , which drew 1 @.@ 37 million viewers . 
 The episode received generally positive reviews . Alan Sepinwall , television columnist with The Star @-@ Ledger , said the episode featured strong physical comedy , political satire , romantic tension and character moments . He said he " loved virtually every beat of the possum story " and finds the developing Andy and April relationship funny and believable . Entertainment Weekly writer Sandra Gonzalez said " The Possum " was a very funny episode , and particularly praised the development of the Andy and April relationship . She said Plaza and Pratt did some of their best work to date in the episode . 
 Matt Fowler of IGN praised the April and Andy relationship and the subplot with Ron and Mark , although he claimed Ron was the funnier of the duo and Mark 's character is too normal and boring for the show . Fowler also liked the way Leslie 's political ambition conflicted with her conscience in the episode . New York magazine writer Steve Kandell praised the main plotline with Leslie and the performances by Pratt and Offerman , particularly praising the jokes surrounding Ron 's woodworking hobby . Kandell pointed out the episode did not suffer from Ann 's absence and suggested although Rashida Jones is charming , the show does not need her . Leonard Pierce of The A.V. Club said the episode 's main story was " a bit of a trifle " and the subplots were lacking , but that " The Possum " included several laughs and demonstrated Ron and Leslie 's opposing attitudes about local government . 
 = = DVD release = = 
 " The Possum " , along with the other 23 second season episodes of Parks and Recreation , was released on a four @-@ disc DVD set in the United States on November 30 , 2010 . The DVD included deleted scenes for each episode . 
 = Psilocybe yungensis = 
 Psilocybe yungensis is a species of psychedelic mushroom in the Strophariaceae family . In North America , it is found in northeast , central and southeastern Mexico . In South America , it has been recorded from Bolivia , Colombia , and Ecuador . It is also known from the Caribbean island Martinique , and China . The mushroom grows in clusters or groups on rotting wood . The fruit bodies have conical to bell @-@ shaped reddish- to orangish @-@ brown caps that are up to 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 0 in ) in diameter , set atop slender stems 3 to 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 to 2 @.@ 0 in ) long . The mushrooms stain blue when bruised , indicative of the presence of the compound psilocybin . Psilocybe yungensis is used by Mazatec Indians in the Mexican State of Oaxaca for entheogenic purposes . 
 = = Taxonomy and classification = = 
 The species was described as new to science by American mycologists Rolf Singer and Alexander H. Smith , based on specimens collected in Nor Yungas Province , Bolivia , on the road to La Paz to <unk> . They published a short description in Latin in a 1958 Mycologia publication , followed by a more detailed description in English later that year . According to Psilocybe specialist Gastón Guzmán , the species Psilocybe <unk> ( described by Roger Heim in 1958 ) , and Psilocybe <unk> ( described by Singer in 1959 ) are synonyms , as both the macroscopic and microscopic features are the same in the type material of all three . Singer considered P. <unk> a species distinct from P. yungensis because of differences in the hairiness of the stem surface . Smith named the variety P. yungensis var. <unk> for specimens he found with conical , rather than <unk> ( the form of an inverted cone ) papilla . Similarly , the main distinguishing feature that Heim ascribed to P. <unk> was a papillate cap ( somewhat resembling the shape of a female human breast ) . Later studies showed that these morphological variations did not warrant individual recognition , because of the variable nature of these characteristics , and the existence of intermediate forms . 
 Guzmán places P. yungensis in the section <unk> , a grouping of Psilocybe species characterized primarily by having rhomboid spores less than 8 micrometers long . The specific epithet yungensis refers to the name of the type locality . The natives of Huautla de Jiménez and Mixe natives call P. yungensis a hongo <unk> ( " divinatory mushroom " ) , hong que <unk> ( " soporific mushroom " ) , or hongo <unk> ( " genius mushroom " ) . 
 = = Description = = 
 The P. yungensis fruit bodies have caps that are conical to bell @-@ shaped in maturity , and reach a diameter of up to 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 0 in ) . The cap surface is smooth and sticky , and , in moist specimens , has faint radial striations ( grooves ) that extend almost to the margin . The color of fresh caps ranges from dark reddish @-@ brown to rusty brown to orangish @-@ brown . Additionally , the cap is hygrophanous , meaning it will change color depending on its state of hydration ; a dry cap fades to become dull yellowish @-@ brown or the color of " dingy straw " . The cap frequently has a prominent umbo . 
 The gill attachment ranges from adnate ( broadly attached to the stem ) to adnexed ( narrowly attached ) . The spacing of the narrow gills is close to crowded , and the gill color is initially dull gray before maturing spores cause the color to change to purplish @-@ brown . The stem is 3 to 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 to 2 @.@ 0 in ) long and 1 @.@ 5 to 2 @.@ 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 06 to 0 @.@ 10 in ) thick , and more or less equal in width throughout its length or slightly larger near the base . The hollow , brittle , stem is pale brown on the upper part , and reddish @-@ brown near the bottom . The stem is densely covered with whitish fibrils that are pressed flat against the surface ; the fibrils slough off in maturity to leave a smooth surface . The mushroom has a cortinate partial veil ( resembling the <unk> cortina produced by species of Cortinarius ) but it does not last for long ; it occasionally leaves behind sparse remnants of tissue hanging on the cap margin and the upper part of the stem . No ring remains on the stem after the veil disappears . All parts of the mushroom will stain blue when injured ; these stains will blacken as the mushroom dries . 
 The spore print is dark purplish @-@ brown . Spores range in shape from roughly rhomboid to roughly elliptical , and typically have dimensions of 5 – 6 by 4 – 6 μm . They are thick @-@ walled and have a large germ pore . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are club @-@ shaped to swollen , hyaline , usually four @-@ spored ( although rarely two- or three @-@ spored forms are present ) , and measure 13 – 19 by 4 @.@ 4 – 6 @.@ 6 μm . The pleurocystidia ( cystidia on the gill face ) are ventricose ( swollen ) near the base and often mucronate ( ending abruptly in a short sharp point ) at the apex , and measure 14 – 25 by 4 @.@ 4 – 10 @.@ 5 μm . The cheilocystidia ( cystidia on the gill edge ) are variable in shape , and measure 14 – 40 by 4 @.@ 4 – 7 @.@ 7 μm . Pleurocystidia are relatively sparse , while cheilocystidia are abundant . Clamp connections are present in the hyphae . The application of a drop of potassium hydroxide solution turns both the cap and the stem from brown to blackish . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 The species Psilocybe <unk> , known only from Venezuela , is roughly similar in form , although somewhat smaller , with a cap width of up to 1 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 in ) in diameter and stem lengths of up to 3 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 4 in ) . In addition to differences in distribution , it can be clearly distinguished from P. yungensis by the larger cystidia : the pleurocystidia measure 8 @.@ 8 – 11 by 3 @.@ 8 – 5 @.@ 5 μm , and the cheilocystidia 16 @.@ 5 – 25 by 7 @.@ 7 – 12 μm . Stamets notes that " Few species resemble P. yungensis " , while Michael Beug considers the orangish @-@ brown cap color unusual for a Psilocybe , and compares it to Conocybe . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Psilocybe yungensis is a saprobic species , and contributes to the degradation of organic matter deposited in soils and nutrient cycling in forests where it grows . It typically grows in clusters or groups on rotting wood ( rarely on humus ) ; it is less frequently found growing solitarily . It is often reported from coffee plantations , subtropical , or cloud forests , especially those occurring at elevations between 1 @,@ 000 and 2 @,@ 000 m ( 3 @,@ 300 and 6 @,@ 600 ft ) . The species occurs in northeast , central and southeastern Mexico , and has been recorded from several locations in the states of Oaxaca , Puebla , Tamaulipas and Veracruz . It is also known from Bolivia , Colombia , and Ecuador , as well as the Caribbean island Martinique . In 2009 , it was reported from China . In Mexico and Colombia , the fungus usually fruits between June and July ; in Bolivia , it was recorded appearing during January . 
 = = Uses = = 
 The fruit bodies of Psilocybe yungensis are used for entheogenic , or spiritual , ritualistic purposes by the Mazatec Indians in the Mexican State of Oaxaca . Some authorities have suggested that P. yungensis is the " tree fungus " reported by Jesuit missionaries of the 17th and 18th centuries , a reddish mushroom that was apparently the source of an intoxicating beverage used by the <unk> Indians of Amazonian Peru . There is , however , no established record of hallucinogenic mushroom use in that area , and it is possible that the mushroom could instead be a psychedelic species of the wood @-@ dwelling genus Gymnopilus . 
 = Norsk Air = 
 Norsk Air was a Norwegian airline based at Sandefjord Airport , Torp . At its height from the mid @-@ 1980s and onwards it operated scheduled flights to Stavanger , Bergen , Trondheim and Copenhagen , and for shorter periods also other Norwegian and international destinations . The airline had 156 employees and 150 @,@ 000 annual passengers in 1989 . The company was established as a sole proprietorship by Øyvind Skaunfelt as Vestfoldfly in 1961 , after purchasing Thor Solberg 's aviation school at Tønsberg Airport , Jarlsberg . In addition to an aviation college , the company operated various charter services using mostly Cessna aircraft . The company split into a flying school and an airline in 1972 , with the latter taking the name Norsk Flytjeneste . Three 50 @-@ passenger Douglas DC @-@ 6 were subsequently bought and were among other places flown with aid charters to Bangladesh . Both the DC @-@ 6 and later charter flights with business jets proved unprofitable and were quickly terminated . 
 The company turned to regular charter services to Bergen and Stavanger in the 1980s , and from 1984 served the routes with scheduled flights , using seven @-@ passenger Beechcraft 200 King Air . In 1985 the company was converted to a limited company and bought by Kosmos . It subsequently acquired four 30 @-@ passenger Embraer EMB 120 Brasilias — as the second European airline . It introduced several new routes , including international flights to Denmark and the United Kingdom , and took the name Norsk Air . The company bought Norving 's Skien Airport , Geiteryggen division in 1987 and started operations from a second base . Kosmos failed in 1988 and Norsk Air was eventually given for free to Widerøe in 1990 . Skien operations were discontinued the following year and the airline changed name to Widerøe Norsk Air . It remained a subsidiary until being amalgamated in 1996 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Vestfoldfly = = = 
 The airline was established as Vestfoldfly by Øyvind Skaunfelt in 1961 . He had been working at Thor Solberg 's aviation school at Tønsberg Airport , Jarlsberg , and offered to purchase the school and airplanes when Solberg retired . Two years earlier , Sandefjord Airport , Torp had opened a civilian sector and Skaunfelt decided to establish his company there . In May 1961 , he received government permission for commercial flying . He started a newspaper route to Oslo Airport , Fornebu , and could also carry three passengers in his single @-@ engined Cessna . The route continued onwards from Sandefjord to Tønsberg , Larvik and at Skien Airport , Geiteryggen . Vestfoldfly also started offering scenic trips and charter . During the summer , the airline also flew seaplanes south along the coast to Kragerø , Risør and Arendal . Other activities involved crop dusting of forest for <unk> . The airline also provided a target service for the military . Four aircraft were permanently used to tow a target about 1 @,@ 000 to 2 @,@ 000 meters ( 3 @,@ 300 to 6 @,@ 600 ft ) behind the aircraft , and military personnel would practice shooting at the target . 
 During the 1960s , Vestfoldfly never received a concession for a regular , scheduled flight from Sandefjord to Oslo . The reason was that the Skien @-@ based <unk> held the concession for the routes from Oslo to Sandefjord , Tønsberg and Skien . <unk> never used its landing rights at Sandefjord , but nevertheless still hindered Vestfoldfly from starting a competing route . Skaunfelt eventually split his activity in two , <unk> the aviation school and renaming it Den Norske <unk> , which remained in operation until 1999 . The other activity was renamed Norsk Flytjeneste . In 1969 , Norsk Flytjeneste and <unk> , a large Sandefjord @-@ based industrial company , established Penguin Air Service , where Norsk Flytjeneste owned 25 percent of the shares . Penguin Air Service company bought a six @-@ seat Piper PA @-@ 31 Navajo and started charter services for <unk> . In 1975 , Bugge <unk> also joined the joint venture and a second aircraft was bought . Most of the traffic was for the oil industry to Stavanger . 
 = = = Norsk Flytjeneste = = = 
 In 1972 , Norsk Flytjeneste purchased two 50 @-@ passenger Douglas DC @-@ 6Bs from Braathens SAFE and leased one from Sterling Airways . They were used for domestic and international charter . The largest contract was from the Norwegian Church Aid , who contracted Norsk Flytjeneste to fly aid to Bangladesh . However , the airline failed to make money on the DC @-@ 6s , mostly because of the high operating costs , and sold them after a year . The company followed up with purchasing a ten @-@ seat Cessna Citation business jet that they offered in the charter market . However , the market was not large enough , and the jet was sold . 
 The main market for the charter services was Stavanger Airport , Sola , mainly serving transport of personnel in the oil industry . By the 1980s , Norsk Air had up to four daily round trips between the two cities . In 1983 , the airline received concession to start a regular scheduled service to Stavanger . A ten @-@ seat Beechcraft Super King Air was bought and services started on 12 January 1984 . Services to Bergen Airport , Flesland started on 10 July . Soon there were four daily round trips to both cities , supplemented by charter trips operated by Penguin . Starting on 26 March 1984 , Norsk Flytjeneste experienced competition on the routes from Sandefjord to Bergen and Stavanger , when Busy Bee , on contract with Braathens SAFE , started flights using 50 @-@ passenger Fokker F27s . However , they operated only one round trip , with the same aircraft serving Sandefjord – Stavanger – Haugesund – Bergen . 
 In 1984 , Norsk <unk> started negotiations with the Sandefjord @-@ based conglomerate Kosmos , who were seeking to invest in a local airline . Kosmos had decided to start a diversification strategy to spread their risk . Norsk Flytjeneste was at the time not making money on its routes , but Kosmos was willing to carry the loss as an investment . The airline was sold to Kosmos on 15 April 1985 . At the time of the take @-@ over , Norsk Flytjeneste had four Cessna <unk> and one Piper Navajo . The airline 's seven @-@ passenger Beechcraft 200 and C90 King Airs were already owned by Kosmos . The company was changed from a sole <unk> to a limited company . Kjell <unk> from Kosmos was appointed managing director while Tor <unk> continued as chief pilot . 
 = = = Norsk Air = = = 
 On 30 July 1985 , Norsk Flytjeneste opened their first international route , to Copenhagen Airport in Denmark . The concessions had a limitation on not using aircraft with more than ten seats . However the limitation was lifted later in the year . Under Kosmos ' management , Norsk Flytjeneste started an aggressive expansion . Applications were made for concessions from Sandefjord to Gothenburg in Sweden , and from Oslo via Hamar and Røros to Trondheim . Norsk Flytjeneste also needed larger aircraft , and the airline evaluated several types , including the Embraer EMB 120 Brasilia , the 30 @-@ passenger Saab 340 and the Fokker F27 . The company chose to order four 30 @-@ passenger Brasilias . During the negotiations with Embraer , the company realized that Norsk Flytjeneste was a difficult name for foreigners , since the Brazilians could not pronounce " Flytjeneste " . When the new aircraft were delivered , the airline rebranded as Norsk Air . 
 The company also joined the joint venture Commuter Service along with other Norwegian regional airlines , Coast Aero Center , <unk> and Trønderfly . The intention was to create a cooperative company which could compete in a more diversified market . The group 's lawyer stated that the organizational structure among regional airlines was 15 years out of date and that the group would take market shares in a growing market , especially by starting new niche direct services . 
 Norsk Air was the second airline in Europe to order the Brasilia , after Air Excel . Three were financed with loans from Banco de Brasil and the last was leased . With the introduction of the Brasilias in 1986 , the airline started a route from Sandefjord to Trondheim Airport , Værnes . From 1985 to 1986 , the airline 's costs doubled , but not their income . In 1987 , Terje <unk> , former bank chief for Christiania Bank in Sandefjord , took over as managing director . The Brasilias had state @-@ of @-@ art technology , and although airlines purchase new aircraft to reduce their maintenance costs , this was not the reality for Norsk Air because they did not have sufficient competence to maintain the aircraft . In particular , they lacked sufficient electronic expertise , due to the increase of electronic components in the aircraft . All the other aircraft were sold . 
 In 1986 , the company established a duty @-@ free shop at Torp . By 1987 , Norsk Air was losing NOK 20 million per year . The company established a route from Sandefjord to Gothenburg @-@ <unk> Airport and to London Stansted Airport , but neither were profitable , and were quickly terminated . Norsk Air started a route from Fagernes Airport , Leirin to Oslo and Bergen on 4 November 1987 . The route turned out to be unprofitable , and was terminated on 1 June 1988 , after the company had lost NOK 5 million on the route . 
 To develop the company , Kosmos and Norsk Air bought the Kirkenes @-@ based airline Norving , that also operated flights from Skien Airport , Geiteryggen — about one hour 's drive from Sandefjord — to Bergen , Trondheim and Stavanger . Norving had seven types of aircraft , but was losing large amounts of money , although the Norwegian Ministry of Transport and Communications covered their losses on some state @-@ subsidized regional routes . The purchase of Norving caused an internal organization conflict between the two organizations . The operations from Skien were merged into Norsk Air , while the rest of Norving was sold . The latter went bankrupt in 1993 . Norsk Air also showed interested in purchasing Widerøe , but none of the large owners were interested in selling . 
 = = = Widerøe Norsk Air = = = 
 Kosmos was bought by the <unk> Group in 1988 , and on 21 October , Kosmos ' Chief Executive Officer ( CEO ) Bjørn <unk> and Chairman Otto Grieg <unk> were fired . The <unk> Group decided to integrate Kosmos ' shipping and oil @-@ related activities into their group . All other investments , including Norsk Air , were to be sold or closed . At the time , Norsk Air had 140 employees . Norsk Air 's CEO , Mr. <unk> , made contact with Bård Mikkelsen , who was CEO of Widerøe , to try to convince them to purchase Norsk Air . Widerøe was a that time solely occupied with flying on the subsidized regional routes . The company was interested in having some non @-@ subsidized routes to better benchmark its operations . The two largest owners , Scandinavian Airlines System ( SAS ) and Braathens SAFE , did not want to purchase Norsk Air , but the third @-@ largest owner , Fred . Olsen & Co. liked the idea , and bought SAS ' and Braathens SAFE 's 62 @.@ 3 percent stake in Widerøe to make the deal possible . Other possible purchasers who had negotiated with Norsk Air were Sterling Airlines , Partnair and Jan Einar Johansen , former owner of Scandi Line . 
 By 1989 , the airline had 156 employees and 150 @,@ 000 annual passengers . On 9 February 1989 , Norsk Air 's board decided to start the termination process if a sale was not made . The employees agreed to cut their wages 10 percent and not take sick days during the sales process . One of the main difficulties in the sales process was that Widerøe could not afford to purchase Norsk Air 's hangar at the airport . Widerøe intended to continue operations at both Torp and Geiteryggen for a year to see where to establish its base . In fear that the airline would move to Skien , the municipalities of Sandefjord and <unk> , who owned the majority of the airport , agreed to purchase the hangar , which had been built for NOK 20 million in 1987 , for NOK 11 @.@ 5 million . Half the hangar would be rented to Widerøe for NOK 500 @,@ 000 per year . This was insufficient to cover the NOK 1 @.@ 2 million in annual interest costs . 
 Widerøe took over Norsk Air free of charge on 1 May 1989 , and changed the company 's name to Widerøe Norsk Air . The company was kept as a subsidiary to avoid cross @-@ subsidization of the subsidized routes . Widerøe started negotiations with Busy Bee , and agreed to lease the Fokker 50 used by Busy Bee to Sandefjord , in exchange for Busy Bee terminating the route in 1990 . Widerøe Norsk Air also decided that it was not profitable to fly from both Skien and Sandefjord , and terminated all Skien services . Starting on 28 October 1991 , the airline also started a route from Sandefjord via Kristiansand Airport , Kjevik to London . This route was terminated one year later . In 1993 , Widerøe sold its Fokker 50 to Norwegian Air Shuttle . On 1 May 1996 , Widerøe Norsk Air was merged with Widerøe and ceased to exist . After the merger , Widerøe phased out the Brasilias and replaced them with de Havilland Canada Dash 8 aircraft . 
 = = Destinations = = 
 The following is a list of destinations served by Norsk Air in regular scheduled services . It includes the city , country , airport and the period in which the airline served the airport . Hubs are denoted with a dagger ( ) . 
 = Bart the Genius = 
 " Bart the Genius " is the second episode of The Simpsons ' first season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on January 14 , 1990 . It was the first episode written by Jon Vitti . It was also the first ever episode to use the opening sequence , as well as the first regular episode . In the episode Bart cheats on an intelligence test and is declared a genius , so he is sent to a school for gifted children . Though he initially enjoys being treated as a genius , he begins to see the downside of his new life . 
 It marks the first use of Bart 's catchphrase " Eat my shorts " . As the second episode produced , directly after the disastrous animation of " Some Enchanted Evening " , the future of the series depended on how the animation turned out on this episode . The animation proved to be more acceptable and production continued . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Simpson family spend a night of playing Scrabble and Lisa reminds Bart that he is supposed to be stimulating his brain with various vocabulary if he hopes to pass his intelligence test . He cheats his way to victory by coming up with his own word , basing its definition on an insulting description of Homer . This angers his father and he spends time chasing after Bart , much to the embarrassment of his family . 
 At Springfield Elementary School , Bart is busted for vandalism by Principal Skinner , who has been informed by class genius , Martin Prince . Faced with the prospect of failing an intelligence test , Bart surreptitiously switches exams with Martin . When the school psychologist , Dr. Pryor , studies the results , he identifies Bart as a genius , to the delight of Homer and Marge , who enroll him in a new school . However , Lisa is not fooled by his supposed genius and still believes Bart to be a moron ; Skinner shares her belief , but takes advantage of Bart 's departure from the school . 
 At the Enriched Learning Center for Gifted Children , Bart feels out of place among the other students with advanced academic skills . Meanwhile , Marge attempts to stimulate Bart with a little culture by taking the family to the opera . However , this proves disastrous as Bart and Homer are quite disruptive , much to Lisa 's joy . <unk> by his brilliant classmates , Bart visits his former school , where his old friends reject him because of his perceived intelligence . On the bright side , he enjoys newfound attention from Homer and he covers for them when Marge makes another attempt to stimulate Bart 's brain by taking to a ballet recital . After Bart 's chemistry experiment explodes , filling the school lab with green goo , he confesses to Dr. Pryor that he switched tests with Martin . Dr. Pryor realizes that he was never a genius and has him readmitted to Springfield Elementary . 
 Bart returns home and tells Homer that he cheated on the intelligence test , but that he is glad they are closer than ever . An angry Homer chases Bart through the house , only for Bart to lock the door of his bedroom . Lisa pronounces that Bart is back to being his normal , dumb self . 
 = = Production = = 
 The concept for the episode developed from writer Jon Vitti coming up with a long list of bad things Bart would do for attention imagining the potential consequences . The only idea that developed into an interesting episode concept was Bart cheating on an IQ test . This idea was based on an incident from Vitti 's childhood when a number of his classmates did not take an intelligence test seriously and suffered poor academic treatment because of it . Because Bart was already obviously unintelligent , Vitti reversed the problem for his episode . Vitti used all his memories of elementary school behavior to produce a draft script of 71 pages , substantially above the required length of about 45 pages . 
 It was Vitti 's first script for a 30 @-@ minute television program . Bart 's use of the phrase " Eat my shorts " was intended to reflect his adoption of catchphrases he had heard on TV ; the creative team had told Vitti that he should not come up with original taglines for the character . The scene where the family plays Scrabble was inspired by the 1985 cartoon The Big <unk> . 
 Director David Silverman had difficulty devising a legible Scrabble board for the opening scene that would convey the idea that the Simpsons were only able to devise very simple words . The design of Bart 's visualization of the math problem was partially inspired by the art of Saul Steinberg . The increasing appearance of numbers in that sequence derived from Silverman 's use of a similar tactic when he had to develop a set design for the play The Adding Machine . 
 Each successive scene in the sequence was shorter than the one before it by exactly one frame . The scene where Bart writes his confession was done as one long take to balance the shorter scenes elsewhere in the episode . It was animated in the United States by Dan Haskett . There were a few problems with the finished animation for the episode . The banana in the opening scene was colored incorrectly , as the Korean animators were unfamiliar with the fruit , and the final bathtub scene was particularly problematic , including issues with lip sync . The version in the broadcast episode was the best of several attempts . 
 The episode was the first to feature the series ' full title sequence . Creator Matt Groening developed the lengthy sequence in order to cut down on the animation necessary for each episode , but devised the two gags as compensation for the repeated material each week . In the first gag , the camera zooms in on Springfield Elementary School , where Bart can be seen writing a message on the chalkboard . This message , which changes from episode to episode , has become known as the " chalkboard gag " . The other gag is known as a " couch gag " , in which a twist of events occur when the family meets to sit on their couch and watch television . Groening , who had not paid much attention to television since his own childhood , was unaware that title sequences of such length were uncommon by that time . As the finished episodes became longer , the production team were reluctant to cut the stories in order to allow for the long title sequence , so shorter versions of it were developed . The episode also introduced the characters Martin Prince and his parents , Richard , Bart 's teacher Edna Krabappel and Dr. J Loren Pryor . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 In the opening scene , Maggie spells <unk> with her blocks , a reference to Albert Einstein 's mass @-@ energy equivalence equation . A picture of Einstein also appears on the wall of Dr. Pryor 's office . At one point Homer erroneously refers to Einstein as the inventor of the light bulb . Dr. Pryor compares Bart 's proposed work among ordinary children to Jane Goodall 's study of chimpanzees . Goodall was pleased to be mentioned in the episode , sending the program a letter , and Vitti an autographed copy of her book . The conductor of the opera the family attends is named Boris <unk> , a reference to animator Gabor Csupo . The opera attended by the family is Carmen , by French composer Georges Bizet ; the song that Bart mocks is a famous aria called the Toreador Song . Students at the gifted school have lunchboxes that feature images of the 1945 novel Brideshead Revisited and chess grandmaster Anatoly Karpov . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Bart the Genius " finished 47th place in the weekly ratings for the week of January 8 – January 14 , 1990 with a Nielsen rating of 12 @.@ 7 . It was the second highest rated show on the Fox Network that week . Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , the authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , strongly praised the episode calling it " superbly written and directed , often a literal child 's @-@ eye view of education , the first Simpsons episode proper is a classic . " They went on to say , " these twenty minutes cemented Bart 's position as a cultural icon and a hero to all underachievers , and managed a good few kicks at hothouse schools along the way . Especially worthy of note is the sequence where Bart visualises his maths problem , the viewing of which should be a required part of teacher training . " 
 In September 2001 , in an DVD review of the first season , David B. Grelck gave the episode a rating of 2 ½ / 5 and commented that the episode was " wacky and fun , very Bart centered , it 's easy to see with this episode why Bart became the figurehead for a few years of class clowns " . Colin Jacobson at DVD Movie Guide said in a review that the episode " offered another decent but unspectacular episode " and further commented that " its early vintage seems clear both through the awkward animation and the lack of appropriate character development . " 
 In February 1991 , in an interview , Jon Vitti described " Bart the Genius " as his favorite among the episodes he wrote to that point . James L. Brooks also mentioned the episode among his favorites , saying that " we did things with animation when that happened that just opened doors for us . " The show received mail from viewers complaining that the throwing away of a comic book was an incident of censorship . The invented word " <unk> " in the episode inspired the creator of the Melissa macro virus , as well as the name of an Iron Oxide Copper Gold deposit in Quebec . 
 = = Home release = = 
 The episode was released first on home video in the United Kingdom , as part of a VHS release titled The Simpsons Collection ; the episode was paired with season one episode " The Call of the Simpsons " . In the United Kingdom , it was once re released as part of VHS boxed set of the complete first season , released in November 1999 . 
 In the United States , the episode would finally see the home video release as a part of The Simpsons Season One DVD set , which was released on September 25 , 2001 . Groening , Brooks , Silverman , and Vitti participated in the DVD 's audio commentary . A digital edition of the series ' first season was published December 20 , 2010 in the United States containing the episode , through Amazon Video and iTunes . 
 = Outflow ( meteorology ) = 
 Outflow , in meteorology , is air that flows outwards from a storm system . It is associated with ridging , or anticyclonic flow . In the low levels of the troposphere , outflow radiates from thunderstorms in the form of a wedge of rain @-@ cooled air , which is visible as a thin rope @-@ like cloud on weather satellite imagery or a fine line on weather radar imagery . Low @-@ level outflow boundaries can disrupt the center of small tropical cyclones . However , outflow aloft is essential for the strengthening of a tropical cyclone . If this outflow is undercut , the tropical cyclone weakens . If two tropical cyclones are in proximity , the upper level outflow from the system to the west can limit the development of the system to the east . 
 = = Thunderstorms = = 
 For thunderstorms , outflow tends to indicate the development of a system . Large quantities of outflow at the upper levels of a thunderstorm indicate its development . Too much outflow in the lower levels of a thunderstorm , however , can choke off the low @-@ level inflow which fuels it . Squall lines typically bow out the most , or bend the most convex outward , at the leading edge of low level outflow due to the formation of a mesoscale high @-@ pressure area which forms within the stratiform rain area behind the initial line . This high pressure area is formed due to strong descending motion behind the squall line , and could come in the form of a downburst . 
 The " edge " of the outflow boundary can often be detected by Doppler radar ( especially in clear air mode ) . Convergence occurs along the leading edge of the downdraft . Convergence of dust , aerosols , and bugs at the leading edge will lead to a higher clear air signature . Insects and arthropods are swept along by the prevailing winds , making them good indicators of the presence of outflow boundaries . The signature of the leading edge is also influenced by the density change between the cooler air from the downdraft and the warmer environmental air . This density boundary will increase the number of echo returns from the leading edge . Clouds and new thunderstorms also develop along the outflow 's leading edge . This makes it possible to locate the outflow boundary when using precipitation mode on a weather radar . Also , it makes outflow boundaries findable within visible satellite imagery as a thin line of cumuliform clouds which is known as an arcus , or arc , cloud . The image to the right depicts a particularly strong <unk> boundary ahead of a line of storms . Often , the outflow boundary will bow in the direction it is moving the quickest . 
 = = Tropical cyclones = = 
 The development of a significant mesoscale convective complex can send out a large enough outflow boundary to weaken the cyclone as the tropical cyclone center moves into the more stable air mass behind the leading edge of thunderstorm outflow , or outflow boundary . Moderate vertical wind shear can lead to the initial development of the convective complex and surface low similar to the mid @-@ latitudes , but it must relax to allow tropical cyclogenesis to continue . 
 While the most obvious motion of clouds is toward the center , tropical cyclones also develop an upper @-@ level ( high @-@ altitude ) outward flow of clouds . These originate from air that has released its moisture and is expelled at high altitude through the " chimney " of the storm engine . This outflow produces high , thin cirrus clouds that spiral away from the center . The clouds are thin enough for the sun to be visible through them . These high cirrus clouds may be the first signs of an approaching tropical cyclone . As air parcels are lifted within the eye of the storm the vorticity is reduced , causing the outflow from a tropical cyclone to have anticyclonic motion . If two tropical cyclones are in proximity to one another , the outflow from the system downstream ( normally to the west ) can hinder the development of the system upstream ( normally to the east ) . 
 = = Local effects = = 
 Low @-@ level outflow boundaries from thunderstorms are cooler and more moist than the air mass the thunderstorm originally formed within due to its wet <unk> by rain , forming a wedge of denser air which spreads out from the base of the parent thunderstorm . If wind speeds are high enough , such as during microburst events , dust and sand can be carried into the troposphere , reducing visibility . This type of weather event is known as a haboob , and is most common in the late spring within Sudan . Upper @-@ level outflow can consist of thick cirrus clouds which would then obscure the sun and reduce solar insolation around the outermost edge of tropical cyclones . 
 = Metal Gear Solid 3 : Snake Eater = 
 Metal Gear Solid 3 : Snake Eater is an action @-@ adventure stealth video game directed by Hideo Kojima . Snake Eater was developed by Konami Computer Entertainment Japan and published by Konami for the PlayStation 2 , and was released on November 17 , 2004 , in North America ; December 16 , 2004 , in Japan ; and in March 2005 in Europe and Australia . The game serves as a prequel to the entire Metal Gear series . 
 Set in 1964 ( three decades before the events of the original Metal Gear ) , the story centers on FOX operative codenamed Naked Snake as he attempts to rescue a weapons designer , sabotage an experimental superweapon , and assassinate his defected former boss . While previous games were set in a primarily urban environment , Snake Eater adopts a 1960s Soviet jungle setting , with the high tech , near @-@ future trappings of previous Metal Gear Solid games being replaced with the wilderness . While the setting has changed , the game 's focus remains on stealth and infiltration , while retaining the series ' self @-@ referential , fourth wall @-@ breaking sense of humor . The story of Snake Eater is told through numerous cut scenes and radio conversations . 
 Metal Gear Solid 3 : Snake Eater was critically acclaimed , and sold 3 @.@ 6 million copies worldwide by August 2005 . It is now widely considered to be one of the greatest video games of all time . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The gameplay of Snake Eater is similar to that of previous games in the Metal Gear Solid series . Snake , controlled by the player , must move undetected through a hostile , enemy @-@ filled environment . Although Snake acquires various weapons ( ranging from handguns to rocket propelled grenades ) , the emphasis is on using stealth to avoid confrontations . A number of objects and gadgets can be found along the way to aid in this , including motion detectors to track hostile soldiers , and the Metal Gear series ' trademark cardboard box , which Snake can hide under to avoid visual detection . 
 Despite the fundamental similarities , Snake Eater introduces many new aspects of gameplay not present in previous Metal Gear games , including camouflage , a new hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat system called " close quarters combat " or " CQC " , a stamina gauge , and an injury @-@ and @-@ treatment system . 
 Approximately two @-@ thirds of the game is set outdoors in a Soviet Union rainforest , and using this varied environment to its fullest potential is often the key to success . Of the new features , particular emphasis is placed on camouflage and using the jungle environment itself ( for example , climbing trees or hiding in tall grass ) to avoid being seen by the enemy . The advanced radar from previous games has been removed in favor of a simple motion detector and sonar system more suitable for the game 's time period . 
 A percentage value called the " camouflage index " gauges Snake 's exposure , on a scale from negative values ( highly visible and attracting attention ) up to 100 % ( completely invisible to the enemy ) . In order to minimize visibility , the player must switch between different camouflage uniforms and face paints to blend in with the environment ; for example , wearing a bark @-@ patterned uniform while leaning against a tree , or wearing striped face paint while hiding in tall grass . Other devices for camouflage , such as a fake <unk> head to decrease chances of being detected in water , are also available . 
 The basic close combat from previous installments has been heavily refined and expanded into the CQC system . When unarmed or using a one @-@ handed weapon , Snake can grab opponents and put them in a chokehold , at which point a variety of actions can be performed , such as choking the enemy unconscious , slitting the enemy 's throat , or interrogating them at knifepoint to obtain information . The context , pressure applied to the button , and movement of the analog stick determine the action performed . 
 While previous games used only a simple life bar , Snake Eater also keeps track of injuries over the entire body . For example , a long fall could fracture Snake 's leg , slowing him down until the injury is properly treated with a splint and bandage . Unless these injuries are treated , Snake will not be able to fully recover his health for some time . 
 The location brings in the need to rely upon native flora and fauna to survive . This is manifested in a stamina gauge , which constantly depletes during gameplay . Failure to restore the gauge by eating has detrimental effects on gameplay , such as decreasing Snake 's ability to aim his weapon and being heard by the enemy due to Snake 's loud stomach grumbles . Food can be stored in the backpack until it is needed . However , some types of food rot over time , and consuming rotten foods may result in Snake developing a stomach ache , causing the stamina gauge to deplete faster . 
 The PlayStation 2 versions of Snake Eater include a minigame called Snake vs. Monkey , in which Snake has to catch Ape Escape @-@ style monkeys . In addition to containing tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek humor , bonus items usable in the main game can be unlocked by progressing through various stages . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 The protagonist of Snake Eater , Naked Snake ( David Hayter / Akio Ōtsuka ) , known as Big Boss in subsequent games , is a young former Green Beret assigned to the CIA unit FOX . During his mission , Snake is assisted by fellow FOX members over his radio : Major Zero ( Jim Piddock / Banjō Ginga ) , commander of FOX and a former member of the British Special Air Service , who provides Snake with mission advice and battle tactics ; Para @-@ Medic ( Heather Halley / Houko Kuwashima ) , who provides medical information , as well as advice on flora and fauna ; and <unk> ( James C. Mathis III / Keiji Fujiwara ) , who provides weapon and equipment information . 
 The two primary antagonists of the game are Colonel Volgin ( Neil Ross / Kenji Utsumi ) , an electricity @-@ controlling GRU colonel and member of the extreme Brezhnev faction , who are attempting to overthrow Nikita Khrushchev to seize power for Leonid Brezhnev and Alexei Kosygin , and The Boss ( Lori Alan / Kikuko Inoue ) , former mentor to Naked Snake and co @-@ founder of the FOX unit . The Cobra Unit , a Special Forces unit led by The Boss , is composed of The End ( J. Grant Albrecht / Osamu Saka ) , a venerable expert sniper credited as the " father of modern sniping " ; The Fear ( Michael Bell / Kazumi Tanaka ) , who has supernatural flexibility and agility ; The Fury ( Richard Doyle / Masato Hirano ) , a disfigured former cosmonaut armed with a flamethrower and a jetpack ; The Pain ( Gregg Berger / Hisao <unk> ) , who can control hornets to both defend himself and attack his enemies ; and The Sorrow ( David Thomas / <unk> Hori ) , the spirit of a deceased medium . 
 Other characters include Dr. Sokolov ( Brian Cummings / Naoki Tatsuta ) , a rocket scientist whom Snake must rescue ; EVA ( <unk> <unk> / Misa Watanabe ) , Snake 's love interest , American defector , and KGB agent sent to assist him , and a young Ocelot ( Josh Keaton / Takumi Yamazaki ) , commander of the elite Ocelot Unit within Volgin 's GRU . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 = = = = Virtuous Mission = = = = 
 Metal Gear Solid 3 is set before the events of first Metal Gear during the Cold War in 1964 , where a CIA agent , codenamed " Naked Snake " , is sent to the jungles of <unk> , in the USSR . Aided over radio by Major Zero , Para @-@ Medic , and his former mentor The Boss , his mission is to rescue a defecting Soviet scientist named Sokolov who is secretly developing an advanced nuclear @-@ equipped tank called the " Shagohod " . The mission goes smoothly until The Boss defects and provides her new benefactor , Colonel Volgin , with two Davy Crockett miniature nuclear shells . Sokolov is captured by Cobra Unit and Snake is heavily injured and thrown off a bridge by The Boss , allowing Volgin and his cohorts to escape with Sokolov . Volgin detonates one of the nuclear shells to cover up its theft , which is subsequently blamed on The Boss . Snake is recovered using the Fulton Recovery System . 
 = = = = Operation Snake Eater = = = = 
 Having detected the U.S. aircraft which deployed Snake flying over Soviet soil , the Soviet Union declares the United States responsible for the nuclear attack , tipping both nations to the edge of a nuclear war . In a secret conference between U.S. President Lyndon B. Johnson and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev , a deal is hatched to prove the U.S. ' s innocence and restore peace . The United States agrees to stop Volgin 's renegade faction , destroy the stolen Shagohod and eliminate the American defector , The Boss . 
 A week after being rescued from the region , Snake is redeployed into the Soviet jungle as part of " Operation : Snake Eater " , to fulfill the United States ' promises . During the mission , he gains the assistance of another American defector , ex @-@ NSA agent EVA , who defected a few years earlier ( though she is informed she would be helped by ADAM , who defected with her ) . After numerous encounters with the elite Ocelot Unit ( led by a young Revolver Ocelot ) , and defeating nearly every member of Cobra Unit , Snake succeeds in locating Sokolov and the stolen Shagohod , only to be captured in Volgin 's military fortress , <unk> Grad . After listening to Volgin brutally beat Sokolov to death , Snake is tortured by Volgin and loses his eye while protecting EVA from Ocelot , who was attempting to kill her upon suspecting her of being a spy ; Snake ultimately escapes . 
 When he returns to the facility to destroy the Shagohod , Snake is once again confronted by Volgin and learns of " The Philosophers " . Made up of the most powerful men in the United States , Soviet Union , and China , they were an Illuminati @-@ like organization who control the world behind the scenes . However , after the end of World War II , they began to fight amongst themselves , and the organization broke down . The Philosopher 's Legacy , a fund the organization had jointly amassed to finance their wars ( $ 100 billion ) , was divided up and hidden in banks all over the world . Volgin had illegally inherited this money , and Snake learns that the U.S. is attempting to retrieve it . 
 Snake continues his mission , destroying the facility and the Shagohod tank , while engaging Volgin , who is killed by a bolt of lightning during the battle . Snake and EVA travel to a lake , where a <unk> ground effect vehicle is hidden . Before they use it to escape the region , Snake confronts his old mentor , The Boss , whom he must assassinate to complete his mission . After an emotional battle , Snake overcomes his feelings and kills The Boss , emerging victorious . He and EVA escape to Alaska , and spend the night together as they make love . During the night , EVA disappears , and leaves behind a tape revealing herself to be a Chinese spy sent to steal the Philosopher 's Legacy for China . The tape continues , and EVA reveals that The Boss did not defect to the Soviet Union ; rather , she was under orders to pretend to defect so she could infiltrate Volgin 's ranks and find the location of the Legacy , which could be brought back to America . The final part of her mission was to sacrifice her honor and die at the hands of Snake , under the guise of a traitor , to prove the U.S. ' s innocence in Volgin 's nuclear attack from the beginning of the game . 
 Snake is awarded the title of " Big Boss " and given the Distinguished Service Cross for his efforts by President Johnson in front of his FOX Unit and other officials ; however Snake has become so distraught and demoralized after EVA 's revelation that he leaves almost immediately after getting his medal , hardly acknowledging Major Zero , Para @-@ Medic and <unk> . Later , he arrives at an anonymous grave , The Boss 's , just one of thousands located in Arlington National Cemetery . Laying down The Boss 's gun and a bouquet of lilies upon the nameless gravestone , he scans the endless rows before him , salutes , and sheds a single tear , knowing that The Boss 's true patriotism would be known by only EVA , himself , and others who knew of her mission . 
 After the credits roll , Ocelot is heard talking to an unknown man over the telephone . Ocelot informs him that the microfilm stolen by EVA was a fake and that half of the Philosopher 's Legacy is now in America 's hands , with the other half held by the KGB . It transpires that Ocelot has been triple @-@ crossing everyone from the very beginning . He then reveals that he is in fact ADAM , that he is talking to the director of the CIA , and that he has been working for the said agency all this time . 
 = = Development = = 
 Originally , the game was supposed to be developed for the PlayStation 3 , but due to the long wait for the PS3 , the game was developed for the PlayStation 2 instead . From the outset , the game 's director Hideo Kojima wished to drastically change the setting from previous games . He stated that the jungle setting is what both his development team , and the Metal Gear fans , wanted . However , he acknowledged that the elements of a jungle environment , such as the weather , landscape and wildlife , were features that would present problems during the game 's development . Whereas in previous installments the player starts out close to , or even within , the enemy base , Kojima wished Snake Eater to be more realistic , with Snake starting out miles from civilization and having to work his way to the enemy encampment . 
 Kojima commented that the outside environment was very difficult to create . He explained that the reason previous games were primarily set indoors is because the current consoles were not powerful enough to portray a true jungle environment . In contrast with urban environments , the jungle does not have a flat surface . The protagonist in Snake Eater has to cross uneven terrain , including rocks , dirt mounds , and <unk> . As a result , the collision engine used in previous installments could not be used , and a new one had to be built from scratch . Setting up the motion capture technology so players could walk over these mounds was a problem during development . 
 Many fans wanted Snake Eater to use a 3D camera , but this was ultimately not implemented in the game . Kojima views Metal Gear Solid , Sons of Liberty and Snake Eater as a trilogy , and wished to keep the camera the same as the previous two in order to keep the feel of the three games the same . He did , however , acknowledge that the current trend for video games is to use the 3D camera . The camera was later implemented in an updated version of Snake Eater titled Metal Gear Solid 3 : Subsistence , and further installments in the franchise . 
 Kojima designed boss battles of Snake Eater to be totally different from those in previous Metal Gear games , or any other games . He said that the boss battle with sniper The End best represented free , open gameplay in the game . The battle takes place over a large area of dense jungle , and the player must search extensively for The End , who attacks over long range from an unknown position . This battle of attrition can last for hours , and contrasts with other boss fights in which the enemy is right in front of the player and in view the whole time . In addition , the player has the ability to both avoid this boss battle altogether by killing The End earlier in the game ; or save and quit during the fight , wait a week , and reload the game to find The End having died of old age . Kojima commented that features like this do not appear in other games . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The musical score of Snake Eater was composed by Harry Gregson @-@ Williams and <unk> <unk> , who provided material for both cut scenes and the game itself . <unk> wrote the game 's opening theme , " Snake Eater " , a distinctly Bond @-@ like vocal track which also appears in the game proper , as performed by Cynthia Harrell . Composer and lyricist Rika Muranaka provides a song called " Don 't Be Afraid " which is played during the ending for the game . The song is performed by Elisa Fiorillo . 
 In a break from tradition , one of the ending themes of the game was not an in @-@ house production , but Starsailor 's " Way To Fall " . Hideo Kojima later revealed in his blog that he originally wanted to use " Space Oddity " and " Ashes to Ashes " ( by David Bowie ) for the ending themes because of the space development theme of the game , but during the game 's development that theme lost its significance . One of his colleagues then advised him to listen to Stellastarr , but Kojima heard Starsailor . He liked the song " Way To Fall " , and chose it as an ending theme . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Snake Eater was a commercial success and sold 3 @.@ 6 million copies worldwide by August 2005 . Although this is considerably lower than Metal Gear Solid 2 : Sons of Liberty , which has sold 7 million copies to date , critics were pleased with the new protagonist , Naked Snake — who strongly resembles the series protagonist Solid Snake — after fans were disappointed by Raiden in MGS2 . Some critics , who found the lengthy dialogues and multitude of plot twists in Sons of Liberty to be detrimental to the game experience found the storyline of Snake Eater a pleasing throwback to the original Metal Gear Solid , with less of the " philosophical babble " present in Sons of Liberty . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Metal Gear Solid 3 : Snake Eater was critically acclaimed , and was given high scores by some of the most prominent gaming critics . On the review aggregator GameRankings , the game has an average score of 91 @.@ 77 % based on 86 reviews . On Metacritic , the game had an average score of 91 / 100 , based on 68 reviews . Gaming website IGN awarded a 9 @.@ 6 / 10 and Edge rated it 8 / 10 . GameSpot , who granted it an 8 @.@ 7 / 10 , commented that the game is " richly cinematic " and " a great achievement . " GameSpy hailed it as " probably the best Metal Gear Solid game yet " , and Eurogamer called it " overwhelmingly superior to MGS2 : Sons of Liberty " in their review . 
 Reviewers had mixed opinions about the game 's camouflage system . Edge commented that " laying , camouflaged , in short grass inches away from a patrolling enemy is a gripping twist on stealth , " while GameSpy criticized it as " just a number to monitor and not a terribly interesting one . " Out of the variety of new features , GameSpot called it " the most important and best implemented . " The game has also been criticized for its low frame rate , which has been reduced to 30 frame / s ( compared with 60 frame / s in Sons of Liberty ) . 
 The cut scenes of Snake Eater have been called " visually exciting and evocative , beautifully shot " by Edge . However , they commented that the script " ranges from awkward to awful " and criticized David Hayter 's performance as Snake , concluding that " Snake Eater 's speech is not up to the standard of other games , let alone cinema . " GameSpot said that some of the humor " falls flat , as if lost in translation from Japanese " and " should appeal to ... hardcore fans but ... takes you out of the moment . " 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Since its release in 2004 , the game has received numerous awards . Notable ones include " best overall action game " , " best overall story " and " best PS2 use of sound " in IGN 's Best of 2004 awards , and " best story " , " best sound effects " and " best new character " in GameSpot 's Game of the Year 2004 awards . 
 Snake Eater 's theme song won the " Best Original Vocal Song - Pop " from the Game Audio Network Guild at the Game Developers Conference in August 2005 , while the game itself won the award for " Best PS2 Game " at 2005 's Game Convention in Germany . David Hayter , voice of Snake , was nominated for the Academy of Interactive Arts and Sciences award for " Outstanding Achievement in Character Performance . " 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Snake Eater was developed as a prequel to the entire Metal Gear series , and was followed by several direct sequels : Metal Gear Solid : Portable Ops , Metal Gear Solid : Peace Walker , Metal Gear Solid V : Ground Zeroes , and Metal Gear Solid V : Phantom Pain . In 2011 , Kojima revealed that he floated the idea of a Metal Gear Solid 5 set during the World War II invasion of Normandy , showing The Boss and Cobra Unit 's assistance in the fight . However , the team was hesitant about such a big project and Kojima later felt that " simply dropping <unk> on the younger staff members was a bit heavy . " 
 The game has since been listed on several " Best of ... " lists by video @-@ gaming publications . In 2009 , IGN placed Subsistence at number 3 on its " The Top 25 PS2 Games of All Time " list . GamePro listed Snake Eater and Subsistence at 8th place on its list of " The 36 Best PS2 Games " in 2010 . That same year , IGN ranked Snake Eater 2nd on its list of the " Top 100 PlayStation 2 Games " , and said that it had " the best story in the franchise . " In 2013 , GamesRadar placed the game at number 22 on its " The 100 Best Games of All Time " list . That same year , the game 's story was ranked 10th place on GamesRadar 's list of " The Best Videogame Stories Ever " . In 2015 , the game placed 2nd on USgamer 's " The 15 Best Games Since 2000 " list . 
 = = Release history = = 
 Like Metal Gear Solid 2 : Sons of Liberty before it , Snake Eater was first released in North America ; the Japanese release was held back for almost a month after that . However , the Japanese version featured a downloadable camouflage pattern unavailable in North America . A limited edition premium package of Snake Eater was released alongside the standard version in Japan . The premium package came with a video DVD disc featuring all the promotional trailers shown prior to the game 's release ( including a proof of concept video shown internally within Konami ) , two booklets and a painted 1 / 144 @-@ scale model of the Shagohod . A special limited edition CD was given away to those who preordered the Japanese version of Snake Eater , which included several tracks from the game 's soundtrack , as well as computer screensavers and additional camouflage for the main game . The pre @-@ order package allowed cell phone users to access a special site featuring image and music downloads . 
 For the European release , Konami added several new features , including the " European Extreme " difficulty setting , a Demo Theater of the game 's cut scenes , and a Duel Mode , where players can replay boss battles from the main game , in addition to extra <unk> based on European flags and two new " Snake vs. Monkey " levels . 
 = = = Subsistence = = = 
 Metal Gear Solid 3 : Subsistence was released in Japan on December 22 , 2005 , later in North America on March 14 , 2006 , in Europe on October 6 , 2006 and in Australia on October 13 , 2006 . Subsistence continues the Metal Gear Solid series tradition of follow @-@ up expanded versions . While previous releases , such as Metal Gear Solid : Integral and Metal Gear Solid 2 : Substance included skill challenge missions and / or side story missions , Subsistence eschews the extra single @-@ player missions to include updated versions of the series ' first two games , Metal Gear and Metal Gear 2 : Solid Snake , a brand @-@ new competitive online mode , and a fully 3D , user @-@ controlled camera in the main portion of the game . 
 Subsistence 's online multiplayer component , titled Metal Gear Online , consists of five tournament @-@ style game modes , each with a capacity of up to eight players . This mode pits players , each playing as a generic soldier against each other in deathmatch battles and variations of capture the flag , using stages , items , maneuvers , and units ( such as the KGB , GRU or Ocelot Unit ) from the main game . Depending on server settings , each round the highest @-@ scoring player in each unit automatically assumes the role of one of the main characters ( or Reiko <unk> from Rumble Roses ) , along with unique abilities and / or items . For example , the highest scoring player on the GRU team would assume the role of Major Raikov , leader of the GRU , next round . Konami 's Metal Gear Online service for the PlayStation 2 closed in Japan on December 26 , 2006 , followed by in North America on April 2 , 2007 and in Europe on October 30 , 2007 , although a fan community has revived it by emulating the servers . As noted above , the online mode , after one of the players unlocks an animal codename , also allowed for the player to play as either Reiko <unk> or Rowdy Reiko from Rumble Roses ( depending if the player in question was of red team or blue team , respectively ) . According to Metal Gear series creator Hideo Kojima , he added the characters into the game as secret characters in part due to opportunity : Kojima had earlier been offered a deal with Rumble Roses producer Akari Uchida to make a crossover between Metal Gear and Rumble Roses . However , the Metal Gear development team at the time refused to work with them . Kojima eventually accepted the offer when trying to decide on secret characters for the online mode for Subsistence to tie up loose ends . He also admitted that he originally considered offering Tomonobu Itagaki , at the time the producer of the Tecmo fighting game series Dead or Alive , the opportunity of using one of his characters as a secret character . 
 In addition to the older games and the online mode , Subsistence includes many minor features common to international version releases . It includes the downloadable extra camouflage and face paint designs and " Snake vs. Monkey " stages previously exclusive to the European release , the European Extreme difficulty level , parody cut scenes and trailers from the official website , and connectivity with Metal Gear Acid 2 . The Japanese version also includes a URL for a hidden website that allows the download of <unk> , a PC and Mac clock program that features Metal Gear Solid series recurring character Otacon . This website is now publicly available . 
 " Limited Edition " copies of Subsistence also include Existence , the game 's cut scenes edited into a three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ hour feature film with additional scenes and remastered sound . The North American " Limited Edition " package was only available to consumers who pre @-@ ordered it before the game 's release . The three disc edition is the standard release of Subsistence in Europe to make up for the title 's lengthy delay . 
 A bonus documentary DVD video titled Metal Gear Saga Vol . 1 was bundled with pre @-@ orders for Subsistence in North America and with the European Platinum reissue of Snake Eater released in Germany on March 23 , 2006 . The disc includes a five @-@ part , 30 @-@ minute featurette about the entire Metal Gear series interspersed with an interview of Hideo Kojima , as well as trailers for various current Metal Gear games . 
 Subsistence received marginally higher review scores than the original Snake Eater , averaging 94 % on Metacritic . Reviewers commented that the introduction of the 3D camera removed the " only grade @-@ A problem " and makes the gameplay feel " less restrictive and more natural . " The online mode is considered " impressive for a PS2 game " , though " [ Snake Eater ] ' s distinctive gameplay conventions do not entirely lend themselves to the online action @-@ gaming experience . " Subsistence received IGN 's award for " best online game " for the PlayStation 2 in December 2006 . 
 = = = HD Edition = = = 
 Konami released a graphically upgraded version of Snake Eater titled Metal Gear Solid 3 : Snake Eater - HD Edition for PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 consoles in late 2011 , and early 2012 in Europe . It was released as a stand @-@ alone digital download , as well as part of the Metal Gear Solid HD Collection , which also include Metal Gear Solid 2 : Sons of Liberty and Metal Gear Solid : Peace Walker . The PS3 and Xbox 360 versions runs in a resolution of 720p and aims for a target framerate of 60 frames per second , compared to the PS2 version 's maximum of 30 FPS . The HD Edition features some of the content from the Subsistence version , such as the third @-@ person camera , demo theater and the inclusion of the MSX2 Metal Gear games , but lacks the online multiplayer mode and the " Snake vs. Monkey " minigame ( due to this version also being released on the Xbox 360 ) . A PlayStation Vita version of the Metal Gear Solid HD Collection on June 2012 , which features Metal Gear Solid 2 and 3 ; this version of Metal Gear Solid 3 features limited touch controls to take advantage of the Vita 's touch screen , and compared to the PS2 version , the framerate is a more consistent 30 FPS , with less screen tearing . 
 = = = Metal Gear Solid : Snake Eater 3D = = = 
 At Electronic Entertainment Expo 2010 , Konami displayed a technical demo for the Nintendo 3DS entitled Metal Gear Solid 3D : Snake Eater – The Naked Sample . The demo 's subtitle " The Naked Sample " was meant to convey its purpose as just a sample of the 3DS hardware , with no plans to bring a game to production at that point . Series producer Hideo Kojima stated at the time that if a Metal Gear game for the 3DS was actually made they would consider some elements from the PlayStation Portable title Metal Gear Solid : Peace Walker , including the game 's cooperative gameplay system . Later in 2010 , Konami announced a full Metal Gear title for release on the 3DS , which was revealed at Nintendo World 2011 to be Metal Gear Solid : Snake Eater 3D . It was released on February 21 , 2012 in North America and March 8 , 2012 worldwide . 
 Due to the limited interface of the 3DS , as well as to take advantage of the touch screen , 3D has vastly unique controls when compared to other games in the Metal Gear series . While the game has been heavily criticized for these control changes , use of the Circle Pad Pro peripheral has been cited to alleviate much of the control issues of the 3DS . This is done by restoring camera movement to the second analog stick , adding <unk> and ZR buttons for aiming and attacking , and allowing the face buttons to be used in a manner more in line with all other releases in the Metal Gear series . 
 3D also has certain optional in @-@ game differences that affect play , such as the concise over the shoulder third @-@ person view and the addition of crouch @-@ walking . Firing in this third @-@ person view substitutes an open cross @-@ hair for the standard down @-@ the @-@ barrel sighting of the standard FPS view . This method of aiming can seem less precise , but does allow for a greater margin of error in accuracy . 3D makes use of the 3DS console 's gyroscope , which is used to maintain balance when walking across a bridge or standing on tree branches . The camouflage system has also been updated , allowing the player to make use of the 3DS ' camera to make a custom camouflage pattern . The port features numerous graphical improvements over the initial PlayStation 2 version including better character models and the addition of normal mapping . Despite this , the framerate has been criticized for falling far below the other versions of Snake Eater . Snake Eater 3D has met with positive reviews , averaging 77 @.@ 74 % at GameRankings based on 34 reviews , and 78 / 100 at Metacritic based on 46 reviews . 
 = = = Other re @-@ releases = = = 
 The 20th Anniversary Edition of Metal Gear released in Japan includes the first disc of Subsistence , with a second disc containing the MSX2 versions of Metal Gear and Metal Gear 2 , without the other extra game modes that were featured in Subsistence ( Snake vs. Monkey , Metal Gear Online , Secret Theater and Duel Mode ) . The version of Metal Gear Solid 3 : Subsistence included in the North American Essential Collection box set is missing the MSX2 games . 
 = = Pachislot = = 
 KPE , the parlor entertainment subsidiary of Konami , announced a pachislot adaptation of Metal Gear Solid : Snake Eater scheduled to be released in Japan sometime during Autumn 2016 . It will be released on a new type of pachislot cabinet known as the " Big Boss " , which features a 32 @-@ inch LCD monitor in full HD covering its front surface . Scenes from the original video game have been redone in updated CGI to showcase the cabinet 's high @-@ end video capabilities . The announcement of this pachislot has been met with backlash among the Metal Gear following the controversy surrounding the circumstances of Kojima 's departure from Konami , with the official trailer on KPE 's Youtube channel currently holding over 53 @,@ 000 thumbs down after 980 @,@ 000 views . 
 = Cold Blood ( Doctor Who ) = 
 " Cold Blood " is the ninth episode in the fifth series of British science fiction television series Doctor Who , which was first broadcast on 29 May 2010 on BBC One . It was written by Chris Chibnall and directed by Ashley Way . It is the second episode of a two @-@ part story , the first episode being " The Hungry Earth " , which features the return of the reptilian humanoid Silurians . 
 Continuing from the previous episode , alien time traveller the Doctor ( Matt Smith ) and geologist Nasreen Chaudhry ( Meera Syal ) have taken the TARDIS deep below the ground to the Silurian city where the Doctor 's companion Amy Pond ( Karen Gillan ) , a local man named Mo ( Alun Raglan ) , and Mo 's son Elliot ( Samuel Davies ) are being held hostage . Meanwhile , above ground , Amy 's fiancé Rory ( Arthur Darvill ) , Mo 's wife Ambrose ( Nia Roberts ) , and Ambrose 's father Tony ( Robert Pugh ) keep watch over Alaya ( Neve McIntosh ) , a captured Silurian who is the key to freeing the hostages . When Ambrose kills Alaya , the Doctor attempts to prevent Alaya 's sister Restac ( McIntosh ) from wiping out the human population as revenge by offering to share the planet with the Silurians . 
 Chibnall was elected by executive producers Steven Moffat and Piers Wenger to write a two @-@ part episode about the return of the Silurians . Chibnall wanted " Cold Blood " in particular to be about the mistakes people make under pressure , and conflict that could come out of protecting a family . The episode is also connected to the series ' story arc , as the crack in the universe returns at the end of the episode . " The Hungry Earth " and " Cold Blood " were filmed in October and November 2009 , with scenes in " Cold Blood " shot in Llanwynno , Wales , Cardiff 's Temple of Peace , Plantasia , and an array of locations and sets for parts of the Silurian city , which the production team did not want to look like a cave . The episode was watched by 7 @.@ 49 million viewers in the United Kingdom and received mixed reviews from critics . Some reviewers were disappointed by the plot and characteristics of the Silurians , but the emotional ending was widely praised . 
 = = Plot = = 
 As the Doctor and geologist Nasreen Chaudhry arrive by TARDIS in the massive Silurian underground civilisation , they are captured and taken to the Silurian doctor , Malohkeh . The Silurians ' hostility is increased when the Doctor recalls his previous meeting with a similar race of reptilian humanoids which were destroyed by humans , a reference to the Third Doctor in Doctor Who and the Silurians . Meanwhile , Amy and Mo escape from <unk> 's experimentation and Mo discovers his son , Elliot , sedated in a chamber and under observation . When <unk> realises the Doctor is not human , the leader of the Silurian warrior caste , Restac , insists both the Doctor and Nasreen be executed and escorts them to a Silurian court ; though Amy and Mo interrupt the trial with stolen weapons , they too are captured . Eldane , Restac 's superior , is called in by Malohkeh and demands a halt to the hostilities . 
 The Doctor makes contact with Rory , Mo 's wife Ambrose , and Ambrose 's father Tony , reminding them to keep their captive Silurian , Restac 's sister Alaya , alive . They are unaware that Ambrose has already killed Alaya because she would not help Tony , whom she had infected with Silurian venom . The Doctor arranges a " conference " between the Silurians ( represented by Eldane ) and the humans ( represented by Amy and Nasreen ) ; the three discuss how both species can co @-@ exist on the surface of the Earth . Ambrose and Tony , worried about the Silurian reaction when they discover Alaya 's death , set Nasreen and Tony 's drill to burrow further and self @-@ destruct fifteen minutes after they depart , which would destroy the Silurian oxygen supply and kill them all . 
 Meanwhile , Restac has killed Malohkeh for his betrayal and awakened other members of the warrior caste , intending to stage a coup against Eldane . When Rory and the others arrive with Alaya 's corpse , Restac becomes furious and orders the humans ' death ; the Doctor disables their weapons to give him , Eldane , and the humans time to escape ; they bar themselves into Malohkeh 's lab . The Doctor and Eldane realise they can use Silurian technology to destroy the drill before it detonates , but it will cause their exit route to collapse if they cannot reach the TARDIS in time . Eldane returns the warriors to hibernation by initiating a " toxic fumigation " ; the humans escape , and Eldane hopes that in a thousand years , peace between humans and Silurians can occur . Tony , still affected by Silurian venom , opts to stay behind to be cured , and Nasreen also remains behind to study the earth from below and help improve human @-@ Silurian relations . 
 Ambrose 's family takes refuge in the TARDIS , but the Doctor , Amy and Rory find a crack in the cavern wall similar to those they have seen before . The Doctor surmises that the crack was caused by an explosion in time , which might have left " shrapnel " behind . He reaches in and pulls out an object which he wraps in a handkerchief . Before he can explain , Restac , dying from the toxic exposure , crawls around the corner and fires at the Doctor , but Rory pushes him out of the way and takes the shot , dying in Amy 's arms . As the crack begins to absorb Rory 's body , the Doctor realises that Rory will be written out of history and forces Amy to board the TARDIS before the drill explodes . He tries to help her concentrate on remembering Rory , but a jolt from the TARDIS causes her to lose concentration and her memories of Rory are lost . The Doctor finds Amy 's engagement ring , which Rory had stowed before the events , on the floor of the TARDIS . 
 On the surface , Ambrose thanks the Doctor for not letting the Silurians execute her for killing Alaya , and the Doctor asks her to help prepare humanity for their next encounter with the Silurians . The Doctor and Amy return to the TARDIS , where Amy sights her future self on the hillside without Rory . The Doctor takes out the object he pulled from the crack : a burnt piece of the TARDIS 's sign . He worriedly compares it to the real thing . Aside from the damage , they appear identical . 
 = = Production = = 
 Writer Chris Chibnall was contracted by executive producers Steven Moffat and Piers Wenger to write a two @-@ part Doctor Who episode about Silurians and a drill . Chibnall had previously written the Doctor Who episode " 42 " as well as episodes of the spin @-@ off series Torchwood . " Cold Blood " is the second part of the story which began with " The Hungry Earth " ; the latter built up the tension while " Cold Blood " was designed to get into the action . " Cold Blood " is also set in the bigger setting of the Silurian city , while " The Hungry Earth " was set in a small Welsh village . Chibnall wanted the Silurian city to contrast with the village . Chibnall wanted it to be a " story about people making mistakes under massive pressure " and the accidental conflict that came out of protecting a family ; as such , he always intended for Alaya to die . He considered " Cold Blood " especially to be " so clearly about the Silurians and what the Silurians want " . 
 Moffat 's plan " from the outset " , to tie the episode into the overarching story arc of the series , was that Rory not just die but be erased from history in the crack in the universe . Moffat would later bring Rory back in " The Pandorica Opens " , though the episode reveals his consciousness was placed in a Roman centurion Auton as part of a trap for the Doctor to save the universe from the cracks . Moffat also thought it was appropriate as the trio had had fun , and now it was time for a casualty . Rory 's death is also connected with Chibnall 's theme of making mistakes ; it was the Doctor 's fault as he stopped to look at the crack . Gillan called the scene " incredibly challenging " for her to perform and tried to make it " truthful and believable " . 
 " The Hungry Earth " and " Cold Blood " made up the fourth production block of the series and were filmed in late October and November 2009 in the Upper Boat Studios and Llanwynno , Wales . " Cold Blood " utilised many different locations and unusual sets to portray the Silurian city , as the production team did not want simply a " cave feel " . They believed that the Silurians were also sophisticated and were able to use materials found underground , such as granite and marble . Many of the sets were given an orange glow from beneath to portray the " ambient glow " from the centre of the earth . The jungle walkway leading to the Silurian city was filmed in the Plantasia botanical garden in Swansea on 13 November 2009 . The set gave a sense of things growing , as these were necessary for the Silurians to survive . Set designers were able to rearrange the plants , though they had to be careful not to show the window leading to the car park or other modern amenities . The hall where the Doctor is brought for execution was filmed at the Temple of Peace in Cardiff , and little dressing was done to the set . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Cold Blood " was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC One and simulcast on BBC HD on 29 May 2010 . Initial overnight ratings showed that the episode was watched by 5 @.@ 7 million viewers , a million more than the previous week . Final consolidated ratings rose to 7 @.@ 49 million ( 7 @.@ 04 million on BBC One and 0 @.@ 45 million on BBC HD ) , ranking the show fourth for the week ending 30 May 2010 on the channel and the highest rated show on BBC One for the day . The episode received an Appreciation Index of 85 , considered " excellent " . 
 " Cold Blood " was released in Region 2 on DVD and Blu @-@ ray on 2 August 2010 with the episodes " Amy 's Choice " and " The Hungry Earth " . It was then re @-@ released as part of the Complete Fifth Series boxset on 8 November 2010 . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The episode received mixed reviews from critics . Dan Martin , writing for The Guardian , said that the episode was similar to previous Silurian stories in Doctor Who , though he said he loved the " tense , mad and thoughtful story " . He expressed " delight " at Amy and Nasreen negotiating for the humans , though he thought the diplomacy scenes were " broadly drawn " . Overall , he considered the strength of the episode was " giving you something big and moral to chew over , in a way that nothing else this series has yet " . Gavin Fuller of The Daily Telegraph also compared " Cold Blood " ' s concept and ideas to the original 1970 Silurians story but considered this story made " less of an impact " due to a " black and white depiction " and the one @-@ dimensional Restac . He was also critical of Matt Smith 's Doctor , whose portrayal " lacked gravitas and conviction and was altogether too light @-@ hearted " . However , he praised both Smith and Gillan 's " strong " performances in the final scene where Rory is killed . 
 The A.V. Club 's Keith Phipps gave the episode a B + , noting that Rory 's death had been spoiled for him by commenters on the site and thus he did not enjoy the episode as much as he might have . He called it " satisfying , if not extraordinary " conclusion and " another pretty solid entry in the series " . He further praising Gillan and Amy 's character for " [ continuing ] to impress " as well as the depths to the supporting characters by both Chibnall and Way , and the allegories that could be derived from the conflict between the humans and the Silurians and the aftermath of Rory 's demise . 
 IGN 's Matt Wales rated the episode 8 out of 10 , and thought that " even less actually happened " than the previous episode , though he enjoyed the " atmospheric build @-@ up and more thoughtful tone " . While he considered it predictable , he said that it " still offered plenty in the way of entertainment with its brisk pace , beautifully @-@ realised underground world and a convincing cast of rounded characters " . He praised Smith and Gillan 's performances in the ending , but thought it was " a surprisingly downbeat denouement " . Ian Berriman of SFX magazine gave " Cold Blood " four and a half out of five stars , positively comparing the emotional ending to episodes from the Russell T Davies era . He also had some " nitpicks " about the episode , such as the abrupt character change of Malohkeh . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " The Hungry Earth " / " Cold Blood " reviews at The Doctor Who Ratings Guide 
 = Che ( 2008 film ) = 
 Che is a two @-@ part 2008 biopic about Argentine Marxist revolutionary Ernesto " Che " Guevara , directed by Steven Soderbergh and starring Benicio del Toro . Rather than follow a standard chronological order , the films offer an oblique series of interspersed moments along the overall timeline . Part One is entitled The Argentine and focuses on the Cuban Revolution from the landing of Fidel Castro , Guevara , and other revolutionaries in Cuba to their successful toppling of Fulgencio Batista 's dictatorship two years later . Part Two is entitled Guerrilla and focuses on Guevara 's attempt to bring revolution to Bolivia and his demise . Both parts are shot in a cinéma vérité style , but each has different approaches to linear narrative , camerawork , and the visual look . 
 Filmmaker Terrence Malick originally worked on a screenplay limited to Guevara 's attempts to start a revolution in Bolivia . When financing fell through , Malick left the project , and Soderbergh subsequently agreed to direct the film . He realized that there was no context for Guevara 's actions in Bolivia and decided that his participation in the Cuban Revolution and his appearance at the United Nations in 1964 should also be depicted . Peter Buchman was hired to write the screenplay : the script was so long that Soderbergh decided to divide the film into two parts , one chronicling Cuba and other depicting Bolivia . Soderbergh shot the films back @-@ to @-@ back starting at the beginning of July 2007 , with Guerrilla first in Spain for 39 days , and The Argentine shot in Puerto Rico and Mexico for 39 days . 
 Che was screened as a single film at the 2008 Cannes Film Festival . Del Toro won the Best Actor Award , and the film received mostly positive reviews . IFC Films , which holds all North American rights to Che , initially released the combined film for one week on 12 December 2008 in New York City and Los Angeles to qualify for the year 's Academy Awards . Strong box office performance led to the " special roadshow edition " being extended in N.Y.C. and L.A. and later expanded into additional markets . The film was released as two separate films , titled Che Part 1 : The Argentine and Che Part 2 : Guerrilla , and distribution expanded further after that . The Independent Film Channel released the films via video on demand and on Region 1 DVD exclusively from Blockbuster . Che Parts I and II have grossed nearly $ 41 million USD , against a budget of $ 58 million USD . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Part 1 : The Argentine = = = 
 In Havana 1964 , Che Guevara is interviewed by Lisa Howard who asks him if reform throughout Latin America might not blunt the " message of the Cuban Revolution . " 
 In 1955 , at a gathering in Mexico City , Guevara first meets Fidel Castro . He listens to Castro ’ s plans and signs on as a member of the July 26th Movement . 
 There is a return to 1964 for Guevara ’ s address before the United Nations General Assembly in New York City , where he makes an impassioned speech against American imperialism , and defends the executions his regime has committed , declaring " this is a battle to the death . " 
 March 1957 . Guevara deals with debilitating bouts of asthma as his group of revolutionaries meet up with Castro ’ s . Together , they attack an army barracks in the Sierra Maestra on May 28 , 1957 . 
 On October 15 , 1958 , the guerrillas approach the town of Las Villas . The Battle of Santa Clara is depicted with Guevara demonstrating his tactical skill as the guerrillas engage in street @-@ to @-@ street fighting and derail a train carrying Cuban soldiers and armaments . Near the film ‘ s end , they are victorious . With the Cuban Revolution now over , Guevara heads to Havana , remarking " we won the war , the revolution starts now . " 
 = = = Part 2 : Guerrilla = = = 
 The second part begins on November 3 , 1966 with Guevara arriving in Bolivia disguised as a middle @-@ aged representative of the Organization of American States hailing from Uruguay , who subsequently drives into the mountains to meet his men . The film is organized by the number of days that he was in the country . On Day 26 , there is solidarity among Guevara 's men despite his status as foreigner . By Day 67 , Guevara has been set up for betrayal . He tries to recruit some peasants only to be mistaken for a cocaine smuggler . On Day 100 , there is a shortage of food and Guevara exercises discipline to resolve conflicts between his Cuban and Bolivian followers . 
 By Day 113 , some of the guerrillas have deserted and the Bolivian Army has discovered their base camp . Much to Che 's disappointment Tamara " Tania " Bunke , Guevara 's revolutionary contact , has botched elaborate preparations and given away their identity . On Day 141 , the guerrillas capture Bolivian soldiers that refuse to join the revolution and are free to return to their villages . CIA advisers arrive to supervise anti @-@ insurgent activity and training . On Day 169 , Guevara 's visiting friend , the French intellectual Régis Debray , is captured at <unk> by the Bolivian Army , which launches an aerial attack on Day 219 . 
 Guevara grows sick and by Day 280 can barely breathe as a result of his acute asthma . On Day 302 , the Bolivian Army kills Tania Bunke , Juan Acuña <unk> , and several others in Che 's forces in an ambush as they attempt to cross the Vado del <unk> after a local informant tells the Bolivian troops about the movements of the rebels . By Day 340 , Guevara is trapped by the Bolivian Army in the <unk> Ravine near the village of La Higuera . Che is wounded and captured . The next day , a helicopter lands and a Cuban American CIA agent Félix Rodríguez emerges . The Bolivian high command are then phoned and give approval for Guevara 's execution . He is shot on 9 October 1967 , and his corpse lashed to a helicopter 's landing skids and flown out . 
 In a final flashback scene , Guevara is aboard the Granma in 1956 , looking out over the ocean . He sees the Castro brothers alone at the bow of the ship ; Fidel is talking and Raúl is taking notes . Guevara hands a peeled orange to one of his comrades and returns his gaze to the lone brothers before the scene fades to black . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Benicio del Toro as Ernesto " Che " Guevara 
 <unk> Bichir as Fidel Castro 
 Rodrigo Santoro as Raúl Castro 
 Santiago Cabrera as Camilo Cienfuegos 
 Franka Potente as Tamara " Tania " Bunke 
 Gastón Pauls as Ciro Bustos ( el Argentino ) 
 Catalina Sandino Moreno as Aleida March 
 Julia Ormond as Lisa Howard 
 Oscar Isaac as U.N. Interpreter and film narrator 
 Lou Diamond Phillips as Mario Monje 
 Benjamín Benítez as Harry " Pombo " Villegas 
 Armando <unk> as Benigno 
 Elvira <unk> as Celia Sanchez 
 Édgar Ramírez as Ciro Redondo 
 Alfredo De Quesada as Israel Pardo 
 Roberto Luis Santana as Juan Almeida Bosque 
 Victor <unk> as Rogelio Acevedo 
 Kahlil Mendez as Urbano 
 Matt Damon as Fr . Schwarz 
 <unk> Ugalde as Roberto " El <unk> " Rodríguez 
 Joaquim de Almeida as René Barrientos 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Originally , Che was intended to be a much more traditional film based on Jon Lee Anderson 's 1997 biography Che Guevara : A Revolutionary Life . Actor Benicio del Toro and producer Laura Bickford optioned the film rights to Anderson 's book . However , after two years they had not found a suitable writer and the rights expired . During this time , Del Toro and Bickford researched the events depicted in Guerrilla with the idea of exploring Guevara 's attempts to start a revolution in Bolivia . Del Toro has said that he previously only thought of Guevara as a " bad guy " . For his role , Del Toro spent seven years " obsessively researching " Guevara 's life , which made him feel like he " earned his stripes " to interpret the character . Preparation included looking at Guevara 's photographs and reading his personal writings . Del Toro read Don Quixote , one of Guevara 's favorites , and the first book published and given out free after the Cuban Revolution . Del Toro then personally met with people from different stages of Guevara 's life , including Guevara 's younger brother and childhood friends , traveling to Cuba where Del Toro met Guevara 's widow , family , and " tons of people that loved this man " . The visit included a five @-@ minute encounter at a book fair with Fidel Castro , who expressed that he was happy for the " serious " research being undertaken . Such research included collaborating with the three surviving guerrillas from Guevara 's ill @-@ fated Bolivian campaign , and with several guerrillas who fought alongside him in Cuba . While researching for both films , Soderbergh made a documentary of his interviews with many of the people who had fought alongside Guevara . In his encounters with people ranging from fellow guerrillas to Guevara 's driver , Del Toro described the reaction as " always the same " , stating that he was " blown away " by the " <unk> of love " they still harbored for Guevara . In an interview , Del Toro described Guevara as " a weird combination of an intellectual and an action figure , Gregory Peck and Steve McQueen , wrapped in one " . After the film 's production concluded , Del Toro professed that " when you tell the story of Che , you 're telling a story of the history of a country , so you have to be very careful " . 
 = = = Screenplay = = = 
 Del Toro and Bickford hired screenwriter Benjamin A. van der Veen to write the screenplay 's first drafts , and their extensive research took them to Cuba where they met with several of the remaining members of Guevara 's team in Bolivia as well as the revolutionary 's wife and children . It was during this phase of development that the filmmakers discovered Terrence Malick had been in Bolivia as a journalist in 1966 working on a story about Che . Malick came on as director and worked on the screenplay with van der Veen and Del Toro , but after a year @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half , the financing had not come together entirely and Malick left to make The New World , a film about Jamestown , Virginia . Afraid that their multi @-@ territory deals would fall apart , Bickford and Del Toro asked Steven Soderbergh , who was previously on board as producer , to direct . The filmmaker was drawn to the contrast of " engagement versus disengagement . Do we want to participate or observe ? Once Che made the decision to engage , he engaged fully . Often people attribute that to a higher power , but as an atheist , he didn 't have that . I found that very interesting " . Furthermore , he remarked that Guevara was " great movie material " and " had one of the most fascinating lives " that he could " imagine in the last century " . Bickford and Del Toro realized that there was no context for what made Guevara decide to go to Bolivia . They began looking for someone to rewrite the screenplay ; Peter Buchman was recommended to them because he had a good reputation for writing about historical figures , based on a script he worked about Alexander the Great . He spent a year reading every available book on Guevara in preparation for writing the script . The project was put on hold when Bickford and Del Toro made Traffic with Soderbergh . 
 Soderbergh wanted to incorporate Guevara 's experiences in Cuba and at the United Nations in 1964 . Buchman helped with the script 's structure , which he gave three storylines : Guevara 's life and the Cuban Revolution ; his demise in Bolivia ; and his trip to New York to speak at the U.N. Buchman found that the problem with containing all of these stories in one film was that he had to condense time and this distorted history . Soderbergh found the draft Buchman submitted to him " unreadable " and after two weeks decided to split the script into two separate films . Buchman went back and with Del Toro expanded the Cuban story for The Argentine . Additional research included reading Guevara 's diaries and declassified documents from the U.S. State Department about his trip to New York and memos from his time in Bolivia . 
 Soderbergh found the task of researching such a popular historical figure as Guevara a daunting one : " If you go to any bookstore , you 'll find an entire wall of Che @-@ related material . We tried to go through all of it , we were overwhelmed with information . He means something different to everyone . At a certain point we had to decide for ourselves who Che was " . The original source material for these scripts was Guevara 's diary from the Cuban Revolution , Reminiscences of the Cuban Revolutionary War , and from his time in Bolivia , Bolivian Diary . From there , he drew on interviews with people who knew Guevara from both of those time periods and read every book available that pertained to both Cuba and Bolivia . Bickford and Del Toro met with Harry " Pombo " Villegas , Urbano and Benigno — three men who met Guevara during the Cuban Revolution , followed him to Bolivia , and survived . They interviewed them individually and then Pombo and Benigno together about their experiences in Cuba and Bolivia . Urbano was an adviser while they were filming in Spain and the actors often consulted with him and the others about specific details , like how to hold their guns in a certain situation , and very specific tactical information . 
 In December 2008 , Ocean Press , in cooperation with the Che Guevara Publishing Project , released Che : The Diaries of Ernesto Che Guevara , with a movie tie @-@ in cover . The book 's aim was to compile all the original letters , diary excerpts , speeches and maps on which Soderbergh relied for the film . The text is interspersed with remarks by Benicio del Toro and Steven Soderbergh . 
 = = = Financing = = = 
 Initially , Che was going to be made in English and a strong interest in financing it was met ; however , when the decision was made to make it in Spanish and break it up into two films , the studios ' pay @-@ TV deals , which were for English @-@ language product only , " disappeared " , according to Bickford , " and , at that point , nobody wanted to step up " . The director defended his decision to shoot almost all of the film in Spanish in an interview : " You can 't make a film with any level of credibility in this case unless it 's in Spanish . I hope we 're reaching a time where you go make a movie in another culture , that you shoot in the language of that culture . I 'm hoping the days of that sort of specific brand of cultural imperialism have ended " . Both films were financed without any American money or distribution deal ; Soderbergh remarked , " It was very frustrating to know that this is a zeitgeist movie and that some of the very people who told me how much they now regret passing on Traffic passed on this one too " . Foreign pre @-@ sales covered $ 54 million of the $ 58 million budget . Wild Bunch , a French production , distribution and foreign sales company put up 75 % of the budget for the two films , tapping into a production and acquisition fund from financing and investment company Continental Entertainment Capitol , a subsidiary of the U.S.-based Citigroup . Spain 's Telecinco / Moreno Films supplied the rest of the budget . 
 = = = Principal photography = = = 
 In 2006 , shortly before the U.N. Headquarters underwent major renovations , Del Toro and Soderbergh shot the scenes of Guevara speaking to the U.N. General Assembly in 1964 . The director wanted to shoot the first part of The Argentine in Cuba , but was prevented from travelling there by the U.S. government 's embargo . Doubling Santa Clara proved to be difficult because it was a certain size and had a certain look . Soderbergh spent four to five months scouting for a suitable replacement , looking at towns in Veracruz / Yucatán before settling on Campeche , which had the elements they needed . 
 The original intention was for The Argentine to be shot using anamorphic 16 mm film because , according to the director , it needed " a bit of Bruckheimer but scruffier " . He kept to his plan of shooting The Argentine <unk> , and Guerrilla with spherical lenses . Soderbergh wanted to use the new RED One rather than 16 mm film because of its ability to replicate film stock digitally but initially , it was not going to be available on time . However , their Spanish work papers and visas were late and Del Toro and Soderbergh were grounded in Los Angeles for a week . The director was meanwhile informed that the prototype cameras were ready . 
 Each half of the film focuses on a different revolution , both fundamentally the same in theory but vastly different in outcome , reflecting the Marxist notion of dialectics . Soderbergh wanted the film 's two parts to mimic the voice of the two diaries they were based on ; the Cuban diaries were written after the fact and , according to the director , " with a certain hindsight and perspective and a tone that comes from being victorious " , while the Bolivian diaries were " contemporaneous , and they 're very isolated and have no perspective , at all . It 's a much more tense read , because the outcome is totally unclear " . 
 Soderbergh shot the films back @-@ to @-@ back in the beginning of July 2007 with Guerrilla shot first in Spain for 39 days and The Argentine shot in Puerto Rico and Mexico for 39 days . The director conceived The Argentine as " a Hollywood movie " shot in widescreen ' scope aspect ratio , with the camera either fixed or moving on a dolly or a Steadicam . Guerrilla was shot , according to Soderbergh , " in Super @-@ 16 , 1 @.@ 85 : 1 . No dollies , no cranes , it 's all either handheld or tripods . I want it to look nice but simple . We 'll work with a very small group : basically me , the producer Gregory Jacobs and the unit production manager " . According to the director , the portion set in Cuba was written from the victor 's perspective and as a result he adopted a more traditional look with classical compositions , vibrant color and a warm palette . With Guerrilla , he wanted a sense of foreboding with hand @-@ held camerawork and a muted color palette . Soderbergh told his production designer <unk> Gomez that the first part would have green with a lot of yellow in it and the second part would have green with a lot of blue in it . 
 At the end of The Argentine , Soderbergh depicts Guevara 's derailment of a freight train during the Battle of Santa Clara . In filming the sequence , Soderbergh balked at the digital effects solution and managed to reallocate $ 500 @,@ 000 from the overall $ 58 million budget to build a real set of tracks and a train powered by two V @-@ 8 car engines . To film the scene , they had six rehearsals , and could only shoot the scene once . 
 Many aspects of Guevara 's personality and beliefs affected the filming process . For instance , close @-@ ups of Del Toro were avoided due to Guevara 's belief in collectivism , with Soderbergh remarking , " You can 't make a movie about a guy who has these hard @-@ core sort of egalitarian socialist principles and then isolate him with close @-@ ups . " According to Edgar Ramirez , who portrays Ciro Redondo , the cast " were improvising a lot " while making The Argentine , and he describes the project as a " very contemplative movie " , shot chronologically . While filming outdoors , Soderbergh used natural light as much as possible . Del Toro , who speaks Puerto Rican Spanish , tried to speak the best Argentinean Spanish ( <unk> Spanish ) he could without sounding " stiff " . Prior to shooting the film 's final scenes that depict Guevara 's time in Bolivia at the end of his life , Del Toro shed 35 pounds to show how ill Guevara had become . The actor shaved the top of his head rather than wear a bald cap for the scenes depicting Guevara 's arrival in Bolivia in disguise . 
 Soderbergh has said that with Che , he wanted to show everyday tasks , " things that have meaning on a practical level and on an ideological level " , as a " way of showing what it might have been like to be there " . While addressing the issue after at the Toronto International Film Festival , Soderbergh remarked that he was trying to avoid what he felt were typical scenes for a biographical film and that he would tell screenwriter Peter Buchman , that he was " trying to find the scenes that would happen before or after the scene that you would typically see in a movie like this " . Soderbergh was not interested in depicting Guevara 's personal life because he felt that " everybody on these campaigns has a personal life , they all left families behind , that doesn 't make him special and why should I go into his personal life and nobody else 's ? " 
 Soderbergh decided to omit the post @-@ revolution execution sentences of " suspected war criminals , traitors and informants " that Guevara reviewed at La Cabana Fortress because " there is no amount of accumulated barbarity that would have satisfied the people who hate him " . Soderbergh addressed the criticism for this omission in a post release interview where he stated : " I don 't think anybody now , even in Cuba , is going to sit with a straight face and defend the events . La Cabana was really turned into a Roman circus , where I think even the people in power look back on that as excessive . However , every regime , in order to retain power when it feels threatened , acts excessively ... This is what people do when they feel they need to act in an extreme way to secure themselves " . The filmmaker noted as well that , " with a character this complicated , you ’ re going to have a very polarized reaction " . Furthermore , he was not interested in depicting Guevara 's life as " a bureaucrat " , stating that he was making a diptych about two military campaigns , declaring the pictures " war films " . Soderbergh said , " I 'm sure some people will say , ' That 's convenient because that 's when he was at his worst . ' Yeah , maybe — it just wasn 't interesting to me . I was interested in making a procedural about guerrilla warfare " . 
 Soderbergh described the Cuban Revolution as " the last analog revolution . I loved that we shot a period film about a type of war that can 't be fought anymore " . Soderbergh has said that he is open to making another film about Guevara 's experiences in the Congo but only if Che makes $ 100 million at the box office . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 Theatrical distribution rights were pre @-@ sold to distributors in several major territories , including France , the United Kingdom , Scandinavia , Italy , and Japan ( Nikkatsu ) ; Twentieth Century Fox bought the Spanish theatrical and home video rights . IFC Films paid a low seven @-@ figure sum to acquire all North American rights to Che after production had completed and released it on 12 December 2008 in New York City and Los Angeles in order to qualify it for the Academy Awards . The " special roadshow edition " in N.Y.C. and L.A. was initially planned as a one @-@ week special engagement — complete with intermission and including a full @-@ color printed program — but strong box @-@ office results led to its re @-@ opening for two weeks on 9 January 2009 as two separate films , titled Che Part 1 : The Argentine and Che Part 2 : Guerrilla . Soderbergh said that the program 's inspiration came from the 70 mm engagements for Francis Ford Coppola 's Apocalypse Now . The film was expanded to additional markets on 16 and 22 January both as a single film and as two separate films . IFC made the films available through video on demand on 21 January on all major cable and satellite providers in both standard and high definition versions . 
 = = = Screenings = = = 
 Che was screened on 21 May at the 2008 Cannes Film Festival reportedly running over four hours . Following this screening , Soderbergh cut 5 – 7 minutes from each half . It was shown at the 46th New York Film Festival and was shown at the 33rd Toronto International Film Festival as Che with a 15 @-@ minute intermission and as two separate films , The Argentine and Guerrilla , where it was considered the festival 's " must @-@ see " film . Che made its sold @-@ out L.A. premiere at Grauman 's Chinese Theatre on 1 November 2008 as part of the AFI Fest . 
 Che was screened in Guevara 's homeland of Argentina in November 2008 . To mark the occasion , the streets of Buenos Aires were decorated with large posters of Del Toro in his role as the guerrilla fighter , unprecedented in the city 's history . When questioned by the press on Guevara 's ideas and use of violence , Del Toro stated that if he had lived during the 1960s , he would have agreed with Guevara , and that although he did not support violent revolution now , in the ' 60s he may " have been another person and in agreement with armed war " . 
 Del Toro and Soderbergh both attended the French premiere in late November 2008 , where they took questions from the press . Del Toro remarked that the " legendary rebel " was still pertinent because " the things that he fought for in the late 1950s and mid 1960s are still relevant today " , adding that " he did not hide behind curtains ... he stood up for the forgotten ones " . When asked why he made the film , Soderbergh stated , " I needed to make the film , and that is a different feeling . I felt like , if I am worth anything , I have to say yes . I can 't say no " . The following day , the Dubai International Film Festival would describe Soderbergh 's narrative as a " magisterial ... compelling experience " , with Del Toro 's performance as " blue @-@ chip " . 
 Che opened in single theaters in N.Y.C. and L.A. where it made $ 60 @,@ 100 with sellouts of both venues . Based on this success , IFC Films executives added two weekends of exclusive runs for the roadshow version , starting 24 December in N.Y.C. and 26 December in L.A. This successful run prompted IFC Films to show this version in nine additional markets on 16 January . Che will be shown in its entirety , commercial and trailer free with an intermission and limited edition program book at every screening . Soderbergh has said that the film 's roadshow version will not be released on DVD but released in two parts with the animated map that opens the roadshow 's second half missing from Part II , as well as the overture and intermission music . 
 According to Variety , it had grossed $ 164 @,@ 142 in one weekend , at 35 locations in North America and $ 20 million from a half @-@ dozen major markets around the world , led by Spain at $ 9 @.@ 7 million . As of May 2009 , it has grossed $ 1 @.@ 4 million in North America and $ 29 @.@ 8 million in the rest of the world for a worldwide total of $ 30 million . Eventually , Che made good profit for IFC Films . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Cannes reaction = = = 
 Early reviews were mixed , although there were several critics who spoke glowingly of the project . Cinematical 's James Rocchi described the biopic as " expressive , innovative , striking , and exciting " as well as " bold , beautiful , bleak and brilliant " . Rocchi went on to brand it " a work of art " that 's " not just the story of a revolutionary " but " a revolution in and of itself " . Columnist and critic Jeffrey Wells proclaimed the film " brilliant " , " utterly believable " , and " the most exciting and far @-@ reaching film of the Cannes Film Festival " . In further praise , Wells referred to the film as " politically vibrant and searing " while labeling it a " perfect dream movie " . 
 Todd McCarthy was more mixed in his reaction to the film in its present form , describing it as " too big a roll of the dice to pass off as an experiment , as it 's got to meet high standards both commercially and artistically . The demanding running time forces comparison to such rare works as Lawrence of Arabia , Reds and other <unk> epics . Unfortunately , Che doesn 't feel epic — just long " . Anne Thompson wrote that Benicio del Toro " gives a great performance " , but predicted that " it will not be released stateside as it was seen here " . Glenn Kenny wrote , " Che benefits greatly from certain <unk> qualities that don 't always serve his other films well , e.g. , detachment , formalism , and intellectual curiosity " . 
 Peter Bradshaw , in his review for The Guardian , wrote , " Perhaps it will even come to be seen as this director 's flawed masterpiece : enthralling but structurally fractured — the second half is much clearer and more sure @-@ footed than the first — and at times frustratingly reticent , unwilling to attempt any insight into Che 's interior world " . In his less favorable review for Esquire , Stephen Garrett criticized the film for failing to show Guevara 's negative aspects , " the absence of darker , more contradictory revelations of his nature leaves Che bereft of complexity . All that remains is a South American superman : <unk> , pure of heart , defiantly pious and boring " . Richard Corliss had problems with Del Toro 's portrayal of Guevara : " Del Toro — whose acting style often starts over the top and soars from there , like a hang @-@ glider leaping from a skyscraper roof — is muted , yielding few emotional revelations , seemingly sedated here ... Che is defined less by his rigorous fighting skills and seductive intellect than by his asthma " . In his review for Salon.com , Andrew O 'Hehir praised Soderbergh for making " something that people will be eager to see and eager to talk about all over the world , something that feels strangely urgent , something messy and unfinished and amazing . I 'd be surprised if Che doesn 't win the Palme d 'Or ... but be that as it may , nobody who saw it here will ever forget it " . 
 Soderbergh replied to the criticism that he made an unconventional film : " I find it hilarious that most of the stuff being written about movies is how conventional they are , and then you have people ... upset that something 's not conventional . The bottom line is we 're just trying to give you a sense of what it was like to hang out around this person . That 's really it . And the scenes were chosen strictly on the basis of , ' Yeah , what does that tell us about his character ? ' " . 
 After Cannes , Soderbergh made a few minor adjustments to the film . This included adding a moment of Guevara and Fidel Castro shaking hands , tweaking a few transitions , and tacking on an overture and entr 'acte to the limited " road show " version . Moreover , he removed the trial of guerrilla Lalo <unk> , which Chicago film critic Ben Kenigsberg found " regrettable " , stating that it was " not only one of the film 's most haunting scenes but a key hint at the darker side of Che 's ideology " . 
 = = = <unk> reaction = = = 
 In her review for The New York Times , based on a screening at the New York Film Festival , Manohla Dargis observes that " throughout the movie Mr. Soderbergh mixes the wild beauty of his landscapes with images of Che heroically engaged in battle , thoughtfully scribbling and reading , and tending to ailing peasants and soldiers " . According to Dargis , " Che wins , Che loses , but Che remains the same in what plays like a procedural about a charismatic leader , impossible missions and the pleasures of work and camaraderie " , referring to the " historical epic " as " Ocean 's Eleven with better cigars " . However , Dargis notes that " Mr. Soderbergh <unk> evades Che 's ugly side , notably his increasing commitment to violence and seemingly endless war , but the movie is without question political — even if it emphasizes romantic adventure over realpolitik — because , like all films , it is predicated on getting , spending and making money " . 
 Film critic Glenn Kenny wrote , " Che seems to me almost the polar opposite of agitprop . It flat out does not ask for the kind of emotional engagement that more conventional epic biopics do , and that 's a good thing " . In his review for UGO , Keith Uhlich wrote , " The best to say about Del Toro 's Cannes @-@ honored performance is that it 's exhausting — all exterior , no soul , like watching an android run a gauntlet ( one that includes grueling physical exertions , tendentious political <unk> , and risible Matt Damon cameos ) " . Slant magazine gave Che two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of four and wrote , " The problem is that , despite his desire to sidestep Hollywood bio @-@ hooey , the director is unable to turn his chilly stance into an ideological perspective , like Roberto Rossellini did in his <unk> portraits of Louis XIV , Garibaldi and Pascal " . 
 In his review for Salon magazine , Andrew O 'Hehir wrote , " What Soderbergh has sought to capture here is a grand process of birth and extinguishment , one that produced a complicated legacy in which John McCain , Barack Obama , and Raúl Castro are still enmeshed . There will be plenty of time to argue about the film 's ( or films ' ) political relevance or lack thereof , to call Soderbergh names for this or that historical omission , for this or that ideological error . He 's made something that people will be eager to see and eager to talk about all over the world , something that feels strangely urgent , something messy and unfinished and amazing " . 
 = = = Miami screening and protest = = = 
 On 4 December 2008 , Che premiered at Miami Beach 's Byron Carlyle Theatre , as part of the Art Basel Festival . Taking place only a few miles from Little Havana , which is home to the United States ' largest Cuban American community , the invitation @-@ only screening was met with angry demonstrators . The organization Vigilia <unk> , led by Miguel Saavedra , amassed an estimated 100 demonstrators to decry what they believed would be a favorable depiction of Guevara . Saavedra told reporters from the El Nuevo Herald that " you cannot offend the sensitivities of the people " , while describing the film as " a disgrace " . A supporter of the demonstration , Miami Beach 's mayor Matti Herrera Bower , lamented that the film was shown , while declaring " we must not allow dissemination of this movie " . When asked days later about the incident , Del Toro remarked that the ability to speak out was " part of what makes America great " while adding " I find it a little weird that they were protesting without having seen the film , but that 's another matter " . For his part , Soderbergh later stated that " you have to separate the Cuban nationalist lobby that is centered in Miami from the rest of the country " . 
 = = = Cuban homecoming = = = 
 On 7 December 2008 , Che premiered at Havana 's 5 @,@ 000 + person Karl Marx Theater as part of the Latin American Film Festival . Benicio Del Toro , who was in attendance , referred to the film as " Cuban history " , while remarking that " there 's an audience in there ... that could be the most knowledgeable critics of the historical accuracy of the film " . The official state paper Granma gave Del Toro a glowing review , professing that he " personifies Che " in both his physical appearance and his " masterly interpretation " . After unveiling Che in Havana 's Yara Cinema , Del Toro was treated to a 10 @-@ minute standing ovation from the 2 @,@ 000 + strong audience , many of whom were involved in the revolution . 
 = = = New York City debut = = = 
 On 12 December 2008 , Che was screened at New York City 's sold out 1 @,@ 100 person Ziegfeld Theater . Upon seeing the first image on the screen ( a silhouette of Cuba ) , the crowd erupted into a raucous cry of " ¡ Viva , Cuba ! " Following the film , and the standing ovation it received , Soderbergh appeared for a post program Q & A. During the sometimes contentious conversation with the audience , in which Soderbergh alternated between defensiveness and modesty , the director categorized Guevara as " a hard ass " , to which one audience member yelled out , " Bullshit , he was a murderer ! " The filmmaker settled down the crowd and explained , " It doesn 't matter whether I agree with him or not — I was interested in Che as a warrior , Che as a guy who had an ideology , who picked up a gun and this was the result . He died the way you would have him die . He was executed the way you would say he executed other people " . Soderbergh ended the 1 am Q & A session by noting that he was " agnostic " on Che 's standing , but " loyal to the facts " , which he insisted were all rigorously sourced . 
 = = = Venezuela and President Chávez = = = 
 On 3 March 2009 , Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez , himself an avowed Marxist and admirer of Che Guevara , greeted Del Toro and co star Bichir at the Presidential Palace in Caracas . The day prior Del Toro attended a screening of the film at a bullfighting ring @-@ turned cultural center , where he was " mobbed by adoring fans " . Del Toro then visited the state @-@ run Cinema Town , a film production facility President Chávez launched to help Venezuela produce its own movies as an alternative to what Chávez calls Hollywood 's cultural imperialism . Del Toro described Che as " a totally Latin American movie " and stated that he had " a good meeting with the President " . 
 = = = General reviews = = = 
 Part One has a 67 % rating at Rotten Tomatoes , while Part Two has an 80 % rating . Scott Foundas of the LA Weekly proclaimed Che " nothing if not the movie of the year " . In his review for the Village Voice , J. Hoberman wrote , " At its best , Che is both action film and ongoing argument . Each new camera setup seeks to introduce a specific idea — about Che or his situation — and every choreographed battle sequence is a sort of algorithm where the camera attempts to inscribe the event that is being enacted " . Hoberman compared Soderbergh 's directing style and " non @-@ personalized " historical approach on the film to Otto Preminger 's observational use of the moving camera , or one of Roberto Rossellini 's " serene " documentaries . Armond White , in his review for the New York Press , wrote , " Out @-@ <unk> Gus Van Sant 's Milk , Soderbergh makes a four @-@ hour @-@ plus biopic about a historical figure without providing a glimmer of charm or narrative coherence " . In his review for The New York Times , A.O. Scott writes , " Mr. Soderbergh once again offers a master class in filmmaking . As history , though , Che is finally not epic but romance . It takes great care to be true to the factual record , but it is , nonetheless , a fairy tale " . Sheri Linden , in her review for the Los Angeles Times , wrote , " in this flawed work of austere beauty , the logistics of war and the language of revolution give way to something greater , a struggle that may be defined by politics but can 't be contained by it " . In her review for the Washington Post , Ann Hornaday wrote , " The best way to encounter Che , is to let go of words like ' film ' and ' movie ' , words that somehow seem inadequate to the task of describing such a mesmerizing , fully immersive cinematic experience . By the end of Che , viewers will likely emerge as if from a trance , with indelibly vivid , if not more ambivalent feelings about Guevara , than the bumper @-@ sticker image they walked in with " . 
 Entertainment Weekly gave a " B + " rating to the first half of the film and a " C- " rating to the second half , and Owen Gleiberman wrote , " As political theater , Che moves from faith to impotence , which is certainly a valid reading of Communism in the 20th century . Yet as drama , that makes the second half of the film borderline deadly ... Che is twice as long as it needs to be , but it is also only half the movie it should have been " . James Verniere of The Boston Herald gave the film a B- , describing the work as a new genre of " arthouse guerrilla nostalgia " , while lamenting Che as the film version of Alberto Korda ’ s iconic 1960 photograph Guerrillero Heroico . In Verniere 's view , so much information was missing , that he recommended one first see The Motorcycle Diaries to fill in the background . In her review for USA Today , Claudia Puig wrote , " With its lyrical beauty and strong performances , the film can be riveting . Its excessive length and rambling scenes also make it maddening . It is worth seeing for its attention to visual detail and ambitious filmmaking , but as a psychological portrait of a compelling historical figure , it is oddly bland and unrevealing " . Anthony Lane , in his review for The New Yorker , wrote , " for all the movie ’ s narrative momentum , Che retains the air of a study exercise — of an interest brilliantly explored . How else to explain one ’ s total flatness of feeling at the climax of each movie ? " Taking a more positive stance , film critic Chris Barsanti compared Che to a " guerrilla take on Patton " , calling it " an exceptionally good " war film , which rivaled The Battle of Algiers in its " you @-@ are @-@ there sensibility " . Roger Ebert awarded the film 3 @.@ 5 our of 4 stars and addressed the film 's length : " You may wonder if the film is too long . I think there 's a good reason for its length . Guevara 's experience in Cuba and especially Bolivia was not a series of events and anecdotes , but a trial of endurance that might almost be called mad " . 
 Film Comment ranked Che as the 22nd best film of 2008 in their " Best Films of 2008 " poll . Film critics Roger Ebert , and James Rocchi went further , naming Che one of the best films of 2008 . The film appeared on several critics ' top ten lists of the best films of 2008 . 
 Looking back at the experience of making Che , Soderbergh has said that he now wishes that he had not made the film and remarked , " Literally I 'd wake up and think , ' At least I 'm not doing that today . ' " The director blamed piracy for the film 's financial failure and felt that " It 's a film that , to some extent , needs the support of people who write about films . If you 'd had all these guys running around talking in accented English you 'd [ have got ] your head taken off " . 
 = = Awards = = 
 Del Toro was awarded the Best Actor Award at the Cannes Film Festival for his performance in Che and in his acceptance speech dedicated his award " to the man himself , Che Guevara and I want to share this with Steven Soderbergh . He was there pushing it even when there [ were lulls ] and pushing all of us " . Guevara 's widow Aleida March , who is president of the Che Guevara Studies Center , sent a congratulatory note to Del Toro upon hearing the news of his award . Del Toro was awarded a 2009 Goya Award as the best Spanish Lead Actor for his depiction of Che . Actor Sean Penn , who won an Oscar for his role in Milk , remarked that he was surprised and disappointed that Che and Del Toro were not also up for any Academy Award nominations . During his acceptance speech for the Best Actor 's trophy at the Screen Actors Guild Awards , Penn expressed his dismay stating , " The fact that there aren 't crowns on Soderbergh 's and Del Toro 's heads right now , I don 't understand ... that is such a sensational movie , Che . " In reference to what Penn deemed a snub , he added " Maybe because it 's in Spanish , maybe the length , maybe the politics " . 
 On 31 July 2009 , Del Toro was awarded the inaugural Tomas Gutierrez Alea prize at a Havana ceremony attended by U.S. actors Robert Duvall , James Caan and Bill Murray . Named after a prolific Cuban filmmaker , the new award was voted for by the National Union of Writers and Artists of Cuba . Del Toro remarked that it was " an honor " to receive the award and thanked Che director Steven Soderbergh . 
 Che was also awarded " The White Camel " , the top award handed out at the sixth annual Sahara International Film Festival , whose ceremony took place during the spring of 2009 in the Wilaya of <unk> at the <unk> refugee camps of 30 @,@ 000 residents . Executive producer Alvaro Longoria , attended to accept the award when Del Toro couldn 't because of filming for The Wolf Man . After dismounting the prize ( which was a literal camel ) Longoria remarked that " this is real , this is what Benicio and Steven tried to tell in the movie . It ’ s right here , a people fighting a war for their dignity and their land . The principles of Che Guevara are very important to them . " However , Longoria returned the live animal before departing , opting for a camel statuette in its place . 
 = = Home media = = 
 The film was released on Region 1 DVD in January 2009 exclusively from Blockbuster for 60 days as per an agreement with IFC . The Criterion Collection was originally scheduled to release the film on Region 1 Blu @-@ ray Disc in December 2009 . However , the release date was re @-@ scheduled to 19 January 2010 . The two @-@ disc Blu @-@ ray Disc release features 1080p video and a Spanish DTS @-@ HD Master Audio 5 @.@ 1 soundtrack ( with English subtitles ) . 
 Additional supplements include audio commentaries on both films featuring Jon Lee Anderson — author of Che Guevara : A Revolutionary Life , and a 20 @-@ page booklet featuring an essay by film critic Amy Taubin . There are also three short documentaries on Guevara : Making Che — a documentary about the film 's production , Che and the Digital Revolution — a documentary about the Red One Camera technology that was used in the film 's production , and End of a Revolution — a 1968 documentary by Brian Moser who was in Bolivia looking for Che when Che was executed . 
 = Volcanology of Io = 
 Volcanology of Io , a moon of Jupiter , is the scientific study of lava flows , volcanic pits , and volcanism ( volcanic activity ) on the surface of Io . Its volcanic activity was discovered in 1979 by Voyager 1 imaging scientist Linda Morabito . Observations of Io by passing spacecraft ( the Voyagers , Galileo , Cassini , and New Horizons ) and Earth @-@ based astronomers have revealed more than 150 active volcanoes . Up to 400 such volcanoes are predicted to exist based on these observations . Io 's volcanism makes the satellite one of only four known currently volcanically active worlds in the Solar System ( the other three being Earth , Saturn 's moon Enceladus , and Neptune 's moon Triton ) . 
 First predicted shortly before the Voyager 1 flyby , the heat source for Io 's volcanism comes from tidal heating produced by its forced orbital eccentricity . This differs from Earth 's internal heating , which is derived primarily from radioactive isotope decay and primordial heat of accretion . Io 's eccentric orbit leads to a slight difference in Jupiter 's gravitational pull on the satellite between its closest and farthest points on its orbit , causing a varying tidal bulge . This variation in the shape of Io causes frictional heating in its interior . Without this tidal heating , Io might have been similar to the Moon , a world of similar size and mass , geologically dead and covered with numerous impact craters . 
 Io 's volcanism has led to the formation of hundreds of volcanic centres and extensive lava formations , making it the most volcanically active body in the Solar System . Three different types of volcanic eruptions have been identified , differing in duration , intensity , lava effusion rate , and whether the eruption occurs within a volcanic pit ( known as a patera ) . Lava flows on Io , tens or hundreds of kilometres long , have primarily basaltic composition , similar to lavas seen on Earth at shield volcanoes such as Kīlauea in Hawaii . Although most of the lava on Io is made of basalt , a few lava flows consisting of sulfur and sulfur dioxide have been seen . In addition , eruption temperatures as high as 1 @,@ 600 K ( 1 @,@ 300 ° C ; 2 @,@ 400 ° F ) were detected , which can be explained by the eruption of high @-@ temperature ultramafic silicate lavas . 
 As a result of the presence of significant quantities of sulfurous materials in Io 's crust and on its surface , some eruptions propel sulfur , sulfur dioxide gas , and pyroclastic material up to 500 kilometres ( 310 mi ) into space , producing large , umbrella @-@ shaped volcanic plumes . This material paints the surrounding terrain in red , black , and / or white , and provides material for Io 's patchy atmosphere and Jupiter 's extensive magnetosphere . Spacecraft that have flown by Io since 1979 have observed numerous surface changes as a result of Io 's volcanic activity . 
 = = Discovery = = 
 Before the Voyager 1 encounter with Io on March 5 , 1979 , Io was thought to be a dead world much like the Moon . The discovery of a cloud of sodium surrounding Io led to theories that the satellite would be covered in evaporites . 
 Hints of discoveries to come arose from Earth @-@ based infrared observations taken in the 1970s . An anomalously high thermal flux , compared to the other Galilean satellites , was discovered during measurements taken at an infrared wavelength of 10 μm while Io was in Jupiter 's shadow . At the time , this heat flux was attributed to the surface having a much higher thermal inertia than Europa and Ganymede . These results were considerably different from measurements taken at wavelengths of 20 μm , which suggested that Io had similar surface properties to the other Galilean satellites . It has since been determined that the greater flux at shorter wavelengths was due to the combined flux from Io 's volcanoes and solar heating , whereas solar heating provides a much greater fraction of the flux at longer wavelengths . A sharp increase in Io 's thermal emission at 5 μm was observed on February 20 , 1978 by <unk> , et al . The group considered volcanic activity at the time , in which case the data was fit into a region on Io 8 @,@ 000 square kilometres ( 3 @,@ 100 sq mi ) in size at 600 K ( 300 ° C ; 600 ° F ) . However , the authors considered that hypothesis unlikely , and instead focused on emission from Io 's interaction with Jupiter 's magnetosphere . 
 Shortly before the Voyager 1 encounter , Stan Peale , Patrick <unk> , and R. T. Reynolds published a paper in the journal Science predicting a volcanically modified surface and a differentiated interior , with distinct rock types rather than a homogeneous blend . They based this prediction on models of Io 's interior that took into account the massive amount of heat produced by the varying tidal pull of Jupiter on Io caused by its slightly eccentric orbit . Their calculations suggested that the amount of heat generated for an Io with a homogeneous interior would be three times greater than the amount of heat generated by radioactive isotope decay alone . This effect would be even greater with a differentiated Io . 
 Voyager 1 's first images of Io revealed a lack of impact craters , suggesting a very young surface . Craters are used by geologists to estimate the age of a planetary surface ; the number of impact structures increase with the age of the planetary surface . Instead , Voyager 1 observed a multi @-@ coloured surface , pockmarked with irregular @-@ shaped depressions , which lacked the raised rims characteristic of impact craters . Voyager 1 also observed flow features formed by low @-@ viscosity fluid and tall , isolated mountains that did not resemble terrestrial volcanoes . The surface observed suggested that , just as Peale and colleagues had theorized , Io was heavily modified by volcanism . 
 On March 8 , 1979 , three days after passing Jupiter , Voyager 1 took images of Jupiter 's moons to help mission controllers determine the spacecraft 's exact location , a process called optical navigation . Although processing images of Io to enhance the visibility of background stars , navigation engineer Linda Morabito found a 300 @-@ kilometre ( 190 mi ) tall cloud along its limb . At first , she suspected the cloud to be a moon behind Io , but no suitably sized body would have been in that location . The feature was determined to be a plume generated by active volcanism at a dark depression later named Pele . Following this discovery , seven other plumes were located in earlier Voyager images of Io . Thermal emission from multiple sources , indicative of cooling lava , were also found . Surface changes were observed when images acquired by Voyager 2 were compared to those taken four months previously by Voyager 1 , including new plume deposits at Aten Patera and Surt . 
 = = Heat source = = 
 Io 's main source of internal heat comes from the tidal forces generated by Jupiter 's gravitational pull . This external heating differs from the internal heat source for volcanism on Earth , which is a result of radioactive isotope decay and residual heat from accretion . In the Earth , these internal heat sources drive mantle convection , which in turn causes volcanism through plate tectonics . 
 The tidal heating of Io is dependent on its distance from Jupiter , its orbital eccentricity , the composition of its interior , and its physical state . Its Laplace orbital resonance with Europa and Ganymede maintains Io 's eccentricity and prevents tidal dissipation within Io from circularizing its orbit . The eccentricity leads to vertical differences in Io 's tidal bulge of as much as 100 metres ( 330 ft ) as Jupiter 's gravitational pull varies between the periapsis and apoapsis points in Io 's orbit . This varying tidal pull also produces friction in Io 's interior , enough to cause significant tidal heating and melting . Unlike Earth , where most of its internal heat is released by conduction through the crust , on Io internal heat is released via volcanic activity and generates the satellite 's high heat flow ( global total : 0 @.@ 6 – 1 @.@ 6 × 1014 W ) . Models of its orbit suggest that the amount of tidal heating within Io changes with time , and that the current heat flow is not representative of the long @-@ term average . The observed release of heat from Io 's interior is greater than estimates for the amount presently generated from tidal heating , suggesting that Io is cooling after a period of greater flexing . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Analysis of Voyager images led scientists to believe that the lava flows on Io were composed mostly of various forms of molten elemental sulfur . The colouration of the flows was found to be similar to its various allotropes . Differences in the lava colour and brightness are a function of the temperature of polyatomic sulfur and the packing and bonding of its atoms . An analysis of the flows that radiate out from Ra Patera revealed differently colored materials , all associated with liquid sulfur , at different distances from the vent : dark albedo material close to the vent at 525 K ( 252 ° C ; 485 ° F ) , red material in the central part of each flow at 450 K ( 177 ° C ; 350 ° F ) , and orange material at the farthest ends of each flow at 425 K ( 152 ° C ; 305 ° F ) . This colour pattern corresponds to flows radiating out from a central vent , cooling as the lava travels away from it . In addition , temperature measurements of thermal emission at Loki Patera taken by Voyager 1 's Infrared Interferometer Spectrometer and Radiometer ( IRIS ) instrument were consistent with sulfur volcanism . However , the IRIS instrument was not capable of detecting wavelengths that are indicative of higher temperatures . This meant that temperatures consistent with silicate volcanism were not discovered by Voyager . Despite this , Voyager scientists deduced that silicates must play a role in Io 's youthful appearance , from its high density and the need for silicates to support the steep slopes along patera walls . The contradiction between the structural evidence and the spectral and temperature data following the Voyager flybys led to a debate in the planetary science community regarding the composition of Io 's lava flows , whether they were composed of silicate or sulfurous materials . 
 Earth @-@ based infrared studies in the 1980s and 1990s shifted the paradigm from one of primarily sulfur volcanism to one where silicate volcanism dominates , and sulfur acts in a secondary role . In 1986 , measurements of a bright eruption on Io 's leading hemisphere revealed temperatures of at least 900 K ( 600 ° C ; 1 @,@ 200 ° F ) . This is higher than the boiling point of sulfur ( 715 K or 442 ° C or 827 ° F ) , indicating a silicate composition for at least some of Io 's lava flows . Similar temperatures were also observed at the Surt eruption in 1979 between the two Voyager encounters , and at the eruption observed by <unk> and colleagues in 1978 . In addition , modeling of silicate lava flows on Io suggested that they cooled rapidly , causing their thermal emission to be dominated by lower temperature components , such as solidified flows , as opposed to the small areas covered by still molten lava near the actual eruption temperature . 
 <unk> volcanism , involving basaltic lava with mafic to ultramafic ( magnesium @-@ rich ) compositions , was confirmed by the Galileo spacecraft in the 1990s and 2000s from temperature measurements of Io 's numerous hot spots , locations where thermal emission is detected , and from spectral measurements of Io 's dark material . Temperature measurements from Galileo 's Solid @-@ State Imager ( SSI ) and Near @-@ Infrared Mapping Spectrometer ( <unk> ) revealed numerous hot spots with high @-@ temperature components ranging from at least 1 @,@ 200 K ( 900 ° C ; 1 @,@ 700 ° F ) to a maximum of 1 @,@ 600 K ( 1 @,@ 300 ° C ; 2 @,@ 400 ° F ) , like at the Pillan Patera eruption in 1997 . Initial estimates during the course of the Galileo mission suggesting eruption temperatures approaching 2 @,@ 000 K ( 1 @,@ 700 ° C ; 3 @,@ 100 ° F ) have since proven to be overestimates because the wrong thermal models were used to calculate the temperatures . Spectral observations of Io 's dark material suggested the presence of <unk> , such as <unk> , magnesium @-@ rich silicate minerals common in mafic and ultramafic basalt . This dark material is seen in volcanic pits , fresh lava flows , and pyroclastic deposits surrounding recent , explosive volcanic eruptions . Based on the measured temperature of the lava and the spectral measurements , some of the lava may be analogous to terrestrial komatiites . <unk> superheating , which could increase the temperature of magma during ascent to the surface during an eruption , may also be a factor in some of the higher temperature eruptions . 
 Although temperature measurements of Io 's volcanoes settled the sulfur @-@ versus @-@ silicates debate that persisted between the Voyager and Galileo missions at Jupiter , sulfur and sulfur dioxide still play a significant role in the phenomena observed on Io . Both materials have been detected in the plumes generated at Io 's volcanoes , with sulfur being a primary constituent of Pele @-@ type plumes . Bright flows have been identified on Io , at <unk> <unk> Fluctus , <unk> Patera , and Balder Patera for example , that are suggestive of effusive sulfur or sulfur dioxide volcanism . 
 = = Eruption styles = = 
 Observations of Io by spacecraft and Earth @-@ based astronomers have led to the identification of differences in the types of eruptions seen on the satellite . The three main types identified include intra @-@ patera , flow @-@ dominated , and explosion @-@ dominated eruptions . They differ in terms of duration , energy released , brightness temperature ( determined from infrared imaging ) , type of lava flow , and whether it is confined within volcanic pits . 
