 = = = Intra @-@ patera eruptions = = = 
 Intra @-@ patera eruptions occur within volcanic depressions known as paterae , which generally have flat floors bounded by steep walls . Paterae resemble terrestrial calderas , but it is unknown whether they form when an empty lava chamber collapses , like their terrestrial cousins . One hypothesis suggests that they are produced through the exhumation of volcanic sills , with the overlying material either being blasted out or integrated into the sill . Some paterae display evidence for multiple collapses , similar to the calderas atop Olympus Mons on Mars or Kīlauea on Earth , suggesting that they may occasionally form like volcanic calderas . Because the formation mechanism is still uncertain , the general term for these features uses the Latin descriptor term employed by the International Astronomical Union in naming them , paterae . Unlike similar features on Earth and Mars , these depressions generally do not lie at the peak of shield volcanoes and are larger , with an average diameter of 41 kilometres ( 25 mi ) . Patera depths have been measured for only a few paterae and typically exceed 1 km . The largest volcanic depression on Io is Loki Patera at 202 kilometres ( 126 mi ) across . Whatever the formation mechanism , the morphology and distribution of many paterae suggest that they are structurally controlled , with at least half bounded by faults or mountains . 
 This eruption style can take the form of either lava flows , spreading across the floor of the paterae , or lava lakes . Except for observations by Galileo during its seven close flybys , it can be difficult to tell the difference between a lava lake and a lava flow eruption on a patera floor , due to inadequate resolution and similar thermal emission characteristics . Intra @-@ patera lava flow eruptions , such as the Gish Bar Patera eruption in 2001 , can be just as voluminous as those seen spreading out across the Ionian plains . Flow @-@ like features have also been observed within a number of paterae , like <unk> Patera , suggesting that lava flows periodically resurface their floors . 
 Ionian lava lakes are depressions partially filled with molten lava covered by a thin solidified crust . These lava lakes are directly connected to a magma reservoir lying below . Observations of thermal emission at several Ionian lava lakes reveal glowing molten rock along the patera margin , caused by the lake 's crust breaking up along the edge of the patera . Over time , because the solidified lava is denser than the still @-@ molten magma below , this crust can founder , triggering an increase in thermal emission at the volcano . For some lava lakes , like the one at Pele , this occurs continuously , making Pele one of the brightest emitters of heat in the near @-@ infrared spectrum on Io . At other sites , such as at Loki Patera , this can occur episodically . During an overturning episode at these more quiescent lava lakes , a wave of foundering crust spreads out across the patera at the rate of about 1 kilometre ( 0 @.@ 6 mi ) per day , with new crust forming behind it until the entire lake has been resurfaced . Another eruption would only begin once the new crust has cooled and thickened enough for it to no longer be buoyant over the molten lava . During an overturning episode , Loki can emit up to ten times more heat than when its crust is stable . 
 = = = Flow @-@ dominated eruptions ( Promethean Volcanism ) = = = 
 Flow @-@ dominated eruptions are long @-@ lived events that build up extensive , compound lava flows . The extent of these flows makes them a major terrain type on Io . In this style of eruption , magma emerges onto the surface from vents on the floor of paterae , vents surrounding paterae , or from fissures on the plains , producing inflated , compound lava flows similar to those seen at Kīlauea in Hawaii . Images from the Galileo spacecraft revealed that many of Io 's major flows , like those at Prometheus and Amirani , are produced by the build @-@ up of small breakouts of lava on top of older flows . Flow @-@ dominated eruptions differ from explosion @-@ dominated eruptions by their longevity and their lower energy output per unit of time . Lava erupts at a generally steady rate , and flow @-@ dominated eruptions can last for years or decades . 
 Active flow fields more than 300 kilometres ( 190 mi ) long have been observed on Io at Amirani and Masubi . A relatively inactive flow field named Lei @-@ Kung Fluctus covers more than 125 @,@ 000 square kilometres ( 48 @,@ 000 sq mi ) , an area slightly larger than Nicaragua . The thickness of flow fields was not determined by Galileo , but the individual breakouts on their surface are likely to be 1 m ( 3 ft ) thick . In many cases , active lava breakouts flow out onto the surface at locations tens to hundreds of kilometres from the source vent , with low amounts of thermal emission observed between it and the breakout . This suggests that lava flows through lava tubes from the source vent to the breakout . 
 Although these eruptions generally have a steady eruption rate , larger outbreaks of lava have been observed at many flow @-@ dominated eruption sites . For example , the leading edge of the Prometheus flow field moved 75 to 95 kilometres ( 47 to 59 mi ) between observations by Voyager in 1979 and Galileo in 1996 . Although generally dwarfed by explosion @-@ dominated eruptions , the average flow rate at these compound flow fields is much greater than what is observed at similar contemporary lava flows on Earth . Average surface coverage rates of 35 – 60 square metres ( 380 – 650 sq ft ) per second were observed at Prometheus and Amirani during the Galileo mission , compared to 0 @.@ 6 square metres ( 6 @.@ 5 sq ft ) per second at Kīlauea . 
 = = = Explosion @-@ dominated eruptions ( <unk> Volcanism ) = = = 
 Explosion @-@ dominated eruptions are the most pronounced of Io 's eruption styles . These eruptions , sometimes called " outburst " eruptions from their Earth @-@ based detections , are characterized by their short duration ( lasting only weeks or months ) , rapid onset , large volumetric flow rates , and high thermal emission . They lead to a short @-@ lived , significant increase in Io 's overall brightness in the near @-@ infrared . The most powerful volcanic eruption observed in historical times was an " outburst " eruption at Surt , observed by Earth @-@ based astronomers on February 22 , 2001 . 
 Explosion @-@ dominated eruptions occur when a body of magma ( called a dike ) from deep within Io 's partially molten mantle reaches the surface at a fissure . This results in a spectacular display of lava fountains . During the beginning of the outburst eruption , thermal emission is dominated by strong , 1 – 3 μm infrared radiation . It is produced by a large amount of exposed , fresh lava within the fountains at the eruption source vent . Outburst eruptions at Tvashtar in November 1999 and February 2007 centred on a 25 @-@ kilometre ( 16 mi ) long , 1 @-@ kilometre ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) tall lava " curtain " produced at a small patera nested within the larger Tvashtar Paterae complex . 
 The large amount of exposed molten lava at these lava fountains has provided researchers with their best opportunity to measure the actual temperatures of Ionian lavas . Temperatures suggestive of an ultramafic lava composition similar to Pre @-@ Cambrian komatiites ( about 1 @,@ 600 K or 1 @,@ 300 ° C or 2 @,@ 400 ° F ) are dominant at such eruptions , though superheating of the magma during ascent to the surface cannot be ruled out as a factor in the high eruption temperatures . 
 Although the more explosive , lava @-@ fountaining stage may last only a few days to a week , explosion @-@ dominated eruptions can continue for weeks to months , producing large , voluminous silicate lava flows . A major eruption in 1997 from a fissure north @-@ west of Pillan Patera produced more than 31 cubic kilometres ( 7 @.@ 4 cu mi ) of fresh lava over a 2 1 ⁄ 2- to 5 1 ⁄ 2 @-@ month period , and later flooded the floor of Pillan Patera . Observations by Galileo suggest lava coverage rates at Pillan between 1 @,@ 000 and 3 @,@ 000 square metres ( 11 @,@ 000 and 32 @,@ 000 sq ft ) per second during the 1997 eruption . The Pillan flow was found to be 10 m ( 33 ft ) thick , compared to the 1 m ( 3 ft ) thick flows observed at the inflated fields at Prometheus and Amirani . Similar , rapidly emplaced lava flows were observed by Galileo at Thor in 2001 . Such flow rates are similar to those seen at Iceland 's Laki eruption in 1783 and in terrestrial flood basalt eruptions . 
 Explosion @-@ dominated eruptions can produce dramatic ( but often short @-@ lived ) surface changes around the eruption site , such as large pyroclastic and plume deposits produced as gas <unk> from lava fountains . The 1997 Pillan eruption produced a 400 km ( 250 mi ) wide deposit of dark , silicate material and bright sulfur dioxide . The Tvashtar eruptions of 2000 and 2007 generated a 330 km ( 210 mi ) tall plume that deposited a ring of red sulfur and sulfur dioxide 1 @,@ 200 km ( 750 mi ) wide . Despite the dramatic appearance of these features , without continuous resupply of material , the vent surroundings often revert to their pre @-@ eruption appearance over a period of months ( in the case of <unk> Patera ) or years ( as at Pillan Patera ) . 
 = = Plumes = = 
 The discovery of volcanic plumes at Pele and Loki in 1979 provided conclusive evidence that Io was geologically active . Generally , plumes form when volatiles like sulfur and sulfur dioxide are ejected skyward from Io 's volcanoes at speeds reaching 1 kilometre per second ( 0 @.@ 62 mi / s ) , creating umbrella @-@ shaped clouds of gas and dust . Additional materials that might be found in the volcanic plumes include sodium , potassium , and chlorine . Although striking in appearance , volcanic plumes are relatively uncommon . Of the 150 or so active volcanoes observed on Io , plumes have only been observed at a couple of dozen of them . The limited area of Io 's lava flows suggests that much of the resurfacing needed to erase Io 's cratering record must come from plume deposits . 
 The most common type of volcanic plume on Io are dust plumes , or Prometheus @-@ type plumes , produced when encroaching lava flows vaporize underlying sulfur dioxide frost , sending the material skyward . Examples of Prometheus @-@ type plumes include Prometheus , Amirani , <unk> , and Masubi . These plumes are usually less than 100 kilometres ( 62 mi ) tall with eruption velocities around 0 @.@ 5 kilometres per second ( 0 @.@ 31 mi / s ) . Prometheus @-@ type plumes are dust @-@ rich , with a dense inner core and upper canopy shock zone , giving them an umbrella @-@ like appearance . These plumes often form bright circular deposits , with a radius ranging between 100 and 250 kilometres ( 62 and 155 mi ) and consisting primarily of sulfur dioxide frost . Prometheus @-@ type plumes are frequently seen at flow @-@ dominated eruptions , helping make this plume type quite long @-@ lived . Four out of the six Prometheus @-@ type plumes observed by Voyager 1 in 1979 were also observed throughout the Galileo mission and by New Horizons in 2007 . Although the dust plume can be clearly seen in sunlit visible @-@ light images of Io acquired by passing spacecraft , many Prometheus @-@ type plumes have an outer halo of fainter , more gas @-@ rich material reaching heights approaching that of the larger , Pele @-@ type plumes . 
 Io 's largest plumes , Pele @-@ type plumes , are created when sulfur and sulfur dioxide gas <unk> from erupting magma at volcanic vents or lava lakes , carrying silicate pyroclastic material with them . The few Pele @-@ type plumes that have been observed are usually associated with explosion @-@ dominated eruptions , and are short @-@ lived . The exception to this is Pele , which is associated with a long @-@ lived active lava lake eruption , though the plume is thought to be intermittent . The higher vent temperatures and pressures associated with these plumes generate eruption speeds of up to 1 kilometre per second ( 0 @.@ 62 mi / s ) , allowing them to reach heights of between 300 and 500 kilometres ( 190 and 310 mi ) . Pele @-@ type plumes form red ( from short @-@ chain sulfur ) and black ( from silicate pyroclastics ) surface deposits , including large 1 @,@ 000 kilometres ( 620 mi ) -wide red rings , as seen at Pele . The erupted sulfurous components of Pele @-@ type plumes are thought to be the result of an excess amount of sulfur in Io 's crust and a decrease in sulfur solubility at greater depths in Io 's lithosphere . They are generally fainter than Prometheus @-@ type plumes as a result of the low dust content , causing some to be called stealth plumes . These plumes are sometimes only seen in images acquired while Io is in the shadow of Jupiter or those taken in ultraviolet . The little dust that is visible in sunlit images is generated when sulfur and sulfur dioxide condense as the gases reach the top of their ballistic trajectories . That is why these plumes lack the dense central column seen in Prometheus @-@ type plumes , in which dust is generated at the plume source . Examples of Pele @-@ type plumes have been observed at Pele , Tvashtar , and <unk> . 
 = History of Poland during the Piast dynasty = 
 The history of Poland during the Piast dynasty is the first major stage in the history of Poland . The Piast period lasted from the 10th through the 14th century , when Poland was established as a state and a nation during the Middle Ages of European history . The history of Poland commences with the founding of the Piast dynasty ( Siemowit , Lestek and Siemomysł were listed by the chronicler as its first dukes ) and the rule of the proper founder of the Polish state Mieszko I , from around 960 AD . The indigenous Piast ruling house was largely responsible for the formation of the state and remained in power until 1370 . Mieszko chose to be baptized in the Western Latin Rite in 966 , which established a major cultural boundary in Europe . He completed the unification of the West Slavic tribal lands fundamental to the existence of the new country of Poland . 
 Following the emergence of the Polish state , a series of rulers converted the population to Christianity , created a strong kingdom and integrated Poland into the European culture . Mieszko 's son , Bolesław I Chrobry , established a Polish Church province , pursued territorial conquests and was officially crowned in 1025 , becoming the first King of Poland . The first Piast monarchy collapsed with the death of Mieszko II Lambert in 1034 , followed by its restoration under Casimir I. Casimir 's son , Bolesław II the Bold , brought back the military assertiveness of Bolesław I , but became fatally involved in a conflict with Bishop Stanislaus of <unk> , and was expelled from the country . 
 Bolesław III , the last duke of the early period , succeeded in defending his country and recovering territories previously lost . Upon his death in 1138 , Poland was divided among his sons . The resulting internal fragmentation eroded the initial Piast monarchy structure in the 12th and 13th centuries and caused fundamental and lasting changes . Konrad I of Masovia invited the Teutonic Knights to help him fight the Baltic Prussian pagans , which led to centuries of Poland 's warfare with the Knights and the German Prussian state . 
 The Kingdom was restored under Władysław I the Elbow @-@ high , then strengthened and expanded by his son Casimir III the Great . The western provinces of Silesia and Pomerania were lost after the fragmentation , and Poland began expanding to the east . The period ended with the reigns of two members of the Angevin dynasty . The consolidation in the 14th century laid the base for the new powerful Kingdom of Poland that was to follow . 
 = = 10th – 12th century = = 
 = = = Mieszko I ; adoption of Christianity ( ca . 960 – 992 ) = = = 
 The tribe of the Polans ( Polanie , lit . " people of the fields " ) of what is now Greater Poland , gave rise to a tribal predecessor of the Polish state in the early part of the 10th century , with the Polans settling in the flatlands around the emerging strongholds of Giecz , Poznań , Gniezno and Ostrów Lednicki . Accelerated rebuilding of old tribal fortified settlements , construction of massive new ones and territorial expansion took place during 920 – 950 . The process continued and the Polish state developed from tribal roots in the second half of the century . According to the chronicler Gallus Anonymus , the Polans were ruled by the Piast dynasty . In existing sources , Piast ruler Mieszko I was first mentioned by Widukind of Corvey in his Res <unk> <unk> , a chronicle of 10th @-@ century Germany . Widukind reported that Mieszko 's forces were twice defeated in 963 by the Veleti tribes acting in cooperation with the Saxon exile Wichmann the Younger . Under Mieszko 's rule ( ca . 960 to 992 ) , his tribal state accepted Christianity and became the Polish state . 
 The viability of the emerging state was assured by the persistent territorial expansion of the early Piast rulers . Beginning with a very small area around Gniezno ( before the town itself existed ) , the Piast expansion lasted throughout most of the 10th century , resulting in a territory approximating that of present @-@ day Poland . The Polanie tribe conquered and merged with other Slavic tribes and formed a tribal federation , and later , a centralized state . After the addition of Lesser Poland , the country of the Vistulans , and of Silesia ( both taken by Mieszko from the Czech state during the later part of the 10th century ) , Mieszko 's state reached its mature form , including the main regions regarded as ethnically Polish . 
 The Piast lands totaled about 250 @,@ 000 km2 ( 96 @,@ 526 sq mi ) in area , with an approximate population of under one million . 
 Initially a pagan , Mieszko I was the first ruler of the Polans tribal union known from contemporary written sources . A detailed account of aspects of Mieszko 's early reign was given by <unk> ibn <unk> , a Jewish traveler , according to whom Mieszko was one of four Slavic " kings " established in central and southern Europe in the 960s . In 965 , Mieszko , who was allied with Boleslaus I , Duke of Bohemia at the time , married the duke 's daughter , Doubravka , a Christian princess . Mieszko 's conversion to Christianity in its Western Latin Rite followed on 14 April 966 , and is considered to be the founding event of the Polish state . In the aftermath of Mieszko 's 967 victory over a force of the <unk> , which was led by Wichmann , the first missionary bishop was appointed . The action counteracted the intended eastern expansion of the Magdeburg Archdiocese , established at about the same time . 
 Mieszko 's state had a complex political relationship with the German Holy Roman Empire , as Mieszko was a " friend " , ally and vassal of Otto I , paying him tribute from the western part of his lands . It fought wars with the Polabian Slavs , the margraves of the Saxon Eastern March ( Gero in 963 – 964 and Hodo in 972 , see Battle of <unk> ) , and the Czechs . The victories over Wichmann and Hodo allowed Mieszko to extend his Pomeranian possessions west to the vicinity of the Oder River and its mouth . After the death of Otto I , and then again after the death of Otto II , Mieszko supported Henry the Quarrelsome , a pretender to the imperial crown . After the death of <unk> , Mieszko married ca . 980 a German , Oda von <unk> , daughter of Dietrich , Margrave of the Northern March . When fighting the Czechs in 990 , Mieszko was helped by the Holy Roman Empire . By about the year 990 , when Mieszko I officially submitted his country to the authority of the Holy See ( Dagome iudex ) , he had transformed Poland into one of the strongest powers in central @-@ eastern Europe . 
 = = = Bolesław I ; Church province , conquests , Kingdom of Poland ( 992 – 1025 ) = = = 
 Mieszko I died in 992 . Contrary to what the first ruler of Poland had intended , when Oda with her ( and Mieszko 's ) minor sons lost the power struggle , Bolesław , Mieszko 's oldest son , became the sole ruler of Poland . A man of high ambition and strong personality , Bolesław embarked on further territorial expansion to the west ( Lusatia region ) , south , and east . While often successful , the campaigns and the gains turned out to be of only passing significance and badly strained the resources of the young nation . Bolesław lost the economically crucial Farther Pomerania , together with its new bishopric in Kołobrzeg ; the region had previously been conquered with great effort by Mieszko . 
 Bolesław Chrobry ( ruled 992 – 1025 ) began his reign by continuing his father 's policy of alliance with the Holy Roman Empire . Bolesław received and helped Wojciech of the <unk> family , a well @-@ connected Czech bishop in exile and missionary who was killed in 997 while on a mission in Prussia . Bolesław skillfully took advantage of Wojciech 's death : the martyrdom of Wojciech gave Poland a patron saint , St. Adalbert , and resulted in the creation of an independent Polish province of the Church with an archbishop in Gniezno . In the year 1000 , the young Emperor Otto III came as a pilgrim to visit St. Adalbert 's grave and lent his support to Bolesław during the Congress of Gniezno ; the Gniezno Archdiocese and several subordinate dioceses were established on this occasion . The Polish ecclesiastical province effectively served as an essential anchor and an institution to fall back on for the Piast state , helping it to survive in the troubled centuries ahead . 
 Otto died in 1002 and Bolesław 's relationship with his successor Henry II turned out to be much more difficult , resulting in a series of wars ( 1002 – 1005 , 1007 – 1013 , 1015 – 1018 ) . From 1003 – 1004 Bolesław intervened militarily in Czech dynastic conflicts . After his forces were removed from Bohemia in 1018 , Bolesław retained Moravia . In 1013 the marriage between Bolesław 's son Mieszko and Richeza of Lotharingia , the niece of Emperor Otto III and future mother of Casimir I the Restorer , took place . The conflicts with Germany ended in 1018 with the Peace of Bautzen accord , on favorable terms for Bolesław . In the context of the 1018 Kiev expedition , Bolesław took over the western part of Red Ruthenia . In 1025 , shortly before his death , Bolesław I the Brave finally succeeded in obtaining the papal permission to crown himself , and became the first king of Poland . 
 = = = Mieszko II ; collapse of the reign ( 1025 – 1039 ) = = = 
 King Mieszko II Lambert ( 990 – 1034 ) tried to continue the politics of his father using Bolesław 's kingdom as an interventionist great power . Mieszko 's actions reinforced old resentment and hostility on the part of Poland 's neighbors , and his two dispossessed brothers took advantage of it , arranging for Rus ' and German invasions in 1031 ; Mieszko was defeated and was forced to leave the country . Later , Mieszko 's brothers <unk> and Otto were killed and Mieszko partially recovered . The first Piast monarchy collapsed with Mieszko 's death in 1034 . Deprived of a government , Poland was ravaged by an anti @-@ feudal and pagan rebellion , and in 1039 by the forces of Bretislaus I of Bohemia . The country suffered territorial losses , and the functioning of the Gniezno archdiocese was disrupted . 
 = = = Restoration under Casimir I ( 1039 – 1058 ) = = = 
 The nation made a recovery under Mieszko 's son , Duke Casimir I ( 1016 – 1058 ) , properly known as the Restorer . After returning from exile in 1039 , Casimir rebuilt the Polish monarchy and the country 's territorial integrity through several military campaigns : in 1047 , Masovia was taken back from <unk> , and in 1054 Silesia from the Czechs . Casimir was aided by the recent adversaries of Poland , the Holy Roman Empire and Kievan Rus ' , both of whom disliked the chaos in Poland . Casimir introduced a more mature form of feudalism and relieved the burden of financing large army units from the duke 's treasury by settling his warriors on feudal estates . Faced with the widespread destruction of Greater Poland after the Czech expedition , Casimir moved his court to Kraków , replacing the old Piast capitals of Poznań and Gniezno ; Kraków functioned as the nation 's capital for several centuries . 
 = = = Bolesław II ; conflict with Bishop Stanisław ( 1058 – 1079 ) = = = 
 Casimir 's son Bolesław II the Bold , also known as the Generous ( ruled 1058 – 1079 ) , developed Polish military strength and waged several foreign campaigns between 1058 and 1077 . As an active supporter of the papal side in its feud with the German emperor , Bolesław crowned himself king in 1076 with the blessing of Pope Gregory VII . In 1079 there was an anti @-@ Bolesław conspiracy or conflict that involved the Bishop of Kraków . Bolesław had Bishop Stanislaus of <unk> executed ; subsequently Bolesław was forced to abdicate the Polish throne because of the pressure from the Catholic Church and the pro @-@ imperial faction of the nobility . St. Stanislaus was to become the second martyr and patron saint of Poland , canonized in 1253 . 
 = = = Władysław I Herman ( 1079 – 1102 ) = = = 
 After Bolesław 's exile the country found itself under the unstable rule of his younger brother Władysław I Herman ( ruled 1079 – 1102 ) . Władysław was strongly dependent on Palatine <unk> . When Władysław 's two sons , Zbigniew and Bolesław , finally forced Władysław to remove his hated protégé , Poland was divided among the three of them from 1098 , and after the father 's death from 1102 to 1106 between the two brothers . 
 = = = Bolesław III ( 1102 – 1138 ) = = = 
 After a power struggle , Bolesław III the Wry @-@ mouthed ( ruled 1102 – 1138 ) became the Duke of Poland by defeating his half @-@ brother in 1106 – 1107 . Zbigniew had to leave the country , but received support from Emperor Henry V , who attacked Bolesław 's Poland in 1109 . Bolesław was able to defend his country because of his military abilities , determination and alliances , and also because of a national mobilization across the social spectrum ( see Battle of Głogów ) ; Zbigniew who later returned was eliminated . Bolesław 's other major achievement was the conquest of all of Mieszko I 's Pomerania ( of which the remaining eastern part had been lost by Poland from after the death of Mieszko II ) , a task begun by his father and completed by Bolesław around 1123 . Szczecin was subdued in a bloody takeover and Western Pomerania up to Rügen , except for the directly incorporated southern part , became Bolesław 's fief , to be ruled locally by <unk> I , the first duke of the Griffin dynasty . 
 At this time , Christianization of the region was initiated in earnest , an effort crowned by the establishment of the Pomeranian Wolin Diocese after Bolesław 's death in 1140 . 
 = = = Fragmentation of the realm ( 1138 – c . 1314 ) = = = 
 Before he died , Bolesław <unk> divided the country , in a limited sense , among four of his sons . He made complex arrangements intended to prevent fratricidal warfare and preserve the Polish state 's formal unity , but after Bolesław 's death the plan 's implementation had failed and in reality a long period of fragmentation was ushered in . For nearly two centuries the Piasts were to spar with each other , the clergy , and the nobility for the control over the divided kingdom . The stability of the system was supposedly assured by the institution of the senior or high duke of Poland , based in Kraków and assigned to the special <unk> Province that was not to be subdivided . Following his concept of <unk> , Bolesław divided the country into five principalities : Silesia , Greater Poland , Masovia , Sandomierz and Kraków . The first four provinces were given to his four sons , who became independent rulers . The fifth province , the <unk> Province of Kraków , was to be added to the senior among the Princes who , as the Grand Duke of Kraków , was the representative of the whole of Poland . This principle broke down already within the generation of Bolesław III 's sons , when Władysław II the Exile , Bolesław IV the Curly , Mieszko III the Old and Casimir II the Just fought for power and territory in Poland , and in particular over the Kraków throne . 
 The external borders left by Bolesław III at his death closely resembled the borders left by Mieszko I ; this original early Piast monarchy configuration had not survived the fragmentation period . 
 = = = Culture = = = 
 From the time of the baptism of Poland 's ruling elite , foreign churchmen had been arriving and the culture of early Medieval Poland was developing as a part of European Christendom . However , it would be a few generations from the time of Mieszko 's conversion until significant numbers of native clergymen appeared . After the establishment of numerous monasteries in the 12th and 13th centuries , Christianization of the populace was accomplished on a larger scale . 
 Intellectual and artistic activity was concentrated around the institutions of the Church , the courts of the kings and dukes , and emerged around the households of the rising hereditary elite . Written annals began to be generated in the late 10th century ; leaders like Mieszko II and Casimir the Restorer were considered literate and educated . Along with the Dagome iudex act , the most important written document and source of the period is the Gesta principum <unk> , a chronicle by Gallus Anonymus , a foreign cleric from the court of Bolesław the Wry @-@ mouthed . A number of Pre @-@ Romanesque stone churches were built beginning in the 10th century , often accompanied by palatium ruler residencies ; Romanesque buildings proper followed . The earliest coins were minted by Bolesław I around 995 . The Gniezno Doors ( 1170s ) of Gniezno Cathedral ( bronze low relief ) are the finest example of Romanesque sculpture . Bruno of Querfurt was one of the pioneering Western clergymen spreading Church literacy ; some of his prominent writings had been produced in <unk> monasteries in Poland . Among the preeminent early monastic religious orders were the Benedictines ( the abbey in Tyniec founded in 1044 ) and the Cistercians . 
 = = 13th century = = 
 = = = State and society ; German settlement = = = 
 The 13th century brought fundamental changes to the structure of Polish society and its political system . Because of the fragmentation and constant internal conflicts , the Piast dukes were unable to stabilize Poland 's external borders of the early Piast rulers . Western Farther Pomerania broke its political ties with Poland in the second half of the 12th century and from 1231 became a fief of the Margraviate of Brandenburg , which in 1307 extended its Pomeranian possessions even further east , taking over the <unk> and Słupsk areas . Pomerelia or Gdańsk Pomerania had been independent of the Polish dukes from 1227 . In mid 13th century , Bolesław II the Bald granted Lubusz Land to the Margraviate , which made possible the creation of the Neumark and had far reaching negative consequences for the integrity of the western border . In the south @-@ east , Leszek the White was unable to preserve Poland 's supremacy over the Halych area of Rus ' , a territory that had changed hands on a number of occasions . 
 The social status was becoming increasingly based on the size of feudal land possessions . Those included the lands controlled by the Piast princes , their rivals the great lay land owners and church entities , all the way down to the knightly class ; the work force ranged from hired " free " people , through serfs attached to the land , to slaves ( purchased or war and other prisoners ) . The upper layer of the feudal lords , first the Church and then others , were able to acquire economic and legal immunity , which made them exempt to a significant degree from court jurisdiction or economical obligations ( including taxation ) , that had previously been imposed by the ruling dukes . 
 The civil strife and foreign invasions , such as the Mongol invasions in 1240 / 1241 , 1259 / 1260 and 1287 / 1288 , weakened and depopulated the many small Polish principalities , as the country was becoming progressively more subdivided . The depopulation and the increasing demand for labor in the developing economy caused a massive immigration of West European peasants , mostly German settlers into Poland ( early waves from Germany and Flanders in the 1220s ) . The German , Polish and other new rural settlements were a form of feudal tenancy with immunity and German town laws were often utilized as its legal bases . German immigrants were also important in the rise of the cities and the establishment of the Polish burgher ( city dwelling merchants ) class ; they brought with them West European laws ( Magdeburg rights ) and customs which the Poles adopted . From that time the Germans , who created early strong establishments ( led by <unk> ) especially in the urban centers of Silesia and other regions of western Poland , had been an increasingly influential minority in Poland . 
 In 1228 , the Acts of <unk> were passed and signed into law by Władysław III <unk> . The titular Duke of Poland promised to provide a " just and noble law according to the council of bishops and barons . " Such legal guarantees and privileges included the lower level land owners — knights , who were evolving into the lower and middle nobility class known later as szlachta . The fragmentation period weakened the rulers and established a permanent trend in Polish history , whereby the rights and role of the nobility were expanded at the monarch 's expense . 
 = = = Teutonic Knights = = = 
 In 1226 Konrad I of Masovia invited the Teutonic Knights to help him fight the pagan Baltic Prussian people , who lived in a territory adjacent to his lands ; substantial border warfare was taking place and Konrad 's province was suffering from Prussian invasions . On the other hand , the Old Prussians themselves were at that time being subjected to increasingly forced ( including papacy @-@ sponsored crusades ) , but largely ineffective Christianization efforts . The Teutonic Order soon overstepped the authority and moved beyond the area granted them by Konrad ( Chełmno Land or Kulmerland ) . In the following decades they conquered large areas along the Baltic Sea coast and established their monastic state . As virtually all of the Western Baltic pagans became converted or exterminated ( the Prussian conquests were completed by 1283 ) , the Knights confronted Poland and Lithuania , then the last pagan state in Europe . Teutonic wars with Poland and Lithuania continued for most of the 14th and 15th centuries . The Teutonic state in Prussia , populated by German settlers beginning in the 13th century , had been claimed as a fief and protected by the popes and Holy Roman Emperors . 
 = = = Reunification attempts ; Przemysł II , Václav II ( 1232 – 1305 ) = = = 
 As the disadvantages of national division were becoming increasingly apparent in various segments of the society , some of the Piast dukes had begun making serious efforts aimed at the reunification of the Polish state . Important among the earlier attempts were the activities of the Silesian dukes Henry I the Bearded , his son Henry II the Pious , who was killed in 1241 while fighting the Mongols at the Battle of Legnica , and Henry IV Probus . In 1295 Przemysł II of Greater Poland became the first , since Bolesław II , Piast duke crowned as King of Poland , but he ruled over only a part of the territory of Poland ( including from 1294 Gdańsk Pomerania ) and was assassinated soon after his coronation . A more extensive unification of Polish lands was accomplished by a foreign ruler , Václav II of Bohemia of the Přemyslid dynasty , who married Przemysł 's daughter and became King of Poland in 1300 . Václav 's heavy @-@ handed policies soon caused him to lose whatever support he had earlier in his reign ; he died in 1305 . 
 An important factor in the unification process was the Polish Church , which remained a single ecclesiastical province throughout the fragmentation period . Archbishop Jakub Świnka of Gniezno was an ardent proponent of Poland 's reunification ; he performed the crowning ceremonies for both Przemysł II and Wenceslaus II . Świnka supported Władysław Łokietek at various stages of the duke 's career . 
 = = = Culture = = = 
 Culturally , the social impact of the Church was considerably broader in the 13th century , as networks of parishes were established and cathedral @-@ type schools became more common . The Dominicans and the Franciscans were the leading monastic orders at this time , and they interacted closely with the general population . A proliferation of narrative annals characterized the period , as well as other written records , laws and documents . More of the clergy were of local origin ; others were expected to know the Polish language . Wincenty Kadłubek , the author of an influential chronicle , was the most recognized representative in the intellectual sphere . <unk> , a treatise on optics by <unk> , a Silesian monk , was one of the finest achievements of medieval science . The construction of churches and castles in the Gothic architecture style predominated in the 13th century ; native elements in art forms were increasingly important , with significant advances taking place in agriculture , manufacturing and crafts . 
 = = 14th century = = 
 = = = Reunited kingdom of the last Piast rulers = = = 
 Władysław the Elbow @-@ high and his son Casimir the Great were the last two rulers of the Piast dynasty in the unified Kingdom of Poland of the 14th century . Their rule was not a return to the Polish state as it existed before the period of fragmentation , because of the loss of internal cohesion and territorial integrity . The regional Piast princes remained strong and for economic and cultural reasons some of them gravitated toward Poland 's neighbors . The Kingdom lost Pomerania and Silesia , the most highly developed and economically important of the original ethnically Polish lands ( a disputable designation in case of Slavic Western Pomerania ) , which left half of the Polish population outside the Kingdom 's borders . The western losses had to do with the failure of the unification efforts undertaken by the Silesian Piast dukes and the German expansion processes . These included the Piast principalities developing ( or falling into ) dependencies in respect to the German political structures , settler colonization and gradual Germanization of the Polish ruling circles . The lower Vistula was controlled by the Teutonic Order . Masovia was not to be fully incorporated into the Polish state anytime soon . Casimir stabilized the western and northern borders , tried to regain some of the lost territories , and partially compensated the losses by his new eastern expansion , which placed within his kingdom regions that were East Slavic , and thus ethnically non @-@ Polish . 
 Despite the territorial truncation , 14th century Poland experienced a period of accelerated economic development and increasing prosperity . This included further expansion and modernization of agricultural settlements , the development of towns and their greater role in briskly growing trade , mining and metallurgy . A great monetary reform was implemented during the reign of Casimir III . 
 Jewish settlement was taking place in Poland since very early times . In 1264 Duke Bolesław the Pious of Greater Poland granted the Statute of Kalisz privilege , which specified a broad range of freedoms ( of religious practices , movement , trading ) and rights for the Jews , creating a legal precedent of official protection from local harassment and exclusion . The act also exempted the Jews from enslavement or serfdom and was the foundation of future Jewish prosperity in the Polish Kingdom ; it was later followed by many other comparable legal pronouncements . Following a series of expulsions of Jews from Western Europe , Jewish communities were established in Cracow , Kalisz and elsewhere in western and southern Poland in the 13th century ; at Lviv , Brest @-@ Litovsk and Grodno further east in the 14th century . King Casimir received Jewish refugees from Germany in 1349 , helping accelerate the Jewish expansion in Poland that was to continue until World War II . German urban and rural settlements were another long @-@ lasting ethnic feature . 
 = = = Władysław I the Elbow @-@ high ( 1305 – 1333 ) = = = 
 Władysław Łokietek ( ruled 1305 – 1333 ) , who began as an obscure Piast duke from Kuyavia , fought a lifelong , uphill battle with powerful adversaries with persistence and determination . When Łokietek died as the king of a partially reunited Poland , he left the Kingdom in a precarious situation . Although the area under King Władysław 's control was limited and many unresolved issues remained , Łokietek may have saved Poland 's existence as a state . 
 Supported by his Hungarian allies , Władysław returned from exile and challenged Václav II , and after his death Václav III in 1304 – 1306 . Václav III 's murder terminated the Přemyslid dynasty and their involvement in Poland . Afterwards Władysław Łokietek completed the takeover of Lesser Poland , entering Kraków , and took the lands north of there , through Kuyavia all the way to Gdańsk Pomerania . In 1308 , Pomerania was conquered by the Brandenburg state . In a recovery effort , Łokietek agreed to ask for help the Teutonic Knights ; the Knights brutally took over Gdańsk Pomerania and kept it for themselves . 
 In 1311 – 1312 , a rebellion in Kraków instigated by the city 's patrician leadership seeking a rule by the House of Luxembourg was put down . This event may have had a limiting impact on the emerging political power of towns . 
 In 1313 – 1314 Władysław conquered Greater Poland . In 1320 , Władysław I Łokietek became the first King of Poland crowned not in Gniezno , but in Kraków 's Wawel Cathedral . The coronation was hesitantly agreed to by Pope John XXII , despite the opposition from John of Bohemia , who had also claimed the Polish crown . John undertook in 1327 an expedition aimed at Kraków , which he was compelled to abort ; in 1328 , he waged a crusade against Lithuania during which he formalized an alliance with the Teutonic Order . The Order was in a state of war with Poland from 1327 to 1332 ( see Battle of <unk> ) ; the Knights captured Dobrzyń Land and Kujawy . Władysław was helped by his alliances with Hungary ( his daughter Elizabeth was married to King Charles Robert in 1320 ) and Lithuania ( 1325 pact against the Teutonic State and the marriage of Łokietek 's son Casimir to Aldona , daughter of Lithuanian ruler Gediminas ) , and from 1329 by a peace agreement with Brandenburg . A lasting achievement of John of Luxembourg ( and Poland 's greatest loss ) was forcing most of the Piast Silesian principalities , often ambivalent about their loyalties , into allegiance ( 1327 – 29 ) . 
 = = = Casimir III the Great ( 1333 – 1370 ) = = = 
 After Łokietek 's death , the old monarch 's 23 @-@ year @-@ old son became King Casimir III , later known as Kazimierz the Great ( ruled 1333 – 1370 ) . Unlike his father the new king had no inclination for the hardships of military life . Casimir 's contemporaries did not give him much of a chance for overcoming the country 's mounting difficulties or succeeding as a leader . But from the beginning , Casimir acted prudently , purchasing in 1335 John 's claims to the Polish throne . In 1343 , Casimir settled several high @-@ level arbitration disputes with the Teutonic Order by a territorial compromise , culminating in the Treaty of Kalisz , a peace treaty that concluded the Polish @-@ Teutonic War of 1326 – 1332 . Dobrzyń Land and Kuyavia were recovered by Casimir . At that time Poland started to expand to the east and through a series of military campaigns between 1340 and 1366 Casimir had annexed the Halych – Volodymyr area of Rus ' . The town of Lviv there attracted newcomers of several nationalities , was granted municipal rights in 1356 , and had thus begun its career as Lwów , the main Polish center in the midst of a Rus ' Orthodox population . Supported by Hungary , the Polish king in 1338 promised the Hungarian ruling house the Polish throne in the event he dies without male heirs . 
 Casimir , who in 1339 formally gave up his rights to several Silesian principalities , unsuccessfully tried to recover the region by conducting military activities against the <unk> between 1343 and 1348 , but then blocked the attempted separation of Silesia from the Gniezno Archdiocese by Charles IV . Later until his death he pursued the Polish claim to Silesia legally by petitioning the pope ; his successors had not continued his efforts . 
 Allied with Denmark and Western Pomerania ( Gdańsk Pomerania was granted to the Order as an " eternal charity " ) , Casimir was able to impose some corrections on the western border . In 1365 <unk> and <unk> became Poland 's fiefs , while <unk> district was in 1368 taken outright , severing the land connection between Brandenburg and the Teutonic state and connecting Poland with Farther Pomerania . 
 Casimir the Great considerably solidified the country 's position in both foreign and domestic affairs . Domestically , he integrated and centralized the reunited Polish state and helped develop what was considered the " Crown of the Polish Kingdom " — the state within its actual , as well as past or potential ( legal from the Polish point of view ) boundaries . Casimir established or strengthened kingdom @-@ wide institutions ( such as the powerful state treasury ) , independent of the regional , class , or royal court related interests . Internationally , the Polish king was very active diplomatically , cultivated close contacts with other European rulers and was a staunch defender of the Polish national interest . In 1364 he sponsored the Congress of Kraków , in which a number of monarchs participated , and which was concerned with the promotion of peaceful cooperation and political balance in Central Europe . 
 = = = Louis I and Jadwiga of the Angevin dynasty ( 1370 – 1399 ) = = = 
 Immediately after Casimir 's death in 1370 , the heirless king 's nephew , Louis of Hungary of the Angevin dynasty , assumed the Polish throne . As Casimir 's actual commitment to the Angevin succession seemed problematic from the beginning ( in 1368 the Polish king adopted his grandson , Casimir of Słupsk ) , Louis engaged in succession negotiations with Polish knights and nobility starting in 1351 . They supported him , exacting in return further guarantees and privileges for themselves ; the formal act was negotiated in Buda in 1355 . After the coronation , Louis returned to Hungary ; he left his mother and Casimir 's sister Elizabeth in Poland as a regent . 
 With the death of Casimir the Great , the period of hereditary ( Piast ) monarchy in Poland came to an end . The land owners and nobles did not want a strong monarchy ; a constitutional monarchy was established between 1370 and 1493 ( beginnings of general sejm , the dominant bicameral parliament of the future ) . 
 During the reign of Louis I , Poland formed a union with Hungary . In the pact of 1374 ( the Privilege of Koszyce ) , the Polish nobility were granted extensive concessions and agreed to extend the Angevin succession to Louis ' daughters , as Louis had no sons . Louis ' neglect of Polish affairs resulted in the loss of Casimir 's territorial gains , including Halych Rus ' , recovered by Queen Jadwiga in 1387 . In 1396 , Jadwiga and her husband Jagiełło ( Jogaila ) forcefully annexed the central Polish lands separating Lesser Poland from Greater Poland , previously granted by King Louis to his Silesian Piast ally , Duke Władysław of Opole . 
 The Hungarian @-@ Polish union lasted for twelve years and ended in war . After Louis ' death in 1382 and an ensuing power struggle , the Polish nobility decided that Jadwiga , Louis ' youngest daughter , should become the next " King of Poland " ; Jadwiga arrived in 1384 and was crowned at the age of eleven . The failure of the union of Poland and Hungary paved the way for the union of Lithuania and Poland . 
 = = = Culture = = = 
 In the 14th century , many large scale brick building projects were undertaken during Casimir 's reign , including the construction of Gothic churches , castles , urban fortifications and homes of wealthy city residents . The most notable architecture of the medieval period in Poland are the many churches representing the Polish Gothic style ; medieval sculpture , painting and ornamental <unk> are best expressed in the furnishings of churches and liturgical items . Polish law was first codified in the Statutes of Casimir the Great ( Piotrków – Wiślica Statutes ) from 1346 – 1362 . Accordingly , conflict resolution relied on legal proceedings domestically , while bilateral or multilateral negotiations and treaties were increasingly important in international relations . By this time , the network of cathedral and parish schools had become well developed . In 1364 , Casimir the Great , based on a papal concession , established the University of Kraków , the second oldest university in Central Europe . While many still traveled to southern and western Europe for university studies , the Polish language , along with the predominant Latin , is increasingly present in written documents . The Holy Cross Sermons ( ca. early 14th century ) constitute possibly the oldest extant Polish prose manuscript . 
 = Welcome Back , Carter = 
 " Welcome Back , Carter " is the third episode of the ninth season of the animated comedy series Family Guy . It originally aired on Fox in the United States on October 10 , 2010 . The episode follows Peter after he discovers his father @-@ in @-@ law , Carter Pewterschmidt , having an affair with another woman . Deciding to blackmail him , Peter begins taking advantage of his father @-@ in @-@ law 's enormous wealth , before accidentally spilling the beans to Carter 's wife , Barbara , who divorces him soon after . Peter then becomes Carter 's wingman , and helps him in rediscovering his bachelorhood , as he begins navigating through the dating scene . 
 The episode was written by Wellesley Wild and directed by Cyndi Tang @-@ Loveland . It received mixed reviews from critics for its storyline and many cultural references . According to Nielsen ratings , it was viewed in 7 @.@ 02 million homes in its original airing . The episode featured guest performances by Max Burkholder , Christine Lakin and Rachael MacFarlane , along with several recurring guest voice actors for the series . " Welcome Back , Carter " was released on DVD along with three other episodes from the season on December 13 , 2011 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After deciding to visit her parents , Carter and Barbara Pewterschmidt , Lois , along with her husband , Peter , discover an old photo album showcasing Barbara and Carter 's love for each other , as well as Barbara 's short @-@ lived affair during the " Great War with Alaska " , during which , after returning home from combat , Carter reclaims his wife , and the two 's love is shown to have lasted ever since . Becoming bored , Peter decides to call his father @-@ in @-@ law to dinner , and soon discovers Carter in his yacht , having sex with another woman of Japanese descent . Questioning his father @-@ in @-@ law 's judgment , he eventually promises to keep the affair a secret from Barbara . The next day , at the Drunken Clam , Peter begins discussing the affair with Quagmire and Joe , who suggest Peter blackmail Carter as revenge for his constant mistreatment . 
 Visiting his wife 's parents during the middle of the night , Peter informs Carter that he is now his personal slave , and must perform any task he wishes , including having a limousine joust and writing witty catchphrases . Noticing Peter and Carter spending time together , Barbara and Lois soon witness the two taking a high @-@ definition television out of the house . Peter then accidentally spills the beans to Barbara about the affair , who runs out of the room sobbing instantly . At the Griffin family home , Carter announces that he and Barbara are getting a divorce , causing Peter to suggest he meet other people . Taking him to the local club , Peter introduces Carter to the dating scene , where he soon meets Paula , an attractive blonde . Going on to demand an African American patron fetch him a drink , Carter is accused of being a racist by Paula , who leaves him . Continuing to desire Barbara , Carter decides to take a bouquet of roses to his former wife . While there , he discovers that Barbara has begun dating the man she had an affair with during the war ( who sings to her in the tune of ' The Miners Mother ' ) . Announcing he has something important to say to Barbara , Carter confesses his love for her , and apologizes . Barbara then allows Carter to earn her trust by letting him move back in , and the two ultimately embrace in a passionate kiss . 
 = = Production and development = = 
 The episode was written by series regular Wellesley Wild and directed by series regular Cyndi Tang @-@ Loveland shortly after the conclusion of the eighth production season . Series veterans Peter Shin and James Purdum , both of whom having previously served as animation directors , served as supervising directors for the episode , with Andrew Goldberg , Alex Carter , Elaine Ko , Spencer Porter and Aaron Blitzstein serving as staff writers for the episode . Composer Ron Jones , who has worked on the series since its inception , returned to compose the music for " Welcome Back , Carter " . Series creator and executive producer Seth MacFarlane reprised his role as Carter Pewterschmidt , with main cast member and former series writer Alex Borstein providing the voice of Carter 's wife , Barbara Pewterschmidt . 
 " Welcome Back , Carter " , along with the two other episodes from Family Guy 's ninth season , was released on a three @-@ disc DVD set in the United States on December 13 , 2011 . The sets include brief audio commentaries by various crew and cast members for several episodes , a collection of deleted scenes and animatics , a special mini @-@ feature which discussed the process behind animating " And Then There Were Fewer " , a mini @-@ feature entitled " The Comical Adventures of Family Guy – Brian & Stewie : The Lost Phone Call " , and footage of the Family Guy panel at the 2010 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International . 
 In addition to the regular cast , child actor Max Burkholder , actress Christine Lakin , and voice actress Rachael MacFarlane guest starred in the episode . Recurring guest voice actress Alexandra Breckenridge , actor Ralph Garman , and writers Patrick Meighan , Danny Smith , Alec Sulkin and John Viener also made minor appearances . Actor Patrick Warburton appeared in the episode as well . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 In the opening scene of the episode , Peter notices a painting of a ship in his mother @-@ in @-@ law 's living room , and questions whether or not he can change the channel . Lois goes on to instruct Peter that it is not a television , with Barbara interrupting and telling him it is actually the television channel PBS . Peter then interjects his hatred of PBS , after viewing a nine @-@ part series on traffic signs by director and producer Ken Burns , the fourth of which on the yield sign . Later , after returning to dinner , Peter becomes an embarrassment to Lois , who recalls having dinner with Paul McCartney 's ex @-@ wife , Heather Mills , during which Peter began playing <unk> with Mills , whose prosthetic leg ultimately falls off . 
 In an attempt to make Barbara love Carter again , Peter instructs him that he must befriend a cute child in order to win her over . Peter then invites child actor Jonathan <unk> to the Griffin family home , but he is immediately shocked by his change in appearance . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Welcome Back , Carter " was broadcast on October 10 , 2010 , as a part of an animated television night on Fox , and was preceded by The Simpsons , and Family Guy creator and executive producer Seth MacFarlane 's spin @-@ off , The Cleveland Show , and followed by an episode of American Dad ! . It was watched by 7 @.@ 02 million viewers , according to Nielsen ratings , despite airing simultaneously with Desperate Housewives on ABC , The Amazing Race on CBS and Sunday Night Football on NBC , and falling only 15 % from the previous week 's broadcast . The episode also acquired a 3 @.@ 4 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , beating The Simpsons , American Dad ! and The Cleveland Show in addition to significantly edging out all three shows in total viewership . 
 Television critics reacted mostly mixed to " Welcome Back , Carter " , calling the storyline " hit @-@ or @-@ miss . " In a simultaneous review of the episodes of The Simpsons and The Cleveland Show that preceded the show , and the broadcast of American Dad ! that followed it , The A.V. Club 's Rowan Kaiser noted the apparent lack of guest stars in the episode , adding , " I can 't help but feel [ it ] is a good thing in for Family Guy . " In the conclusion of his review Kaiser praised the " shock humor " in the limousine jousting scene , but compared Carter 's catchphrases to " the kind of groan @-@ inducing meta @-@ humor that [ ... ] The Cleveland Show aims for . " He ultimately gave the episode a C rating , the second best rating of the night , beating The Cleveland Show episode " How Cleveland Got His Groove Back " and tying with the American Dad ! episode " Son of Stan " . In a slightly more neutral review of the episode , Jason Hughes of TV Squad praised the episode 's cutaways , stating that they " came back with a vengeance this week . " Hughes went on to comment negatively on the scene involving Carter being woken up and hinting at incest with his daughter , noting , " It 's weird that while the pedophile character of Herbert doesn 't bother me at all , this potential admission really does . Maybe because it adds an element of incest , or seemed more genuine than Herbert 's over @-@ the @-@ top antics . But really , it 's just another throwaway gag in the world of Seth MacFarlane . " Actor Jonathan <unk> , who was parodied in the episode , responded to his portrayal by stating , " I don 't feel bad about what they said on Family Guy . It was all in good fun , I 've worked on that show [ before ] . " 
 = Castlevania : Harmony of Dissonance = 
 Castlevania : Harmony of Dissonance , known in Japan as Castlevania : Byakuya no Concerto ( <unk> <unk> , <unk> Byakuya no <unk> , officially translated Castlevania : Concerto of Midnight Sun ) , is a platform @-@ adventure video game developed and published by Konami for the Game Boy Advance . Belonging to Konami 's Castlevania video game series , it is the second installment of the series on the Game Boy Advance . It was released in Japan in June 2002 , in North America in September 2002 , and in Europe in October 2002 . It was the first Castlevania game to be called " Castlevania " in Japan instead of " Akumajō Dracula " . 
 Harmony of Dissonance occurs in the fictional universe of the Castlevania series ; the premise of the series centers on the eternal conflict between the vampire hunters of the Belmont clan and the immortal vampire Dracula . Set fifty years after Simon Belmont vanquished Dracula 's curse , Harmony of Dissonance focuses on his grandson Juste Belmont and his quest to rescue a kidnapped childhood friend . 
 Koji Igarashi produced Harmony of Dissonance with the intent of " creat [ ing ] a game that was similar to Castlevania : Symphony of the Night " , the critically acclaimed PlayStation game that he had worked on . Harmony of Dissonance sold 126 @,@ 000 units in the United States and did not become a " huge hit in Japan " . Critics praised it as an entertaining game with improved graphics as compared to its predecessor Castlevania : Circle of the Moon , but criticized its soundtrack . In January 2006 , Harmony of Dissonance was re @-@ released in North America and later Europe , along with Castlevania : Aria of Sorrow , as part of the Castlevania Double Pack . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Harmony of Dissonance makes use of a 2D side @-@ scrolling style of gameplay , similar to many of the previous Castlevania video games . The objective of the game is to lead the player @-@ character , Juste Belmont , through the monster @-@ filled castle as he searches for his kidnapped friend . The castle consists of two " layers " : Castle A and B. Structurally , each castle has mostly the same room layout , but monster types , items , and other aspects vary between the two versions . Later , the player can use special warp rooms that can teleport Juste to other castle rooms and between castles . The two castles share a connection ; for example , the destruction of a wall in one castle can cause a change in the other . The game further divides the castle into various , named areas : the Shrine of the <unk> , for example . Relics and keys found within the castle allow Juste to reach previously inaccessible areas . Harmony of Dissonance makes use of the forward dash move , which causes Juste to move forward with a short burst of speed . Unique to Harmony of Dissonance is the ability to collect furniture and collectables to furnish a bare room that Juste finds in the castle . This , under certain circumstances , does affect the ending . 
 Juste primarily attacks at close quarters using the series ' traditional whip weapon , the Vampire Killer . It can be brandished to deflect projectile attacks , reminiscent of Simon Belmont 's usage of the weapon in Super Castlevania IV . A variety of ranged sub @-@ weapons — holy water , a dagger , a holy book , a cross , a gem , an axe , and a thunder gauntlet — are available , one of which can be carried at any given time and combined with one of the five spell books — Fire Book , Ice Book , Bolt Book , Wind Book , and the Summoning Tome — hidden throughout the castle to create a magical attack . Casting a spell renders the player character invincible for a moment . 
 Harmony of Dissonance also makes use of elements found in role @-@ playing games . Defeating minor enemies and bosses will procure experience points for Juste , who will level up when statistical requirements are met . Leveling up will increase his statistics : hit points , the amount of damage the character can receive before dying ; magic points , which affects how often he can cast a magical attack ; strength , the power of the physical attack ; defense , the reduction of damage taken from an enemy ; intelligence , the strength of the magical attack ; and luck , which determines the rate of items dropped by enemies . Certain relics will also affect his statistics : the Fang of Vlad increases his defense points , for example . Equipment in the form of weapon modifications , armor and accessories can also be found scattered about the castle and will contribute to his statistics . Occasionally , an enemy will drop an item after being killed . Items can also be bought with in @-@ game money from a merchant who appears in various places throughout the castle . 
 Additional modes can be unlocked in the game . For Boss Rush Mode , the player is required to complete the game once and can then fight the bosses from the game in order with the number of bosses depending on the level of difficulty selected . Maxim Mode requires the player to finish the game with the best ending and allows the player to take control of Maxim . Unlike Juste , Maxim cannot equip items and can only use his boomerang as a weapon . Finishing with the best ending also unlocks an option to listen to the music of the game . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting and characters = = = 
 Harmony of Dissonance takes place in 1748 , fifty years after Simon Belmont ended Dracula 's curse . As result of his battle against Dracula was that the villagers changed their opinion of him and the Belmont family . Producer Koji Igarashi explained : " Simon was regarded as a life @-@ saver , and people started to look upon him as a hero ; little by little , the people started to gather around them . A village , therefore , was formed around Belmonts . Juste Belmont grew up in this environment with his childhood friends Maxim <unk> and Lydie Erlanger . " 
 The protagonist and primary player character is Juste Belmont , the grandson of Simon Belmont and descendant of <unk> Belnades , who at the age of sixteen , gained the Vampire Killer whip . Together with his amnesiac and injured best friend Maxim <unk> , he sets off to rescue his kidnapped childhood friend , Lydie Erlanger . While exploring the castle , he encounters a merchant who stumbled upon the castle and Death , Dracula 's servant . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 Juste meets Maxim at a castle where Lydie is being held captive ; after a brief talk , he leaves Maxim outside and begins to explore the castle . Within the castle , Juste encounters Death , who confirms that the castle is Dracula 's . He then meets up with a dazed Maxim , whose memory is slowly returning to him and they split up to cover more of the castle ground . While trekking through the castle , Juste notices that the castle sometimes has different atmospheres . He also meets Maxim several more times , but is baffled by how his friend seems to change personalities periodically . Regardless , in one of their meetings , Maxim reveals that he went on a journey to find and destroy the remains of Dracula , something Simon Belmont had previously done , but when he collected all six , his memory went blank . 
 Juste encounters Death again , who explains that the castle has been split in two " layers " to accommodate the two spirits living in Maxim 's body : his original spirit and an evil one created from Dracula 's remains and his suppressed jealousy of Juste . Maxim later confirms this and admits to being Lydie 's kidnapper . Juste meets his friend again in the other layer of the castle where he reveals that he lost his memory to protect Lydie . He then gives Juste his bracelet to help him locate her in the castle . However , when Juste finds her , Death kidnaps her to use her blood as a means to unite the two castles by destroying Maxim 's spirit . Juste defeats Death , and proceeds to search for Maxim . Along the way , he accumulates Dracula 's remains , which are scattered throughout the castle . In the center of the castle , he finds Maxim with an unconscious Lydie . 
 Three endings exist . In the first , Maxim , possessed , has already bitten Lydie . With Maxim 's defeat , Juste escapes the collapsing castle alone and curses his inability to save either friend . In the second , Maxim struggles against the possession and urges Juste to kill him . In his final moments , he thanks Juste for killing him and reveals that he had wished to save him from his fate as a Belmont . Outside the castle , Lydie awakens , unharmed , and tells Juste not to blame himself for Maxim 's death . The third ending begins the same as the first , except that , during the fight , Maxim notices that Juste wore his bracelet and resists the possession . Dracula flees into a weakened form using the gathered remains and fights Juste , planning to use his blood to return himself to full power . <unk> him , Juste escapes the castle together with Maxim and Lydie , whose bite marks disappear by the time she regains consciousness . Outside the castle , the three resolve to return home . 
 = = Development = = 
 Produced by Koji Igarashi and developed by Konami Computer Entertainment Tokyo , Castlevania : Harmony of Dissonance is the second installment of Konami 's Castlevania video game series for the Game Boy Advance ( GBA ) . Its predecessor Castlevania : Circle of the Moon had been developed by a different studio , Konami Computer Entertainment Kobe . Igarashi began the game 's development with the intention of making an installment of the series for GBA that shared similarities with Symphony of the Night ( 1997 ) . Ayami Kojima , who had previously worked on the character designs for Symphony of the Night , designed the characters of Harmony of Dissonance . 
 Harmony of Dissonance departs from the usual structure of the series , in which Dracula is resurrected and a member of the Belmont clan sets out to defeat him , in favor of a plot that takes place in between Dracula 's resurrections . Harmony of Dissonance incorporates other changes : a fusion @-@ spell system replaced the dual @-@ card system introduced in Circle of the Moon , and the graphics were also brightened and controls improved . In production at the same time was Castlevania : Aria of Sorrow ( 2003 ) , and as a result , the two share similar programming engines and gameplay elements . Originally slated for a mid @-@ June release , Harmony of Dissonance was not released until September 2002 . It was released in Japan on June 6 , 2002 , in North America on September 16 , 2002 , and in Europe on October 11 , 2002 . It was published on the Wii U Virtual Console on October 16 , 2014 , in North America . 
 = = = Audio = = = 
 On June 26 , 2002 , Konami published Castlevania : Circle of the Moon & Castlevania : Concerto of Midnight Sun Original Soundtrack ( <unk> @-@ 162 ) . <unk> Hokkai composed the soundtrack for Harmony of Dissonance with Michiru Yamane creating the additional stage music . Igarashi later noted that the quality of the music had been " sacrifice [ d ] " for the graphics of the game . 
 Notes 
 Tracks 1 through 19 from Castlevania : Circle of the Moon 
 Tracks 20 through 45 from Castlevania : Harmony of Dissonance 
 = = Reception = = 
 In the United States , about 126 @,@ 000 units of Harmony of Dissonance were sold , and in Japan , it was not considered a " huge hit " by Igarashi . Metacritic assigned it a score of 87 of 100 while GameRankings gave it an 84 % . 
 At the time of its release , Harmony of Dissonance received positive reviews from English @-@ language critics . GameSpot commended it as " not just a fine Castlevania <unk> 's also one of the better Game Boy Advance games to come around in a while " . Gamespy stated : " Despite its unevenness , Castlevania : Harmony of Dissonance is a quality adventure that represents the best attempt yet made at <unk> the brilliance of Symphony of the Night . " While worrying about the loss of originality of the franchise and noting that " Harmony of Dissonance almost obsessively copies Symphony of the Night " , GamePro called it " a fun action game and a fine Castlevania game in its own right . " The improved graphics of Harmony of Dissonance , especially the backgrounds , 3D effects , and multi @-@ jointed bosses , received praise from reviewers , who called them " plentiful and visually stunning " , and " top @-@ notch " . 
 The soundtrack of the game was less well received . Critics panned the music as " easily the worst Castlevania soundtrack " and " muddy , plodding , and reminiscent of the days of four @-@ channel NES soundtracks " . Conversely , GameSpot found that the music was " decent " and occasionally " fitting or even catchy " , but failed to live up to the high expectations of the series . IGN felt that while not " quite as bad as importers have made it out to be " , the songs " aren 't nearly as nice as they have been in past Castlevania adventures . " Reviewers also disliked the lack of difficulty with GamePro describing it as the game 's " biggest flaw " . Other criticism included predictable and easy boss battles , and " a much smaller explorable area and somewhat less compelling map design " . 
 Retrospective reviews , however , have been more critical of the game . Considering Harmony of Dissonance " one of the more disappointing titles of the series " and " the least @-@ impressive of the three GBA titles , " retrospective critics cited the dull castle design and frequent switching between castle layers as some of the game 's biggest flaws . PALGN 's David Low criticized the inclusion of the " possessed ally " element from previous Castlevania titles along with the game 's easier gameplay , the player character 's badly animated sprite , and the occasionally gaudy environments . Looking back on the series , Mark Bozon of IGN concluded : " Still Harmony of Dissonance shows off some decent visuals as an in @-@ between , mid @-@ generation game , and paved the way for GBA 's strongest Castlevania title , Aria of Sorrow . " Game Informer 's Tim Turi meanwhile felt that its design was among Castlevania 's best despite having among the worst music in the series . 
 Castlevania : Harmony of Dissonance was re @-@ released in North America in January 2006 , along with Castlevania : Aria of Sorrow , as part of Castlevania Double Pack . Both games are contained on a single GBA Game Pak . This pack also appeared in Europe later that year . It was picked as the IGN Game Boy Game of the Month for January 2006 . 
 = Transformers : The Ride = 
 Transformers : The Ride 3D ( or simply Transformers : The Ride ) is a 3D dark ride located at Universal Studios Singapore , Universal Studios Hollywood and Universal Studios Florida . The ride , based on the Transformers film franchise , was designed by Universal Creative , Oceaneering International , and Industrial Light & Magic . Each installation is reported to have cost US $ 100 million . Universal Studios Singapore was the first to open the ride . 
 The dark ride consists of vehicle @-@ mounted motion platforms which follow a 2 @,@ 000 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 610 m ) track . Throughout the ride , screens up to 60 feet ( 18 m ) high project 3D images of various Transformers characters as the Autobots attempt to protect the AllSpark from the Decepticons . Transformers : The Ride has been praised by media around the world with some stating it is one of the best theme park attractions in the world . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Announcements = = = 
 Early planning and design for the ride began in 2007 . In October 2008 , Universal Parks & Resorts announced the addition of Transformers : The Ride to their Singapore and Hollywood theme parks . At the time of the announcement , speculation that the ride would feature an upgraded version of the ride system used in The Amazing Adventures of Spider @-@ Man ride at Islands of Adventure appeared in the press . After the two attractions at Universal Studios Singapore and Hollywood were opened , Universal Orlando Resort announced on November 1 , 2012 , that Transformers : The Ride would open at Universal Studios Florida in mid @-@ 2013 . The announcement was made just prior to that night 's showing of Universal 's Cinematic Spectacular : 100 Years of Movie Memories . 
 = = = Universal Studios Singapore = = = 
 Construction started in Singapore in late 2009 in a back @-@ of @-@ house location . Construction continued throughout the soft opening period of the park , which began on March 18 , 2010 . By October 2010 , some of the track for the ride had been installed . It was discovered that the ride will be spread across two levels . On October 27 , 2011 , Universal Studios Singapore announced that Transformers : The Ride would open in Singapore on December 3 , 2011 . On November 19 , 2011 , Universal Studios Singapore opened the ride to the public for " technical rehearsals " ; the ride operated intermittently until the official opening date . The ride debuted at an exclusive evening event on December 2 , 2011 , attended by director Michael Bay and Universal Parks & Resorts CEO Tom Williams . The ride officially opened to the public on December 3 , 2011 . 
 = = = Universal Studios Hollywood = = = 
 Installation of Transformers : The Ride at Universal Studios Hollywood , required the removal of two attractions . On April 11 , 2010 , <unk> and Special Effects Stages closed . The Special Effects Stages were relocated to the Upper Lot and renamed the Special Effects Stage on June 26 , 2010 . Work began almost immediately on the construction of the ride . After a period of construction spanning close to two years , the ride and its gift store , the Transformers Supply Vault , soft opened to the public in late April 2012 . Transformers : The Ride officially opened to the public on May 24 , 2012 . 
 = = = Universal Studios Florida = = = 
 A few days after Transformers : The Ride opened at Universal Studios Hollywood , Universal Parks & Resorts decided to open the attraction at Universal Studios Florida . Construction began almost immediately on the site of Soundstage 44 , which was once home of Hercules and Xena : Wizards of the Screen and Murder , She Wrote Mystery Theatre . They were demolished in June 2012 . In July 2012 , construction of a new building began with the installation of a tower crane and the start of excavation . On May 2 , 2013 , the park announced that the ride would open on June 20 , 2013 . On May 30 , 2013 , technical rehearsals for the ride officially began . On June 20 , 2013 , the ride officially opened to the general public . Transformers : The Ride 3D celebrated its One @-@ <unk> Rider in August 2013 . 
 = = Ride system and experience = = 
 = = = Ride system = = = 
 The ride system used on Transformers : The Ride is similar to that used by The Amazing Adventures of Spider @-@ Man at Islands of Adventure in Orlando , Florida , and later at Universal Studios Japan . The ride vehicles , developed by Oceaneering International , are mounted to a track @-@ roaming platform that provides the forward motion to move the vehicle through each show scene . The yaw motor and a stewart platform with six degrees of freedom attaching it to the platform allows the vehicle to move 360 degrees at different angles along the 2 @,@ 000 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 610 m ) track . Each vehicle is fitted with a motor that controls the right side door through which guests board and leave . These vehicles are modeled after an Autobot named Evac and each vehicle accommodates twelve riders . Each row of four riders is restrained by a single lapbar . 
 = = = Queue and pre @-@ show = = = 
 Riders enter the queue from the Sci @-@ Fi City themed area of Universal Studios Singapore , the Lower Lot at Universal Studios Hollywood or Production Central at Universal Studios Florida . Riders must be at least 122 centimetres ( 48 in ) to ride alone or 102 centimetres ( 40 in ) if they are with an adult . The first portion of the queue is a large collection of switchbacks . The later part of the queue is themed as a <unk> Extraterrestrial Species Treaty ( NEST ) base . A series of signs and video screens are located within this area . The video screens play briefings from General Morshower , Bumblebee , Ironhide , and Ratchet , who explain that the Decepticons have come to Earth in search of the AllSpark . Optimus Prime concludes the briefing by introducing all of the Autobots that are featured in the ride . Towards the end of the queue , guests are given a pair of 3D glasses . Once guests arrive at the loading station , they are grouped and loaded into a ride vehicle modeled on an Autobot named Evac . 
 = = = Ride = = = 
 The ride begins with Evac moving out of the loading station and making a turn . The vehicle approaches the first of thirteen 3D high @-@ definition video screens which depicts Ravage grabbing a canister containing the AllSpark . Evac spins 180 ° to face the second screen on which Bumblebee is fighting Sideways for the AllSpark which ends up in Evac 's possession . Evac reverses into one of two elevator shafts which ascend to the second level of the attraction . During the ascent Optimus Prime battles Megatron and Grindor chases Evac who is furiously heading in reverse until Grindor 's arm is broken off by a train . Megatron grabs Evac and the two struggle until Megatron breaks a water pipe , which sprays riders with water . Evac enters a dead end pathway before reversing and turning to face another 3D screen , which shows Megatron firing a missile at Evac while continuing to find Optimus . Hot air and fog generate the illusion of an explosion . Evac then heads through the hole in a building which was caused by the explosion . Inside lies Devastator , who is trying to suck everything out of the building . Ratchet and Ironhide cover fire while Evac reverses and escapes the suction . Here the Autobot Sideswipe helps in the battle against the Decepticon Bonecrusher . Devastator returns to the scene alongside Starscream . Evac escapes from Devastator a second time by going through him , but Starscream grabs Evac and throws him across several city blocks before landing on a construction site and smashing into some drums which release clouds of fog resulting in Evac asking if the riders are okay . Optimus Prime and Megatron continue their battle in the construction site as Evac reverses away in an attempt to protect the AllSpark . Starscream appears for a second time but is chased away by two NEST helicopters . Evac then returns to a second set of two elevators . During the descent to the ground floor , Evac forces the AllSpark into Megatron 's chest causing both to freefall to the ground when Megatron grabs Evac . Bumblebee saves Evac from destruction before Optimus Prime congratulates Evac and the riders on their mission . The last thing guests see before disembarking is the twisted wreckage of Megatron stuck in the ceiling near the exit . 
 = = = Exit and Transformers Supply Vault = = = 
 Once the ride is complete , riders dismount the Evac vehicle at the unload station . Upon exiting the ride , guests are greeted with the Transformers Supply Vault gift store , which sells items from the Transformers film franchise , Transformers : The Ride merchandise and a variety of Transformers toys . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Andrew <unk> – Military 
 Pilar Holland – Sonya Bradley 
 Corey <unk> – Theodore Stallworth 
 Ezra Masters – Sergeant Dees 
 Glenn Morshower – General Morshower 
 = = = Voices = = = 
 Charlie Adler – Starscream 
 Peter Cullen – Optimus Prime 
 Robert Foxworth – Ratchet 
 Jess Harnell – Ironhide 
 Tom Kenny – Wheelie 
 Dustin Leighton – Evac 
 James Remar – Sideswipe 
 Frank Welker – Megatron 
 John DiMaggio – Grindor 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Transformers : The Ride was primarily developed by Universal Creative , the research and development division of Universal Parks & Resorts . Universal Creative 's Thierry Coup was the Creative Director of the ride , having worked on previous Universal attractions including Harry Potter and the Forbidden Journey , The Amazing Adventures of Spider @-@ Man , and Shrek 4 @-@ D. Michael Bay , director of the Transformers film franchise , collaborated with Universal Creative on the ride , despite an earlier blog post that suggested otherwise : " I don 't support it yet – I 'm not involved and [ I 'm ] not sure the story of the ride works , and I know Optimus is not going to just show up to be directed by some new people that have never worked with him , " he wrote . Bay 's involvement in the attraction 's development was revealed by Mark Woodbury , president of Universal Creative , in an NBC documentary on Islands of Adventure 's Wizarding World of Harry Potter . Industrial Light & Magic developed the special effects for the ride , having previously worked on Transformers , Transformers : Revenge of the Fallen and Transformers : Dark of the Moon . Each installation is reported to have cost US $ 100 million . 
 = = = Special effects = = = 
 As well as the motion based vehicle , riders feel wind , water , hot air , fog , air blasts , vibration , and smoke . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 Initial promotion for the ride began with a blog by Resorts World Sentosa dedicated to the ride . Universal Studios Hollywood launched a website called Prepare For Battle . The ride 's launch at Universal Studios Hollywood saw a 30 @-@ second commercial for Transformers : The Ride premiere during Super Bowl in 2012 and an 80 @-@ foot ( 24 m ) high silhouette of Megatron attached to the Staples Center in Los Angeles . Universal Studios Hollywood also released a 30 @-@ minute documentary about the construction of the ride . Similar to Universal Studios Hollywood 's marketing campaign , Universal Studios Florida utilised the same Prepare For Battle website as well as attaching another silhouette of Megatron to the <unk> Credit Union Tower in Downtown Orlando . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Transformers : The Ride has been praised by media around the world . Brady MacDonald of the Los Angeles Times said he had high expectations of the ride , and was very pleased with it , and wrote that it " ranks among the top theme park attractions in the world " . Martin Miller , also of the Los Angeles Times , was equally pleased with the ride , and called it " one of Universal 's most sophisticated , satisfying rides " . Miller acknowledged the long queues associated with the ride but commended Universal for the design and theming of the queue to combat this . John Chan of CNET stated Transformers : The Ride " isn 't as heart @-@ stopping as a roller coaster [ but ] the ( relatively ) long 4 @-@ minute ride is every bit as entertaining " . Florida Today 's Tim Walters and Jennifer <unk> stated the " action @-@ packed ' Transformers ' ride doesn 't disappoint " . Both praised the ride 's " fun factor " giving it a rating of 5 / 5 , with Walters and <unk> giving ratings of 4 1 / 2 and 4 overall , respectively . 
 Bob Strauss from the Daily Breeze interviewed some park guests who had experienced the attraction . Their comments included " the 3 @-@ D 's crazy ; I think it 's a step above where the other rides are so far " and " it 's a new way of making these rides " . News.com.au stated " the happy smiles on the faces of visitors as the exit ... say it all " . 
 The opening of the ride at Universal Studios Hollywood was an immediate success , with record attendance over the Memorial Day weekend . A 15 percent rise in attendance in 2012 was attributed to the ride 's opening . Within days of the ride 's opening executives decided to install the ride at Universal Studios Florida with construction beginning almost immediately . 
 = The Last Sam Weiss = 
 " The Last Sam Weiss " is the penultimate episode of the third season of the Fox science fiction television series Fringe , and the 64th episode overall . The storyline follows the continuing disintegration of the prime universe , as the Fringe team races to prevent the destruction of their world . FBI agent Olivia Dunham recruits Sam Weiss for help while Peter recovers from touching the doomsday machine in the previous episode . 
 Executive producers Monica Owusu @-@ Breen and Alison Schapker co @-@ wrote the episode , and cinematographer Thomas Yatsko directed . " The Last Sam Weiss " is meant to be the middle of an " epic trilogy , " as the season finale aired the following week . Guest actors Kevin Corrigan and Ryan McDonald returned as Weiss and Brandon Fayette , respectively . 
 On its initial broadcast on April 29 , 2011 in the United States , an estimated 3 @.@ 49 million viewers tuned in . More viewers in America time shifted the episode than watched it live , leading to a 67 percent increase in the 18 – 49 demographic . This was the highest increase on any network for that week . While the episode received generally positive reviews , television critics were divided about the ending , with some comparing it to the television series Lost . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In the prime universe , the doomsday machine creates numerous static lightning storms along the eastern seaboard . As Walter and Astrid see to Peter 's recovery after his failed attempt to enter the machine , Olivia takes Sam Weiss to the machine . Weiss states that the machine is not meant to be a doomsday device and that the strange effects are a byproduct of the machine 's " frustration " due to its believing that Peter is already inside the machine . Weiss suggests finding a proverbial " crowbar " that can be used to break the shield protecting the device to give Peter enough time to enter it . As Olivia travels with Weiss to collect a box and the key containing this crowbar , Weiss explains that he descends from a long unbroken line of men named Sam Weiss whose forebear found the incomplete collection of information on the First People and the device , and have sought to try to find the rest . Upon collecting both the box and key , they open it to find a parchment , revealing that Olivia herself is the crowbar . 
 Meanwhile , Walter and Astrid determine that most of the effects of the device are occurring in the areas between western Massachusetts and Liberty Island — the locations of the doomsday machines in the prime and parallel universes respectively — aligned like iron filings around the ends of a magnet . Walter convinces Broyles to move the device to Liberty Island to reduce the area affected by the strange events . During this time , Peter wakes with confused memories and leaves the hospital , traveling to a location in New York City and buying a silver dollar coin from a pawn shop . 
 Olivia and Weiss bring the parchment to Walter , who recognizes that Olivia 's telekinetic powers must be used to turn off the machine in the parallel universe . To prepare Olivia , they use the quantum entangled Selectric typewriter that the shapeshifters had used to contact the parallel universe . Olivia struggles unsuccessfully with trying to activate the typewriter , even with Walter 's support . Peter is soon discovered in New York , about the same time that the machine has been moved into position . Walter and Olivia rejoin him , finding him confused and believing himself to be in the parallel universe . Peter eventually comes to his senses , with Walter believing his confusion to be a temporary result of the head trauma . Astrid calls the trio from the lab , revealing that the typewriter is typing out " Be a better man than your father " , a phrase that Olivia and Peter have talked about before , thus giving them hope that Olivia will be able to disengage the parallel universe 's device . After she does so , Peter takes a moment to recall the events of his life , including his experiences with Walter and Olivia , and then steps into the machine . 
 Peter wakes up on a chaotic street in New York City . He finds himself in an unfamiliar territory , facing a plaque dedicated to the victims of the September 11 attacks , but falls wounded into the arms of an officer of the militarized Fringe division . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was co @-@ written by co @-@ executive producers Monica Owusu @-@ Breen and Alison Schapker , while being directed by cinematographer Thomas Yatsko . " The Last Sam Weiss " was the second @-@ to @-@ last episode of the season . Though the season 3 finale was scheduled to be just an hour long , executive producer Jeff Pinkner confirmed that the last three episodes would be " linked in one continuous story arc " . This was a reflection of Pinkner and co @-@ executive producer J.H. Wyman 's intent to have the last three episodes of every season seem like " you 're turning the last page of a chapter in a novel . And usually in a good novel , the last pages [ of a chapter ] compels you forward with a new understanding of what the subject matter is and you get deeper and you can ’ t wait to turn that page . " Some media outlets have referred to the episodes as a " three @-@ part third @-@ season finale " . 
 Actor John Noble called the beginning scene with Olivia and Walter naked " the funniest thing " yet , explaining " The writers keep throwing challenges at me , because I never say no . They said , ' Okay , John , you ’ ll do a scene naked . ' I said ' Okay . ' And so that was a big surprise . So I do this scene , this strange scene with Anna Torv , without any clothes on . Anna ’ s staying at the Bishop house with Walter running around with no clothes on except for a pair of slippers , getting breakfast . She comes round the corner and catches him in the full <unk> , going , ' Oh no ! ' Didn ’ t know where to look . That was probably one of the most fun things we ever did . Anna ’ s reaction was priceless to that . I haven ’ t seen the scene yet , but it was hilarious to do it . " 
 In March 2011 , TVLine 's Michael Ausiello exclusively confirmed that previous guest actor Kevin Corrigan would be returning for the twentieth and twenty @-@ first episodes of the season . Corrigan last appeared in the season 's twelfth episode " Concentrate and Ask Again " ; his role in " The Last Sam Weiss " marked his seventh appearance on Fringe . The actor expressed appreciation that his character 's name was used in the title , but was disappointed it alluded to his final appearance in the show to date . The episode is Corrigan 's last credit on the series , though he previously stated his interest in returning as one of his ancestors or as a doppelganger . 
 As with other Fringe episodes , Fox released a science lesson plan in collaboration with Science Olympiad for grade school children , focusing on the science seen in " The Last Sam Weiss " , with the intention of having " students learn about static electricity and how it is created and dissipated . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 On its first broadcast in the United States on April 29 , 2011 , the episode was watched by an estimated 3 @.@ 49 million viewers and scored a 1 @.@ 3 ratings share among adults 18 – 49 . More viewers time shifted the episode than watched it live , as its ratings increased 67 percent in the 18 – 49 demographic , resulting in a 2 @.@ 0 rating ; this was the largest increase out of every other television series airing that week . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " The Last Sam Weiss " received generally positive reviews from television critics . Ken Tucker from Entertainment Weekly called the episode " equally surprising in its plotting and pacing " , praised Sam and Olivia 's scenes together , and believed the ending to be " mind @-@ blowing " and " both startling and thrilling " . The A.V. Club 's Noel Murray graded the episode with an A- , writing the first half " wasn 't quite as rollicking as last week 's episode , because there was a lot more set @-@ up and explanation required to keep the story moving " but " then the second half brought in all the emotion and tension , topped off by an unexpected gut @-@ punch of an ending . " Murray admitted his " eyes glazed over a bit " during the search for the " crowbar " , believing it to be " little too Lost @-@ y " , but " the quirky Corrigan as Weiss helped put all the mumbo @-@ jumbo over " . 
 SFScope columnist Sarah Stegall agreed with Murray 's Lost comparison , writing that the ending of the episode was " right out of the Lost playbook , a little too on the nose for my liking . " Stegall did however call it a " good bridge episode , taking us from the setup of last week to the denouement next week , when it all comes together . " IGN writer Ramsey Isler was more positive about the final sequence , explaining that the " last five minutes of this story changed everything , and made me excited about the series again . " While praising the special effects , he also noted his displeasure that Sam Weiss " ends up not being as mystical or magical as previous stories hinted " . Isler wished Corrigan had more screen time in the episode , calling it " under @-@ utilization of a great character the writers have spent a lot of time building up . " He rated it 7 @.@ 5 / 10 , an indication of a " good " episode , but criticized its " slow " pacing . 
 While Isler was pleased that Olivia appeared on the drawing , Stegall expressed skepticism that this revelation " smacks too much of manipulation , which would render our heroes ' actions and sacrifices meaningless . " TV.com staff highlighted " The Last Sam Weiss " as one of the best television episodes of the 2010 – 11 United States network television schedule . 
 = Stanisław Koniecpolski = 
 Stanisław Koniecpolski ( 1590 or 1594 – 11 March 1646 ) is regarded as one of the most capable military commanders in the history of the Polish @-@ Lithuanian Commonwealth . He was also a magnate , a royal official ( starosta ) , a castellan , a member of the Polish nobility ( szlachta ) , and the voivode ( governor ) of Sandomierz from 1625 until his death . He led many successful military campaigns against rebelling Cossacks and invading Tatars . From 1618 he held the rank of Field Crown Hetman before becoming the Grand Crown Hetman , the military commander second only to the King , in 1632 . 
 Koniecpolski 's life was one of almost constant warfare . Before he had reached the age of 20 , he had fought in the Dymitriads and the Moldavian Magnate Wars . Later , in 1620 , he took part in the Battle of Cecora , during which he was captured by Ottoman forces . After his release in 1623 , he defeated the Ottomans ' Tatar vassals several times between 1624 and 1626 . With inferior numbers , during the Polish – Swedish War ( 1626 – 29 ) , Koniecpolski stopped the Swedish forces of Gustavus Adolphus from conquering Prussia and Pomerania before the war was concluded with the Truce of Altmark . In 1634 , he defeated a major Turkish invasion at Kamianets @-@ Podilskyi ( Kamieniec Podolski ) , in the Ukraine , while in 1644 , his victory against the Tatars at the Battle of Ochmatów brought him international fame and recognition . 
 = = Youth = = 
 The details of Stanisław Koniecpolski 's birth are unclear . Various dates between 1590 and 1594 have been provided , and none of his biographers identify where he was born . What is known , though , is that his father , Aleksander Koniecpolski , was a wealthy magnate belonging to the szlachta ( Polish nobility ) and was also the <unk> of Sieradz , and a staunch supporter of King Sigismund III of the Swedish House of Vasa . Koniecpolski 's mother , Anna <unk> , was the daughter of Stanisław <unk> , the voivode of Kamianets @-@ Podilskyi , and had brought several large Podole estates into the Koniecpolski family upon her marriage to Aleksander . Stanisław 's brothers were Krzysztof , who held the court office of chorąży wielki koronny ( Grand Standard @-@ Bearer of the Crown ) and was voivode of <unk> from 1641 ; Remigiusz , who was the bishop of Chełm before his death in 1640 ; Jan , a castellan and the voivode of Sieradz ; and Przedbór who died in 1611 . 
 Although Koniecpolski had a stutter , when he was 15 , through his father 's influence in the royal court , he secured an appointment as starosta ( mayor ) of Wieluń . In 1603 he began studying at the Kraków Academy , and after several years he was sent to the royal court by his father so that he could continue his education in a more practical fashion . He is believed to have stayed there a year or two . He may also have undertaken a tour of Western Europe for several months , spending the majority of his time in France before returning to his family 's estates . 
 = = Early career : 1610 – 26 = = 
 From a young age Koniecpolski chose to follow a military career . In 1610 , together with his brother Przedbór , he took part in the Dymitriads against Muscovy , raising a group of 300 men to join the Army of the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth at Smolensk . On 4 July 1610 he participated in the Battle of Klushino before joining the Siege of Smolensk where Przedbór was crushed to death by the fortress ' collapsing walls on 8 July 1611 . After returning to his family mansion at <unk> with his brother 's body , the following autumn Koniecpolski rejoined the army . Under the command of Grand Lithuanian Hetman Jan Karol Chodkiewicz , he took part in the effort to relieve and supply the besieged Polish forces in the Moscow Kremlin . During that time , he was entrusted by the Hetman with command of the right flank of the Polish forces . 
 In 1612 Koniecpolski joined the wojsko kwarciane ( regular Commonwealth army ) in Ukraine under the command of Field Crown Hetman Stanisław Żółkiewski , who greatly influenced his career . In 1614 he was entrusted with destroying rebellious regular units led by Jan <unk> , and on 17 May , with Stanisław Żółkiewski 's son , Jan , he won the Battle of Rohatyn and captured <unk> . In 1615 he married Żółkiewski 's daughter Katarzyna ( Catherine ) . Soon after the wedding , he received the official rank of podstoli koronny ( Crown Master of the Pantry ) . 
 Throughout 1615 and 1616 Koniecpolski gained further experience in Ukraine , fighting the Tatar hordes , but failed to destroy or capture any sizable enemy units . In 1616 , Katarzyna died while giving birth to in labor with Koniecpolski 's first son , Andrzej . The following year , Koniecpolski took part in the Moldavian Magnate Wars alongside <unk> , and stood against Iskender Pasha 's powerful Turkish army . The conflict ended that year with a negotiated cease @-@ fire . Following negotiations with the Cossacks in <unk> , Koniecpolski reduced the Cossack register to 1 @,@ 000 , thereby limiting the number of positions that the Cossacks could hold in the Commonwealth military . He also banned raids on the Black Sea . Such raids , which pillaged wealthy Ottoman cities , contributed to the Cossacks ' income but provoked retaliatory raids into Commonwealth territory . 
 In 1618 , during a session of the Sejm — the Commonwealth parliament — King Sigismund III Vasa granted the <unk> ( ceremonial mace or baton ) of Grand Crown Hetman to Stanisław Żółkiewski and that of Field Crown Hetman to Koniecpolski , disregarding the opposition of magnate Krzysztof Zbaraski and his allies . Soon afterward , Koniecpolski was defeated by the Tatars near <unk> , where he committed the mistake of pursuing the enemy against overwhelming odds and barely made it out of the battle alive . In 1619 , Koniecpolski married Krystyna Lubomirska , who gave birth to a son , Aleksander , the following year . 
 That year Koniecpolski and Żólkiewski led an army to Moldova to protect Gaspar Graziani , an ally of the Commonwealth . The army numbered over 7 @,@ 000 and included the private regiments of the Korecki , Zasławski , Kazanowski , Kalinowski and Potocki magnates . During the Battle of Cecora ( Ţuţora ) Koniecpolski commanded the right flank of the Commonwealth forces , which were defeated on 19 September by a combined force belonging to Iskender Pasha and Kantymir ( Khan <unk> ) . After retreating in good order , the army 's morale fell and while Koniecpolski prevented the army 's disintegration on 20 – 21 September , during the later stages of the retreat its resolve collapsed and the men ran for the river . In the ensuing battle , Żólkiewski was killed and Koniecpolski and many magnates including Samuel Korecki , Mikołaj <unk> , Mikołaj Potocki , and Jan and Łukasz Żółkiewski were taken captive . The prisoners were transported to <unk> ( <unk> ) , to Iskender Pasha , then to the Castle of Seven Towers at Constantinople , where they were held in the Black Tower . Polish @-@ Ottoman relations stabilized in the wake of the Ottoman defeat at Khotyn in 1621 , and in the spring of 1623 the prisoners returned to Poland after a diplomatic mission by Krzysztof Zbaraski purchased their freedom for 30 @,@ 000 thalers . 
 In the aftermath of the Battle of Khotyn , a treaty had been signed that aimed to prevent further border hostilities . While Khan <unk> Giray resolved to respect the treaty 's provisions , Kantymir continued to raid the borderlands in an effort to usurp <unk> Giray 's position . Following fresh raids by Kantymir 's forces in June 1623 , Koniecpolski was given command of local Commonwealth forces and ordered to stop the incursions . Early the following year , the Budjak horde , under Kantymir 's command , attacked southern Poland . On 6 February , Koniecpolski intercepted one of the Budjak armies and destroyed it near <unk> and <unk> . Later that year , after Kantymir 's forces crossed the border in early June , Koniecpolski inflicted a further defeat on him at the Battle of <unk> . Using a new strategy that employed light Cossack cavalry to drive Kantymir 's forces towards fortified tabors where they were attacked by small arms and artillery , Koniecpolski forced the khan 's troops to retreat in disarray . His victory was soon celebrated throughout the Commonwealth and , as a reward , Koniecpolski was granted 30 @,@ 000 złoty by the Sejm . He was also appointed voivode of Sandomierz . 
 In 1625 , during the <unk> Uprising the Zaporozhian Cossacks , led by Marek Zhmaylo , rebelled . <unk> forces with <unk> <unk> , they attempted to form an alliance with Moscow . Reasoning that the Tatars had their share of trouble with the Porte and that Kantymir 's Budjak horde would be unable to send major assistance , Koniecpolski gathered a 12 @,@ 000 @-@ strong army of regular and private units to deal with the rebellion . He pledged fair treatment to all Cossacks loyal to the Commonwealth , and death to rebels . On 25 October 1625 , near <unk> , he launch a cavalry attack against the Cossacks . His initial thrusts were stopped and the Cossacks fell back toward Lake Kurukove where they checked a secondary attack . As the tide of battle went against him , Koniecpolski 's position was at one point described as " grave " ; however , the conflict eventually ended in a negotiated cease @-@ fire . This was formalized by the Treaty of Kurukove on 6 November under which the Cossack register was set at 6 @,@ 000 , and the Cossacks again promised to stop raiding the Black Sea shores and provoking the Tatars . 
 In late January 1626 the Tatars invaded again . With an army estimated at between 15 @,@ 000 and 20 @,@ 000 , they raided and pillaged territories as far north as the Podole Voivodeship , passing <unk> and <unk> , while some advanced units reached the cities of Lutsk , Volodymyr @-@ Volynskyi and Lviv . In response , Koniecpolski gathered some 13 @,@ 000 troops and moved to intercept the Tatars , but they refused to engage . Eventually Koniecpolski defeated the rear guard of the main Tatar army , which crossed the borders with much treasure and slaves . Later that year , fearing a repeat invasion , Koniecpolski violated a Sejm resolution in recruiting and fielding an army of 8 @,@ 000 against an expected Tatar second wave . During this time , Koniecpolski was aided in a number of battles by a highly capable officer , Bohdan Khmelnytsky ; Khmelnytsky would also score a major victory over the Tatars later that year , after Koniecpolski had departed north to a new battlefield near the Baltic Sea . 
 = = Fighting Gustavus Adolphus : 1626 – 29 = = 
 In 1626 the southern threat to the Commonwealth was overshadowed by a northern one , as an incursion by Swedish forces reignited the Polish – Swedish War . In June , Gustavus Adolphus , with a fleet of 125 ships and an army of over 14 @,@ 000 men , approached the Polish coast and began collecting tariffs on trade passing through Gdańsk ( Danzig ) . Having taken <unk> and Braniewo , Swedish forces spread through Pomerania , taking <unk> , <unk> , Elbląg , Malbork , Gniew , Tczew and <unk> , while other Swedish forces landed near Puck — the main port of the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth fleet — and captured it . The major city of Gdańsk , however , refused to surrender even in the face of lightning Swedish advances . In a battle that took place between 22 and 30 September 1626 near the village of Gniew , Gustavus defeated a Polish army led by King Sigismund , who retreated and called for reinforcements from other parts of the country . In response , Koniecpolski was tasked with defending Royal Prussia against the Swedish incursion . He was delayed by the unstable situation in the south , though , and it was not until 1 October that he finally departed for Prussia . 
 Koniecpolski 's force of 4 @,@ 200 light cavalry , 1 @,@ 000 dragoons , and 1 @,@ 000 infantry quickly moved to Prussia . Reinforced by other units , he had 9 @,@ 000 men against the 20 @,@ 000 @-@ strong Swedish force . Employing maneuver warfare , using small mobile units to strike at enemy communication lines and smaller units , he stopped the Swedish attack and forced Axel Oxenstierna into a defensive posture . Meanwhile , the Sejm agreed to raise money for the war . The situation of the Commonwealth forces , short of money and food , was difficult . Lithuanian forces were dealt a serious defeat near Koknese , Inflanty Voivodeship , in December 1626 and they subsequently retreated behind the Dvina River . The Swedes then planned to strike Koniecpolski from two directions : Oxenstierna , from the Vistula River , and Johann <unk> von <unk> and Maxymilian <unk> , from Swedish @-@ held <unk> . The flooding of the Vistula , however , disrupted their plans and allowed Koniecpolski to intercept the enemy units advancing from Pomerania . 
 On 2 April 1627 Koniecpolski managed to recapture Puck . He took Czarne ( <unk> ) on 18 April and forced the Swedish forces to retreat into the city . A week later they surrendered , with many mercenaries and some Swedish abandoning their banners and insignia , and changing sides . As a result of the series of Swedish defeats in spring 1627 , they lost all their strongholds on the west bank of the Vistula , and with those , their hopes for a quick and decisive victory . The situation also convinced the Elector of Brandenburg to declare his support for the Commonwealth , and afterwards the Lithuanian forces resumed their offensive in Livonia . 
 On 17 May Gustavus landed with 8 @,@ 000 reinforcements . On the night of 22 – 23 May , while crossing the Vistula near <unk> and Danzig , Gustavus encountered Polish forces . Wounded in the hip , he was forced to retreat . Koniecpolski then decided to take back Gniew and devised a diversionary plan . Polish forces were sent to attempt to take back Braniewo , forcing Gustavus to relieve the siege ; then Gustavus followed the retreating Polish army and laid siege to <unk> . Koniecpolski , who had foreseen this , responded with a sudden attack on Gniew , his primary objective , which he captured . Gustavus was reported to be impressed with the speed of Koniecpolski 's reaction . 
 Near Tczew , with about 7 @,@ 800 men — including 2 @,@ 500 cavalry and hussars , the Commonwealth 's elite heavy cavalry — Koniecpolski tried to stop the Swedish army from reaching Danzig . On 7 – 8 August , he encountered a Swedish force consisting of 10 @,@ 000 men , which included 5 @,@ 000 infantry , near the swamps of <unk> . The Swedes wanted to provoke the Poles into attacking , then destroy them with infantry fire and artillery , but Koniecpolski decided against attacking . The Swedes then went on the attack with cavalry , but were unable to draw the Poles within range of their fire . The Swedish attacks dealt severe damage to the Polish cavalry but did not cripple the Polish army whose morale was kept high by Koniecpolski . The battle ended when Gustavus Adolphus was again wounded and the Swedes retreated . 
 Koniecpolski now recognized the need to reform his army and strengthen the firepower of its infantry and artillery to match the Swedes ' . The Swedes , on the other hand , had learned the arts of cavalry charges and melée combat from the Poles . Overall the 1627 campaign had been favorable to the Commonwealth ; Puck and Gniew had been retaken , Swedish plans had been thwarted , and the Swedish army had been weakened . The last major engagement of the year saw the surprising defeat of a Swedish flotilla by the small Polish Navy on 28 November 1627 at the Battle of Oliwa . 
 In 1628 the Polish forces , short of funds , were forced to cease their offensive and go on the defensive . Gustavus Adolphus captured <unk> , Nowe and <unk> . Koniecpolski counterattacked , putting his small forces to most efficient use — quick cavalry melée attacks , combined with supporting infantry and artillery fire , guerrilla warfare , the use of engineers to raise fortifications , and clever use of terrain advantage . Despite his best efforts , he was hampered by insufficient funds . The Sejm increased funding for the war after the Battle of <unk> , where Stanisław " <unk> " Potocki was defeated . Austria sent the Commonwealth help in the form of forces under Field Marshal Johann Georg Arnheim . Arnheim , however , refused to take orders from Koniecpolski . 
 The final battle took place on 27 June 1629 near <unk> ( or <unk> ) . The Swedes attacked toward <unk> , were halted , and retreated to <unk> and Malbork . Koniecpolski attacked the rear guard , which was led by Jan Wilhelm <unk> , Count of Ren , and destroyed it . He also repelled a counterattack by Swedish raitars , who were pushed toward <unk> , where another counterattack was led by Gustavus Adolphus with 2 @,@ 000 raitars . This counterattack was also fended off , and the Swedish forces were saved from total defeat by the last Swedish reserves , led by Field Marshal Herman Wrangel , who blocked the Polish attack . Gustavus Adolphus was wounded and barely escaped . Of the Swedes , 1 @,@ 200 were killed , and <unk> and several hundred others were captured . Polish losses were under 200 killed or injured . 
 Poland did not follow up this victory politically or militarily . A cease @-@ fire contracted at Stary Targ ( the Truce of Altmark ) on 26 October 1629 favored the Swedes , who received the right to tax Polish trade moving over the Baltic ( 3 @.@ 5 % of the value of goods ) , retained control of many cities in Royal Prussia , and were recognized as the dominant power on the southern Baltic coast . Koniecpolski exerted little influence on the negotiations , as he had been called back to Ukraine to crush a Tartar incursion . 
 = = Grand Crown Hetman : 1630 – 37 = = 
 In 1630 , the Cossack leader , Taras Fedorovych , executed the moderate Hryhoriy <unk> , and began a Cossack uprising , later dubbed the " Fedorovych Uprising " . Soon afterwards he captured the fortress of Korsun . In an effort to restore the situation , Koniecpolski laid siege to Pereyaslav . Lacking artillery and infantry support , he could not breach its walls , but the Cossacks , needing supplies and having suffered heavy casualties , agreed to negotiate . The Treaty of Pereyaslav , signed in August 1630 , resulted . It granted liberal terms , including amnesty for the rebels . Koniecpolski , as usual , was for harsh punishment , but also argued that in the long run the Cossack situation was better remedied by more equitable treatment , including an increase in the Cossack register and the regular payment of wages . Still , he supported policies aimed at turning the Cossacks into serfs , which was one of the main causes of unrest in Ukraine ; this , along with his decision to settle his soldiers ' living expenses on the local populace instead of paying them wages , led to his extreme unpopularity in Ukraine . 
 In 1632 , a few months before his death , King Sigismund III Vasa awarded Koniecpolski the post of Grand Crown Hetman . It had stood vacant for 12 years , since the death of Stanisław Żółkiewski ; presumably King Sigismund had feared that Koniecpolski , if given the post earlier , would have become too powerful a magnate . After the King 's death , Koniecpolski played a major role in directing the political affairs of the Commonwealth and in 1632 supported the election of Sigismund 's son , Władysław IV Vasa , as king . In return , a year after his election , King Władysław IV rewarded Koniecpolski with the office of Castellan of Kraków , the most prestigious of the Commonwealth 's district offices . Koniecpolski became an influential adviser to the new king , often encouraging him to direct Polish foreign policy against the Tartars . Koniecpolski also supported King Władysław IV 's military reforms . Though generally seen as a supporter of the King , Koniecpolski opposed some of his plans aimed at increasing royal power in the Commonwealth and weakening the Golden Liberty of the nobility . 
 In 1633 Koniecpolski thwarted the Turks ' attacks on the Commonwealth , defeating their forces on 4 July at <unk> <unk> . On 22 October that year , he repulsed a superior invading Ottoman force of over 20 @,@ 000 at Kamianets @-@ Podilskyi , his own forces numbering a mere 11 @,@ 000 . The Ottoman defeats and Koniecpolski 's attitude persuaded the Turks to sign a new treaty on 19 August 1634 . The treaty repeated the terms of the Treaty of Chocim of 1621 and ended the Ottoman – Commonwealth War ( 1633 – 34 ) . 
 In 1635 , in the short lived Sulima Uprising , after Cossacks under Ivan <unk> captured and destroyed the Polish Kodak Fortress ( near modern Dnipropetrovsk ) , Koniecpolski led an expedition that retook the fort and punished the insurgents . Sulima was taken prisoner and executed . 
 Later that year Koniecpolski returned to Pomerania to prepare for another war against Sweden , but it was rendered unnecessary by the Treaty of Sztumska Wieś . 
 Koniecpolski grasped the need to modernize the Commonwealth 's military and worked with King Władysław IV to that end , including the recruitment of mercenaries experienced in western warfare , and further development of artillery ( he supervised the construction of arsenals at Kudak , Bar and Kamieniec Podolski , and built forges on his Ukrainian estates ) . He was patron to many gifted artillery and engineering officers . He may also have sponsored cartographers such as William le Vasseur de <unk> , who mapped Ukraine , and Sebastian <unk> , who mapped Crimea . He also supported plans to create a Commonwealth Baltic Fleet . 
 = = Last years : 1637 – 45 = = 
 After 1637 Koniecpolski 's declining health made him reliant on the younger Hetman Mikołaj Potocki , who successfully crushed Cossack uprisings in 1637 and 1638 , and a Tartar uprising in 1639 . Koniecpolski 's influence also protected the outlaw Samuel Łaszcz , whom he saw as another able commander . 
 One of Koniecpolski 's greatest victories occurred during a winter 1644 campaign against Tatars . With a large army of some 19 @,@ 000 soldiers ( 60 % of them , magnates ' private armies ; Koniecpolski 's own forces numbered 2 @,@ 200 ) he dealt a crushing defeat to Toğay bey 's forces near Ochmatów on 30 January 1644 . Many Tatars drowned near Sina <unk> when the ice over the water gave way . The Battle of Ochmatów , the Commonwealth 's greatest victory over the Tatars in the first half of the 17th century , brought international fame to Koniecpolski , who had not only predicted the time and place of their attack but had destroyed their forces before they could deploy their usual tactic of splitting their main forces into multiple highly @-@ mobile units ( <unk> ) . 
 The victory led King Władysław IV to consider an offensive war against the Turks . Koniecpolski supported a limited war against the Crimean Khanate but opposed the King 's plan to wage war on the entire Ottoman Empire , believing it to be an unrealistic folly . Setting out his strategic views in a plan titled " <unk> o <unk> <unk> <unk> i <unk> z <unk> " ( Discourse on Destruction of the Crimean Tartars and on coalition with Moscow ) , Koniecpolski also strongly urged a coalition with Moscow for such a campaign . King Władysław IV continued to push for a crusade against Turkey , but it had little internal support and failed to achieve anything except to spread false hopes among the Cossacks , to whom he promised privileges and money in exchange for their participation . 
 On 15 June 1645 , Koniecpolski 's wife , Krystyna , died . Koniecpolski remarried soon after , taking the hand of 16 @-@ year @-@ old Zofia <unk> , daughter of future Crown Marshal Łukasz Opaliński , on 16 January 1646 . The marriage was short lived , though , ending with Koniecpolski 's death in Brody on 11 March 1646 . Sources suggest that his new marriage was the cause of his death ; Joachim <unk> wrote in his diary that Koniecpolski had overdosed on an aphrodisiac . His funeral was held in Brody on 30 April 1646 . 
 = = Wealth and influence = = 
 Over the course of his life , Koniecpolski accumulated much wealth . Most of his possessions were in Ukraine , and he became Ukraine 's unofficial ruler ; some foreigners referred to him as " viceroy of Ukraine " , though no such Commonwealth position ever existed . King Władysław IV trusted him with most political decisions concerning this southeastern region of the Commonwealth . With the knowledge and support of the King , Koniecpolski sent and received diplomatic missions from Constantinople , carried out negotiations and signed treaties , and as the Grand Crown Hetman he directly controlled a substantial part of the Commonwealth 's military . He had his own private army and an espionage network that stretched from Moscow to the Ottoman Empire . 
 Koniecpolski inherited some seven or eight villages from his father . At his death , he owned 12 starostwo districts , with over 300 settlements , including dozens of towns , giving him yearly revenues of over 500 @,@ 000 złoty . His holdings of land and serfs in western Ukraine were considerable ; he owned 18 @,@ 548 households in <unk> . Koniecpolski invested much of his wealth in developing his Ukrainian estates , and supported settlement of underpopulated regions . He founded and sponsored the development of many towns and cities , including the town of Brody , which flourished with his investments , and became an important local commercial center . Koniecpolski fortified the town with a citadel and bastions in 1633 and set up workshops for producing Persian @-@ type <unk> fabrics , carpets and rugs . He also constructed a fortified palace in <unk> ( <unk> ) with beautiful Italian gardens . Like most magnates , Koniecpolski was a patron of the arts , sponsoring painters , sculptors , writers . He also founded many churches and sought to upgrade Brody 's school to an academy . He sponsored the construction of the Koniecpolski Palace ( now the Presidential Palace ) in Warsaw , and military fortifications in Bar and Kudak . 
 Regarded as a courteous and educated man , Koniecpolski participated in all the Sejm sessions that he could , though he rarely spoke publicly due to his stutter . He was widely respected and highly popular among his szlachta peers . 
 = Leopold Report = 
 The Leopold Report , officially known as Wildlife Management in the National Parks , is a 1963 paper composed of a series of ecosystem management recommendations that were presented by the Special Advisory Board on Wildlife Management to United States Secretary of the Interior Stewart Udall . Named for its chairman and principal author , zoologist and conservationist A. Starker Leopold , the report proved influential for future preservation mandates . 
 After several years of public controversy regarding the forced reduction of the elk population in Yellowstone National Park , Udall appointed an advisory board to collect scientific data to inform future wildlife management of the national parks . The committee observed that culling programs at other national parks had been ineffective , and recommended different management of Yellowstone 's elk population . In addressing the goals , policies , and methods of managing wildlife in the parks , the report suggested that in addition to protection , wildlife populations should be managed and regulated to prevent habitat degradation . Touching upon predator control , fire ecology , and other issues , the report suggested that the National Park Service ( NPS ) hire scientists to manage the parks using current scientific research . 
 The Leopold Report became the first concrete plan to manage park visitors and ecosystems under unified principles . It was reprinted in several national publications , and many of its recommendations were incorporated into the official policies of the NPS . Although the report is notable for proposing that park management have a fundamental goal of reflecting " the primitive scene ... a reasonable illusion of primitive America " , some have criticized it for its idealism and limited scope . 
 = = Background = = 
 Yellowstone National Park was established by the United States Congress on March 1 , 1872 , as the first U.S. national park , and quickly became a popular tourist destination . At first , national parks were overseen by a variety of agencies and lacked bureaucratic support . In 1916 , more than four decades after Yellowstone 's founding , President Woodrow Wilson signed a bill creating the National Park Service ( NPS ) , giving it the power " to conserve the scenery and the natural and historic objects and wildlife therein , and to provide for the enjoyment of the same in such manner and by such means as will leave them unimpaired for the enjoyment of future generations . " The NPS was tasked with both preservation and tourism , two divergent goals that would prove divisive during the resurgence of the conservation movement in the 1940s and 1950s . 
 NPS managers became interested in attracting more tourists to Yellowstone during the 1910s and 1920s . Species such as elk and antelope were considered a major attraction for park visitors , and an attempt was made to increase their numbers through winter feeding and predator control . The effort was successful , and the number of elk expanded significantly , but to the detriment of other wildlife such as bighorn sheep . Despite sporadic reductions of elk by hunters , the animals still posed a problem to the northern range ecosystems , mainly because of overgrazing . In the winter of 1961 , park rangers responded to this dilemma by shooting and killing approximately 4 @,@ 300 elk . This aggressive reduction by the Park Service caused a massive public outcry ; network television and newspaper coverage of the culling resulted in public opposition and congressional hearings . The International Association of Game and Fish Commissioners protested the " slaughtering of elk by hired killers " rather than by sportsmen , and schoolchildren from across the country were inspired to write letters of condemnation . Facing public backlash , the NPS announced it would stop killing elk . 
 = = Advisory Board and reporting = = 
 The controversy surrounding the reduction of elk in Yellowstone shed a negative light upon the NPS and their management of wildlife populations within the country 's national parks . In response to what was deemed a " crisis in public relations " , Secretary of the Interior Stewart Udall assembled the Special Advisory Board on Wildlife Management in 1962 to conduct thorough studies to be conducted on its science and resource management . The purpose of the board was to collect scientific data and investigate the necessity of wildlife population control . Chairing the board was A. Starker Leopold , the eldest son of noted conservationist Aldo Leopold . A respected zoologist , professor of ecology , and Assistant to the Chancellor at the University of California , Berkeley , Leopold was joined on the board by other prominent scientists and conservationists : Professor Stanley A. Cain of the Department of Conservation at the University of Michigan ; Ira N. Gabrielson , formerly of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service ( FWS ) and President of the Wildlife Management Institute ; Thomas L. Kimball , executive director of the National Wildlife Federation ; and Clarence Cottam , former assistant director of the FWS and director of the <unk> Wildlife Foundation . 
 The formation of the Advisory Board was historically important , as this was the first time an outside group was asked to evaluate wildlife programs within the NPS . The report was officially named " Wildlife Management in the National Parks " when it was first presented on March 4 , 1963 , but it became informally known as the " Leopold Report " . At the same time , a separate Advisory Board was formed by the National Academy of Sciences ( NAS ) to produce " A Report by the Advisory Committee to the National Park Service on Research " . The NAS Report , more commonly known as the Robbins Report , was named after its primary author , biologist William J. Robbins . The Robbins Report was released on August 1 , 1963 , five months after the Leopold Report . 
 = = Recommendations = = 
 The report began by arguing that not only was it necessary to control the elk population in Yellowstone National Park , but direct reduction of elk was presented as the most suitable option . According to scientific findings , reduction programs at other national parks had not been implemented on a large enough scale ; as a result , the Advisory Board recommended future reductions of animals should " be larger and in many cases repeated annually " . The report also supported the concept of carrying capacity , and the idea that the elk population could be actively managed to restore its natural balance . 
 Although the Advisory Board recommendations focused on wildlife and habitat management , they also touched upon the recreation of primitive , uncontrolled conditions . Revisiting fire ecology and the importance of fire , which had long been suppressed in national parks and other federal lands , the report recommended the use of prescribed fire as a cheap and natural tool for shaping the park environment . 
 Predator control was also reviewed , and deemed unnatural and unpopular . Recreational hunting was strongly opposed , but the report allowed for select members of the public to assist in the " sole purpose of animal removal " . The main goal of the NPS , the report explained , was to preserve national parks primarily for the " aesthetic , spiritual , scientific and educational values they offered to the public " . 
 The report strayed from arguments based on scientific data and veered into environmental philosophy , concluding that national parks should serve a historical purpose . One of the most popular passages in the report is from the section " The Goal of Park Management in the United States " ; here , the report alludes to recreating an unaltered landscape , a sentiment touching upon a national park ideal : " As a primary goal , we would recommend that the biotic associations within each park be maintained , or where necessary recreated , as nearly as possible in the condition that prevailed when the area was first visited by the white man . A national park should represent a vignette of primitive America . " It continues : 
 Restoring the primitive scene is not done easily nor can it be done completely . Some species are extinct . Given time , an eastern hardwood forest can be regrown to maturity but the chestnut will be missing and so will the roar of pigeon wings . The colorful <unk> finches are not to be heard again in the lowland forests of Hawaii , nor will the jack @-@ hammer of the ivory @-@ bill ring in southern swamps . The wolf and grizzly bear cannot readily be reintroduced into ranching communities , and the factor of human use of the parks is subject only to regulation , not elimination . Exotic plants , animals , and diseases are here to stay . All these limitations we fully realize . Yet , if the goal cannot be fully achieved it can be approached . A reasonable illusion of primitive America could be recreated , using the utmost in skill , judgment , and ecologic sensitivity . This in our opinion should be the objective of every national park and monument . 
 Most importantly , the Leopold Report emphasized the need for scientific research and ecological management expertise in the national parks . Acknowledging the harm caused to nature by humans , the Advisory Board asked for the implementation of " a set of ecologic skills unknown in this country today " . A call to arms was raised for exploring new methods of active protection and restoration of plant and animal life in the national parks : " Americans have shown a great capacity for degrading and fragmenting native biotas . So far we have not exercised much imagination or ingenuity in rebuilding damaged biotas . It will not be done by passive protection alone . " 
 = = Reception and publication = = 
 The report was first presented on March 4 , 1963 , and originally published in the Transactions of the Twenty @-@ Eighth North American Wildlife and Natural Resources Conference . Conrad L. Wirth , director of the NPS from 1951 to 1964 , stated that the report reworded the Service 's 1916 mandate into " modern language " , using a scientific perspective to redefine the basic purpose of national parks . Secretary Udall supported the report and instructed the NPS to incorporate the findings into the agency 's operations . In a memorandum dated May 2 , 1963 , he reiterated the purpose of the national park in the scope of the Leopold Report : " ... a primary goal of park management is to maintain the biotic associations within each park as nearly as possible in that relationship which existed at a predetermined time period . The goal then is to create or maintain the mood of wild America . " 
 The Advisory Board was reconstituted in part as a permanent Natural Sciences Advisory Board to the NPS . In 1964 , Wirth 's successor , George B. Hartzog , Jr . , established the Division of Natural Science Studies , naming biologist George <unk> , Jr. the Service 's chief scientist . The memorable idea of a " vignette of primitive America " drew popular attention from readers and the report received widespread publicity and praise amongst conservationists . It was reprinted in several national publications and was also noted in the Sierra Club Bulletin . Leopold often said that had he known the report would be widely read and dissected , he probably would have written it more carefully . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The Leopold Report was the first concrete plan for managing park visitors and ecosystems under unified principles . With an infusion of scientists and resource programs , it set into motion a series of ecologically positive legislative actions in the 1960s and into the 1970s . While direct management of the elk population in Yellowstone National Park continues to spark debate amongst scientists , the report nonetheless successfully influenced multiple areas of park management . Prior to the report 's publication , California 's Sequoia National Park was beset by a thick underbrush , which the report directly referred to as a " dog @-@ hair thicket ... a direct function of <unk> from natural ground fires " . This underbrush would have been naturally eradicated by lightning storms , but because of policies that supported wildfire suppression , the growth threatened the park 's Giant Sequoia trees . As a direct result of the report 's advice regarding the usefulness of controlled burning , in 1964 the park began performing trial controlled burns , which led to a 1968 policy championing the continuation of burns for the betterment of the park 's forest ecosystems . Fire ecologist Bruce Kilgore credited the Leopold Report as being a true catalyst for change , stating that it was the " document of greatest significance to National Park Service [ fire ] policy " . 
 Although the Robbins Report did not receive the same recognition as the Leopold Report , it reached similar conclusions . However , unlike the Leopold Report , the Robbins Report criticized the NPS for its lack of scientific research and made recommendations for sweeping changes in the structure of the NPS , with a proposal for a strong focus on a science @-@ based approach . In 1972 , the far more detailed Cain Report was released ; amounting to 207 pages in comparison to the Leopold Report 's scant 28 , its committee was chaired by Stanley A. Cain , who also worked on the Leopold Report . Although this report made similar recommendations to the one primarily written by Leopold , it stated that little had been done to advance the previous report 's findings , especially in terms of predator control . As a result of the Cain Report 's recommendations , President Richard Nixon signed Executive Order <unk> , which restricted the usage of poisons such as strychnine and sodium cyanide for predator control . 
 The report 's visionary goal for preservation has been both lauded and criticized . Author of the book Searching for Yellowstone : Ecology and Wonder in the Last Wilderness , Paul <unk> , wrote of the report : " Scholars return to it for new interpretations and even inspiration regularly , speakers invoke it on all occasions , and it is trotted out to prove almost every perspective in debates about modern park management . " On the other hand , Alston Chase , a vocal critic of the National Park Service , disapproved of the limited scope of the Leopold Report , arguing that it had " inadvertently replaced science with nostalgia , subverting the goal it had set out to support " . The report 's insistence to return parks to the condition that " prevailed when the area was first visited by the white man " has also been criticized for ignoring the Native Americans ' historical presence in the area . Historian and author Philip Burnham in particular stated in his 2000 book , Indian Country , God 's Country : Native Americans and the National Parks , that although Leopold et al. were more progressive than their predecessors , they " still dismissed native people as passive onlookers " . 
 = Battle of P 'ohang @-@ dong = 
 The Battle of P 'ohang @-@ dong was an engagement between United Nations and North Korean forces early in the Korean War , with fighting continuing from 5 – 20 August 1950 around the town of P 'ohang @-@ dong , South Korea . It was a part of the Battle of Pusan Perimeter , and was one of several large engagements fought simultaneously . The battle ended in a victory for the United Nations after their forces were able to drive off an attempted offensive by three North Korean divisions in the mountainous eastern coast of the country . 
 Forces of the South Korean Republic of Korea Army , supported by the United States Navy and United States Air Force , defended the eastern coast of the country as a part of the Pusan Perimeter . When several divisions of the North Korean People 's Army crossed through mountainous terrain to push the UN forces back , a complicated battle ensued in the rugged terrain around P 'ohang @-@ dong , which contained the vital supply line to the main UN force at Taegu . 
 Over two weeks , North Korean and South Korean ground units fought in several bloody back @-@ and @-@ forth battles , taking and retaking ground in which neither was able to gain the upper hand . Finally , following the breakdown of the North Korean supply lines and amidst mounting casualties , the exhausted North Korean troops were forced to retreat . 
 The battle was a turning point in the war for North Korean forces , which had seen previous victories owing to superior numbers and equipment , with the distances and demands exacted on them at P 'ohang @-@ dong rendering their supply lines untenable . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Outbreak of war = = = 
 Following the invasion of the Republic of Korea ( South Korea ) by its northern neighbor , the Democratic People 's Republic of Korea ( North Korea ) and the subsequent outbreak of the Korean War on 25 June 1950 , the United Nations decided to enter the conflict on behalf of South Korea . The United States — a member of the UN — subsequently committed ground forces to the Korean peninsula with the goal of fighting back the North Korean invasion and to prevent South Korea from collapsing . However , U.S. forces in the Far East had been steadily decreasing since the end of World War II , five years earlier , and at the time the closest forces were the 24th Infantry Division , headquartered in Japan . 
 Advance elements of the 24th Infantry were badly defeated in the Battle of Osan on 5 July , the first encounter between American and North Korean forces . For the first month after the defeat of Task Force Smith , 24th Infantry was repeatedly defeated and forced south by superior North Korean numbers and equipment . The regiments of the 24th Infantry were systematically pushed south in engagements around Chochiwon , Chonan , and Pyongtaek . The 24th made a final stand in the Battle of Taejon , where it was almost completely destroyed but delayed North Korean forces until July 20 . By that time , the 8th Army ′ s force of combat troops were roughly equal to North Korean forces attacking the region , with new UN units arriving every day . 
 While the 24th Infantry Division was fighting on the Korean western front , the 5th and 12th North Korean Infantry Divisions advanced steadily on the eastern front . The North Korean army , 89 @,@ 000 men strong , had advanced into South Korea in six columns , catching the Republic of Korea Army by surprise , resulting in a complete rout . The smaller South Korean army suffered from widespread lack of organization and equipment , and it was unprepared for war . Numerically superior , North Korean forces destroyed isolated resistance from the 38 @,@ 000 South Korean soldiers on the front before it began moving steadily south . 
 = = = North Korean advance = = = 
 With Taejon captured , North Korean forces began surrounding the Pusan Perimeter from all sides in an attempt to envelop it . The 4th and 6th North Korean Infantry Divisions advanced south in a wide flanking maneuver . The two divisions attempted to envelop the UN ′ s left flank , but became extremely spread out in the process . At the same time , the NK 5th and 12th Division pressured the South Koreans on the right flank . They advanced on UN positions with armor and superior numbers , repeatedly defeating U.S. and South Korean forces and forcing them further south . On 21 July , the NK 12th Division was ordered by the II North Korean Corps to capture P 'ohang @-@ dong by 26 July . 
 Though it was steadily pushed back , South Korean forces on the right flank increased their resistance further south hoping to delay North Korean units as much as possible . North and South Korean units sparred for control of several cities , inflicting heavy casualties on one another . The Republic of Korea Army forces defended Yongdok fiercely before being forced back . They also performed well in the Battle of Andong , forcing the NK 12th Division to delay their attacks on P 'ohang @-@ dong until the early August . The South Korean forces had also undergone significant reorganizations , and after receiving a large number of recruits by 26 July , the South Korean Army had reached an effective strength of 85 @,@ 871 men . 
 = = = Eastern corridor = = = 
 Along the South Korean front of the perimeter , on the eastern corridor , the terrain made moving through the area incredibly difficult . A major road ran from Taegu 50 mi ( 80 km ) east , to P ’ ohang @-@ dong on Korea 's east coast . The only major north @-@ south road intersecting this line moves south from Andong through Yongch 'on , midway between Taegu and P 'ohang @-@ dong . 
 The only other natural entry through the line lies at the town of An 'gang @-@ ni , 12 mi ( 19 km ) west of P 'ohang @-@ dong , which is situated near a valley through the natural rugged terrain to the major rail hub of Kyongju , which was a staging area for moving supplies to Taegu . General Walton Walker — commanding the 8th Army — chose not to heavily reinforce the area as he felt the terrain made meaningful attack impossible , preferring to respond to attack with reinforcements from the transportation routes and air cover from Yonil Airfield , which was south of P 'ohang @-@ dong . 
 With the exception of the valley between Taegu and P <unk> @-@ dong , the terrain along the line was extremely rough and mountainous thanks to the Taebaek Mountains which ran from north to south down Korea 's east coast . Northeast of P <unk> @-@ dong along the South Korean line the terrain was especially treacherous , and movement in the region was extremely difficult . Thus , the UN established the northern line of the Pusan Perimeter using the terrain as a natural defense . However the rough terrain also made communication difficult , particularly for the South Korean forces . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 The Republic of Korea Army — a force of 58 @,@ 000 — was organized into two corps and five divisions along the line ; from east to west , ROK I Corps controlled the 8th Infantry Division and Capital Divisions , while the ROK II Corps controlled the 1st Division and 6th Infantry Division . A reconstituted ROK 3rd Division was placed under direct ROK Army control . Morale among the UN units was low due to the large number of defeats at that point in the war . The South Korean Army had lost an estimated 70 @,@ 000 men up to that point in the war . 
 At the same time , forces of the U.S. 5th Air Force provided 45 P @-@ 51 Mustang fighters to provide cover from Yongil Airfield , and the U.S. Navy provided several ships to provide support by sea . Evacuation of wounded and surrounded troops was carried out by the aircraft carriers USS Valley Forge and Philippine Sea . The heavy cruisers USS Helena and Toledo also provided fire support for troops operating in the town . 
 The North Korean People 's Army forces were organized into a mechanized combined arms force of ten divisions , originally numbering some 90 @,@ 000 well @-@ trained and well @-@ equipped troops in July , with hundreds of T @-@ 34 Tanks . However , defensive actions by U.S. and South Korean forces had delayed the North Koreans significantly in their invasion of South Korea , costing them 58 @,@ 000 of their troops and a large number of tanks . In order to recoup these losses , the North Koreans had to rely on less experienced replacements and conscripts , many of whom had been taken from the conquered regions of South Korea . 
 The North Korean forces suffered a shortage of men and equipment ; their divisions were far understrength . Opposing the South Koreans , from west to east , were the 8th , 12th , and 5th Divisions and the 766th Independent Infantry Regiment . On 5 August , the NK 8th Division was estimated to have 8 @,@ 000 men , the NK 5th Division had 6 @,@ 000 men , the NK 12th Division had 6 @,@ 000 men and the 766th Independent Regiment had 1 @,@ 500 men , giving these units a total strength of at least 21 @,@ 500 . 
 = = Battle = = 
 In early August , the three North Korean divisions mounted offensives against the three passes through the South Koreans ' line . The NK 8th Division attacked Yongch 'on , the NK 12th Division attacked P ’ ohang @-@ dong and NK 5th Division , in conjunction with the 766th Independent Infantry Regiment , attacked toward An 'gang @-@ ni at Kigye , 6 mi ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) north of the town . The South Korean forces had far less training and were poorly equipped , and so they presented the weakest line on the Pusan Perimeter . The North Koreans knew they could be most successful there . 
 = = = Opening moves = = = 
 The NK 8th Division 's attack stalled almost immediately . The division drove for Yongch 'on from <unk> . However , the attack failed to reach the Taegu @-@ P 'ohang corridor after being surprised and outflanked by the ROK 8th Division . NK 8th Division 's 3rd Regiment was nearly destroyed by South Korean forces immediately , forcing its 2nd Regiment to attempt to relieve it , resulting in at least 700 casualties for the 2nd Regiment . At least six tanks were also destroyed by U.S. Air Force F @-@ 51 Mustangs and mines . 
 This fighting was so heavy that the NK 8th Division was forced to hold its ground a week before trying to advance . When it finally broke out , it was only able to advance briefly before it was stalled again by South Korean resistance . The division was forced to halt a second time to wait for reinforcements . However the other two attacks were more successful , catching the UN forces by surprise . The North Koreans quickly pushed South Korean forces back . 
 East of the NK and ROK 8th Divisions , the NK 12th Division crossed the Naktong River at Andong , moving through the mountains in small groups to reach P 'ohang @-@ dong . The division was far under strength and at least one of its artillery batteries had to send its guns back north because it had no ammunition for them . UN planners had not anticipated that the 12th Division would be able to do this effectively , and thus was unprepared when its forces infiltrated the region so heavily . 
 On 9 August , troops from the ROK 25th Regiment , Capitol Division probed through the mountains from Kigye to establish contact with the ROK 3rd Division south of Yongdok . It advanced 2 @.@ 5 mi ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) north before encountering fierce North Korean resistance , which pushed it almost 5 mi ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) south . It was apparent to the UN forces that the ROK 3rd Division was being outflanked . It held the road 20 mi ( 32 km ) north of P 'ohang @-@ dong but there were no defenses inland in the mountains and North Korean units had penetrated there . 
 In the meantime , the ROK 3rd Division was heavily engaged with the NK 5th Division along the coastal road to P 'ohang @-@ dong . The divisions clashes centered on the town of Yongdok , with each side capturing and recapturing the town several times . On 5 August , the North Koreans launched their attack , again taking the town from the South Korean forces and pushing them south . At 19 : 30 on 6 August , the South Koreans launched a counteroffensive to retake the hill . 
 U.S. aircraft and ships pounded the town with rockets , napalm and shells before South Korean troops from the 22nd and 23rd regiments swarmed the town . However , NK 5th Division forces were able to infiltrate the coastal road south of Yongdok at Hunghae . This effectively surrounded the ROK 3rd Division , trapping it several miles above P 'ohang @-@ dong . The NK 766th Independent Regiment advanced around the ROK 3rd Division and took the area around P 'ohang @-@ dong . 
 Due to severe manpower shortages , ROK commanders had assigned a company of student soldiers to defend P 'ohang @-@ dong Girl 's Middle School to delay the NKPA advance into the town . On August 11 , the squad held their ground and confronted more numerous NK forces . Out of initial 71 squad members 48 died in the 11 @-@ hour @-@ long battle . This part of the battle is depicted in the movie 71 : Into the Fire . 
 = = = UN counteroffensive = = = 
 On 10 August , the 8th Army organized Task Force P 'ohang , consisting of the ROK 17th , 25th , and 26th Regiments as well as the ROK 1st Anti @-@ Guerrilla Battalion , Marine Battalion and a battery from the U.S. 18th Field Artillery Battalion . The task force was given the mission to clear out North Korean forces in the mountainous region . At the same time , the 8th Army formed Task Force Bradley , consisting of elements of the U.S. 8th Infantry Regiment , 2nd Infantry Division under the command of Brigadier General Joseph S. Bradley , the 2nd Division ′ s assistant commander . Task Force Bradley was tasked with defending P 'ohang @-@ dong from the North Korean 766th Independent Regiment which was infiltrating the town . 
 On 11 August , Task Force Bradley struck out from Yongil Airfield to counterattack the North Korean forces around P 'ohang @-@ dong while Task Force P 'ohang attacked from An 'gang @-@ ni area . Both forces immediately met resistance from North Korean forces . By that time , the North Korean forces had captured P 'ohang @-@ dong . What followed was a complicated series of fights through the large region around P 'ohang @-@ dong and An 'gang @-@ ni as South Korean ground forces , aided by U.S. air forces engaged groups of North Korean forces operation all around the vicinity . 
 The NK 12th Division was operating in the valley west of P 'ohang @-@ dong and was able to push back Task Force P 'ohang and the ROK Capital Division . At the same time , the NK 766th Infantry Regiment and elements of the NK 5th Division fought Task Force Bradley at and south of P 'ohang @-@ dong . U.S. naval fire was able to drive NK troops from the town , but it became a bitterly contested no man 's land as fighting moved to the hills around the town . 
 = = = UN forces pull back = = = 
 By 13 August , North Korean troops were operating in the mountains west and southwest of Yongil Airfield . U.S. Air Force commanders — wary of enemy attack — evacuated the 45 P @-@ 51s of the 39th and 40th Fighter Squadron from the airstrip , against complaints of General MacArthur . However , the airstrip remained under the protection of UN ground forces and never came under direct North Korean fire . The squadrons were moved to <unk> on the island of Kyushu , Japan . 
 As the battles at P 'ohang @-@ dong raged to the south , the ROK 3rd Division faced increasing pressure from the NK 5th Division . North Korean officers from the division continued to attack the ROK unit hoping it would collapse , and the North Korean troops were able to slowly erode at the South Korean division ′ s defenses , forcing it into a smaller and smaller pocket . The ROK division was forced further south to the village of <unk> @-@ dong , where U.S. Navy planners began preparations to evacuate the division by LSTs and DUKWs . 
 The division would sail 20 miles ( 32 km ) south to Yongil bay to join the other UN forces in a coordinated attack to push the North Koreans out of the region . This evacuation was carried out on the night of 16 August under heavy support from the U.S. Navy . In all , 9 @,@ 000 men of the division were evacuated south , as well as 1 @,@ 200 national police and 1 @,@ 000 laborers . Now at the height of their advance , the North Korean divisions had pushed the line to within 12 mi ( 19 km ) of Taegu . 
 = = = North Korean defeat = = = 
 By 14 August , large forces from the NK 5th and 12th Divisions , as well was the 766th Independent Regiment were focused entirely on taking P 'ohang @-@ dong . However they were unable to hold it because of U.S. air superiority and naval bombardment on the town . More importantly , the supply chain had completely broken down for the division , and more food , ammunition and supplies were not available . Captured North Korean prisoners claimed the units received no food after 12 August and had been so exhausted that they were completely unable to fight . Opposing them , the ROK Capital Division and Task forces P 'ohang and Bradley which had joined forces to prepare for a final offensive to push the North Koreans out of the region . 
 UN forces began their final counteroffensive against the stalled North Korean forces on 15 August . Intense fighting around P 'ohang @-@ dong ensued for several days as each side suffered large numbers of casualties in back @-@ and @-@ forth battles . By 17 August , UN forces were able to push North Korean troops out of the Kyongju corridor and An 'gang @-@ ni , putting the supply road to Taegu out of immediate danger . The NK 766th Independent Regiment — now down to 1 @,@ 500 men — was forced to withdraw north to prevent being surrounded . 
 The NK 12th Division , also down to just 1 @,@ 500 , evacuated P 'ohang @-@ dong after this , having been exhausted from heavy casualties . The two units merged and received replacements , with the NK 12th Division re @-@ forming with 5 @,@ 000 men . By 19 August the North Korean forces had completely withdrawn from the offensive and retreated into the mountains . Troops of the ROK Capital Division advanced to 2 mi ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) north of Kigye , while the ROK 3rd Division retook P 'ohang @-@ dong and advanced north of the town the next day . The ROK line had been pushed back several miles , but it had managed to repel the North Koreans . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The fight at P 'ohang @-@ dong was the final breaking point for North Korean units already on the verge of exhaustion from continuous combat . North Korean supply lines were overextended to the point of breaking down , causing a collapse in resupply that is seen as a primary factor in turning the tide of the battle . Moreover , U.S. air superiority was also crucial to the engagement , since repeated bombing runs by U.S. aircraft prevented North Korean ground forces from reaching and holding their objectives . 
 Poor organization among both North and South Korean units made it extremely difficult to estimate total casualties for both sides . Several units were completely destroyed in the fighting , making precise casualty counting difficult . A memo from the South Korean army claimed 3 @,@ 800 North Korean killed and 181 captured in the P 'ohang area from 17 August onward . However , casualty numbers are likely far higher . The NK 12th Division alone likely suffered at least 4 @,@ 500 casualties on top of that number , reporting a strength of 6 @,@ 000 on 5 August and only 1 @,@ 500 on 17 August . 
 = Highland cattle = 
 Highland cattle ( Scottish Gaelic : <unk> <unk> ; Scots : <unk> coo ) are a Scottish cattle breed . They have long horns and long wavy coats that are coloured black , brindle , red , yellow , white , silver ( looks white but with a black nose ) or dun , and they are raised primarily for their meat . They originated in the Highlands and Western Isles of Scotland and were first mentioned in the 6th century AD . The first herd book described two distinct types of Highland cattle but , due to crossbreeding between the two , only one type now exists and is registered . They have since been exported worldwide . 
 They are a hardy breed due to their native environment , the Highlands of Scotland . This results in long hair , giving the breed its ability to overwinter . Bulls can weigh up to 800 kilograms ( 1 @,@ 800 pounds ) and cows up to 500 kilograms ( 1 @,@ 100 pounds ) . Their milk generally has a very high butterfat content , and their meat , regarded as of the highest quality , is gaining mainstream acceptance as it is lower in cholesterol than other varieties of beef . 
 = = Breed characteristics = = 
 They have an unusual double coat of hair . On the outside is the oily outer hair - the longest of any cattle breed - covering a downy undercoat . This makes them well suited to conditions in the Highlands , which have a high annual rainfall and sometimes very strong winds . Their skill in foraging for food allows them to survive in steep mountain areas where they both graze and eat plants that many other cattle avoid . They can dig through the snow with their horns to find buried plants . 
 Mature bulls can weigh up to 800 kilograms ( 1 @,@ 800 pounds ) and cows can weigh up to 500 kilograms ( 1 @,@ 100 pounds ) . Cows typically have a height of 90 – 106 centimeters ( 3 – 3 @.@ 5 ft ) , and bulls are typically in the range of 106 – 120 centimeters ( 3 @.@ 5 – 4 ft ) . Mating occurs throughout the year with a gestation period of approximately 277 – 290 days . Most commonly a single calf is born , but twins are not unknown . Sexual maturity is reached at about eighteen months . Highland cattle also have a longer expected lifespan than most other breeds of cattle , up to 20 years . 
 The coat colors are caused by alleles at the MC1R gene ( E locus ) and the <unk> or <unk> gene ( D locus ) . 
 They have a docile temperament and the milk has a high butterfat content , so have traditionally been used as house cows . They are generally good @-@ natured animals but very protective of their young . 
 = = = Cold tolerance = = = 
 All European cattle cope relatively well with low temperatures but Highland cattle have been described as " ... almost as cold @-@ tolerant as the arctic @-@ dwelling caribou and reindeer ... " Conversely they are much less tolerant of heat than zebu cattle , which originated in South Asia and are adapted for hot climates . Highland cattle have been successfully established in countries where winters are substantially colder than Scotland such as Norway and Canada . 
 = = = Social behaviour = = = 
 A fold of semi @-@ wild Highland cattle was studied , over a period of 4 years . It was found that the cattle have a clear structure and hierarchy of dominance , which reduced aggression . Social standing depended on age and sex , with older cattle being dominant to calves and younger ones and males dominant to females . Young bulls would dominate adult cows when they reached around 2 years of age . Calves from the top ranking cow were given higher social status , despite minimal intervention from their mother . <unk> , licking and mounting were seen as friendly contact . 
 Breeding occurred in May and June , with heifers first giving birth at 2 – 3 years old . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The breed was developed in the Highlands and Western Isles of Scotland from two types of now @-@ extinct cattle , one originally black , and the other reddish . The original cattle were brought to Britain by Neolithic farmers . Highland cattle have a history that dates back to at least the 6th century AD , with the first written evidence dating back to the 12th century AD . 
 The 1885 herd book describes two distinct types of Highland cattle . One was the West Highland , or <unk> , originating from the islands , which had harsher conditions . These cattle tended to be smaller , to have black coats and , due to their more rugged environment , to have long hair . The other type was the mainland ; these tended to be larger because their pastures provided richer nutrients . They came in a range of colours , most frequently dun or red . These types have now been crossbred so that there is no distinct difference . 
 Since the early 20th century , breeding stock has been exported to many parts of the world , especially Australia and North America . 
 It is estimated that there are now around 15 @,@ 000 Highland cattle in the United Kingdom . 
 = = = Scotland = = = 
 Originally , small farmers kept Highlands as house cows to produce milk and for meat . The Highland cattle registry ( " herd book " ) was established in 1885 . This is the oldest herd book in the world , which makes them the oldest registered cattle in the world . Although a group of cattle is generally called a herd , a group of Highland cattle is known as a " fold " . This is because in winter , the cattle were kept in open shelters made of stone called folds to protect them from the weather at night . They were also known as <unk> in Scots . 
 In 1954 , Queen Elizabeth ordered Highland cattle to be kept at Balmoral Castle where they are still kept today . 
 = = = Australia = = = 
 Highland cattle were first imported into Australia by the mid @-@ 19th century by Scottish migrants such as Chieftain <unk> <unk> MacDonell of Glengarry , Scotland . Arriving in Port Albert , Victoria , in 1841 with his clan , they apparently drove their Highland cattle to a farm at Greenmount , on the <unk> River , preceded by a piper . Samuel <unk> , also from Scotland , who made a fortune in the Victorian goldfields and became Mayor of Melbourne in 1869 , kept a small fold of black Highland cattle on Churchill Island . They were seen and survived in Port Victoria during the late 1800s , but other folds were believed to have died out in areas such as New South Wales . In 1988 the Australian Highland Cattle Society was formed . Since then , numbers have been growing and semen is being exported to New Zealand to establish the breed there . 
 = = = Canada = = = 
 Highland cattle were first imported into Canada in the 1880s . Both the Honourable Donald A. Smith , Lord Strathcona of Winnipeg , Manitoba , and Robert Campbell of <unk> , Manitoba , imported one bull each . There were also Highland cattle in Nova Scotia , Canada , in the 1880s . However , their numbers were small until the 1920s when large @-@ scale breeding and importing began . In the 1950s cattle were imported and exported from North America . The Canadian Highland Cattle Society was officially registered in 1964 and currently registers all purebred cattle in Canada . Towards the end of the 1990s , there was a large semen and embryo trade between the UK and Canada . However , that has stopped , largely due to the BSE ( mad cow disease ) outbreaks in the United Kingdom . Today , Highland cattle are mainly found in eastern Canada . The population of Highland cattle for Canada and the United States of America combined is estimated at 11 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Modern farming = = 
 The meat of Highland cattle tends to be leaner than most beef because Highlands are largely insulated by their thick , shaggy hair rather than by subcutaneous fat . Highland cattle can produce beef at a reasonable profit from land that would otherwise normally be unsuitable for agriculture . The most profitable way to produce Highland beef is on poor pasture in their native land , the Highlands of Scotland . The meat is also gaining popularity in North America as the beef is low in cholesterol . 
 = = = Commercial success = = = 
 The beef from Highland cattle is very tender , but the market for high @-@ quality meat has declined . To address this decline , it is common practice to breed Highland " suckler " cows with a more favourable breed such as a Shorthorn or Limousin bull . This allows the Highland cattle to produce a crossbred beef calf that has the tender beef of its mother on a carcass shape of more commercial value at slaughter . These crossbred beef suckler cows inherit the hardiness , thrift and mothering capabilities of their Highland dams and the improved carcass configuration of their sires . Such crossbred <unk> can be further crossbred with a modern beef bull such as a Limousin or Charolais to produce high quality beef . 
 = = Showing = = 
 For show purposes , Highland cattle are sometimes groomed with oils and conditioners to give their coats a fluffy appearance that is more apparent in calves ; it leads some outside the industry to call them " fluffy cows " . Many also call the cows " hairy cows " due to their thick coats . 
 = = = Breed standard = = = 
 The breed standard is a set of guidelines which are used to ensure that the animals produced by a breeder or breeding facility conform to the specifics of the standardized breed . All registered Highland cattle must conform to it . The breed standard was created in Inverness on 10 June 1885 . There are four main parts to the standard : the head , the neck , the back and body , and the hair . Below is a concise list of the main points of the breed standard . A judge in a show will judge the cattle against a provided breed standard . 
 Head 
 <unk> to body 
 Wide between eyes 
 Must naturally have horns , but may be trimmed in commercial rearing 
 Neck 
 Clear , without dewlap 
 Straight line to body 
 Back and Body 
 The back must be rounded 
 The quarters must be wider than the hips 
 The legs must be short and straight 
 Hair 
 The hair must be straight and waved 
 Sources : Highland Cattle Society , <unk> 
 = Albany Free School = 
 The Albany Free School is the oldest independent , inner @-@ city alternative school in the United States . Founded by Mary Leue in 1969 based on the English Summerhill School philosophy , the free school lets students learn at their own pace . It has no grades , tests , or firm schedule : students design their own daily plans for learning . The school is self @-@ governed through a weekly , democratic all @-@ school meeting run by students in Robert 's Rules . Students and staff alike receive one equal vote apiece . Unlike Summerhill @-@ style schools , the Albany Free School is a day school that serves predominantly working @-@ class children . Nearly 80 percent of the school is eligible for reduced @-@ price meals in the public schools . About 60 students between the ages of three and fourteen attend , and are staffed by six full @-@ time teachers and a number of volunteers . 
 The school runs on a shoestring budget as a tradeoff for its financial independence and accessibility to low @-@ income students . Tuition is billed on a sliding scale based on what parents can afford . Revenue from rental properties and fundraising supplements tuition income . The Free School started a high school program in 2006 . It later spun off as the Harriet Tubman Democratic High School and enrolls about 20 students in both self @-@ directed and traditional classes . Alumni of the school have attended a variety of colleges . Journalists have noted the school 's similarity to unschooling and homeschooling , and its work to that of <unk> politics . The Albany Free School is one of the few schools remaining from the 1960s and 1970s free school movement . It inspired the program of the Brooklyn Free School . 
 = = History = = 
 The Albany Free School is the oldest independent , inner @-@ city alternative school in the United States . It was founded in 1969 by Mary Leue , who wanted to start a school that was free both by " democratic principles and accessibility to poor children " . Leue approached A. S. Neill of Summerhill , the democratic school 's progenitor , for advice on how to make a similar school for working @-@ class children , he replied that " she would be mad to try " . The school 's first pupils withdrew from the public school . Chris Mercogliano came to the school in 1973 and became " its co @-@ director and figurehead " . The school is located in a socioeconomically and racially diverse downtown Albany in a building that once housed a parochial school . They purchased a number of buildings in the early 1970s for " next to nothing " in the impoverished neighborhood . The Albany Free School is one of the few free schools to persist from the hundreds once open in the free school movement of the 1960s and 1970s . 
 Over time , the Albany Free School became a " safety net " for children with special needs who were not fully accommodated in the public schools . The school 's waiting list grew accordingly , and its program was also impacted by the difficult home situations that these students would often bring to school . The school 's " unofficial adage " is , " Never a dull moment , always a dull roar . " 
 = = Program = = 
 The school 's philosophy is that students learn best at their own pace . The original curriculum was a cross between " instruction and home life " . The Albany Free School has no firm schedule and does not grade students . The day begins at 8 : 15 a.m. and students are asked what they want to do each day . Students are grouped by age and present their own plan for each day . They pursue various projects including writing , filmmaking , and studying language or history . The school also offers structured math and reading classes for those who want it . Classes tend to have five to seven students per teacher and the school 's teacher – student relationships are close . Teachers report a relative ease in holding students accountable to their stated plans . In 2006 , the school had ten teachers , four interns , and a number of parent volunteers for 58 students between the ages of three and fourteen ( pre @-@ K to eighth grade ) . The school has a " Living and Learning " program between 10 a.m. and noon , followed by lunch , which the students make themselves as part of the program . The children play sports until their 3 p.m. class and school ends at 4 p.m. 
 The Albany Free School self @-@ governs through a weekly " all @-@ school meeting " where students and teachers each receive single votes of equal weight in deciding school policy . Teachers recommend that children resolve their disputes themselves or through small groups . If a conflict is irreconcilable , any member of the community can call a school @-@ wide meeting . After this person informs the school , everyone sits in a circle in the basement . The group chooses three students to run the meeting in Robert 's Rules . Adults facilitate more than lead , and rarely intervene in the meetings , which are intended to teach " mediation and compromise " . The school prioritizes self @-@ expression , " honesty , and emotions " . One teacher explained the " free " in " free school " to represent the freedom to be oneself without coercion , which comes with the responsibility to listen to others and respect their feelings voices . In the late 2000s , the school expelled a student for the first time by vote at the community meeting . 
 The school privileges its financial independence and accessibility over sufficient budgeting , a result of Leue 's governance choices . The Free School does not receive government funding and instead subsists on student tuition and supplemental income from rental properties and " extensive fundraising " . Student tuition is billed on a sliding scale : parents give what they can afford . In 2012 , about 80 percent of the school 's families were eligible for free or reduced @-@ price public school meals , and Free School parents paid an average monthly tuition of US $ 160 ( substantially below the US $ 215 cost per child ) . In 2012 , one half the school 's students lived in Albany 's inner @-@ city South End ( mostly black and Latino , with a burgeoning immigrant population ) , one fourth lived in uptown neighborhoods , and one fourth lived in the suburbs . Leue initially struggled to recruit children of upwardly mobile families , who thought the school would limit their children 's chances to join a suitable income bracket . She found that low @-@ income , black families were the most skeptical about the school 's usefulness . The school also provides inexpensive ( or free ) preschool and daycare for young children , operates a car collective ( wherein a dozen people share a minivan ) , and provides low @-@ interest loans through a community credit system . 
 The school operates on a shoestring budget of US $ 100 @,@ 000 , or US $ 150 @,@ 000 when including the kitchen program . The Free School intentionally foregoes government funding to avoid external control and needless bureaucracy . A volunteer staff performs the school 's administrative duties , and as of 2012 , six teachers are employed full @-@ time at forty @-@ hour weeks for a US $ 11 @,@ 000 yearly stipend . Many take second jobs . Their school 's website notes that it has become harder to keep teachers , who are qualified for salaries at least three times this amount plus fringe benefits at public schools . In 2012 , co @-@ director Chris Mercogliano , who arrived in 1973 , continued to receive the same pay as a new teacher . Teachers report high interest in their work and less interest in the low pay . Younger teachers have expressed more of an interest in racial and social justice , and have tried to increase the school 's diversity . Within the school community , some have " half @-@ jokingly " expressed a mix of philosophies between the school 's " young anarchists and ... old liberals " . 
 = = = High school and graduation = = = 
 The Free School began a high school program in late 2006 . It later became the separate Harriet Tubman Democratic High School , and was accredited by the Department of Education . As of 2011 , the school enrolls 17 students , plans to expand to 40 , and employs one full @-@ time teacher , though part @-@ time workers , volunteers , interns , and graduate students keep the ratio of one staff to five students . The school offers both interest @-@ based and " traditional " classes : the former lets students play musical instruments and teach music theory , while the latter prepares students for the state Regents exams . None of the traditional classes enroll more than 11 students . Students are not turned away based on inability to pay tuition , and 80 percent of the school receives tuition aid . As such , the school includes students from the city as well as the suburbs . The pupils also participate in staff hiring and school maintenance chores . The director has said that the school is best suited for independent students . 
 Free School graduates apply to college with essays and interviews rather than standardized test scores . Tubman High School graduates have attended Clarkson University and Hudson Valley Community College . Albany Free School alumni have continued into occupations including development director at an alternative education organization , and an undersecretary for the Governor of New York . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Matthew Appleton wrote that the day school 's existence proved that the Summerhill method could work in non @-@ boarding school environments , and Ron Miller noted the Albany Free School as an " anomaly " and model for American free schools , which tend to serve upper @-@ middle class children . The Albany Free School inspired the program of the Brooklyn Free School . 
 In contemplating the role of democratic schools in addressing race @-@ based inequities , Astra Taylor saw the Albany Free School " as a microcosm of an American society that had failed to come into existence " . She thought that the school sounded " like unschooling , but in a group setting " , where children are free to cross age lines , learn from older idealists , and manage their own affairs . Children are trusted to " learn responsibility , problem solving , and self @-@ governance in the process " . Taylor added that the practical needs of tending the chicken coop and vegetables turned " necessity into virtue " as lack of money became " self @-@ reliance and simple living " . She compared the school 's work to Rebecca <unk> 's <unk> politics : one small group models a different way to pursue a principle , such that the group can live by its ideals while affecting a change they seek . 
 In comparison to the Albany Free School , the City School District of Albany felt that it was better prepared to fit the needs of all students by offering more social services and learning opportunities , such as an elementary school " dual language enrichment program " and the International Baccalaureate . In contrast , a Free School teacher said that the school 's graduates were better able to empathize and emotionally interact , and thus were better equipped to address the fear and mistrust of authority that leads to " laws , judges , courts , prisons " . 
 The Times Union reported the Tubman High School as an " educational island ... outside the public , charter , and private school sphere " that served as a " refuge " for students who disliked traditional public schools . The newspaper wrote that the school , " perhaps the most unique educational experience in the region " , was closer to homeschooling than traditional schooling , like a college dorm where small roundtable discussions prevailed . 
 = Titan Quest : Immortal Throne = 
 Titan Quest : Immortal Throne is an expansion pack to the 2006 action role @-@ playing hack and slash video game Titan Quest . Developed by Iron Lore Entertainment , it was originally published by THQ in 2007 : it would be Iron Lore 's last original project prior to their closure in 2008 . Following directly on from the events of Titan Quest , Immortal Throne follows the player character as they are confronted by a new wave of monsters attacking the mortal realm from the Underworld . Gameplay is identical to that of Titan Quest , with navigation through locations around the Ancient world and action combat . For Immortal Throne , improvements were made to the inventory system and multiplayer , and a new character class was added . 
 Development began in July 2006 after work was completed on Titan Quest , with preparatory work beginning prior to this . Staff members returned while assuming different roles to the original game : Michael Verrette produced , Michael <unk> acted as art director , the script was written by Dean O 'Donnell , while Arthur Bruno took over as main designer . Scott Morton returned to compose new tracks . The concept was to both expand upon the narrative of Titan Quest and improve the gameplay experience . It also went for a darker aesthetic compared to the original . Announced in November 2006 , it released to a positive critical reception and favorable sales . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Like its predecessor Titan Quest , Immortal Throne is an action role @-@ playing game where the player @-@ created character navigates environments within the Ancient World : in Immortal Throne , the player begins by exploring locations like Rhodes and Epirus , before entering the Underworld and passing through supernatural locations such as the Styx and Elysium . Players progress through the story and different locations by completing quests from non @-@ playable characters ( NPCs ) for various rewards , including money and experience points . 
 Combat happens in real @-@ time , featuring a hack and slash style where the player character attacks enemies highlighted with the mouse . As the character gains experience levels through completing quests and killing enemies , they can access Mastery skill trees linked to different combat styles , similar to a character class system : players can have access to a primary and secondary skill tree , which grand either passive or active boons upon characters . Items and equipment , which include new armor and weapons alongside healing potions , are acquired from defeated enemies or purchased from merchants . Players of the original Titan Quest can import their current selected character into Immortal Throne , while new players must complete the main campaign before accessing Immortal Throne . 
 Immortal Throne features multiple additions and alterations over Titan Quest . The main addition is a new Mastery titled Dream Mastery : available to new players from the start of the main campaign , it is a magic @-@ focused skill that relies on illusion and stasis effects to disrupt enemy groups . Among the abilities available are putting nearby enemies to sleep until they are hit by a weapon strike , turning enemies on each other , and effects which make enemies take damage when they strike the player or faster health and energy recovery . In addition to extra quests , new items and equipment are included . An additional item slot for the player character is reserved for Artifacts , charms crafted for the player by Enchanters after the player discovers enough Arcane <unk> after defeating enemies . Artifacts are divided into three levels ( Lesser , Greater and Divine ) , which grant a variety of status effects depending on their level . A separate type of item are Scrolls , expendable items that produce powerful effects and can be equipped in a similar fashion to healing potions . Additional sellers and storage Caravans are included in between towns . Multiplayer functions return from the original game , while adding refinements such as the ability to automatically join parties and engage in player @-@ versus @-@ player matches . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Immortal Throne picks up immediately after the events of the main game : after the titan Typhon has been defeated , the Olympian gods hail the player character as humanity 's hero , and decide that the human world can function without their protection . The player is transported to Rhodes , where a new wave of monsters has appeared : this is blamed by Tiresias on the player 's activities creating strife in the Underworld , the source of the monsters . To discover the reason behind the attacks , the player must seek out the sorceress Medea , who sends the player to a region near the <unk> Mountains . Following a path into them , the player finds the path into the Underworld , where the dead are trapped in limbo due to the Judges of the Underworld no longer passing sentence on them . After the player defeats Charon and Cerberus , who have abandoned their original purposes , they head through Elysium . The player learns that Hades , god of the Underworld , is launching an attack on the living world now that the more powerful Olympians have left humanity unprotected . After trapping Hades ' army in the Underworld , the player then defeats Hades himself . Persephone then appears , dubs the player " <unk> " and declares that humans have earned the right to control both life and death . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 Development on Immortal Throne began in early June 2006 , a few weeks after the original Titan Quest went gold . Preparatory work was in progress during the late development stages of Titan Quest , with staff drawing up feature lists and choosing what features to improve and what additions to make . According to producer Michael Verrette , Immortal Throne was considered an extension of Titan Quest , as many of the elements it included were features that could not be included in the original game due to time constraints . Multiple staff from Titan Quest returned , either in their original roles or different roles : Verrette became producer after being a sound designer for the original game , Arthur Bruno became lead gameplay designer , and Michael <unk> and Scott Morton returned as art director and composer respectively . The original graphics engine was carried over from the original game with some accompanying refinements . The level design was based around the increased vertical elements in environments , giving a wider variety of gameplay spaces and vistas . A big addition to the game was the Dream Mastery character class , which was both designed to fit in among the existing character classes and to be a useful skill in cooperative multiplayer . The level editor , a feature present in the original game , was left mostly intact , although additional development features were added such as lockable day and night cycle and preview features for new elements . Visually , the game was themed around a descent into the Underworld : the deeper the player went on their journey , the darker the environments became . Immortal Throne would be the last original property worked on by Iron Lore Entertainment : after completing work on <unk> , an expansion to Warhammer 40 @,@ 000 : Dawn of War , the studio was forced to close in February 2008 due to difficulties in securing any funding for future projects . 
 The game 's story was born from wanting to expand upon the original game 's theme of the growing rift between mankind and the gods . The Greek Underworld was the one major mythical location that the developers of Titan Quest had not yet approached . As it offered a rich source of material for their creative staff , it was made the location for the expansion . The story concept the team began with was the possibility of a secondary hostile force besides the Titans that had only kept away from humans due to the presence of the Olympians , and now rose up as they retreated from human affairs . With the quests , the team worked to improve on the structure and impact they had in the original , introducing famous places and people from history and mythology . They also expanded the variety of side quests , and included elements such as legends and customs related to the dead . The script was written by Dean O 'Donnell . While an experienced playwright , he encountered new challenges in writing for the video game medium , as he needed to always assume that the player had spoken first to a selected NPC and to contain the necessary information in the first line of dialogue with embellishment in additional lines . Aesthetically , the tone of Immortal Throne was darker than that of its predecessor , with one of the main elements of this change being the cover art : according to designer Arthur Bruno , this was in reaction to the unfavorable impression players received from the surface appearance of Titan Quest when compared to the darker take on Grecian mythology in the God of War series . 
 Immortal Throne was announced by publisher THQ in November 2006 , four months after the release of Titan Quest . The game went gold in February 2007 . It released in North America and Europe on March 2 , 2007 . In Japan , it released on March 23 . The game was released on Steam on July 17 , 2007 alongside its predecessor by THQ . Immortal Throne was re @-@ released as part of the Titan Quest gold edition : it released on October 22 , 2007 in the West , and on April 25 , 2008 in Japan . Since its release and the closure of Iron Lore , fan patches were created to address issues found within Immortal Throne such as bugs and multiplayer issues . The Titan Quest intellectual property was purchased by Nordic Games after THQ began selling off its shares in the wake of its 2013 bankruptcy . Beginning in 2016 , Nordic Games began supporting the game 's Steam version with patches to fix gameplay and multiplayer issues , along with glitches and bugs . Titan Quest was later ported to mobile devices in 2016 by DotEmu under supervision by Nordic Games : when asked whether Immortal Throne would also be released on the platforms , DotEmu stated that they were focusing on the main game and would hopefully port Immortal Throne at a later date . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its debut month , the NPD Group reported that Immortal Throne reached # 13 in the dedicated PC gaming charts . According to Bruno , the combined worldwide sales of Titan Quest and Immortal Throne totaled over one million units worldwide by late 2008 . It also continued to sell well on Steam , though exact figures were not given . 
 Titan Quest : Immortal Throne received positive reviews from professional critics upon release . Aggregate review website Metacritic assigned a score of 80 / 100 based on 23 reviews . 1UP.com 's Jeff Green positively noted that Immortal Throne had transformed his character " from bored millionaire to desperate pauper " due to the increased amount of desirable loot and its rebalanced economy . Eurogamer 's Jim Rossignol , while admitting that the expansion would not bring in new players , enjoyed the additional playtime and the improvements it made . Game Informer 's Adam Biessener said that it " breathed new life " into Titan Quest while staying true to the conventions of its genre . Ryan Davis of GameSpot praised the improvements it made to the original game , but noted performance drops on computers that exceeded the game 's recommended specifications . 
 GameSpy 's Thierry Nguyen enjoyed the expansion and particularly noted the Dream Mastery 's impressive ability roster compared to others in the game , but noted that it retained its formulaic structure from Titan Quest . IGN 's Steve Butts said that , while it would not win new fans due to its similarity to Titan Quest , praised the new additions and tweaks while criticizing the lack of improvements made to multiplayer . PALGN 's Mark Marrow was highly positive , saying that despite its flaws Immortal Throne " further cements [ Titan Quest 's ] position as being a worthy purchase for fans of the genre " . Quintin Smith , writing for PC Gamer UK , admired the effort put into the creation of the new zone and praised the gameplay additions despite elements such as the Dream Mastery not being as innovative . 
 = Liberty Bell = 
 The Liberty Bell is an iconic symbol of American independence , located in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania . Formerly placed in the steeple of the Pennsylvania State House ( now renamed Independence Hall ) , the bell today is located in the Liberty Bell Center in Independence National Historical Park . The bell was commissioned from the London firm of Lester and Pack ( today the Whitechapel Bell Foundry ) in 1752 , and was cast with the lettering " Proclaim LIBERTY throughout all the land unto all the inhabitants thereof , " a Biblical reference from the Book of Leviticus ( 25 : 10 ) . The bell first cracked when rung after its arrival in Philadelphia , and was twice recast by local workmen John Pass and John Stow , whose last names appear on the bell . In its early years , the Liberty Bell was used to summon lawmakers to legislative sessions and to alert citizens to public meetings and proclamations . 
 No immediate announcement was made of the Second Continental Congress 's vote for independence , and thus the bell could not have rung on July 4 , 1776 , at least not for any reason related to that vote . Bells were rung to mark the reading of the Declaration of Independence on July 8 , 1776 , and while there is no contemporary account of the Liberty Bell ringing , most historians believe it was one of the bells rung . After American independence was secured , it fell into relative obscurity for some years . In the 1830s , the bell was adopted as a symbol by abolitionist societies , who dubbed it the " Liberty Bell . " 
 The bell acquired its distinctive large crack sometime in the early 19th century — a widespread story claims it cracked while ringing after the death of Chief Justice John Marshall in 1835 . The bell became famous after an 1847 short story claimed that an aged bell @-@ ringer rang it on July 4 , 1776 , upon hearing of the Second Continental Congress 's vote for independence . Despite the fact that the bell did not ring for independence on that July 4 , the tale was widely accepted as fact , even by some historians . Beginning in 1885 , the City of Philadelphia , which owns the bell , allowed it to go to various expositions and patriotic gatherings . The bell attracted huge crowds wherever it went , additional cracking occurred and pieces were chipped away by souvenir hunters . The last such journey occurred in 1915 , after which the city refused further requests . 
 After World War II , the city allowed the National Park Service to take custody of the bell , while retaining ownership . The bell was used as a symbol of freedom during the Cold War and was a popular site for protests in the 1960s . It was moved from its longtime home in Independence Hall to a nearby glass pavilion on Independence Mall in 1976 , and then to the larger Liberty Bell Center adjacent to the pavilion in 2003 . The bell has been featured on coins and stamps , and its name and image have been widely used by corporations . 
 = = Founding ( 1751 – 1753 ) = = 
 Philadelphia 's city bell had been used to alert the public to proclamations or civic danger since the city 's 1682 founding . The original bell hung from a tree behind the Pennsylvania State House ( now known as Independence Hall ) and was said to have been brought to the city by its founder , William Penn . In 1751 , with a bell tower being built in the Pennsylvania State House , civic authorities sought a bell of better quality , which could be heard at a greater distance in the rapidly expanding city . Isaac Norris , speaker of the Pennsylvania Provincial Assembly , gave orders to the colony 's London agent , Robert Charles , to obtain a " good Bell of about two thousands pound weight " . 
 We hope and rely on thy care and assistance in this affair and that thou wilt procure and forward it by the first good <unk> as our workmen inform us it will be much less trouble to hang the Bell before their <unk> are struck from the Building where we intend to place it which will not be done ' till the end of next Summer or beginning of the Fall . Let the bell be cast by the best workmen & examined carefully before it is Shipped with the following words well shaped around it <unk> . By Order of the Assembly of the <unk> [ sic ] of <unk> [ sic ] for the State house in the City of Philada 1752 
 and Underneath 
 Proclaim Liberty thro ' all the Land to all the Inhabitants <unk> XXV . 10 . 
 Charles duly ordered the bell from Thomas Lester of the London <unk> firm of Lester and Pack ( today the Whitechapel Bell Foundry ) for the sum of £ 150 13s 8d , ( equivalent to £ 21 @,@ 351 @.@ 87 today ) including freight to Philadelphia and insurance . It arrived in Philadelphia in August 1752 . Norris wrote to Charles that the bell was in good order , but they had not yet sounded it , as they were building a clock for the State House 's tower . The bell was mounted on a stand to test the sound , and at the first strike of the clapper , the bell 's rim cracked . The episode would be used to good account in later stories of the bell ; in 1893 , former President Benjamin Harrison , speaking as the bell passed through Indianapolis , stated , " This old bell was made in England , but it had to be re @-@ cast in America before it was attuned to proclaim the right of self @-@ government and the equal rights of men . " Philadelphia authorities tried to return it by ship , but the master of the vessel which had brought it was unable to take it on board . 
 Two local founders , John Pass and John Stow , offered to recast the bell . Though they were inexperienced in bell casting , Pass had headed the Mount Holly Iron Foundry in neighboring New Jersey and came from Malta , which had a tradition of bell casting . Stow , on the other hand , was only four years out of his apprenticeship as a brass founder . At Stow 's foundry on Second Street , the bell was broken into small pieces , melted down , and cast into a new bell . The two founders decided that the metal was too brittle , and augmented the bell metal by about ten percent , using copper . The bell was ready in March 1753 , and Norris reported that the lettering ( which included the founders ' names and the year ) was even clearer on the new bell than on the old . 
 City officials scheduled a public celebration with free food and drink for the testing of the recast bell . When the bell was struck , it did not break , but the sound produced was described by one hearer as like two coal scuttles being banged together . <unk> by the crowd , Pass and Stow hastily took the bell away and again recast it . When the fruit of the two founders ' renewed efforts was brought forth in June 1753 , the sound was deemed satisfactory , though Norris indicated that he did not personally like it . The bell was hung in the steeple of the State House the same month . 
 The reason for the difficulties with the bell is not certain . The Whitechapel Foundry , still in business today , takes the position that the bell was either damaged in transit or was broken by an inexperienced bell ringer , who incautiously sent the clapper flying against the rim , rather than the body of the bell . In 1975 , the Winterthur Museum conducted an analysis of the metal in the bell , and concluded that " a series of errors made in the construction , reconstruction , and second reconstruction of the Bell resulted in a brittle bell that barely missed being broken up for scrap " . The Museum found a considerably higher level of tin in the Liberty Bell than in other Whitechapel bells of that era , and suggested that Whitechapel made an error in the alloy , perhaps by using scraps with a high level of tin to begin the melt instead of the usual pure copper . The analysis found that , on the second recasting , instead of adding pure tin to the bell metal , Pass and Stow added cheap pewter with a high lead content , and incompletely mixed the new metal into the mold . The result was " an extremely brittle alloy which not only caused the Bell to fail in service but made it easy for early souvenir collectors to knock off substantial trophies from the rim " . 
 = = Early days ( 1754 – 1846 ) = = 
 Dissatisfied with the bell , Norris instructed Charles to order a second one , and see if Lester and Pack would take back the first bell and credit the value of the metal towards the bill . In 1754 , the Assembly decided to keep both bells ; the new one was attached to the tower clock while the old bell was , by vote of the Assembly , devoted " to such Uses as this House may hereafter appoint . " The Pass and Stow bell was used to summon the Assembly . One of the earliest documented mentions of the bell 's use is in a letter from Benjamin Franklin to Catherine Ray dated October 16 , 1755 : " Adieu . The Bell rings , and I must go among the Grave ones , and talk <unk> . [ sic ] " The bell was rung in 1760 to mark the accession of George III to the throne . In the early 1760s , the Assembly allowed a local church to use the State House for services and the bell to summon worshipers , while the church 's building was being constructed . The bell was also used to summon people to public meetings , and in 1772 , a group of citizens complained to the Assembly that the bell was being rung too frequently . 
 Despite the legends that have grown up about the Liberty Bell , it did not ring on July 4 , 1776 ( at least not for any reason connected with independence ) , as no public announcement was made of the Declaration of Independence . When the Declaration was publicly read on July 8 , 1776 , there was a ringing of bells , and while there is no contemporary account of this particular bell ringing , most authorities agree that the Liberty Bell was among the bells that rang . However , there is some chance that the poor condition of the State House bell tower prevented the bell from ringing . According to John C. Paige , who wrote a historical study of the bell for the National Park Service , " We do not know whether or not the steeple was still strong enough to permit the State House bell to ring on this day . If it could possibly be rung , we can assume it was . Whether or not it did , it has come to symbolize all of the bells throughout the United States which proclaimed Independence . " 
 If the bell was rung , it would have been most likely rung by Andrew McNair , who was the doorkeeper both of the Assembly and of the Congress , and was responsible for ringing the bell . As McNair was absent on two unspecified days between April and November , it might have been rung by William Hurry , who succeeded him as doorkeeper for Congress . Bells were also rung to celebrate the first anniversary of Independence on July 4 , 1777 . 
 After Washington 's defeat at the Battle of Brandywine on September 11 , 1777 , the revolutionary capital of Philadelphia was defenseless , and the city prepared for what was seen as an inevitable British attack . Bells could easily be recast into munitions , and locals feared the Liberty Bell and other bells would meet this fate . The bell was hastily taken down from the tower , and sent by heavily guarded wagon train to the town of Bethlehem . Local <unk> transported the bell to the Zion German Reformed Church in Northampton Town , now Allentown , where it waited out the British occupation of Philadelphia under the church floor boards . It was returned to Philadelphia in June 1778 , after the British departure . With the steeple of the State House in poor condition ( the steeple was subsequently torn down and later restored ) , the bell was placed in storage , and it was not until 1785 that it was again mounted for ringing . 
 Placed on an upper floor of the State House , the bell was rung in the early years of independence on the Fourth of July and on Washington 's Birthday , as well as on Election Day to remind voters to hand in their ballots . It also rang to call students at the University of Pennsylvania to their classes at nearby Philosophical Hall . Until 1799 , when the state capital was moved to Lancaster , it again rang to summon legislators into session . When Pennsylvania , having no further use for its State House , proposed to tear it down and sell the land for building lots , the City of Philadelphia purchased the land , together with the building , including the bell , for $ 70 @,@ 000 , equal to $ 976 @,@ 020 today . In 1828 , the city sold the second Lester and Pack bell to St. Augustine 's Roman Catholic Church , which was burned down by an anti @-@ Catholic mob in the Philadelphia Nativist Riots of 1844 . The remains of the bell were recast ; the new bell is now located at Villanova University . 
 It is uncertain how the bell came to be cracked ; the damage occurred sometime between 1817 and 1846 . The bell is mentioned in a number of newspaper articles during that time ; no mention of a crack can be found until 1846 . In fact , in 1837 , the bell was depicted in an anti @-@ slavery publication — <unk> . In February 1846 Public Ledger reported that the bell had been rung on February 23 , 1846 in celebration of Washington 's Birthday ( as February 22 fell on a Sunday , the celebration occurred the next day ) , and also reported that the bell had long been cracked , but had been " put in order " by having the sides of the crack filed . The paper reported that around noon , it was discovered that the ringing had caused the crack to be greatly extended , and that " the old Independence Bell ... now hangs in the great city steeple irreparably cracked and forever dumb " . 
 The most common story about the cracking of the bell is that it happened when the bell was rung upon the 1835 death of the Chief Justice of the United States , John Marshall . This story originated in 1876 , when the volunteer curator of Independence Hall , Colonel Frank <unk> , announced that he had ascertained the truth of the story . While there is little evidence to support this view , it has been widely accepted and taught . Other claims regarding the crack in the bell include stories that it was damaged while welcoming Lafayette on his return to the United States in 1824 , that it cracked announcing the passing of the British Catholic Relief Act 1829 , and that some boys had been invited to ring the bell , and inadvertently damaged it . David Kimball , in his book compiled for the National Park Service , suggests that it most likely cracked sometime between 1841 and 1845 , either on the Fourth of July or on Washington 's Birthday . 
 The Pass and Stow bell was first termed " the Liberty Bell " in the New York Anti @-@ Slavery Society 's journal , Anti @-@ Slavery Record . In an 1835 piece , " The Liberty Bell " , Philadelphians were castigated for not doing more for the abolitionist cause . Two years later , in another work of that society , the journal Liberty featured an image of the bell as its frontispiece , with the words " Proclaim Liberty " . In 1839 , Boston 's Friends of Liberty , another abolitionist group , titled their journal The Liberty Bell . The same year , William Lloyd Garrison 's anti @-@ slavery publication The Liberator reprinted a Boston abolitionist pamphlet containing a poem entitled " The Liberty Bell " , which noted that , at that time , despite its inscription , the bell did not proclaim liberty to all the inhabitants of the land . 
 = = Becoming a symbol ( 1847 – 1865 ) = = 
 A great part of the modern image of the bell as a relic of the proclamation of American independence was forged by writer George Lippard . On January 2 , 1847 , his story " Fourth of July , 1776 " appeared in Saturday Review magazine . The short story depicted an aged <unk> on July 4 , 1776 , sitting morosely by the bell , fearing that Congress would not have the courage to declare independence . At the most dramatic moment , a young boy appears with instructions for the old man : to ring the bell . The story was widely reprinted and closely linked the Liberty Bell to the Declaration of Independence in the public mind . The elements of the story were reprinted in early historian Benson J. Lossing 's The Pictorial Field Guide to the Revolution ( published in 1850 ) as historical fact , and the tale was widely repeated for generations after in school primers . 
 In 1848 , with the rise of interest in the bell , the city decided to move it to the Assembly Room ( also known as the Declaration Chamber ) on the first floor , where the Declaration and United States Constitution had been debated and signed . The city constructed an ornate pedestal for the bell . The Liberty Bell was displayed on that pedestal for the next quarter @-@ century , surmounted by an eagle ( originally sculpted , later stuffed ) . In 1853 , President Franklin Pierce visited Philadelphia and the bell , and spoke of the bell as symbolizing the American Revolution and American liberty . At the time , Independence Hall was also used as a courthouse , and African @-@ American newspapers pointed out the incongruity of housing a symbol of liberty in the same building in which federal judges were holding hearings under the Fugitive Slave Act . 
 In February 1861 , the President @-@ elect , Abraham Lincoln , came to the Assembly Room and delivered an address en route to his inauguration in Washington DC . In 1865 , Lincoln 's body was returned to the Assembly Room after his assassination for a public viewing of his body , en route to his burial in Springfield , Illinois . Due to time constraints , only a small fraction of those wishing to pass by the coffin were able to ; the lines to see the coffin were never less than 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) long . Nevertheless , between 120 @,@ 000 and 140 @,@ 000 people were able to pass by the open casket and then the bell , carefully placed at Lincoln 's head so mourners could read the inscription , " Proclaim Liberty throughout all the land unto all the inhabitants thereof . " 
 = = Traveling icon of freedom ( 1866 – 1947 ) = = 
 In 1876 , city officials discussed what role the bell should play in the nation 's Centennial festivities . Some wanted to repair it so it could sound at the Centennial Exposition being held in Philadelphia , but the idea was not adopted ; the bell 's custodians concluded that it was unlikely that the metal could be made into a bell which would have a pleasant sound , and that the crack had become part of the bell 's character . Instead , a replica weighing 13 @,@ 000 pounds ( 5 @,@ 900 kg ) ( 1 @,@ 000 pounds for each of the original states ) was cast . The metal used for what was dubbed " the Centennial Bell " included four melted @-@ down cannons : one used by each side in the American Revolutionary War , and one used by each side in the Civil War . That bell was sounded at the Exposition grounds on July 4 , 1876 , was later recast to improve the sound , and today is the bell attached to the clock in the steeple of Independence Hall . While the Liberty Bell did not go to the Exposition , a great many Exposition visitors came to visit it , and its image was ubiquitous at the Exposition grounds — myriad souvenirs were sold bearing its image or shape , and state pavilions contained replicas of the bell made of substances ranging from stone to tobacco . In 1877 , the bell was hung from the ceiling of the Assembly Room by a chain with thirteen links . 
 Between 1885 and 1915 , the Liberty Bell made seven trips to various expositions and celebrations . Each time , the bell traveled by rail , making a large number of stops along the way so that local people could view it . By 1885 , the Liberty Bell was widely recognized as a symbol of freedom , and as a treasured relic of Independence , and was growing still more famous as versions of Lippard 's legend were reprinted in history and school books . In early 1885 , the city agreed to let it travel to New Orleans for the World Cotton Centennial exposition . Large crowds mobbed the bell at each stop . In Biloxi , Mississippi , the former President of the Confederate States of America , Jefferson Davis came to the bell . Davis delivered a speech paying homage to it , and urging national unity . In 1893 , it was sent to Chicago 's World Columbian Exposition to be the centerpiece of the state 's exhibit in the Pennsylvania Building . On July 4 , 1893 , in Chicago , the bell was serenaded with the first performance of The Liberty Bell March , conducted by " America 's Bandleader " , John Philip Sousa . Philadelphians began to cool to the idea of sending it to other cities when it returned from Chicago bearing a new crack , and each new proposed journey met with increasing opposition . It was also found that the bell 's private watchman had been cutting off small pieces for souvenirs . The city placed the bell in a glass @-@ fronted oak case . In 1898 , it was taken out of the glass case and hung from its yoke again in the tower hall of Independence Hall , a room which would remain its home until the end of 1975 . A guard was posted to discourage souvenir hunters who might otherwise chip at it . 
 By 1909 , the bell had made six trips , and not only had the cracking become worse , but souvenir hunters had deprived it of over one percent of its weight . When , in 1912 , the organizers of the Panama @-@ Pacific International Exposition requested the bell for the 1915 fair in San Francisco , the city was reluctant to let it travel again . The city finally decided to let it go as the bell had never been west of St. Louis , and it was a chance to bring it to millions who might never see it otherwise . However , in 1914 , fearing that the cracks might lengthen during the long train ride , the city installed a metal support structure inside the bell , generally called the " spider . " In February 1915 , the bell was tapped gently with wooden mallets to produce sounds which were transmitted to the fair as the signal to open it , a transmission which also inaugurated transcontinental telephone service . Some five million Americans saw the bell on its train journey west . It is estimated that nearly two million kissed it at the fair , with an uncounted number viewing it . The bell was taken on a different route on its way home ; again , five million saw it on the return journey . Since the bell returned to Philadelphia , it has been moved out of doors only five times : three times for patriotic observances during and after World War I , and twice as the bell occupied new homes in 1976 and 2003 . Chicago and San Francisco had obtained its presence after presenting petitions signed by hundreds of thousands of children . Chicago tried again , with a petition signed by 3 @.@ 4 million schoolchildren , for the 1933 Century of Progress Exhibition and New York presented a petition to secure a visit from the bell for the 1939 New York World 's Fair . Both efforts failed . 
 In 1924 , one of Independence Hall 's exterior doors was replaced by glass , allowing some view of the bell even when the building was closed . When Congress enacted the nation 's first peacetime draft in 1940 , the first Philadelphians required to serve took their oaths of enlistment before the Liberty Bell . Once the war started , the bell was again a symbol , used to sell war bonds . In the early days of World War II , it was feared that the bell might be in danger from saboteurs or enemy bombing , and city officials considered moving the bell to Fort Knox , to be stored with the nation 's gold reserves . The idea provoked a storm of protest from around the nation , and was abandoned . Officials then considered building an underground steel vault above which it would be displayed , and into which it could be lowered if necessary . The project was dropped when studies found that the digging might undermine the foundations of Independence Hall . The bell was again tapped on D @-@ Day , as well as in victory on V @-@ E Day and V @-@ J Day . 
 = = Park Service administration ( 1948 – present ) = = 
 After World War II , and following considerable controversy , the City of Philadelphia agreed that it would transfer custody of the bell and Independence Hall , while retaining ownership , to the federal government . The city would also transfer various colonial @-@ era buildings it owned . Congress agreed to the transfer in 1948 , and three years later Independence National Historical Park was founded , incorporating those properties and administered by the National Park Service ( NPS or Park Service ) . The Park Service would be responsible for maintaining and displaying the bell . The NPS would also administer the three blocks just north of Independence Hall , which had been condemned by the state , razed , and developed into a park , Independence Mall . 
 In the postwar period , the bell became a symbol of freedom used in the Cold War . The bell was chosen for the symbol of a savings bond campaign in 1950 . The purpose of this campaign , as Vice President Alben Barkley put it , was to make the country " so strong that no one can impose ruthless , godless ideologies on us " . In 1955 , former residents of nations behind the Iron Curtain were allowed to tap the bell as a symbol of hope and encouragement to their compatriots . Foreign dignitaries , such as Israeli Prime Minister David Ben @-@ Gurion and West Berlin Mayor Ernst Reuter were brought to the bell , and they commented that the bell symbolized the link between the United States and their nations . During the 1960s , the bell was the site of several protests , both for the civil rights movement , and by various protesters supporting or opposing the Vietnam War . 
 Almost from the start of its stewardship , the Park Service sought to move the bell from Independence Hall to a structure where it would be easier to care for the bell and accommodate visitors . The first such proposal was withdrawn in 1958 , after considerable public protest . The Park Service tried again as part of the planning for the 1976 United States Bicentennial . The Independence National Historical Park Advisory Committee proposed in 1969 that the bell be moved out of Independence Hall , as the building could not accommodate the millions expected to visit Philadelphia for the Bicentennial . In 1972 , the Park Service announced plans to build a large glass tower for the bell at the new visitors center at South Third Street and Chestnut Street , two blocks east of Independence Hall , at a cost of $ 5 million , but citizens again protested the move . Instead , in 1973 , the Park Service proposed to build a smaller glass pavilion for the bell at the north end of Independence Mall , between Arch and Race Streets . Philadelphia Mayor Frank Rizzo agreed with the pavilion idea , but proposed that the pavilion be built across Chestnut Street from Independence Hall , which the state feared would destroy the view of the historic building from the mall area . Rizzo 's view prevailed , and the bell was moved to a glass @-@ and @-@ steel Liberty Bell Pavilion , about 200 yards ( 180 m ) from its old home at Independence Hall , as the Bicentennial year began . 
 During the Bicentennial , members of the <unk> 's Club of America jokingly picketed the Whitechapel Bell Foundry with signs " We got a lemon " and " What about the warranty ? " The foundry told the protesters that it would be glad to replace the bell — so long as it was returned in the original packaging . In 1958 , the foundry ( then trading under the name Mears and Stainbank Foundry ) had offered to recast the bell , and was told by the Park Service that neither it nor the public wanted the crack removed . The foundry was called upon , in 1976 , to cast a full @-@ size replica of the Liberty Bell ( known as the Bicentennial Bell ) , which was presented to the United States by the British monarch , Queen Elizabeth II , and was housed in the tower once intended for the Liberty Bell , at the former visitor center on South Third Street . The bell was removed and placed in storage in January 2013 in preparation for the demolition of the visitor center , future location of the Museum of the American Revolution . 
 = = = Liberty Bell Center = = = 
 In 1995 , the Park Service began preliminary work on a redesign of Independence Mall . Architects Venturi , Scott Brown & Associates developed a master plan with two design alternatives . The first proposed a block @-@ long visitors center on the south side of Market Street , that would also house the Liberty Bell . This would have interrupted the mall 's three @-@ block vista of Independence Hall , and made the bell visible only from the south , i.e. Chestnut Street . The second alternative placed a similar visitors center on the north side of Market Street , also interrupting the mall 's vista , with the bell in a small pavilion on the south side . City planner Edmund Bacon , who had overseen the mall 's design in the 1950s , saw preservation of the vista of Independence Hall as essential . He created his own plan , which included a domed bell pavilion built north of Market Street . Public reaction to the possibility of moving the Liberty Bell so far from Independence Hall was strongly negative . NPS announced that the bell would remain on the block between Chestnut and Market Streets . Other plans were proposed , each had strengths and weaknesses , but the goal of all was to encourage visitors to see more of the historical park than just the Liberty Bell . 
 The Olin Partnership was hired to create a new master plan for Independence Mall ; its team included architect Bernard Cywinski , who ultimately won a limited design competition to design what was called the Liberty Bell Center ( LBC ) . Cywinski 's design was unveiled in early 1999 . Significantly larger than the existing pavilion , allowing for exhibit space and an interpretive center , the proposed LBC building also would cover about 15 % of the footprint of the long @-@ demolished President 's House , the " White House " of George Washington and John Adams . Archaeologists excavating the LBC 's intended site uncovered remnants of the 1790 – 1800 executive mansion , which were reburied . The project became highly controversial when it was revealed that Washington 's slaves had been housed only feet from the planned LBC 's main entrance . The Park Service refused to redesign the LBC building , or delay its construction . Initially , NPS resisted interpreting the slaves and the slave quarters , but after years of protest by Black activists , agreed . The new facility , which opened hours after the bell was installed on October 9 , 2003 , is adjacent to an outline of Washington 's slave quarters marked in the pavement , with interpretive panels explaining the significance of what was found . 
 Inside the LBC , visitors pass through a number of exhibits about the bell before reaching the Liberty Bell itself . Due to security concerns following an attack on the bell by a visitor with a hammer in 2001 , the bell is hung out of easy reach of visitors , who are no longer allowed to touch it , and all visitors undergo a security screening . 
 Today , the Liberty Bell weighs 2 @,@ 080 pounds ( 940 kg ) . Its metal is 70 % copper and 25 % tin , with the remainder consisting of lead , zinc , arsenic , gold and silver . It hangs from what is believed to be its original yoke , made from American elm . While the crack in the bell appears to end at the abbreviation " Philada " in the last line of the inscription , that is merely the 19th century widened crack which was filed out in the hopes of allowing the bell to continue to ring ; a hairline crack , extending through the bell to the inside continues generally right and gradually moving to the top of the bell , through the word " and " in " Pass and Stow , " then through the word " the " before the word " Assembly " in the second line of text , and through the letters " <unk> " in the word " Liberty " in the first line . The crack ends near the attachment with the yoke . 
 Professor Constance M. <unk> , in her book tracing the history of Independence National Historical Park , wrote of the Liberty Bell : 
 [ T ] he Liberty Bell is the most venerated object in the park , a national icon . It is not as beautiful as some other things that were in Independence Hall in those momentous days two hundred years ago , and it is irreparably damaged . Perhaps that is part of its almost mystical appeal . Like our democracy it is fragile and imperfect , but it has weathered threats , and it has endured . 
 = = Legacy and commemorations = = 
 In addition to the replicas which are seen at Independence National Historical Park , early replicas of the Liberty Bell include the so @-@ called Justice Bell or Women 's Liberty Bell , commissioned in 1915 by suffragists to advocate for women 's suffrage . This bell had the same legend as the Liberty Bell , with two added words , " establish justice " , words taken from the Preamble to the United States Constitution . It also had the clapper chained to the bell so it could not sound , symbolizing the inability of women , lacking the vote , to influence political events . The Justice Bell toured extensively to publicize the cause . After the passage of the Nineteenth Amendment ( granting women the vote ) , the Justice Bell was brought to the front of Independence Hall on August 26 , 1920 to finally sound . It remained on a platform before Independence Hall for several months before city officials required that it be taken away , and today is at the Washington Memorial Chapel at Valley Forge . 
 As part of the Liberty Bell Savings Bonds drive in 1950 , 55 replicas of the Liberty Bell ( one each for the 48 states , the District of Columbia , and the territories ) were ordered by the United States Department of the Treasury and were cast in France by the Fonderie Paccard . The bells were to be displayed and rung on patriotic occasions . Many of the bells today are sited near state capitol buildings . Although Wisconsin 's bell is now at its state capitol , initially it was sited on the grounds of the state 's Girls Detention Center . Texas 's bell is at Texas A & M University in College Station . The Texas bell was presented to the university in appreciation of the service of the school 's graduates . Walt Disney World has a replica of the Liberty Bell , which is located in Liberty Square in the Magic Kingdom . The replica was cast from the mold of the actual Liberty Bell in 1989 . 
 The Liberty Bell appeared on a commemorative coin in 1926 to mark the sesquicentennial of American independence . Its first use on a circulating coin was on the reverse side of the Franklin half dollar , struck between 1948 and 1963 . It also appeared on the Bicentennial design of the Eisenhower dollar , superimposed against the moon . 
 On the 150th anniversary of the Declaration of Independence in 1926 the U.S. Post Office issued a commemorative stamp depicting the Liberty Bell for the Sesquicentennial Exposition in Philadelphia in 1926 , though this stamp actually depicts the replica bell erected at the entrance to the exposition grounds . The Liberty Bell was chosen for the stamp design theme because the symbol was most representative of the nation 's independence . Since then the Liberty Bell has also appeared on several other U.S. postage stamps , including the first forever stamp , issued since 2007 . 
 An image of the Liberty Bell appears on the current $ 100 note . The image shifts in color and even disappears , depending on the angle at which it is held . 
 The name " Liberty Bell " or " Liberty Belle " is commonly used for commercial purposes , and has denoted brands and business names ranging from a life insurance company to a Montana escort service . A large outline of the bell hangs over the right @-@ field bleachers at Citizens Bank Park , home of the Philadelphia Phillies baseball team , and is illuminated whenever one of their players hits a home run . This bell outline replaced one at the Phillies ' former home , Veterans Stadium . On April 1 , 1996 , Taco Bell announced via ads and press releases that it had purchased the Liberty Bell and changed its name to the Taco Liberty Bell . The bell , the ads related , would henceforth spend half the year at Taco Bell corporate headquarters in Irvine , California . Outraged calls flooded Independence National Historical Park , and Park Service officials hastily called a press conference to deny that the bell had been sold . After several hours , Taco Bell admitted that it was an April Fools Day joke . Despite the protests , company sales of tacos , enchiladas , and burritos rose by more than a half million dollars that week . 
 The Justice Bell ( aka " The Women 's Liberty Bell " ) is a notable replica of the Liberty Bell with a few minor differences . The Justice Bell was created as a symbol for women 's suffrage in 1915 . As a symbol of how women 's voices were being silenced , the bell 's clapper was chained in place until women were permitted to vote . After five years of silence , the Justice Bell was sounded on September 25 , 1920 at a ceremony held on the steps of Independence Hall in Philadelphia , to celebrate the ratification of the 19th Amendment to the United States Constitution . The Justice Bell resides in the Washington Memorial Chapel in Valley Forge National Park . 
 = = Inscription = = 
 The inscription on the bell is : 
 At the time , " <unk> " was an accepted alternative spelling for " Pennsylvania . " That spelling was used by Alexander Hamilton , a graduate of King 's College ( now Columbia University ) , in 1787 on the signature page of the United States Constitution . 
 = The Destroying Angel and Daemons of Evil Interrupting the Orgies of the Vicious and Intemperate = 
 The Destroying Angel and Daemons of Evil Interrupting the Orgies of the Vicious and Intemperate , also known as The Destroying Angel and Daemons <unk> Divine Vengeance on the Wicked and Intemperate and The Destruction of the Temple of Vice , is an oil painting on canvas by English artist William Etty , first exhibited in 1832 . Etty had become famous for nude paintings , and acquired a reputation for tastelessness , indecency and a lack of creativity . With The Destroying Angel he hoped to disprove his critics with an openly moral piece . The painting is 127 @.@ 8 cm by 101 @.@ 9 cm ( 50 in by 40 in ) and depicts a classical temple under attack from a destroying angel and a group of daemons . Some of the human occupants are dead or unconscious , others flee in terror or struggle helplessly against the daemons . 
 When first exhibited in 1832 , The Destroying Angel was widely praised for its technical brilliance , but critics were divided on the subject matter . Some praised its vividness and ability to mix fear and beauty without lowering into tastelessness ; others criticised its thematic matter as inappropriate , and chastised Etty for wasting his talents . The painting changed the manner in which art critics viewed the artist ; some saw it as indicating previously unseen character depths , others considered it a renunciation of his previous works . In 1854 Henry Payne , who had commissioned the painting , sold it to Sir Joseph Whitworth . Whitworth donated it in 1882 to the Manchester Art Gallery , where it remains . 
 = = Background = = 
 William Etty ( 1787 – 1849 ) , the seventh son of a York baker and miller , had originally been an apprentice printer in Hull , but on completing his seven @-@ year apprenticeship at the age of 18 moved to London to become an artist . Strongly influenced by the works of Titian and Rubens , he became famous for painting nude figures in biblical , literary and mythological settings . Many of his peers greatly admired him , and he was elected a full Royal Academician in 1828 , ahead of John Constable . 
 Between 1820 and 1829 Etty exhibited 15 paintings , of which 14 depicted nude figures . While some nude paintings by foreign artists existed in private collections , England had no tradition of nude painting and the display and distribution of nude material to the public had been suppressed since the 1787 Proclamation for the Discouragement of Vice . Etty was the first British artist to specialise in the nude , and the reaction of the lower classes to these paintings caused concern throughout the 19th century . Although his portraits of male nudes were generally well received , many critics condemned his repeated depictions of female nudity as indecent . Etty 's Youth on the Prow , and Pleasure at the Helm , completed in 1830 and exhibited in 1832 , attracted scathing criticism for its supposed seductive and sensual nature , leading The Morning Chronicle to comment that " [ Etty ] should not persist , with an unhallowed fancy , to pursue Nature to her holy recesses . He is a laborious draughtsman , and a beautiful colourist ; but he has not taste or chastity of mind enough to venture on the naked truth . " 
 <unk> by repeated attacks from The Morning Chronicle on his supposed indecency , poor taste and lack of creativity , Etty determined to produce a work that would prove his detractors wrong . The result was The Destroying Angel and Daemons of Evil Interrupting the Orgies of the Vicious and Intemperate . 
 The Destroying Angel was commissioned by Henry Payne of Leicester in 1822 , on a promise of 60 guineas ( about £ 5 @,@ 200 in today 's terms ) when complete . Payne had granted Etty complete freedom in the creation of the piece , but Etty had done little with the notion until , stung by The Morning Chronicle 's criticism , he decided to return to the theme , completing it in 1832 . As Etty had become a more prominent painter in the meantime , Payne paid him £ 130 ( about £ 11 @,@ 000 in today 's terms ) for the piece . The work is thought to have been inspired by the works of John Milton and Alexander Pope , by Michelangelo 's The Last Judgment and possibly by the French Revolution of 1830 , in which Etty had been caught up during a visit to Paris to study in the Louvre . The topic was one to which Etty felt particularly close , saying that he had put his " whole soul " into the piece . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The Destroying Angel is a visionary work , depicting a wholly imaginary scene rather than a scene from history , literature or mythology . It measures 127 @.@ 8 cm by 101 @.@ 9 cm ( 50 in by 40 in ) , and depicts an ornate imaginary classical temple . The temple and its occupants are under attack from a destroying angel and a group of daemons , who are in the process of abducting its human occupants . The angel itself is wreathed in smoke in the centre of the image . Having destroyed one side of the temple , it is poised to hurl a thunderbolt . Below the angel , daemons attack a group of around 25 semi @-@ naked human figures . Each human is shown in a different position and expresses terror in a different way , and each is deliberately painted in paler tones than those Etty typically used in an effort to suggest death and pallor . As with most of Etty 's works , the figures are a collection of depictions of models in studio poses , later arranged for dramatic effect , rather than painted as a group . 
 To the right of the painting , daemons drag terrified women away . The woman in the lower right hand corner turns to see flames reflected in the eyes of the daemon who holds her from behind , with a look of horrified guilt on her face . Behind her , other women struggle helplessly with the daemons or are carried away unconscious , having fainted . 
 In the centre of the foreground is a figure modelled on Caius Gabriel Cibber 's Raving Madness , which at the time was one of two monumental sculptures above the entrance to Bethlem Hospital ( " Bedlam " ) , and a well @-@ known London landmark and symbol of insanity . The chained figure is contorted in agony struggling to escape his bonds , while a daemon pulls on one end of the chain . Beside this lunatic is an unconscious or dead gambler , his winnings spread on the floor beside him . 
 Behind the central images of the lunatic , daemon and gambler are a group of people who have only just realised what is happening . A male figure in a red Phrygian cap ( a symbol of the French and American Revolutions ) <unk> with his arm around the waist of a female figure ( identified as a bacchante by Sarah Burnage of the University of York ) . The female figure shades her eyes , either against the brightness of the angel or to block out the horror taking place in front of her . 
 On the left @-@ hand side of the painting , in the background , the structure of the temple crumbles and burns in the wake of the angel 's path , while figures in varying stages of undress flee the approaching daemons . In the foreground a drunken man mimics the pose of the Barberini Faun as he clutches his head , alert enough to realise his fate if he does not escape but too intoxicated to flee . 
 Around the painting lie corpses in various states of undress . The Destroying Angel was painted shortly after Etty 's visit to Paris in which he had witnessed the July Revolution at first hand , and the sight and smell of the dead in the streets had left a strong impression on him . The heaped bodies in The Destroying Angel were probably directly inspired by the events Etty had witnessed in France , and perhaps also by the cholera epidemic which killed thousands in London in 1832 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Destroying Angel was first exhibited at the Royal Academy Summer Exhibition in 1832 . It immediately generated much critical and public interest , and was compared favourably with The Fall of the Damned by Peter Paul Rubens , Michelangelo 's The Last Judgment and " <unk> 's frightful fancies " . 
 Although the painting was celebrated as a technical accomplishment , some critics were uncertain if it had the correct moral effect . The Library of the Fine Arts was critical of its " pantomimic " quality , which it considered " calculated to excite any but such ideas as we should wish to see produced by Art " , while The Examiner complained about the depiction of women being attacked , arguing : " Mr Etty should not treat the fair sex in this harsh and wanton manner . We doubt his right to put a single one of them into the hands of a Demon , much less to deliver them over by the dozen to the grasp of the destroyers . " The Times said , " We do not profess to understand what class of compositions that is which originates neither in history nor poetry — no doubt Mr. Etty does ; but as far as we can comprehend his picture , which is much more intelligible than his language , it represents a quantity of able @-@ bodied demons , who appear angry at the ladies for having stayed out so long , and who are come to fetch them home accordingly " , and criticised Etty for a " slovenly manner " and for " abusing his rich gifts , and [ wasting ] upon the wild and unmeaning what might be made subservient to much more worthy purposes " . Despite this , the same critic conceded that " The work is one of extraordinary power " and that " The figures are drawn with exquisite skill , the grouping admirably varied , and yet so combined as to present a complete picture , and the colouring vigorous and harmonious in an eminent degree . " 
 Other critics admired Etty 's unusual interpretation of apocalyptic religious imagery , his ability to give distinct characters and shapes to the individual demons and their victims , and the vividness of his imagination . The Morning Post particularly praised Etty 's ability to convey " creation conceived and thrown upon the canvas with all the fury of poetical inspiration " by combining the " dauntless spirit of a sketch " with the " powerful impression of a finished picture " . The prominent art critic William Paulet Carey ( writing under the name of ' Ridolfi ' ) championed The Destroying Angel , and in particular Etty 's ability to balance beauty , horror and fear without descending into tastelessness . Carey saw Etty as proof that British artistic traditions were equal to any others in the world , and The Destroying Angel as evidence of Etty 's " redeeming grace and spirit " . Etty 's long @-@ standing adversaries at The Morning Chronicle found little to attack in the painting , their review stating that " The upper part of the picture is masterly , grand and beautiful . The lower part not so well , but some of the figures are in admirable action and fine drawing . " The reticence of The Morning Chronicle prompted Carey to comment that they were in " envious silence " . 
 Despite some criticism , The Destroying Angel changed the way Etty was perceived by critics . They commonly had viewed Etty 's works as insights into his mind , generally with the aim of discrediting him for supposed sexual <unk> . Confronted with a piece so obviously intended to convey a moral lesson , many of those same critics felt that Etty had revealed a more moral nature than they had previously believed . Many explicitly saw The Destroying Angel as a counterweight to the nude paintings for which Etty was famous , or even a representation of Etty 's own repentance for or renunciation of his previous works . Fraser 's Magazine described the painting as " a sermon to [ Etty 's ] admirers ... where he inflicts poetical justice upon his own gay dames and their gallants , their revels being broken in upon , and they themselves being carried off most unceremoniously , like that little gentleman Don Juan , by sundry grim @-@ looking brawny devils " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 After 1832 , Etty exhibited over 80 more paintings at the Summer Exhibition . He remained a prominent painter of nudes , but from this time made conscious efforts to reflect moral lessons . Yet he remained , in the majority view , a pornographer . Charles Robert Leslie observed shortly after Etty 's death that " [ Etty ] himself , thinking and meaning no evil , was not aware of the manner in which his works were regarded by grosser minds " . Etty remained commercially successful in his lifetime , amassing £ 17 @,@ 000 ( about £ 1 @,@ 600 @,@ 000 in today 's terms ) by his death . 
 Etty died in 1849 , and his work enjoyed a brief boom in popularity . Interest in him declined over time , and by the end of the 19th century the cost of all his paintings had fallen below their original prices . Henry Payne sold the The Destroying Angel in 1854 for 770 guineas ( about £ 68 @,@ 000 in today 's terms ) to Sir Joseph Whitworth , who donated it in 1882 to the Manchester Art Gallery , where it remains . The painting was exhibited as part of a major retrospective of Etty 's work at the York Art Gallery in 2011 – 12 . 
 As Etty had rapidly fallen from fashion , his works had little influence on most subsequent painters . William Edward Frost was a great admirer of Etty , and Frost 's Una Alarmed by <unk> ( 1843 ) and Una and the Wood Nymphs ( 1847 ) owe a conscious debt to The Destroying Angel in their depiction of a group of semi @-@ clad daemonic and human figures , as does John Everett Millais 's early work Cymon and Iphigenia ( 1848 ) . As Etty 's style became increasingly unpopular , those artists who had imitated him , other than Frost , soon abandoned the style . Etty 's biographer Leonard Robinson contends that the later fairy paintings of Richard <unk> , which often show large crowds of mythical creatures mingling with humans , were influenced by Etty but concedes that <unk> was likely unconscious of Etty 's influence on his style . 
 = Final Fantasy Agito = 
 Final Fantasy Agito ( Japanese : <unk> , Hepburn : Fainaru Fantajī Agito ) is a role @-@ playing video game developed and published by Square Enix for mobile devices . The game 's story is set in the universe of Final Fantasy Type @-@ 0 , and is an entry in the Fabula Nova Crystallis subseries . A downloadable episodic game similar to Final Fantasy Dimensions , it featured a turn @-@ based combat system encouraging both single @-@ player exploration and multiplayer combat . There was a day @-@ night cycle tied to the real @-@ world time of day , and featured a social element whereby talking with and befriending certain characters advances the player 's ranking in the game . 
 The game , which acts as a companion to Type @-@ 0 , was set in the world of Orience during a time of war between its four nations . The story is seen through the eyes of a player @-@ created Cadet entering the Rubrum Magical Academy during a time of war , and chosen to become the Agito , a figure destined to save Orience from destruction . The original protagonists of Type @-@ 0 appear in different roles and act as secondary characters . The story was intended to be played repeatedly , tying into the nature of the game 's world and the eventual culmination of a player becoming the Agito . 
 The game was developed around director Hajime Tabata 's original concept for Final Fantasy Type @-@ 0 as a mobile game which would give players easy access to a universe within the Fabula Nova Crystallis series and would be influenced by player choice . The title stems from Type @-@ 0 's earlier title Final Fantasy Agito XIII . Many of Type @-@ 0 's staff returned , with Takeharu Ishimoto composing new music for the title , and former level designer <unk> Nishida and texture artist <unk> Hoshino returning respectively as producer and art director . 
 The game came online in May 2014 , and remained active until its servers were shut down in November the following year . Upon release in Japan , the game had 500 @,@ 000 registered users within a week , and one million by November of the same year , but apparently numbers dropped after later negative impressions . Japanese and Western journalists were positive at its release . In August 2015 , it was announced that the game could not continue in its current form , and would be replaced by a new version . Planned versions for the PlayStation Vita and Windows devices were scrapped , along with an announced localization . Its successor , an online multiplayer game Final Fantasy Type @-@ 0 Online , is set for release in 2016 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Final Fantasy Agito was a role @-@ playing video game where a player @-@ created character , the " Cadet " , sets out on missions across the world of Orience . The player could choose the gender and physical appearance of their character , along with their style of clothing , hair color , skin tone , voice and weapons . During play , the in @-@ game time of day was synchronized with local real @-@ world time . The Cadet began the game by exploring the Rubrum Magical Academy , but was eventually able to explore Orience as a whole . The game employed a leveling system whereby interaction with students and teachers , combined with performance during missions , raised the Cadet from their starting rank within the Academy . Recurring creatures such as small flying Moogles and galliform riding birds called Chocobos appeared . A Moogle accompanied the Cadet around the Peristylium , while Chocobos could be ridden during later parts of the game . Navigation was handled either by a virtual control stick on the touch screen , or by tapping an area of the visible game environment . The Cadet 's bedroom acted as a central hub , while the fountain area within the Academy was where many non @-@ player characters ( NPCs ) could be found and talked with . 
 Conversations with the previous game 's protagonists increased the Cadet 's standing with them : if the player tapped a special button on @-@ screen during timed sections of the conversation , the bond statistic with the chosen character would be increased . The relationships built up by the player triggered special character interactions during the final chapter . Agito featured sub @-@ missions , the game 's version of side @-@ quests , some of which changed depending on the real @-@ world day of the week . They were given by NPCs , and could range from crafting new spells and equipment to performing certain actions within a combat mission . Completing quests yielded rewards such as new equipment and items . 
 Unlike Final Fantasy Type @-@ 0 , Agito used a turn @-@ based combat system . The Attack menu , which appeared during battles , featured a gauge , which when full enabled the character to attack the targeted enemy , and buttons displayed for various physical and magical attacks ; these abilities could be chained together into combos that , once used , took time to recharge . Pressing the " Ability " icon triggered assigned skills , while " Chain " abilities enabled the player to preset sequences of attacks and use them consecutively . Using certain setups rewarded the player with in @-@ game bonuses . Also available was Type @-@ 0 's Kill Sight ability , in which precisely timed actions enabled the Cadet to kill an enemy with one hit . The game also gave the option for players to adjust battle speed to their personal preference . Using a special item , players could temporarily summon both NPCs with whom they had a strong relationship and summoned monsters called Eidolons to deal high damage to enemies . 
 During single @-@ player segments , the player could select two AI companions after selecting missions , which added to the player 's total score at the end of these missions . During missions , the companions could be issued with Team Commands , which could either order them to attack or increase healing abilities while lowering their defensive capabilities . Each attempt at a mission used up the Cadet 's stamina meter , which allowed a maximum of three missions at a time . The game used a job system similar to other entries in the Final Fantasy series , where different equipment and weapons alter a character 's abilities in battle . Specific skills accompanied each job . Players could create multiple equipment sets , with each item and weapon ranked according to its rarity in @-@ game . Materials gathered during missions could be used to upgrade the player 's equipment and abilities . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Setting and characters = = = 
 Final Fantasy Agito takes place in Orience , a land divided between four nations , or Crystal States , which have existed in a state of near @-@ constant war for the past thousand years : the Dominion of Rubrum , the Militesi Empire , the Kingdom of Concordia and the Lorican Alliance . The cause of the war is the nation 's crystals , objects of magical and political power that bestow different blessings on each nation , and choose people to become magical warriors known as l 'Cie , which serve and protect their respective crystal . The land of Orience is locked in a stable time loop , whereby events repeat constantly , then reset and begin all over again with minor variations . The reason is an experiment set up by the deities Pulse and Lindzei to find the doorway to the afterlife for their creator . The time in which Agito occurs is referred to as " the first cycle that surpasses the spiral of 600 million " , being at the very beginning of Orience 's spiral of repeating history . Agito 's initial events differ from Type @-@ 0 as it was to have been directed to a history were the Agito is born , making it an alternate story using the same setting . The game 's events across its lifetime are split across two " phases " , or cycles of Orience 's history . A key event at the end of each cycle is Tempus Finis , an event in which Orience is destined to end and be reborn . 
 The main character is a player @-@ created Cadet selected for training as Agito , a prophesied messiah said to prevent Orience 's destruction during an event known as Tempus Finis . Interacting with the Cadet on his journey are Ace , the previous game 's main protagonist ; Miyu Kagerohi , the representative for Cadets within the Vermillion Peristylium ; Lean <unk> , a Militesi scientist ; and Tono Mahoroha , a mysterious and cold young woman from Rubrum . The previous game 's main cast , Class Zero , as well as Machina Kunagiri and Rem Tokimiya , former members of Class Zero who acted as Type @-@ 0 's narrators , appear in supporting roles as students in other classes . Other characters include Marshal Cid Aulstyne , leader of the Milites Empire and the game 's central antagonist ; Arecia Al @-@ Rashia , supervisor of magic at the <unk> and servant of Pulse ; and Gala , unseen leader of the Lulusath Army and servant of Lindzei . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 In the First Phase , the Cadet is saved from a Behemoth attack by Ace , who brings them to the safety of Akademeia . There they are introduced to everyday life and sent out on a mission against the Behemoth . Then war is declared against Milites after its aggressive actions against Rubrum and Lorica , and the Cadet learns of Class Zero . Concordia forms an alliance with Milites , severely hampering Rubrum 's efforts . Rubrum then musters their forces , including their powerful magical warriors , and conquer all three Crystal States . In the final chapter , Rubrum 's victory over the other Crystal States causes the arrival of Tempus Finis , and Miyu is made into a l 'Cie and renamed Judge Myuria : her mission is to test the Cadet to see if they are worthy of becoming the Agito . The Cadet is victorious , but it is judged the Agito has not appeared and Tempus Finis consumes the world , resetting it for a new cycle of history . 
 In the Second Phase , events play in vaguely the same fashion , but there are minor variations : Lorica forms an alliance with Milites rather than being conquered , and while Concordia offers an alliance , Imperial sympathizers within Concordia orchestrate the Queen 's death and ally with Concordia . After overcoming Lorica and Concordia , the Rubrum forces storm the Militesi capital and Cid is killed . Before dying , he warns the Cadet and his comrades of the Crystals ' role in Orience 's cycle . When Tempus Finis arrives , Ace goes alone to find the one mentioned by Cid . He is himself marked as a l 'Cie and transformed into Judge Ace . As with the previous cycle , he is defeated , but Tempus Finis arrives and the cycle continues . In a final side story episode , various additional stories revolving around the main cast are revealed . Among the events presented are a talk between Myuria and Arecia as to whether to continue the experiment , and then Lean and Tono are chosen by Arecia to exist outside the cycle and retain their memories . In this new form , the two agree to gather the memories of Orience 's people and find a way of liberating the world from its cycle . The story ends with them wishing the Cadet well , saying that they hope to meet them again in a future cycle . 
 = = Development = = 
 The idea for Final Fantasy Agito originated with the early origins of Type @-@ 0 . Originally , Type @-@ 0 was a game for mobiles titled Final Fantasy Agito XIII , but eventually changed platforms and title . Type @-@ 0 's director Hajime Tabata still liked the " Agito " title and the original concepts for the game , which included an episodic storyline that hinged on player choice and day @-@ night cycles linked to real @-@ world time . With this in mind , Tabata decided to revisit it and began development of Agito : eventually , they settled on smartphones as the release platform of choice , partly because the platforms ' progress since Type @-@ 0 started development . One of Tabata 's wishes for the title was that players unfamiliar with Type @-@ 0 would download and play it . Development on the game began in September 2012 . During development , Tabata considered Type @-@ 0 to have become the prototype for Agito , although it did not share much with its predecessor . The game 's story grew out of what he originally conceived for Agito XIII before it evolved into Type @-@ 0 . In contrast to Type @-@ 0 's dark and serious storyline , the team decided to give Agito a lighter atmosphere , although serious dramatic scenes were still present . Along with returning staff , mobile developer <unk> K. K. helped with development . The previous game 's level designer , <unk> Nishida , returned to direct , and original character texture artist <unk> Hoshino became art director . To create the characters ' portrait animations for the smartphone environment , the team used Silicon Studio 's Motion Portrait middleware . The game was developed using the Unity engine . The game 's designer was Kensuke Shimoda , an industry veteran who had experience with Unity , and was in charge of designing the game 's battle system . His involvement with the game ended after its release . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The music for Agito was composed by Takeharu Ishimoto , who had composed the score for Type @-@ 0 . At first , no original music was to have been created for the title , but Ishimoto convinced the company to allow him to compose new music . The title still lifted several pieces of music from Type @-@ 0 . Part of Ishimoto 's wish for the title was to incorporate accents from Japanese pop music which would register well with fans . The pop @-@ oriented tunes were also meant to emphasize the lighter atmosphere , although more dramatic music was used for the darker moments . Arrangements were done by Kentaro Sato . The battle music for the weekend multiplayer segments was augmented with vocal work by Japanese rock band Dazzle Vision . Two music tracks from the game were available at the 2014 Tokyo Game Show ( TGS ) in a giveaway CD along with other tracks from future game releases . Tracks from the game were included with tracks from Type @-@ 0 in a special disc included in the collector 's edition of Type @-@ 0 HD . All new tracks from Agito were included in the Blu @-@ ray album for Type @-@ 0 HD , Final Fantasy Type @-@ 0 HD Original Soundtrack . 
 = = Release = = 
 The first hint of its existence became public when Square Enix trademarked the name in May 2013 . The game was first announced in the second September issue of Famitsu Weekly , and was demoed during TGS 2013 . Originally scheduled for release in the winter of 2013 , it was delayed due to development problems concerning environment sizes , which needed to be scaled down . It was rescheduled for the first quarter of 2014 , then was pushed forward to spring of that year . Street clothes for the characters were offered as a pre @-@ registration bonus , while a code to download outfits inspired by Kurasame , a supporting character from Type @-@ 0 , were included in the final volume of the spin @-@ off manga Final Fantasy Type @-@ 0 Side Story : Reaper of the Icy Blade . Pre @-@ registration closed on May 7 , 2013 . Chapter delivery began the day after the game 's official release on May 14 , 2014 . The base game was a free download , but players had the option of buying items , restore health and speeding up re @-@ spawn time via microtransactions . The original version also reset individual character experience levels at the end of a playthrough , while an update in 2015 allowed players to carry over experience levels between playthroughs . 
 = = = Episodes = = = 
 Final Fantasy Agito was published in chapters , with decisions made by the player base influencing the events of the next installment . The number of chapters was designed to be smaller than that of Tabata 's previous Final Fantasy title for mobiles , Before Crisis : Final Fantasy VII . The intention was to create a high replay value . The projected chapter delivery rate was once a fortnight . Chapters are designed to take around two weeks for players to complete , with the first 10 days involving single @-@ player solo missions . The final portions feature " subjugation " multiplayer missions , requiring players to work together to battle powerful bosses . These battles take place during weekends . 
 Each chapter comes in four or five named segments , with each containing different story missions . There is a heavy emphasis on player choice in the story , with decisions made during previous episodes of the story affecting future events . The game 's story is meant to be played repeatedly , with different decisions yielding different outcomes . Chapter delivery was projected to , and eventually ended , in September 2014 . After all chapters were released , the team focused on improving the experience , introducing a higher difficulty setting , and incorporating a grander sense of scale . They also developed further scenario choices to expand variation of events in future playthroughs . In the months after the initial release , a second " phase " of the story began release through 2014 into 2015 . In addition to the final chapter , a gaiden episode was released that concluded the events of Agito . Special battles against the Rursus , then against Miyu and multiple Eidolons , were made available during the game 's final month . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Agito 's original release was plagued with multiple issues including long load times , which the team sought to rectify through updates . After the initial release , a Club Activities system was going to be added . Similar to the Guilds of previous games , players could ally with them , engage in activities unique to the clubs and compete with rival clubs in contests . From the end of July to mid August during the game 's original release , it was featured in a crossover with Rise of Mana , a mobile installment in Square Enix 's Mana series . An earlier collaboration was also staged between Agito and Square Enix Legend World , a Japan @-@ exclusive browser game . Eventually , it was determined by the developers that Agito was no longer suited for continued updates . The game was shut down on November 30 , 2015 . As part of its announcement of the game 's shutdown , Square Enix said that a new updated version was being prepared that would be better suited for further updates and improved player experience . This updated version was revealed to be Final Fantasy Type @-@ 0 Online , a 2016 multiplayer game for similar platforms to Agito . 
 The first hint of a localization appeared when the Agito trademark filed for European territories in September 2013 . Later , at TGS 2013 , Tabata said that Agito would definitely be localized , although he refused to clarify whether this meant it would be released in western territories . An official western release was confirmed by Square Enix at Electronic Entertainment Expo 2014 . The plan for the international release was to first release Final Fantasy Type @-@ 0 HD so players in the west could get accustomed to the world and characters , then release Agito as a separate experience rather than a parallel release . With its discontinuance in Japan , Agito 's western release was consequently cancelled , however it was stated that Type @-@ 0 Online was being considered for international release in place of Agito . 
 A novel based within the continuity of Agito titled Final Fantasy Agito : Change the World -A Whiter Shade of <unk> was released on April 30 , 2015 . Written by Tora Tsukishima , it focuses on the characters of Nine and Rubrum cadet <unk> <unk> . A port for the PlayStation Vita titled Final Fantasy Agito + was announced and demoed during the 2014 Tokyo Game Show . The decision to port the game to this platform was made upon due to popular demand and platform compatibility with the Unity engine . While originally announced for release in January 2015 , it was delayed due to a problem with the development environment with the Vita , which left the team stuck until Sony could update the system and provide them with suitable support . The team also used it as an opportunity to improve the overall quality of the port . The Vita version was to include access to all the content of the mobile version along with added control and gameplay improvements . As part of the physical release , players were to be given codes for downloadable content : the content includes rare in @-@ game armor and items . Save data from the mobile version could not be transferred to the Vita . In September 2015 , it was announced that the Vita port had been cancelled . Tabata later explained that the team had been confronted by a " technical bottleneck " , facing critical problems with the multiplayer functionality , together with problems involving server compatibility . The game was also being ported to Microsoft Windows for operation on the Windows 10 home operating system and Windows 10 Mobile @-@ compatible smartphones and tablets . The mobile version was to have been the continued main focus for the team despite the Windows port . After the cancellation of Agito + and the end of Agito 's service , refunds were offered to customers who had bought items in @-@ game or preordered the Vita port . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Roughly a week after Agito 's release , it was announced that the game had 500 @,@ 000 registered users in Japan . By November of that year , the figure had expanded to one million players . Later , Touch Arcade reported that active player numbers had dropped drastically after long @-@ term poor impressions . 
 Famitsu , in a review of the game shortly after release , praised the combat and graphics , but found the touch controls difficult to handle . The reviewer finished by recommending the game to fans of the Final Fantasy series . Kotaku 's Richard Eisenbeis said that the game went " far beyond what [ he ] expected going in " , noting that he did not feel outclassed by other players despite not using the game 's microtransaction system . Shaun Musgrave of Touch Arcade praised the game 's graphics and combat , comparing the battle missions to Puzzle & Dragons . He did question the general balance , but noted that the game was still young and Square Enix had the chance to smooth things out . 
 = Japanese battleship Hiei = 
 Hiei ( <unk> ) was a warship of the Imperial Japanese Navy during World War I and World War II . Designed by British naval architect George Thurston , she was the second launched of four Kongō @-@ class battlecruisers , among the most heavily armed ships in any navy when built . Laid down in 1911 at the Yokosuka Naval Arsenal , Hiei was formally commissioned in 1914 . She patrolled off the Chinese coast on several occasions during World War I , and helped with rescue efforts following the 1923 Great Kantō earthquake . 
 Starting in 1929 , Hiei was converted to a gunnery training ship to avoid being scrapped under the terms of the Washington Naval Treaty . She served as Emperor Hirohito 's transport in the mid @-@ 1930s . Starting in 1937 , she underwent a full @-@ scale reconstruction that completely rebuilt her superstructure , upgraded her powerplant , and equipped her with launch catapults for floatplanes . Now fast enough to accompany Japan 's growing fleet of aircraft carriers , she was reclassified as a fast battleship . On the eve of the US entry into World War II , she sailed as part of Vice @-@ Admiral Chuichi Nagumo 's Combined Fleet , escorting the six carriers that attacked Pearl Harbor on 7 December 1941 . 
 As part of the Third Battleship Division , Hiei participated in many of the Imperial Japanese Navy 's early actions in 1942 , providing support for the invasion of the Dutch East Indies ( now Indonesia ) as well as the Indian Ocean raid of April 1942 . During the Battle of Midway , she sailed in the Invasion Force under Admiral Nobutake Kondō , before being redeployed to the Solomon Islands during the Battle of Guadalcanal . She escorted Japanese carrier forces during the battles of the Eastern Solomons and Santa Cruz Islands , before sailing as part of a bombardment force under Admiral Kondō during the Naval Battle of Guadalcanal . On the evening of 13 November 1942 , Hiei engaged American cruisers and destroyers alongside her sister ship Kirishima . After inflicting heavy damage on American cruisers and destroyers , Hiei was crippled by enemy vessels . Subjected to continuous air attack , she sank on the evening of 14 November 1942 . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 Hiei was the second of the Imperial Japanese Navy 's Kongō @-@ class battlecruisers , a line of capital ships designed by the British naval architect George Thurston . The class was ordered in 1910 in the Japanese Emergency Naval Expansion Bill after the commissioning of HMS Invincible in 1908 . The four battlecruisers of the Kongō class were designed to match the naval capabilities of the other major powers at the time ; they have been called the battlecruiser versions of the British ( formerly Turkish ) battleship HMS Erin . With their heavy armament and armor protection ( the latter of which made up 23 @.@ 3 % of their approximately 30 @,@ 000 ton displacement ) , Hiei and her sister ships were vastly superior to any other Japanese capital ship afloat at the time . 
 The keel of Hiei was laid down at Yokosuka Naval Arsenal on 4 November 1911 , with most of the parts used in her construction manufactured in Britain . She was launched on 21 November 1912 , and fitting @-@ out began in December 1913 . On 15 December 1913 , Captain Takagi <unk> was assigned as her chief equipping officer . She was completed on 4 August 1914 . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Hiei 's main battery consisted of eight 14 @-@ inch ( 36 cm ) heavy @-@ caliber main guns in four twin turrets , two forward and two aft . The turrets were noted by the US Office of Naval Intelligence to be " similar to the British 15 @-@ inch turrets " , with improvements made in flash @-@ tightness in the gun chambers . Each of her main guns could fire high @-@ explosive or armor @-@ piercing shells 38 @,@ 770 yards ( 19 @.@ 14 nmi ; 35 @.@ 45 km ) at a rate of two shells per minute . In keeping with the Japanese doctrine of deploying more powerful vessels than their opponents , Hiei and her sister ships were the first vessels in the world equipped with 14 @-@ inch ( 36 cm ) guns . The main guns carried ammunition for ninety shots and had an approximate gun @-@ life of 250 – 280 shots . In 1941 , dyes were introduced for the armor @-@ piercing shells of the four Kongo @-@ class battleships to assist their gunners in distinguishing the hits from a distance , with Hiei 's armor @-@ piercing shells using black dye . 
 Her secondary battery was originally sixteen 6 @-@ inch ( 15 cm ) 50 @-@ caliber medium guns in single casemates ( all located amidships ) , eight 3 @-@ inch ( 7 @.@ 6 cm ) guns and eight submerged 21 @-@ inch ( 53 cm ) torpedo tubes . The sixteen 6 @-@ inch / 50 caliber guns were capable of firing between 5 and 6 rounds per minute , with a barrel life of 500 rounds . The 6 @-@ inch / 50 caliber gun was capable of firing both antiaircraft and antiship shells , though the positioning of the guns on Hiei made antiaircraft firing impractical . The eight 5 @-@ inch / 40 caliber guns added later could fire between 8 and 14 rounds per minute , with a barrel life of 800 – 1500 rounds . These guns had the widest variety of shot type of Hiei 's guns , being designed to fire antiaircraft , antiship , and illumination shells . Hiei was also armed with a large number of 1 @-@ inch ( 2 @.@ 5 cm ) Type 96 antiaircraft autocannons . 
 = = Service = = 
 = = = 1914 – 1929 : Battlecruiser = = = 
 On 4 August 1914 , Hiei was formally commissioned and assigned to the Sasebo Naval District , before being attached to the Third Battleship Division of the First Fleet two weeks later . On 23 August 1914 , Japan declared war on the German Empire , occupying the former German colonies in Palau and in the Caroline , Marshall and Mariana Islands . In October 1914 , Hiei departed Sasebo alongside Kongō to support Imperial Japanese Army units in the Siege of Tsingtao , but she was recalled on 17 October . On 3 October 1915 , Hiei and Kongō participated in the sinking of Imperator Nikolai I , a Russian pre @-@ dreadnought captured in 1905 during the Russo @-@ Japanese War that had subsequently served in the Japanese Navy under the name Iki as a coastal defense ship . In April 1916 , she patrolled the Chinese coast with her newly launched sisters Kirishima and Haruna . From 1917 to the end of World War I , Hiei remained primarily at Sasebo , patrolling the Chinese and Korean coasts with her sister ships on several occasions . 
 Following the end of World War I , the Japanese Empire gained control of former German possessions in the central Pacific per the terms of the Treaty of Versailles . Due to Japan 's warm relations with the British Empire and the United States at the time , Hiei and other Japanese warships became significantly less active after the war . Other than a patrol alongside Haruna and Kirishima off the Chinese coast in March 1919 , Hiei remained in the Japanese home ports . On 13 October 1920 , she was placed in reserve . Following the Great Kantō earthquake of September 1923 , the capital ships of the Japanese Navy assisted in rescue work until the end of the month . Hiei arrived at Kure Naval Base on 1 December 1923 for a refit which increased the elevation of her main guns from 20 to 33 degrees and rebuilt her foremast . 
 With the conclusion of World War I , the world powers attempted to stem any militarization that might re @-@ escalate into war . Under the terms of Washington Naval Treaty of 1922 , the Imperial Japanese Navy was significantly reduced , with a ratio of 5 : 5 : 3 required between the capital ships of the United Kingdom , the United States , and Japan . The treaty also banned Japan from building any new capital ships until 1931 , with no capital ship permitted to exceed 35 @,@ 000 tons . Provided that further additions did not exceed 3 @,@ 000 tons , existing capital ships were allowed to be upgraded with improved torpedo bulges and deck armor . By the time the Washington Treaty had been fully implemented in Japan , only three classes of World War I @-@ era capital ships — the Fusō class ( e.g. Yamashiro ) and Ise @-@ class battleships , and the Kongō @-@ class battlecruisers — remained active . 
 In July 1927 , Crown Prince Takamatsu — Emperor Hirohito 's younger brother — was assigned to Hiei . From October to November 1927 , the ship underwent a minor refit at Sasebo to accommodate two Yokosuka E1Y floatplanes , though no launch catapults were added . On 29 March 1928 , Hiei departed Sasebo alongside Kongō and the battleships Nagato and Fusō to patrol off the Chusan Archipelago , before arriving in the company of Kongō in Port Arthur in April 1928 . In October 1929 , she returned to Kure in preparation for her demilitarization and reconstruction . 
 = = = 1929 – 1937 : <unk> and training ship = = = 
 To avoid having to scrap Hiei under the terms of the Washington Treaty , the Imperial Japanese Navy decided to convert her into a demilitarized training ship . On 15 October 1929 , she went into drydock at Kure Naval Arsenal . Her aft 14 @-@ inch gun turrets were removed , and she was stripped of all eight of her submerged torpedo tubes , as well as her 6 @-@ inch guns and armor belt . All but nine of her boilers were taken out , reducing her speed to 18 knots ( 33 km / h ) , and one of her three funnels was removed . She was reclassified as a reserve ship at the end of November 1929 . On 24 April 1930 , reconstruction was halted due to the signing of the London Naval Treaty , which further restricted battleship construction and possession amongst the great naval powers , and preservation work was begun at Sasebo . Reconstruction would not resume until July 1931 . 
 In September 1931 , Japanese army units invaded the Chinese province of Manchuria , transforming it into the puppet state of Manchukuo . In December 1932 , Hiei was reassigned to the Imperial Japanese Navy 's training squadron . On 25 February , the League of Nations ruled that Japan had violated Chinese sovereignty and international law in her invasion of Manchuria . Refusing to accept the League 's judgment , the Empire of Japan withdrew from the League the same day . This also signaled its exit from the Washington and London Naval Treaties , which removed all restrictions on the Imperial Japanese Navy 's construction of capital ships . From the end of May 1933 to 13 August , Hiei received upgrades that allowed her to perform regular duties for the Emperor , and she served as the Emperor 's observation ship for the Imperial Naval Review three days later . From January to March 1934 , her No. 4 turret and ammunition magazine were refitted . In November 1935 , Hiei served as the Emperor 's ship for his official visit to the Kagoshima and Miyazaki Prefectures . 
 = = = 1937 – 1941 : Reconstruction and fast battleship = = = 
 No longer bound by the restrictions of the Washington and London Treaties , the Imperial Japanese Navy proceeded to reconstruct Hiei along the same lines as her sisters . She received eight new oil @-@ fired Kampon boilers and geared turbines , while her stern was lengthened by 26 feet ( 7 @.@ 9 m ) to increase speed . Her aft 14 @-@ inch turret was refitted and fire control systems installed for all four main turrets . The elevation of her main and secondary guns was increased , and she was equipped with two Nakajima E8N " Dave " and Kawanishi E7K " Alf " reconnaissance floatplanes . To this end , catapults and launch @-@ rails were also fitted aft of turret # 3 . Fourteen of her 6 @-@ inch guns were refitted , and an antiaircraft suite of eight 5 @-@ inch dual @-@ purpose guns and ten twin mounts of Type 96 25 mm autocannons were mounted . Her superstructure was rebuilt as a prototype of the tower @-@ mast that would eventually be used on the Yamato class , then still in the design phase . 
 Hiei 's armor was also extensively upgraded . Her main belt was reapplied and strengthened to a uniform thickness of 8 inches ( as opposed to varying thicknesses of 6 – 8 inches before the upgrades ) , while diagonal bulkheads of a depth ranging from 5 to 8 inches ( 127 to 203 mm ) reinforced the main armored belt . The turret armor was strengthened to 10 inches ( 254 mm ) , while 4 inches ( 102 mm ) were added to portions of the deck armor . The armor around her ammunition magazines was also strengthened over the course of the refit . Though still less heavily armored than other Japanese battleships , Hiei was significantly faster . The reconstruction was declared complete on 31 January 1940 . Capable of speeds of up to 30 @.@ 5 knots ( 56 @.@ 5 km / h ; 35 @.@ 1 mph ) , Hiei was reclassified as a fast battleship . She participated in the Imperial Fleet Review in October 1940 , where she was inspected by Emperor Hirohito , members of the royal family , Navy Minister <unk> Oikawa , and Admiral Isoroku Yamamoto . In November , she was assigned to the Third Battleship Division of the First Fleet . 
 On 26 November 1941 , Hiei departed Hitokappu Bay , Kurile Islands , in the company of Kirishima and six Japanese fast carriers of the First Air Fleet Striking Force ( Akagi , Kaga , Sōryū , Hiryū , Shōkaku , and Zuikaku ) under the command of Vice @-@ Admiral Chuichi Nagumo . On 7 December 1941 , aircraft from these six carriers attacked the United States Pacific Fleet at their home base of Pearl Harbor , sinking four US Navy battleships and numerous other vessels . Following the attack and the declaration of war by the United States , Hiei returned to Japan . 
 = = = 1942 : Combat and loss = = = 
 On 17 January 1942 , Hiei departed Truk Lagoon Naval Base with the Third Battleship Division to support carrier operations against Rabaul and Kavieng . In February , she deployed alongside a force of carriers and destroyers in response to American raids on Japanese bases in the Gilbert and Marshall Islands . On 1 March , following carrier operations against Darwin and Java ( in the Dutch East Indies ) , Hiei , Kirishima and Chikuma — which were acting as escorts for the carrier task force — engaged the destroyer USS Edsall , with Hiei firing 210 14 @-@ inch and seventy 6 @-@ inch shells . When the ships failed to score any hits , dive @-@ bombers from three of Admiral Nagumo 's carriers immobilized the destroyer , which was then sunk by gunfire from the three ships . 
 In April 1942 , Hiei and the Third Battleship Division joined five fleet carriers and two cruisers in a massive raid against British naval forces in the Indian Ocean . On 5 April — Easter Sunday — the Japanese fleet attacked the harbor at Colombo , Ceylon while seaplanes from the cruiser Tone spotted two fleeing British cruisers , both of which were later sunk by aerial attack . On 8 April , Japanese carrier aircraft attacked the Royal Navy base at Trincomalee , only to find that all of Admiral James Somerville 's remaining warships in the British Eastern Fleet had withdrawn the previous night . Returning from the attack , a floatplane from Hiei 's sister ship Haruna spotted the aircraft carrier HMS Hermes , which was quickly sunk by massive aerial attack . The fleet then returned to Japan , arriving at the home bases on 23 April . 
 On 27 May 1942 , Hiei sortied with Kongō and the heavy cruisers Atago , Chōkai , Myōkō , and Haguro as part of Admiral Nobutake Kondō 's Invasion Force during the Battle of Midway . Following the disastrous loss of four of the Combined Fleet 's fast carriers on 4 June , Kondō 's force withdrew to Japan . In July , Hiei was drydocked for refits to her aircraft complement and the addition of single and twin 25 mm gun mounts . In August , she escorted the Japanese carrier Shōkaku during the Battle of the Eastern Solomons . In October , Hiei sortied as part of Rear Admiral Abe 's Vanguard Force , and maintained distant cover as Kongō and Haruna nearly destroyed Henderson Field on Guadalcanal on the night of 13 October . From 26 – 30 October , Hiei and her sisters participated in the Battle of the Santa Cruz Islands . 
 On 10 November 1942 , Hiei departed Truk alongside Kirishima and eleven destroyers in preparation to shell American positions near Henderson Field in advance of a major convoy of Japanese troops . Under the command of Rear Admiral Hiroaki Abe , the force was spotted by US Navy reconnaissance aircraft several days in advance . A force of two heavy cruisers , three light cruisers and eight destroyers was deployed under the command of Rear Admiral Daniel J. Callaghan in Ironbottom Sound to meet them . At 01 : 24 on 13 November , the Japanese force was detected 28 @,@ 000 yards ( 26 km ) out by the light cruiser USS Helena . Because Abe had not anticipated resistance , his battleships ' main guns were loaded with high @-@ explosive shells for bombarding Henderson Field , and thus they were unable to open fire immediately while the switch was made to armor @-@ piercing shells . At 01 : 50 , Hiei activated her searchlights and opened fire on the light cruiser USS Atlanta , commencing the First Naval Battle of Guadalcanal . Though Atlanta 's guns succeeded in disabling the searchlight , Hiei was able to concentrate her main batteries on the bridge , crippling the light cruiser and killing Rear Admiral Norman Scott . Hiei and Kirishima then disabled two American destroyers ( one of which later sank ) . In turn , Hiei became the target of the majority of the American firepower , with the American 5 @-@ inch guns inflicting severe damage on Hiei 's superstructure at close range ; Admiral Abe himself was later injured after USS Laffey shelled the bridge with her own guns , killing his chief of staff , Captain Suzuki <unk> . This concentration enabled Kirishima to evade the American barrage and cripple USS San Francisco , killing Admiral Callaghan . However , shells from San Francisco disabled Hiei 's steering machinery . 
 With one of his battleships crippled , Abe ordered the remainder of the Japanese fleet to withdraw at 02 : 00 . Kirishima attempted to tow Hiei to safety , but water flooded her steering compartments , jamming her rudder to starboard . Throughout the morning of 14 November , Hiei was subjected to attack from American Army B @-@ 17 Flying Fortress bombers . She continued circling starboard at 5 knots ( 5 @.@ 8 mph ) . At 11 : 30 , two torpedoes launched from Grumman TBF Avenger torpedo @-@ bombers struck Hiei . After suffering several more torpedo and dive @-@ bomber attacks throughout the day , the order was given for her crew to abandon ship before her escorting destroyers scuttled her . Hiei sank sometime in the evening on 14 November with the loss of 188 of her crew , the first battleship ever lost in action by Japan . She was removed from the Navy List on 20 December 1942 . 
 = SRI International = 
 SRI International ( SRI ) is an American nonprofit research institute headquartered in Menlo Park , California . The trustees of Stanford University established SRI in 1946 as a center of innovation to support economic development in the region . 
 The organization was founded as the Stanford Research Institute . SRI formally separated from Stanford University in 1970 and became known as SRI International in 1977 . SRI describes its mission as creating world @-@ changing solutions to make people safer , healthier , and more productive . It performs client @-@ sponsored research and development for government agencies , commercial businesses , and private foundations . It also licenses its technologies , forms strategic partnerships , sells products , and creates spin @-@ off companies . 
 SRI 's annual revenue in 2014 was approximately $ 540 million . SRI 's headquarters are located near the Stanford University campus . William A. Jeffrey has served as SRI 's president and CEO since September 2014 . 
 SRI employs about 2 @,@ 100 people . Sarnoff Corporation , a wholly owned subsidiary of SRI since 1988 , was fully integrated into SRI in January 2011 . 
 SRI 's focus areas include biomedical sciences , chemistry and materials , computing , Earth and space systems , economic development , education and learning , energy and environmental technology , security and national defense , as well as sensing and devices . SRI has received more than 4 @,@ 000 patents and patent applications worldwide . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Foundation = = = 
 In the 1920s , Stanford University professor Robert E. Swain proposed creating a research institute in the Western United States . Herbert Hoover , then a trustee of Stanford University , was also an early proponent of an institute , but became less involved with the project after he was elected president of the United States . The development of the institute was delayed by the Great Depression in the 1930s and World War II in the 1940s , with three separate attempts leading to its formation in 1946 . 
 In August 1945 , Maurice Nelles , <unk> A. Visel , and Ernest L. Black of Lockheed made the first attempt to create the institute with the formation of the " Pacific Research Foundation " in Los Angeles . A second attempt was made by Henry T. Heald , then president of the Illinois Institute of Technology . In 1945 , Heald wrote a report recommending a research institute on the West Coast and a close association with Stanford University with an initial grant of $ 500 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to $ 17 @,@ 099 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) . A third attempt was made by Fred Terman , Stanford University 's dean of engineering . Terman 's proposal followed Heald 's , but focused on faculty and student research more than contract research . 
 The trustees of Stanford University voted to create the organization in 1946 . It was structured so that its goals were aligned with the charter of the university — to advance scientific knowledge and to benefit the public at large , not just the students of Stanford University . The trustees were named as the corporation 's general members , and elected SRI 's directors ( later known as presidents ) ; if the organization were dissolved , its assets would return to Stanford University . 
 Research chemist William F. Talbot became the first director of the institute . Stanford University president Donald Tresidder instructed Talbot to avoid work that would conflict with the interests of the university , particularly federal contracts that might attract political pressure . The drive to find work and the lack of support from Stanford faculty caused the new research institute to violate this directive six months later through the pursuit of a contract with the Office of Naval Research . This and other issues , including frustration with Tresidder 's micromanagement of the new organization , caused Talbot to repeatedly offer his resignation , which Tresidder eventually accepted . Talbot was replaced by Jesse Hobson , who had previously led the Armour Research Foundation , but the pursuit of contract work remained . 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 SRI 's first research project investigated whether the <unk> plant could be used as a source of natural rubber . During World War II , rubber was imported into the U.S. and was subject to shortages and strict rationing . From 1942 to 1946 , the United States Department of Agriculture ( USDA ) supported a project to create a domestic source of natural rubber . Once the war ended , the United States Congress cut funding for the program ; in response , the Office of Naval Research created a grant for the project to continue at SRI , and the USDA staff on the project worked through SRI until Congress reauthorized funding in 1947 . 
 SRI 's first economic study was for the United States Air Force . In 1947 , the Air Force wanted to determine the expansion potential of the U.S. aircraft industry ; SRI found that it would take too long to escalate production in an emergency . In 1948 , SRI began research and consultation with Chevron Corporation to develop an artificial substitute for tallow and coconut oil in soap production ; SRI 's investigation confirmed the potential of <unk> as a suitable replacement . Later , Procter & Gamble used the substance as the basis for Tide laundry detergent . 
 The institute performed much of the early research on air pollution and the formation of ozone in the lower atmosphere . SRI sponsored the First National Air Pollution Symposium in Pasadena , California , in November 1949 . Experts gave presentations on pollution research , exchanged ideas and techniques , and stimulated interest in the field . The event was attended by 400 scientists , business executives , and civic leaders from the U.S. SRI co @-@ sponsored subsequent events on the subject . 
 In the early 1950s , Walt and Roy Disney consulted with SRI ( and in particular , Harrison Price ) on their proposal for Disneyland in Burbank , California . SRI provided information on location , attendance patterns , and economic feasibility . SRI selected a larger site in Anaheim , prepared reports about operation , and provided on @-@ site administrative support , and acted in an advisory role as the park expanded . In 1955 , SRI was commissioned to select a site and provide design suggestions for the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts . 
 In 1952 , the Technicolor Corporation contracted with SRI to develop a near @-@ instantaneous , electro @-@ optical alternative to the manual process of timing during film copying . In 1959 , the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences presented the Scientific and Engineering Award jointly to SRI and Technicolor for their work on the design and development of the Technicolor electronic printing timer which greatly benefited the motion picture industry . In 1954 , Southern Pacific asked SRI to investigate ways of reducing damage during rail freight shipments by mitigating shock to railroad box cars . This investigation led to William K. MacCurdy 's development of the Hydra @-@ Cushion technology , which remains standard today . 
 In the 1950s , SRI worked under the direction of the Bank of America to develop <unk> ( Electronic Recording Machine , Accounting ) and magnetic ink character recognition ( MICR ) . The <unk> project was led by computer scientist <unk> Noe , who was at the time SRI 's assistant director of engineering . As of 2011 , MICR remains the industry standard in automated check processing . 
 = = = Rapid expansion = = = 
 Douglas Engelbart , the founder of SRI 's Augmentation Research Center ( ARC ) , was the primary force behind the design and development of the multi @-@ user <unk> @-@ Line System ( or NLS ) , featuring original versions of modern computer @-@ human interface elements including bit @-@ mapped displays , collaboration software , hypertext , and precursors to the graphical user interface such as the computer mouse . As a pioneer of human @-@ computer interaction , Engelbart is arguably SRI 's most notable alumnus . He was awarded the National Medal of Technology and Innovation in 2000 . 
 Bill English , then chief engineer at ARC , built the first prototype of a computer mouse from Engelbart 's design in 1964 . SRI also developed inkjet printing ( 1961 ) and optical disc recording ( 1963 ) . Liquid @-@ crystal display ( LCD ) technology was developed at RCA Laboratories in the 1960s , which later became Sarnoff Corporation in 1988 , a wholly owned subsidiary of SRI . Sarnoff was fully integrated into SRI in 2011 . 
 In the early 1960s , Hewitt Crane and his colleagues developed the world 's first all @-@ magnetic digital computer , based upon extensions to magnetic core memories . The technology was licensed to AMP Inc . , who then used it to build specialized computers for controlling tracks in the New York City Subway and on railroad switching yards . 
 In 1966 , SRI 's Artificial Intelligence Center began working on " Shakey the robot " , the first mobile robot to reason about its actions . Equipped with a television camera , a triangulating rangefinder , and bump sensors , Shakey used software for perception , world @-@ modeling , and acting . The project ended in 1972 . SRI 's Artificial Intelligence Center marked its 45th anniversary in 2011 . 
 On October 29 , 1969 , the world 's first electronic computer network , ARPANET , was established between nodes at Leonard Kleinrock 's laboratory at University of California , Los Angeles ( UCLA ) and Douglas Engelbart 's laboratory at SRI . Interface Message Processors at both sites served as the backbone of the first Internet . The following year , Engelbart 's laboratory installed the first <unk> system outside of BBN where it was developed . In addition to SRI and UCLA , University of California , Santa Barbara and the University of Utah were part of the original four network nodes . By December 5 , 1969 , the entire four @-@ node network was connected . In the 1970s , SRI developed packet @-@ switched radio ( a precursor to wireless networking ) , over @-@ the @-@ horizon radar , <unk> , vacuum microelectronics , and software @-@ implemented fault tolerance . 
 This first true Internet transmission occurred on November 22 , 1977 , when SRI originated the first connection between three disparate networks . Data flowed seamlessly through the mobile Packet Radio Van between SRI in Menlo Park , California and the University of Southern California in Los Angeles via London , England , across three types of networks : packet radio , satellite , and the ARPANET . In 2007 , the Computer History Museum presented a 30th anniversary celebration of this demonstration , which included several participants from the 1977 event . SRI would go on to run the Network Information Center under the leadership of Jake <unk> . 
 = = = Split and diversification = = = 
 The Vietnam War ( 1955 – 1975 ) was an important issue on college campuses across the United States in the 1960s and 1970s . As a belated response to Vietnam War protesters who believed that funding from the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency ( DARPA ) made the university part of the military – industrial complex , the Stanford Research Institute split from Stanford University in 1970 . The organization subsequently changed its name from the Stanford Research Institute to SRI International in 1977 . 
 In 1972 , physicists Harold E. Puthoff and Russell Targ undertook a series of investigations of psychic phenomena sponsored by the CIA , for which they coined the term remote viewing . Among other activities , the project encompassed the work of consulting " consciousness researchers " including artist / writer Ingo Swann , military intelligence officer Joseph <unk> , and psychic / illusionist Uri Geller . This ESP work continued with funding from the US intelligence community until Puthoff and Targ left SRI in the mid @-@ 1980s . For more information , see Parapsychology research at SRI . 
 Social scientist and consumer futurist Arnold Mitchell created the Values , Attitudes and Lifestyles ( <unk> ) <unk> methodology in the late 1970s to explain changing U.S. values and lifestyles . <unk> was formally inaugurated as an SRI product in 1978 and was called " one of the ten top market research breakthroughs of the 1980s " by Advertising Age magazine . 
 Throughout the 1980s , SRI developed <unk> , stealth technologies , improvements to ultrasound imaging , two @-@ dimensional laser fluorescence imaging , and order @-@ sorted algebra . In computing and software , SRI developed a multimedia electronic mail system , a theory of non @-@ interference in computer security , a multilevel secure ( MLS ) relational database system called Seaview , <unk> , Open Agent Architecture ( <unk> ) , a network intrusion detection system , the Maude system , a declarative software language , and <unk> , a peer @-@ to @-@ peer wireless technology to create scalable ad hoc networks . SRI 's research in network intrusion detection led to the patent infringement case SRI International , Inc. v. Internet Security Systems , Inc . The AI center 's robotics research led to Shakey 's successor , <unk> the robot , which focused on fuzzy logic . 
 In 1986 , <unk> became the 8th registered " .com " domain . The Artificial Intelligence Center developed the Procedural Reasoning System ( PRS ) in the late 1980s and into the early 1990s . PRS launched the field of BDI @-@ based intelligent agents . In the 1990s , SRI developed a letter sorting system for the United States Postal Service and several education and economic studies . 
 Military @-@ related technologies developed by SRI in the 1990s and 2000s include ground- and foliage @-@ penetrating radar , the <unk> and <unk> command and control system for the U.S. military , and <unk> ( integrated GPS radio system ) — an advanced military personnel and vehicle tracking system . To train armored combat units during battle exercises , SRI developed the Deployable Force @-@ on @-@ Force Instrumented Range System ( <unk> ) , which uses GPS satellites , high @-@ speed wireless communications , and digital terrain map displays . 
 SRI created the <unk> in 2003 , one of the first and largest teams of coordinated , autonomous mobile robots that explore , map , and survey unknown environments . 
 With DARPA @-@ funded research , SRI contributed to the development of speech recognition and translation products and was an active participant in DARPA 's Global Autonomous Language Exploitation ( <unk> ) program . SRI developed <unk> speech recognition technology which was used in the handheld <unk> <unk> , allowing U.S. soldiers overseas to communicate with local citizens in near real time . SRI also created translation software for use in the <unk> , a device which allows two @-@ way , speech @-@ to @-@ speech machine translation between English and colloquial Iraqi Arabic . 
 In medicine and chemistry , SRI developed dry @-@ powder drugs , laser <unk> ( a treatment for some eye maladies ) , remote surgery ( also known as <unk> surgery ) , bio @-@ agent detection using <unk> phosphor technology , the experimental anticancer drugs <unk> and TAS @-@ 108 , ammonium <unk> ( an environmentally benign oxidizer for safe and cost @-@ effective disposal of hazardous materials ) , the <unk> polymer ( " artificial muscle " ) , new uses for diamagnetic levitation , and the antimalarial drug <unk> . 
 SRI performed a study in the 1990s for Whirlpool Corporation that led to modern self @-@ cleaning ovens . In the 2000s , SRI worked on Pathway Tools software for use in bioinformatics and systems biology to accelerate drug discovery using artificial intelligence and symbolic computing techniques . The software system generates the <unk> database collection , SRI 's growing collection of genomic databases used by biologists to visualize genes within a chromosome , complete biochemical pathways , and full metabolic maps of organisms . 
 = = = Early 21st century = = = 
 SRI researchers made the first observation of visible light emitted by oxygen atoms in the night @-@ side airglow of Venus , offering new insight into the planet 's atmosphere . SRI education researchers conducted the first national evaluation of the growing U.S. charter schools movement . For the World Golf Foundation , SRI compiled the first @-@ ever estimate of the overall scope of the U.S. golf industry 's goods and services ( $ 62 billion in 2000 ) , providing a framework for monitoring the long @-@ term growth of the industry . In April 2000 , SRI formed Atomic Tangerine , an independent consulting firm designed to bring new technologies and services to market . 
 In 2006 , SRI was awarded a $ 56 @.@ 9 million contract with the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases to provide preclinical services for the development of drugs and antibodies for anti @-@ infective treatments for avian influenza , SARS , West Nile virus and hepatitis . Also in 2006 , SRI selected St. Petersburg , Florida , as the site for a new marine technology research facility targeted at ocean science , the maritime industry and port security ; the facility is a collaboration with the University of South Florida College of Marine Science and its Center for Ocean Technology . That facility created new a method for underwater mass spectrometry , which has been used to conduct " advanced underwater chemical surveys in oil and gas exploration and production , ocean resource monitoring and protection , and water treatment and management " and was licensed to Spyglass Technologies in March 2014 . 
 In December 2007 , SRI launched a spin @-@ off company , Siri Inc . , which Apple acquired in April 2010 . In October 2011 , Apple announced the Siri personal assistant as an integrated feature of the Apple iPhone 4S . Siri 's technology was born from SRI 's work on the DARPA @-@ funded <unk> project , described by SRI as the largest artificial intelligence project ever launched . Siri was co @-@ founded in December 2007 by Dag <unk> ( CEO ) , Adam <unk> ( vice president , engineering ) , and Tom Gruber ( CTO / vice president , design ) , together with Norman <unk> ( vice president of SRI Ventures ) . Investors included Menlo Ventures and <unk> Ventures . 
 For the National Science Foundation ( NSF ) , SRI operates the advanced modular incoherent scatter radar ( <unk> ) , a novel <unk> atmospheric research facility . Other SRI @-@ operated research facilities for the NSF include the Arecibo Observatory in Puerto Rico and the <unk> Upper Atmospheric Research Facility in Greenland . In May 2011 , SRI was awarded a $ 42 million contract to operate the Arecibo Observatory from October 1 , 2011 to September 30 , 2016 . 
 In February 2014 , SRI announced a " photonics @-@ based testing technology called <unk> " for the detection and characterization of rare circulating tumor cells from blood samples . The test is aimed at cancer @-@ specific biomarkers for breast , lung , prostate , colorectal and leukemia cancers that circulate in the blood stream in minute quantities , potentially diagnosing those conditions earlier . 
 = = Description = = 
 = = = Employees and financials = = = 
 As of February 2015 , SRI employs approximately 2 @,@ 100 people . In 2014 , SRI had about $ 540 million in revenue . In 2013 , the United States Department of Defense consisted of 63 % of awards by value ; the remainder was composed of the National Institutes of Health ( 11 % ) ; businesses and industry ( 8 % ) ; other United States agencies ( 6 % ) ; the National Science Foundation ( 6 % ) ; the United States Department of Education ( 4 % ) ; and foundations ( 2 % ) . 
 As of February 2015 , approximately 4 @,@ 000 patents have been granted to SRI International and its employees . 
 = = = Facilities = = = 
 SRI is primarily based on a 63 @-@ acre ( 0 @.@ 25 km2 ; 0 @.@ 10 sq mi ) campus located in Menlo Park , California , which is considered part of Silicon Valley . This campus encompasses 1 @,@ 300 @,@ 000 square feet ( 120 @,@ 000 m2 ) of office and lab space . In addition , SRI has a 254 @-@ acre ( 1 @.@ 028 km2 ; 0 @.@ 397 sq mi ) campus in Princeton , New Jersey , with 600 @,@ 000 square feet ( 56 @,@ 000 m2 ) of research space . There are also offices in Washington , D.C. , and Tokyo , Japan . In total , SRI has 2 @,@ 300 @,@ 000 square feet ( 210 @,@ 000 m2 ) of office and laboratory space . 
 = = = Organization = = = 
 SRI International is organized into seven units ( generally referred to as divisions ) that focus on specific subject areas . 
 = = Staff members and alumni = = 
 SRI has had a chief executive of some form since its establishment . Prior to the split with Stanford University , the position was known as the director ; after the split , it is known as the company 's president and CEO . SRI has had nine so far , including William F. Talbot ( 1946 – 1947 ) , Jesse E. Hobson ( 1947 – 1955 ) , E. Finley Carter ( 1956 – 1963 ) , Charles Anderson ( 1968 – 1979 ) , William F. Miller ( 1979 – 1990 ) , James J. Tietjen ( 1990 – 1993 ) , William P. Sommers ( 1993 – 1998 ) Curtis Carlson ( 1998 – 2014 ) and most recently , William A. Jeffrey ( 2014 – present ) . 
 SRI also has a board of directors since its inception , which has served to both guide and provide opportunities for the organization . The current board of directors includes Samuel <unk> ( Chairman of the Board Emeritus ) , Mariann <unk> ( chairman ) , William A. Jeffrey , Charles A. Holloway ( vice chairman ) , Vern Clark , Robert L. Joss , Leslie F. <unk> , Henry Kressel , David Liddle , Philip J. Quigley , Wendell Wierenga and John J. Young , Jr . 
 Of its researchers , many notable ones were involved with the Augmentation Research Center . These include Douglas Engelbart , the developer of the modern GUI ; William English , the inventor of the mouse ; Jeff <unk> , the primary developer of the NLS ; Elizabeth J. <unk> , who ran the Network Information Center ; and David Maynard , who would help found Electronic Arts . 
 The Artificial Intelligence Center has also produced a large number of notable alumni , many of whom contributed to Shakey the robot ; these include project manager Charles Rosen as well as Nils Nilsson , Bertram Raphael , Richard O. Duda , Peter E. Hart , Richard <unk> and Richard <unk> . AI researcher Gary Hendrix went on to found Symantec . Current Yahoo ! President and CEO Marissa Mayer performed a research internship in the Center in the 1990s . The <unk> project ( and its spin @-@ off , Siri ) also produced notable names including C. Raymond Perrault and Adam <unk> . 
 Several SRI projects produced notable researchers and engineers long before computing was mainstream . Early employee Paul M. Cook founded <unk> . William K. MacCurdy developed the Hydra @-@ Cushion freight car for Southern Pacific in 1954 ; Hewitt Crane and <unk> Noe were instrumental in the development of Electronic Recording Machine , Accounting ; Harrison Price helped The Walt Disney Company design Disneyland ; James C. Bliss developed the <unk> ; and Robert <unk> invented the first telecommunications device for the deaf . 
 = = Spin @-@ off companies = = 
 Working with investment and venture capital firms , SRI and its former employees have launched more than 60 spin @-@ off ventures in a wide range of fields , including Siri ( acquired by Apple ) , Tempo AI ( acquired by Salesforce.com ) , Redwood Robotics ( acquired by Google ) , Desti ( acquired by HERE ) , <unk> , <unk> , Artificial Muscle , Inc . ( acquired by Bayer <unk> ) , Nuance Communications , Intuitive Surgical , and Orchid <unk> . 
 Former SRI staff members have also established new companies . In engineering and analysis , for example , notable companies formed by SRI alumni include <unk> Communications , Exponent and <unk> . Companies in the area of legal , policy and business analysis include Fair Isaac Corporation , Global Business Network and Institute for the Future . 
 Research in computing and computer science @-@ related areas led to the development of many companies , including Symantec , the Australian Artificial Intelligence Institute , E @-@ Trade , and <unk> Corporation . Wireless technologies spawned <unk> and venture capital firm <unk> Partners . Health systems research inspired <unk> Systems . 
 = = = SRI history = = = 
 Carlson , Curtis R. ; Wilmot , William W. ( 2006 ) . Innovation : The Five Disciplines for Creating What Customers Want . New York : Crown Publishing Group . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 307 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 Lento , Thomas V ( 2006 ) . Inventing the Future : 60 Years of Innovation at Sarnoff . Princeton , New Jersey : Sarnoff Corporation . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 @-@ X. 
 Gibson , Weldon B. ( 1986 ) . SRI : The Take @-@ Off Days . Los Altos , California : Stanford Research Institute . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 103 @-@ 5 . 
 = = = Specific topics = = = 
 Crane , Hewitt ; <unk> , Edwin ; Malhotra , <unk> ( June 2010 ) . A Cubic Mile of Oil . Oxford , New York : Oxford University Press USA . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 Markoff , John ( 2005 ) . What the Dormouse Said : How the 60s Counterculture Shaped the Personal Computer Industry . New York : Viking Adult . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 670 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 Hafner , Katie ( 1996 ) . Where Wizards Stay Up Late : The Origins of the Internet ( with Matthew Lyon ) . New York : Simon & Schuster . ISBN 0 @-@ 684 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 Bowden , Mark ( 2011 ) . <unk> : The First Digital World War [ about the <unk> computer worm ] . New York : Atlantic Monthly Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 8021 @-@ 1983 @-@ 2 . 
 = Asad ibn Abdallah al @-@ Qasri = 
 Asad ibn Abdallah ibn Asad al @-@ Qasri ( died 738 ) was a prominent official of the Umayyad Caliphate , serving twice as governor of Khurasan under the Caliph Hisham ibn Abd al @-@ Malik . The descendant of a prominent Arab family , he was the brother of Khalid al @-@ Qasri , the powerful governor of Iraq for most of Hisham 's reign . Asad 's first tenure in 724 – 727 came in the wake of the " Day of Thirst " , a severe defeat at the hands of the Turgesh Turks in Transoxiana . Asad tried to reconcile the local Soghdians to Muslim rule , initiated tax reforms to address the grievances of the native converts to Islam ( mawali ) , and enjoyed good relations with many local nobles , who began to convert to Islam under his influence . His military expeditions during his first tenure were targeted mainly against restive local princes , and avoided a direct confrontation with the Turgesh . 
 After his dismissal , his successors reversed his policy of reconciliation , resulting in a large @-@ scale anti @-@ Arab rebellion among the Soghdians . Another major defeat against the Turgesh in the Battle of the Defile was followed by the almost complete collapse of the Arab position in <unk> and the outbreak of a major rebellion in Khurasan itself , led by al @-@ Harith ibn Surayj . Appointed for a second time to Khurasan in late 734 , Asad brought in fresh troops to the province and managed to suppress Harith 's uprising in 735 – 736 , although the rebel leader himself escaped capture . An expedition in Khuttal in 737 brought about the intervention of the Turgesh khagan at the head of an army . Despite initial Arab setbacks and the Turgesh invasion of Khurasan , Asad succeeded in inflicting a defeat upon the khagan in person in the Battle of Kharistan and turning back the Turgesh army . Despite Asad 's death a few months later , this success was instrumental in preserving Muslim rule in Central Asia , as the blow to the khagan 's prestige led to his murder soon thereafter and the collapse of Turgesh power . At the same time , Asad 's conciliatory policy towards the native population laid the foundations for its eventual acceptance of Muslim rule and the Islamization of Central Asia . 
 = = Origin = = 
 Asad was a member of the Qasr clan , a subtribe of the Banu <unk> . His great @-@ grandfather Asad ibn Kurz al @-@ Qasri is said by some traditions to have been the chief of the <unk> in the times of the Islamic prophet Muhammad , and is accounted as one of Muhammad 's companions . Other traditions , however , hostile to the family , report that Asad was a Jew and a runaway slave . Asad 's grandfather Yazid was an early and prominent supporter of the Umayyads in the First Fitna , while Asad 's father Abdallah sided with Ibn al @-@ Zubayr in the Second Fitna , but was eventually pardoned by the Caliph Abd al @-@ Malik ( reigned 685 – 705 ) . 
 = = First governorship of Khurasan = = 
 In 724 , immediately after the rise of Hisham ibn Abd al @-@ Malik ( r . 724 – 743 ) to the throne , Asad 's brother Khalid al @-@ Qasri was appointed to the important post of governor of Iraq , with responsibility over the entire Islamic East , which he held until 738 . Khalid in turn named Asad as governor of Khurasan . The two brothers thus became , according to Patricia Crone , " among the most prominent men of the Marwanid period " . Asad 's arrival in Khurasan found the province in peril : his predecessor , Muslim ibn Sa 'id al @-@ Kilabi , had just attempted a campaign against Ferghana and suffered a major defeat , the so @-@ called " Day of Thirst " , at the hands of the Turgesh Turks and the Soghdian principalities of Transoxiana that had risen up against Muslim rule . 
 As the historian H.A.R. Gibb wrote , this Muslim defeat " marks a period in the history of the Arab conquests . It was practically the last aggressive expedition of the Arabs into Transoxania for fifteen years , but of much greater importance was the blow which it struck at Arab prestige . The roles were reversed ; from now onwards the Arabs found themselves on the defensive and were gradually ousted from almost every district across the Oxus " . In this situation , Asad followed a policy of consolidation and limited military activity , focusing on enforcing Muslim control on the minor local potentates and avoiding a direct confrontation with the Muslims ' main enemy , the Turgesh . Thus in 107 AH ( 725 or 726 AD ) Asad campaigned against <unk> , King of al @-@ <unk> ( northeast of Herat ) , whom he forced to submit and convert to Islam , before going on to subdue the region of Ghur ( central Afghanistan ) . In the next year , Asad campaigned in Khuttal in Tokharistan , where he was confronted by the khagan , who was called upon for aid by the local ruler , al @-@ Sabal . One tradition holds that he retreated over the Oxus and went on to campaign with success in Ghur in the next year , but according to another he suffered a heavy defeat by the Turgesh . Whatever the true events , Asad 's military ventures were only moderately successful , and most importantly failed to address the growing danger of the Turgesh , who with the support of the local princes threatened to expel the Arabs back beyond the Oxus . 
 At the same time , Asad tried to conciliate the local population , hoping to prevent them from supporting the Turgesh . He continued his predecessor 's policy of appointing men known for their honesty as his fiscal agents . His reforms tried to stop the discrimination especially against the mawali , the native converts to Islam , stopping the collection of the jizya from them . This measure was vehemently opposed by the Arab settlers of Khurasan , but according to Khalid Yahya Blankinship " it may have helped to discourage the Turks for a couple of years by keeping the <unk> on the Muslims ' side " . Despite Asad 's efforts and his good relations with the local Iranian land @-@ owning class , the dihqans , taxation remained a heavy burden for the subject populations , and the greed and cruelty of Arab and Iranian tax collectors alike meant that Khurasan became a fertile field for the Shi 'ite and Abbasid missionaries ( da 'wa ) . Among the local nobility , Saman Khuda , the ancestor of the Samanid dynasty , is said to have been converted to Islam by Asad at this time , and Saman 's eldest son was named Asad in the governor 's honour . 
 In 726 Asad rebuilt the city of Balkh , which had been destroyed by Qutayba ibn Muslim following a revolt , and transferred there the Arab garrison troops from nearby <unk> . Asad also resumed , after almost a decade , the practice of sending envoys to the Chinese court . This move was obviously linked to the Turgesh threat , as the Turks were Chinese vassals and were regarded by the <unk> as the agents of the Chinese emperor , sent to deliver them from Arab rule . Asad is also said to have built the village of Asadabad near Nishapur , which his descendants held until Tahirid times . 
 Asad was dismissed from his office in Ramadan 109 AH ( December 727 or January 728 AD ) , when in an outburst of anger he had the chief representatives of the four greatest Arab tribes in Khurasan , the Ahl al- ' Aliyah , Azd , Tamim , and Bakr , publicly flogged . Caliph Hisham demanded his dismissal , and after naming al @-@ Hakam ibn ' <unk> al @-@ Kalbi as his deputy , Asad returned to his brother in Iraq . 
 = = Second governorship of Khurasan = = 
 Asad was replaced by Ashras ibn Abdallah al @-@ Sulami ( 727 – 730 ) . At first he continued Asad 's policy of conciliation , but then reversed it , leading to the outbreak of a full @-@ scale rebellion in Transoxiana , which , coupled with renewed Turgesh attacks , reduced the Arab presence there to Samarkand and its environs . Ashras was able to recover Bukhara , but his successor , Junayd ibn Abd al @-@ Rahman al @-@ Murri , presided over the disaster of the Battle of the Defile in 731 , which crippled the Khurasani army . By the time of Junayd 's death in 734 , the Muslim holdings in Transoxiana had been reduced to Bukhara and parts of Tokharistan . These military defeats , the long @-@ held grievances against the Umayyad government , and the forcible requisition of food by Junayd during the famine of 733 led to the outbreak of a rebellion in early 734 , led by al @-@ Harith ibn Surayj . Harith 's uprising involved both Arabs and native princes , especially from the hitherto loyal principalities of Tokharistan , and spread quickly , with the rebels capturing Balkh . The new governor , Asim ibn Abdallah al @-@ Hilali , managed to check Harith 's advance on the capital , Marw , and forced him to seek terms . Asim 's position remained precarious , however , and he wrote to the Caliph , asking for the placement of Khurasan once again under the purview of Iraq , the appointment of a new governor and the substantial reinforcement of the province with Syrian troops . Hisham accepted the recommendations , and instructed Khalid al @-@ Qasri to send Asad once again as governor to Khurasan . Early in 735 , Harith renewed his rebellion . This time , whether due to pressure from local sympathizers in Marw or as an expedient way to gain time for Asad to arrive , Asim agreed to a truce with Harith , in which he also promised to support Harith 's demands against the Caliph . 
 Thus , in early 735 Asad arrived once more to take up the governorship of Khurasan , this time accompanied by 20 @,@ 000 Syrian troops , according to the 11th @-@ century historian Gardizi . He imprisoned Asim for embezzling money and failing to campaign against the rebels , and immediately took the field himself . He soon gained the upper hand in a succession of victorious , if costly , battles with Harith 's supporters . Asad 's success was aided by his long @-@ standing personal relations with the local Arab tribal leaders , as well as by the continuing tribal rivalries : as a Yamani opposed to the Mudari Harith , he could count on the support of his fellow tribesmen — thus most of the Rabi 'ah , the traditional enemies of Harith 's Tamim tribe , soon defected to him . Asad divided his forces , sending the Kufan and Syrian troops under Abd al @-@ Rahman ibn Na <unk> towards Marw Rudh , where Harith 's main army was located , while he himself with the Basrans and remaining Khurasanis marched on the fortresses of Amul and Zamm . The rebel forces at Amul surrendered and were pardoned , and the garrison of Balkh followed soon after . Harith himself abandoned Marw Rudh and retreated across the Oxus before Abd al @-@ Rahman , finding refuge with the princes of Tokharistan . With their aid , he laid siege to the major crossing point over the Oxus at Tirmidh . In the face of Harith 's forces , Asad 's troops could not cross the Oxus but retreated to Balkh . However , the Tirmidh garrison managed to defeat Harith , who now retired eastwards to the mountains of Badakhshan . Asad followed up this success by persuading the garrison of Zamm to surrender on promises of amnesty and double pay . Asad then led an expedition to recover Samarkand , which had been lost in the aftermath of the Defile . He failed to take the city , and returned to Balkh after destroying the sluices of the city 's irrigation canals . 
 In the next year , 736 , Asad 's forces cleared the mountains of Upper Tokharistan from the remnants of Harith 's supporters . Many of the latter , including some of Harith 's relatives , were blockaded in the fortress of <unk> by Asad 's commander Juday ' al @-@ Kirmani with 6 @,@ 000 men , until they surrendered . According to al @-@ Tabari , 400 of the men were executed , and the other defenders , including women and children , were sold into slavery . In the same year , Asad moved the capital of Khurasan to Balkh . This decision was influenced by a number of factors : Balkh was the traditional , pre @-@ Islamic capital and remained so in the eyes of the local population ; it lay closer to Tokharistan , where Asad concentrated his military activities ; and was settled by reliable Syrians and removed from the factional politics of the Khurasani Arabs of Marw . At this time , Asad also captured and executed one of the leaders of the Khurasani Hashimiyya movement , Ammar ibn Yazid , known as <unk> , by crucifixion . 
 In 737 , Asad led his troops again north of the Oxus in a retaliatory campaign against Khuttal , whose ruler had allied himself with both Harith and the Turgesh . While Asad captured a few fortresses and pillaged the land , the Khuttalan regent , Ibn al @-@ Sa 'iji , called for aid from the Turgesh khagan , Suluk . The Turgesh army 's arrival caught the Arab troops , widely dispersed while ravaging the countryside , by surprise , and precipitated a headlong flight across the Oxus . The Turgesh followed after them and attacked and almost annihilated the Arab baggage train , which Asad had sent ahead . The timely arrival of Asad 's main army saved the baggage train 's remnants , before both sides settled for winter quarters . Ominously for the Arabs , the khagan remained in Khurasan instead of retiring north , and Harith now emerged from hiding and joined him . Harith now counselled the khagan to take advantage of the dispersal of the Arab army to its winter quarters , and resume his advance . In early December the khagan led the Turgesh army , 30 @,@ 000 strong and comprising contingents from virtually every native ruler of Transoxiana and Upper Tokharistan , south . They bypassed Balkh and marched into <unk> , hoping to raise the Hephthalite princes of Lower Tokharistan in revolt as well . In this the Turgesh failed , as the king of <unk> joined Asad , who was approaching with what forces he could muster . Asad 's advance caught the khagan and Harith off guard ; Asad came upon them near Kharistan when they were accompanied by only 4 @,@ 000 men , the rest having scattered to plunder and forage . In the ensuing Battle of Kharistan , Asad routed the Turgesh . Harith and the khagan barely escaped themselves and fled north over the Oxus . The Turgesh detachments south of the Oxus were largely destroyed piecemeal by Juday ' al @-@ Kirmani , ending the threat to Khurasan . 
 After his victory over the Turgesh , Asad sent an expedition against Badr Tarkhan , possibly a prince of <unk> in Ghur , who in the turmoil of the previous year had taken the opportunity of capturing Khuttal . The expedition was successful , and Khuttal returned to Arab rule . A short while later , in February 738 , Asad died at Balkh after a brief illness . Ja 'far ibn <unk> al @-@ Bahrani succeeded him temporarily , until , in July , Nasr ibn Sayyar was named to the governorship . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Asad 's second governorship was of crucial importance to the future of Central Asia . His victory at Kharistan averted a possible collapse of Muslim rule and ended the Turgesh threat to Khurasan and Transoxiana . As Gibb writes , it was not only " the turning @-@ point in the fortunes of the Arabs in Central Asia , but gave the signal for the downfall of Turgesh power " . The khagan ′ s defeat was a serious blow to his prestige , encouraging his domestic rivals ; backed secretly by the Chinese , they assassinated him in early 738 . The Turgesh realm collapsed in civil war , leaving the Muslims without a serious opponent in the region . At the same time , Asad 's excellent personal relationship with the native nobility strengthened their ties to the Arab government . As Gibb writes , " he was able to attract to his side many of the more influential elements in Lower Tokharistan and the Hephthalite lands — to this , in fact , was largely due his success in the struggle with the Turks . " His influence led to the conversion to Islam of several local rulers , like Saman Khuda and possibly also the <unk> . Even though as yet " practically confined to the ruling classes " and limited to the territories under direct Arab control , Gibb credits Asad with beginning a process of " true reconciliation " . For this achievement he was greatly honoured later generations , as attested in the work of the 10th @-@ century Bukharan historian <unk> . His successor , Nasr ibn Sayyar , was able to build upon Asad 's work and restore the Arab position over much of Transoxiana ; Muslim pre @-@ eminence over western Central Asia was sealed with the Battle of Talas in 751 , and the withdrawal of Chinese influence after the outbreak of the An Lushan Rebellion . 
 = Euphoria ( Usher song ) = 
 " Euphoria " is a song recorded by American singer Usher for his seventh studio album Looking 4 Myself ( 2012 ) . It was written by Axel Hedfors , Juan Najera , Klas Åhlund , Ryon Lovett , Sebastian Ingrosso , Steve Angello , Terry Lewis and Usher himself . The production of the song was done by Axwell , Angello and Ingrosso under their stage name Swedish House Mafia . After their joint performance at the 2011 American Music Awards , Usher and Swedish House Mafia managed to start working on recording sessions for Usher 's seventh studio album in Atlanta . 
 " Euphoria " is a dance @-@ pop and euro @-@ trance song which " include the DJs ' glimmering synths while Usher croons in his coolly @-@ controlled falsetto . " The track received generally mixed to positive reviews from contemporary music critics with many of them praising its Ibiza sound which is also present on Usher 's previous singles " OMG " and " DJ Got Us Fallin ' in Love " . Upon the release of Looking 4 Myself , the song debuted at number 60 on the South Korea Gaon International Chart , with sales of 6 @,@ 029 digital copies . This song appears as DLC along with " Twisted " in Dance Central 3 with choreography from both Usher and his choreographer <unk> “ AJ ” Jones . 
 = = Production = = 
 Speaking to The <unk> , Usher explained that he wanted to work with Swedish House Mafia ever since they both performed together at the 2011 American Music Awards . The group agreed to work with Usher , saying " We 'll see if we can come to Atlanta , and if we can , we 'll start to work on some tracks , writing , and moving the ball forward . " In an interview with MTV News , regarding the collaboration with Usher , Steve Angello commented , [ sic ] " We met Usher couple of years ago , we did the AMA 's together and then we came to hang @-@ out in Ibiza . We were in Atlanta and we were all working together for five days . He has always been a great artist and he always knows what he wants so it is a good collaboration all in all . We rather work with somebody who we respect , than to rather work with just big name . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Euphoria " is a dance @-@ pop and euro @-@ trance song with a length of four minutes and 20 seconds . It was written by Axel Hedfors , Juan Najera , Klas Åhlund , Ryon Lovett , Sebastian Ingrosso , Steve Angello , Terry Lewis and Usher himself . The production of the song was helmed by Hedfors , Angello and Ingrosso under their stage name Swedish House Mafia . Swedish House Mafia together with disc jockey Alesso also co @-@ produced one more song from Looking 4 Myself entitled " Numb " . According to Lewis Corner of Digital Spy both " Euphoria " and " Numb " " include the DJs ' glimmering synths while he [ Usher ] croons in his coolly @-@ controlled falsetto . " Jim Farber of The New York Daily News wrote that the songs which were produced by Swedish House Mafia propose a possible crossover point from electronica to R & B like Usher ’ s biggest hit " Yeah ! " did from crunk to soul . Mark " Exit " Goodchild recorded the song at Silent Sound Studios in Atlanta and Glenwood Place Studios in Burbank , while Jorge Velasco , Kory Aaron and Randy <unk> served as recording assistants . It was mixed by Manny Marroquin at Larrabee Sound Studio , Universal City , with Chris Galland and Delbert Bowers serving as mixing assistants . Natural did the vocal production of the song while the track 's producers Hedfors , Ingrosso and Angello provided the complete instrumentation of " Euphoria " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In a review of Looking 4 Myself , Matt Cibula of PopMatters commented that Usher " absolutely rips ' Climax ' and ' What Happened to U ' , nails party anthems like ' Scream ' and ' Euphoria ' to the wall , and puts across harder things even while multitracking himself 35 times over with the greatest of ease . " Nathan S. of DJ Booth wrote that " ' Euphoria ' hews even closer to the 4 AM in Ibiza template , as does the essentially identical Scream . " People 's Chuck Arnold wrote that Usher " is an Ibiza @-@ ready club kid on electro thumpers like current single ' Scream ' and the Swedish House Mafia @-@ produced ' Euphoria ' that build on the success of ' OMG ' , ' DJ Got Us Fallin ' in Love ' and ' Without You ' ( with David Guetta ) . " Regarding the song Trent Fitzgerald of PopCrush wrote that " Euphoria " " comes out with a great Ibiza @-@ style dance track that should help him crack the European market . It sounds big and brings euphoria to our ears . " 
 Erika Ramirez of Billboard concluded that " Euphoria " is grittier , more startling and arguably more powerful than " Numb " and commented that it " leaves listeners with a feeling that reflects the song 's uplifting title " . Alex Macpherson of guardian.co.uk was more critical to the song and labeled it as " <unk> trance " , while Danny Walker of RWD Magazine called the song pacy . According to Carrie Battan of Pitchfork Media Usher " sounds most uncomfortable and the least sharp on overblown club tracks ' Euphoria ' and ' Numb ' , and the presence of rote numbers is almost comically predictable . " Katherine St Asaph of Popdust stated that the track would sound great in the clubs , however it isn 't standout by any means , further stating " Usher and Swedish House Mafia talk about euphoria , but what they deliver is perfectly passable excitement . " 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording and mixing 
 Recorded at Silent Sound Studios , Atlanta , Georgia ; Glenwood Place Studios , Burbank , California ; mixed at Larrabee Sound Studio , Universal City , California 
 Personnel 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Looking 4 Myself , RCA Records . 
