 = = Charts = = 
 Upon the release of Looking 4 Myself , due to digital downloads " Euphoria " charted in the lower regions on the singles chart in South Korea . It debuted on the South Korea Gaon International Chart at number 60 on June 10 , 2012 , with sales of 6 @,@ 029 digital copies . 
 = Hispanic Americans in World War II = 
 Hispanic Americans , also referred to as Latinos , served in all elements of the American armed forces in the war . They fought in every major American battle in the war . Between 250 @,@ 000 and 500 @,@ 000 Hispanic Americans served in the U.S. Armed Forces during World War II , out of a total of 12 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 , constituting 2 @.@ 3 % to 4 @.@ 7 % of the U.S. Armed Forces . The exact number is unknown as , at the time , Hispanics were not tabulated separately , but were generally included in the general white population census count . Separate statistics were kept for African Americans and Asian Americans . 
 On December 7 , 1941 , when the United States officially entered the war , Hispanic Americans were among the many American citizens who joined the ranks of the Army , Navy and Marine Corps as volunteers or through the draft . Not only did Hispanics serve as active combatants in the European and Pacific Theatres of war , but they also served on the home front as civilians . Hundreds of Hispanic women joined the Women 's Army Auxiliary Corps ( WAACs ) and Women Accepted for Volunteer Emergency Service ( WAVES ) , serving as nurses and in administrative positions . Many worked in traditionally male labor jobs in the manufacturing plants that produced munitions and materiel , replacing men who were away at war . 
 When conscription was increased , some Puerto Ricans from the island were assigned as replacements to units in the Panama Canal Zone and British Caribbean islands , which were made up mostly of continental ( United States mainland ) soldiers . Most Puerto Ricans and Hispanics residing in Puerto Rico were assigned to the 65th Infantry Regiment or to the Puerto Rico National Guard . These were the only all @-@ Hispanic units whose statistics were kept . More than 53 @,@ 000 Puerto Ricans and Hispanics who resided on the island served in the war . According to Senator Robert Menendez , more than 9 @,@ 000 Latinos died in the defense of the United States in World War II . Because of lack of separate documentation , the total number of Hispanic Americans who died in the conflict is unknown . 
 = = Terminology = = 
 Hispanic American is an ethnic term used to categorize any citizen or resident of the United States , of any racial background , and of any religion , who has at least one ancestor from the people of Spain or any of the Spanish @-@ speaking countries of the Americas . The three largest Hispanic groups in the United States are the Mexican Americans , Puerto Ricans , and Cuban Americans . Hispanic Americans are also referred to by others , and some Hispanics prefer to be known as " Chicano " . 
 = = Prelude to World War II = = 
 Before the United States entered World War II , Hispanic Americans were already fighting on European soil in the Spanish Civil War . The Spanish Civil War was a major conflict in Spain that started after an attempted coup d 'état by parts of the army , led by the Nationalist General Francisco Franco , against the government of the Second Spanish Republic . Hispanic Americans fought on behalf of both of the factions involved , the " Nationalists " as members of the Spanish Army and the " Loyalists " ( Republicans ) either as members of the Abraham Lincoln International Brigade or as aviators in the Yankee Squadron led by Bert Acosta ( 1895 – 1954 ) . 
 General Manuel Goded Llopis ( 1882 – 1936 ) , who was born in San Juan , Puerto Rico , was a high @-@ ranking officer in the Spanish Army . Llopis was among the first generals to join General Francisco Franco in the uprising against the government of the Second Spanish Republic . Llopis led the fight against the Anarchists in Catalonia , but his troops were outnumbered . He was captured and sentenced to die by firing squad . 
 Lieutenant Carmelo Delgado Delgado ( 1913 – 1937 ) was among the many Hispanics who fought on behalf of the Second Spanish Republic as members of the Abraham Lincoln Brigade . Delgado fought in the Battle of Madrid , but was captured and sentenced to die by firing squad on April 29 , 1937 . He was amongst the first United States ( US ) citizens to die in that conflict . 
 = = Pearl Harbor = = 
 On December 7 , 1941 , when the Empire of Japan attacked the United States Pacific Fleet at Pearl Harbor , many sailors with Hispanic surnames were among those who perished . PFC Richard I. Trujillo of the United States Marine Corps was serving aboard the Battleship USS Nevada ( BB @-@ 36 ) when the Japanese attacked Pearl Harbor . The Nevada was among the ships which were in the harbor that day . As her gunners opened fire and her engineers got up steam , she was struck by torpedoes and bombs from the Japanese attackers . Fifty men were killed and 109 wounded . Among those killed was Trujillo , who became the first Hispanic Marine casualty of World War II . 
 When the United States officially entered World War II , Hispanic Americans were among the many American citizens who joined the ranks of United States Armed Forces as volunteers or through the draft . 
 In 1941 , Commander Luis de Florez played an instrumental role in the establishment of the Special Devices Division of the Navy 's Bureau of Aeronautics ( what would later become the NAWCTSD ) . He was later assigned as head of the new Special Devices Desk in the Engineering Division of the Navy ’ s Bureau of Aeronautics . De Florez , who has been credited with over sixty inventions , urged the Navy to undertake development of " synthetic training devices " to increase readiness . During World War II , he was promoted to Captain and in 1944 , to Rear Admiral . 
 = = European Theatre = = 
 The European Theatre of World War II was an area of heavy fighting between the Allied forces and the Axis powers from September 1 , 1939 , to May 8 , 1945 . The majority of Hispanic Americans served in regular units ; some active combat units recruited from areas of high Hispanic population , such as the 65th Infantry Regiment from Puerto Rico and the 141st Regiment of the 36th Texas Infantry , were made up mostly of Hispanics . 
 Hispanics of the 141st Regiment of the 36th Infantry Division were some of the first American troops to land on Italian soil at Salerno . Company E of the 141st Regiment was entirely Hispanic . The 36th Infantry Division fought in Italy and France , enduring heavy casualties during the crossing of the Rapido River near Cassino , Italy . This was a controversial event over which military analysts have argued . 
 = = = 65th Infantry Regiment = = = 
 A small detachment of insular troops from Puerto Rico was sent to Cuba in late March as a guard for Batista Field . In 1943 , the 65th Infantry was sent to Panama to protect the Pacific and the Atlantic sides of the isthmus and the Panama Canal , critical to oceangoing ships . An increase in the Puerto Rican induction program was immediately authorized . Continental troops such as the 762nd Antiaircraft Artillery Gun Battalion , 766th AAA Gun Battalion and the <unk> AAA Gun Battalions were replaced by Puerto Ricans in Panama . They also replaced troops in the bases on British Islands , to the extent permitted by the availability of trained Puerto Rican units . The 295th Infantry Regiment followed the 65th Infantry in 1944 , departing from San Juan , Puerto Rico to the Panama Canal Zone . 
 That same year , the 65th Infantry was sent to North Africa , where they underwent further training . By April 29 , 1944 , the Regiment had landed in Italy and moved on to Corsica . On September 22 , 1944 , the 65th Infantry landed in France and was committed to action in the Maritime Alps at Peira Cava . On December 13 , 1944 , the 65th Infantry , under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Juan César Cordero Dávila , relieved the 2nd Battalion of the 442nd Infantry Regiment , a regiment which was made up of Japanese Americans under the command of Col. Virgil R. Miller , a native of Puerto Rico . 
 The 3rd Battalion fought against and defeated Germany 's 34th Infantry Division 's 107th Infantry Regiment . There were 47 battle casualties , including Pvt. Sergio Sanchez @-@ Sanchez and Sergeant Angel Martinez from Sabana Grande , who were the first two Puerto Ricans from the 65th Infantry to be killed in combat action . On March 18 , 1945 , the regiment was sent to the District of Mannheim and assigned to military occupation duties after the end of the war . The regiment suffered 23 soldiers killed in action . 
 In March 1943 , Private First Class Joseph ( Jose ) R. Martinez , member of Patton 's Seventh Army , destroyed a German Infantry unit and tank in Tunis by providing heavy artillery fire , saving his platoon from being attacked in the process . He received the Distinguished Service Cross , second to the Medal of Honor , from General George S. Patton , thus becoming the first Puerto Rican recipient of said military decoration . 
 Sergeant First Class Agustín Ramos Calero , a member of the 65th Infantry who was reassigned to the 3rd U.S. Infantry Division because of his ability to speak and understand English , was one of the most decorated Hispanic soldiers in the European Theater . Calero was born and raised in Isabela , in the northern region of Puerto Rico . He joined the U.S. Army in 1941 and was assigned to Puerto Rico 's 65th Infantry Regiment at Camp Las Casas in Santurce , where he received training as a rifleman . At the outbreak of World War II , Calero was reassigned to the 3rd U.S. Infantry Division and sent to Europe . 
 In 1945 , Calero 's company engaged in combat against a squad of German soldiers in what is known as the Battle of Colmar Pocket in the vicinity of Colmar , France . Calero attacked the enemy squad , killing 10 and capturing 21 before being wounded . For these actions , he was awarded the Silver Star Medal and nicknamed " One @-@ Man Army " by his comrades . Calero was wounded four times during combat in Europe . He was awarded 22 decorations and medals for his actions , making him one of the most decorated Hispanic soldiers in the U.S. military during World War II . Among his many decorations were the Silver Star Medal , four Purple Hearts and the French Croix de guerre . 
 = = Pacific Theatre = = 
 The Pacific Theatre of Operations ( PTO ) is the term used in the United States for all military activity between the Allies and Japan , from 1937 to 1945 , in the Pacific Ocean and the countries bordering it , during World War II . Three units of mostly Hispanic Americans served in the Pacific Theatre battlefields : the 200th Coast Artillery and the 515th Anti @-@ Aircraft Artillery Battalions from New Mexico , whose members participated in the infamous Bataan Death March , and the 158th Regimental Combat Team from Arizona . 
 = = = Bataan Death March = = = 
 Two National Guard units : the 200th and the 515th Battalions , were activated in New Mexico in 1940 . Made up mostly of Spanish @-@ speaking Hispanics from New Mexico , Arizona and Texas , the two battalions were sent to Clark Field in the Philippine Islands . Shortly after the Imperial Japanese Navy launched its surprise attack on the American Naval Fleet at Pearl Harbor , Japanese forces attacked the American positions in the Philippines . General Douglas MacArthur moved his forces , which included the 200th and 515th , to the Bataan Peninsula , where they fought alongside Filipinos in a three @-@ month stand against the invading forces . 
 By April 9 , 1942 , rations , medical supplies , and ammunition became scarce ; officers ordered the starving and outnumbered troops of the 200th and 515th Battalions to lay down their arms and surrender to the Japanese . These Hispanic and non @-@ Hispanic soldiers endured the 12 @-@ day , 85 @-@ mile ( 137 km ) Bataan Death March from Bataan to the Japanese prison camps . They were force @-@ marched in scorching heat through the Philippine jungle . Survivors remained interned for 34 months in a prisoner @-@ of @-@ war ( POW ) camp . Others were wounded or killed when unmarked enemy ships transporting prisoners of war to Japan were sunk by U.S. air and naval forces . 
 Colonel Virgilio N. Cordero , Jr . ( 1893 – 1980 ) was the Battalion Commander of the 31st Infantry Regiment on December 8 , 1941 , when Japanese planes attacked the U.S. military installations in the Philippines . Cordero and his men underwent brutal torture and humiliation during the Bataan Death March and nearly four years of captivity . Cordero was one of nearly 1 @,@ 600 members of the 31st Infantry who were taken as prisoners . Half of these men perished while prisoners of the Japanese forces . After Cordero gained his freedom when the Allied troops defeated the Japanese returned to the United States . Cordero , who retired with the rank of Brigadier General , wrote about his experiences as a prisoner of war and what he went through during the Bataan Death March . He authored My Experiences during the War with Japan , which was published in 1950 . In 1957 , he authored a revised Spanish version titled Bataan y la Marcha de la Muerte ; Volume 7 of Colección Vida e Historia . 
 Private ( Pvt. ) Ralph Rodriguez , age 25 , of the 200th Coast Artillery Battalion was a Bataan Death March survivor . According to Rodriguez , the Japanese ordered the American soldiers to begin marching . Soldiers who faltered during the march were prodded with bayonets , while those unable to continue were killed . He remembered a sense of brotherhood among the Hispanic soldiers who marched together in groups , and assisted each other along the way . When the soldiers reached their detention center , they were forced into a 30 @-@ by @-@ 100 foot fenced area . Later , the soldiers were forced into boxcars . One hundred soldiers were crammed into a car built to hold 40 or 50 men . The train took the soldiers on a four @-@ hour ride to Camp O 'Donnell where they became prisoners of war . 
 Corporal <unk> E. " Gap " Silva ( 1919 – 2007 ) , was another member of the 200th Coast Artillery Battalion who survived the Bataan Death March . He was held at Cabanatuan prison camp in the Philippines and assigned to the " burial details " when hundreds of prisoners were dying each month of disease and starvation . He was later transported to Fukuoka POW Camp # 17 , a Japanese prison camp near <unk> , Japan . There he was forced to work as a slave laborer in a coal plant . Silva narrated the following about his experiences as a prisoner of war : 
 " The POWs ( prisoner of war ) faced constant danger working in the coal mines . It was so unbearable that many of the men would resort to self @-@ inflicted injuries such as breaking their arms and legs to avoid working 10 to 12 hour days . " 
 Silva and more than 1 @,@ 900 American POWs were forced to work in coal mine camps encircled by electrical fences . Silva would spend 3 ½ years in the Japanese POW camps before the war ended in September 1945 . He was the recipient of the Bronze Star and Purple Heart Medal . 
 = = = 158th Regimental Combat Team = = = 
 The 158th Regimental Combat Team , an Arizona National Guard unit of mostly Hispanic soldiers , also fought in the Pacific Theatre . Early in the war , the 158th , nicknamed the " <unk> " , had been deployed to protect the Panama Canal and had completed jungle training . The unit later fought the Japanese in the New Guinea area in heavy combat and was involved in the liberation of the Philippine Islands . General MacArthur referred to them as " the greatest fighting combat team ever deployed for battle . " The 158th was selected to spearhead the invasion of Japan and was sent to attack the island of <unk> Shima to silence Japanese air warning stations . The planned invasion of Japan was never realized ; after Japan 's surrender , the unit was sent on October 13 , 1945 to Yokohama , Japan as part of the United States Army of occupation . 
 = = = PFC Guy Gabaldon = = = 
 Private First Class Guy Gabaldon was a young Marine who single @-@ handedly persuaded more than 1 @,@ 000 enemy civilians and troops to surrender . 
 PFC Guy Gabaldon ( 1926 – 2006 ) was adopted at the age of 12 by parents of Japanese @-@ American heritage . At the outbreak of World War II , his adoptive family was placed in a relocation camp . Gabaldon joined the Marines when he was only 17 years old ; he was a Private First Class ( PFC ) when his unit was engaged in the Battle of Saipan in 1944 . Gabaldon , who acted as the Japanese interpreter for the Second Marines , working alone in front of the lines , entered enemy caves , pillboxes , buildings , and jungle brush , frequently in the face of hostile fire , and succeeded not only in obtaining vital military information , but in convincing over 1 @,@ 500 enemy civilians and troops to surrender . He was nominated for the Medal of Honor , but was awarded the Silver Star instead . His medal was later upgraded to the Navy Cross , the Marines second @-@ highest decoration for heroism . He turned in more enemy soldiers than Sergeant Alvin York , who was awarded the Medal of Honor during World War I for having captured 132 enemy German soldiers . Gabaldon 's actions on Saipan were later memorialized in the film Hell to Eternity , in which he was portrayed by actor Jeffrey Hunter . 
 = = = Guarding the atomic bomb = = = 
 In 1945 , when Kwajalein of the Marshall Islands was secured by the U.S. forces , Sergeant Fernando Bernacett from Puerto Rico was among the Marines who were sent to guard various essential military installations . Bernacett , a combat veteran of the Battle of Midway , guarded the airport and POWs , as well as the atomic bomb as it was transported to Japan . 
 = = United States Coast Guard = = 
 Many Hispanics also served in the United States Coast Guard . Joseph B. Aviles , Sr. , the first Hispanic to be promoted to chief petty officer in the Coast Guard was also the first Hispanic to be promoted to chief warrant officer . He spent most of the war in St. Augustine , Florida training recruits . 
 Valentin R. Fernandez was awarded a Silver Lifesaving Medal for " maneuvering a Marine landing party ashore under constant Japanese attack " during the invasion of Saipan . 
 Louis Rua was awarded the Bronze Star Medal for " meritorious achievement at sea December 5 – 6 , 1944 , while serving aboard a U.S. Army large tug en route to the Philippines . His craft went to the rescue of another ship which had been torpedoed by enemy action and saved 277 survivors from the abandoned ship . " Rua was the first known Hispanic @-@ American Coast Guardsman to be awarded with a Bronze Star Medal . 
 Gunner 's Mate Second Class Joseph Tezanos was awarded a Navy & Marine Corps Medal during World War II for " ... distinguished heroism while serving as a volunteer member of a boat crew engaged in rescue operations during a fire in Pearl Harbor , Oahu , T.H. on 21 May 1944 . Under conditions of great personal danger from fire and explosions and with disregard of his own safety he assisted in the rescuing of approximately 42 survivors some of whom were injured and exhausted from the water and from burning ships . " He was also the first known Hispanic @-@ American to complete OCS training at the Coast Guard Academy . 
 Not everyone served aboard ships during the war . Some men like Jose R. Zaragoza served on missions on some lonely atolls . When 19 @-@ year @-@ old Zaragoza , a native of Los Angeles , California , joined the Coast Guard , he was sent on patrols in the Pacific coast of the United States defending against sabotage and invasion from the Japanese . Later he received instructions in the then @-@ emerging and secretive field of Loran navigation and sent to Ulithi atoll , located between Guam and the Philippines where he worked in Long Range Aids to Navigation , which is akin to radar work . He served on Ulithi Island for 15 months . 
 = = Aviators = = 
 Hispanics not only served in ground and <unk> combat units , they also distinguished themselves as fighter pilots and as bombardiers . In 1944 , Puerto Rican aviators were sent to the Tuskegee Army Air Field in Tuskegee , Alabama to train the famed 99th Fighter Squadron of the Tuskegee Airmen . The Tuskegee Airmen were the first African @-@ American military aviators in the United States armed forces . Puerto Ricans were also involved in clerical positions with the Tuskegee unit . Among the Puerto Ricans who helped make the Tuskegee experiment a successful one were T / Sgt. Pablo Diaz <unk> , an NCO ( Non Commissioned Officer ) in charge of the Special Service Office , and Eugene Calderon , who was assigned to the " Red Tail " unit , as the Company Clerk . By the end of the war , the Tuskegee Airmen were credited with 109 Luftwaffe aircraft shot down , a patrol boat run aground by machine @-@ gun fire , and destruction of numerous fuel dumps , trucks and trains . 
 A " flying ace " or fighter ace is a military aviator credited with shooting down five or more enemy aircraft during aerial combat . The term " ace in a day " is used to designate a fighter pilot who has shot down five or more enemy aircraft in a single day . Since World War I , a number of pilots have been honored as " Ace in a Day " ; however , the honor of being the last " Ace in a Day " for the United States in World War II belongs to First Lieutenant Oscar Francis Perdomo of the 464th Fighter Squadron , 507th Fighter Group . 
 First Lieutenant Perdomo , ( 1919 – 1976 ) , the son of Mexican parents , was born in El Paso , Texas . When the war broke out , Perdomo joined the United States Army Air Forces ( USAAF ) as an aviation cadet and was trained to pilot the P @-@ 47 Thunderbolt . After receiving his pilot training , he was assigned to the 464th Fighter Squadron , which was part of the 507th Fighter Group that was sent to the Pacific Island of Ie Shima off the west coast of Okinawa . 
 The atomic bomb was dropped on Nagasaki , Japan on August 9 , 1945 , but while the Allies awaited Japan 's response to the demand to surrender , the war continued . On August 13 , 1945 , 1st Lt. Perdomo shot down four Nakajima Ki @-@ 43 " Oscar " fighters and one Yokosuka <unk> " Willow " Type 93 biplane trainer . This action took place near Keijo / Seoul , Korea when 38 Thunderbolts of the 507th Fighter Wing encountered approximately 50 enemy aircraft . This action was Lt. Perdomo 's tenth and final combat mission , and the five confirmed victories made him an " Ace in a Day " and earned him the distinction of being the last " Ace " of World War II . He was awarded the Distinguished Service Cross for extraordinary heroism in action and the Air Medal with one oak leaf cluster . 
 Other Hispanics served with distinction in aerial combat , among which are the following men whose names are placed in accordance to their ranks : Commander Eugene A. Valencia , Jr . , Lieutenant Colonel Donald S. Lopez , Sr. , Captain Michael Brezas , Captain Mihiel " Mike " Gilormini , Captain Alberto A. Nido , Captain Robert L. Cardenas , 2nd Lieutenant César Luis González , First Lieutenant Francisco Mercado , Jr , Lieutenant Richard Gomez Candelaria , Lieutenant José Antonio Muñiz , Lieutenant Arthur Van Haren , Jr . , Technical Sergeant Clement Resto and Corporal Frank Medina . 
 Commander Eugene A. Valencia , Jr . , United States Navy ( USN ) fighter ace , is credited with 23 air victories in the Pacific during World War II . Valencia 's decorations include the Navy Cross , five Distinguished Flying Crosses , and six Air Medals . 
 Lieutenant Colonel Donald S. Lopez , Sr. , USAAF fighter ace was assigned to the 23rd Fighter Group under the command of General Claire Chennault . The mission of the fighter group ( the " Flying Tigers " ) was to help defend Chinese nationals against Japanese invaders . During 1943 – 1944 , Lopez was credited with shooting down five Japanese fighters , four in a Curtiss P @-@ 40 and one in a North American P @-@ 51 . 
 Captain Michael Brezas , USAAF fighter ace , arrived in Lucera , Italy during the summer of 1944 , joining the 48th Fighter Squadron of the 14th Fighter Group . Flying the P @-@ 38 aircraft , Lt. Brezas downed 12 enemy planes within two months . He received the Silver Star Medal , the Distinguished Flying Cross , and the Air Medal with eleven oak leaf clusters . 
 Captain Mihiel " Mike " Gilormini , Royal Air Force and USAAF , was a flight commander whose last combat mission was attacking the airfield at Milano , Italy . His last flight in Italy gave air cover for General George C. Marshall 's visit to Pisa . Gilormini was the recipient of the Silver Star Medal , five Distinguished Flying Crosses , and the Air Medal with four oak leaf clusters . Gilormini later founded the Puerto Rico Air National Guard and retired as Brigadier General . 
 Captain Alberto A. Nido , Royal Canadian Air Force , the British Royal Air Force and the USAAF . He flew missions as a bomber pilot for the RCAF and as a Supermarine Spitfire fighter pilot for the RAF . As member of the RAF , he belonged to 67th Reconnaissance Squadron who participated in 275 combat missions . Nido later transferred to the USAAF 's 67th Fighter Group as a P @-@ 51 Mustang fighter pilot . He was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross with four oak leaf clusters and the Air Medal with four oak leaf clusters . Nido co @-@ founded the Puerto Rico Air National Guard and , as Gilormini , retired a Brigadier General . 
 Captain Robert L. Cardenas , USAAF , served as a B @-@ 24 aircraft pilot in the European Theater of Operations with the 506th Bombardment Squadron . He was awarded the Air Medal and two oak leaf clusters for bombing missions before being shot down over Germany in March 1944 . Despite head wounds from flak , he made his way back to Allied control . On October 14 , 1947 , Cardenas flew the B @-@ 29 launch aircraft that released the X @-@ 1 experimental rocket plane in which Charles E. Yeager became the first man to fly faster than the speed of sound . Cardenas retired as Brigadier General . 
 2nd Lieutenant César Luis González , USAAF , the co @-@ pilot of a C @-@ 47 , was the first Puerto Rican pilot in the United States Army Air Forces . He was one of the initial participants of the invasion of Sicily on July 10 , 1943 also known as Operation Husky . During the invasion of Sicily , he flew on two night missions , the first on July 9 , where his mission was to release paratroops of 82nd Airborne Division on the area of Gela and the second on July 11 , when he dropped reinforcements in the area . His unit was awarded a " <unk> " for carrying out this second mission in spite of bad weather and heavy attack by enemy ground and naval forces . González died on November 22 , 1943 , when his plane crashed during training off the end of the runway at Castelvetrano . He was posthumously promoted to First Lieutenant . 
 Lieutenant Richard Gomez Candelaria , USAAF , was a P @-@ 51 Mustang pilot from the 435th Fighter Squadron of the 479th Fighter Group . With six aerial victories to his credit , Candelaria was the only pilot in his squadron to make " ace " . Most of his victories were achieved on a single mission on April 7 , 1945 , when he found himself the lone escort protecting a formation of USAAF B @-@ 24 Liberators . Candelaria defended the bombers from at least 15 German fighters , single @-@ handedly destroying four before help arrived . He was also credited with a probable victory on an Me 262 during this engagement . Six days later , Candelaria was shot down by ground fire , and spent the rest of the war as a POW . After the war , Candelaria served in the Air National Guard , reaching the rank of Colonel prior to his retirement . 
 Lieutenant Francisco Mercado , Jr . , USAAF , flew 35 combat missions as a Bombardier over enemy occupied Continental Europe as a member of the <unk> Bomb Squadron , <unk> Bomb Group , 8th Air Force . He was awarded the Air Medal with four Oak Leaf Cluster and the Distinguished Flying Cross . He flew ten missions as the Squadron Lead Bombardier , and one as the Group Lead Bombardier on December 30 , 1944 , on a mission to the Railroad Bridge at <unk> , Germany . On July 21 , 1944 , he earned a membership into the exclusive " Caterpillar Club " after he parachuted over England while returning from a mission with a crippled B @-@ 24 . 
 Lieutenant José Antonio Muñiz , USAAF , served with distinction in the China @-@ Burma @-@ India Theater . During his tour of duty he flew 20 combat mission against the Imperial Japanese Army Air Force and shot down a Mitsubishi A6M Zero . In 1960 , Muñiz was flying a formation of F @-@ 86s celebrating the 4th of July festivities in Puerto Rico and upon take off his airplane flamed out and crashed . In 1963 , the Air National Guard Base , at the San Juan International airport in Puerto Rico , was renamed " Muñiz Air National Guard Base " in his honor . 
 Lieutenant Arthur Van Haren , Jr . , USN , was a fighter pilot who was considered the top fighter ace of World War II from Arizona . He was part of the infamous U.S. Navy Fighting Squadron Two ( VF @-@ 2 " Rippers " ) . Based on the USS Hornet , a United States Navy aircraft carrier of the Essex class , Lt. Van Haren , Jr . , flew the F6F Hellcat . He downed nine confirmed enemy planes during grueling combat in the Pacific Theater skies , and had three additional unconfirmed kills . Three of his nine kills occurred in the Marianas Turkey Shoot . Additionally , Van Haren , Jr. was awarded two Distinguished Flying Cross ( United States ) medals . 
 Technical Sergeant Clement Resto , USAAF , was not an " ace " but served with the 303rd Bomb Group and participated in numerous bombing raids over Germany . During a bombing mission over Duren , Germany , Resto 's plane , a B @-@ 17 , was shot down . He was captured by the Gestapo and sent to Stalag XVII @-@ B where he spent the rest of the war as a prisoner of war . Resto , who lost an eye during his last mission , was awarded a Purple Heart , a POW Medal and an Air Medal with one battle star after he was liberated from captivity . 
 Corporal Frank Medina , USAAF , was an air crew member on a B @-@ 24 that was shot down over Italy . He was the only crewmember to evade capture . Medina explained that his ability to speak Spanish had allowed him to communicate with friendly Italians who helped him avoid capture for eight months behind enemy lines . 
 = = Servicewomen = = 
 Prior to World War II , traditional Hispanic cultural values expected women to be homemakers , thus they rarely left the home to earn an income . As such , women were discouraged from joining the military . Only a small number of Hispanic women joined the military before World War II . However , with the outbreak of World War II , cultural prohibitions began to change . With the creation of the Women 's Army Auxiliary Corps ( WAAC ) , predecessor of the Women 's Army Corps ( WAC ) , and the U.S. Navy Women Accepted for Volunteer Emergency Service ( WAVES ) , women could attend to certain administrative duties left open by the men who were reassigned to combat zones . While most women who served in the military joined the WAACs , a smaller number of women served in the Naval Women 's Reserve ( the WAVES ) . One of the first Hispanic women to serve in the USAAF was Staff Sergeant Eva Romero Jacques . Romero Jacques , who spoke Spanish and English and had three years of college spent two years in the Pacific Theater , 1944 in New Guinea and 1945 in the Philippines , as an administrative aide . She survived a plane disaster when the craft in which she was on crashed in the jungles of New Guinea . 
 In 1944 , the Army recruited women in Puerto Rico for the Women 's Army Corps ( WAC ) . Over 1 @,@ 000 applications were received for the unit , which was to be composed of only 200 women . After their basic training at Fort Oglethorpe , Georgia , the Puerto Rican WAC unit , Company 6 , 2nd Battalion , 21st Regiment of the Women 's Army Auxiliary Corps , a segregated Hispanic unit , was assigned to the New York Port of Embarkation to work in military offices that planned the shipment of troops around the world . Among them was PFC Carmen García Rosado , who in 2006 , authored and published a book titled " LAS <unk> @-@ <unk> de la Mujer Boricua en la Segunda Guerra Mundial " ( The WACs @-@ The participation of the Puerto Rican women in the Second World War ) , the first book to document the experiences of the first 200 Puerto Rican women who participated in said conflict . However , not all of the WAAC units were stationed in the mainland USA . In January 1943 , the 149th WAAC Post Headquarters Company became the first WAAC unit to go overseas when they went to North Africa . Serving overseas was dangerous for women ; if captured , WAACs , as " auxiliaries " serving with the Army rather than in it , did not have the same protections under international law as male soldiers . 
 One of the members of the 149th WAAC Post Headquarters Company was <unk> Carmen Contreras @-@ <unk> , who served in Algiers within General Dwight D. Eisenhower 's theatre headquarters . Contreras joined the Women 's Army Auxiliary Corps ( WAAC ) in 1942 and was sent to Fort Lee , Virginia for training . Contreras volunteered to be part of the 149th WAAC Post Headquarters Company , thus becoming the first Hispanic to serve as an interpreter and in numerous administrative positions . The unit was the first WAAC unit to go overseas , setting sail from New York Harbor for Europe on January 1943 . 
 Contreras ' unit arrived in Northern Africa on January 27 , 1943 , and rendered overseas duties in Algiers within General Dwight D. Eisenhower 's theatre headquarters , dealing with nightly German air raids . Contreras remembers that the women who served abroad were not treated like the regular Army servicemen . They did not receive overseas payment nor could they receive government life insurance . They had no protection if they became ill , wounded or captured . She served until 1945 and earned the European @-@ African Middle Eastern Campaign Medal with 2 Battle Stars , World War II Victory Medal , American Campaign Medal , Women 's Army Corps Service Medal and the Army Good Conduct Medal . 
 Mercedes O. Cubria , born in Guantanamo , Cuba , became a United States Citizen in 1924 . She joined the WAC 's in 1943 and served in the U.S. Counter Intelligence gathering information against the enemy . She retired in 1973 with the rank of Lieutenant Colonel . 
 Other Hispanic servicewomen like Contreras and Cubria served either in the WAACs , WAVES or <unk> ( Marine Corps Women 's Reserve ) ; among them Lieutenant Junior Grade Maria Rodriguez @-@ Denton . The Navy assigned Rodriguez @-@ Denton as a library assistant at the Cable and Censorship Office in New York City . It was Rodriguez @-@ Denton who forwarded the news ( through channels ) to President Harry S. Truman that the war had ended . 
 = = = Female nurses = = = 
 When the United States entered World War II , the military was in need of nurses . Hispanic female nurses wanted to volunteer for service , however they were not accepted into the Army Nurse Corps or Navy Nurse Corps . As a result , many women went to work in the factories which produced military equipment . As more Hispanic men joined the armed forces , a need for bilingual nurses became apparent and the Army started to recruit Hispanic nurses . In 1944 , the Army Nurse Corps ( ANC ) decided to accept Puerto Rican nurses . Thirteen women submitted applications , were interviewed , underwent physical examinations , and were accepted into the ANC . Eight of these nurses were assigned to the Army Post at San Juan , Puerto Rico where they were valued for their bilingual abilities . Five nurses were assigned to work at the hospital at Camp Tortuguero in Puerto Rico . One of these nurses was Second Lieutenant Carmen Lozano Dumler . 
 Second Lieutenant Carmen Lozano Dumler was born and raised in San Juan , Puerto Rico , where she also received her primary and secondary education . After graduating from high school , she enrolled in the Presbyterian Hospital School of Nursing in San Juan where she became a certified nurse in 1944 . On August 21 , 1944 , she was sworn in as a Second Lieutenant and assigned to the 161st General Hospital in San Juan , where she received further training . Upon completing her advanced training , she was sent to Camp Tortuguero where she also assisted as an interpreter . 
 In 1945 , Lozano Dumler was reassigned to the 359th Station Hospital of Ft . Read , Trinidad and Tobago , British West Indies , where she attended wounded soldiers who had returned from Normandy , France . After the war , Lozano , like so many other women in the military , returned to civilian life . She continued her nursing career in Puerto Rico until she retired in 1975 . 
 Another Hispanic nurse who distinguished herself in service was Lieutenant Maria Roach . Roach , a recipient of two Bronze Star Medals and an Air Medal , served as a flight nurse with the Army Nurse Corps in the China @-@ Burma @-@ India Theater of Operations . 
 = = Senior Officers = = 
 Most of the Hispanics serving as senior military officers during World War II were graduates of the United States Naval Academy . The three highest ranking Hispanic officers who played an instrumental role in the war were Major General ( later Lieutenant General ) Pedro Augusto del Valle — the first Hispanic to reach the rank of General in the U.S. Marine Corps — , Brigadier General ( later Lieutenant General ) Elwood R. " Pete " Quesada of the Army Air Forces and Army Major General Terry de la Mesa Allen . 
 = = = Generals = = = 
 Major General del Valle 
 Lieutenant General Pedro Augusto del Valle ( 1893 – 1978 ) , as a Colonel was the Commanding Officer of the 11th Marine Regiment ( artillery ) . Upon the outbreak of World War II , del Valle led his regiment during the seizure and defense of Guadalcanal , providing artillery support for the 1st Marine Division . In the Battle of the Tenaru , the firepower provided by del Valle 's artillery units killed many assaulting Japanese soldiers — almost to the last man — before they reached the Marine positions . As a result of the outcome of the battle Japanese commander , Colonel Ichiki Kiyonao , committed seppuku shortly afterwards . General Alexander Vandegrift , impressed with del Valle 's leadership , recommended his promotion and on October 1 , 1942 , del Valle became a Brigadier General . Vandegrift retained del Valle as head of the 11th Marines , the only time that the 11th Marines has ever had a general as their commanding officer . In 1943 , he served as Commander of Marine Forces overseeing Guadalcanal , Tulagi , and the Russell and Florida Islands . 
 On April 1 , 1944 , del Valle , as Commanding General of the Third Corps Artillery , III Marine Amphibious Corps , took part in the Battle of Guam and was awarded a Gold Star in lieu of a second Legion of Merit . The men under his command did such a good job with their heavy artillery that no one man could be singled out for commendation . Instead each man was given a letter of commendation by del Valle , which was carried in his record books . 
 In late October 1944 , del Valle succeeded Major General William Rupertus as Commanding General of the 1st Marine Division , being personally greeted to his new command by Colonel Lewis Burwell " Chesty " Puller . At the time , the 1st Marine Division was training on the island of Pavuvu for the invasion of Okinawa . On May 29 , 1945 , del Valle participated in one of the most important events that led to victory in Okinawa . After five weeks of fighting , del Valle ordered Company A of the 1st Battalion 5th Marines to capture Shuri Castle , a medieval fortress of the ancient Ryukyuan kings . Seizure of Shuri Castle represented a morale blow for the Japanese and was a milestone in the Okinawa campaign . The fighting in Okinawa would continue for 24 more days . Del Valle was awarded a Distinguished Service Medal for his leadership during the battle and the subsequent occupation and reorganization of Okinawa . 
 Brigadier General Quesada 
 Lieutenant General Elwood R. " Pete " Quesada , ( 1904 – 1993 ) was assigned as a Brigadier General in October 1940 to intelligence in the Office of the Chief of Air Corps . He became commanding general of the 9th Fighter Command where he established advanced headquarters on the Normandy beachhead on D @-@ Day plus one , and directed his planes in aerial cover and air support for the Allied invasion of the European continent . He was the foremost proponent of " the inherent flexibility of air power " , a principle he helped prove during World War II . 
 In December 1942 , Quesada took the First Air Defense Wing to North Africa . Shortly thereafter , he was given command of the XII Fighter Command and in this capacity would work out the mechanics of close air support and Army @-@ Air Force cooperation . 
 The successful integration of air and land forces in the Tunisia campaign forged by Quesada and the Allied leaders became a blueprint for operations incorporated into Army Air Forces field regulations — FM 100 @-@ 20 , " Command and Employment of Air Power " , first published on July 21 , 1943 — and provided the Allies with their first victory in the European war . Principles such as the co @-@ equality of ground and air force commanders , centralized command of tactical aircraft to exploit " the inherent flexibility of air power " , and the attainment of air superiority over the battlefield as a prerequisite for successful ground operations formed the core of tactical air doctrine . In October 1943 , Quesada assumed command of the IX Fighter Command in England , and his forces provided air cover for the landings on Normandy Beach . Among Quesada 's many military decorations were the Distinguished Service Medal with oak leaf cluster ; Distinguished Flying Cross ; Purple Heart and an Air Medal with two silver star devices . 
 Major General Terry de la Mesa Allen 
 Major General Terry de la Mesa Allen , Sr. ( 1888 – 1969 ) was the son of Colonel Samuel Edward Allen and Conchita Alvarez de la Mesa . During World War II he was the commanding general of the 1st Infantry Division in North Africa and Sicily , and was made commander of the 104th Infantry Division . While in North Africa Allen and his deputy 1st Division Commander , Brigadier General Theodore Roosevelt Jr. distinguished themselves as combat leaders . Allen was reassigned to the 104th Infantry Division . The 104th Infantry Division landed in France on September 7 , 1944 and fought for 195 consecutive days during World War II . The division 's nickname came from its <unk> shoulder insignia . Some 34 @,@ 000 men served with the division under Allen who came to be nicknamed " Terrible Terry " . The division was particularly renowned for its night fighting prowess . 
 = = = Commanders = = = 
 In 1941 , Commander Luis de Florez played an instrumental role in the establishment of the Special Devices Division of the Navy 's Bureau of Aeronautics ( what would later become the NAWCTSD ) . He was later assigned as head of the new Special Devices Desk in the Engineering Division of the Navy 's Bureau of Aeronautics . De Florez , who has been credited with over sixty inventions , urged the Navy to undertake development of " synthetic training devices " to increase readiness . During World War II , he was promoted to Captain and in 1944 , to Rear Admiral . 
 A number of Hispanics served in senior leadership positions during World War II , including Admiral Horacio Rivero , Jr . ( USN ) , Rear Admiral Jose M. Cabanillas ( USN ) , Rear Admiral Edmund Ernest García ( USN ) , Rear Admiral Frederick Lois Riefkohl ( USN ) , Rear Admiral Henry G. Sanchez ( USN ) , Colonel Louis Gonzaga Mendez , Jr . ( USA ) , Colonel Virgil R. Miller ( USA ) , Colonel Jaime Sabater , Sr. ( USMC ) and Lieutenant Colonel Chester J. Salazar ( USMC ) . 
 Admiral Horacio Rivero , Jr . , USN , served aboard the USS San Juan , providing artillery cover for Marines landing on Guadalcanal , Marshall Islands , Iwo Jima , and Okinawa . Rivero eventually reached the rank of Full @-@ Admiral ( four @-@ stars ) and in October 1962 , found himself in the middle of the Cuban Missile Crisis . As Commander of amphibious forces , Atlantic Fleet , he was on the front line of the vessels sent to the Caribbean by President Kennedy to stop the Cold War from escalating into World War III . 
 Rear Admiral Edmund Ernest García , USN , was the commander of the destroyer USS Sloat and saw action in the invasions of Africa , Sicily , and France . 
 Rear Admiral Jose M. Cabanillas , USN , was an Executive Officer of the USS Texas , which participated in the invasions of North Africa and Normandy ( D @-@ Day ) during World War II . In 1945 , he became the first Commanding officer of the USS Grundy ( APA @-@ 111 ) . 
 Rear Admiral Frederick Lois Riefkohl , USN , was a World War I Navy Cross recipient who served as Captain of the USS Vincennes during World War II . The Vincennes was engaged in combat against a fleet of Japanese ships just off Guadalcanal and received 85 direct hits . Riefkohl ordered his men to abandon ship . The sailors manned the life rafts ; among them was Ensign C. Kenneth Ruiz , who later become a submarine commander . 
 Rear Admiral Henry G. Sanchez , USN , commanded ( as a Lieutenant Commander ) VF @-@ 72 , an F4F squadron of 37 aircraft , on board the USS Hornet from July to October 1942 . His squadron was responsible for shooting down 38 Japanese airplanes during his command tour , which included the Battle of the Santa Cruz Islands . 
 Colonel Virgilio N. Cordero , Jr . , USA , was the Battalion Commander of the 31st Infantry Regiment in the Philippines . Survivor of the infamous Bataan Death March , he was awarded three Silver Star Medals and a Bronze Star Medal . 
 Colonel Louis Gonzaga Mendez , Jr . , USA , was dropped behind German lines as a parachute infantry battalion commander in the Army 's elite 82nd Airborne " All American " Division . For leading the attack that captured the town of <unk> , France , Colonel Mendez was awarded the Army 's Distinguished Service Cross . He was also the recipient of 3 Bronze Star Medals . 
 Colonel Virgil R. Miller , USA , native of San German , Puerto Rico , was the Regimental Commander of the 442d Regimental Combat Team , a unit which was composed of " Nisei " ( second generation Americans of Japanese descent ) , during World War II . He led the 442nd in its rescue of the Lost Texas Battalion of the 36th Infantry Division , in the forests of the Vosges Mountains in northeastern France . 
 Colonel Jaime Sabater , Sr. , USMC , commanded the 1st Battalion , 9th Marines during the Bougainville amphibious operations of World War II . Sabater also participated in the Battle of Guam ( July 21 , 1944 – August 10 , 1944 ) as Executive officer of the 9th Marines . On July 21 , 1944 , he was wounded in action and awarded the Purple Heart . 
 Lieutenant Colonel Chester J. Salazar , USMC , Salazar was the Commanding Officer of the 2d Battalion , 18th Marines . Salazar served as commanding officer the unit in the Gilbert Islands which fought in the Battle of Tarawa and later in the Battles of Saipan and Tinian . 
 = = = Submarine commanders = = = 
 Captain Marion Frederic Ramírez de Arellano , ( 1913 – 1999 ) USN , the first Hispanic submarine commanding officer , participated in five war patrols . He led the effort to rescue five navy pilots and one enlisted gunner off Wake Island , and contributed to the sinking of two Japanese freighters and damaging a third . For his actions , he was awarded a Silver Stars Medal and a Legion of Merit Medal . 
 After a brief stint at the Mare Island Naval Shipyard , he was reassigned to the USS Skate , a Balao @-@ class submarine . He participated in the Skate 's first three war patrols and was awarded a second Silver Star Medal for his contribution in sinking the Japanese light cruiser Agano on his third patrol . The Agano had survived a previous torpedo attack by submarine USS Scamp . 
 In April 1944 , Ramirez de Arellano was named Commanding Officer of the USS Balao . He participated in his boat 's war patrols 5 , 6 and 7 . On July 5 , 1944 , Ramirez de Arellano led the rescue of three downed wavy pilots in the Palau area . On December 4 , 1944 , the Balao departed from Pearl Harbor to patrol in the Yellow Sea . The Balao engaged and sunk the Japanese cargo ship Daigo Maru on January 8 , 1945 . Ramirez de Arellano was awarded a Bronze Star Medal with Combat V and a Letter of Commendation . 
 Among the Hispanic submarine commanders were Rear Admiral Rafael Celestino Benítez and Captain C. Kenneth Ruiz . 
 Rear Admiral Rafael Celestino Benítez , USN , was a lieutenant commander who saw action aboard submarines and on various occasions weathered depth charge attacks . For his actions , he was awarded the Silver and Bronze Star Medals . Benitez would go on to play an important role in the first American undersea spy mission of the Cold War as commander of the submarine USS Cochino in what became known as the " Cochino Incident " . 
 Captain Charles Kenneth Ruiz , USN , was a crew member of the cruiser USS Vincennes , during the Battle of Savo Island . After being rescued at sea and sent to Pearl Harbor , he was invited by Admiral Chester Nimitz to join the Submarine Service . He served with distinction aboard the submarine USS Pollack and participated in eight war patrols in the hostile waters of the Pacific during World War II and on . 
 = = Military honors = = 
 = = = Recipients of the Medal of Honor = = = 
 The Medal of Honor is the highest military decoration in the United States bestowed " for conspicuous gallantry and intrepidity at the risk of life , above and beyond the call of duty , in actual combat against an armed enemy force . " The medal is awarded by the President of the United States on behalf of the Congress . Joe P. Martinez was the first of 17 Hispanic Medal of Honor recipients during World War II . His posthumous award was the first for combat heroism on American soil ( other than Pearl Harbor ) since the American Indian Wars . 
 Private Joe P. Martinez , whose birth name was Joseph <unk> Martinez , was one of nine children born to a family of Mexican immigrants . His family moved to Ault , Colorado and on August 1942 , he was drafted into the United States Army and sent to Camp Roberts , California , where he received his basic training . 
 On May 26 , 1943 , the 32nd Infantry Regiment was pinned down by enemy fire in the vicinity of Fish Hook Ridge , in the Aleutian Islands . On his own account , Martinez led two assaults , firing into the Japanese foxholes and occasionally stopping to urge on his comrades . His example inspired the men of his unit to follow . Martinez was shot in the head as he approached one final foxhole after the second assault , dying of the wound the following day . Because of his actions the pass was taken , and its capture was an important preliminary to the end of organized hostile resistance . Martinez was posthumously awarded the Medal of Honor . 
 Prior to March 18 , 2014 , 13 was the total of Medals of Honor awarded to Hispanics for their actions in World War II . On April 28 , 1951 , President Barack Obama announced that on March 18 , 2014 , 4 Hispanics who served in World War II will have their Distinguished Service Cross Medal 's upgraded to the Medal of Honor in a ceremony in the White House . They are : Pvt. Pedro Cano , Pvt. Joe <unk> , Pfc. Salvador J. Lara and Staff Sgt. Manuel V. Mendoza . The award comes through the Defense Authorization Act which called for a review of Jewish American and Hispanic American veterans from WWII , the Korean War and the Vietnam War to ensure that no prejudice was shown to those deserving the Medal of Honor . 
 Of the 17 Medals of Honor awarded to Hispanics , ten were awarded posthumously . Texas accounted for the most Hispanic Medal of Honor recipients in World War II with a total of five ( <unk> Garcia was raised in Sugar Land , Texas ) . The 17 recipients are : 
 Lucian Adams : United States Army . Born in Port Arthur , Texas . Place and Date of Action : St. Die , France , October 1944 . 
 Pedro Cano * : United States Army . Born in La Morita , Mexico . For courageous actions during combat operations in <unk> , Germany , on Dec. 3 , 1944 . 
 Rudolph B. Davila : United States Army . Born in El Paso , Texas . Place and Date of Action : <unk> , Italy , May 28 , 1944 . Davila was of Hispanic @-@ Filipino descent and the only person of Filipino ancestry to receive the medal for his actions in the war in Europe . 
 Joe <unk> * : United States Army . Born in Santa Monica , California . For courageous actions during combat operations in Amfreville , France , on June 9 , 1944 . 
 <unk> Garcia : United States Army . Born in Villa de <unk> , Mexico . Place and Date of Action : Near <unk> , Germany , November 27 , 1944 . Garcia was the first Mexican national Medal of Honor recipient . 
 Harold Gonsalves * : United States Marine Corps . Born in Alameda , California . Place and Date of Action : Ryūkyū Chain , Okinawa , April 15 , 1945 . 
 David M. Gonzales * : United States Army . Born in Pacoima , California . Place and Date of Action : Villa Verde Trail , Luzon , Philippine Islands , April 25 , 1945 . 
 Silvestre S. Herrera : United States Army . Born in Camargo , Chihuahua , Mexico . Place and Date of Action : Near <unk> , France , March 15 , 1945 . At the time of his death , Herrera had been the only living person authorized to wear the Medal of Honor and Mexico 's equivalent Premier Merito Militar ( Order of Military Merit ) , Mexico 's highest award for valor . Herrera was a Mexican citizen by birth . 
 Salvador J. Lara * : United States Army . From Riverside , California . For courageous actions during combat operations in Aprilia , Italy , May 27 – 28 , 1944 . 
 Jose M. Lopez : United States Army . Born in Mission , Texas . Place and Date of Action : Near <unk> , Belgium , December 17 , 1944 . 
 Joe P. Martinez * : United States Army . Born in Taos , New Mexico . Place and Date of Action : Attu , Aleutians , May 26 , 1943 . Martinez was the first Hispanic American posthumously awarded the Medal of Honor for combat heroism on American soil during World War II . 
 Manuel V. Mendoza * : United States Army . Born in Miami , Arizona . For courageous actions during combat operations on Mount Battaglia , Italy , on Oct. 4 , 1944 . 
 Manuel Perez Jr . * : United States Army . Born in Oklahoma City , Oklahoma . Place and Date of Action : Fort William McKinley , Luzon , Philippine Islands , February 13 , 1945 . 
 <unk> L. Rodriguez : United States Army . Born in San Marcos , Texas . Place and Date of Action : Paco Railroad Station , Manila , Philippine Islands , February 9 , 1945 . 
 Alejandro R. Ruiz : United States Army . Born in Loving , New Mexico . Place and Date of Action : Okinawa , Japan , April 28 , 1945 . 
 Jose F. Valdez * : United States Army . Born in <unk> , New Mexico . Place and Date of Action : Rosenkrantz , France , January 25 , 1945 . 
 <unk> R. Villegas * : United States Army . Born in Casa Blanca , California . Place and Date of Action : Villa Verde Trail , Luzon , Philippine Islands , March 20 , 1945 . 
 * Awarded posthumously . 
 = = = Top military decorations = = = 
 Hispanics were recipients of every major U.S. military decoration during World War II ; they have also been honored with military awards from other countries . Thirty @-@ one Hispanic @-@ Americans were awarded the Belgian Croix de guerre and three Hispanic @-@ Americans received the French Croix de guerre . The figures in the following table were derived from the book Undaunted Courage Mexican American Patriots Of World War II published in 2005 by Latino Advocates for Education , Inc. and according to Rogelio C. Rodriguez of the <unk> , the figures are based on listings of military service personnel that have been complied from military records , historical documentation , or personal accounts . 
 = = = Hero Street , USA = = = 
 In the Midwest town of <unk> , Illinois , the former Second Street is now known as Hero Street USA . The muddy block and a half long street was home to Mexican immigrants who worked for the Rock Island Railroad . The 22 families who lived on the street were a close @-@ knit group . From this small street , 84 men served in World War II , Korea , and Vietnam . The street contributed more men to military services in World War II and Korea than any other street of comparable size in the U.S. In total , eight men from Hero Street gave their lives during World War II — Joseph Gomez , Peter Macias , Johnny Muños , Tony <unk> , Frank Sandoval , Joseph " Joe " Sandoval , William " Willie " Sandoval and Claro Solis . Second Street 's name was changed to Hero Street in honor of these men and their families . 
 Of the 22 families on Second Street , the two Sandoval families had a total of thirteen men who served in the armed forces . Three died in service during World War II . The <unk> were two families of Mexican immigrants , with the same surname and lived on Second Street . 
 <unk> and Angelina Sandoval immigrated to the U.S. from Romita , Mexico . Their son , Frank , was a combat engineer assigned to help build the Ledo Road in Burma . He was killed when his unit was sent unexpectedly to the front to fight for control of a key airbase . His older brother , Joe , was assigned to the 41st Armored Infantry Division in Europe . He was killed in April 1944 , just days before the war ended . 
 Joseph and Carmen Sandoval also immigrated to the United States from Mexico . When the war broke out , their son Willie asked for permission to enlist in the Army and both parents consented to their son 's request . Willie Sandoval was trained as a paratrooper and was assigned to the 82nd Airborne Division . He fought in Italy and Germany , and was killed on October 6 , 1944 , during a combat mission related to Operation Market @-@ Garden , the largest airborne operation of all time . 
 Other families like the <unk> had multiple members join the Armed Forces . The <unk> family , originally from Mexico and who resided in Los Angeles , California , the Garcia family from Los Angeles , California , and the Mora family from Laredo , Texas , each had six siblings who served in the military during the war . The Nevarez family , from Los Angeles , California , had a total of eight siblings serving in the Armed Forces . Seven brothers of the Medina family known as " The fighting <unk> " , fought in the war . They came from Rio Grande , Puerto Rico and Brooklyn , New York . 
 = = Home front = = 
 Some Hispanics in the entertainment business served in the United Service Organizations ( USO ) , which provided entertainment to help troop morale . One notable USO entertainer was Desi Arnaz , the Cuban bandleader who starred opposite Lucille Ball in the television show I Love Lucy . When he was drafted into the army in 1943 , he was classified for limited service because of a prior knee injury . As a result , he was assigned to direct the <unk> programs at a military hospital in the San Fernando Valley , California , where he served until 1945 . 
 Hispanic Americans who lived in the mainland benefited from the sudden economic boom as a result of the war , and the doors opened for many of the migrants who were searching for jobs . After the war , many Puerto Ricans migrated to the United States to find work . 
 Hispanic women were discouraged from working outside the home prior to World War II , even more than other American women . During World War II , the broad changes in the role of women caused by a need for labor on the home front affected the role of Hispanic women , who worked as secretaries and nurses , helped build airplanes , made ammunition in factories , and worked in shipyards . 
 Isabel Solis @-@ Thomas and <unk> Solis were born in Veracruz , Veracruz , Mexico . The Solis family immigrated to the United States and moved to Brownsville , Texas . When World War II broke out , both sisters volunteered to become " <unk> " , welding pipes and repairing cargo ships by the war 's end with women of all races from all over the country . Mrs. Solis @-@ Thomas said recruiters wanted women who were small , short and thin for crawling into dangerous places in the ships . She said she worked nine @-@ hour days , six days a week , striking and sealing steel rods with precision and purpose . 
 Josephine Ledesma , from Austin , Texas , was 24 when the war broke out and worked as an airplane mechanic from 1942 to 1944 . When her husband , Alfred , was drafted she decided to volunteer to work as an airplane mechanic . Even though the army waived her husband 's duty , she was sent to train at Randolph Air Force Base , Texas , where she was the only Mexican @-@ American woman on the base . After her training , she was sent to Bergstrom Air Field . There were two other women , both non @-@ Hispanic , at Bergstrom Air Field , and several more in Big Spring , all working in the sheet metal department . At Big Spring , she was the only woman working in the hangar . She worked as a mechanic between from 1942 to 1944 . 
 = = Discrimination = = 
 = = = In the military = = = 
 During World War II , the United States Army was segregated , and Hispanics were categorized as white . Hispanics , including the Puerto Ricans who resided on the mainland , served alongside their " white " counterparts , while those who were " black " served in units mostly made up of African @-@ Americans . The majority of the Puerto Ricans from the island served in Puerto Rico 's segregated units , like the 65th Infantry and the Puerto Rico National Guard 's 285th and 296th regiments . 
 Discrimination against Hispanics has been documented in several first @-@ person accounts by Hispanic soldiers who fought in World War II . Private First Class Raul Rios Rodriguez , a Puerto Rican , said that one of his drill instructors was particularly harsh on the Hispanic and black soldiers in his unit during his basic training at Fort Bragg . Private First Class Felix Lopez @-@ Santos , another Puerto Rican , said that he observed some racial discrimination against African Americans , but that he never experienced discrimination himself because of his light eyes and fair complexion . Private First Class Norberto Gonzalez , a Cuban @-@ born New Yorker , experienced discrimination in his all @-@ white battalion , where he was frequently asked about his name and place of birth , and found he was treated differently once fellow soldiers learned he was Hispanic . After being transferred to a black battalion on request , he no longer faced the same problems . Corporal Alfonso Rodriguez , a Mexican @-@ American born in Santa Fe , New Mexico , said that he first experienced racial discrimination during recruit training . A white soldier once demanded that the Rodriguez and other Latinos stop speaking Spanish and speak English , " like Americans " , and Rodriguez was involved in several physical altercations stemming from the incident . Rodriguez was also often referred to using racial insults such as " smart @-@ ass Mexican . " 
 = = = After returning home = = = 
 After returning home , Hispanic soldiers experienced the same discrimination felt by other Hispanic Americans . According to one former Hispanic soldier , " There was the same discrimination in Grand Falls ( Texas ) , if not worse " than when he had departed . While Hispanics could work for $ 2 per day , whites could get jobs working in petroleum fields that earned $ 18 per day . In his town , signs read " No Mexicans , whites only " , and only one restaurant would serve Hispanics . The American GI Forum was started to ensure the rights of Hispanic World War II veterans . 
 Discrimination also extended to those killed during the war . In one notable case , the owner of a funeral parlor refused to allow the family of Private Felix Longoria , a soldier killed in action in the Philippines , to use his facility because " whites would not like it " . Then @-@ U.S. Senator Lyndon B. Johnson and Hector P. Garcia , the Mexican @-@ American World War II veteran who founded the American G.I. Forum , intervened on Longoria 's behalf . Johnson , Lady Bird Johnson , Congressman John Lyle , and President Truman 's military aide Gen. Harry H. Vaughan joined the Longoria family for a full military burial with honors at Arlington National Cemetery on February 16 , 1949 . Johnson stated of the incident , " This injustice and prejudice is deplorable . I am happy to have a part seeing that this Texas hero is laid to rest with the honor and dignity his service deserves . " 
 = = Post @-@ war commemoration = = 
 The memory of Hispanic American heroes has been honored in various ways : some of their names can be found on ships , in parks and inscribed on monuments . Captain Linda Garcia Cubero ( USAF ) , while serving as Special Assistant to the Deputy Secretary of Defense , supervised the development of a United States commemorative stamp to honor Hispanics who served in America 's defense . The stamp was designed to honor the ten Hispanic Medal of Honor recipients still alive and was unveiled on October 31 , 1984 . 
 Latino organizations and writers documented the Hispanic experience in World War II , most notably the U.S. Latino & Latina WWII Oral History Project , launched by Professor Maggie Rivas @-@ Rodriguez of the University of Texas . 
 The failure of the Ken Burns World War II documentary The War , which aired on PBS in September 2007 , to mention Hispanic contributions to the war spurred protests by the Hispanic community . Officials in PBS announced that Burns ' documentary would include additional content incorporating the Hispanic contributions to the war effort as result of public pressure . 
 = 3rd Division ( Australia ) = 
 The 3rd Division was an infantry division of the Australian Army . Existing during various periods between 1916 and 1991 , it is considered the " longest serving Australian Army division " . It was first formed during World War I , as an infantry division of the Australian Imperial Force and saw service on the Western Front in France and Belgium . During this time it fought major battles at Messines , Broodseinde Ridge , Passchendaele , Amiens , and the St Quentin Canal . 
 After the war the division was demobilised in 1919 before being re @-@ raised in 1921 as part of the Citizen Forces , based in central Victoria . Throughout the 1920s and 1930s , the division 's establishment fluctuated due to the effects of the Great Depression and a general apathy towards military matters . 
 During World War II , the division was mobilised for war in December 1941 and initially undertook defensive duties in Australia before being deployed to New Guinea in 1943 where they took part in the Salamaua – Lae campaign against the Japanese in 1943 – 44 , before returning to Australia for rest and reorganisation . In late 1944 they were sent to Bougainville to take part in their final campaign of the war . There they undertook a series of advances across the island before the war came to an end in August 1945 . 
 Following the end of hostilities the division was disbanded in December 1945 as part of the demobilisation process , but was it later re @-@ raised in 1948 as part of the Citizens Military Force . It subsequently served through the Cold War as a reserve formation until 1991 when the division was disbanded for a final time as the Australian Army was restructured and the focus of Australian field force operations shifted from the divisional @-@ level to brigades . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 = = = = Formation and training = = = = 
 In early 1916 , following the unsuccessful Gallipoli campaign , the decision was made to expand the size of the Australian Imperial Force ( AIF ) . At the time there were two divisions in Egypt — the 1st and 2nd — and of these , one of them ( the 1st ) was split up to provide a cadre upon which to raise the 4th and 5th Divisions . Around this time the decision to raise a fifth division from fresh volunteers in Australia was also made and as a result the 3rd Division was officially raised on 2 February 1916 . 
 Upon formation , the division drew its personnel from all Australian states and consisted of three four @-@ battalion infantry brigades — the 9th , 10th and the 11th — and a number of supporting elements including engineers , artillery and medical personnel . Only rudimentary initial training was undertaken before elements of the division began the embarkation process in May and June 1916 as they were moved to the United Kingdom , where the individual sub units concentrated for the first time , received arms and other equipment and began the task of undertaking further training at Lark Hill , on Salisbury Plain . In July the division 's artillery component was formed , consisting of three batteries of 18 @-@ pounders and one 4 @.@ 5 inch howitzer battery . The process of raising and training took some time and consequently the division was not transferred to France until mid November 1916 . Prior to this , however , the division endured proposals to break it up to provide reinforcements to the other four Australian divisions that were already in France . Although these threats passed , in early September 1916 , following losses around Pozières , almost 3 @,@ 000 men from the 3rd Division were transferred . Throughout October it seemed likely that further drafts would be siphoned away from the division , however , this did not occur and in early November two divisional exercises were undertaken . Finally , on 21 November 1916 , the 3rd Division crossed the English Channel and arrived in France . 
 Under the command of Major General John Monash , the division was assigned to II ANZAC Corps . For the next two years they would take part in most of the major battles that the Australians fought on the Western Front . Initially they were deployed around Armentières in a " quiet " sector of the line , where they gained their first experiences of trench warfare , conducting patrols into No Man 's Land and minor raids on the German trenches opposite them during the winter months . 
 = = = = Early engagements , 1917 = = = = 
 By January 1917 the 3rd Division 's artillery had been reorganised so that it consisted of two field artillery brigades , each of which consisted of three six @-@ gun 18 @-@ pounder batteries and twelve 4 @.@ 5 inch howitzers . These brigades were the 7th ( consisting of the 25th , 26th , 27th and 107th Batteries ) and the 8th ( 29th , 30th , 31st and 108th Batteries ) . In April 1917 the division was moved to the Messines – Wytschaete Ridge section of the line in Belgium , taking up a position on the extreme right of II ANZAC Corps , with the New Zealand Division to its left . It was here , in early June 1917 , that the division undertook its first major engagement of the war when it was committed to the fighting during the Battle of Messines . Monash tasked the 9th and 10th Brigades to provide the assault force for the 3rd Division 's part of the operation , while the 11th Brigade was to act as the divisional reserve . 
 As the division 's assault units began their approach march towards the line of departure late on the evening of 6 June , the German artillery opened up with a gas bombardment that severely hindered the march , breaking up the assaulting units as men became lost . Suffering over 2 @,@ 000 casualties before the battle even began , many of the division 's assault units reached their assembly points with less than 200 men , nevertheless they arrived on time and at the appointed hour , after a number of mines were exploded in front of their positions , the assault began . The exploding mines had destroyed a large part of the German line and as a result initial resistance was quickly overcome by the division 's lead battalions — the 33rd , 34th , 38th and 39th — and by 5 am , the division had gained the crest of the Messines ridge and began digging in to defend against a possible counter @-@ attack . In the engagements that followed the division largely played only a supporting role . 
 Following this , the division 's next major engagement came on 4 October 1917 when it took part in the Battle of Broodseinde Ridge . This time the 9th Brigade was held back in reserve , while the 10th and 11th Brigades led the division forward . Attacking on the left of the Australian 2nd Division and the right of the New Zealand Division , early on the morning of the scheduled start of the attack the German artillery opened up on the division 's eight assaulting infantry battalions as they stood to in the open ready to step off . Conserving their artillery for the main attack , the supporting Allied artillery only provided limited counter @-@ battery fire and the division suffered heavily as they were forced to endure an hour @-@ long barrage before zero hour came at 6 am . As the 37th and 43rd Battalions led the advance towards the German lines , supported by small teams of mortarmen and machine gunners , the Germans launched their own attack , however , the Australian assault had taken them by surprise and after some initial resistance , the German assault troops began to fall back or surrender . As the follow @-@ on battalions exploited the ground gained in the initial assault the advance continued and by 9 : 15 am the 3rd Division had carried the ridge and begun to dig in , having advanced 2 @,@ 000 yards ( 1 @,@ 800 m ) . A counterattack late in the day on the 11th Brigade 's position was turned back , sealing a stunning success for the 3rd Division . Nevertheless , the division 's casualties were high , with over 1 @,@ 800 men killed or wounded . For his actions during the attack , Walter Peeler , a Lewis @-@ gunner from the 3rd Pioneer Battalion who was attached to 37th Battalion for anti @-@ aircraft duties received the Victoria Cross after he personally led the assault on a number of German positions . 
 They held the line for a further three days before being withdrawn for rest and reorganisation . On 10 October 1917 the division returned to the front and began to make preparations to assault Passchendaele Ridge , an advance of over 3 @,@ 000 yards ( 2 @,@ 700 m ) . Heavy rain , however , had turned the battlefield into a thick , muddy morass and as a result transportation and resupply efforts were hampered as were attempts to reposition the supporting artillery and as a consequence when the attack went in at 5 : 25 am on 12 October the 9th and 10th Brigades had only limited fire support . With only a fraction of the guns required and limited ammunition , the artillery that was supposed to provide a creeping barrage behind which the infantry were to advance could only provide a thin bombardment . Nevertheless , the mud was so thick that the infantry were unable to keep up with the barrage and , unable to maintain the required rate of advance , they eventually they fell behind the barrage and lost any cover that it might otherwise have provided . 
 Upon reaching the Bellevue Spur , the assaulting infantry , caught in the open upon the barbed wire in front of the German positions , suffered heavily at the hands of the German artillery that was able to fire without answer from the British batteries that had run out of ammunition . Nevertheless , the 10th Brigade managed to reach its first objective , as did the 9th which even pushed on to its second , however , as they began to receive enfilade fire from their left flank where the New Zealand Division 's attack had ground to a halt , the Germans began massing for a counterattack and the Australian positions quickly became untenable . On the division 's right flank another gap had begun to develop as they lost contact with the Australian 4th Division and as a result the order to retire was passed . As they returned to the start line , the assault units were relieved by the 11th Brigade , which had formed the divisional reserve . By the end of the day , the division had lost almost 3 @,@ 200 men killed or wounded . They played no further offensive role in the battle and were eventually removed from the line on 22 October as the Canadians took over from them . 
 The fighting around Passchendaele proved to be the division 's last offensive actions for 1917 and they spent the winter months in the rear training , or undertaking defensive duties in reasonably quiet sectors of the line as they were reformed and brought back up to strength . Around this time also , the five Australian divisions on the Western Front were reorganised into a unified command structure under the Australian Corps . 
 = = = = German Spring Offensive , 1918 = = = = 
 In March 1918 the Germans launched their Spring Offensive near Saint @-@ Quentin and as the Allied line collapsed , the German forces advanced swiftly into the Somme valley . Believing that another attack would be directed against the forces in the Flanders sector , in an effort to reinforce the British forces there , the Allied commanders recalled the 3rd Division was recalled from its quiet sector around Armentières and sent it to Ypres . The attack came , however , at the Somme and so on 24 March the division was transferred south to help stem the advance and defend the approaches towards the important railhead at Amiens . Temporarily placed under the command of the British VII Corps , the division took up position to the east of Amiens in between the Ancre and Somme Rivers . 
 Lacking any reserves and possessing only limited artillery support , the division 's engineers prepared the bridges over the rivers for detonation . From 27 March onwards minor actions were fought along the line as the German advance began to reach the Australians . On 30 March a serious attempt at penetrating the line around Sailly @-@ Laurette was held and broken up by the 11th Brigade , with German losses being assessed at around one and a half brigades , or roughly between 3 and 4 @,@ 000 men . On 6 April further attempts were made and in the confusion the charges that had been placed on the <unk> Bridge were fired and it was dropped into the Somme Canal . Nevertheless , the attempt was beaten off by the 10th Brigade . Following this the Australians were able to begin taking the initiative and throughout May they began to slowly recapture some of the ground that had been lost earlier as they undertook a series of peaceful penetration operations . 
 In June 1918 , the 3rd Division 's commander , Monash , was promoted to take over command of the Australian Corps and as a result Major General John Gellibrand took over as divisional commander . 
 = = = = Battle of Amiens , 1918 = = = = 
 On 8 August 1918 , the Allies launched their Hundred Days Offensive around Amiens and the 3rd Division was tasked with leading the Australian Corps part in the attack . By this stage , the divisional artillery consisted of three field brigades , and under the cover of a heavy artillery bombardment provided by nine field brigades that were organised in three supporting sub @-@ groups , and supported by tanks and gas , the attack began at 4 : 20 am . The weight of the Allied fire support was intense as over 2 @,@ 000 artillery pieces opened up on the German defences . The assaulting infantry battalions were each assigned a frontage of about 1 @,@ 000 yards ( 910 m ) which they assaulted with two companies forward and two in support . Thick smoke meant that the attackers found it difficult to maintain their spacing and some of the supporting armour was also delayed . Nevertheless , the attack proved successful , as the Australians overwhelmed the German defenders and by the end of the day the division had achieved all of its objectives . 
 Throughout the rest of August , they continued offensive operations , even launching daylight raids upon the German positions . On 22 August they attacked once more , advancing through the village of Bray , capturing a number of German prisoners . After a brief lull in the fighting , they continued the advance again on 25 August capturing Clery at the end of the week before taking <unk> on 2 September . Throughout September the Germans began to withdraw back towards the Hindenburg Line and the 3rd Division took part in the operations undertaken to follow them up and harass the rearguard . Casualties during this phase had been high , however , and as a result the division 's pioneers were used as infantry and even led the advance towards <unk> on 6 September . 
 As operations continued throughout the month , casualties amongst the Australian Corps became critical and the decision was made to disband some of the 3rd Division 's battalions and use them to reinforce the remaining units . This decision saw the reduction of the strength of division 's infantry brigades from four battalions to three , bringing the Australians into line with the British , who had made a similar decision earlier in the war . Nevertheless , the decision was not popular amongst the soldiers and when the 42nd Battalion received the order to disband , the attempt was rejected by its personnel and the order disobeyed . As a result , the proposed reorganisation was postponed until after the division 's final offensive actions were fought in early October 1918 . These came around the St Quentin Canal when the division attacked the Beaurevoir Line in concert with American troops from the US 27th Division , who would lead the assault in . The attack went awry , however , when the lead assault units failed to adequately clear the forward positions and subsequently when the 3rd Division was committed they came under fire almost immediately and instead of passing through the American positions , they had to complete the mopping up process before they could advance . Nevertheless , by nightfall on 1 October , the division had captured the northern end of the tunnel that ran under the canal . 
 On 2 October the majority of the 3rd Division was removed from the line for rest and reorganisation , although a number of its artillery batteries would continue to support the operations of the II American Corps until they were withdrawn . Following this they continued to participate in the fighting in support of the British 6th Division . The 27th Battery fired the division 's last shot of the war on 4 November at <unk> . Nevertheless , the division was out of the line when news of the Armistice came on 11 November 1918 . Following the end of hostilities the demobilisation process began and as men were repatriated back to Australia , the division was eventually disbanded on 28 May 1919 . 
 = = = Inter @-@ war years = = = 
 Following the end of the war , the AIF was disbanded and the focus of Australia 's military forces was the units of the Citizens Force . Between 1918 and 1921 , as the demobilisation process was completed , this force existed in a state of flux , however , in 1921 planning for the post war Army was finally completed . On 1 May 1921 the 3rd Division was re @-@ raised in Victoria as part of the 3rd Military District . Upon formation it consisted of three four @-@ battalion brigades — the 4th Brigade , 10th Brigade and 15th Brigade — and various supporting units including artillery , engineers , signals , transport and medical . 
 At this time , the existing infantry battalions of the Citizens Force were redesignated to perpetuate the numerical designations of the AIF , and although an attempt was made to allocate these designations based on regional considerations , ultimately this was not always possible and ultimately when the 3rd Division was re @-@ established , only two of its component battalions — the 37th and 39th Battalions — had previously been assigned to the division . 
 With a peacetime establishment of about 16 @,@ 000 personnel ( 18 @,@ 400 upon mobilisation ) , the division was brought up to strength through the compulsory training scheme . Initially the system worked well and a number of the division 's subunits reported being above establishment , however , this did not last long . In 1922 , the Washington Naval Treaty was signed and theoretically alleviated Australia 's security concerns about Japanese expansion in the Pacific . As a result , the Army 's budget was halved and as the scope of the compulsory training scheme was scaled back , the authorised strength of each infantry battalion was reduced to just 409 men of all ranks . The division 's artillery was also reduced , with one field battery in each artillery brigade being disbanded at this time . As a result of the subsequent reorganisation , the 3rd Division 's artillery consisted of three artillery brigades , the 2nd , 4th and 8th . 
 In 1929 the compulsory training scheme was suspended following the election of the Scullin Labor government . In its place a new system was introduced whereby the Citizens Force would be maintained on a part @-@ time , voluntary basis only . It was also renamed the " Militia " at this time . The decision to suspend compulsory training , coupled with the economic downturn of the Great Depression meant that the manpower of many Militia units dropped considerably and as a result a number of units were amalgamated . As a part of this process , the division was reduced from 12 infantry battalions to nine as six battalions were merged to form new amalgamated units — 29th / 22nd , 37th / 52nd and 57th / 60th Battalions . To a large extent , however , these were hollow structures and by 1931 the 3rd Division 's overall establishment was just 4 @,@ 505 men all ranks . 
 Throughout the 1930s the number of active personnel remained low and out of necessity training opportunities were limited . After 1936 , however , the Army attempted to improve the conditions of service for its members and to reinvigorate the training program , while individual units began to undertake their own recruiting campaigns . Nevertheless , it was not until 1938 , as tensions grew in Europe and the prospect of war became more likely , that an attempt was made to expand the establishment of the Militia . At this time an effort was made to determine the readiness of the Militia to expand if mobilised . During the continuous training camps undertaken throughout 1938 , each component unit was assessed with mixed results . The following year , 1939 , saw further expansion and by the end of April of that year , the division 's posted strength had grown to 9 @,@ 589 personnel . As a part of this expansion , the divisional artillery was expanded by the re @-@ raising of the batteries that had been disbanded in 1922 . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 = = = = Home duties = = = = 
 On 3 September 1939 , Australia found itself once again at war , after attempts at finding a diplomatic solution to the German invasion of Poland had failed . Following the outbreak of World War II , mobilisation began slowly as the government called up a force of about 8 @,@ 000 Militia personnel to undertake security duties in the days following the declaration of war . A short time later , the decision was made to raise an all volunteer force for overseas service , known as the Second Australian Imperial Force ( 2nd AIF ) . This was necessary due to the provisions of the Defence Act ( 1903 ) which precluded deploying the Militia outside of Australian territory , and as a result the government decided to use the Militia to provide a small cadre upon which the 2nd AIF would be raised , as well as to provide training to conscripts as part of the compulsory training scheme which was re @-@ established in early 1940 . Nevertheless , during this time large numbers of officers and senior non commissioned officers from the 3rd Division volunteered for service with the 2nd AIF and many units lost a large amount of their experienced personnel at this time . 
 Throughout 1940 – 41 , the Militia were called up in cohorts for periods of continuous training , and the 3rd Division , still consisting of the 4th , 10th and 15th Brigades , undertook a series of training camps around Seymour , Victoria . In March 1941 , the division 's artillery was reorganised to bring it in line with the British organisational system with each artillery brigade being converted to a field regiment . Numerical designations stayed the same , however , and by late 1941 the division had completed its transition . This saw its infantry brigades once again reduced from four battalions to three , while various supporting elements were inserted at brigade @-@ level , however , training at this time was still rudimentary and limited mainly to individual skills , and the division 's establishment was recorded as being only half of its authorised wartime establishment . There was also a shortage of modern equipment . 
 With Japan 's entry into the war following the attacks on Pearl Harbor and Malaya , it became more likely that the division would be called upon to undertake active service overseas , and the division was mobilised for war . In early January 1942 , Major General Stanley Savige , an experienced officer who had commanded the 17th Brigade in combat against the Germans in the Middle East earlier in the war , took over command of the division . Savige set about the task of preparing the division for combat and he began by removing officers that he did not think were physically fit enough or competent to lead in battle and replacing them with men who had gained experience in AIF units . A comprehensive training program was established and in April 1942 the division was assigned to the Australian I Corps , and in order to enable divisional exercises to begin , the 3rd Division moved to <unk> , Victoria . In order to toughen the men up , Savige decided that they would march on foot to the new camp . 
 The following month they were relocated once more , this time to Queensland where they undertook training exercises and defensive duties along the coast between Brisbane and Tweed Heads on the New South Wales border . At this time , the Army began to rectify the deficiencies in the division 's equipment lists and battalions began receiving new machine guns , motor transport and Bren carriers . As the situation in New Guinea grew worse , the decision was made to reorganise the 3rd Division and throughout August , four battalions were amalgamated — the 37th , 52nd , 58th and 59th . In September , the 10th Brigade was disbanded and its battalions reallocated to the 4th and 15th Brigades . In October the 29th and 46th Battalions were also amalgamated , leaving the division with just six infantry battalions in two brigades . 
 = = = = New Guinea , 1943 – 1944 = = = = 
 In early 1943 the division was despatched to New Guinea , with the 15th Brigade being sent to Port Moresby and the 4th Brigade going to Milne Bay . At this point the 4th Brigade was reassigned to the 5th Division . It would later be replaced within the division by the 29th Brigade . The division 's stay in Port Moresby was brief and in April it began moving to Wau where they subsumed the units assigned to Kanga Force , including the 17th Brigade , a 2nd AIF formation , and began operations as part of the Salamaua – Lae campaign . 
 Initially operations were limited to the area immediately surrounding Bulolo , but as the division became established the headquarters was shifted to Tambu Bay and brigades were pushed out towards Mubo , and the Komiatum and <unk> Ridges , while defensive patrols were undertaken through the Wampit Valley , around the Bulwa and <unk> airstrips and towards the Markham River . Stretched across a front of over 75 miles ( 121 km ) , in June the division was reinforced by the US 162nd Infantry Regiment . Following this the division took on primary responsibility for Allied operations in New Guinea . Eventually Lae fell in September and soon afterwards , its elements were moved back to Port Moresby , before being sent to support the 7th Division 's campaign in the Markham and Ramu Valleys and the advance on Madang . 
 In August 1944 the 3rd Division 's brigades were withdrawn back to Australia for leave and reorganisation . After this , preparations began for the division 's next campaign . Around this time , the 3rd Division adopted the jungle divisional establishment , and was reorganised around three infantry brigades : the 7th , 15th and 29th Brigades . It was also assigned to the Australian II Corps . 
 = = = = Bougainville 1944 – 1945 = = = = 
 In late 1944 it was decided that the Australians would take over responsibility for operations against the Japanese on Bougainville from the Americans . From November – December 1944 , the 3rd Division , along with two independent brigades , the 11th and 23rd , began to relieve the units of the US XIV Corps that were to be transferred elsewhere in the Pacific . Allied intelligence of Japanese strengths on the island varied at the time , although it was believed that there were around 17 @,@ 500 Japanese on Bougainville . Although this was later proved to be grossly incorrect , nevertheless the Allies believed that the Japanese formations in the area , despite being under strength , were still capable of carrying out effective combat operations . As a result , it was decided that II Corps would go on the offensive in order to clear the Japanese from the island and a three pronged campaign was planned in the northern , central and southern sectors of the island . 
 The division was supported by a number of artillery units including the 2nd and 4th Field Regiments and the 2nd Mountain Battery , and various anti @-@ aircraft units . Later , also ' U ' Heavy Battery , with four 155 mm howitzers was transferred from Lae , as was the 2 / 11th Field Regiment . In order to provide organic fire support during the advance , the decision was made at this time to place the divisional artillery assets directly underneath the subunits they were supporting . At the outset , the division 's allocation of engineers consisted of only two field companies , the 5th and 11th , however over the course of the campaign others arrived including the 10th , 15th and the 7th , which was the last to arrive in June 1945 . Ultimately the division had almost 1 @,@ 600 engineers across five field companies and various supporting plant , park and other units . This represented one of the largest engineer contingents within an Australian division during the war . Initially the division was deployed without armoured support , however , in December 1944 , ' B ' Squadron , 2 / 4th Armoured Regiment , equipped with Matilda II tanks , arrived and subsequently took part in operations on the island attached to elements of the division . 
 The 7th Brigade , supported by the 2nd Field Regiment , was the first to commence operations , as the 9th Battalion launched a surprise attack in the central sector of the island upon a Japanese outpost at Little George Hill on 25 November . The following month the battalion seized control of Artillery Hill , while the 29th Brigade began patrolling operations in the southern sector . 
 Following the capture of Pearl Ridge by the 25th Battalion , the focus of the 3rd Division 's operations on Bougainville was shifted on the northern and southern sectors . The 11th Brigade , independent of the 3rd Division , assumed control of the drive to the north , while the 3rd Division concentrated on the drive south towards Buin , where the main Japanese force was concentrated . Rotating his brigades , the division 's commander , Major General William Bridgeford , advanced south from Torokina towards the Puriata river . After crossing it , the Japanese launched a significant counterattack around Slater 's Knoll , which was eventually beaten off in early April . 
 In April 1945 the 15th Brigade took over from the 7th Brigade and resumed the advance on the Hongorai and Mivo rivers . In early July , the 29th Brigade relieved the 15th and continued the advance and as they attempted to cross the Mivo , the Japanese launched a ferocious counter @-@ attack upon the 15th Battalion which was turned back by desperate defence . Following this the advance came to a halt as torrential rain turned the axis of advance into " a sea of mud " and many of the bridges upon which the Australian supply system was dependent were washed away . As the situation became worse , briefly even patrolling operations had to be stopped . These patrols were resumed , however , in late July and into August , as isolated pockets of Japanese began to attack the 3rd Division 's supply lines and support units . As preparations were made to resume the advance , the dropping of two atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki and Japan 's subsequent unconditional surrender brought the fighting on Bougainville to an end and a cease fire came into effect . 
 Following the end of hostilities , the demobilisation process began and eventually the 3rd Division was disbanded on 4 December 1945 . During the division 's campaign in Bougainville , one of its soldiers , Reg Rattey , earned the Victoria Cross for his actions during the fighting around Slater 's Knoll . 
 = = = Cold War = = = 
 In 1948 , with demobilisation of Australia 's wartime army complete , the decision was made to re @-@ raise the part @-@ time forces of the Militia , albeit with the new name of the Citizens Military Force ( CMF ) , and on a reduced establishment of two infantry divisions , an armoured brigade and various corps @-@ level support units . During this time the 3rd Division was re @-@ raised and based around a nucleus of three infantry brigades — the 4th , 6th and 9th Brigades — it was once again based in central Victoria , although subunits were also based in South Australia and Tasmania . Once again the division 's component units bore little resemblance to those that had fought with it during the two World Wars . Service in the post war CMF was initially on a voluntary basis and recruitment remained poor until 1951 when conscription was introduced once again in an effort to improve the readiness of the Australian military during the Korean War . The 3rd Division was not deployed during this time , however , and although national service was instituted , service in Korea was undertaken on a voluntary basis , and conscription was used only as a means to expand the CMF and provide a base upon which mobilisation could be achieved if it proved necessary . 
 Nevertheless , the resulting influx of manpower revitalised the CMF to the point that during the 1950s the division experienced a remarkable level of manning and resources that saw many units achieve full strength , with full equipment allocations . On 23 March 1958 a divisional parade was conducted at Puckapunyal , bringing together all of the division 's Victorian @-@ based units in a concentration of force not seen in the division since 1916 . The following year the division conducted a live @-@ fire exercise at Puckapunyal based upon the 4th Brigade and involving over 3 @,@ 500 men , tanks , artillery , aircraft , and various supporting arms . Despite the success demonstrated by the exercise , it would be the last time that the division mounted something similar the national service scheme was modified to limit the size of each yearly intake of trainees and the size of the CMF was reduced by over 30 @,@ 000 men in an effort to free up Regular personnel to raise the 1st Brigade . The 1957 reforms , however , did not achieve the efficiencies required in order to free up Regular personnel to meet the strategic requirements to maintain a regular field force that was ready to respond to the exigencies of the Cold War . As a result , in 1959 the decision was made to suspend national service as it was realised that further changes were required to expand the size of the Regular army . Further changes came with the introduction of the Pentropic divisional establishment into the Australian Army . This saw the reduction of the Army to just two divisions , the 1st and 3rd Divisions , and as a part of this the division was reorganised into five battalion @-@ plus sized battle groups , and resulted in the removal of brigade @-@ level formations and the disbandment and amalgamation of a number of smaller regionally based infantry battalions , into larger units that were part of State @-@ based regiments . 
 With an authorised peacetime establishment of 13 @,@ 621 personnel , the 3rd Division included formations in five different military command districts including Queensland , New South Wales and Western Australia as well as those in South Australia , Tasmania and Victoria . The main infantry components at this time were : 2nd Battalion , Royal Queensland Regiment ( <unk> ) ; 1st Battalion , Royal Victoria Regiment ( RVR ) ; 2nd Battalion , RVR ; 1st Battalion , Royal South Australia Regiment ( RSAR ) ; and 1st Battalion , Royal Western Australia Regiment . 
 The Australian Army 's experiment with the Pentropic establishment did not last long , however , as it created a number of planning issues including lack of interoperability with other Western allies , none of whom used it . As a result , it was abandoned in late 1964 and into early 1965 and the 3rd Division was once again reorganised . The resulting changes saw the establishment of brigade @-@ level formations , briefly known as " task forces " , however , due to other planning considerations only one was raised for the 3rd Division at this time : the 4th Task Force , consisting of four infantry battalions : 1 , 2 , 5 and 6 RVR . 
 At the same time , the Australian government announced that the national service scheme would be implemented once again , however , instead of focusing upon expanding the CMF , the scheme was set up so that national servicemen would serve limited terms of service in Australian Regular Army ( ARA ) units with a view to service overseas in Vietnam and Malaysia . This highlighted the changing focus of Australia 's military planning towards Regular forces , however , it had a negative impact upon the division as essentially it was forced to compete with the ARA for manpower and although some gains were made from men that chose to serve longer national service terms in the CMF in order to defer their service in ARA units , these were negligible and arguably of limited quality . The government 's decision not to deploy CMF units to these conflicts meant that many of the division 's experienced personnel chose to transfer to ARA units in order to gain operational experience , although some attempts were made to rectify this situation by offering CMF officers the opportunity to undertake a short attachment to an ARA unit serving in Vietnam and a number of 3rd Division officers took up this opportunity , a few even saw combat . 
 When the national service scheme was ended following the election of the Whitlam Government in late 1972 , the 3rd Division lost a large number of personnel . At this time , the division 's artillery assets included two artillery field regiments , a medium regiment , and a divisional locating battery , and although on paper the division was a large , combined arms formation , in reality many of its units were hollow and inadequately equipped , and in the decades following this the division , and indeed the CMF in general , underwent a period of uncertainty as the government attempted to solve the issues that the organisation faced , the most pressing of which was the question of its role and strategic relevance , as well as those concerning conditions of service , centralisation of training and access to equipment . 
 In 1976 the division 's combat strength had dropped to the extent that it was really only a brigade @-@ group formation , possessing only two infantry battalions : 1 and 2 RVR , as well as two field artillery regiments , a medium regiment and a locating battery . As a result , in February the division 's headquarters were merged with the 4th Task Force 's headquarters as the 3rd Division was redesignated as the " 3rd Division Field Force Group " . At the same time , the position of formation commander was downgraded to the rank of brigadier rather than major general . This remained the case until April 1984 when the divisional headquarters was re @-@ established . 
 In the late 1980s the division was given the task of vital asset protection under the Defence of Australia doctrine and the division undertook a number of exercises in the north of Australia , including " Kangaroo 89 " in which more than 3 @,@ 000 of its personnel took part . Nevertheless , in June 1991 , following a force structure review , the 3rd Division was finally removed from the Australian Army 's order of battle , and its remaining units were transferred to the command of the 4th Brigade . 
 = = Commanding officers = = 
 The following is a list of the 3rd Division 's commanding officers : 
 = Stanton Drew stone circles = 
 The Stanton Drew stone circles are just outside the village of Stanton Drew in the English county of Somerset . The largest stone circle is the Great Circle , 113 metres ( 371 ft ) in diameter and the second largest stone circle in Britain ( after Avebury ) ; it is considered to be one of the largest Neolithic monuments to have been built . The date of construction is not known but is thought to be between 3000 and 2000 BCE which places it in the Late Neolithic to Early Bronze Age . It was made a scheduled monument in 1982 . 
 The Great Circle was surrounded by a ditch and is accompanied by smaller stone circles to the north east and south west . There is also a group of three stones , known as The Cove , in the garden of the local pub . Slightly further from the Great Circle is a single stone , known as Hautville 's Quoit . Some of the stones are still vertical , but the majority are now recumbent and some are no longer present . 
 The stone circles have been studied since John Aubrey 's visit in 1664 with some excavations of the site in the 18th century . In the late 20th and early 21st centuries geophysical surveys have confirmed the size of the stone circles and identified additional pits and postholes . The Cove has been shown to be around one thousand years older than the stone circles . A variety of myths and legends about the stone circles have been recorded , including one about dancers at a celebration who have been turned to stone . 
 = = Monument = = 
 The most famous feature is the Great Circle , the second largest stone circle in Britain ( after Avebury ) . The stone circle is 113 metres ( 371 ft ) in diameter and probably consisted of 30 stones , of which 27 survive today . It was recorded by both John Aubrey in 1664 and William Stukeley in 1776 . The Great Circle probably was surrounded by the ditch ( approximately 135 metres ( 443 ft ) outer diameter — now filled in ) of a henge . The North East Circle is 30 metres ( 98 ft ) in diameter and probably consisted of 10 or more stones , of which 8 survive today . The South West Circle is 43 metres ( 141 ft ) in diameter , and has 12 stones surviving today . An avenue extends to the northeast of the Great Circle towards the River Chew and a second avenue meets it from the north eastern stone circle . 
 A ( now recumbent ) standing stone called Hautville 's Quoit lies across the river to the north on an alignment with the centres of the Great Circle and the southern circle . It is a large stone close to Hautville Quoit Farm , recumbent since at least the mid 17th century but assumed to have originally been upright . Described by Stukeley in 1723 as being 13 feet ( 4 @.@ 0 m ) long , it is now about half that length , Leslie Grinsell suggesting that fragments have occasionally been broken off for mending the roads . Stukeley also referred to the presence of a second stone . 
 Further to the west is a cove of two standing stones with a recumbent slab between them , which can be found in the garden of the Druid 's Arms public house . All are of different heights , the stone to the north east being 4 @.@ 4 metres ( 14 ft ) the south western 3 @.@ 1 metres ( 10 ft ) , and the north eastern 1 @.@ 4 metres ( 4 ft 7 in ) . The stones of The Cove are <unk> different from those in the nearby stone circles . A long barrow burial chamber has been found under the stones of The Cove . It is thought that this predates the erection of the stones by approximately a thousand years . 
 = = Excavations = = 
 In 1740 the site was surveyed and mapped by John Wood , the Elder , who noted the different stones used . He suggested the layout was based on the Pythagorean planetary system , and thought it was used as the Druid 's " University " . 
 When one of the stones fell in the mid 17th century , some human bones were discovered accompanied by an object described as a " round bell , like a large horse @-@ bell " . The burial date and the purpose of the bell @-@ like object are unknown . 
 = = Geophysical survey = = 
 Geophysical work by English Heritage in 1997 revealed a surrounding ditch and nine concentric rings of postholes within the stone circle . More than four hundred pits , 1 metre ( 3 ft 3 in ) across and at 2 @.@ 5 metres ( 8 ft 2 in ) intervals , stood in rings at the site . The ditch is 135 metres ( 443 ft ) in diameter and about 7 metres ( 23 ft ) wide . A 40 metres ( 130 ft ) wide entrance was visible on the north east side . No surrounding bank has been identified although the site awaits excavation . 
 The geophysical work transformed the traditional view of Stanton Drew as being a surface monument and the Great Circle is now seen as being one of the largest and most impressive Neolithic monuments to have been built . Analogous with the circles of postholes at sites at <unk> , <unk> Walls and The Sanctuary , it is thought that the pits would have held posts which would have either been freestanding or <unk> as they could not have supported a roof at that size . The postholes in nine concentric rings held posts up to 1 metre ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) in diameter . 
 Nearby and to the north east is a smaller ring of eight stones in the centre of which the geophysical work identified four further pits . A third ring of twelve stones , measuring 43 metres ( 141 ft ) wide , stands to the south west . 
 A <unk> <unk> survey in July 2009 investigated standing stones in the garden of the Druids Arms public house known as The Cove , which showed that the stones date from nearly a thousand years before the stone circles . The conclusion from the study was that these upright stones are likely to have been the portals or façade of a chambered tomb . 
 In 2010 a further survey was carried out by Bath and Camerton Archaeological Society and the Bath and North East Somerset Archaeological Officer . This involved high data density magnetometer , resistance <unk> profiles and photographic surveys showed a new henge entrance and further detail of post holes . 
 = = Myths about Stanton Drew = = 
 Being a henge and stone circle site , astronomical alignments are a common theory to explain the positioning of the stones at Stanton Drew . Similarly , there are less well evidenced theories relating to ley lines . 
 Theories suggest the site was dedicated to funerary ritual . There are several local traditional stories about the megalithic complex . The best known tells how a wedding party was turned to stone : the party was held throughout Saturday , but a man clothed in black ( the Devil in disguise ) came and started to play his violin for the <unk> after midnight , continuing into holy Sunday morning . When dawn broke , everybody had been turned to stone by the Demon : so the stone circles are the dancers , the avenues are the fiddlers and The Cove is the bride and the groom with the drunken churchman at their feet . They are still awaiting the Devil who promised to come back someday and play again for them . 
 Wade and Wade in their 1929 book " Somerset " suggest : 
 One of the curiosities of the place is Hautville 's Quoit , which , to save time , should also be looked for on approaching the village . ( Enter iron gate on L. a few hundred yards before reaching tollhouse , and search backwards along the hedge bordering road . ) It is a large stone , which legend says was hurled by Sir J. Hautville ( whose effigy is in Chew Magna Church ) from the top of Maes Knoll . The famous " <unk> remains " will be found near the church . About 50 yards from the entrance to the churchyard take a lane to the L. leading to an orchard : the stones will be observed in the field beyond ( admission free , but field closed on Sundays ) . The " remains " consist of three contiguous circles . The first is of considerable area , and is marked out by twelve large stones , only three of which remain upright ; a smaller circle of eight stones lies just beyond ; and a third circle of eight will be found farther away in an orchard on the R. The two larger circles have each a few scattered stones thrown off as a kind of avenue . Standing apart from the circles is a curious group of three stones huddled together in a garden abutting on the churchyard , from which they can be easily seen by looking over the W. boundary wall . These mystic rings probably had the same origin ( whatever that may have been ) as that of the more famous circle at Avebury in Wiltshire , with which they should be compared . The proximity of Maes Knoll is comparable with that of Silbury Hill . A ridiculous theory suggests that the monoliths were erected as a trophy after one of Arthur 's victories . Arthur is connected to the site because a site in the nearby village of <unk> is reputed to be the location of Camelot in an oral tradition . The stones are of a reddish hue similar to that described in the Arthurian legend as connected to Camelot and to a sword that was seen in a stone near to Camelot . The country story is that a local wedding once took place on a Sunday , when the frivolous guests would insist on winding up with a dance . The penalty for a " Sabbath " thus " profaned " was the prompt transformation of the bridal party into stone . Hence the local appellation of " The fiddlers and the maids " . 
 = Lecture Circuit = 
 " Lecture Circuit " is a two @-@ part episode of the American comedy television series The Office . They constituted the sixteenth and seventeenth episodes of the fifth season , and the 88th and 89th overall episodes of the series . The first episode originally aired on NBC on February 5 , 2009 , and the second on February 12 . 
 During both episodes , Michael and Pam visit the various branches of Dunder Mifflin to make business lectures , and in particular visit the Utica branch - where Jim 's ex @-@ girlfriend Karen is regional manager , and the Nashua branch , where Michael 's ex @-@ girlfriend and the love of his life , Holly is an H.R. rep . In both episodes , Jim and Dwight hit a snag as the new heads of the Party Planning Committee when they forget Kelly 's birthday . In the first episode , Andy develops a crush on a customer , and in the second episode , Angela 's unhealthy obsession with her cats is spotlighted when she installs a nanny cam . 
 Both episodes were directed by Ken Kwapis and written by Mindy Kaling , who also plays Kelly Kapoor in the show . " Lecture Circuit " included guest appearances by screenwriter Dan Goor , comedian Rob Huebel and actress Rashida Jones , who reprises her role of Karen Filippelli , a regular character from the third season . Although the character Holly Flax played a major part in the storyline , actress Amy Ryan did not appear in " Lecture Circuit " . The episodes received generally positive reviews . According to Nielsen Media Research , the first part was watched by 8 @.@ 4 million viewers and the second part was watched by 8 @.@ 89 million viewers . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Part one = = = 
 Michael ( Steve Carell ) is asked to visit the Dunder Mifflin branches to lecture about his success in Scranton . He and Pam ( Jenna Fischer ) , who is coming along as his assistant and driver , plan to visit every branch except Nashua because Michael is not ready to face his ex @-@ girlfriend Holly , who works there . They first visit the Utica branch , where former Scranton employee Karen ( Rashida Jones ) is now regional manager . Pam , who is engaged to Karen 's ex @-@ boyfriend Jim ( John Krasinski ) , fears the encounter will be awkward . But Karen is now married and pregnant , and the two get along very well - when Pam reveals her and Jim 's engagement , Karen even offers genuine congratulations . Michael 's lecture in Utica proves to be a disaster when he tries to teach the employees a trick for how to memorize names and ends up insulting everybody . Nevertheless , Pam is ecstatic to have found closure with Karen . Later , on the road , Michael tells Pam that he never found closure with Holly and , at Pam 's suggestion , they decide to blow off the other lectures and drive to Nashua to find Holly . 
 Back in Scranton , Jim and Dwight ( Rainn Wilson ) have been named the reluctant heads of the Party Planning Committee due to previous fights between Phyllis ( Phyllis Smith ) and Angela ( Angela Kinsey ) . Jim and Dwight prove terrible at the job , especially when an upset Kelly ( Mindy Kaling ) chastises them for forgetting her birthday . They try to make it up to her by throwing a party but they do a poor job , choosing horrible decorations and forgetting Kelly 's age . Dwight reads her file and learns Kelly spent time in juvenile hall , but is disappointed to learn it does not affect her job performance . Meanwhile , Andy ( Ed Helms ) finds himself attracted to Julia , a female potential client who is talking with Stanley ( Leslie David Baker ) . Andy repeatedly acts awkwardly in front of Julia , and accidentally sets off her car alarm while trying to look inside and find out what music she likes . Andy admits his attraction to her to Stanley , who then gives the potential client over to Andy in exchange for two of his clients . After walking her out to the car , Andy tries to kiss her , but is immediately rebuked . Andy apologizes and mentions that he just got out of a relationship . The client claims she also just got out of a relationship and Andy starts feeling a connection , but she still rejects him and he loses the account . 
 = = = Part two = = = 
 Michael and Pam arrive at the Nashua branch , only to learn Holly is away on a human relations retreat . They also learn Holly is dating one of the Nashua salesmen named A. J. ( Rob Huebel ) . Deeply upset , Michael is at first unable to go forward with the presentation , but Pam tries to comfort him by telling him that she felt the same way when Jim was dating Karen . She encourages Michael to do the best presentation possible so people will tell Holly about it . He starts the presentation , but it falls apart when Michael starts asking A. J. intimate questions about his relationship with Holly . Michael leaves in the middle of the talk , leaving Pam to awkwardly finish the rest of the presentation . When Michael goes to Holly 's desk he cuts a sleeve off her sweater , and notices a document on her computer called " Dear Michael " , which he copies onto his flash drive . Later , at a diner , Michael tells Pam about the letter , but she insists reading it would be violating Holly 's trust . Pam herself reads the letter and does not tell him the exact contents , but she reassures him Holly still has feelings for Michael and it is not over , giving an ecstatic Michael the closure he sought . 
 Back in Scranton , the party planning continues to go poorly . Dwight publicly and loudly confronts Kelly about her time in juvenile hall , which turns out to be for stealing the boat of an ex @-@ boyfriend when she was 14 . Kelly also declares she hates the cake Jim picked for her , which is completely blank ; he later decorates it and spells her name incorrectly as " Kelley " . When Kelly insists the party needs a theme , Jim and Dwight are unable to think of anything . They finally settle on offering her one hour of napping or one hour of watching television . She loves the idea and chooses the nap . Meanwhile , Angela appears much happier than usual because she bought a new $ 7 @,@ 000 cat with the money she received from selling Andy 's engagement ring . She has also set up a nanny cam so she can monitor the cats from work . However , she is horrified to see one of her other cats having sex with the new cat , and rushes home to stop it . Later , Kevin ( Brian Baumgartner ) and Oscar ( Oscar Nunez ) watch Angela arrive home on the nanny cam screen , and become disgusted when Angela starts licking the cat to help clean it . Angela eventually returns to work and coughs up a <unk> . Oscar claims the image will haunt him for the rest of his life . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Lecture Circuit " was directed by Ken Kwapis and written by Mindy Kaling , who also plays Kelly Kapoor in the show . The first episode included a cameo performance by Rashida Jones , a regular cast member during the third season , where she played Jim Halpert 's love interest Karen Filippelli . " Lecture Circuit " aired just two months before Jones began her regular role as Ann Perkins in the NBC comedy series Parks and Recreation , which was created by Office producers Greg Daniels and Michael Schur . Dan Goor , a future writer for Parks and Recreation , made a cameo as Karen 's husband in the photographs featured in the part one episode . Rob Huebel , a comedian best known for the MTV sketch comedy series Human Giant , guest starred as Holly 's boyfriend , A.J. Amy Ryan , who played Holly Flax in previous episodes , did not appear in either " Lecture Circuit " episode , although the decision by Michael and Pam to visit Holly at the end of the first episode led to speculation about whether she would appear in the second . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Michael handing out candy bars during his lectures is a reference to the third season episode , " Business School " , where Michael passed out chocolate bars during his speech to a business school classroom . Michael expresses regret for insulting Tony Gardner , the heavyset man who briefly transferred from the Stamford branch of Dunder Mifflin to the Scranton branch , who Michael drives to quit by trying to lift onto a table for an orientation demonstration in the third season episode , " The Merger " . Among the Dunder Mifflin branches Michael visits is Nashua , New Hampshire , where Holly works , and Utica , New York , where Karen works . Michael said he can only prepare for his lectures by listening to " silence or Sam Kinison " , an American stand @-@ up comedian known for his extreme and vulgar sense of humor . Michael said he learned the Pledge of Allegiance , the lyrical oath of loyalty to the United States flag , by setting the lyrics to the rhythm of " Old McDonald Had a Farm " , a children 's song about the various animals on a farm . During one lecture , Michael and Pam both do impressions of the protagonist from Forrest Gump , the 1994 film starring Tom Hanks as a mentally handicapped man . Michael also uses the title from the films Good Morning , Vietnam ( at his Nashua lecture by saying " Good morning , <unk> ... <unk> ! " ) The Princess Bride , Gone with the Wind and Jerry Maguire in his lectures . Holly 's computer has a screensaver with images of Ed Grimley , the nerdy character with a <unk> played by comedian Martin Short in the comedy shows SCTV and Saturday Night Live . 
 Angela said she sold Andy 's engagement ring on eBay , an online auction website . Creed gives Andy romantic advice and says , " This is how I got Squeaky Fromme " , a reference to the Manson family member who tried to assassinate U.S. President Gerald Ford . A picture of President George W. Bush appears on a fake three @-@ dollar bill Creed gives Jim to pay for the party . Creed suggests Kelly watch The Bonnie Hunt Show , a syndicated talk show hosted by actress Bonnie Hunt . Andy puts Splenda , an artificial sweetener , into Stanley 's coffee because he has adult onset diabetes , a disorder characterized by high blood glucose . Andy sings Julia a song by Feist , the Canadian singer and songwriter , after he spots a Feist CD in her car . Michael takes a document file from Holly 's computer that was created with Microsoft Word , the Microsoft word processing program . Pam said she hates the notion of even Al @-@ Qaeda hating her , a reference to the Islamist terrorist organization that organized the September 11 attacks against New York City . Kelly confesses she went to juvenile detention in Berks County , Pennsylvania , at age 14 for doing something " like Thelma & Louise , but with a boat " , a reference to the 1991 road movie starring Geena Davis and Susan Sarandon on the run from their troubled , caged lives . Jim said during a birthday trip to a museum at age seven , his father bought him a plastic toy triceratops , a three @-@ horned dinosaur from the Late Cretaceous Period , which Dwight insists is not a good dinosaur . Pam remembers the name of one audience member by comparing her to k.d. lang , the Canadian singer known for her extremely short hair . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast on February 5 , 2009 , the first part of " Lecture Circuit " was seen by 8 @.@ 4 million viewers , according to Nielsen Media Research . The original broadcast for the second part on February 12 was seen by 8 @.@ 89 million viewers . The second episode received a 4 @.@ 3 rating / 11 share among viewers aged between 18 and 34 , and a 3 @.@ 8 rating / 9 share among viewers aged between 18 and 49 , numbers which were close to the season 's average rating . The first episode received a 5 @.@ 0 rating / 14 share among viewers aged between 18 and 34 , and a 4 @.@ 3 rating / 11 share among viewers aged between 18 and 49 . Both ratings were three @-@ tenths of a drop from the previous episode , " Stress Relief " , which was heavily viewed because it immediately followed the broadcast of Super Bowl XLIII on NBC . The drop in ratings led some media outlets to speculate that the post @-@ Super Bowl ratings boost was only temporary and would not help The Office in the long run . 
 Both episodes of " Lecture Circuit " received generally positive reviews . Whitney Pastorek of Entertainment Weekly described them as " nearly perfect " , calling them the two best episodes of the season so far : " ( Writer Mindy Kaling ) nailed the characterizations , the interactions , the tossed @-@ off one @-@ liners , the weird @-@ yet @-@ realistic scenarios ... I wonder how much it helps that she 's out on the acting floor every day , getting attuned to her costars ' rhythms ? " Josh McAuliffe of The Times @-@ Tribune of Scranton , Pennsylvania , said the first " Lecture Circuit " episode was his favorite episode of the fifth season so far , which he said provided several laugh @-@ out @-@ loud moments and a poignancy with Michael 's decision to find Holly . McAuliffe described the second episode as a " satisfying wrap @-@ up " and said Michael 's outburst during the lecture was " one of the most painful Michael meltdown moments in the show 's history " . Alan Sepinwall of The Star @-@ Ledger said the first episode perfectly balanced drama and comedy . He particularly complimented the chemistry between both Carell and Fischer and between Krasinski and Wilson , and said he was particularly pleased to receive closure over the Karen character . But Sepinwall said the second episode felt padded with " material I would have been fine seeing as deleted scenes " . Although he said Carell 's reaction to the news that Holly still has feelings for him as a " wonderful performance " , Sepinwall also said the subplot involving Angela 's cat was particularly unfunny and that subplot with Jim and Dwight , " so brilliant last week , ran out of steam quickly here . " 
 Nathan Rabin of The A.V. Club said the episode " was full of laughs but had a bit of a bittersweet aftertaste " and had " one hell of a cliffhanger " ending . Rabin praised the Jim and Dwight teaming in the first episode , but said the plot line of Michael 's lectures were predictable and " promised more than it delivered " . Rabin said the second episode " wrapped up everything nicely ( and ) delivered laughs aplenty " ; he particularly enjoyed the subplot involving Angela 's cats , and the fact that it " left the door open for Holly 's return " . Will Leitch of New York magazine praised the cliffhanger ending of the first episode and said he was pleased the Holly character was still in the show 's equation . Leitch also praised Ed Helms , who " is nailing the right combination of ridiculous and sad @-@ sack pathos " , although he said he " ( wasn 't ) nearly as inspired " by the Jim and Dwight subplot . Leitch also enjoyed the second episode , particularly the " legitimately sweet moment " when Pam tells Michael that Holly still has feelings for him . Leitch was less praiseworthy of the Angela subplot involving her cats , and said the character " appears to have officially gone batshit insane . " Travis Fickett of IGN criticized the first episode and said , " I 'm starting to wonder if the show is showing signs of winding down . " Fickett said the idea of Michael giving awkward lecture tours felt old and familiar , so much so that " I was convinced it was a repeat " . He also said the Jim and Dwight idea was funny , but " nothing the show hasn 't tapped before " . Likewise , Fickett described the second episode as " average Office and feels overly familiar without really blazing any new ground . " He also said it was disappointing Holly did not appear , and that Angela felt like a " caricature " in her subplot . 
 The first part of the episode was voted the fifth highest @-@ rated episode out of 26 from the fifth season , according to an episode poll at the fansite OfficeTally ; the episode was rated 8 @.@ 64 out of 10 . The second part of the episode , however , was voted the third @-@ worst of the season , with a rating of 7 @.@ 14 However , the scene with Angela licking her cat was heavily criticized by reviewers , prompting some observers to describe it as the moment when The Office jumped the shark , a phrase used to describe the moment of downturn for a previously successful television show . When asked about this during an interview , actor Oscar Nuñez responded , " No show is ' Jump the Shark ' <unk> , but there have been other moments on The Office that I think were more ' Jump the Shark ' than that . " He did not specify what other moments he meant . 
 = Fill the Void = 
 Fill the Void ( Hebrew : <unk> את <unk> - <unk> et ha <unk> ) is a 2012 Israeli drama film written and directed by Rama Burshtein . It focuses on life among the Haredi Jewish community in Tel Aviv , Israel . Hadas Yaron stars as Shira Mendelman , an 18 @-@ year @-@ old girl who is pressured to marry her older sister 's husband following the death of her sister in childbirth . 
 The film required a lengthy production period , taking over a year for the casting to be completed and another year and three months for editing . Burshtein , who was doubtful as to how much of the process would be completed , took a step @-@ by @-@ step approach , focusing first on the writing , then on accumulating enough funding for the project , followed by the filming and editing . Burshtein became the first Orthodox Jewish woman to direct a film intended for wide distribution . The film premiered at the 69th Venice Film Festival on 1 September 2012 and was later released in the United States on 24 May 2013 . 
 Fill the Void was well received by critics for its depiction of Orthodox Jews and their lifestyle . It won seven Israeli Academy Awards , and lead actress Hadas Yaron won Best Actress for her portrayal of Shira at the Venice Film Festival . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Shira Mendelman , an 18 @-@ year @-@ old Hasidic girl living in Tel Aviv , is looking forward to an arranged marriage with a young man whom she likes . However , on Purim , her family suffers a tragedy when Shira 's older sister Esther dies in childbirth . Shira 's father subsequently delays the engagement so as not to have to deal with an empty house so soon after Esther 's death . Esther 's husband , Yochay , begins to regularly bring their son , Mordechai , to the Mendelman 's house , where Shira cares for him . 
 One day , Yochay 's mother approaches Shira 's mother , Rivka , about the possibility of Yochay remarrying , believing it to be best for Mordechai . She plans to suggest an offer from a widow in Belgium . Rivka is distraught by the idea of Mordechai being taken out of the country and suggests that Yochay marry Shira instead . He and Shira both initially oppose the prospect , though he eventually warms to it and she agrees to take it into consideration on learning that her previous engagement has been called off due to her father 's delays . 
 Shortly afterwards , Frieda , a friend of Esther who has never received any marriage proposals , tells Shira that Esther would have preferred that Yochay marry her in the event of her death . As a result , Shira tells Yochay that Frieda is more suitable , which he takes as an affront . 
 Shira and Yochay remain distant from one another afterwards , and he announces that he plans to move with Mordechai to marry the widow in Belgium . Shira , pressured by her family , agrees to go forward with the engagement to Yochay , believing it to be the best scenario for everyone . However , the rabbi realizes that Shira is acting to please her family and refuses to condone the marriage . 
 Time passes , and Shira eventually grows to love Yochay of her own accord . She approaches the rabbi and asks again that she and Yochay be married , and he agrees this time . The film closes with their wedding . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Hadas Yaron as Shira Mendelman 
 Chaim Sharir as Aharon Mendelman 
 Ido Samuel as Yossi Mendelman 
 <unk> Sheleg as Rivka Mendelman 
 Yiftach Klein as Yochay Goldberg 
 Hila Feldman as Freida 
 Razia Israeli as Aunt Hanna 
 <unk> Raz as Esther Goldberg 
 Yael Tal as <unk> 
 Michael David Weigl as <unk> 
 Neta Moran as <unk> 
 <unk> Thal as Rabbi 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing and themes = = = 
 Fill the Void was written and directed by Rama Burshtein , who , in the course of its production , became the first Orthodox Jewish woman to direct a film intended to be viewed outside of the Orthodox community . In doing so , she hoped to create a greater understanding of the Orthodox community , in part by dispelling the common misconceptions that women are often forced into arranged marriages ; despite the differences in structure , the woman is always given the final say in whom she marries . Burshtein also deliberately avoided depicting a divide between the religious and secular Jews , a theme that commonly appears in films about the Orthodox . She explained : 
 As a people we are thousands of years old and we exist without that conflict of the secular and the religious . The truth is that most of us do not want to leave our communities . All of those films were always about someone either trying to get out or someone from the outside trying to get in and it was very important for me to say that we also just exist and feel and love and struggle and hurt by ourselves , not always because we 're in conflict . 
 In her director 's notes , Burshtein wrote , " I love Jane Austen . She 's romantic , intelligent , and full of humor . … The parallel is also quite obvious in that ' Fill the Void ' takes place in a world where the rules are rigid and clear . The characters are not looking for some way to burst out of that world . Instead , they are trying to find a way to live within it . " Critics noted the similarities between Austen 's characters and those in Fill the Void , and Stephanie Merry from The Washington Post likened the character of Frieda to Charlotte Lucas from Pride and Prejudice . Frieda , like Charlotte , has never had any marriage prospects and is the subject of others ' pity as a result . 
 Merry suggested that , regardless of cultural differences , the story is universal due to " its themes of loss and family loyalty , not to mention the realization that life may not align with our idealized expectations " . Boston Globe correspondent Peter Keough agreed that the " themes of love and loss , self @-@ sacrifice and self @-@ preservation " are applicable to audiences both in and outside the Orthodox community . John Podhoretz , an editor of The Weekly Standard , was surprised that the " state of grace " featured prominently in Fill the Void , perceiving it to be an uncommon concept in Jewish movies . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Casting the film took a full year to complete , largely because , according to Burshtein , she " didn 't know what [ she ] wanted " . She initially considered using " regular people " with no background in acting before realizing that " non @-@ actors couldn 't handle the complexities of their characters " . 
 Israeli actress Hadas Yaron , then aged 20 , was cast for the role of Shira , the protagonist of the film . She commented that her character " is much more naïve at 18 than I was when I was 18 , and there was something so special about that and it was like going back to the basics " . Yaron was unfamiliar with Orthodox practice prior to participating in Fill the Void . In order to become better acquainted with Shira 's lifestyle , she started memorizing all of the Hebrew blessings , saying , " There 's something so beautiful about it because you 're being so grateful all the time for everything you do and hoping that everything works out okay and I started doing those blessings every day and it sounds silly but it helps you feel that you are closer to the character . " 
 Yiftach Klein was cast to act alongside her as Yochay Goldberg . Burshtein remarked that Klein " is a big star in Israel , and has played a pimp , a homosexual , and a cop ( among many other roles ) , so I was not sure you could really believe him as this Orthodox guy . But his audition , and then his chemistry with Hadas were just perfect " . 
 Additional cast members include Hila Feldman as Frieda , <unk> Sheleg as Rivka Mendelman , Chaim Sharir as Aharon Mendelman , Razia Israeli as Aunt Hanna , <unk> Raz as Esther Goldberg , Ido Samuel as Yossi Mendelman , Yael Tal as <unk> , Michael David Weigl as <unk> , Neta Moran as <unk> , and <unk> Thal as Rabbi . 
 As most of the main cast was not from the Orthodox community , Burshtein instructed them to attend all of the major events that take place within the film , including a wedding and a circumcision . Yaron commented , " [ At the wedding ] it was so intense and [ the bride ] was crying and she was really in it and I felt like she was my sister because I 'm going to be like her in a while . So it was really helpful to experience all these things and to see how it is and to feel a part of it actually . " 
 = = = Costumes = = = 
 <unk> Gurewitz oversaw costume design for the film , and much of the low budget was spent on the clothing worn by the actors , which was designed to be soft and colorful . Hasidic style of dress was used , including headgear and heavy attire worn by the males and modest dresses and head coverings worn by the females . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Burshtein found creating a believable relationship between Yiftach Klein and Hadas Yaron to be one of the more challenging aspects of the production . She hoped to keep the relationship between Yochay and Shira enigmatic , with a strong undercurrent of tension , throughout the film . One method of doing so was ensuring that the actors never touched while filming . She explained , " That 's how we see the enigma — the power of wanting and then restraining . The restraining is the power . The passion cannot exist if you have it all the time — the passion is only for something that you don 't have . You have to work to keep the passion . Judaism is all about that . " Burshtein considered including a scene in which Shira and Yochay kissed about halfway through the movie but decided against it , believing that the energy would be lost . 
 Yaron had never acted in a role with a romance before and at certain points found it difficult to portray the emotions her character felt when interacting with Yochay . Cinematographer Asaf Sudry assisted in conveying to the audience that the marriage between the lead characters would eventually take place by frequently using sunlight for their scenes . 
 In general , Sudry designed the visual effects in Fill the Void to create a claustrophobic view point . Blurred backgrounds were often utilized to focus on the faces of the characters , and most of the long takes were shot from an interior perspective . Sudry used Arri Alexa cameras and short @-@ range lenses with limited camera movements to maintain the effect . Burshtein explained that this was done to illustrate that " the heart is very colorful and very small " and that " we as human beings only see fragments of the big picture ; God sees the whole thing ! " While a " documentary feel " was retained throughout most the film 's duration , the style was switched for the wedding scene to create a euphoric atmosphere similar to those used in productions by Terrence Malick and David Lynch . 
 The film relied on subtext , requiring the actors to " read between the lines " for a number of their scenes . Most of the sentiments are understated , and Burshtein avoided having any of the characters break down or openly become angry when pressured . Yaron described a scene between Yochay and Rivka as her favorite , saying , " I think it 's because there is so much pain there ; it touches you the most when people feel something and try to hide it and you see it . " 
 Following the completion of filming , Burshtein continued to edit the footage for another year and three months until it was declared complete . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Yitzhak Azulay composed the music played in Fill the Void . He chose primarily melodic and traditional pieces , using them frequently throughout the film . Other soundtrack is composed largely of contemporary Orthodox pop music , and the prayers are " regularly chanted rather than spoken " . The song " Im <unk> Yerushalayim " ( Hebrew : <unk> <unk> <unk> , ' If I Forget Thee Jerusalem ' ) features prominently in the film , playing at all three of the major events : the funeral , the <unk> <unk> , and the wedding . Azulay used an acapella version of the song , which is derived from an excerpt of Psalm 137 and expresses the yearnings of the Jewish people in exile following the Babylonian conquest of Jerusalem in 586 BCE : " If I forget you , O Jerusalem , let my right hand wither ; Let my tongue stick to my palate if I cease to think of you , if I do not keep Jerusalem in memory even at my happiest hour . " 
 Shira is frequently shown playing the accordion , which Hadas Yaron did not know how to play . She described it as a " very difficult instrument " and stated , " There was so much noise in [ one scene ] . It was like <unk> [ as I tried to play ] , I was faking the melody and it was ugly , very weird stuff . I had to really switch this button [ in my head ] like don 't listen to it and feel what you ’ ' re feeling . It took a while because at the beginning , I was very aware of playing this horrible melody , if you could call it a melody , and I knew I had to feel something . It took a few takes because I thought , ' oh , how could [ the crew ] listen to that ? The cinematographer ! ' It took a while to ignore that and just be in the moment . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 First released in Israel in September 2012 , Fill the Void grossed $ 59 @,@ 164 on its opening weekend . It appeared in three theaters with an average of $ 19 @,@ 721 per theater , ranking at # 38 in the country . During the film 's eight @-@ week release , it appeared in 64 theaters and reached a figure of $ 1 @,@ 468 @,@ 587 for total domestic gross . It was later released in the United States in May 2013 , grossing $ 2 @,@ 418 @,@ 587 worldwide . 
 = = = Critical reviews = = = 
 Fill the Void received generally positive reviews , garnering an 88 % " fresh " rating based from 64 reviews on review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes ; the consensus states : " Graceful , complex , and beautifully layered , Fill the Void offers a sympathetic portrait of an insulated culture by exploring universal themes . " Several critics compared the female characters to Jane Austen 's novels . The Weekly Standard editor John Podhoretz opinionated , " I don 't know when I 've ever seen a film as eerily perfect in tone and taste as Fill the Void ... There isn 't a moment when Burshtein goes wrong , goes melodramatic , goes didactic , goes false . Working as a woman of faith in a medium looked on with understandable suspicion and skepticism by those who believe as she does , Rama Burshtein has made a work of art of overwhelming beauty and impact . " The New York Post critic Farran Smith <unk> disagreed , writing , " While the social milieu is nicely realized , other parts of the drama are not . Too often Burshtein cuts off a scene prematurely , darting away just as the crucial moment of emotion or confrontation appears . " 
 The Boston Globe correspondent Peter Keough gave the film a highly favorable review : 
 Films tend to confirm , not confront , stereotypes . Not so Israeli director Rama Burshtein 's exquisitely acted , <unk> shot , and delicately nuanced " Fill the Void , " a melodrama set in the ultra @-@ Orthodox Haredi Jewish community of Tel Aviv . By bringing to life complex and sympathetic characters in a precisely observed setting and social framework , and by presenting that isolated world as a microcosm , Burshtein has achieved a gripping film without victims or villains , an ambiguous tragedy drawing on universal themes of love and loss , self @-@ sacrifice and self @-@ preservation . 
 Deborah Young from The Hollywood Reporter also published a good review , adding that it was " more realistic than beautiful , though when the story calls for it she has no trouble injecting poetry into a scene . " A review in Slant Magazine was equally positive , adding that the film used " long static takes , restricting her shots largely to interiors and strategically alternating between depth staging and blurry backgrounds , Rama Burshtein brings a sense of inevitability and constriction to the insular world of Israeli Hassidic Judaism . " More broadly , Screen International suggested that director " Burshtein paints a perfect bubble that can last only as long as it has no contact with the world outside ( no secular presence is allowed in here ) . " 
 Additionally , critics praised the respect shown to the film 's portrayal of Orthodox Jews . Jane <unk> from The New York Times suggested that , " While the film may deliver a message at odds with contemporary feminism in the eyes of some critics , the movie portrays female characters with a strength that is both subtle and believable . " A. O. Scott , also from The New York Times , added , " Their routines are dominated by prayer , ritual observance and obedience to Jewish law , but their world does not seem narrow and austere . On the contrary , it is at times almost unbearably full of feeling and significance . " 
 Scott further commended the acting by Hadas Yaron , saying , " Shira is modest and sensible , forthright with her opinions and discreet about expressing emotion , but the way Ms. Yaron composes her features — and the way she is lighted by Ms. Burshtein and the cinematographer , Asaf Sudry — seems to offer direct access to her soul . " Likewise , Los Angeles Times film critic Kenneth Turan found Yaron 's performance " exceptional " . By contrast , Peter <unk> from Pleasanton Weekly disliked the idea of Shira marrying under the circumstances in the film and wrote that she " comes across as temperamentally battered by her mother and her potential husband , who is himself slow to see the wisdom of marrying Shira " . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 The film won seven Ophir Awards , the Israeli equivalent of the American Oscars , including one for best director and one for best film . It was selected to compete for the Golden Lion award at the 69th Venice International Film Festival , and Hadas Yaron won the Volpi Cup for Best Actress . In September 2012 , the film was selected as the Israeli entry for the Best Foreign Language Oscar at the 85th Academy Awards , but it did not make the final shortlist . 
 = Voćin massacre = 
 The Voćin massacre was the killing of 43 civilians , mostly Croats , by the Serbian White Eagles paramilitary unit in Voćin , Croatia on 13 December 1991 , during the Croatian War of Independence . The massacre was carried out after the unit was ordered to abandon the village before the Croatian Army ( Hrvatska vojska – HV ) recaptured the area in Operation Papuk @-@ 91 . The unit generally targeted Croats living in the village , but also killed a Serb civilian who tried to protect others . Most of the victims were killed by gunfire , but some of them were killed with axes or chainsaws , or were burned to death . The victims exhibited signs of torture and were left unburied . On the night of 13 / 14 December , the unit also demolished a 550 @-@ year @-@ old church in the village using explosives . 
 The HV secured Voćin on the night of 14 / 15 December , the Serb population having left the previous night . Afterwards , Croatian soldiers torched many homes belonging to the Serbs who had once inhabited the village . The area was toured by US Congressman Frank McCloskey shortly afterwards . McCloskey publicised the killings at a news conference held in Zagreb the next day , deeming them genocide . He then persuaded Jerry Blaskovich , an Associate Clinical Professor at the University of Southern California Los Angeles County Hospital Medical Center to take part in the investigation of the killings . The International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia ( ICTY ) later charged Slobodan Milošević with the killings and Vojislav Šešelj with the deportation of non @-@ Serbs from Voćin . In 2015 , the International Court of Justice ruled that the massacre in Voćin was not an example of genocide , and stated that Croatia had failed to prove that the killings had even occurred . 
 = = Background = = 
 Within the 1991 Yugoslav campaign in Croatia , the 5th ( Banja Luka ) Corps of the Yugoslav People 's Army ( Jugoslovenska Narodna Armija – JNA ) was tasked with advancing north through western Slavonia , from Okučani to Daruvar and Virovitica , and with a secondary drive from Okučani towards Kutina . This task was essentially consistent with the line expected to be reached by the main thrust of the JNA advancing from eastern Slavonia in about a week . The linkup was designed to facilitate a further advance west to Zagreb and Varaždin . The JNA was stopped by the Croatian National Guard ( Zbor Narodne Garde – ZNG ) between Novska , Nova Gradiška and Pakrac , although SAO Western Slavonia Territorial Defense Forces ( Teritorijalna <unk> – TO ) units took positions on the Bilogora and Papuk north of Pakrac , near Virovitica and Slatina with no JNA support . The TO was supported by Serbian paramilitaries deploying to the village of Voćin on the Papuk Mountain in October . 
 The paramilitaries were the White Eagles under the control of Vojislav Šešelj . He visited Voćin in the following month and incited the paramilitaries to persecute the Croat population . According to testimonies of surviving residents of Voćin , the White Eagles and several local Serbs terrorised the Croat population , reduced to 80 by late 1991 . Prior to the war , ethnic Serbs formed eighty percent of the village 's population . 
 On 29 October , the ZNG launched Operation Hurricane @-@ 91 against positions held by the JNA and the TO near Novska and Nova Gradiška , and Operation Swath @-@ 10 against the TO positions on the Bilogora Mountain south of Virovitica . Aiming to exploit the success of Operation Swath @-@ 10 and recapture Papuk area , Croatian forces , renamed the Croatian Army ( Hrvatska vojska or HV ) on 3 November , launched Operation Papuk @-@ 91 on 28 November . 
 = = Killings = = 
 The HV began advancing in the area of Đulovac , located approximately 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 miles ) west of Voćin , on 12 December , and the TO were forced to retreat from the area . In turn , the White Eagles were to abandon Voćin , but were ordered to take no prisoners . They were also instructed to ensure the evacuation of the Serb population . Those who refused to leave were threatened and one man was killed in front of his home . 
 The killing of civilians living in Voćin and two nearby smaller villages began on 13 December at noon . The White Eagles infantry , supported by at least one tank , moved through Voćin bombing Croat @-@ owned houses and killing civilians . The killings and the destruction took twelve hours and claimed the lives of 43 civilians . The bodies of the victims were mutilated and left on display , presumably as a warning to others , outside Voćin itself , to flee or perish . All the victims were Croat civilians , except one 77 @-@ year @-@ old Serb who was reported to had tried to protect his neighbours from the paramilitaries . Most of the victims were elderly , including twelve women aged 56 – 76 and eleven men aged 60 – 84 . 
 Many of those killed were tortured , beaten using chains and burned . Most of the victims were killed by gunshots , but the cause of death proved hard to establish for eight victims whose bodies were severely burned . A couple was bound with chains and burned alive , two women were killed using axes or similar sharp objects , one of them by several axe blows to her head . Another couple was beheaded and their heads were placed in bags . One of the victims was cut by a chain saw while still alive , and another died trapped in her house which was torched by the paramilitaries . The Serb civilian who attempted to protect the others was also beaten , tortured using lighted cigarettes and heated chains , and then flayed . 
 At 3 : 00 a.m. , the paramilitaries demolished the Roman Catholic church of the Pilgrimage to the Blessed Virgin Mary in Voćin . They used the 550 @-@ year @-@ old structure as an ammunition depot . In the wake of the explosion , a single wall of the structure remained standing . It is estimated that several tons of explosives were used for the purpose . At the same time , approximately 20 other Croat inhabitants of villages of <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> , further to the south , were reportedly killed . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The HV captured Voćin on the night of 14 / 15 December , the village 's Serb population having withdrawn the night before . Afterwards , Croatian soldiers torched many homes that belonged to the Serbs who had once inhabited the village . One of the first to arrive in the village following its re @-@ capture was US Congressman Frank McCloskey , who was in Croatia on a fact @-@ finding mission . 
 McCloskey asked his aide , Pat Mackley , to arrange a press conference in Zagreb the next day , while Mackley persuaded Dr. Jerry Blaskovich , an Associate Clinical Professor at the LAC + USC Medical Center , sent to Croatia to investigate alleged use of chemical weapons , to take part in the investigation of the killings . At the conference , McCloskey called the killings genocide . CNN reporter Mark <unk> refused to attend the press conference as the network distrusted the reports of the killings , and , according to Dr. Blaskovich , only became interested in the event once Blaskovich 's involvement was announced . 
 The victims ' bodies were taken to the nearby town of Slatina for forensic examination on 17 December . Mackley contacted Croatian authorities and obtained permission to document the autopsies of the victims , but was denied access by authorities in Slatina . Mackley telephoned Croatian Defence Minister Gojko Šušak asking him to intervene on his behalf , but the local police allegedly disobeyed Šušak . The special police was deployed to Slatina to enforce Šušak 's order to cooperate , almost causing an armed clash over the issue . To settle matters , a team was sent to Slatina by Zagreb University 's Institute for Forensic Medicine to perform autopsies , retrieve bodies and perform the rest of the procedures in Zagreb . 
 Survivors who took shelter in basements or cornfields , as well as a captured member of the paramilitary forces , later testified about the killings and identified the White Eagles as the perpetrators . In addition , the withdrawing paramilitaries left critical evidence behind , including personnel records confirming the force was indeed the White Eagles associated with Šešelj . US investigator for the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia ( ICTY ) John <unk> corroborated the information in an interview with a witness linking Slobodan Milošević , then president of Serbia to the killings . The ICTY charged Milošević with the deaths of 32 civilians in Voćin . Milošević was subsequently arrested and tried , but he died before his trial was completed . The ICTY also charged Šešelj with involvement in the forced deportation of non @-@ Serb civilians from Voćin , but as of August 2013 his trial is still in progress . 
 In March 2014 , Croatia alleged before the International Court of Justice ( ICJ ) that the massacre in Voćin was part of a larger campaign of genocide targeting the Croat population of Slavonia . In 2015 , the ICJ ruled that Serb forces had not committed genocide in Croatia , and stated that the Croatian legal team had failed to prove that any mass killing had taken place in Voćin . 
 = Jon Scheyer = 
 Jonathan James " Jon " Scheyer ( Hebrew : ג <unk> <unk> ; born August 24 , 1987 ) is an American former basketball player , currently an assistant coach of the Duke Blue Devils men 's basketball team . Scheyer led his high school team to an Illinois state basketball championship as a high school All @-@ American , and was one of the starters on the 2009 – 10 Duke Blue Devils that won the 2010 NCAA Basketball Championship , as a college All @-@ American . He was a prolific high school scorer , and later an Atlantic Coast Conference ( ACC ) leader in numerous statistical categories , ranging from free throw percentage and three point shots / game to assists / turnover ratio . 
 In high school , he once scored 21 points in a game 's final 75 seconds of play in an attempt to spark a comeback . The 4th @-@ leading scorer in Illinois high school history , he led his team to a state championship in 2005 , and was named Illinois Mr. Basketball in 2006 . Also in 2006 , Scheyer was voted as one of the 100 Legends of the IHSA Boys Basketball Tournament , a group of former players and coaches in honor of the 100 anniversary of the IHSA boys basketball tournament . 
 He chose to attend Duke for college , for whom he moved from shooting guard to point guard towards the end of the 2008 – 09 season , and was the Most Valuable Player ( MVP ) of the 2009 ACC Men 's Basketball Tournament . In his senior year in 2009 – 10 as Duke 's captain , he led the team to ACC regular season and Tournament championships , and to the NCAA National Championship . He led the championship team in points per game , assists , free throw percentage , and steals per game . Scheyer was a 2010 consensus All @-@ American ( Second Team ) , a unanimous 2009 – 10 All @-@ ACC First Team selection , and was named to the 2010 ACC All @-@ Tournament First Team . 
 He played the most consecutive games in Duke history ( 144 ) , shot the third @-@ highest free throw percentage ( <unk> ) , shot the third @-@ most free throws ( 608 ) , shot the fourth @-@ most 3 @-@ pointers ( 297 ) , and is ranked ninth in scoring ( 2 @,@ 077 points ) . He holds the ACC single @-@ season record for minutes ( 1 @,@ 470 ; in 2009 – 10 ) and the Duke freshman free throw record ( 115 ) , shares the Duke record for points off the bench in a game ( 27 ) , and had the third @-@ longest streak of consecutive free throws in Duke history ( 40 ) . He was not drafted in the 2010 NBA Draft , but played for the 2010 Miami Heat Las Vegas summer league team ; however , playing for the team in July he was poked in the eye by Golden State 's Joe Ingles and suffered a serious , life @-@ changing right eye injury in which his eye 's optic nerve was injured , and he suffered a tear in its retina , which was re @-@ attached surgically . He was a 2010 Los Angeles Clippers training camp invitee , but was waived in the team 's reduction to its final roster . In 2011 he played shooting guard for the Rio Grande Valley Vipers of the NBA D @-@ League . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Scheyer was born in Northbrook , Illinois and is the youngest of three children of Laury ( née <unk> ) and Jim Scheyer . He was raised in his father 's Jewish religion , and was Bar Mitzvah . He began dribbling a basketball at age three and played in his first AAU national tournament six years later . As a youth , he played in a league called the Fellowship of Afro @-@ American Men ( <unk> ) , in Evanston , Illinois . He received a scholarship offer from Marquette University 's Tom Crean as an 8th grader . 
 = = High school career = = 
 Because Scheyer 's talent was obvious by the time he was set to start high school , many people encouraged his parents to move so he could attend a high school with a powerhouse basketball program . The move was recommended so that he would have a greater chance of success . Scheyer shrugged off the suggestion , telling his parents : " We 'll just do it here . We 'll build the success at Glenbrook North . " His father said : " I get chills thinking about it . That wasn 't my vision . It wasn 't Laury 's . It wasn 't his coaches ' . That was Jon 's vision , and it never occurred to him that anything else would happen . " 
 Scheyer attended Glenbrook North High School and led the Spartans to an Illinois High School Association Class AA state basketball championship as a junior , a 3rd @-@ place finish in 2003 as a freshman , and an Elite Eight appearance in the state playoffs three out of four years from 2003 – 06 . Scheyer was known as the " Jewish Jordan " , and the Spartans ' state championship team is the only high school state championship basketball squad in the nation known to have included an all @-@ Jewish starting line @-@ up . 
 As a freshman , Scheyer led Glenbrook North in scoring and assists and was First Team All @-@ State as a sophomore in 2004 . Scheyer was the only non @-@ senior among those First Team All @-@ State selections and was the only underclassman on any of the first three All @-@ State squads . As a junior , he averaged 26 points , 5 rebounds , and 5 assists . His coach David Weber said : " I call him a combination of Larry Bird and ' Pistol ' Pete ( Maravich ) . He 's got the flair , the passing abilities . He 's got good size . He 's a rare player in this day and age . " Scheyer rose to national fame in his senior year by scoring 21 points in 75 seconds of play during a one @-@ man comeback effort in the last minute and a half of a high school game against Proviso West High School , in an effort to keep alive his team 's 35 @-@ game winning streak . It has been called one of the best performances ever on a high school court . He averaged 32 points , 6 rebounds , 5 assists , and 3 steals for the Spartans as a senior . 
 One example of his dogged pursuit of excellence is that while in high school , Scheyer refused to leave the gym one night until he made 50 consecutive free throws . After finally hitting 49 in a row , he missed on his final attempt . His father encouraged him to join him and go home , but – as his coach recalled – “ Jon looked at him and said , ‘ No . I ’ m starting over . ’ Then he stayed until he made 50 in a row . ” 
 Scheyer is the 4th @-@ leading scorer in Illinois history with 3 @,@ 034 points , and he is the only player in state history to finish his career ranked in the all @-@ time top 10 in points ( 4th ) , rebounds , assists ( 6th ) , and steals ( 7th ) . He was named Illinois Mr. Basketball in 2006 by an overwhelming margin ( receiving 217 votes , to 17 for the 2nd @-@ place finisher ) , a high school All @-@ American , a two @-@ time Gatorade state Player of the Year , and a three @-@ time All @-@ State selection . He had a reputation as an exceptional 3 @-@ point shooter , a good defensive rebounder , and a big @-@ game performer . In naming him to the Illinois First @-@ Team for the decade , ESPN wrote that he was " one of the greatest Illinois high school players of all @-@ time " . He was also named to the century @-@ list , the " 100 Legends of Illinois Basketball ( 1908 – 2007 ) " . Illinois Warriors coach Larry Butler said : " Jon Scheyer is one of the most prolific scorers I 've seen in Illinois high school basketball . He was just the ultimate team player . Jon Scheyer would take the shirt off his back to win a game . " A Chicago Sun @-@ Times article observed : 
 Scheyer 's offensive game is amazing ... He hits jumpers from all manner of pogo @-@ stick angles . He can hit runners while shooting back across his body . He can drive and finish in acrobatic ways . His offensive repertoire of ways to score is like a magician 's bag of tricks . Offensively , he is a modern @-@ day ' Pistol ' Pete Maravich . 
 = = College career = = 
 Scheyer 's final four college choices were Arizona , Duke , Illinois , and Wisconsin . On the one hand , his connection with Illinois was strengthened by the fact that his high school coach was Illinois coach Bruce Weber 's brother . In addition , when he had been in junior high school , he had really disliked Duke 's team , because all his friends liked Duke and he wanted to be different . <unk> in favor of Duke , however , was the fact that its assistant coach Chris Collins had also attended Glenbrook North . He also believed that playing for the Blue Devils provided him with the best chance of playing in the Final Four . He ultimately chose to attend Duke , where he majored in History . 
 = = = 2006 – 07 = = = 
 In the 2006 – 07 season he started all 33 Blue Devils games as a freshman , and scored a season @-@ high 26 points in a loss to North Carolina on February 7 , 2007 . He led all freshmen in the ACC with an .846 free throw percentage , and was eighth in the ACC in minutes per game ( 33 @.@ 7 ) . He was an ACC All @-@ Freshman Team selection , and was named " ACC Rookie of the Week " three times . He tied for second on the team with 39 steals , and averaged 12 @.@ 2 points per game ( third @-@ best on the team ) . He also tied the Duke freshman record by making 115 free throws , and holds the third @-@ longest streak for consecutive free throws made in Duke history at 40 . Though not naturally a point guard , Scheyer spent some time playing the point due to lack of depth at that position . " It was a learning experience , " Scheyer said . " It made me more confident bringing the ball up the court . " 
 = = = 2007 – 08 = = = 
 Despite the fact that he was a starter as a freshman , Coach Mike Krzyzewski ( Coach K ) chose to start Gerald Henderson , Jr . , in Scheyer 's place for the majority of the season . Scheyer started only once during his sophomore year , but played in all 34 games . On December 20 , 2007 , he grabbed a career @-@ high 12 rebounds against Pittsburgh . He scored 27 points at Miami on February 20 , 2008 , matching the most points by a player off the bench in Duke history . His free throw percentage ( <unk> ) was 2nd in the ACC for the season , 12th in the nation , and 5th @-@ best in school history . He had a team @-@ best 2 @.@ 24 : 1 assist @-@ to @-@ turnover ratio , averaged the third @-@ most minutes @-@ per @-@ game on the team ( 28 @.@ 3 ) , was fourth in scoring ( 11 @.@ 7 ) , and was widely hailed as one of the country 's top sixth men . He averaged 3 @.@ 9 rebounds , 2 @.@ 4 assists , and 1 @.@ 4 steals per game . 
 = = = 2008 – 09 = = = 
 Scheyer was named one of three captains for the Blue Devils for the 2008 – 09 season . He scored a then @-@ career @-@ high 30 points against Wake Forest on February 22 , 2009 . On February 19 , Scheyer was moved from shooting guard , where he had played 91 games , to point guard ; there he played well for the last 9 games of the season and into the post @-@ season . As a point guard , he averaged 19 @.@ 7 points and 2 @.@ 5 assists per game , and committed 1 turnover a game . Florida State Seminoles men 's basketball coach Leonard Hamilton said he thought Scheyer had a " calming " influence on the team 's offense . 
 Scheyer was 7th in the ACC in free throw percentage ( <unk> ) for the season , 8th in minutes per game ( 32 @.@ 8 ) , tied for 8th in steals per game ( 1 @.@ 6 ) and three @-@ point field goals made per game ( 2 @.@ 1 ) , and 18th in points per game ( 14 @.@ 9 ) . In the team 's 36 games , Scheyer led the Blue Devils in minutes , free throws , free throw percentage , 3 @-@ point field goals , 3 @-@ point field goal percentage ( .395 ) , assists , and assists per game ( 2 @.@ 8 ) . He was named the MVP of the 2009 ACC Tournament after scoring 29 points in the championship game . Krzyzewski said after the season : " He 's a great competitor . He handles the ball real well . He scores — he scored more when he was bringing the ball up than when he didn 't bring the ball up . I think the more the ball is in Jon 's hands , the better . " Reflecting his off @-@ the @-@ court accomplishments , Scheyer was a 2009 ACC Academic Honor Roll selection . 
 = = = 2009 – 10 = = = 
 Scheyer was again named captain along with Lance Thomas . Commenting on his play , Coach Krzyzewski said : " He understands , which most kids , believe me , do not , the value of the ball . He makes really good decisions with the ball , whether it 's a pass , a shot , or the time on the clock . " And : " Some of the plays he makes — you might not think he 's that fast , but he has great body control . " On December 2 , 2009 , he became the first Duke player to record 1 @,@ 400 points , 400 rebounds , 250 assists , 200 3 @-@ point field goals , and 150 steals for a career . On December 16 , he scored 24 of a career @-@ high 36 points in the first half to lead Duke past Gardner @-@ Webb . He shot 11 @-@ of @-@ 13 and hit a career @-@ best seven 3 @-@ pointers while grabbing eight rebounds and getting nine assists . Jay Bilas of ESPN picked Scheyer as starting guard on his mid @-@ season First @-@ Team All @-@ American team in January 2010 , writing : 
 Scheyer had one of the best assist to turnover ratios in the NCAA . No player in the country has been as efficient with the ball as Scheyer has been ... [ H ] e consistently makes good passes and good decisions . Scheyer leads the nation with a 4 @.@ 8 @-@ to @-@ 1 assist @-@ to @-@ turnover ratio , and when guarded by smaller point guards he will work off the ball , and take advantage of defenders not used to playing off the ball .... There are several other guards who are having great seasons ... but there aren 't many who have had comparable seasons to date . 
 ESPN play @-@ by @-@ play announcer Dan Schulman said : " He 's not your prototypical break @-@ you @-@ down @-@ off @-@ the @-@ dribble with blow @-@ by @-@ speed kind of point guard . I would describe him as a very cerebral player , a very unselfish player ... He 's been one of the most effective point guards in America . " ESPN 's Doug Gottlieb said Scheyer was making an interesting case for national player of the year . On February 15 , Scheyer became the first player to win the ACC Player of the Week award three times in the 2009 – 10 season ; it was the fourth time he had won the award in his career . After facing him , North Carolina point guard Larry Drew said : " He 's as crafty as you can get . You just don 't like playing against players like that . He can shoot the ball well . He 's quick enough . He 's smart . He knows about angles . He 's a good actor . And he can shoot . " University of Maryland coach Gary Williams observed : 
 Scheyer 's like an old @-@ time guard ... in that he does everything , in terms of handling the ball , shooting the ball , playing defense .... that 's what makes him so tough , because he can do all those things and do them at a very high level for almost 40 minutes every game ... It 's almost like having more than one player on the court . 
 ESPN college basketball analyst Jay Williams said in March that Scheyer had been great and was deserving of being the NCAA Player of the Year or perhaps a co @-@ Player of the Year with Greivis Vásquez . Commenting on his demeanor , Sports Illustrated sportswriter Stewart Mandel wrote : " Scheyer is one of the shyest Duke stars in recent memory . The next time he brags or trash @-@ talks will be the first . " 
 After sinking a 3 @-@ pointer with 18 seconds left to seal a win for Duke over Georgia Tech for the ACC championship , Scheyer said : " This is really exciting . I could do this 100 times . This could never get old . " Despite having struggled with his 3 @-@ point shot all game on 1 – 8 shooting , he said : " Even though I wasn 't hitting , I still wanted the opportunity in the end to shoot the ball . " " Scheyer made an unbelievable shot , " said Georgia Tech coach Paul Hewitt . " If you 're a basketball fan , enjoy it for what it is . " Coach Krzyzewski noted : " There ’ s something about Scheyer that produces wins .... He 's never afraid . " Playing Baylor on March 28 in the Elite Eight , he recalled : 
 There was a TV timeout with under four minutes in the second half . ... [ W ] e were tied , or down by one . There was 3 : 39 on the clock .... I came to the bench , and was kind of looking around . I thought : ' This is it . It is a three @-@ minute game for our season , everything you 've been working for your whole life . ' I smiled , and went for it . That was the most surreal moment . That is a moment I 'll never forget . 
 With 2 : 37 remaining , he hit a 3 @-@ pointer to put Duke ahead 67 – 61 . The Blue Devils won as he finished with 20 points , 5 rebounds , and 4 assists . In Duke 's Final Four win over West Virginia , he led the team with 23 points while shooting 5 for 9 from 3 @-@ point range , with 6 assists , no turnovers , and 2 steals . 
 Duke won the national championship with a 61 – 59 victory over Butler , as Scheyer scored 5 of the team 's last 10 points . After Butler 's Gordon Hayward missed a last @-@ second shot , a media member said to Scheyer : " In the movies , that goes in . " Scheyer laughed , and responded : " Good thing this wasn 't the movies then . " Scheyer had 15 points in the win , and led the team with 5 assists . He became the second player to win an Illinois high school state championship and an NCAA Division I championship , the other having been Quinn Buckner , who won state titles at <unk> High School in 1971 and 1972 , and then was a champion with Indiana in 1976 . Scheyer played a prank after Duke 's win . He tweeted his more than 6 @,@ 700 Twitter followers : " <unk> at me ! ! ! 847 @-@ <unk> .... ! " . But instead of including his own cell number , it was the cell number of his former high school teammate Zach Kelly . Even Sports Illustrated was taken in by the ruse . After Kelly had received more than 2 @,@ 000 text messages and several hundred calls , Scheyer tweeted his fans , begging them to stop texting and calling his friend . Sports Illustrated featured Scheyer on the cover of their April 12 , 2010 , issue . 
 When the Duke team went to the White House in honor of their championship in late May , President Obama caught Scheyer off guard by calling him " my homeboy , " when he introduced himself to Scheyer , and then saying it again ( " my homeboy from the Chicago area " ) when he said he had been following Scheyer since his high school days in Chicago . Scheyer said : " that was probably the coolest moment of my life . " Obama also noted that Scheyer , Kyle Singler , and Nolan Smith were the top @-@ scoring trio in the NCAA for the year ( at 52 @.@ 4 points per game ) . 
 = = = = Records and statistics = = = = 
 Scheyer set the ACC all @-@ time single @-@ season record for minutes played in 2009 – 10 ( with 1 @,@ 470 , passing Dennis Scott ) . Scheyer said : " I feel as though this is what I 've prepared my whole life to do . There 's never a time in a game when I feel I 'm winded . " In the 2009 – 10 season , he also led the ACC in assist / turnover ratio ( 3 @.@ 0 ; 2nd @-@ best in Duke history to Steve Wojciechowski in 1997 ) , free throw percentage ( <unk> ; 7th @-@ best in Duke history ) , and 3 @-@ point FGs made ( 2 @.@ 8 per game ) . He also tied for 2nd in games with 20 or more points ( 17 ) , and was 3rd in scoring ( 18 @.@ 2 points per game ) , 4th in assists ( 4 @.@ 9 per game ) and 3 @-@ point FG percentage ( .383 ) , and 7th in steals ( 1 @.@ 6 per game ) . 
 For the season , he has also led the nation in assist / turnover ratio . He had 38 double @-@ figure scoring games in the single season ( tied for 3rd @-@ most in Duke history with Elton Brand ) , 110 3 @-@ point field goals ( the 6th @-@ highest Duke season total ; behind Trajan Langdon ) , 194 free throws ( 10th in Duke history , behind J. J. Redick ) , and was the 9th player in Duke history to score over 100 points for four seasons . Freshman guard Andre Dawkins said : " Jon ’ s the glue . He takes the big shots . " 
 In his career , he played in 144 consecutive games ( most in team history , tied with Chris Duhon ) , played 4 @,@ 759 minutes ( 3rd in both Duke and ACC history , behind Bobby Hurley ) , had an <unk> free throw percentage ( 3rd in Duke history , and 6th in ACC history ) , sank 604 free throws ( 3rd in Duke history , behind Christian Laettner and Redick ) , 297 3 @-@ pointers ( 4th in school history , ahead of Bobby Hurley , and 10th in ACC history ) , played 144 games ( tied for 4th on Duke 's all @-@ time list with Duhon ) , and had 114 double @-@ figure scoring games ( 5th all @-@ time at Duke , ahead of Mike <unk> and Grant Hill ) . In addition , he had 208 steals ( 8th in school history , behind Grant Hill ) , and had scored 2 @,@ 077 points ( 9th on Duke ’ s all @-@ time list , behind Jason Williams and Gene Banks ) . Asked to comment on his having passed the career 2 @,@ 000 @-@ points mark , he said : " That 's a pretty cool thing . I don 't know all the names [ of those ] who have hit 2 @,@ 000 , but it 's a great list to be part of . It 's not better than a win tonight , and going to the Sweet 16 , but it 's still a great honor . " 
 He is the only player in Duke history to record at least 2 @,@ 000 points , 500 rebounds , 400 assists , 250 3 @-@ pointers , and 200 steals in a career . 
 = = = = Awards = = = = 
 Scheyer was a 2009 – 10 consensus All @-@ American ( Second Team ) , a Wooden and Lowe ’ s Senior First Team All @-@ American , and was named to the 2009 – 10 All @-@ America Second Teams of the AP , National Association of Basketball Coaches ( NABC ) , Sporting News , and U.S. Basketball Writers Association ( USBWA ) . In 2010 he was also a unanimous All @-@ ACC First Team selection , an ACC All @-@ Tournament First Team pick , and an NCAA South All @-@ Regional and All @-@ Final Four Team selection . In addition , he was named to the NABC and USBWA 2009 – 10 All @-@ District teams , and the Jewish Sports Review Division 1 All @-@ America team . He was also awarded the NABC Senior Achievement Award . He was second in voting for the ACC Player of the Year Award , to Maryland 's Greivis Vasquez . 
 = = = = Award lists = = = = 
 In 2010 , Scheyer was one of 6 finalists for the Bob Cousy Award ( as top college point guard ; awarded to Greivis Vasquez ) , and one of 10 finalists for the Lowe 's Senior CLASS Award ( as top NCAA Division I basketball senior ; awarded to West Virginia 's Da 'Sean Butler ) . He was also one of 10 finalists for the John R. Wooden Award , one of 16 finalists for the 2010 Oscar Robertson Trophy , and one of 30 mid @-@ season candidates for the 2010 Naismith Trophy , each a national player of the year award that in the end was awarded to Ohio State 's Evan Turner . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 Doug Gottlieb of ESPN opined in early January 2010 that Scheyer " is probably not an NBA player , but his Jewish faith allows him to get an Israeli passport , and he would be a highly coveted player for a team like Maccabi Tel Aviv . " 
 David Thorpe , ESPN 's resident expert on NBA rookies and noted trainer of NBA prospects , differed with Gottlieb . He noted most NBA teams would benefit by having Scheyer on their team as a sixth man . Chad Ford , ESPN 's draft expert , rated Scheyer within the top @-@ 60 NBA prospects . Asked in March 2010 whether he feels he can make it in the NBA , Scheyer said he was confident he can . 
 By early April , most NBA draft analysts thought he would be selected in the second round , but Larry Butler , his former AAU coach with the Illinois Warriors , thought he might go late in the first round . 
 He 's shown his toughness , his will to win . He brings all those little intangibles to the table that the elite players do . He 's always making the right pass , always making the big shots , always making the big plays , always making his free throws .... The kid is a winner . He 's always been a winner . 
 Eamonn Brennan of ESPN announced the results of his College Basketball Production @-@ Only Mock Draft in late May , meant to indicate how NBA teams would draft if they focused only at how college basketballs players played in college . He ranked Scheyer 6th , saying that as a college player , Scheyer was " ruthlessly effective " . 
 The Chicago Sun @-@ Times opined that coaches Phil Jackson of the Los Angeles Lakers and Gregg Popovich of the San Antonio Spurs might value Scheyer 's ability to move without the ball , pass , and spot up for jumpers . And one scout pointed to his poise , leadership , feel for the game , threat from the perimeter , smooth stroke , textbook form , and the vital role he played in the championship run , saying Scheyer can hold his own in the NBA and could be a solid backup point guard / no @-@ stats @-@ All @-@ Star similar to Shane Battier . 
 Scheyer signed with Mark Bartelstein of Priority Sports . Scheyer missed the NBA Draft Combine in late May and lost 10 pounds as he battled mononucleosis , which had him out for approximately three weeks and also forced him to miss his graduation . In June he participated in pre @-@ draft workouts for ten teams , including the Chicago Bulls , Los Angeles Lakers , Milwaukee Bucks , New Jersey Nets , San Antonio Spurs , Utah Jazz , Portland Trail Blazers , Sacramento Kings , and Phoenix Suns . " I 've spent more time at airports than with teams " , said Scheyer , " but it 's such a great opportunity . " 
 The Dallas Morning News reported in May 2010 that a NBA draft projection of NBADraft.net had the Dallas Mavericks selecting Scheyer with their first pick of the draft ( the draft 's 50th overall pick ) . Bleacher Report carried a mock draft article predicting him being drafted 51st by Oklahoma City , and Yahoo carried one predicting he would be drafted 53rd by the Atlanta Hawks . 
 Draft Express compared 19 top shooting guards in the draft , on the basis of detailed points @-@ per @-@ possession statistics generated by Synergy Sports Technology . It found that Scheyer ranked as the most efficient overall scorer ( at 1 @.@ 054 PPP ) . His jump shooting ability when open gave him success in spot @-@ up situations ( 1 @.@ 16 PPP ) , but he also ranked well above average in isolation ( .938 PPP ; 3rd ) , and was the most effective pick and roll player on the list ( 1 @.@ 16 PPP ) . 
 Duke Coach K said he could be a second @-@ round pick , 
 but I 'm not sure if that 's even the best thing for [ him ] because when you 're a second @-@ round pick , you belong to a team .... I think it would be better to go to the team that really wants [ him ] because there will be teams that want [ him . He 's ] going to be [ a ] good pro . 
 He was not drafted , however , in the 2010 NBA Draft . Coach K elaborated on what he had said before the draft : " In the second round , it 's better not to be drafted . As soon as the draft is over , if you are good enough , you will be invited by five or six teams , and you will have a chance to choose who you will play summer league ball with . I would be a little bit surprised if [ Scheyer is ] not on an NBA roster playing next season . " 
 = = = Miami Heat summer league team ; Eye injury = = = 
 Scheyer played on the Miami Heat 's 19 @-@ man 2010 NBA Las Vegas Summer League team . He hit the game @-@ winning shot in the team 's first game . In the team 's second game , however , in mid @-@ July , he was poked in the eye by Golden State 's Joe Ingles . He suffered a serious , life @-@ changing right eye injury . He needed five stitches to close a cut to his right eyelid , his eye 's optic nerve was injured , and he suffered a tear in its retina , which was re @-@ attached surgically . 
 Sidelined initially with an eye @-@ patch and incapacitating headaches , he ultimately returned to the court wearing protective goggles to protect his eyes . Maccabi Tel Aviv coach David Blatt also approached Scheyer about playing in Europe . 
 = = = LA Clippers training camp = = = 
 On September 22 , 2010 , Scheyer accepted a training camp invitation with the NBA 's Los Angeles Clippers . Coach Vinny Del Negro observed : 
 He just knows how to play , and that 's a basketball skill . He 's got such a nice feel for the game , and works so hard . There 's not much maintenance with him . He doesn 't make a lot of mistakes . This is a good chance to take a long look , and see what he can do here . 
 It was just two months following his serious eye injury , however , and he was not 100 % . On October 9 , he was waived . 
 = = = Rio Grande Valley Vipers = = = 
 After some additional time off to recover from his injury , on February 17 , 2011 , Scheyer signed a contract with the Rio Grande Valley Vipers , the Houston Rockets D @-@ League team , which had 16 games left in their season . He had turned down several offers from overseas , and offers from other D @-@ League teams . 
 Scheyer said his eye had healed from the traumatic injury that he suffered in the NBA Summer League . On March 14 , he had a D @-@ League career @-@ high 21 points and 7 assists against Sioux Falls Skyforce , the next night he broke those personal records with 24 points and 8 assists , and four nights later he scored a new career @-@ high 27 points which included five three @-@ pointers . In 24 regular and post @-@ season games , he averaged 13 @.@ 1 points , 4 @.@ 0 assists , and 4 @.@ 0 rebounds as the team finished the season as runner @-@ up in the championship . Coach K said : " He got back on the horse . He did very well .... I 'd like to see him go play internationally and be a key guy . " 
 = = = Maccabi Tel Aviv = = = 
 In June 2011 , Scheyer signed a two @-@ year contract worth a reported $ 450 @,@ 000 with Euroleague contender Maccabi Tel Aviv , the European league 's 2011 runner @-@ up and five @-@ time champion . Maccabi Tel Aviv was 26 – 1 in 2010 – 11 , and included NBA guard Jordan Farmar and former American college players Richard Hendrix ( Alabama ) , Shawn James ( Duquesne ) , and David Blu ( University of Southern California ) . He began playing for Maccabi Tel Aviv when its season started on October 1 , 2011 . 
 The team is limited to no more than four players who are non @-@ Israeli , but because Scheyer has a Jewish father he had the ability to obtain Israeli citizenship relatively quickly , and did so in September 2011 . As an Israeli citizen , Scheyer does not count towards that limit . " I am really excited to take the next step in my basketball career and go play for Maccabi Tel Aviv , " said Scheyer . " I am looking forward to the opportunity to play for a team with such great tradition . " 
 = = = Philadelphia 76ers summer league team = = = 
 Scheyer agreed to play with the Philadelphia 76ers in the 2012 Orlando Summer League . Scheyer played in five games in the summer league , averaging 5 @.@ 8 points and 1 @.@ 4 assists per game . 
 = = = CB Gran Canaria = = = 
 After playing this league , he signed for Gran Canaria 2014 to play in the Spanish league . 
 = = Awards = = 
 = = Coaching career = = 
 On April 29 , 2013 , Duke Men 's Basketball Head Coach Mike Krzyzewski announced that he had named Scheyer to his staff as a special assistant after the resignation of assistant coach Chris Collins . With the departure of Steve Wojciechowski from the Blue Devil staff , Scheyer was promoted to a full assistant coach on April 18 , 2014 . 
 = = Hall of Fame = = 
 Scheyer was a 2006 Inductee into the National Jewish Sports Hall of Fame . Jonah Keri wrote for ESPN in 2007 : " Scheyer , is an honest @-@ to @-@ goodness <unk> If he continues to develop his Redick Lite repertoire , he could eventually become one of the all @-@ time great Jewish basketball stars , right there with Dolph Schayes " . 
 = John FitzAlan , 14th Earl of Arundel = 
 John FitzAlan , 14th Earl of Arundel , 4th Baron Maltravers KG ( 14 February 1408 – 12 June 1435 ) was an English nobleman and military commander during the later phases of the Hundred Years ' War . His father , John FitzAlan , 3rd Baron Maltravers , fought a long battle to lay claim to the Arundel earldom , a battle that was not finally resolved until after the father 's death , when John FitzAlan the son was finally confirmed in the title in 1433 . 
 Already before this , in 1430 , FitzAlan had departed for France , where he held a series of important command positions . He served under John , Duke of Bedford , the uncle of the eight @-@ year @-@ old King Henry VI . FitzAlan was involved in recovering fortresses in the Île @-@ de @-@ France region , and in suppressing local rebellions . His military career ended , however , at the Battle of <unk> in 1435 . Refusing to retreat in the face of superior forces , Arundel was shot in the foot and captured . His leg was later amputated , and he died shortly afterwards from the injury . His final resting place was a matter of dispute until the mid @-@ nineteenth century , when his tomb at Arundel Castle was revealed to contain a skeleton missing one leg . 
 Arundel was considered a great soldier by his contemporaries . He had been a successful commander in France , in a period of decline for the English , and his death was a great loss to his country . He was succeeded by his son Humphrey , who did not live to adulthood . The title of Earl of Arundel then went to John 's younger brother William . 
 = = Family background = = 
 John FitzAlan was born at <unk> Matravers in Dorset on 14 February 1408 . He was the son of John FitzAlan , 3rd Baron Maltravers ( 1385 – 1421 ) and Eleanor ( d . 1455 ) , daughter of Sir John Berkeley of <unk> , Gloucestershire . John FitzAlan the elder , through his great @-@ great @-@ grandfather Richard FitzAlan , 4th Earl of Arundel , made a claim on the earldom of Arundel after the death of Thomas FitzAlan , 5th Earl of Arundel , in 1415 . The claim was disputed , however , by Thomas 's three sisters and their families , foremost among these Elizabeth FitzAlan , who had married Thomas de Mowbray , 1st Duke of Norfolk . It is debatable whether Maltravers ever held the title of Earl of Arundel ; he was summoned to parliament under this title once , in 1416 , but never again . When he died in 1421 , the dispute continued under his son , and it was not until in 1433 that the younger John FitzAlan finally had his title confirmed in parliament . Four years earlier , in July 1429 , he had received his late father 's estates and title . 
 As a child , John FitzAlan was contracted to marry Constance , who was the daughter of John Cornwall , Baron Fanhope , and through her mother Elizabeth granddaughter of John of Gaunt . The two may or may not have married , but Constance was dead by 1429 , when John married Maud , daughter of Robert Lovell . FitzAlan was knighted in 1426 along with the four @-@ year @-@ old King Henry VI , where he was referred to as " Dominus de <unk> " ( " Lord Maltravers " ) . In the summer of 1429 he was summoned to parliament , this time styled " <unk> Arundell ' <unk> " , meaning he was now Lord Arundel . In 1430 , however , in an indenture for service with the king in France , he was styled Earl of Arundel , a title he also used himself . When he was finally officially recognised in his title of Earl of Arundel in 1433 , this was based on the recognition that the title went with the possession of Arundel Castle . In reality though , the grant was just as much a reward for the military services he had by that point rendered in France . 
 = = Service in France = = 
 John FitzAlan the father had been a prominent soldier in the Hundred Years ' War under King Henry V , and the son followed in his father 's footsteps . On 23 April 1430 , the younger FitzAlan departed for France in the company of the Earl of Huntingdon . There he soon made a name for himself as a soldier , under the command of the king 's uncle , John , Duke of Bedford . In June he took part in the Siege of Compiègne , where Joan of Arc had recently been captured . Later , he raised the siege of <unk> with the help of the Burgundians . On 17 December 1431 , he was present when Henry VI was crowned King of France in Paris , where he distinguished himself at the accompanying tournament . FitzAlan 's military success led to several important appointments of command ; in November 1431 , he was made lieutenant of the Rouen garrison , and shortly after also captain of Vernon . In January 1432 he was appointed captain of Verneuil . On the night of 3 February he was taken by surprise while in bed at the Great Tower of Rouen Castle , when a band of French soldiers from nearby <unk> managed to take the castle . Arundel was hoisted down the walls in a basket ; and made his escape . The assailants could not hold the castle , because Marshall <unk> refused to garrison the town ; Guillaume de <unk> was forced to surrender twelve days later . In April 1432 , FitzAlan was rewarded for his actions so far by initiation into the Order of the Garter . In a separate action from Rouen Arundel was sent to rescue Saint <unk> from an attack by the duke of Alençon 's army , after the town 's captain Raoul <unk> had been appointed to replace Suffolk , who was captured at the Battle of Jargeau . The French retreated to the fastness of Mont St Michel , from where they continued to raid Anglo @-@ Normandy towns , like Granville in 1433 . 
 From early 1432 onwards , FitzAlan held several regional commands in northern France . One of his tasks was recovering fortresses in the Île @-@ de @-@ France region , at which he was mostly successful . At <unk> @-@ sur @-@ Marne he blew up the bridge to prevent the citizens from reaching the castle , but still failed to take the fortification . In December he was appointed to a regional command in Upper Normandy , but had to defend the town of Sées from a siege . On 10 March 1433 , he issued a pardon to the inhabitants when the town was retaken from the <unk> . 
 In July Arundel was instead made lieutenant @-@ general of Lower Normandy . The earl continued his work of recovering lost fortresses that belonged to Ambrose de <unk> , <unk> was taken easily , but de <unk> 's family had occupied Saint @-@ <unk> . After three months of culverin bombardment the walls were breached and most of the garrison killed . The remainder were allowed to march out unharmed . 
 In the County of Alençon , a young , tall and courageous earl led the campaign that probably took place in 1433 , taking back Saint @-@ <unk> , <unk> @-@ le @-@ Guillaume , where there was a short skirmish . The Armagnacs arrived , and demanded the return of the hostages in the castle ; Arundel feigned to agree and departed . As soon as the <unk> rode off Arundel returned and took the castle by <unk> and by 1434 Beaumont @-@ le @-@ Vicomte . In December 1433 , Bedford again appointed him commander in Upper Normandy , as well as captain of Pont @-@ de @-@ l <unk> . 
 By now the Earl of Arundel might have returned briefly to England in May 1434 , when he was in the process of gathering troops for an English expedition to France . But John , Duke of Bedford was forced to raise loans for the soldiers ' pay in the Maine campaign . That Spring he was joined in Paris by Talbot with nearly 1000 reinforcements from England . Later in May he was replaced as lieutenant of Upper Normandy by John Talbot , Earl of Shrewsbury , and instead received a command between the Seine and Loire rivers . This effectively meant that the two shared the command of Normandy , with Talbot east of the Seine and Arundel to the west . But they combined operations capturing Beaumont @-@ sur @-@ Oise , and then <unk> , which was finally taken on 20 June 1434 . In the summer Arundel captured the Mantes @-@ Chartres regional fortresses ; it appeared for a time at least the Armagnacs no longer posed a threat to Paris . 
 On 8 September , Arundel was also made Duke of Touraine – an area held by the French . The grant was made as a reward for his good service , but also in the hope that he would campaign in the area . In October he was made captain of Saint @-@ Lô , where he had to deal with a rebellion in the Bessin area . The Duke of Alençon was trying to exploit the revolt to take control of Avranches , but Arundel managed to prevent the French advance and ended the rebellion . 
 But in early 1435 the area of western Normandy erupted in popular revolt . Arundel wads summoned to call muster from Rouen in order to protect Caen . Arundel was joined by another lieutenant @-@ general Lord Scales from his base at Domfront , commanded to relieve Avranches . Alençon intended to build a fortress at Savigny , but when the English found out , the bailli of Cotentin was required to demolish it . With 800 men , Arundel was sent to recover Rue was he learnt that La Hire was fortifying Gerberoy , only 37 miles east of Rouen . Talbot had previously cleared out the Picardy , but when Arundel arrived he discovered to his surprise La Hire and <unk> de <unk> had already occupied the fortress . He was forced to give battle or besiege . 
 = = Death and aftermath = = 
 On the night of 31 May / 1 June 1435 , Arundel was at Mantes @-@ la @-@ Jolie in the Île @-@ de @-@ France , when he was ordered to relocate north to Gournay @-@ sur @-@ Epte ( now Gournay @-@ en @-@ Bray ) . When he was informed that the French had taken over the nearby fortress at Gerberoy , he moved quickly to attack it . The English met with a large French force at Gerberoy . Many withdrew to Gournay in panic , but Arundel remained to fight . In the ensuing battle , Arundel lost many of his men and was himself hit in the foot by a shot from a culverin – a primitive musket . Heavily wounded , he was taken to Beauvais as a captive of the French . According to the French historian Thomas Basin , Arundel was humiliated by his defeat and refused to receive medical treatment for the damage to his foot . The leg was eventually amputated , but Arundel 's life could not be saved ; he died of his injuries on 12 June 1435 , depriving the English of one of their youngest , most able and dedicated military leaders . Arundel was replaced in his command by Lord Scales . 
 There was long uncertainty about what had happened to the earl 's body . The French chronicler Jehan de Waurin claimed that Arundel had simply been buried in Beauvais . In the mid @-@ nineteenth century , however , the chaplain of the Duke of Norfolk came upon the will of Arundel 's squire , Fulk Eyton , when he died later in 1454 . Eyton maintained therein that he had secured the earl 's body and brought it back to England , for which he had been rewarded with a payment of 1400 Marks . The body was disinterred brought back to England , then entombed in the Fitzalan Chapel of Arundel Castle , as Arundel had expressly wished for in his own will . On 16 November 1857 , the tomb in the Arundel chapel carrying the earl 's effigy was opened . In it was found a skeleton measuring over six feet , with a missing leg . 
 Arundel 's military career coincided with a period of general decline for the English in France . He had been an unusually successful campaigner . His death was lamented in England and celebrated in France . He was referred to as the " English Achilles " ; the historian Polydore Vergil called him " a man of singular valour , constancy , and gravity . " With his wife , Maud , he had a son , Humphrey , who was born on 30 January 1429 . Humphrey succeeded to his father 's title , but died on 24 April 1438 , while still a minor . John FitzAlan 's younger brother , William , was next in line of succession . William was born in 1417 and was created Earl of Arundel in 1438 when he came of age . 
 = = FitzAlan family tree = = 
 The following simplified family tree shows the background for the dispute over the Arundel title and inheritance . Solid lines denote children and dashed lines marriages . 
 = = = Secondary = = = 
 J Barker , Conquest : The English Kingdom of France 1417 @-@ 1450 , Little , Brown : London , 2009 
 C de Beaurepaire , Les <unk> d e Normandie sous la Domination <unk> 1422 @-@ 1435 , Évreux 1859 
 L <unk> @-@ D <unk> , ( ed . ) , La Chronique d <unk> de <unk> , Paris , 1859 – 62 , vols 3 @-@ 6 . 
 A J R Pollard , John Talbot and the War in France , 1427 @-@ 1453 , London and New Jersey , 1983 
 Thomas Rymer , ed . , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , London , 1726 – 35 , 10 vols . 
 Very Rev Canon Tierney , <unk> of the Remains of John , 7th Earl of Arundel , Sussex Archaeological Collections , <unk> , ( 1860 ) , pp. 232 – 9 
 J H Wylie , The History of England under Henry the Fifth ( 1896 ) 
 = Ed , Edd n Eddy ( season 2 ) = 
 The second season of the Canadian @-@ American animated comedy television series Ed , Edd n Eddy , created by Danny Antonucci , originally aired on Cartoon Network from November 26 , 1999 , to December 22 , 2000 , and consists of 26 episodes . The series revolves around three adolescent boys collectively known as " the Eds " , who live in a suburban cul @-@ de @-@ sac . Unofficially led by Eddy , the Eds constantly scheme to make money off their peers in order to purchase their favorite confectionery , jawbreakers . However , their plans usually fail , leaving them in various predicaments . 
 The first season was a success in Nielsen ratings , prompting Cartoon Network for a November 1999 premiere . While the first season itself received generally positive reviews , the second season proved to be an improvement in reception , garnering acclaim and earning two Leo Awards , while the first received one . 
 The Complete Second Season DVD was released in Region 1 in 2007 . The Ed , Edd n Eddy DVD volume Edifying Ed @-@ Ventures , also featured season two episodes . Both DVDs were published by Warner Home Video . Many Cartoon Network compilation DVDs featured episodes from the season . It can also be purchased from the iTunes Store . It was written by Antonucci , Jono Howard , Mike Kubat , and Robert Leighton . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Concept = = = 
 Ed , Edd n Eddy follows the lives of three adolescent boys who all share variations of the name Ed , but differ greatly in their personalities . In the pursuit of buying jawbreakers and fitting in with the other kids , dimwitted Ed and intellectual Double Dee aid the self @-@ appointed leader , Eddy , in his plans to scam the other children in their cul @-@ de @-@ sac out of their money during a perpetual summer vacation ; however problems always ensue . The other children mostly dislike or show indifference to the Eds , though they all share a common fear of the Kanker Sisters , a group of teenage girls who live in the nearby " Park n ' Flush " trailer park . The series takes place mostly within the fictional town of Peach Creek , and new locations were rarely introduced . 
 = = = Production and cast = = = 
 Danny Antonucci , a cartoonist known for his edgy adult work such as Lupo the Butcher and The Brothers Grunt , was dared by someone to <unk> a children 's cartoon . In 1996 , Antonucci pitched Ed , Edd n Eddy , which he conceived while designing a commercial , to Cartoon Network and Nickelodeon . After Cartoon Network agreed to give Antonucci creative control over the show , the series went into production and premiered its first season on January 4 , 1999 . 
 According to Cartoon Network executive Linda Simensky , the first season did " remarkably well " in ratings ever since its premiere , becoming one of the top @-@ rated series on the network and prompting Cartoon Network to quickly order a second season for a November 1999 premiere , making it one of four seasons which Ed , Edd n Eddy was set to run . Antonucci stated that change in the characters from the first to the second season is " very " noticeable , due to the amount of development they 've went through . Antonucci directed the season , and co @-@ wrote the episodes with Jono Howard and Mike Kubat , although Robert Leighton was credited as a co @-@ writer for " To Sir with Ed " . 
 The cast mostly remained the same as in season one ; Matt Hill , Samuel Vincent and Tony Sampson were cast as Ed , Double Dee , and Eddy , David Paul Grove as Jonny <unk> , Keenan Christenson as Jimmy , Janyse Jaud as Sarah and Lee Kanker , Kathleen Barr as Kevin and Marie , Peter Kelamis as Rolf , and Erin Fitzgerald as May Kanker , but Tabitha St. Germain , the voice of Nazz , was replaced by Fitzgerald . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Reviews and accolades = = = 
 The second season of Ed , Edd n Eddy was generally acclaimed by critics and marked an improvement in reception from the first season . In 2000 , the season won Danny Antonucci the Leo Award for Best Director of an Animated Production . In 2001 , Patric Caird was nominated for the Leo Award for Best Musical Score of an Animation Program or Series , for his work on the episode " Ed in a <unk> " . 
 In his review of The Complete Second Season DVD , David Cornelius of DVD Talk considered the Eds adolescent equivalents of The Three Stooges , believing : " The series revels in the sort of frantic , often gross humor kids love so much , and there 's just enough oddball insanity at play to make adults giggle just as easily . " Cornelius also concurred that the " animation is colorful and intentionally bizarre ; bold lines forming the characters and backgrounds wiggle and morph in a delirious haze . This is animation that 's , well , really animated . " 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Two Ed , Edd n Eddy DVDs which featured a number of season 2 episodes were released by Warner Home Video in Region 1 from 2005 to 2007 . The DVD volume titled Edifying Ed @-@ Ventures was released on May 10 , 2005 , featuring three season two episodes out of a total six . The Complete Second Season was released on April 24 , 2007 . Both DVDs can also be purchased on the Cartoon Network Shop . The season is also available for download on the iTunes Store . Selected episodes from the season were also featured on several Cartoon Network compilation DVDs . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 Note : All episodes directed by Danny Antonucci 
 = = DVD release = = 
 = Albertus Soegijapranata = 
 This is an Indonesian name ; it does not have a family name . The name Albertus is a baptismal name , and the subject should be referred to by his birth name Soegija or his adult name Soegijapranata , as appropriate . 
 Mgr . Albertus Soegijapranata , SJ ( [ <unk> <unk> ] ; Perfected Spelling : Albertus <unk> ; 25 November 1896 – 22 July 1963 ) , better known by his birth name Soegija , was the Apostolic Vicar of Semarang and later its archbishop . He was the first native Indonesian bishop and known for his pro @-@ nationalistic stance , often expressed as " 100 % Catholic , 100 % Indonesian " . 
 Soegija was born in Surakarta , Dutch East Indies , to a Muslim courtier and his wife . The family moved to nearby Yogyakarta when Soegija was still young ; there he began his education . Known as a bright child , around 1909 he was asked by Father Frans van Lith to join Xaverius College , a Jesuit school in Muntilan , where Soegija slowly became interested in Catholicism . He was baptised on 24 December 1910 . After graduating from Xaverius in 1915 and spending a year as a teacher there , Soegija spent two years at the on @-@ site seminary before going to the Netherlands in 1919 . He began his two @-@ year novitiate with the Society of Jesus in September 1920 in Grave , and finished his <unk> there in 1923 . After three years studying philosophy at Berchmann College in <unk> , he was sent back to Muntilan as a teacher for a further two years . In 1928 , he returned to the Netherlands to study theology at Maastricht , where he was ordained by Bishop of Roermond Laurentius <unk> on 15 August 1931 ; Soegija then added the word " <unk> " to the back of his name . He was then sent back to the Indies to preach and became a parochial vicar at the parish in Kidul Loji , Yogyakarta , and in 1934 he was given his own parish in Bintaran . There he focused on creating a sense of Catholicism within the native community , emphasising the need for strong bonds between Catholic families . Soegijapranata was consecrated as the vicar apostolic of the newly established Apostolic Vicariate of Semarang in 1940 . 
 Although the population of native Catholics expanded greatly in the years following his consecration , Soegijapranata was soon faced with numerous trials . The Empire of Japan invaded the Indies beginning in early 1942 , and during the ensuing occupation numerous churches were seized and clergymen were arrested or killed . Soegijapranata was able to resist several of these seizures , and spent the rest of the occupation serving the Catholics in his vicariate . After President Sukarno proclaimed the country 's independence in August 1945 , Semarang was overcome with unrest . Soegijapranata helped broker a ceasefire after a five @-@ day battle between Japanese and Indonesian troops and called for the central government to send someone to deal with the unrest and food shortages in the city . However , these problems continued to grow , and in 1947 Soegijapranata moved his seat to Yogyakarta . For the remainder of the national revolution Soegijapranata worked to promote international recognition of Indonesia 's independence . Soon after the Dutch , who had returned in late 1945 , recognised the country 's independence , Soegijapranata returned to Semarang . During the post @-@ revolution years he wrote extensively against communism and expanded the church ; he also served as a mediator between several political factions . He was made an archbishop on 3 January 1961 , when Semarang was elevated to an ecclesiastical province . At the time he was in Europe , participating in the first session of the Second Vatican Council . Soegijapranata died in 1963 , in Steyl , the Netherlands . His body was flown back to Indonesia , where he was made a national hero and interred at Giri Tunggal Heroes ' Cemetery in Semarang . 
 Soegijapranata continues to be viewed with respect by both Catholic and non @-@ Catholic Indonesians . Several biographies have been written , and in 2012 a fictionalised biopic by Garin Nugroho , entitled Soegija , was released to popular acclaim . Soegijapranata Catholic University , a large university in Semarang , is named after him . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Soegija was born on 25 November 1896 in Surakarta to <unk> , an <unk> <unk> ( courtier ) at the <unk> of Surakarta , and his wife <unk> . The family was <unk> Muslim , and Soegija 's grandfather <unk> was a kyai ; Soegija followed their religion . Soegija – whose name was derived from the Javanese word <unk> , meaning rich – was the fifth of nine children . The family later moved to <unk> , Yogyakarta . There , <unk> began to serve as a courtier at the Kraton <unk> <unk> to Sultan Hamengkubuwono VII , while his wife sold fish ; despite this , the family was poor and sometimes had little food . Soegija was a daring child , quick to fight , skilled at football , and noted for his intellect from a young age . While Soegija was still young , his father made him fast in accordance with Islamic law . 
 Soegija started his formal education at a school in the Kraton complex , known locally as a Sekolah <unk> Loro ( Number Two School ) , where he learned to read and write . He later transferred to a school in <unk> , Yogyakarta , near <unk> . Beginning in his third year he attended a Dutch @-@ run school for native Indonesian ( Hollands <unk> School ) in <unk> . Outside of school he studied gamelan and singing with his parents . Around 1909 he was asked by Father Frans van Lith to join the Jesuit school in Muntilan , 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) north @-@ west of Yogyakarta . Although his parents were initially worried that Soegija would become too Europeanised , they agreed . 
 = = Xaverius College = = 
 In 1909 Soegija started at the Xaverius College in Muntilan , a school for aspiring teachers , and stayed in the dormitory . He was one of 54 students in his year . The boys followed a strict schedule , attending classes in the morning and engaging in other activities , such as gardening , discussions , and chess , in the afternoon . The Catholic students had regular prayers . Although the college did not require students to be Catholic , Soegija was pressured by his Catholic classmates , leading to several fights . Feeling dissatisfied , Soegija complained to his teacher that the Dutch priests were like merchants , thinking only of money . The priest replied that the teachers were unpaid and only hoped for the students ' good . This led Soegija to better respect the priests , and when van Rijckevorsel told the other students that Soegija did not want to be Catholic , they stopped pressuring him . 
 The following year Soegija asked to join the Catholic @-@ education classes , citing a desire to fully use the facilities at Xaverius . His teacher , Father Mertens , told Soegija that he required permission from his parents first ; although they refused , Soegija was nevertheless allowed to study Catholicism . He was intrigued by the Trinity , and asked several of the priests for clarification . Van Lith cited the works of Thomas Aquinas , while Mertens discussed the Trinity as explained by Augustine of Hippo ; the latter told him that humans were not meant to understand God with their limited knowledge . Soegija , who wanted to learn more , asked to be baptised , quoting the Finding in the Temple to show why he should not need his parents ' permission . The priests agreed , and Soegija was baptised on 24 December 1910 , taking the baptismal name Albertus , for Albertus Magnus . During Christmas holidays , he told his family that he had converted . Although his immediate family eventually accepted this , and may have eventually supported him , Soegija 's other relatives refused to speak to him afterwards . 
 Soegija and the students continued their education at Xaverius , receiving further instruction . According to Father G. Budi <unk> , a lecturer on theology at Sanata Dharma University , during this period one of the teachers taught the Fourth Commandment , " Honour your father and your mother , that your days may be long in the land which the Lord your God gives you . " , as relating not only to one 's birth father and mother , but all who had come before ; this left the students with nationalistic tendencies . On another occasion , a visit by a Capuchin missionary – who was physically quite different from the Jesuit teachers – led Soegija to consider becoming a priest , an idea which his parents accepted . In 1915 Soegija finished his education at Xaverius , but stayed on as a teacher . The following year he joined the on @-@ site seminary , one of three native Indonesians who entered the seminary that year . He graduated in 1919 , having studied French , Latin , Greek , and literature . 
 = = Path to priesthood = = 
 Soegija and his classmates sailed to Uden , in the Netherlands , to further their studies in 1919 . In Uden Soegija spent a year further studying Latin and Greek , necessary for his preaching back in the Indies . He and his classmates adapted to Dutch culture . On 27 September 1920 Soegija began his novitiate to join the Jesuits , the first of his classmates . While completing his studies at <unk> in Grave , he was separated from much of the world and spent his time in introspection . He completed his novitiate on 22 September 1922 and was initiated into the Jesuits , taking their oath of poverty , chastity and obedience . 
 After joining the Jesuits Soegija spent another year in <unk> in <unk> . Beginning in 1923 he studied philosophy at Berchmann College in <unk> ; during this time he examined the teachings of Thomas Aquinas and began writing on Christianity . In a letter dated 11 August 1923 , he wrote that the Javanese were so far unable to discern between Catholics and Protestants , and that the best way to convert the Javanese was by deeds , not words . He also translated some of the results of the 27th International Eucharistic Congress , held in Amsterdam in 1924 , for the Javanese @-@ language magazine Swaratama , which circulated mainly among Xaverius alumni . Several of Soegija 's other writings were published in St. <unk> , <unk> uit Java . He graduated from Berchmann in 1926 , then began preparations to return to the Indies . 
 Soegija arrived in Muntilan in September 1926 , where he began teaching algebra , religion , and Javanese at Xaverius . Little is known about his period as an instructor at the school , although records indicate that he based his teaching style on that of van Lith , who had died in early 1926 , explaining religious concepts in terms based on Javanese tradition . He supervised the school 's gamelan and gardening programs and became the chief editor of Swaratama . Soegijapranata wrote editorials that covered a variety of topics , including condemnations of communism and discussions of various aspects of poverty . 
 After two years at Xaverius , in August 1928 , Soegija returned to the Netherlands , where he studied theology at Maastricht . On 3 December 1929 he and four other Asian Jesuits joined Jesuit General <unk> <unk> in a meeting with Pope Pius XI in Vatican City ; the pope told the Asian men that they were to be the " backbones " of Catholicism in their respective nations . Soegija was made a deacon in May 1931 ; he was ordained by Bishop of Roermond Laurentius <unk> on 15 August 1931 , while still studying theology . After his ordination , Soegija appended the word <unk> , meaning " prayer " or " hope " , as a suffix to his birth name ; such additions were a common practice in Javanese culture after its bearer reached an important milestone . He finished his theology studies in 1932 and in 1933 spent his <unk> in <unk> , Belgium . That year he wrote an autobiography , entitled La <unk> di un <unk> ( The Conversion of a Javanese ) ; the work was released in Italian , Dutch , and Spanish . 
 = = Preaching = = 
 On 8 August 1933 Soegijapranata and two fellow priests departed for the Indies ; Soegijapranata was assigned to preach at Kidul Loji in Yogyakarta , near Kraton . He served as parochial vicar for Father van Driessche , one of his teachers from Xaverius . The elder priest taught Soegijapranata how to better address the needs of his parish , while van Driessche likely used Soegijapranata to preach to the city 's growing native Catholic population . Soegijapranata was , by this point , a short and chubby man with what the Dutch historian Geert Arend van Klinken described as " a boyish sense of humour that won him many friends " . 
 After the St Yoseph Church in Bintaran , about 1 kilometre ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) from Kidul Loji , opened in April 1934 , Soegijapranata was transferred there to become its priest ; the church primarily served the Javanese Catholic community . Bintaran was one of four centres of Catholic presence in Yogyakarta at the time , along with Kidul Loji , <unk> , and <unk> ; each major church served a wide area , and the priests from the major churches gave sermons in the furthest reaches of their parishes . After van Driessche 's death in June 1934 , Soegijapranata 's duties were extended to include the village of <unk> , Bantul , 20 kilometres ( 12 mi ) south of the city , which was home to more than a thousand native Catholics . He was also a spiritual adviser to several local groups and established a Catholic credit union . 
 The Catholic Church at the time faced difficulty retaining converts . Some Javanese , who had converted as students , returned to Islam after reentering society and facing social ostracism . In a 1935 meeting with other Jesuits , Soegijapranata blamed the problem on the lack of a united Catholic identity , or <unk> <unk> , as well as few intermarriages between native Catholics . Soegijapranata opposed marriage between Catholics and non @-@ Catholics . He counselled young Catholic couples before marriage , believing that these unions helped unite the Catholic families in the city , and continued to write for Swaratama , again serving as its editor in chief . In 1938 , he was chosen to advise the Society of Jesus , coordinating Jesuit work in the Indies . 
 = = Vicar apostolic = = 
 The increasing population of Catholics in the Indies led Mgr . Petrus Willekens , then Vicar Apostolic of Batavia , to suggest that a new apostolic vicariate be established in Central Java , headquartered in Semarang , as the area was culturally different and geographically separate from Batavia . The <unk> Vicariate of Batavia was split in two on 25 June 1940 ; the eastern half became the Apostolic Vicariate of Semarang . On 1 August 1940 Willekens received a telegram from Pro @-@ Secretary of State Giovanni Battista Montini ordering that Soegijapranata be put in charge of the newly established apostolic vicariate . This was forwarded to Soegijapranata in Yogyakarta , who agreed to the appointment , despite being surprised and nervous . His assistant <unk> later recalled that Soegijapranata cried after reading the telegram – an uncharacteristic response – and , when eating a bowl of soto , asked if <unk> had ever seen a bishop eating the dish . 
 Soegijapranata left for Semarang on 30 September 1940 and was consecrated by Willekens on 6 October at the Holy Rosary Church in Randusari , which later became his seat ; this consecration made Soegijapranata the first native Indonesian bishop . The ceremony was attended by numerous political figures and sultans from Batavia , Semarang , Yogyakarta , and Surakarta , as well as clergy from Malang and Lampung ; Soegijapranata 's first act as vicar was to issue a pastoral letter with Willekens that outlined the historical background that led to his appointment , including Pope Benedict XV 's <unk> letter Maximum <unk> , which called for more local clergy , and Pope Pius XI and Pope Pius XII 's efforts to appoint more pastors and bishops from native ethnic groups worldwide . Soegijapranata began working on the Church hierarchy in the region , establishing new parishes . 
 In Soegijapranata 's apostolic vicariate were 84 pastors ( 73 European and 11 native ) , 137 brothers ( 103 European and 34 native ) , and 330 nuns ( 251 European and 79 native ) . The vicariate included Semarang , Yogyakarta , Surakarta , Kudus , Magelang , Salatiga , Pati , and Ambarawa ; its geographic conditions ranged from the fertile lowlands of the Kedu Plain to the arid Gunung Sewu mountainous area . The vast majority of its population was ethnic Javanese , consisting of more than 15 @,@ 000 native Catholics , as well as a similar number of European Catholics . The number of native Catholics quickly outpaced the number of European ones , and had doubled by 1942 . There were also several Catholic groups , mostly working in education . However , the Indonesian Catholics were less prominent than the Protestants . 
 = = = Japanese occupation = = = 
 After the Japanese occupied the Indies in early 1942 , on 9 March 1942 Governor @-@ General Tjarda van Starkenborgh Stachouwer and head of the Royal Netherlands East Indies Army General Hein ter Poorten capitulated . This brought numerous changes in the governance of the archipelago , reducing the quality of life for non @-@ Japanese . In his diary , Soegijapranata wrote of the invasion that " fires were everywhere ... no soldiers , no police , no workers . The streets are full of burnt out vehicles . ... Luckily least there are still some lawmakers and Catholics out there . They work as representatives of their groups to ensure the city is in order . " 
 The occupation government captured numerous ( mostly Dutch ) men and women , both clergy and laymen , and instituted policies that changed how services were held . They forbade the use of Dutch in services and in writing , and seized several church properties . Soegijapranata attempted to resist these seizures , at times filling the locations with people to make them unmanageable or indicating that other buildings , such as cinemas , would serve Japanese needs better . When the Japanese attempted to seize Randusari Cathedral , Soegijapranata replied that they could take it only after decapitating him ; the Japanese later found another location for their office . He prevented the Japanese from taking Gedangan Presbytery , where he lived , and assigned guardians for schools and other facilities to prevent seizure . These efforts were not always successful , however , and several Church @-@ run institutions were seized , as were church funds . 
 Soegijapranata was unable to prevent Japanese torture of prisoners of war , including the clergy , but was himself well @-@ treated by the Japanese forces ; he was often invited to Japanese ceremonies , but never attended , sending bouquets in his stead . He used this position of respect to lobby for fair treatment of those interned . He successfully petitioned the Japanese overlords to exempt nuns from the paramilitary draft and allow them to work at hospitals . He and the Catholic populace also gathered food and other supplies for interned clergy , and Soegijapranata kept in contact with the prisoners , supplying and receiving news , such as recent deaths , and other information . 
 As the number of clergy was severely limited , Soegijapranata roamed from church to church to attend to parishioners , actively preaching and serving as the de facto head of the Catholic Church in the country ; this was in part to counteract rumours of his detention by the Japanese . He travelled by foot , bicycle , and carriage , as his car had been seized . He sent pastors to apostolic prefectures in Bandung , Surabaya , and Malang to deal with the lack of clergy there . Soegijapranata worked to ensure that the seminary would continue to produce new pastors and appointed the recently ordained Father <unk> as its rector . He also granted native priests the authority to perform marriages . To calm the Catholic populace , he visited their homes and convinced them that the streets were safe . 
 = = = Indonesian National Revolution = = = 
 After the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki and the proclamation of Indonesian independence in August 1945 , the Japanese began withdrawing from the country . In support of the new Republic , Soegijapranata had an Indonesian flag flown in front of the Gedangan Rectory ; however , he did not formally recognise the nation 's independence , owing to his correspondence with Willekens regarding the Church 's neutrality . He and his clergy treated injured Dutch missionaries , who had recently been released from internment , at the rectory . The Dutch clergy were malnourished , and several required treatment at a hospital . Some were later taken to Indonesian @-@ run internment camps , but the Catholics were still allowed to look after them . Meanwhile , inter @-@ religious strife led to the burning of several mission buildings and the murder of some clergymen . The government also took several buildings , and some that had been seized by the Japanese were not returned . 
 Allied forces sent to disarm the Japanese and repatriate prisoners of war arrived in Indonesia in September 1945 . In Semarang , this led to a conflict between Japanese forces and Indonesian rebels , that began on 15 October ; the Indonesians aimed to confiscate the Japanese weapons . Allied forces began landing in the city on 20 October 1945 ; a small group was sent to Gedangan to speak with Soegijapranata . Concerned with civilian suffering , the vicar apostolic told the Allies that they must stop the battle ; the Allies could not comply as they did not know the Japanese commander . Soegijapranata then contacted the Japanese and , that afternoon , brokered a cease @-@ fire agreement in his office at Gedangan , despite Indonesian forces ' firing at the Gurkha soldiers posted in front of the building . 
 Military conflicts throughout the area and an ongoing Allied presence led to food shortages throughout the city , as well as constant blackouts and the establishment of a curfew . Civilian @-@ run groups attempted to deal with the food shortages but were unable to cope . In an attempt to deal with these issues , Soegijapranata sent a local man , <unk> , to the capital at Jakarta – renamed from Batavia during the Japanese occupation – to speak with the central government . <unk> met with Prime Minister Sutan Sjahrir , who sent Wongsonegoro to help establish a civilian government , installing Moch . <unk> as mayor . The city 's government was , however , still unable to handle the crisis , and the major figures in this government were later captured by the Dutch @-@ run Netherlands @-@ Indies Civil Administration ( Nederlandsch Indië Civil <unk> , or NICA ) and imprisoned ; Soegijapranata , although he at times harboured Indonesian revolutionaries , was spared . 
 In January 1946 the Indonesian government moved from Jakarta – by then under Dutch control – to Yogyakarta . This was followed by a widespread exodus of civilians fleeing the advancing NICA soldiers . Soegijapranata at first stayed in Semarang , working to establish patrols and watches . He also corresponded with Willekens in Jakarta , although the elder bishop considered the revolution an internal security matter for the Dutch and not an issue for the Church . However , in early 1947 Soegijapranata moved to Yogyakarta , allowing easy communication with the political leadership . He established his seat at St Yoseph in Bintaran and counselled young Catholics to fight for their country , saying that they should only return " once they were dead " . Soegijapranata was present during several battles that arose where he was preaching . 
 After the Linggadjati Agreement failed to solve conflicts between Indonesia and the Netherlands and the Dutch attacked republicans on 21 July 1947 , Soegijapranata declared that Indonesia 's Catholics would work with the Indonesians and called for an end to the war in a speech on Radio Republik Indonesia ; van Klinken describes the address as " passionate " and considers it to have boosted the Catholic populace 's morale . Soegijapranata wrote extensively to the Holy See . In response , the Church leadership sent Georges de <unk> d <unk> to Indonesia as its delegate , initiating formal relations between the Vatican and Indonesia . D <unk> arrived in the new republic in December 1947 and met with President Sukarno ; however , formal diplomatic relations were not opened until 1950 . Soegijapranata later became a friend of the president . 
 After the Dutch captured the capital during Operation Kraai on 19 December 1948 , Soegijapranata ordered that the Christmas festivities be kept simple to represent the Indonesian people 's suffering . During the Dutch occupation Soegijapranata smuggled some of his writings out of the country ; the works , later published in Commonweal with the help of George McTurnan Kahin , described Indonesians ' daily lives under Dutch rule and called for international condemnation of the occupation . Soegijapranata further opined that the Dutch blockade on Indonesia , aside from strangling the new country 's economy , increased the influence of its communist groups . After the Dutch retreated in the wake of the General Attack of 1 March 1949 , Soegijapranata began working to ensure Catholic representation in the government . With I. J. <unk> , he organised the All @-@ Indonesia Catholic Congress ( Kongres <unk> <unk> <unk> Indonesia ) . Held between 7 and 12 December , the congress resulted in the union of seven Catholic political parties into the Catholic Party . Soegijapranata continued his efforts to consolidate the Party after the revolution . 
 = = = Post @-@ revolution = = = 
 After the Dutch recognised Indonesia 's independence on 27 December 1949 , following a several month @-@ long conference in the Hague , Soegijapranata returned to Semarang . The post @-@ revolution period was marked by a drastic increase in enrolment at the nation 's seminary ; the 100th native Indonesian clergyman was ordained in 1956 . The government , however , enacted several laws that limited the Church 's ability to expand . In 1953 the Ministry for Religion decreed that no foreign missionaries would be allowed into the country , and a subsequent law prohibited those already in Indonesia from teaching . In response , Soegijapranata encouraged eligible clergy to apply for Indonesian citizenship , circumventing the new laws . 
 Aside from overseeing the new clergy , Soegijapranata continued to work towards Catholic education and prosperity , similar to his pre @-@ war work . He emphasised that students must not only be good Catholics , but also good Indonesians . The Church began further development of its schools , ranging from elementary schools to universities . Soegijapranata also began reforming the Church in his apostolic vicariate , making it more Indonesian . He advocated the use of local languages and Indonesian during mass , allowing it throughout his diocese beginning in 1956 . In addition , he pressed for the use of gamelan music to accompany services , and agreed to the use of wayang shows to teach the Bible to children . 
 As the Cold War heated up , tensions developed between the Church in Indonesia and the Indonesian Communist Party ( Partai Komunis Indonesia , or PKI ) . Soegijapranata believed that the PKI was making progress with the poor through its promises of workers ' rights in a communist @-@ led union . To combat this , he worked with other Catholics to establish labour groups , open to both Catholics and non @-@ Catholics . He hoped that these would empower workers and thus limit the PKI 's influence . One such labour group was <unk> Pancasila , which was formed on 19 June 1954 ; through the organisation Soegijapranata helped promote the state philosophy of Pancasila , literally " the five tenets " . The following year the Church Representatives Conference of Indonesia ( <unk> <unk> Indonesia , or KWI ) , recognising Soegijapranata 's devotion to the poor , put him in charge of establishing social @-@ support programmes throughout the archipelago . On 2 November 1955 , he and several other bishops issued a decree denouncing communism , Marxism , and materialism , and asking the government to ensure fair and equitable treatment for all citizens . Relations between Indonesia and the Netherlands continued to be poor , specifically in regard to control of West Papua , historically under Dutch control but claimed by Indonesia . Soegijapranata firmly supported the Indonesian position ; West Papua was annexed in 1963 . 
 There was also friction within the Catholic groups , first over Sukarno 's 1957 decree that he was president for life and establishment of a guided democracy policy . A faction , led by Soegijapranata , supported this decree , while Catholic Party leader I. J. <unk> 's faction was heavily against it . Sukarno , who had a good working relationship with Soegijapranata , asked the vicar to join the National Council , a request that Soegijapranata refused ; he did , however , assign two delegates to the Council , ensuring Catholic representation . This , along with Soegijapranata 's support of Sukarno 's decree on 5 July 1949 calling for a return to the 1945 constitution , resulted in Bishop of Jakarta Adrianus <unk> 's denunciation of Soegijapranata as a sycophant . However , Soegijapranata was strongly against Sukarno 's idea of Nasakom , which based part of the nation 's government on communism . 
 = = Archbishop of Semarang and death = = 
 During the latter half of the 1950s , the KWI met several times to discuss the need for a self @-@ determined Indonesian Roman Catholic hierarchy . At these annual meetings , they touched on administrative and pastoral issues , including the translation of songs into Indonesian languages . In 1959 Cardinal Grégoire @-@ Pierre <unk> visited the country to see the Church 's preparations . The KWI formally requested their own hierarchy in a May 1960 letter ; this letter received a reply from Pope John XXIII dated 20 March 1961 , which divided the archipelago into six ecclesiastical provinces : two in Java , one in Sumatra , one in Flores , one in Sulawesi and Maluku , and one in Borneo . Semarang became the seat of the province of Semarang , and Soegijapranata its archbishop . He was elevated on 3 January 1961 . 
 When this happened , Soegijapranata was in Europe to attend the Second Vatican Council as part of the Central Preparatory Commission ; he was one of eleven diocesan bishops and archbishops from Asia . He was able to attend the first session , where he voiced concerns about declining quality of pastoral work and called for the modernisation of the Church . He then returned to Indonesia , but his health , poor since the late 1950s , quickly declined . 
 After a stay at Elisabeth Candi Hospital in Semarang in 1963 , Soegijapranata was forbidden from undertaking active duties . Justinus <unk> , a former internee of the Japanese army and vicar general of Semarang since 1 August 1962 , served as acting bishop . On 30 May 1963 Soegijapranata left Indonesia for Europe to attend the election of Pope Paul VI . Soegijapranata then went to Canisius Hospital in Nijmegen , where he underwent treatment from 29 June until 6 July ; this was unsuccessful . He died on 22 July 1963 , at a nunnery in Steyl , the Netherlands , having had a heart attack shortly before his death . 
 As Sukarno did not want Soegijapranata buried in the Netherlands , his body was flown to Indonesia after last rites were performed by Cardinal <unk> Johannes <unk> . Soegijapranata was declared a National Hero of Indonesia on 26 July 1963 , through Presidential Decree No. 152 / 1963 , while his body was still in transit . Soegijapranata 's body arrived at Kemayoran Airport in Jakarta on 28 July and was brought to the Jakarta Cathedral for further rites , including a speech by Sukarno , presided by Bishop of Jakarta Adrianus <unk> . The following day Soegijapranata 's body was flown to Semarang , accompanied by several Church and government luminaries . He was buried at Giri Tunggal Heroes ' Cemetery in a military funeral on 30 July , after several further rites . <unk> was appointed as the new archbishop in December 1963 ; he was consecrated on 6 April 1964 by Archbishop Ottavio De Liva . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Soegijapranata is remembered with pride by Javanese Catholics , who praise his strength of will during the occupation and national revolution . The historian <unk> <unk> described Soegijapranata as not just a bishop , but an Indonesian leader who " was tested as a good leader and deserved the hero status " . The Indonesian historian Anton <unk> described Soegijapranata 's ascension to <unk> as " monumental " , considering that Soegijapranata had only been ordained nine years previously and was chosen ahead of non @-@ Indonesian priests several years his senior . <unk> <unk> , a nun in the Order of Carolus <unk> , writes that the Catholic Church became nationally influential under Soegijapranata , and that the archbishop cared too much for the people to take an outsider 's approach . Van Klinken writes that Soegijapranata eventually became like a priyayi , or Javanese nobleman , within the church , as " committed to hierarchy and the status quo as to the God who created them " . According to van Klinken , by coming to the nascent republic Soegijapranata had been willing to see " the coming Javanese paradise " at a great personal risk . 
 Soegijapranata is the namesake of a large Catholic university in Semarang . Streets in several Indonesian cities are named after him , including in Semarang , Malang , and Medan . His grave in <unk> is often the site of pilgrimage for Indonesian Catholics , who hold graveside masses . 
 In June 2012 director Garin Nugroho released a biopic on Soegijapranata entitled Soegija . Starring <unk> Dewanto in the titular role , the film followed Soegijapranata 's activities during the 1940s , amidst a backdrop of the Japanese occupation and the war for Indonesian independence . The film , which had a Rp 12 billion ( US $ 1 @.@ 3 million ) budget , sold over 100 @,@ 000 tickets on its first day . Its launch was accompanied by a semi @-@ fictional novelisation of Soegija 's life , written by Catholic author Ayu Utami . Several non @-@ fiction biographies of Soegija , by both Catholic and non @-@ Catholic writers , were released concurrently . 
 In Indonesian popular culture , Soegijapranata is known for his motto " 100 % Catholic , 100 % Indonesian " ( " 100 % <unk> , 100 % Indonesia " ) . The motto , which has been used to advertise several biographies and the film Soegija , is derived from Soegijapranata 's opening speech at the 1954 All @-@ Indonesia Catholic Congress in Semarang , as follows : 
 If we consider ourselves good Christians , than we should also become good patriots . As such , we should feel 100 % patriotic because we are 100 % Catholic . According to the Fourth Commandment , as written in the Catechism , we must love the Catholic Church and , it follows , that we must love our country with all our hearts . 
 = Reel Affirmations = 
 Reel Affirmations ( RA ) is a non @-@ profit , all @-@ volunteer LGBT film festival in Washington , D.C. Founded in 1991 and held every year in mid @-@ October , as of 2011 Reel Affirmations was one of the largest LGBT film festivals ( in terms of attendance ) in the United States . Baltimore 's Gay Life newspaper called it " one of the top three films festivals for the entire LGBT community . " A 2007 guidebook claims it was one of the largest LGBT film festivals in the world . A listing of LGBT film festivals claims it is the largest all @-@ volunteer film festival in the world . 
 = = Organization = = 
 Reel Affirmations is a program of One In Ten , a Washington , D.C.-based LGBT non @-@ profit arts organization . One In Ten is overseen by a board of four officers and nine board members . Until 2009 , a full @-@ time , paid executive director oversaw the day @-@ to @-@ day operations of the organization . But as of 2011 , its operations were run by the board and three volunteer directors . All One In Ten programs , including Reel Affirmations , are conceived , organized , and implemented by volunteers . 
 Planning for Reel Affirmations begins after the conclusion of each year 's festival . Deposits are placed to secure venues , and corporate sponsors are secured ( an ongoing process which lasts until August ) . Programming teams for feature films , women 's shorts , men 's shorts , and documentaries begin researching and screening films in February . Films are secured by contract beginning as early as May , although most contracts are not finalized until early July . A coordinating committee oversees implementation of VIP relations , hospitality , volunteer coordination , marketing , embassy relations , public relations , and other aspects of the film festival . 
 Most funding for Reel Affirmations comes from corporate sponsorships and ticket sales . Additional support comes from grants provided by the D.C. city government . 
 Reel Affirmations previously sponsored a two @-@ day film festival which coincided with Capital Pride . The program began sponsoring monthly film screenings titled RA Xtra beginning in 2000 , but stopped these events after <unk> in 2005 . RA Xtra resumed in November 2010 . The organization also formerly sponsored " Divas Outdoors " , a two @-@ movie outdoor screening of classic gay @-@ related movies at <unk> Estate , Museum & Gardens , the former home of Marjorie Merriweather Post ( heiress to the Post cereal fortune ) . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Reel Affirmations was co @-@ founded by Barry Becker , Mark <unk> , Matthew <unk> and Keith Clark , gay residents of Washington , D.C. , who wished to found a gay arts organization . They began meeting in 1990 , and founded the LGBT arts organization One In Ten , with Reel Affirmations as the organization 's first program . The four sought the advice and input of Frameline , then the largest LGBT gay film festival in the U.S. With financial and administrative assistance from Frameline , the first Reel Affirmations film festival opened on October 11 , 1991 . The first festival venue was the Biograph Theater in Georgetown . The 10 @-@ day festival screened 62 feature films , short subjects and documentaries to 2 @,@ 500 attendees . The opening night film was My Father Is Coming , and the closing night film was Together Alone . 
 In 1992 , the festival expanded to screen its opening night film at the Cineplex Odeon Embassy Theatre in the District . Author Armistead Maupin opened the festival . <unk> screened 76 short and feature @-@ length works shown at the Biograph . 
 The following year , the festival screened 24 features and 44 shorts and added screenings at the Goethe @-@ Institut and Charles Sumner School . With the film festival on firm financial footing , Frameline did not provide administrative and financial support for <unk> . 
 The festival continued to expand in 1994 , screening 130 films and dropping smaller venues ( Biograph , Sumner School ) while adding larger ones ( such as the West End 1 @-@ 4 cinema ) . The festival also conducted a screening at the Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden — one of the first gay events to be held in a federal building . 1994 was also the year the festival scored its first U.S premiere . 
 By its fifth anniversary in 1995 , Reel Affirmations was the fourth @-@ largest LGBT film festival in the United States in attendance , with more than 12 @,@ 000 attendees . Although the festival screened only 102 films that year , it expanded to a fifth large venue ( the AMC Courthouse Theatre in Virginia ) . A year later , it dropped two of its smaller venues in favor of the 275 @-@ seat Goldman Theatre in the D.C. Jewish Community Center in Dupont Circle . 
 = = = Lincoln Theatre years = = = 
 Reel Affirmations ' growth led it to move out of the Cineplex Odeon Embassy and West End theaters in 1998 . The film fest moved into the 1 @,@ 200 @-@ seat historic Lincoln Theatre located near U and 14th Streets , N.W. <unk> screened more than 140 feature films , shorts and documentaries at the two venues . 
 1999 was a turning point for Reel Affirmations . Several years of declining attendance by women led festival director Sarah Kellogg to create a special women 's program . The event , known as the Women Filmmakers Brunch , has continued ever since and features women filmmakers , screenings , and a discussion of films with particular appeal to women . <unk> also was the only LGBT film festival of the season to screen Boys Don 't Cry . The award @-@ winning film debuted in New York City , screened at Reel Affirmations , and then opened in theaters nationwide . 
 In honor of the festival 's continuing success , the Gay and Lesbian Activists Alliance bestowed its 2004 Distinguished Service Award on Reel Affirmations festival director Sarah Kellogg . In 2006 , RA 16 screened more than 100 movies to more than 30 @,@ 000 attendees during its 10 @-@ day run . 
 = = = Post @-@ 2008 festival = = = 
 In 2008 , in addition to the Lincoln Theatre , the film festival used several locations including the Goethe @-@ Institut , Sixth & I Synagogue , and Landmark E Street Cinema ( all in Washington , D.C. ) , as well as the AFI Silver theater in Silver Spring , Maryland . 
 In 2009 , Reel Affirmations struck a relationship with the Shakespeare Theatre Company . The film festival did not use the Lincoln Theatre , holding its larger film screenings at the company 's Sidney Harman Hall . Festival executive director Margaret Murray left in November 2009 after four years as RA head — leaving the festival with about $ 40 @,@ 000 in debt . According to the Washington Blade , an LGBTQ newspaper in D.C. , a number of factors were responsible for the debt : A diminishing number of corporate sponsors , the timing of Murray 's resignation ( just as donor recruitment was beginning for the following year ) , lack of preparation by RA for Murray 's departure , an increasing number of popular LGBTQ events competing with the festival in October , fewer advertisers in the festival 's program booklet , poor weather during several days of the 2009 festival , discontinuation of the festival 's VIP program ( which left it dependent on single ticket sales ) , and a heavy drop in single ticket sales . Many board members left the organization , new board members were recruited , and three volunteers took over RA 's day @-@ to @-@ day operations . 
 In July 2010 , RA organizers announced that the film festival would move from October 2010 to April 2011 because of funding shortfalls . One news source reported that RA organizers had intended to hold an October film festival , but a community fundraiser brought in only $ 5 @,@ 000 — far less than hoped , and not enough to allow an October festival to occur . The move to April was prompted , in part , by the hope that a $ 75 @,@ 000 D.C. government grant would allow the festival to occur . However , on March 8 , 2011 , RA officials cancelled the April event because of continuing heavy debt and because several grants had not been awarded to the organization . Festival organizers scheduled the 20th Reel Affirmations LGBTQ film festival for October 13 – 22 , 2011 . 
 Additional changes occurred during the 20th film festival . The film festival no longer held events at the Shakespeare Theatre Company . The primary film festival venue was <unk> Auditorium at George Washington University ( GWU ) . Other venues included GWU 's Documentary Center , GWU 's Marvin Center Amphitheatre , Atlas Performing Arts Center , the <unk> 360 Globe Theater , and the West End Cinema ( one of the original venues for the film festival in the early 1990s ) . The festival also instituted an " Embassy Screening Series , " in which LGBTQ films from a specific country were screened at that nation 's embassy in Washington , D.C. Screenings occurred at the Embassy of Israel and Embassy of France , and by the Embassy of Germany at the Goethe @-@ Institut . The Women and Filmmakers ' Brunch continued to be held , although the venue was now the U.S. Navy Memorial Heritage Center 's Arleigh Burke Theater . Festival volunteer coordinator Mark <unk> estimated that the festival would draw 20 @,@ 000 attendees in 2011 . 
 Reel Affirmations continued to recover from its financial crisis in 2012 . In March 2012 , it held an " Oscar Party " ( with muscular men covered in gold welcoming patrons ) in which the public was invited to view the Academy Awards in a gay @-@ friendly setting . Reel Affirmations hosted a truncated four @-@ day festival ( November 1 – 4 ) in 2012 . Once more , its venues changed . The festival returned to its long @-@ time venue at the D.C. Jewish Community Center and the Goethe Institut as well as its RA Xtra venue at the Carnegie Institution for Science . 
 = = = End of annual festival = = = 
 Reel Affirmations ceased to offer an annual film festival at the conclusion of the 2012 event . One In Ten turned the Reel Affirmations program over to The DC Center , a nonprofit organization offering several different programs to the local LGBTQ community . The DC Center reestablished the RA Xtra program of monthly film screenings , which it offered beginning in 2015 . 
 Reel Affirmations planned a three @-@ day film festival for August 28 @-@ 30 , 2015 , at the Gala Hispanic / Tivoli Theatre . 
 = = Awards = = 
 Reel Affirmations presents four major awards each year . Each award is bestowed based on audience balloting . Honors are given for Best Feature , Best Documentary , Best Male Short , and Best Female Short . Beginning in 2011 , Reel Affirmations added two new awards . These included a First Time Director and a Best International Movie award . 
 Reel Affirmations formerly distributed a Plant @-@ A @-@ Seed filmmaker grant at the end of each festival . The grant was established in 2000 . It was supported by audience donations and a silent auction held throughout each year 's festival , and varied in amount from year to year . The grant was awarded by the One In Ten board to a filmmaker or filmmakers who had previously produced a feature film , short or documentary , and was intended to help the filmmaker complete a current work in progress . This grant was discontinued in 2008 . The festival re @-@ established its filmmaker 's grant award in 2011 , renaming it the Keith Clark & Barry Becker Filmmaker Award ( in honor of the co @-@ founders of the festival ) . 
 = Siege of Fort Ticonderoga ( 1777 ) = 
 The 1777 Siege of Fort Ticonderoga ' occurred between 2 and 6 July 1777 at Fort Ticonderoga , near the Sothern end of Lake Champlain in the state of New York . Lieutenant General John Burgoyne 's 8 @,@ 000 @-@ man army occupied high ground above the fort , and nearly surrounded the defences . These movements precipitated the occupying Continental Army , an under @-@ strength force of 3 @,@ 000 under the command of General Arthur St. Clair , to withdraw from Ticonderoga and the surrounding defences . Some gunfire was exchanged , and there were some casualties , but there was no formal siege and no pitched battle . Burgoyne 's army occupied Fort Ticonderoga and Mount Independence , the extensive fortifications on the Vermont side of the lake , without opposition on 6 July . Advance units pursued the retreating Americans . 
 The uncontested surrender of Ticonderoga caused an uproar in the American public and in its military circles , as Ticonderoga was widely believed to be virtually impregnable , and a vital point of defence . General St. Clair and his superior , General Philip Schuyler , were vilified by Congress . Both were eventually exonerated in courts martial , but their careers were adversely affected . Schuyler had already lost his command to Horatio Gates by the time of the court martial , and St. Clair held no more field commands for the remainder of the war . 
 = = Background = = 
 In September 1775 , early in the American Revolutionary War , the American Continental Army embarked on an invasion of Quebec . The invasion ended in disaster in July 1776 , with the army chased back to Fort Ticonderoga by a large British army that arrived in Quebec in May 1776 . A small Continental Navy fleet on Lake Champlain was defeated in the October 1776 Battle of Valcour Island . The delay required by the British to build their fleet on Lake Champlain caused General Guy Carleton to hold off on attempting an assault on Ticonderoga in 1776 . Although his advance forces came within three miles of Ticonderoga , the lateness of the season and the difficulty of maintaining supply lines along the lake in winter caused him to withdraw his forces back into Quebec . 
 = = = British forces = = = 
 General John Burgoyne arrived in Quebec in May 1777 and prepared to lead the British forces assembled there south with the aim of gaining control of Ticonderoga and the Hudson River valley , dividing the rebellious provinces . His British Army troops consisted of the 9th , 20th , 21st , 24th , 47th , 53rd and 62nd regiments , along with the flank companies of other regiments left as a garrison in Quebec . The light infantry and flank companies formed the army 's advance force , and were commanded by Brigadier General Simon Fraser . The remaining regulars , under the leadership of Major General William Phillips , formed the right wing of the army , while the left was composed of Hessians under the command of Baron Riedesel . His forces consisted of the <unk> , Riedesel , Specht , Barner , and Hesse @-@ Hanau regiments , along with one regiment of grenadiers and another of horseless dragoons . Most of these forces had arrived in 1776 , and many participated in the campaign that drove the American army out of Quebec . 
 The total size of Burgoyne 's regular army was about 7 @,@ 000 . In addition to the regulars , there were about 800 Indians , and a relatively small number of Canadiens and Loyalists , who acted primarily as scouts and screening reconnaissance . The army was also accompanied by more than 1 @,@ 000 civilians , including a pregnant woman , and Baroness Riedesel with her three small children . Including these non @-@ military personnel , the total number of people in Burgoyne 's army was more than 10 @,@ 000 . 
 Burgoyne and General Carlton recited the troops at Fort Saint @-@ Jean , near the northern end of Lake Champlain , on 14 June . By 21 June , the armada carrying the army was on the lake , and they had arrived at the unoccupied Fort Crown Point by 30 June . The Indians and other elements of the advance force laid down such an effective screen that the American defenders at Ticonderoga were unaware of either the exact location or strength of the force moving along the lake . While en route , Burgoyne authored a proclamation to the Americans , written in the turgid , pompous style for which he was well @-@ known , and frequently criticized and parodied . 
 = = = American defences = = = 
 American forces had occupied the forts at Ticonderoga and Crown Point since they captured them in May 1775 from a small garrison . In 1776 and 1777 , they undertook significant efforts to improve the defenses surrounding Ticonderoga . A peninsula on the east side of the lake , renamed Mount Independence , was heavily fortified . To the north of old Fort Ticonderoga , the Americans built numerous redoubts , a large fort at the site earlier French fortifications , and a fort on Mount Hope . A quarter @-@ mile long floating bridge was constructed across the lake to facilitate communication between Ticonderoga and Mount Independence . 
 Command at Ticonderoga went through a variety of changes early in 1777 . Until 1777 , General Philip Schuyler had headed the Continental Army 's Northern Department , with General Horatio Gates in charge of Ticonderoga . In March 1777 the Continental Congress gave command of the whole department to Gates . Schuyler protested this action , which Congress reversed in May , at which point Gates , no longer willing to serve under Schuyler , left for Philadelphia . Command of the fort was then given to General Arthur St. Clair , who arrived only three weeks before Burgoyne 's army . 
 The entire complex was manned by several under @-@ strength regiments of the Continental Army and militia units from New York and nearby states . A war council held by Generals St. Clair and Schuyler on 20 June concluded that " the number of troops now at this post , which are under 2 @,@ 500 effectives , rank and file , are greatly inadequate to the defense " , and that " it is prudent to provide for a retreat " . Consequently , plans were made for retreat along two routes . The first was by water to Skenesboro , the southernmost navigable point on the lake . The second was overland by a rough road leading east toward Hubbardton in the New Hampshire Grants ( present @-@ day Vermont ) . 
 = = = Sugar Loaf = = = 
 A height called Sugar Loaf ( now known as Mount Defiance ) overlooked both Ticonderoga and Independence , and large cannons on that height would make the fort impossible to defend . This tactical problem had been pointed out by John Trumbull when Gates was in command . It was believed to be impossible for the British to place cannons on the heights , even though Trumbull , Anthony Wayne , and an injured Benedict Arnold climbed to the top and noted that gun carriages could probably be dragged up . 
 The defence , or lack thereof , of Sugar Loaf was complicated by the widespread perception that Fort Ticonderoga , with a reputation as the " Gibraltar of the North " , had to be held . Neither abandoning the fort nor garrisoning it with a small force ( sufficient to respond to a feint but not to an attack in strength ) was viewed as a politically viable option . Defending the fort and the associated outer works would require all the troops currently there , leaving none to defend Sugar Loaf . Furthermore , George Washington and the Congress were of the opinion that Burgoyne , who was known to be in Quebec , was more likely to strike from the south , moving his troops by sea to New York City . 
 Following the war council of 20 June , Schuyler ordered St. Clair to hold out as long as he could , and to avoid having his avenues of retreat cut off . Schuyler took command of a reserve force of 700 at Albany , and Washington ordered four regiments to be held in readiness at Peekskill , further down the Hudson River . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = British advance = = = 
 On 1 July , General St. Clair was still unaware of the full strength of Burgoyne 's army , which lay just 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) away . Burgoyne had deployed Fraser 's advance force and right column on the west side of the lake , hoping to cut off the defences at Mount Hope . Riedesel and the German column were deployed on the east side of the lake , where their objective was Mount Independence and the road to Hubbardton . Burgoyne gave the order to advance on 2 July . 
 On the morning of 2 July , St. Clair decided to withdraw the men occupying the defence post at Mount Hope , which was exposed and subject to capture . The detachment there set fire to the works and retreated to the old French lines ( so called because they were the site of the French defence in the 1758 Battle of Carillon ) , getting away not long before the arrival of Burgoyne 's advance guard . That afternoon , a company of British soldiers and Indians came toward those lines , but not near enough to do significant damage , and opened fire . St. Clair ordered his men to hold their fire until the enemy was closer , but James Wilkinson fired at a British soldier , spurring the untrained defenders to follow suit . The soldier Wilkinson fired at fell , and the British troops fled . When the man was captured , it turned out he was uninjured , and that he had fallen down because he was drunk . Through the deception of placing him with a man posing as a captured Loyalist , St. Clair learned the nature of the opposing forces . 
 Fraser 's advance forces occupied Mount Hope on 3 July . Burgoyne ordered some of the scouts and Indians over to the east side of the lake for reconnaissance ahead of the German column , and brought some of the Germans over to the west side . Some of the British camp was placed close enough to the American lines that they were harassed by gunfire . This did not prevent the British from making repairs to the bridges on the portage road between Ticonderoga and Lake George . 
 British engineers discovered the strategic position of Sugar Loaf , and realized that the American withdrawal from Mount Hope gave them access to it . Starting on 2 July , they began clearing and building gun emplacements on top of that height , working carefully to avoid notice by the Americans . They spent several days drawing some of their larger guns up the slope . Burgoyne 's objective was to spring the trap only when Riedesel 's Germans were in position to cut off the American retreat . 
 = = = American retreat = = = 
 On 4 July , the Americans held a quiet celebration with some toasts to commemorate the previous year 's Declaration of Independence . That night the British lost their element of surprise when some Indians lit fires on Sugar Loaf , alerting the Americans to their presence there . On the morning of 5 July , St. Clair held a war council in which the decision was made to retreat . Since their position was completely exposed , they delayed departure until nightfall , when their movements would be concealed . In a conversation with one of his quartermasters , St. Clair observed that he could " save his character and lose the army " by holding the fort , or " save the army and lose his character " if he retreated , giving a clear indication of the political reaction he was expecting to his decision . 
 All possible armaments , as well as invalids , camp followers , and supplies were loaded onto a fleet of more than 200 boats that began to move up the lake toward Skenesboro , accompanied by Colonel Pierse Long 's regiment . Owing to a shortage of boats , four invalids were left behind , as were the very largest cannons and a variety of supplies — everything from tents to cattle . The rest of the army crossed to Mount Independence and headed down the Hubbardton road , which Riedesel 's forces had not yet reached . A handful of men were left at the pontoon bridge with loaded cannons to fire on British attempts to cross it , but they were drunk when the British arrived the next morning . 
 The British occupied the forts without firing a single shot , and detachments from Fraser 's and Riedesel 's troops set out in pursuit of the retreating Americans on the Hubbardton road , while Burgoyne hurried some of his troops up the lake toward Skenesboro . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 At least seven Americans were killed and 11 wounded in skirmishing prior to the American retreat . British casualties were not tallied , but at least five were killed in skirmishes . 
 The Americans made good time on the Hubbardton road . Most of the force reached Castleton — a march of 30 miles ( 50 km ) — on the evening of 6 July . The British pursuit resulted in the Battle of Hubbardton when they caught up with the rear guard on the morning of 7 July , but this enabled the main American body to escape , eventually joining forces with Schuyler at Fort Edward . The smaller American force that had fled by boat to Skenesboro fought off Burgoyne 's advance force in the Battle of Fort Anne , but was forced to abandon equipment and many sick and wounded in skirmishing at Skenesboro . 
 The confrontation at Ticonderoga did not substantially slow Burgoyne 's advance , but he was forced to leave a garrison of more than 900 men in the Ticonderoga area , and wait until 11 July for the dispersed elements of his army to regroup at Skenesboro . He then encountered delays in traveling the heavily wooded road between Skenesboro and Fort Edward , which General Schuyler 's forces had effectively ruined by felling trees across it and destroying all its bridges in the swampy terrain . Burgoyne 's campaign ultimately failed and he was forced to surrender after the Battles of Saratoga . General Gates reported to Governor George Clinton on 20 November that Ticonderoga and Independence had been abandoned and burned by the retreating British . 
 = = = Political and public outcry = = = 
 The political and public outcry after the withdrawal was significant . The Congress was appalled , and criticized both Schuyler and St. Clair for the loss . John Adams wrote , " I think we shall never be able to defend a post until we shoot a general " , and George Washington said it was " an event of chagrin and surprise , not apprehended nor within the compass of my reasoning " . Rumors circulated that St. Clair and Schuyler were traitors who had taken bribes in exchange for the retreat . 
 Schuyler was eventually removed as commander of the Northern Department , replaced by General Gates ; the fall of Ticonderoga was among the reasons cited . St. Clair was removed from his command and sent to headquarters for an inquiry . He maintained that his conduct had been honorable , and demanded a review by court martial . The court martial was not held until September 1778 due to political intrigues against Washington ; St. Clair was completely exonerated , although he was never given another field command . Schuyler was also cleared of any wrongdoing by a court martial . 
 The news made headlines in Europe . King George is reported to have burst into the chambers of the scantily clad Queen , exclaiming , " I have beat them ! I have beat all the Americans ! " The French and Spanish courts were less happy with the news , as they had been supporting the Americans , allowing them to use their ports , and engaging in trade with them . The action emboldened the British to demand that France and Spain close their ports to the Americans ; this demand was rejected , heightening tensions between the European powers . 
 = Dante ( Devil May Cry ) = 
 Dante ( <unk> ) is a fictional character and the primary protagonist of the Devil May Cry series created and published by Capcom . In the first four games , Dante is a mercenary , private investigator , and demon hunting vigilante dedicated to exterminating them and other malevolent supernatural foes , a mission he follows in pursuit of those that killed his mother and corrupted his brother . He is the son of Sparda , a demon of great power and as a result of his heritage , he possesses numerous powers beyond that of any human , which he uses in combination with a variety of weapons to accomplish his goals . The character also appears in several Devil May Cry novels and manga volumes ; and is featured in the 2007 anime TV series . A reboot of the series by Ninja Theory features him in an alternate universe as a young adult fighting against demons . Dante has also appeared as a guest character in multiple crossover games . 
 Named after the Italian poet Dante Alighieri , the character was designed to fit Devil May Cry game designer Hideki Kamiya 's vision of a " cool and stylish " man , and his personality was based on the title character of the manga series Cobra . Across the series , Dante 's portrayal has been modified to appeal to criticism aimed towards his role in the first sequel with Devil May Cry 3 featuring a younger and cockier Dante while Devil May Cry 4 offered an older yet cocky characterization . While Capcom handled the character in the first four games , Ninja Theory was in charge of his persona in the reboot . 
 Dante has become one of the most popular characters in gaming , having been recognized for his role in the Devil May Cry series and various characteristics that have attracted gamers . However , Dante 's redesign and characterization in the reboot was the subject of controversy amongst gamers . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Dante is a mercenary and private investigator specializing in paranormal cases , preferring those that call for demon slaying . He is muscular , has white / silver hair , icy @-@ blue eyes and is usually seen wearing red dusters / trench coats . Dante 's arsenal usually consists of firearms and melee weapons , including " Ebony and Ivory " , twin handguns that never need reloading , as well as a variety of swords such as the " Rebellion " and " Force Edge " , Devil Arms created by his father . The guns are handmade with " For Tony Redgrave , <unk> Art <unk> " written on them ( Tony Redgrave is the alias used by Dante ) . He possesses superhuman strength , agility , stamina , reflexes , coordination , and resistance to injury that approaches invulnerability as a result of his half @-@ demon heritage . This gives him the ability to enter a heightened state called " Devil Trigger " . In this state , Dante possesses greater strength and speed , his health regenerates at a steady pace , and further abilities with his equipped melee weapon , including flight . 
 Dante is one of the twin sons of Sparda , the demon knight who sided with humanity and drove back an invasion of the human world by demons roughly 2 @,@ 000 years prior to the events of the series . After Sparda 's death , Dante and his identical twin brother Vergil were raised by their human mother , Eva . When Dante and Vergil were children , the family was attacked by demons , resulting in Eva 's death . This event led to Dante 's commitment to hunting demons in pursuit of those that killed his mother . Dante is confident in his encounters with opponents , and frequently taunts enemies before battling them . With the exception of Devil May Cry 4 , Dante says the phrase " Devils never cry " in every game , implying that no matter how much of a demon he may prove to be , his ability to cry makes his human side precious to him . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = Devil May Cry video games = = = 
 In the original Devil May Cry , Dante is hired by Trish , a mysterious woman who looks similar to his deceased mother , to stop the return of the devil king Mundus . However , she is actually setting up events for Mundus ' agents to kill Dante as he makes his way to Mundus himself . During the course of the game Dante is also reunited with his brother Vergil , who , under the control of Mundus , attempts to kill him . Trish eventually betrays Mundus to save Dante , and the pair work together to lock Mundus in the demon world . Afterwards , they become partners in Dante 's demon @-@ slaying business , now renamed " Devil Never Cry " . 
 In the first sequel , Devil May Cry 2 , Dante is shown to have a habit of flipping a coin to make his decisions , although it is revealed at the end of the game that both sides of the coin are heads . Set some time after the first game , Devil May Cry 2 focuses on aiding the character Lucia in defeating Arius , an international businessman who uses demonic power and seeks to conquer the world . At the end of the game , Dante must go into the demon world to stop a demon lord from escaping , but the gate closes behind him and he is trapped . With no way back to the human world , Dante heads even deeper into the demon world on his motorcycle . 
 The third game , Devil May Cry 3 : Dante 's Awakening , serves as a prequel to the first game and features a cockier and younger Dante . In the story , Dante is drawn out by his brother Vergil , who is attempting to reopen the portal to the demon world in order to obtain the full power of Sparda , which remains on the other side contained within the sword Force Edge . Along the way , Dante encounters Lady , who is in pursuit of her father Arkham , who is working with Vergil , but has plans of his own . In the end , Dante claims ownership of the Force Edge , while Vergil chooses to remain in the demon world . Inspired by Lady 's courage and commitment to her own family , Dante continues his business with a greater sense of purpose . They become friends , and he decides to call his shop " Devil May Cry " , after something Lady had said to comfort him . 
 Released in 2008 , Devil May Cry 4 is the first game in the series not to feature Dante as the primary character . Dante is seen as an antagonist by the game 's lead character , Nero , after he presumably kills Sanctus , the leader from The Order of the Sword in charge of hunting demons . Across the story , Dante befriends Nero when he decides to face The Order . When Nero is kidnapped by Sanctus , the player controls Dante once again as he continues his fight against the Order . After Nero is saved and Sanctus defeated , Dante entrusts Nero with Vergil 's sword he has been wielding . 
 = = = Reboot = = = 
 A reboot of Devil May Cry franchise , DmC : Devil May Cry , features an alternative universe Dante with a very different appearance . Dante is featured as a young adult in his early twenties who is attacked by a seemingly sentient town known as Limbo City populated by demons . During the reboot , Dante meets his brother Vergil , who is the leader of The Order – a rogue vigilante group trying to free the world from the demons . The city is controlled by the demon king , Mundus , who killed Dante 's mother Eva ( an angel ) and later imprisoned his father ( Sparda , a demon and Mundus ' former lieutenant ) in an attempt to kill the children , since Nephilim ( half @-@ angel , half @-@ demon offspring ) held the power to kill Mundus . Dante joins Vergil 's group to oppose Mundus , eventually taking him down and freeing humanity from the demons ; however , Vergil 's intentions to take Mundus ' place cause a fight between the brothers which Dante wins and Vergil escapes . In the downloadable content sequel , Vergil 's Downfall , a replica of Dante appears to oppose Vergil in his quest for power but is killed in combat . 
 = = = Other appearances = = = 
 Dante has playable appearances in several games outside of the Devil May Cry series of games . In the Viewtiful Joe series , also created by Hideki Kamiya , Dante is playable in the PlayStation 2 version of Viewtiful Joe and the PSP version of Viewtiful Joe : Red Hot Rumble . In both games , he frequently has dialogue with Alastor , who is revealed to be the embodiment of the identically @-@ named sword from Devil May Cry . He appears as an enemy and optional ally in the director 's cut release of Shin Megami Tensei : Nocturne . His inclusion was suggested by the Atlus staff due to how well Dante would fit in the game 's plot and convinced Capcom to include him . There is a Dante character card in SNK vs. Capcom : Card Fighters DS . He makes his second fighting game appearance as a playable character in Marvel vs. Capcom 3 : Fate of Two Worlds . He was also set to appear in Soulcalibur III , but did not make it into the final game . He appears as a playable character in the tactical role @-@ playing game Project X Zone , with <unk> Maximoff from Darkstalkers as his partner . He will return in the sequel , Project X Zone 2 , with Vergil as his partner . Hideki Kamiya , now in Platinum Games , has stated he was approached about having Sega character Bayonetta included in this game , to which he refused as he wanted Bayonetta and Dante from Devil May Cry to meet " on his own terms " . However , he has stated he has come to regret this decision due to realizing how the fans would have loved the two interacting , and that if there is a Project X Zone 3 he would be all for Bayonetta 's inclusion . Dante is a playable character in PlayStation All @-@ Stars Battle Royale , using his appearance from DmC : Devil May Cry . The inclusion of his DmC persona over the classic one generated criticism by fans and <unk> Entertainment responded to them expecting them to enjoy the character 's gameplay mechanics . 
 Dante also appears in many other pieces of media based on the video games . These include two light novels written by Shinya Goikeda featuring original stories ; The first has a young Dante under the alias of " Tony Redgrave " as he is chased by assassins and Devil May Cry 2 prequel that has him searching for a demonic statue known as the <unk> . A Devil May Cry 4 novel by writer Bingo Morihashi reprises Dante 's role from the game but reveals his interest in Nero after finding him very similar to his brother , Vergil . There is also a Devil May Cry 3 manga that follows Dante before the game 's events , a comic of the first game published by Dreamwave Productions , and an anime titled Devil May Cry : The Animated Series that follows his daily life as he solves cases involving demons . The reboot version of Dante also appears in the prequel comic The Chronicles of Vergil when he receives the sword Rebellion to fight demons . In the Sengoku Basara vs. Devil May Cry stage he will be portrayed by Hiroki Suzuki . 
 The popularity of the Devil May Cry series lead to a line of action figures produced by <unk> . Japanese company <unk> produced a similar line for Devil May Cry 2 and a Devil May Cry 3 Dante action figure . 
 = = Conception and design = = 
 Dante debuted in Devil May Cry , a game originally intended to be a part of Capcom 's Resident Evil franchise . Series ' creator Hideki Kamiya wrote his name after rewriting the story and took it from Dante Alighieri 's poem Divine Comedy . Kamiya has said that the title character from the manga series Cobra by Buichi Terasawa served as the basis for Dante 's personality . Kamiya based his idea of Dante on what he perceived as " Stylish " – wearing a long coat to make the character " showy " and a non @-@ smoker , as Kamiya saw that as " more cool " . The character wears red because in Japan it is a traditional color for a heroic figure . Kamiya has also stated he perceives Dante as " a character that you would want to go out drinking with " , someone who was not a show @-@ off but would instead " pull some ridiculous , mischievous joke " to endear people to him . He added that this aspect was intended to make the character feel familiar to audiences . Although Kamiya was not the main writer from the first two Devil May Cry novels he viewed Shinya Goikeda 's depiction of Dante similar to the one he wrote . 
 In the prequel game Devil May Cry 3 , Dante 's attitude was emphasized to reflect a younger and more arrogant character than in previous installments . The Devil Trigger forms for Dante was designed by Kazuma Kaneko from Atlus . Gameplay @-@ wise he was made to be easy to control contrasting Vergil who was harder yet stronger . Devil May Cry 4 's producer Hiroyuki Kobayashi noted prior to the release of that game that they wanted to make Dante seem significantly more powerful than the game 's other protagonist , Nero . This was done in order to create an evident difference between the strength of a " veteran " when compared to a " rookie " . Another reason for this portrayal is based on the series ' continuity , which dictated that Dante display the power he would possess after the events of the first game and its prequel , Devil May Cry 3 . In this game Dante was designed by Tatsuya Yoshikawa who enjoyed the character in his original appearance to the point of calling him " the ultimate Hollywood action superstar . " Yoshikawa discussed with the staff to make Dante older , more mature and more experienced to and have him look between his 30s and 40s . The design included multiple details such as Dante 's stubble that reflected his cool personality as he did not care about shaving . 
 For both Devil May Cry 3 and Devil May Cry 4 Dante was voiced by Reuben Langdon who also did the motion capture for certain scenes . During the development of Devil May Cry 3 , Langdon found that doing the motion capture of Dante was difficult to the multiple moves the character makes . Langdon often discussed with the staff about Dante 's characterization that was different from the original one as they wanted " a different spin . " Eventually , Langdon decided to do his own rendition of Dante as he was confused with the staff 's suggestions . In retrospective , Langdon finds Dante " the most difficult , frustrating and yet rewarding character " he has ever played and stated he grew attached with him . Langdon was told to make Devil May Cry 4 's Dante similar to his Devil May Cry 3 persona albeit more mature . Despite the staff 's concerns for the difficulties of such portrayal , Langdon had no issues after choosing Roy Focker from the anime series The Super Dimension Fortress Macross as his character model and noting he had almost the same age as Dante during production of the game . 
 = = = Redesign = = = 
 For DmC : Devil May Cry , a reboot of the series , Dante was completely redesigned as a result of comments by the Capcom staff . Dante 's original design was originally meant to be similar to the ones from previous games , but Capcom told the Ninja Theory staff it had to be completely different in order to appeal to a younger demographic . Motohide Eshiro stated this Dante was completely set apart from the previous <unk> which they expected would generate major criticism . While the original Dante was design from a Japanese perspective , the new one was made from a Western perspective . After several drafts of Dante 's new character , the designers settled on a look as inspired by Christopher Nolan 's film The Dark Knight . Dante 's coat is not long , only coming down to his lower @-@ back , his hair is shorter and is black ; he has a Devil Trigger form which makes him look close to the classic Dante . Art designer Alessandro <unk> drew the character as a child and explain with reboot 's origin story why he has white hair . Director <unk> Antoniades denied rumors that his design was modelled after him . 
 For this game , Dante was made young , consumed by hatred and inexperienced resulting in a fighting style similar to a street brawler rather than that of a skilled swordsman . As a result of the reboot 's theme being " rebellion " most of Dante 's actions are based around it . Antoniades stated that Dante is about " being cool and making you feel cool when you 're playing it , " and , as such , they felt that his attire from previous games would be found comical . Antoniades added he felt the classic Dante was not appealing anymore and when comparing the new Dante with the title character from Bayonetta he did not see her style to be what he wanted for the reboot . Antoniades responded to criticism stating they would not change it as it is supposed to fit within the game 's setting . Additionally , he stated he would have liked this Dante in response to the criticism . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Dante 's confident and fearless attitude has gained him widespread popularity . When first introduced , Game Informer described him as " one of the most bad @-@ ass characters around , " citing the contrast between his character and those previously seen in the Resident Evil series . His design and personality received praise from numerous reviews , such as IGN , who referred to him as " a dark antihero kind of guy even a down @-@ in @-@ the @-@ dumps , disgruntled teenager would love . " GameSpy described his appearance as " awe @-@ inspiring to look at " , feeling his attire was reminiscent of Vincent Price . Empire also ranked Dante on their list of the 50 greatest video game characters as 38th , adding Dante is " surely one of the coolest " ones in the history of video gaming . 
 GamesRadar named him " Mister 2001 " in their article on the sexiest new characters of the decade , stating that compared to the female characters in Devil May Cry , Dante was the " hottest " of them all , due to his muscular build , hair , his fighting abilities , and his attitude . Dante was ranked third in ScrewAttack 's list of the " coolest " video game characters in 2007 . GameDaily named him one of their favorite Capcom characters , ranking him seventh and stating that the various aspects of the character made him an " unstoppable force " . GamesRadar also listed him as one of the 25 best new characters of the decade , calling him " unforgettable " , as well as stating that he had set the template for " smartass action heroes " . In 2010 , Dante came 23rd in a Famitsu poll featuring the most popular video game characters in Japan . He was also voted by Game Informer as the 13th best character from the 2000s . In 2012 , GamesRadar stated that despite Dante 's multiple characterizations " he 's a guy who you 'll always have a hell of a time playing with . " Dante and Trish were also included in The Inquirer 's list of the most memorable video game love teams , with comments focused on how the two join forces to defeat their enemies . In 2014 , La Nueva España included this " ephebe that exudes testosterone from every pore " among the top ten sexiest video game characters of both genders . 
 Additionally , Dante has also often been compared with the title character from Bayonetta especially in his Devil May Cry 4 persona based on their personalities and actions that made the two of them appealing . Reuben Langdon 's performance as Dante in Devil May Cry 3 and Devil May Cry 4 received praise by GamesRadar for being the character 's best voice actor noting that the two actors did not fit the character well . 
 On the other hand , Dante 's characterization has often resulted in criticism . In Devil May Cry 2 , Dante 's cocky attitude was largely absent , which was one of the main criticisms of the game . Fan reactions to the new design of Dante in DmC : Devil May Cry were mostly negative . Hideki Kamiya found him based on the modern 's rebellious youth and said he missed the original Dante , but he still hoped that people would try it . Dave Riley from Anime News Network compared the reboot 's Dante with the young Dante from Devil May Cry 3 but criticized him for being " pretty generic adolescent power fantasy " as well as his use of swearing when confronting enemies . Dante 's voice actor , Reuben Langdon , expressed disappointment with Dante 's characterization in the reboot despite his anticipation to it . On the other hand , several websites writers criticized the fanbase 's negative reactions stating they were solely influenced by the character 's look and that his personality was very close to the classic Dante . 
 = Danny Deever = 
 " Danny Deever " is an 1890 poem by Rudyard Kipling , one of the first of the Barrack @-@ Room Ballads . It received wide critical and popular acclaim , and is often regarded as one of the most significant pieces of Kipling 's early verse . The poem , a ballad , describes the execution of a British soldier in India for murder . His execution is viewed by his regiment , paraded to watch it , and the poem is composed of the comments they exchange as they see him hanged . 
 = = Context = = 
 The poem was first published on 22 February 1890 in the Scots Observer , in America later in the year , and printed as part of the Barrack @-@ Room Ballads shortly thereafter . 
 It is generally read as being set in India , though it gives no details of the actual situation . Some research has suggested that the poem was written with a specific incident in mind , the execution of one Private Flaxman of The Leicestershire Regiment , at Lucknow in 1887 . A number of details of this execution correspond to the occasion described by Kipling in the poem , and he later used a story similar to that of Flaxman 's as a basis for the story Black Jack . 
 Kipling apparently wrote the various Barrack @-@ Room Ballads in early 1890 , about a year since he had last been in India , and three years since Flaxman 's execution . Though he wrote large amounts of occasional verse , he usually added a note beneath the title giving the context of the poem . Danny Deever does not have any such notes , but " Cleared " ( a topical poem on the Parnell Commission ) , written in the same month as Danny Deever , does . This suggests that it was not thought by Kipling to be inspired by a specific incident , though it is quite possible that he remembered the Flaxman case . 
 = = Summary = = 
 The form is a dialogue , between a young and inexperienced soldier ( or soldiers ; he is given as " Files @-@ on @-@ Parade " , suggesting a group ) and a more experienced and older NCO ( " the Colour @-@ Sergeant " ) . The setting is an execution , generally presumed to be somewhere in India ; a soldier , one Danny Deever , has been tried and sentenced to death for murdering a fellow soldier in his sleep , and his battalion is paraded to see the hanging . This procedure strengthened discipline in the unit , by a process of deterrence , and helped inure inexperienced soldiers to the sight of death . 
 The young soldier is unaware of what is happening , at first – he asks why the bugles are blowing , and why the Sergeant looks so pale , but is told that Deever is being hanged , and that the regiment is drawn up in " [ h ] <unk> square " to see it . He presses the Sergeant further , in the second verse – why are people breathing so hard ? why are some men collapsing ? These signs of the effect that watching the hanging has upon the men of the regiment are explained away by the Sergeant as being due to the cold weather or the bright sun . The voice is reassuring , keeping the young soldier calm in the sight of death , just as the Sergeant will calm him with his voice in combat . In the third verse , Files thinks of Deever , saying that he slept alongside him , and drank with him , but the Sergeant reminds him that Deever is now alone , that he sleeps " out an ' far to @-@ night " , and reminds the soldier of the magnitude of Deever 's crime – 
 For ' e shot a comrade <unk> ' – you must look ' im in the face ; 
 Nine ' <unk> of ' is county an ' the regiment 's disgrace , 
 ( Nine hundred was roughly the number of men in a single infantry battalion , and as regiments were formed on local lines , most would have been from the same county ; it is thus emphasised that his crime is a black mark against both the regiment , as a whole , and against his comrades . ) The fourth verse comes to the hanging ; Files sees the body against the sun , and then feels his soul as it " whimpers " overhead ; the term reflects a shudder in the ranks as they watch Deever die . Finally , the Sergeant moves the men away ; though it is not directly mentioned in the poem , they would be marched past the corpse on the gallows – reflecting that the recruits are shaking after their ordeal , and that " they 'll want their beer to @-@ day " . 
 = = Structure = = 
 The poem is composed of four eight @-@ line verses , containing a dialogue between two ( or three ) voices : 
 " What are the bugles blowin ' for ? " said Files @-@ on @-@ Parade . 
 " To turn you out , to turn you out " , the Colour @-@ Sergeant said . 
 " What makes you look so white , so white ? " said Files @-@ on @-@ Parade . 
 " I 'm <unk> ' what I 've got to watch " , the Colour @-@ Sergeant said . 
 For they 're hangin ' Danny Deever , you can hear the Dead March play , 
 The regiment 's in ' <unk> square – they 're hangin ' him to @-@ day ; 
 They 've taken of his buttons off an ' cut his stripes away , 
 An ' they 're hangin ' Danny Deever in the mornin ' . 
 It is immediately noticeable that the poem is written in a vernacular English . Though the Barrack @-@ Room Ballads have made this appear a common feature of Kipling 's work , at the time it was quite unusual ; this was the first of his published works to be written in the voice of the common soldier . The speech is not a direct representation of any single dialect , but it serves to give a very clear effect of a working class English voice of the period . Note the " taken of his buttons off " , a deliberate error , to add to the stylised speech ; it refers to the ceremony of military degradation , where the man to be executed is formally stripped of any marks of rank , such as his stripes , or of significant parts of his uniform – the buttons bore the regimental crest . 
 The four verses each consist of two questions asked by " Files " and answered by the <unk> a call @-@ and @-@ response form – and then another four lines of the Sergeant explaining , as above . In some interpretations , the second four lines are taken to be spoken by a third voice , another " file @-@ on @-@ parade " . Both the poem 's rhythm and its rhyme scheme reinforce the idea of drilling infantry by giving the effect of feet marching generally but not perfectly in unison : Although the poem 's overall meter is iambic , each line in the verses and , to the slightly lesser extent , the chorus features syllables with additional grammatical and phonetic emphasis that fit the rhythm of the " left , left , left right left " marching cadence . The first four lines always end with the same word , and the last four feature an <unk> rhyme scheme with slightly lighter syllables that force the pace into a brisk march despite its somber mood ( cf. the text of the poem 's final chorus ) . Eliot noted the imperfect rhyme scheme – parade and said do not quite rhyme – as strongly contributing to this effect , with the slight interruption supporting the feel of a large number of men marching together , not quite in harmony . 
 = = Critical reaction = = 
 Danny Deever is often seen as one of Kipling 's most powerful early works , and was greeted with acclaim when first published . David Masson , a professor of literature at the University of Edinburgh , is often reported ( perhaps apocryphally ) to have waved the magazine in which it appeared at his students , crying " Here 's literature ! Here 's literature at last ! " . William Henley , the editor of the Scots Observer , is even said to have danced on his wooden leg when he first received the text . 
 It was later commented on by William Butler Yeats , who noted that " [ Kipling ] interests a critical audience today by the grotesque tragedy of Danny Deever " . T. S. Eliot called the poem " technically ( as well as in content ) remarkable " , holding it up as one of the best of Kipling 's ballads . Both Yeats and Eliot were writing shortly after Kipling 's death , in 1936 and 1941 , when critical opinion of his poetry was at a low point ; both , nonetheless , drew out Danny Deever for attention as a significant work . 
 Discussing that low critical opinion in a 1942 essay , George Orwell considered Danny Deever as an example of Kipling " at his worst , and also his most vital ... almost a shameful pleasure , like the taste for cheap sweets that some people secretly carry into middle life " . He felt the work was an example of what he described as " good bad poetry " ; verse which is essentially vulgar , yet undeniably seductive and " a sign of the emotional overlap between the intellectual and the ordinary man . " 
 = = Music = = 
 The Barrack @-@ Room Ballads , as the name suggests , are songs of soldiers . Written by Kipling , they share a form and a style with traditional Army songs . Kipling was one of the first to pay attention to these works ; Charles Carrington noted that in contrast to the songs of sailors , " no @-@ one had thought of collecting genuine soldiers ' songs , and when Kipling wrote in this traditional style it was not recognised as traditional " . Kipling himself was fond of singing his poetry , of writing it to fit the rhythm of a particular tune . In this specific case , the musical source has been suggested as the Army 's " grotesque bawdy song " Barnacle Bill the Sailor , but it is possible that some other popular tune of the period was used . 
 However , the ballads were not published with any music , and though they were quickly adapted to be sung , new musical settings were written ; a musical setting by Walter Damrosch was described as " Teddy Roosevelt 's favourite song " , and is sometimes encountered on its own as a tune entitled They 're Hanging Danny Deever in the Morning . To date , at least a dozen published recordings are known , made from 1893 to 1985 . 
 The tune " They 're Hanging Danny Deever in the Morning " was played from the Campanile at UC Berkeley at the end of the last day of classes for the Spring Semester of 1930 , and has been repeated every year since , making it one of the oldest campus traditions . 
 The song is referenced in the book Starship Troopers when the Mobile Infantry hangs Dillinger for murder while the main character is in basic training . 
 = Spyro : Year of the Dragon = 
 Spyro : Year of the Dragon is a platform video game developed by Insomniac Games and published by Sony Computer Entertainment for the PlayStation in 2000 . Year of the Dragon is the third installment in the Spyro series and the last Spyro game to be released for the first generation PlayStation . The game was also the last Spyro game Insomniac developed ; their next title would be Ratchet & Clank for the PlayStation 2 . 
 Named after the animal of the Chinese zodiac , which was the symbol at the time of the game 's release , Year of the Dragon follows the titular purple dragon Spyro as he travels to the " Forgotten Worlds " after 150 magical dragon eggs are stolen from the land of the dragons by an evil sorceress . Players travel across thirty different worlds gathering gems and eggs . Year of the Dragon introduced new characters and minigames to the series , as well as offering improved graphics and music . 
 Upon release , the game sold more than two million units in the United States and received positive critical response . Reviewers noted the game built on the successful formula of its predecessors by adding more games and expansive environments . It was followed by the multiplatform title Spyro : Enter the Dragonfly , and was later released for download on the PlayStation Store in 2009 in North America and in 2012 in Europe , the latter date coincidentally being another Year of the Dragon in the real @-@ world Chinese zodiac . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Year of the Dragon is set primarily in the third @-@ person ; its gameplay makes few deviations from that of its predecessors . The main objective of the game is to collect special dragon eggs which are scattered across 37 worlds . These eggs are hidden , or are given as rewards for completing certain tasks and levels . The worlds of Spyro are linked together by " <unk> " or " hubs " , large worlds which contain gateways to many other levels . To proceed to the next hub , the character must complete five worlds , gather a certain number of eggs , and defeat a boss . Players do not need to gather every egg to complete the main portion of the game or gain access to new levels ; in fact , certain eggs can only be found by returning to the world at a later time . Gems are scattered across the worlds , hidden in crates and jars . These gems are used to bribe a bear named Moneybags to release captured " critters " and activate things which help Spyro progress through levels ( Such as bridges ) . Gems , along with the number of eggs collected , count to the total completion percentage of the game . 
 For most of the game , the player controls the dragon Spyro . Spyro 's health is measured by his companion , a dragonfly named Sparx ; Sparx changes color and then disappears after taking progressively more damage . If the player has no Sparx , then the next hit would cause the player to lose a life and restart at the last saved checkpoint . Consuming small wildlife known as " fodder " regenerates Sparx . Spyro has several abilities , including breathing fire , swimming and diving , gliding , and headbutting , which he can use to explore and combat a variety of enemies , most of which are rhinoceros @-@ like creatures called <unk> . Some foes are only vulnerable to certain moves . Spyro can run into " <unk> Gates " , which give him special abilities for a limited period . 
 Year of the Dragon introduced playable characters other than Spyro , known as " critters " , which are gradually unlocked as the player proceeds through the game . Critters can be found blocking the level they are played in until released from Moneybags . Subsequently , the player plays as the character in specially marked sections of levels . Each homeworld features one world which is played through entirely by a non @-@ Spyro character . There are a total of seven playable characters , which all have their own special moves and abilities . Sheila the Kangaroo , for example , can double jump , while Sgt. Byrd is armed with rocket launchers and can fly indefinitely . 
 Besides the primary quest to find dragon eggs , Year of the Dragon features an extensive set of minigames , which are split off from the levels into smaller zones . Some of the minigames were featured in Spyro 2 : Ripto 's Rage ! and were subsequently expanded for Year of the Dragon , while others are entirely new to the series . These minigames are played by Spyro or the other playable characters . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting and characters = = = 
 Spyro is assisted by many characters during the course of Year of the Dragon . Spyro is the game 's protagonist , and Sparx is his dragonfly sidekick . Sparx functions as the player 's health meter and assists the player in gathering gems ; Sparx is a playable character in certain levels . Also aiding Spyro is Hunter the Cheetah , who teaches the player game mechanics and is a playable character at special racing levels . Four other playable characters are freed from Moneybags during the game ; Sheila the kangaroo , Sergeant Byrd the penguin , Bentley the yeti , and Agent 9 the space monkey . The primary antagonist of the game is the Sorceress , a tyrant who rules over the Forgotten Worlds with her forces . Aiding her is the apprentice Bianca the Rabbit , who attempts to hinder Spyro on his mission . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 The game opens with a celebration in the land of the dragons , where Spyro and his kin are celebrating the " Year of the Dragon " , an event that occurs every twelve years when new dragon eggs are brought to the realm . During the celebration however , a cloaked rabbit girl named Bianca invades the Dragon Realms with an army of creatures called <unk> and steals all of the Dragon eggs , bringing them back to the Sorceress , who scatters the eggs throughout several worlds . The worlds are split up into four realms : Sunrise Spring , Midday Gardens , Evening Lake , and Midnight Mountain . Spyro , along with Sparx and Hunter , are sent down a hole to find the thieves and recover the dragon eggs . 
 While pursuing the thief , Spyro discovers a world once inhabited by the dragons , but long abandoned and forgotten . This world is ruled by the Sorceress and her <unk> army . Only a few creatures stand and fight against the Sorceress ' rule . Spyro learns from one such inhabitant named Sheila the Kangaroo that when the dragons left the realm , the magic of the world began to dry up . Spyro travels through each world in the forgotten realm , acquiring aid from the local inhabitants and rescuing the dragon eggs . It is revealed that the Sorceress is seeking not the baby dragons themselves , but merely their wings to concoct a spell that can grant her immortality . Once Bianca discovers this , she sympathizes for the baby dragons and decides to side with Spyro and his allies . Spyro eventually fights and defeats the Sorceress and celebrations occur throughout the realm . 
 The Sorceress survives her battle with Spyro , however , and waits for Spyro with the last of the dragon eggs . Spyro and the Sorceress battle again where the Sorceress is finally defeated , allowing Spyro to return all the baby dragons to the Dragon Realms . 
 = = Development = = 
 Development of Spyro : Year of the Dragon spanned about ten and a half months , from November 1999 to September 2000 ; the development team was influenced by a host of other games , including Doom and Crash Bandicoot . Among the new features touted before the game 's release was " Auto Challenge Tuning " , which Insomniac CEO Ted Price described as " invented to even out the gameplay difficulty curve for players of different abilities " . The levels were made much larger than those in Spyro 2 , so that more areas for minigames could be added ; to prevent player confusion on where to go next , these areas were designed to load separately from the main hubs . Price stated that the addition of critters was a way to make the game more enjoyable and varied , instead of just adding more moves for Spyro . The game was named " Year of the Dragon " simply because it was released during 2000 , the year of the Dragon in the Chinese zodiac . 
